Upon the Frontispice.
THrough a Triumphant Arch, see Albion plas't,
In Happy site, in Neptunes arms embras't,
In Power and Plenty, on her Cleeuy Throne
Circled with Natures Ghirlands, being alone
Styled The Oceans Insula Caruli.
Island. On the Columns been
(As Trophies raiz'd) what Princes Time has seen
Ambitious of her. In her younger years,
Vast Earth-bred Giants wooed her: but, who bears
In So Hauillan and Vpton anciently delivered. I justify it not; yet, as well
as others can his other attributed Arms, I might.
Golden field the Lion passant red,
Aeneas Nephew (Brute) them conquered.
Next, Laure at Caesar, as a Philtre, brings,
On's shield, his Grandame Object not, that it should be the Eagle, because it
is now bo^ne by the Emperors; and that some Heralds ignorantly publish it, as
I. Caesar's Coat, Double headed. They move me not; for plainly the Eagle was
single at that time (unless you call it (...), as Pindar does Jove's Eagle) and
but newly used among the Romans (first by Marius) as their Standard, not
otherwise, until afterward Constantine made it respect the two Empires: and
since, it has been borne on a Shield. I took Venus proper to him, for that
the stamp of her face (she being his Ancestor Aeneas his mother) in his Coins
is frequent; and can so maintain it here fitter, then many of those invented
Coats (without color of reason) attributed to the old Heroes. As for matter of
Armory, Venus being a Goddess may be as good Bearing, if not better then
Atalanta, which, by express Authority of Euripides, was borne, in the Theban
w^^re by Parthinopoe^.
Venus: Him her Kings
Withstood. At length, the Roman, by long suit,
Gained her (most Part) from the ancient race of Brute.
Diuors't from Him, the Saxon Hengist has other Arms in some traditions,
which are to be respected as Old wiu^s fictions. Hi^ name expresses a Horse,
and the Dukes of Saxony are said to have borne it anciently, before their
Christianity, Sable: therefore, if you give him any, with most reason, let him
have this.
sable Horse,
Borne by stern Hengist, wins her: but, through force
Garding the The common Blazon of the Norman Arms iustifies it. And, if you
please, see for it to the XI. Canto.
Norman Leopards bathed in Gules,
She changed her Love to Him, whose Line yet rules.
POLY-OLBION

By Michael Drayton Esquire.

London printed for M Lownes. I Brown. I Helm. I Busbie.
Ingraue by W Hole

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY, HENRY, Prince of Wales.
THis first part of my intended Poem I consecrate to your Highness: in whom
(beside my particular zeal) there is a natural interest in my Work; as the
hopeful Heir of the kingdoms of this Great Britain: whose Delicacies,
Chorographicall Description, and History, be my subject. My Soul, which has
seen the extreamitie of Time and Fortune, cannot yet despair. The influence
of so glorious and fortunate a Star, may also reflect upon me: which has
power to give me new life, or leave me to die more willingly and contented. My
Poem is genuine, and first in this kind. It cannot want envy: for, even in
the Birth, it already finds that. Your Gracious acceptance, mighty Prince,
will lessen it. May I breath to arrive at the Orcades (whither in this kind I
intend my course, if the Muse fail me not) I shall leave your whole British
Empire, as this first and southern part, delineated:

To your HIGHNESS, the most humbly devoted, MICHAEL DRAYTON.

Britain, behold here portray'd, to thy sight,
Henry, thy best hope, and the world's delight;
Ordained to make thy eight Great Henry's, nine:
Who, by that virtue in the trebble Trine,
To his own goodness (in his Being) brings
These several Glories of the eighth English Kings;
The several happine^^e^ of the eight Henry's.
Deep 1Knowledge, 2Greatness, 3long Life, 4Policy,
5Courage, 6Zeal, 7Fortune, 8awful Majesty.
He like great Neptune on The West, North, and East Ocean.
three Seas shall roue,
And rule three Realms, with triple power, like Jove;
Thus in soft Peace, thus in tempestuous Wars,
Till from his foot, his Fame shall strike the stars.


TO THE GENERAL READER
IN publishing this Essay of my Poem, there is this great disadvantage against
me; that it comes out at this time, when Verses are wholly deduc't to
Chambers, and nothing esteemed in this lunatique Age, but what is kept in
Cabinets, and must only pass by Transcription; In such a season, when the Idle
Humerous world must hear of nothing, that either sauors of Antiquity, or may
awake it to secke after more, then dull and slothful ignorance may easily
reach unto: These, I say, make much against me; and especially in a Poem, from
any example, either of Ancient, or Modern, that have proved in this kind: whose
unusual tract may perhaps seem difficult, to the female Sex; yea, and I
fear, to some that think themselves not meanly learned, being not rightly
inspired by the Muses: such I mean, as had rather read the fantasies of
foreign inventions, then to see the Rarities and History of their own
Country delivered by a true native Muse. Then, whosoever thou be, possessed with
such stupidity and dullness, that, rather then thou will take pains to search
into ancient and noble things, choosest to remain in the thick fogges and
mists of ignorance, as near the common Lay-stall of a City; refusing to walk
forth into the Tempe and Feelds of the Muses, where through most delightful
Groves the Angellique harmony of Birds shall steal thee to the top of an easy
hill, where in artificial caves, cut out of the most natural Rock, thou shall
see the ancient people of this I Will delivered thee in their lively images: from
whose height thou mai'st behold both the old and later times, as in thy
prospect, lying far under thee; then conuaying thee down by a soule-pleasing
Descent through delicate embrodered Meadows, often veined with gentle gliding
Brooks; in which thou may fully view the dainty Nymphs in their simple naked
bewties, bathing them in Crystalline streams; which shall lead thee, to most
pleasant Downs, where harmless Shepherds are, some exercising their pipes,
some singing roundelaies, to their gazing flocks: If as, I say, thou had
rather, (because it asks thy labor) remain, where thou were, then strain thy
self to walk forth with the Muses; the fault proceeds from thy idleness, not
from any want in my industry. And to any that shall demand wherefore having
promised this Poem of the general Island so many years, I now publish only
this part of it; I plainly answer, that many times I had determined with my
self, to have left it off, and have neglected my papers sometimes two years
together, finding the times since his Majesty's happy coming in, to fall so
heavily upon my distressed fortunes, after my zealous soul had labored so long
in that, which with the general happiness of the kingdom, seemed not then
impossible somewhat also to have advanced me. But I instantly saw all my long
nourisht hopes even buried alive before my face: so uncertain (in this world)
be the ends of our cleerest endeavors. And what ever is herein that tastes of a
free spirit, I thankfully confess it to proceed from the continual bounty of
my truly Noble friend Sir Walter Aston; which has given me the best of those
hours, whose leisure has effected this which I now publish. Sundry other
Songs I have also, though yet not so perfect that I dare commit them to
public censure; and the rest I determine to go forward with, God enabling me,
may I find means to assist my endeavor. Now Reader, for the further
understanding of my Poem, thou have three especial helps; First the Argument
to direct thee still, where thou art, and through what Shires the Muse makes
her journey, and what she chiefly handles in the Song thereto belonging. Next,
the Map, lively delinearing to thee, every Mountain, Forest, River, and
Valley; expressing in their sundry postures; their loves, delights, and
natural situations. Then have thou the Illustration of this learned Gentleman,
my friend, to explain every hard matter of history, that, lying far from the
way of common reading, may (without question) seem difficult unto thee. Thus
wishing thee thy hearts desire, and committing my Poem to thy charitable
censure, I take my leave.

Thine, as thou art mine, MICHAEL DRAYTON.

TO MY FRIENDS, THE CAMBRO-BRITANS.
TO have you without difficulty understand, how in this my intended progress,
through these united kingdoms of great Britain, I have placed your (and I
must confess) my loved Wales, you shall perceive, that after the three first
Songs, beginning with our French Islands, Iernsey, and Iersey, with the rest;
and perfecting in those first three the suruay of these six our most Western
Countries, Cornwall, Deuon, Dorset, Hamp, Wilt, and Summerset; I then make over
Seuerne into Wales, not far from the midst of her Broad side that lies
against England. I term it her Broad side, because it lies from Shrewsbury,
still along with Seuerne, till she lastly turn sea. And to explain two li^es of
mine (which you shall find in the fourth Song of my Poem; but it is the first
of Wales) which are these, And ere seven Books have end, I Will strike so high a
string,
Thy Bards shall stand amazed with wonder whilst I sing.
Speaking of seven Books; you shall understand that I continue Wales through
so many; beginning in the fourth Song (where the nymphs of England and Wales,
contend for the I Will of Lundy) and ending in the tenth; Striving, as my much
loved (the learned) Humfrey Floyd, in his description of Cambria to Abraham
Ortelius, to uphold her ancient bounds, Seuerne, and Dee, and therefore have
included the parts of those three English Shiers of Gloucester, Worster, and
Sallop, that lie on the west of Seuerne, within their ancient mother Wales: In
which if I have not done her right, the want is in my ability, not in my love.
And beside my natural inclination to love Antiquity (which Wales may highly
boast of) I confess, the free and gentle company of that true lover of his
Country (as of all ancient and noble things) M. John William^, his Majesty's
Goldsmiths, my dear and worthy friend, has made me the more seek into the
antiquities of your Country. Thus wishing your favorable construction of these
my faithful endeavors, I bid you farewell.

Michael Drayton.

From the Author OF The Illustrations.
PErmit me thus much of these Notes to My Friend. What the Verse often, with
allusion, as supposing a full knowing Reader, lets slip; or in winding steps of
Personating Fictions (as some times) so infolds, that sudden conceit cannot
abstract a Form of the clothed Truth, I have, as I might, Illustrated.
Breuity, and Plainenes (as the one endured the Other) I have joined; purposely
avoiding frequent commixture of different language; and, whenever it happens,
either the Page or Margin (specially for Gentlewomens sake) summarily
interprets it, except where Interpretation aides not. Being not very Prodigal
of my Historical Faith, after Explanation, I often adventure on Examination, and
Censure. The Author, in Passages of first Inhabitants, Name, State, and
Monarchique succession in this Isle, follows Geffrey ap Arthur, Polychronicon,
Matthew of Westminster, and such more. Of their Traditions, for that one so
much controuerted, and by Cambro-Britons still maintained, touching the Trojan
Brute, I have (but as an Aduocat for the Muse) argued; disclaiming in it, if
alleged for my own Opinion. In most of the rest, upon weighing the Reporters
credit, Comparison with more persuading authority, and Synchronisme (the best
Touchstone in this kind of Trial) I leave note of Suspicion, or add
coniecturall Amendment: as, for particular examples, among other, in Brennus
mistook by all Writers of later time, following Iustins Epitome of Trogus ill
conceived; in Robert of Swaphams Story of K. Wulphers murdring his Children; in
Rollo first D. of Normandy his time; none of them yet rectified (although the
first has been adventured on) by any that I have seen; and such more. And
indeed my Jealousy has often vexed me with particular inquisition of whatsoever
occurrs, bearing not a mark of most apparent Truth, ever since I found so
intolerable Antichronismes, incredible reports, and Bardish impostures* as
well from Ignorance as assumed liberty of Invention in some of our Ancients;
and red also such palpable Fauxeties, of our Nation, thrust into the World by
Later Time: as (to give a taste) that of Randall Higden affirming the Beginning
of Wards in VI. Hen. III. Polydores assertion (upon mistaking of the Statute of
I. Hen. VII.) that it was death by the English laws for any man to wear a
Visard, with many like errors in his History, of our, Trials by XII. Shriues,
Coat of the Kingdom, Parliaments, and other like; Bartol's delivering the
custom in this Isle to be, Ad C. de sum. Trinit. l. 1. number. 42.
quod Primogenitus succedit in omnibus Bonis; The Greek Chalcondylas his
slanderous description of our usual form of kind entertainment to begin with
the Wives Courteous admission to that most affected pleasure of Lascivious
fancy (he was deceived by misunderstanding the Reports of Our Kissing
Salutations, Vnum blan^^entis, ad pulsu^ ^nguae long mellitum. Apuletus De
Aur. Asin 6. and you may remember (as like enough he did) that in Plautus
Curcul. Qui vult Cubare p^ngit saltem ^uau^am, and such more in other wanton
Po^ts, with the opinion of Baldus, that a K^^le in those Southern Nations, is
sufficient consent to imperfit espculess, nothing of that kind, but Copulation,
with v^ and our neighboring Dutch bring so.
given and accepted amongst us with more freedom then in any part of the
Southern world, er^onetously thinking, perhaps, that every Kiss must be
thought seconded with that addition to the Seven promised by Mercury in name of
Venus to him that should find Psyche; or as wanton, as Aristophanes his (...):)
and many vntruth's of like Nature in Others. Concerning the Arcadian deduction
of our British Monarchy; within that time, from Brute, supposed about
M.M.DCCC.L. of the world ( Samuel then Judge of Israel) unto some ^^v. before
Christ (about when, Julius Caesar visited the Island) no Relation was extant,
which is now left to our use. How then are they, which pretend Chronologies of
that Age without any Fragment of Authors before Gildas, Taliessin and Nennius
(the eldest of which was since D. of Christ) to be credited? For my part, I
believe much in them as I do the finding of Hiero's Shipmast in our (...), quae
nempe ver^or videtur ^^ctio.
Mountains, which is collected upon a corrupted place in Athenaeus, cited out
of Moschion; or, that Ptolemy Philadelph sent to Reutha King of Scots some
M.DCCCC. years since, for discovery of this Country, which Claude Ptolemy
afterward put in his Geography; or that Julius Caesar built Arthurs Hossen in
Stirling Shiri^dome; or, that Britons were at the Rape of Hesione with
Hercules, as our excellent wit Joseph of Excester (published falsely under name
of Cornelius Nepos) sings: which are even equally warrantable, as Ariosto's
Narrations of Persons and Places in his Rowlands, Spensers Elfin Story, or
Rablais his strange discoueries. Yet the Capricious faction will (I know) never
quit their Belief of wrong; although some Elias or Delian Diuer should make
open what is so inquired after. Briefly, until Polybius, who wrote near
M.DCCC. since (for Aristotle (...) is clearly counterfeited in title) no
Greek mentions the Isle; until Lucretius (some C. years later) no Roman has
expressed a thought of us; until Caesar's Commentaries, no piece of its
description was known, that is now left to posterity. For time therefore
preceding Caesar, I dare trust none; but with Others adhere to Conjecture. In
Ancient matter since, I rely on Tacitus and Dio especially, Vopiscus,
Capitolin, Spartian (for so much as they have, and the rest of the Augustan
Story) afterward Gildas, Nennius (but little is left of them, and that of the
last very imperfect) Bid, Asserio, Ethelwerd (near of blood to King Alfred)
William of Malmesbury, Marian, Florence of Worcester (that published under name
of Florence has the very syllables of most part of Marian the Scots Story,
fraught with English Antiquities; which will show you how easily to answer
Buchanan's objection against our Historians about Athelstans being King of all
Albion, being deceived when he imagined that there was no other of ^arian but
the common printed Chronicle, which is indeed but an Epitome or Destoration
made by Robert of Lorraine, Bishop of Hereford under Hen. I.) and the numerous
rest of our Monkish and succeeding Chronographers. In all, I believe him most
which freest from Affection and Hate (causes of corruption) might best know,
and has, with most likely assertion, delivered his report. Yet so, that, to
explain the Author, carrying himself in this part, an Historical, as in the
other, a Chorograph^ca^l Poet, I insert often, out of the British story, what I
importune you not to credit. Of that kind, are those Prophecies out of Merlin
sometime interwouen: I discharge my self; nor impute you to me any serious
respect of them. Inuiting, not wresting in, occasion, I add sometime what is
different from my task, but such as I guess would any where please an
understanding Reader. To aid you in course of Times, I have in fit place drawn
Chronologies, upon Credit of the Ancients; and, for matter of that kind, have
admonisht (to the IV. Canto) what as yet I never saw by any observed, for wary
consideration of the Dionysian Cycle, and mis-interpreted Root of his
Dominicall year. Those old Rimes, which (some number) you often meet with, are
offered the willinger, both for Variety of your Mother Tongue, as also, because
the Author of them Robert of Gloucester never yet appeared in common light. He
was, in Time, an Age before; but, in Learning and Wit, as most others, much
behind our Worthy Chaucer: whose name by the way Occuring, and my work here
being but to add plain song after Muses descanting, I cannot but digress to
admonition of abuse which this Learned allusion, in his Troilus, by ignorance
has endured.

I am till God me better mind send Chaucer explaned.

At Dulcarnon right at my wits end.
Its not Necham, or any else, that can make me entertain the least thought of
the signification of Dulcarnon to be Pythagoras his sacrifice after his
Geometrical Theorem in finding the Squares of an Orthogonall Triangles sides,
Epoch Sele^cidarum.
or that it is a word of Latin deduction; but indeed by easier pronounciation
it was made of (...).i. Two horned: which the Mohammedan Arabians victora Root
in Calculation, meaning Alexander, as that great Dictator of knowledge Joseph
Scaliger (with some Ancients) wills, but, by warranted opinion of my learned
friend Mr. Lydyat in his Emendatio Temporum, it began in Seleucus Nicanor, XII.
years after Alexanders death; The name was applied, either because after time
that Alexander had persuaded himself to be Jupiter Hammons son, whose Statue
was with Rams horns, both his own and his Successors Coins were stamped with
horned Images: or else in respect of his II. pillars erected in the East as a
Christman. Comment in Alsragan cap. 11.
Nihil vltra of his Conquest, and some say because he had in Power the
Eastern and Western World, Lys^machi Cornuum apud Cael Rhodigie. Antiq. lect.
20 cap. 12. hic gonuin^ interpretatio.
signified in the two Horns. But, howsoever, it well fits the Passage, either,
as if he had personated Creseide at the entrance of two ways, not knowing
which to take; in like sense as that of Prodicus his Hercules, Pythagoras his
Y, or the Logicians Dilemma express; or else, which is the truth of his
conceit, that she was at a Nonplus, as the interpretation in his next Staff
makes plain. How many of Noble Chaucers Readers never so much as suspect this
his short essay of knowledge, transcending the common Rode? and by his Treatise
of the Astrolabe (which, I dare swear, was chiefly learned out of Messahalah)
it is plain he was much acquainted with the Mathematiques, and amongst their
Authors had it. But, I return to my self. From vain loading my Margin, with
Books, Chapters, Folio's, or Names of our Historians, I abstain: Course of Time
as readily directs to them. But, where the place might not so easily occur
(chiefly in matter of Philologie) there only (for view of them which shall
examine me) I have added assisting references. For most of what I use of
Chorographie, join with me in thanks to that most Learned Nourice of
Antiquity -- Of who^ even every ingenius stranger makes honorable mention.
Comitem vero illum Palatinu^ R. Vitum Basingslochium ( Cuius Historiae magnam
partem quasi (...) Chorographica substructio pla^^que ad Antiquitat^ amus^im ab
Eruditissimo hoc suo populari acceptu, ne ditam suppilata, est) adea inhuma^u^
fuisse suesse miror, vt been m^rentem non tam libenter agnoscat, q^am Clariss.
Viri syllabis et inuentis Codicem suum sapius perquam ingrate suffarcinet.
Atque id feregenus Plagiarios, rudes omnino, et (...), et Vernaculos nimirum
Nostratet iam nunc imponere sarcinam video indignanter and ringor.
(...)
(...), --
my instructing friend Mr. Camden Clarenceulx. From him and Girald of Cambria
also comes most of my British; And then may Mercury and all the Muses deadly
hate me, when, in permitting occasion, I profess not by whom I learn! Let
them vent judgment on me which understand; I justify all, by the self
Authors cited, crediting no Transcribers, but when of Necessity I must. My
thirst compeld me always seek the Fountains, and, by that, if means grant
it, judge the Rivers nature. Nor can any Conversant in Letters be ignorant
what error is oftimes fallen into, by trusting Authorities at second hand, and
rash collecting (as it were) from visuall beam's refracted through another
eye. In performance of this charge (undertaken at request of my kind friend
the Author) Breuity of Time (which was but little more then since the Poem
first went to the Press) and that daily discontinued, both by my other most
different Studies seriously attended, and interrupting Business, as enough can
witness, might excuse great faults, especially of Omission. But, I take not
thence advantage to desire more then Common Courtesy in Censure: Nor of this,
nor of what else I heretofore have published, touching Ianus Anglorum.
Historical deduction of Our Ancient Laws, wherein I escape not without Tax
Sunt quibus in verbis videorque obscurior, hec est,
Euandri cum Matre ^^qui, Faunisque Numaque
Nec s^eut (...) si ^uctor Sa^^aris Carminis essem.
I have read in Cicero, Agellius, Luctans Lexiphanes, and others, much against
that form; But withal, this later age (wherein so industrious search is among
admired Ruins of old Monuments) has, in our greatest Latin Critiques Hans
Do^^, P. Merula, Lipsius and such more, so received that Saturnian Language,
that, to Students in Philology, it is now grown familiar; and (as he says)
Verba a Vetustate repetita non solum magnos Assertores habent, Quintilian.
sed etiam afferunt Orationi Maiestatem aliquam, non sine delectatione. Yet for
Antique Terms, to the Learned, I will not justify it without exception
(disliking not that of Phauorin, Vu^e Moribus praeteritis, loquere verbis
praesentibus; and, as Coin, so words, of a public and known stamp, are to
be used) although so much, as that way I offend, is warranted by example of
such, of whom to endeavor imitation allows me more then the bare title of
Blamelet. The purblind Ignorant I salute, with the English of that Monitory
Epigram -- If thou have no taste in Learning meddle no more with what thou
vnderstand'st not.
(...)
(...).
Reprehension of them, whose Language and best learning is purchased from such
Volumes as Rablias reckon in S. Victors Library, or Barbarous Glosses Quam
nihil ad Genium, Papiniane, tuum!
or, which are furnished in our old story, only out of the Common Polychronicon,
Caxton, Fabian, Stow, Grafton, Lanquet, Cooper, Holingshed (perhaps with gift
of understanding) Polydore, and the rest of our later Compilers; or, of any
aduenturous Thersites daring find fault even with the very Graces, in a strain
Cornua quod vincatque Tuba^ --
I regard as metamorphized Lucius his looking out at window; I Slight, Scorn,
and Laugh at it. By Paragraph's in the Verses you know what I meddle wit^ in
the Illustrations; but so, that with Latitude, the direction admonishes
sometimes as well for explaning a Following or Preceding passage, as its own*
Ing^nuous Readers, to you I wish your best desires; Grant me too, I pray, this
one, that you read me not, without comparing the Faults escaped; I have
collected them for you. Compelled Absence, endeuor'd Dispatch, and want of
Reuises soon bred them. To the Author, I wish (as an old Cosmographicall Poet
did long since to himself.) -- That the Godlike sort of men, may worthily
guerdon his labors.
(...)
(...)
To Gentlewome^ and their Loves is consecrated all the wooing Language,
Allusions to Loue-Passions, and sweet Embracements feigned by the Muse among
Hills and Rivers; Whatsoever tastes of description, Battle, Story, Abstruse
Antiquity, and (which my particular Study caused me sometime remember) Law of
the Kingdom, To the more Severe Reader. To the one, Be contenting enioyments
of their Auspicious Desires; To the other, Happy Attendance of their chosen
Muses.

From the Inner Temple May. IX. M.DC.XII.
Faults escaped in the Illustrations.
Page 22. in marg. (...). Page 34. l. 30. black haird. p. 35. l. 3. Marsyas P.
35. lin. Last save one, read Grandelchild ild for son. P. 50. in marg. (...).
p. 66. marg. natura. p. 67. marg. Ammia^ p. 68. marg. (...) etc. p. 68. l. 35.
That not so much. p. 68 marg. aft p. 70. marg. Schei^ast. p. 70. l 44. for
r^sies read fleys. 71. l. 29. tie l. 30. Adardaga. p. 72. marg. Sabinis.. page
73. lin. 30. Me^se. and, of Rollo there, read not without the examination to
the thirteenth Song. page 95. lin 7 for Rivers, Beuers, p. 96. marg. Epod. p.
97. l. 22. Barrhit^^ l. 44. (...). p. 109. to the last line add, But I have
read that the Authors name was John Maluerne, a follow of Oriall College in
Oxford. who finished it in XVI. Ed. III. p. 125. in marg. (...) lin. 6.
Oiscing. l. 30. Bolgius p. 126. lin. 27. stont. page 130. Le^inaeum in marg.
page 131. in marg. Their. page 14^. lin. 50. for New read New page 147. lin. 8.
read Fou^e renascenti^ quom etc. lin. 24. (...) lin. 25. (...). page 149. marg.
Senen. p. 153. l. 29. Antium. p. 154. l. 13. You. in marg. Alij. Et. p. 164. l.
13. Earth, next night. p. 168 in marg. Rhetia p. 183. marg. Sympos. ibid.
Aethiopum p. 185. l. 40. enjoying p. 187. marg. Douz. 224. l. 26. it ceased
225. l. 30. Hror^el. 34. DCCC. LIII. p. 284. l. 21. vini. 225. l. 14 Alba^eg^i.
l. 16. Arzarbel. 17. Coning^burg. 244. marg Sansouin 256. lin. 26. etc 27.
English idiom. p. 267. marg. Alpheus. l. 21. Guadiana p. 269. marg. Illust. p.
270. marg. modeste sed (...) 271. marg. Rich l. Fin. Rot. p. 272. l. 2 Ralph
Fitz l. 14 Pandulph. l. 22. Runingmede. l. 24 Charter and rhat of. l. 49. Peter
de Roches. p. 273. l. 8. Leopold. p. 274. l. 30 looked were. p. 277. 9.
Cognisances, and in the marg. Ice^^^. p. 278. l. 4. Hadham. p. 279. marg.
dispunctio. p. 281. marg. Arenarij. and Q. Curt. p. 301. l: 45; deliver, page
302, make the inference of o to the last line save one. p. 303. Marg.
Norwegians. If you meet with other, or Points omitted or amiss inserted, you
may amend them.

Faults escaped in the Poem.
PAge 222. in the Margent, for bands read bounds. p. 250. l. 5. for Bernitia.
read Diera. ibid. l. 13. for Diera, read Bernitia. p. 283. l. 26. for course he
to. read course to.



POLY-OLBION. The first Song.
* THE ARGUMENT.
The sprightly Muse her wing displaies,
And the French Islands first survaies;
Beares-vp with Neptune, and in glory
Transcends proud Cornwalls Promontorie;
There crowns Mount-Michaell, and discries
How all those Riuerets fall and rise;
Then takes in Tamer, as she bounds
The Cornish and Deuonian grounds.
And whilst the Deuonshire-Nymphes relate
Their loves, their fortunes, and estate,
Dert undertakes to reviue
Our Brute, and sings his first arrive:
Then Northward to the verge she bends,
And her first Song at Ax she ends.
OF Albions glorious I Will the Wonders whilst I write,
The sundry varying soyles, the pleasures infinite
(Where heat kills not the cold, nor cold expells the heat,
The calmes too mildly small, nor winds too roughly great,
Nor night does hinder day, nor day the night does wrong,
The Summer not too short, the Winter not too long)
What help shall I invoke to aid my Muse the while?
Thou Genius of the place (this most renowned I Will)
Which liuedst long before the All-earth-drowning Flood,
Whilst yet the world did swarm with her Gigantick brood;
Go thou before me still thy circling shores about,
And in this wandering Maze help to conduct me out:
Direct my course so right, as with thy hand to show
Which way thy Forests range, which way thy Rivers flow;
Wise Genius, by thy help that so I may discry
How thy fair Mountains stand, and how thy Vallyes lie;
From those clear pearlie Cleeues which see the Mornings pride,
And check the surly Impes of Neptune when they chide,
Unto the big-swolne waves in the The Western or Spanish Ocean.
Iberian stream,
Where Titan still vnyokes his fiery-hoofed Teame,
And often his flaming locks in lushious Nectar steepes,
When from Olympus top he plungeth in the Deepes:
That from The coast of little Britain in France.
the Armorick sands, on surging Neptunes leas
Through the Hibernick Gulf (those rough Vergiuian seas)
My verse with wings of skill may fly a lofty gate,
. As Amphitrite clips this Island Fortunate,
Till through the sleepy Maine to The furthest I Will in the British Ocean.
Thuly I have gone,
And seen the frozen Isles, the cold The Sea upon the north of Scotland.
Ducalidon,
. Amongst whose Iron rocks grym Saturn yet remains,
Bound in those gloomie Caves with Adamantine chains.
Ye sacred The old British Poets.
Bards, that to your Harps melodious strings
Sung the ancient Heroes deeds (the monuments of Kings)
And in your dreadful verse ingrau'd the prophecies,
The aged worlds descents, and Genealogies;
If, as those Priests amongst the ancient Britains.
Druides taught, which kept the British rites,
And dwelt in darksome Groves, there counsailing with sprites
(But their opinions faild, by error led awry,
As since clear truth has showed to their posterity)
When these our souls by death our bodies do forsake,
. They instantly again do other bodies take;
I could have wished your spirits redoubled in my breast,
To give my verse applause, to times eternal rest.
Thus scarcely said the Muse, but houering while she hung
Upon the The French Seas.
Celtick wastes, the Sea-Nymphes loudlie sung:
O euer-happie Isles, your heads so high that bear,
By Nature strongly fenc't, which never need to fear
On Neptunes watery Realms when Eolus raises wars,
And every billow bounds, as though to quench the stars:
Fair Iersey first of these here scattred in the Deep,
Peculiarly that boast'st thy double-horned sheep:
Inferior nor to thee, thou Iernsey, braueli^ crowned
With rough-imbatteld rocks, whose venom-hating ground
The hardened Emerill has, which thou abroad do send:
Thou Ligon, her beloved, and Serk, that do attend
Her pleasure every hour; as Iethow, them at need,
With Phesants, fallow Dear, and Conies that do feed:
Ye seven small sister Isles, and Sorlings, which to see
The halfe-sunk seaman joys, or whatsoever you be,
From fruitful Aurney, near the ancient Celtick shore,
To Vshant and the Seames, whereas those Nuns of yore
. Gave answers from their Caves, and took what shapes they please:
Ye happy Islands set within the British Seas,
With shrill and iocund shouts, th'vnmeasur'd deepes awake,
And let the Gods of Sea their secret Bowres forsake,
Whilst our industrious Muse great Britain forth shall bring,
Crowned with those glorious wreathes that beautify the Spring;
And whilst green Thetis Nymphs, with many an amorous lay
Sing our Invention safe unto her long-wisht Bay.
Upon the utmost end of Cornwalls furrowing beak,
Where A small Island upon the very point of Cornwall.
Bresan from the Land the tilting waves does break;
The shore let her transcend, the A hill lying out, as an elbowe of land, into
the Sea.
Promont to discry,
And view about the Point th'vnnumbred Foul that fly.
Some, rising like a storm from off the troubled sand,
Seem in their houering flight to shadow all the land;
Some, sitting on the beach to prune their painted breasts,
As if both earth and air they only did possess.
Whence, climing to the Cleeues, her self she firmlie sets
The Bourns, the Brooks, the Becks, the Rills, the Riuilets,
Exactlie to derive; receiving in her way
That straightned tongue of Land, where, at Mount-Michaells Bay,
Rude Neptune cutting in, a cantle forth does take;
And, on the other side, Hayles vaster mouth does make
A * Chersonese thereof, the corner clipping in:
Where to the industrious Muse the Mount does thus begin;
Before thou further pass, and leave this setting shore,
. Whose Towns unto the Saints that lived here of yore
(Their fasting, works, and prayers, remaining to our shames)
Were reared, and justly called by their peculiar names,
The builders honor still; this due and let them have,
As deigne to drop a tear upon each holy Grave;
Whose charity and zeal, in steed of knowledge stood:
For, surely in themselves they were right simply good.
If, credulous too much, thereby the offended heaven
In their devout intents, yet be their sins forgiven.
Then from his rugged top the tears down trickling fell;
And in his passion stirred, again began to tell
Strange things, that in his days times course had brought to pass,
That forty miles now Sea, sometimes firm fore-land was;
And that a Forest then, which now with him is Flood,
. Whereof he first was called the H^are-Rock in the Wood;
Relating then how long this soil had lain forlorn,
As that her Genius now had almost her forsworn,
And of their ancient love did utterly repent,
Since to destroy her self that fatal tool she lent
By which the insatiate slave her intrailes out does draw,
That thrusts his gripple hand into her golden mawe;
And for his part does wish, that it were in his power
To let the Ocean in, her wholly to devour.
Which, Hayle does ouer-heare, and much does blame his rage,
And told him (to his teeth) he doated with his age.
For Hayle (a lusty Nymph, bent all to amorous play,
And having quick recourse into the Seuerne Sea
With Neptunes Pages often disporting in the Deep;
One never touched with care; but how her self to keep
In excellent estate) does thus again entreat;
. Muse, leave the wayward Mount to hi^ distempred heat,
Who nothing can produce but what does taste of spite:
I Will show thee things of ours most worthy thy delight.
Behold our Diamonds here, as in the quarr's they stand,
By Nature neatly cut, as by a skillful hand,
Who varieth them in forms, both curiously and often;
Which for she (wanting power) produces them too soft,
That virtue which she could not liberally impart,
She strives to amend by her own proper Art.
Besides, the Seaholme here, that spreads all our shore,
The sick consuming man so powerful to restore:
Whose root th'Eringo is, the reins that does inflame
So strongly to perform the Cytheraan game,
That generally approou'd, both far and near is sought.
. And our Main-Amber here, and Burie^ Trophy, thought
Much wronged, not yet preferred for wonders with the rest.
But, the laborious Muse, upon her journey pressed,
Thus utters to her self; To guide my course aright,
What Mound or steddie Mere is offered to my sight
Upon this out-stretcht Arm, whilst sailing here at ease,
Betwixt the Southern waste, and the Sabrinian seas,
I view those wanton Brooks, that waxing, still do wane;
That scarcely can conceive, but brought to bed again;
Scarce rising from the Spring (that is their natural Mother)
To grow into a stream, but buried in another.
When Chore does call her on, that wholly does betake
Her self unto the Loo; transformed into a Lake,
Through that impatient love she had to entertain
The lustful Neptune often; whom when his wracks restrain,
Impatient of the wrong, impetuously he raues:
And in his ragefull flow, the furious King of waves,
Breaks foming over the Beach, whom nothing seems to cool,
Till he have wrought his will on that capacious Poole:
Where Menedge, by his Brooks, a A place almost environed with water, wel-neer
an Island.
Chersonese is cast,
Widening the slender shore to ease it in the wast;
A Promont iutting out into the dropping South,
That with his threatening cleeues in horrid Neptunes mouth,
Derides him and his power: nor cares how him he greets.
Next, Roseland (as his friend, the mightier Menedge) meets
Great Neptune when he swells, and rages at the Rocks
(Set out into those seas) enforcing through his shocks
Those arms of Sea, that thrust into the tinny strand,
By their Meandred creeks indenting of that Land
Whose fame by every tongue is for her Myneralls hurld,
Near from the mid-daies point, throughout the Western world.
Here Vale, a lively flood, her nobler name that gives
To The bravery of Flamouth Haven.
Flamouth; and by whom, it famous ever lives,
Whose entrance is from sea so intricatelie wound,
Her haven angled so about her harbrous sound,
That in her quiet Bay a hundred ships may ride,
Yet not the tallest mast, be of the tall'st descri'd;
Her bravery to this Nymph when neighboring rivers told,
Her mind to them again she briefly does unfold;
Let This has also the name of Alan.
Camel, of her course, and curious windings boast,
In that her Greatness reigns sole Mistress of that coast
Twixt Tamer and that Bay, where Hayle poures forth her pride:
And let us (nobler Nymphs) upon the mid-daie side,
Be frolic with the best. Thou Foy, before us all,
By thine own named Town made famous in thy fall,
As Low, amongst us here; a most delicious Brook,
With all our sister Nymphs, that to the noone-sted look,
Which glyding from the hills, upon the tinny ore,
Betwixt your high-rear'd banks, resort to this our shore:
Loved streams, let us exult, and think our selves no less
Then those upon their side, the Setting that possess.
Which, Camel ouer-heard: but what does she respect
Their taunts, her proper course that loosely does neglect?
As frantic, ever since her British Arthurs blood,
By Mordreds murtherous hand was mingled with her flood.
For, as that River, best might boast that Conquerours breath,
So sadly she bemoanes his too untimely death;
Who, after twelve proud fields against the Saxon fought,
Yet back unto her banks by fate was lastly brought:
As though no other place on Britains spacious earth,
Were worthy of his end, but where he had his birth:
And careless ever since how she her course do steer,
This muttreth to her self, in wandering here and there;
Even in the agedst face, where beauty once did dwell,
And nature (in the least) but seemed to excel,
Time cannot make such waste, but something will appear,
To show some little tract of delicacie there.
Or some religious work, in building many a day,
That this penurious age has suffered to decay,
Some lim or model, dragd out of the ruinous mass,
The richness will declare in glory whilst it was:
But time upon my waste committed has such theft,
That it of Arthur here scarce memory has left:
The Nine-ston'd Trophie thus whilst she does entertain,
Proud Tamer swoopes along, with such a lusty train
As fits so brave a flood two Countries that diuides:
So, to increase her strength, she from her equal sides
Receives their several rills; and of the Cornish kind,
First, takes Atre in: and her not much behind
Comes Kensey: after whom, clear Enian in does make,
In Tamers room their banks, their rest that scarcely take.
Then Lyner, though the while aloof she seemed to keep,
Her Sovereign when she sees t'approach the surgefull deep,
To beautify her fall her plentious tribute brings.
This honors Tamer much: that she whose plentious springs,
Those proud aspyring hills, Bromwelly and his friend
High Rowter, from their tops impartiallie commend,
And is by A worthy Gentleman, who writ the description of Cornwall.
Carewes Muse, the river most renound,
Associate should her grace to the Deuonian ground.
Which in those other Brooks does Emulation breed.
Of which, first Car comes crowned, with oziar, segs and reed:
Then Lid creeps on along, and taking Thrushel, throws
Her self amongst the rocks; and so incauern'd goes,
That of the blessed light (from other floods) debarred,
To bellowe under earth, she only can be heard,
As those that view her tract, seems strangely to affright:
So, Toouy straineth in; and Plym, that claims by right
The christning of that Bay, which bears her nobler name.
The praise of Plymouth.
Upon the British coast, what ship yet ever came
That not of Plymouth hears, where those brave Nauies lie,
From Canons thundering throats, that all the world defy?
Which, to invasiue spoil, when The English list to draw,
Have checked Iberias pride, and held her often in awe:
Often furnishing our Dames, with Indias rar'st devices,
And lent us gold, and pearl, rich silks, and dainty spices.
But Tamer takes the place, and all attend her here,
A faithful bound to both; and two that be so near
For likeliness of soil, and quantity they hold,
Before the Roman came; whose people were of old
. Known by one general name, upon this point that dwell,
All other of this I Will in wrestling that excel:
With collars be they yokt, to prove the arm at length,
Like Bulls set head to head, with mere deliver strength:
Or by the girdles graspt, they practice with the hip,
The words of Art in wrestling.
The forward, backward, falx, the mare, the turn, the trip,
When stripped into their shirts, each other they invade
Within a spacious ring, by the beholders made,
According to the law. Or when the Ball to throw,
And drive it to the Gole, in squadrons forth they go:
And to avoid the troops (their forces that fore-lay)
Through dikes and rivers make, in this robustious play;
By which* the toiles of war most lively are expressed.
But Muse, may I demand, Why these of all the rest
(As mighty Albyons eld'st) most active are and strong?
From Our first great wrastler ariuing here with Brute.
Corin came it first, or from the use so long?
. Or that this fore-land lies furth'st out into his sight,
Which spreads his vigorous flames on every lesser light?
With th'vertue of his beams, this place that does inspire:
Whose pregnant womb prepared by his all-powerful fire,
Being purelie hot and moist, proiects that fruitful seed,
Which strongly does beget, and does as strongly breed:
The weldisposed heaven here proouing to the earth,
A Husband furthering fruit; a Midwife helping birth.
But whilst the industrious Muse thus labors to relate
Those rillets that attend proud Tamer and her state,
A neighbourer of this Nymphs, as high in Fortunes grace,
And whence calm Tamer trippes, clear Towridge in that place
Is poured from her spring; and seems at first to flow
That way which Tamer strains: but as she great does grow
Remembers to foresee, what Riualls she should find
To interrupt her course: whose so unsettled mind
Ock coming in perceiues, and thus does her persuade;
Now Neptune shield (bright Nymph) thy beauty should be made
The object of her scorn, which (for thou can not be
Upon the Southern side so absolute as she)
Will awe thee in thy course. Wherefore, fair flood recoile:
And where thou may alone be sovereign of the soil,
There exercise thy power, thy braueries and displaie:
Turn Towridge, let us back to the Sabrinian sea;
Where Thetis handmaids still in that recoursefull deep
With those rough Gods of Sea, continual reuells keep;
There may thou live admired, the mistress of the Lake.
Wise Ock she does obey, returning, and does take
The Tawe: which from her fount forced on with amorous gales,
And easily ambling down through the Deuonian dales,
Brings with her Moule and Bray, her banks that gently bathe;
Which on her dainty breast, in many a silver swathe
She bears unto that Bay, where Barstable beholds,
How her beloved Tawe clear Towridge there enfolds.
The confluence of these Brooks divulged in Dertmoore, bred
Distrust in her sad breast, that she, so largely spread,
And in this spacious Shire the neer'st the Center set
Of any place of note; that these should bravely get
The praise, from those that sprung out of her pearlie lap;
Which, nourisht and bred up at her most plentious pap,
No sooner taught to dade, but from their Mother trip,
And in their speedy course, strive others to outstrip.
The Yalme, the Own, the A^me, by spacious Dertmoore fed,
And in the Southern Sea, b^ing likewise brought to bed;
That these were not of power to publish her desert,
Much grieved the ancient Moore: which understood by Dert
(From all the other floods that only takes her name,
And as her eld'st (in right) the heir of all her fume)
To show her nobler spirit it greatly does behoue.
Dear Mother, from your breast this fear (quoth she) remove:
Defy their utmost force: there is not the proudest flood,
That falls betwixt the Mount and Exmore, shall make good
Her royalty with mine, with me nor can compare:
I challenge any one, to answer me that dare.
That was, before them all, predestinate to meet
My Britaine-founding Brute, when with his puissant fleet
At Totnesse first he touched? which shall renown my stream
. (Which now the envious world does slander for a dream.)
Whose fatal flight from Greece, his fortunate arrive
In happy Albion here whilst strongly I revive,
Dear Harburne at thy hands this credit let me win,
Quoth she, that as thou have my faithful handmaid bin:
So now (my only Brook) assist me with thy spring,
Whilst of the God-like Brute the story thus I sing.
When long-renowned Troy lay spent in hostile fire,
And aged Priams pomp did with her flames expire,
Aeneas (taking thence Ascanius, his young son,
And his most reverent Sire, the grave Anchises, won
From sholes of slaughtering Greeks) set out from Simois shores;
And through the Tirrhene Sea, by strength of toyling ores,
Raught Italy at last: where, King Latinus lent
Safe harbor for his ships, with wrackfull tempest^ rent:
When, in the Latin Court, Lauinia young and fair
(Her Fathers only child, and kingdoms only heir)
Upon the Trojan Lord her liking strongly placed,
And languisht in the fires that her fair breast embraced:
But, Turnus (at that time) the proud Rutulian King,
A suter to the maid, Aeneas malicing,
By force of Arms attempts, his rival to extrude:
But, by the Teucrian power courageouslie subdued,
Bright Cythereas son the Latin crown obtained;
And dying, in his stead his son Ascanius reigned.
. Next, Siluius him succeeds, begetting Brute again:
Who in his Mothers womb whilst yet he did remain,
The Oracles gave out, that next borne Brute should be
. His Parents only death: which soon they lived to see.
For, in his painful birth his Mother did depart;
And ere his fifteenth year, in hunting of a Heart,
He with a lucklesse shaft his hapless Father slew:
For which, out of his throne, their King the Latins threw.
Who, wandering in the world, to Greece at last does get.
Where, whilst he lived unknown, and often with want beset,
He of the race of Troy a remnant hapt to find,
There by the Grecians held; which (having still in mind
Their tedious ten years war, and famous Heroee slain)
In slavery with them still those Trojans did detain:
Which Pyrrhus thither brought (and did with hate pursue,
To wreake Achilles death, at Troy whom Paris slew)
There, by Pandrasus kept, in sad and servile awe.
Who, when they knew young Brute, and that brave shape they saw,
They humbly him desire, that he a mean would be,
From those imperious Greeks, his countrymen to free.
He, finding out a rare and sprightly Youth, to fit
His humor every way, for courage, power, and wit,
Assaracus (who, though that by his Sire he were
A Prince amongst the Greeks, yet held the Trojans dear;
Descended of their stock upon the Mothers side:
For which, he by the Greeks his birthright was denied)
Impatient of his wrongs, with him brave Brute arose,
And of the Trojan youth courageous Captains chose,
Raysd Earthquakes with their Drums, the ruffling Ensigns rear;
And, gathering young and old that rightly Trojan were,
Up to the Mountains march, through straits and forests strong:
Where, taking-in the Towns, pretended to belong
Unto that Assaracus.
Grecian Lord, some forces there they put:
Within whose safer walls their wives and children shut,
Into the fields they drew, for liberty to stand.
Which when Pandrasus heard, he sent his strict command
To levy all the power he presently could make:
So, to their strengths of war the Trojans them betake.
But whilst the Grecian Guides (not knowing how or where
The Teuerians were entrencht, or what their forces were)
In foul disordred troops yet straggled, as secure,
This looseness to their spoil the Trojans did allure,
Who fiercely them assailed: where stanchlesse fury raped
The Grecians in so fast, that scarcely one escaped:
Yea, proud Pandrasus flight, himself could hardly free.
Who, when he saw his force thus frustrated to be,
And by his present loss, his passed error found
(As by a later war to cure a former wound)
Does reinforce his power to make a second fight.
When they whose better wits had ouer-matcht his might,
Loath what they got to lose, as politiquelie cast
His Armies to entrap, in getting to them fast
Antigonus as friend, and Anaclet his pheere
(Surpised in the last fight) by gifts who hired were
Into the Grecian Camp th'insuing night to go
And feign they were stolen forth, to their Allies to show
How they might have the spoil of all the Trojan pride;
And gaining them belief, the credulous Grecians guide
Into th'ambushment near, that secretly was laid:
So to the Trojans hands the Grecians were betrayed;
Pandrasus self surpised; his Crown who to redeem
(Which scarcely worth their wrong the Trojan race esteem)
Their slavery long sustained did willingly release:
And (for a lasting league of amity and peace)
Bright Innogen, his child, for wife to Brutus gave,
And furnished them a fleet, with all things they could crave
To set them out to Sea. Who lanching, at the last
They on Lergecia light, an I Will; and, ere they past,
Unto a Temple built to great Diana there,
The noble Brutus went; wise One of the titles of Diana.
Triuia to enquire,
To show them where the stock of ancient Troy to place.
The Goddess, that both knew and loved the Trojan race,
Revealed to him in dreams, that furthest to the West,
. He should discrie the I Will of Albion, highly blessed;
With Giants lately stored; their numbers now decaid:
By vanquishing the rest, his hopes should there be staid:
Where, from the stock of Troy, those puissant Kings should rise,
Whose conquests from the West, the world should scant suffice.
Thus answered; great with hope, to sea they put again,
And safely under sail, the hours do entertain
With sights of sundry shores, which they from far discrie:
And viewing with delight the Azarian Mountains hie,
One walking on the deck, unto his friend would say
As I have heard some tell) So goodly Ida lay.
Thus talking among themselves, they sunburned Africa keep
Upon the lee-ward still, and (sulking up the deep^)
For Mauritania make: where putting-in, they find
A remnant (yet reserved) of the ancient Dardan kind,
By brave Antenor brought from out the Greekish spoils
(O long-renowned Troy! Of thee, and of thy toils,
What Country had not heard?) which, to their General, then
Great Corineus had, the strong'st of mortal men:
To whom (with joyful hearts) Dianas will they show.
Who easlie being won along with them to go,
They altogether put into the watery Plain:
Oft-times with Pirates, often with Monsters of the Maine
Distressed in their way; whom hope forbids to fear.
Those pillars first they pass which Jove's great son did rear.
And cuffing those stern waves which like huge Mountains roll
(Full joy in every part possessing every soul)
In Aquitane at last the ^l^on race arrive*
Whom strongly to repulse when as those recreants strive,
They (anchoring there at first but to refresh their fleet,
Yet saw those savage men so rudely them to greet)
Vnshipt their warlike youth, aduauncing to the shore.
The Dwellers, which perceived such danger at the door,
Their King Groffarius get to raise his powerful force:
Who, mustring up an host of mingled foot and horse,
Upon the Trojans set; when suddenly began
A fierce and dangerous fight: where Corineus ran
With slaughter through the thick-set squadrons of the foes;
And with his armed Axe laid on such deadly blows,
That heaps of liuelesse trunks each passage stopped up quite.
Groffarius having lost the honor of the fight,
Repaires his ruined powers; not so to give them breath:
When they, which must be freed by conquest or by death,
And, conquering them before, hoped now to do no less
(The like in courage still) stand for the like success.
Then stern and deadly War put-on his horridst shape;
And wounds appeared so wide, as if the Grave did gape
To swallow both at once; which strove as both should fall,
When they with slaughter seemed to be encircled all:
Where Turon (of the rest) Brutes Sisters valiant son
By whose approved deeds that day was chiefly won)
Six hundred slew outright through his peculiar strength:
By multitudes of men yet ouer-prest at length.
His nobler Uncle there, to his immortal name,
. The City Turon built, and well endowed the same.
For Albion sailing then, th'arriued quickly here
(O! never in this world men half so joyful were
With shoutes heard up to heaven, when they beheld the Land)
And in this very place where To^nesse now does stand,
First set their Gods of Troy, kissing the blessed shore;
Then, forraging this I Will, long promisd them before,
Amongst the ragged Cleeues those monstrous Giants sought:
Who (of their dreadful kind) t'appall the Trojans, brought
Great Gogmagog, an Oak that by the roots could tear:
. So mighty were (that time) the men who lived there:
But, for the use of Arms he did not understand
(Except some rock or tree, that coming next to hand
He razed out of the earth to execute his rage)
He challenge makes for strength, and offers there his gage.
Which, Corin takes up, to answer by and by,
Upon this son of Earth his utmost power to try.
All, doubtful to which part the victory would go,
Upon that lofty place at Plimmouth called the Hoe,
Those mighty The description of the wrestling betwixt Corineus and Gogmagog.
Wrastlers met; with many an irefull look
Who threatened, as the one hold of the other took:
But, grapled, glowing fire shines in their sparkling eyes.
And, whilst at length of arm one from the other lies,
Their lusty sinews swell like cables, as they strive:
Their feet such trampling make, as though they forced to drive
A thunder out of earth; which staggered with the weight:
Thus, eithers utmost force urged to the greatest height.
Whilst one upon his hip the other seeks to lift,
And th'adverse (by a turn) does from his cunning shift,
Their short-fetcht troubled breath a hollow noise does make,
Like bellows of a Forge. Then Corin up does take
The Giant twixt the grayns; and, voyding of his hold
(Before his combrous feet he well recover could)
Pitched headlong from the hill; as when a man does throw
An Axtree, that with slight deliuerd from the toe
Roots up the yielding earth: so that his violent fall,
Struck Neptune with such strength, as shouldred him withal;
That where the monstrous waves like Mountains late did stand,
They leap't out of the place, and left the bared sand
To gaze upon wide heaven: so great a blow it gave.
For which, the conquering Brute, on Corineus brave
This horn of land bestowed, and marked it with his name;
. Of Corin, Cornwall called, to his immortal fame.
Clear Dert delivering thus the famous Brutes arrive,
Inflamed with her report, the straggling ^iuelets strive
So highly her to raise, that Ting (whose banks were blessed
By her beloved Nymph dear Leman) which addressed
And fully with her self determined before
To sing the Danish spoils committed on her shore,
When hither from the East they came in mighty swarms,
Nor could their native earth contain their numerous Arms,
Their surcrease grew so great, as forced them at last
To seek another soil (as Bees do when they cast)
And by their impious pride how hard she was bested,
When all the Country swam with blood of Saxons shed:
This River (as I said) which had determined long
The Deluge of the Danes exactlie to have song,
It utterly neglects; and studying how to do
The Dert those high respects belonging her unto,
Inuiteth goodly Ex, who from her ful-fed spring
Her little Barlee has, and Dunsbrook her to bring
From Exmore: when she yet has scarcely found her course,
Then Creddy comes in, and Forto, which enforce
Her faster to her fall; as Ken her closely clips*
And on her Eastern side sweet Leman gently slips
Into her widened banks, her Sovereign to assist,
As Columb winnes for Ex, clear Weuer and the Clist,
Contributing their streams their Mistress fame to raise.
As all assist the Ex, so Ex consumes these;
Like some unthrifty youth, depending on the Court,
To win an idle name, that keepts a needless port;
And raising his old rent, exacts his Farmers store
The Landlord to enrich, the Tenants wondrous poor:
Who having lent him theirs, he then consumes his own,
That with most vain expense upon the Prince is thrown:
So these, the lesser Brooks unto the greater pay;
The greater, they again spend all upon the Sea:
As, Otre^ (that her name does of the Otters take,
Abounding in her banks) and Ax, their utmost make
(Tony de stout Dert, that dared Brutes story to revive.
For, when the Saxon first the Britans forth did drive,
Some up into the hills themselves over Seuerne shut:
Upon this point of land, for refuge others put,
To that brave race of Brute still fortunate. For where
Great Brute first disembarqu this wandering Trojans, there
. His offspring (after long expulst the Inner land,
When they the Saxon power no longer could withstand)
Found refuge in their ^light; where Ax and Otrey first
Gave these poor souls to drink, oppressed with grievous thirst.
Here I Will unyoke awhile, and turn my steeds to meat:
The land grows large and wide: my Teame begins to sweat.
Illustrations.
IF in Prose and Religion it were as justifiable, as in Poetry and Fiction, to
inuoke a Local power (for anciently both Jews, Gentiles, and Christians have
supposed to every Country a singular Rabbin. ad 10. Dan. Macrob. Saturnal. 3.
cap. 9. Symmach. Epist. 40. lib. 1. D. Th. 2. did. 10. art. 3. alij.
Genius) I would therein join with the Author. Howsoever, in this and all God
before.
(...): and so I begin to you.

As Amphitrite clips this Island fortunate.
When Pope Clement VI. granted the fortunate Isles to Jews Earl of
Cleremont, by that general name (meaning only the seven Canaries, and
purposing their Christian conversion) the English Ambassadors at Rome seriously
doubted, Rob Auesburiens. A. XVII. Ed. III. The fortunate Isles.
least their own Country had been comprised in the Donation. They were Henry
of Lancaster Earl of Derby, Hugh Spenser, Ralph L. Stafford, the Bishop of
Oxford, and others, agents therewith the Pope, that he; as a private friend,
not as a Judge or party interessed, should determine of Edward the third^ right
to France* where you have this Embassage in Walsingha^, Hypodigmatis Neustriae
locus emendatus, sub anno M.CCC.XLIV.
correct Regnum Angliae, and read Francia, Britains excellence in earth and
air (whence the Macares, Pompo^. Mela l. 2. c. 7.
and particularly Crete among the Greeks, had their title) together with the
Popes exactions, in taxing, collating, and prouising of Benefices (an
intolerable wrong to Laymens inheritances, and the Crowne-reuenewes) gave
cause of this jealous conjecture; seconded in the conceit of them which deny
Albion from Happy.
(...) hither^to the Author in his title and this verse alludes. But of Albion
more, presently.

Amongst whose iron rocks grim Saturn yet remains.
Fabulous Jupiters ill dealing with his Father Saturn, is well known, and that
after deposing him, and his priuities (...) off, he perpetually imprisoned
him. Homer Iliad. ^. and Hesiod. in Theogon.
ioynes I^pet with him, living in eternal night about the utmost ends of the
earth: which well fits the more Northern climate of these Islands. Of them
(dispersed in the Deucalidonian Sea) in one most temperate, of gentle air, and
fragrant with sweetest odours, lying toward the Northwest, it is reported,
Plutar. de facie in Orb Lunae. and l. de defect oracul.
that Saturn lies bound in iron chains, kep^ by Briareus, attended by
spirits, continually dreaming of Jupiters proiects, whereby his ministers
prognosticate the secrets of Fate. Every thirty years, diverse of the ad^acent
Islander^ with solemnity for success of the undertaken voyage, and competent
provision, enter the vast Seas, (...).
and at last, in this Saturn^an Isle (by this name the Sea is called also)
enjoy the happy quie^ of the place, some in studies of nature, and the
Mathematiques, which continue* others in sensuality, Rablais.
which after XXX. years return perhaps to their first home. This fabulous
relation might be, and in part is, by Chymiques as well interpreted for
mysteries of their art, as the common tale of Daedalus Labyrinth, Pasoh and his
Argonautiques, and almost the whole Chaos of Mythique inventions. But neither
Geography (for I guess no^ where or what this Isle should be, unless than
ideal (...) which (...) discovered) nor the manner self permits it l^sse
Poetical (although a learned Greek Father Clem. Alexandrin. stromat. ^.
Odyss.. Iliad. ^.
out of some credulous Historian seems to remember it) then the Elisian
fields, which, with this, are always laid by Homer about the Utmost ends of
the earth. Upon affinity of this with the Cap^ de Finistere, Goropius thinks
the Elisian fields were by that Promontory of Spain. v. Strab. lib. (...).
(...); a place whereof too large liberty was given to ^aine, because of the
difficult possibility in finding the truth. Only thus note seriously, that
this revolution of XXX. years (which with some latitude is Saturnes natural
motion) is especially Plin, hist. na^. 16. cap. 44.
noted for the longest period, or age also among our Druids; and that in a
particular form, to be accounted yearly from the sixth Moon, as their
New-yeares-day: which circuit of time* diverse of the Ancients reckon for their
generations in Chronology; as store E^stat. ad Iliad ^. Herodot. lib. ^. Suid.
in (...). Censori^. in de d^^nat. cap. 17.
of Authors show you.

They instantly again do other bodies take.
You cannot be without understanding of this Pythagorean opinion of
trans-animation (I have like liberty to naturalize that word, as Lipsius had to
make it a Roman, by turning A passing of souls from one to another.
(...)) if ever you read any that speaks of Pythagoras (whom, for this
particular, Epiphanius reckons among his heretics) or discourse largely of
Philosophical doctrine of the soul. But especially, if you affect it tempered
with inuiting pleasure, take Lucians Cock, and his Negroman^y; if in serious
discourse, Plato's Phadon, and Phadrus with his followers. Lipsius doubts
Physiolog. Stoi^. l. 3. dissert. 12.
whether Pythagoras received it from the Druids, or they from him, because in
his travels he conuerst as well with Gaulish as Indian Philosophers. Out of
Caesar and Lucan inform your self with full testimony of this their opinion,
too ordinary among the heathen and Jews also, which thought our Justin Martyr.
dialog.
Savior to be Jeremy or Elias upon this error; irreligious indeed, yet such a
one, as so strongly erected moving spirits, that they did never -- Spare in
spending their lives, which they hoped to receive again.
rediturae parcere vitae,
but most willingly deuote their whole selves to the public service: and this
was in substance the politic enuoyes wherewith Plato and Cicero concluded
their Common-welths, as Macrobius has observed. The Author, with pity,
imputes to them their being led away in blindness of the time, and errors of
their fancies; as all other the most divine Philosophers (not lightened by the
true word) have been* although (mere humane sufficiencies only considered)
some of them were sublimat far above earthly conceit: as especially Hermes,
Orpheus, Pythagoras, (first learning the sou^es immortality of Cicer. Tusculan.
1.
Pherecydes a Syrian) Seneca, Plato, and Plutarch; which last two, in a Greek
hymn of an Eastern Ioann Eucha^tens. iampridem Etoniae graece editus.
Bishop, are commended to Christ for such as came nearest to holiness of any
untaught Gentiles. Of the Druids more large in fitter place.

Gave answer from their caves, and took what shapes they please.
In the Seame (an Isle by the coast of the French Bretaigne) nine Virgins
consecrate to perpetual chastity, were Priests of a famous oracle, remembered
by Mela. His printed books have Gallicenas vocant; where that great critique
Turneb reads The Gauls call them Jupiters Priests or Bawdes.
Galli Zenas, or Lenas vocant. But White of Basingstoke will have it Vain.
Cenas, as interpreting their profession and religion, which was in an
arbitrarie metamorphosing themselves, charming the winds (as of later time the
Witches of Lappland and Finland) skill in predictions, more then natural
medicine, and such like; their kindness being in all chiefly to Solin. Polyhist.
cap. 35.
Sayler^* But finding that in the Syllies were also of both Sexes such kind of
professors, that there were (...) Dionys. Asro in (...) multis. n. pro a^bitrio
antiquorum S. litera ad est vel abest. v. Casaubon. ad ^. Strab*
Samn^tae, strangely superstitious in their Baccha^a^s, in an I Will of this coast
(as is delivered by Strabo) and that the Gauls, Britains, Indians (twixt both
whom and Pythagoras is found no small concent of doctrine) had their
Philosophers (under which name both Priests and Prophets of those times were
included) called Origin. (...). lib a. Clem. Alex strom. (...) and (...).
Diogen. La^rt. lib. (...) Conjecture upon Mela.
Samanai, and Semni, and (perhaps by corruption of some of these) Samothei,
which, to make it Greek, might be turned into Semnothes: I doubted whether
some relic of these words remained in that of Mela, if you read Cenas or
Senas, as contracted from Samanaei; which by deduction from a root of some
Eastern tongue, might signify as much, as, what we call Astrologers. But of
this too much.

Whose towns unto the Saints that lived here of yare.
Not only to their own country Saints (whose names are there very frequent)
but also to the Irish; a people anciently (according to the name of the Festo
Auteno Insula sacra dicta Hiber^ae.
Holy Island given to Ireland) much devoted to, and by the English much
respected for their holiness and learning. I omit their fabulous Caesara niece
to Noah, Girald. Cambrens. did. 3. cap. 2.
their Bartholan, their Ruan, who, as they affirm, first planted Religion,
before Christ, among them: nor desire I your belief of this Ruans age, which
by their account (supposing him living CCC. years after the flood, and
christened by Saint Patriq^^s) exceeded M.DCC. years, and so was elder then
that impostor, Assuerus Cordonnier (dictus in historia Gallica Victor^ ante
triennium edita de la pa^x etc.) ^^ius parts olim egisse videntur Ioseph^^
Clint^ophylacius (referente Episcopo Armenia^o apud Matthew. Paris in Hen. 3.)
and Ioannes ille (Guidom Bonato in Astrologia sic indigitalus) Butta-deus.
whose fained continuance of life and restles travails, ever since the
Passion, lately offered to deceive the credulous. Only thus I note out of
Venerable Bede, that in the Saxon times, it was usual for the English and
Gaulish to make Ireland, as it were, both their University and Monastery, for
studies of learning and divine contemplation, as the life of In Bibliothec.
Floriacens. edit. per Ioann. a bosco.
Gildas also, and other frequent testimonies discover.

From which he first was called the Hoare-rocke in the wood.
That the Ocean (as in many other places of other countries) has eaten up much
of what was here once shore, is a common report, approved in the Cornish name
of S. Michaels mount; which is Careg Cowz in Clowz Carew descript. Corn. lib. 2.
.i. the hoare rock in the wood.

And our main-Amber here, and Burien trophy --
Main-Amber.i. Ambroses stone (not far from Pensans) so great, that many men's
united strength cannot remove it, yet with one finger you may wagge it. The
Burien trophy is xix. stones, circularly disposed, and, in the middle, one much
exceeding the rest in greatness: by conjecture of most learned Camden, erected
either under the Romans, or else by K. Athelstan in his conquest of these
parts.

Were worthy of his end, but where he had his birth.
Near Camel about Camblan, was Dictus hinc in Merlini vaticinio, Aper Cornubia.
Arthur slain by Mordred, and on the same shore, East from the rivers mouth,
borne in Tintagel castle. Gorlois Prince of Cornwall at Vther-Pendragons
coronation, solemnized in London, upon diverse too kind passages and lascivious
regards twixt the King and his wife Igerne, grew very jealous, in a rage left
the Court, committed his wives chastity to this Castles safeguard; and to
prevent the wasting of his country (which upon this discontent was threatened)
betook himself in other forts to martial preparation. Other (his blood still
boiling in lust) upon advice of Vlfin Rhicaradech, one of his Knights, by
Ambrose Merlins magique personated like Gorlois, and Vlsin like one Jordan,
servant to Gorlois, made such successful use of their imposture, that (the
Prince in the mean time slain) Arthur was the same night begotten, and
verified that Euripid. Andromach. Bastards are ofttimes better then legitimates.
(...); although Merlin by the rule of Hermes, or Astrologicall direction,
justified, that he was conceived III. hours after Gorlois death; by this
shift answering the dangerous imputation of bastardy to the heir of a crown.
For Other taking Igern to wife, left Arthur his successor in the Kingdom. Here
have you a Jupiter, an Alcmena, an Amphitry^, a Sofias, and a Mercury; nor
wants there scarce any thing, but that truth-passing reports of Poetical Bards
have made the birth an Hercules.

Known by one general name upon this point that dwell.
The name Dumnonij, Damnonij, or Danmonij, in Solinus and Ptolemy, comprehended
the people of Devonshire and Cornwall: whence the Lizard- promontory is called
Damnium in Marcian Heracleotes; (...).
and William of Malmesbury, Florence of Worcester, Roger of Houeden, and
others, style Devonshire by name of Dom^^nia, perhaps all from Duff neint. i.
low valleys in British; wherein are most habitations of the country, as
judicious Camden teaches me.

Or that this foreland lies furth'st out into his sight,
Which spreads his vigorous flames --
Fuller report of the excellence in wrestling and nimblenesse of body,
wherewith this Western people have been, and are famous, you may find in
Carew's description of his country. But to give reason of the climat^ nature,
for this prerogative in them, I think as difficult, as to show why about the
Magellanique straights they are so white, about the Cape de buon speranza so
black, Ortelius theatro.
yet both under the same Tropique; why the Abyssins are but tawny Moors, when
as in the East Indian Isles Zeilan and Malabar, they are very black, both in
the same parallel; or why we that live in this Northern latitude, compared
with the Southern, should not be like affected from like cause. I refer it
no more to the Sun, then the special Horsmanship in our Northern men, the
nimble ability of the Irish, the fiery motions of the French, Italian
jealousy, German liberty, Spanish puffed up vanity, or those different and
perpetual carriages of state-gouernement, Haste and Delay, Thucydid. ^ and
passim. de Athen. and Lacedaem. and de Thaebis and Chalcide v. Columell. i. de
re rustic. cap. 4.
which as inbred qualities, were remarqueable in the two most martial people
of Greece. The cause of Ethiopian blackenesse and curled hair was long since
iudiciously Onesecrit. ap. Strabon. lib. ^.
fetched from the disposition of soil, air, water, and singular operations of
the heavens; with co^futation of those which attribute it to the Suns distance:
And I am resolved that every land has its so singular selfe-nature, and
individual habitude with celestial influence, that humane knowledge,
consisting most of all in universality, is not yet furnished with what is
requisite to so particular discovery: but for the learning of this point in a
special Treatise Hippocrates, Ptolemy, Bodin, others have copious disputes.

Which now the envious world does slander for a dream.
I should the sooner have been of the Authors opinion (in more then Poetical
form, standing for Brute) if in any Greek or Latin Story authentic,
speaking of Aeneas and his planting in Latium, were mention made of any such
like thing. To reckon the learned men which deny him, or at least permit him
not in conjecture, were too long a Catalogue: and indeed, this critique age
scarce any longer endures any nation, their first supposed Authors name, not
Italus to the Italian, not Hispalus to the Spaniard, Bato to the Hollander,
Brabo to the Brabantine, Francio to the French, Celtes to the Celt, Galathes to
the Gaul, Scota to the Scot; no, nor scarce Romulus to his Rome, because of
their unlikely and fictitious mixtures: especially this of Brute, supposed long
before the beginning of the Olympiads (whence all time backward is justly
called by Ap. Censorin. de dit not. cap. 21. Christoph. Heluici Chronologia^
sequimur, nec, vt accuratius temporum subductioni hoc loci in^umbamus, res
postulat; verem and ille satis accurate, qui Samuelis praefecturam A.
MM.M.DCCC.L. haut iniquo computo posuit.
Varro, unknown or fabulous) some M.M.D.CC. and more years since, about
Samuels time, is most of all doubted. But (reserving my censure) I thus
maintain the Author: although nor Greek nor Latin, nor our country stories
of Bid and Malmesbury especially, nor that fragment yet remaining of Gildas,
speak of him; and that his name were not published until Geffrey of Monmouths
edition of the British story, which grew and continues much suspected, in much
rejected; yet observe that Tali^ssin a Io. Pris. def. hist. Brit.
great Bard, more then M. years since affirms it, Nennius (in some copies he
is under name of Gildas) above DCCC. years past, and the Gloss of Samuel
Beaulan, or some other, crept into his text, mention both the common report,
and descent from Aeneas; and withal, (which I take to be Nennius his own)
make him son to one Isicio or Hesich^^ (perhaps meaning Aschenaz, of whom
more to the fourth Song) continuing a pedigree to Adam, joining these words: Ex
vetustiss and perpulchre m. s. Nennio sub titulo Gildae.
This Genealogy I found by tradition of the Ancients, which were first
inhabitants of Britain. In a Manuscript Epistle of Henry of Huntingdon Lib. de
summitatibus reru^^ qui 10. est historiarum in m.s. Huntingdon began his
History at Caesar, but upon better inquisition added Brute. Libru^ illum, in
quem ait se incidisse, Nenuium fuisse obsignatis serm^tabulu sum potis adserere.
to one Warin, I read the Latin of this English; You ask me, Sir, Why
omitting the succeeding reigns from Brute to Julius Caesar, I begin my story
at Caesar? I answer you, that neither by word nor writing, could I find any
certainty of th^se times; although with diligent search I often inquired it, yet
this year in my journey toward Rome, in the Abbey of Beccensam, even with
amazement, I found the story of Brute: and in his own printed book he
affirms, that what Bid had in this part omitted, was supplied to him by other
authors; of which Girald seems to have had use. The British story of Monmouth
was a translation (but with much liberty, and no exact faithfulness) of a
Welsh book, delivered to Geffrey by one Walter, Archdeacon of Oxford, and has
been followed (the Translator being a man of some credit, and Bishop of S.
Asaphs, under K. Stephen) by Ponticus Virunnius an Italian; most of our
Country Historians of middle times, and this age; speaking so certainly of
him, that they blazon his coat Harding. Nich. Vpton. de re militari. 2.
to you, two Lions combatant, and crowned Or in a field gules; others, Or, a
Lion passant gules; and lastly, by Doctor White of Basingstoke, lately living
at Doway, a Count Palatine; according to the title bestowed by the C. tit. de
professorib l. vnica.
Imperials upon their professors. Arguments are there also drawn from some
affinity of the Greek Girald descript. cap. 15.
tongue, and much of Trojan and Greek names, with the British. These things
are the more enforst by Cambro-Britons, through that universal desire,
bewitching our Europe, to derive their blood from Trojans, which for them might
as well be Camden.
by supposition of their ancestors marriages with the hither deduced Roman
Colonies, who by original were certainly Trojan, if their antiquities deceive
not. You may add this weak conjecture; that in those large excursions of the
Gauls, Cimmerians, and Colts (among them I doubt not but were many Britons,
having with them community of nation, manners, climat, customs; and Brennus
himself is affirmed a Briton) which under indistinct names when this Western
world was undiscovered, ouer-ran Italy, Greece, and part of Asia, it is
Agesianax ap. Strab. lib. (...).
reported that they came to Tro^ for safeguard; presuming perhaps upon like
kindness, as we read of twixt the Trojans and Roma^^s, in their wars with
Trog. Pomp. lib. 31.
Antiodius (which was loving respect through con^^^gence of blood) upon like
cause remembered to them by tradition. Briefly, seeing no National story,
except such as Thucydides, Xenophon, Polybius, Cae^ar, Tacitus, Procopius,
Cantacuzen, the late Guicciardin, Commnines, Maccha^el, and their like, which
were employed in the state of their times, can justify themselves but by
tradition; and that many of the Fathers and Ecclesiastical Melchior Canus lib.
11. de ant. hist. hum. de his plurima.
Histori^ns, especially therewish Rabbis (taking their highest learning of
Cabala, but from antique and successiue report) have inserted upon tradition
many relations curr^nt enough, where holy Writ crosses them not: you shall
enough please Saturn and Mercury, presidents of antiquity and learning, if
with the Author you foster this belief. Where are the authorities (at least of
the names) of Iannes and Iambres, Origin. ad 35. Matthew.
the writings of Enoch, and other such like, which we know by divine tradition
were? The same question might be of that infinite loss of Authors, whose names
are so frequent in Stephen, Athenaeus, Plu^arch, Clemens, Polybius, Li^ie,
others. And how dangerous it were to examine antiquities by a foreign writer
(especially in those times) you may see by the Stories of the Hebrews
delivered in Justin, Strabo, Tacitus, and such ^^her discording and contrary
(beside their infinite omissions) to Moses infallible conte^^. Nay he with his
successor Iosuah (...) copious in the Israelites entering; conquering, and
expelling the Gergesites, See the VI. Song.
Ieb^lites, and the rest out of the holy land; yet no (...) have they of their
transmigration, and peopling of Afrique, which by testimony of two pillars,
Precopius de bell. Vandilic. lib. (...).
erected and engraven at Ting^ has been affirmed. But you blame me thus
expatiating. Let me add for the Author, that our most judicious antiquary of
the last age John Leland, Ad Cyg. Cant.
with reason and authority has also for Brute argued strongly.

Next, Syluius him succeedes --
So goes the ordinary descent; but some make Syluius son to Aeneas, to whom
the Prophecy was given: -- Aeneid 6. and ibid Seru. Honoratu^. After thy death
Lauinia brings a King borne in the woods, father of kings.
Serum Lauinia coniunx,
Educet Syluis regem regumque parent^m.


As you have it in Virgill.

His parents only death --
From these unfortunate accidents, one Basingstoch. lib. 1.
will have his name Brotus, as from the Greek (...) i. mortal; but rather (if
it had pleased him) from (...), i. bloody.

He should discrie the Isle of Albion, highly blessed;
His request to Diana in an Hexastich, and her answer in an Ogdoastich,
hexameters and pentameters, discovered to him in a dream, with his sacrifice
and rituall ceremonies are in the British story: the verses are pure Latin,
which clearly (as is written of Cicer. de diuinat. lib. 2.
Apollo) was not in those times spoken by Diana, nor understood by Brute:
therefore in charity, believe it a Translation; by Gildas a British Poet, as
Virunnius tells you. The Author takes a justifiable liberty, making her call it
Albion, which was the old name of this Isle, and remembered in Pliny, Marcian,
the book (...), falsely attributed to Aristotle, Stephen, Apulelus, others; and
our Monk of Bury Io. Lidgat. lib. de bell. Trojan. 5. and alibi saepius
calls Henry the fifth -- Protec^our of Brutes Albion,
often using that name for the Island. From Albina, daughter to Dioclesian
Chronic. S. Albani.
King of Syria some fetch the name: others from a Lady of that name, one of the
Danaid's; affirming their Hugo de Genes. ap. Harding. cap. 3.
arrival here, copulation with spirits, and bringing forth Giants. and all
this above CC. years before Brute. But neither was there any such King in
Syria, nor had Danaus (that can be found) any such daughter, nor traveled they
for adventures, but by their father were newly Pausanias in Laconic.
married, after slaughter of their husbands: briefly, nothing can be written
more impudently fabulous. Others from K. Albion, Neptunes son, from the
Greek Happy.
(...) others, or from (I know not what) Olibius a Celtish King, remembered by
the false Mancthon. Follow them rather, which will it From white cliffs.
ab albis rupibus, whereby it is specially conspicuous. So was an Isle in the
Indian Sea called Leuca.i. white and (...), vti Euripides in Andromacha, magis
vellem, quam (...) quod ^anit Dionysi^^ Afer.
another in Pontus, supposed also fortunate, and a receptacle of the souls of
those great Heroes, Peleus and Achilles. Thus was a place by Tyber Strabo lib.
^. and Sixth. Pompeius in Alpum.
called Albiona* and the very name of Albion was upon the Alps, which from
like cause had their denomination; Alpum in the Sabin tongue (from the Greek
(...)) signifying white. Some much dislike this deriuation, Humf. Lhuid. in
Breuiar.
because it comes from a tongue (suppose it either Greek or Latin) not
anciently communicated to this Isle. For my part, I think clearly (against
the common opinion) that the name of Britain was known to strangers before
Albion. I could vouch the Moshion ap. Athen. dipnosop^.
finding of one of the masts of Hi^r^'s Ship, In the hills of Britany.
(...) (...) her torns de (...) (...) lower Calubria in (...), a place above
all other, I remember ^^ore of Ship-tymber; commended Thucydid. hist. ^.
by Alcibiades to the L^cedaemonians. But with better surety can I produce the
express (...) of British Isles.
(...), out of a writer that Polyb. hist. (...). qu^ I. C^sarem C C. ferm^ (...)
and traveled in warfare with Selpio; before whose time S^^lox ((...) king^
Catalogue of XX. other Isles) and Heracletus (to whom these Western parts were
by his confession unknown) never so much as speak of us by any name.
Afterward was Albion imposed upon the cause before touched, expressing the old
British name The white Isle.
Inis-guin: which argument moves me before all other, for that I see it usual
in antiquity to have names among strangers, in their tongue just significant
with the same in the language of the country, to which they are applied; as the red Sea is (in Strabo, Curtius, Stephen, others) named from a King of that
coast called Erythraus (for, to speak of read sand, as some, or read hills,
as an old Vranius in Arabic. ap. Steph, (...).
writer, were but refuges of shameful ignorance) which was surely the same
with Esau, called in holy Writ Aedom Genesis 36. Number. 20.
; both signifying (the one in Greek, the other in Hebrew) read. So the river
Nile, Iesai. 23. Iirm. 2.
in Hebrew and Egyptian called (...).i. black, in observed by that mighty
Prince of learnings state, Joseph Scaliger, to signify the same color in the
word (...), used for it by Odyss. (...) -- forte tamen, fluuius Aegypti, vt
Hebraeis (...) Genesis 15. commat. 17
Homer; which is inforst also by the black Pausan. Arcadic. ^.
Statues among the Greeks, erected in honor of Nile, named also expressly
Melas: so in proper names of men; Simon Zelotes, Festus in Alcedo.
in Luke, is but Simon the Chanauit, and N^brissens. in quinquagen. cap. 49.
(...) in Orpheus the same with Moses, Ianus with Oenetrus: and in our times
those Authors, Melanchthon, Magirus, Theocr^nus, Palargus, in their own
language, but Swertearth, Cooks, Fountain de dieu, Storke. Diverse such other
plain examples might illustrate the conceit; but, these sufficient. Take
largest etymologicall liberty, and you may have it from Camden.
Ellan-ban.i. the white Isle, in Scottish, as they call their Albani^; and to
fit all together, the name of Britain from Brith-inia.i. the colored Isle in
Welsh, twixt which and the Greek Vocabulo (...) vsi sunt AEschylus, Sophocles,
Hellanus, Archil^chus, Hecataus ap. Athenaum dipnosoph. 10. (...) eiusdem pere
natura cum Sytho and Curmithe apud Dioscoridem lib. (...). cap. (...) and
(...). ferte (...).
(...), or (...) (used for a kind of drink nearly like our Beer) I would
with the French Forcatulus think affinity (as Italy was called Oen^tria, from
the name of wine) were it not for that (...) may be had from an ordinary
primitive, or else from (...).i. sweet (as Solinus teaches, making Britomart
signify as much as sweet Virgin) in the Cretique tongue. But this is to play
with syllables, and abuse precious time.

The City Turon built --
Understand Tours upon Loire in France, whose name and foundation the
inhabitants Andre du Chesne en les recorchez des vilies 1. ca. 122.
refer to Turnus (of the same time with Aeneas, but whether the same which
Virgil speaks of, they know not:) his funeral monuments they yet show, boast
of, and from him idly derive the word Torneaments. The British story says
Brute built it (so also Nennius) and from one Turon, Brutes nephew there
buried, gives it the name. Homer is cited for testimony: in his works extant it
is not found. But, because he had diverse others (which wrongful time has
filcht from us) as appears in Herodotus and Suidas; you may in favor think
it to be in some of those lost; yet I cannot in conscience offer to persuade
you that he ever knew the continent of Gaul (now, in part, France) although a
learned Goropius in Hispanic. 4. ^. Strab. geograph. 2. and alios de
Olyssippone.
German endeauours by force of wit and etymology, to carry Ulysses (which he
makes of Elizza in Genesis) into Spain, and others before Solin. Polyhist.
cap. 35.
him (but falsely) into the Northern parts of Scotland. But for Homers
knowledge, see the last note to the six^ song.

So mighty were that time the men that lived there:
If you trust our stories, you must believe, the land then peopled with Giants,
of vast bodily composture. I have read of the Nephilim, the R^pha^^^, Anakim,
Og, Goliath, and other in holy writ: of Mars, Tityus, Antaus, T^^rnus, and the
Titans in Homer, Virgil, Ovid, and of Adams stature (according to Jewish Rabbi
Eleazar ap. Riccium in epit. Talmud. caeterum in bac. re allegoriam v. ap. D.
Cypgianu^ sermon. de montib. Sina and Sion.
fiction) equalling at first the worlds Diameter; yet seeing that nature (now
as fertile as of old) has in her effects determinate limits of quantity, that
in Aristotle's (...)
time (near M.M. years since) their beds were but six foot ordinarily (nor
is the difference, twixt ours and Greek dimension, much) and that near the
same length was our Saviors Sepulcher, as Adamnan informed Bed. hist.
Ecclesiast. 5. cap. 17.
K Alfrid; I could think that there now are some, as great Statures, as for the
most part have been, and that Giants were but of a somewhat more then vulgar
(...) Baruch. cap. (...). Consule, si placet, Scaliger. exercitat. Becan.
becc^selan. ^. Augustine Ciu. Dei. 25. cap. ^2. Clement. Romans Recognit. 1.
Lactavit. etc.
excellence in body, and martial performance. If you object the finding of
great bones, which, measured by proportion, largely exceed our times. I first
answer, that in some singulars, as Monsters rather then natural, such proof
has bin; but withal, that both now and of ancient, S^^t^n. Oct^n. cap. 72.
time, the eyes judgment in such like has been, and is, subject to much
imposture; mistaking bones of huge beasts for humane. Dio Cass. lib. (...).
Claudius brought over his Elephants hither, and perhaps Julius Caesar some,
(for I have read Poly^^. ^rata germat. ^. in Caesar^.
that he terribly frighted the Brit^ns, with sight of one at Coway stakes) and
so may you be deceived. But this in no place to examine it.

Of Corin, Cornwall called, to his immortal fame.
So, if you believe the tale of Corin, and Gogmagog: but rather imagine the
name of Cornwall from this promontory of the lands end; extending it self
like a Cornugallia dicta est Henrico Huntingd^nio, a^ijs.
horn, which in most tongues is Corn, or very near. Thus Strabo lib. (...).
and. ^. Steph. M^^. Plin. Geographi passim.
was a promontory in Cyprus, called Cerastes, and in the now Candy or Crete,
and Gazaria, (the old Taurica Chersonesus) another titled Rams head.
(...), and Brundusium in Italy had name from Brendon or Seleucus ap. Steph.
(...) and Suid. (...).
Brention. i. a Harts-head in the M^ssapian tongue, for similitude of horns.
But De gest. reg. 2. cap. 6.
Malmesbury thus: They are called Cornewalsh men, because being seated in the
Western part of Britain, they ly over against a horn (a promontory) of
Gaul. The whole name is, as if you should say Corne-wales; for hither in the
Sa^^n conquest the British called Welsh (signifying the people, rather then
strangers as the vulgar opinion wills) made transmigration: whereof an old
Rob. Glocestrens.
Rimer; The vewe that were of hom bileued, as in Cornwaile and Walis,
Brutons ner namore ycluped, at Waleys ywis.
Such, was the language of your fathers between CCC. and CCCC. years since:
and of it more hereafter.

The deluge of the Dane exactly to have song.
In the IIII. year of A. DCC.LXXX.VII.
Brithric, K. of the West Saxons at Portland, and at this place (which makes
the fiction proper) three ships of Danish Pirates entered: the Kings Lieutenant
offering inquisition of their name, state and cause of arrival, was the first
English man, in this first Danish invasion, slain by their hand. Miserable
losses and continual, had the English by their frequent irruptions from this
time till the Norman conquest, twixt which intercedes CC.LXX.IX. years: and
that less account of Audacter lege ducento^ v^ce (...) tricentos in sol. 237.
Houedeni, cui prologum libro quinto H. Huntindon. committas licet. Dangelt
showed against a common error, both in remission and institution.
CC.XXX. during which space this land endured their bloody slaughters,
according to some men's calculation, begins at K. Ethelulph; to whose ^^me Henry
of Huntigdon, and Roger of Houeden, refer the beginning of the Danish
mischief, continuing so intolerable, that under K. Ethelred was there begun a
tribute insupportable (yearly afterward exacted from the subjects) to give
their King Sw^^n, and so prevent their insatiat rap^n. It was between XXX. and
XL, thousand Mariano Scoto XXXVI.M. librae, and Florentio Wigorn.
pounds (for I find no cert^inty of it, so variable are the reports) not
instituted for pay of Garrisons, ^mployed in service against them (as upon the
misunderstanding of the Confessors ^awes some ill affirm) but to satisfy the
wasting enemy; but so that it ceased not* although their spoils ceased, but
was collected to the use of the crown; until K. Stephen promised to remit it.
For indeed S. Edward upon imagination of seeing a devil dancing about the
whole sum of it lying in his treasury, moved in conscience, caused it to be
repaied, and released the duty, as Ingulph Abbot of Crowland tells you: yet
observe him, and read Florence of Worcester, Marian the Scot, Henry of
Huntigdon, and Roger Houeden, and you will confess that what I report thus
from them is truth, and different much from what vulgarly is received. Of the
Danish race were afterward in Kings, Cnut, Hardcnut, and Harold the 1.

His offspring after long expulst the inner land.
Chronologiam huc spectantem consulas in illustrat. ad. ^. Cant.
After some M.D. years from the supposed arrival of the Trojans, their
posterity were by incroachment of Saxons, Iutes, Angles, Danes (for among the
Saxons that noble Ian. D^uz. Annal. Holland. 1. and 6.
Denz. wills that surely Danes were) Frisians Procopius in frag. (...) lib.
Gothic. ap. Camden. Name of England.
and Franks driven into those western parts of the now Wales and Cornwales.
Our stories have this at large, and the Saxon Heptarchy; which at last by
public edict of K. Ecbert was called (...). But John Bishop of Pollicratic.
lib. 6. cap. 17.
Chartres says it had that name from * the first coming of the Angles; others
from the name of Hengist Chronic. S. Albani. Hector B^^t. Sc^ter. hist. 7.
(a matter probable enough) whose name, wars, policies, and government,
being first invested by Vortigern in Kent, are above all the other Germans most
notable in the British stories: and Harding -- He called it Engestes land,
Which afterward was shorted, and called England.
Hereto accords that of one of our I. Gower Epigram in confess. amantis.
country old Poets: -- Britain sings in Hengists tongue.
Engisti lingua canit insula Bruti.
If I should add the idle conceits of Godfrey of Viterbo, drawing the name
from I know not what Angri, the insertion of L. for R. by Pope Gregory, or the
conjectures of vnlimitable fantasy, I should unwillingly, yet with them
impudently, err.



The second Song.
* THE ARGUMENT.
The Muse from Marshwood way commands,
Along the shore through Chesills sands:
Where, ouertoyld, her heat to cool,
She bathes her in the pleasant Poole:
Thence, ouer-land again does scowre,
To fetch in Froome, and bring down Stowre;
Falls with New-forrest, as she sings
The wanton Wood-Nymphes reuellings.
Whilst Itchin in her lofty lays,
Chaunts Beuis of South-hamptons praise,
She Southward with her active flight
Is wafted to the I Will of Wight,
To see the (...) the Sea-gods keep:
There swaggering in the Solent deep.
Thence Hampshire-ward her way she bends;
And visiting her Forest friends,
Near Salsbury her rest does take:
Which she her second pause does make.
MArch strongly forth my Muse, whilst yet the temperat air
Inuites us, easily on to hasten our repair.
Thou powerful God of flames (in verse divinely great)
Touch my invention so with thy true genuine heat,
That high and noble things I slightly may not tell,
Nor light and idle toys my lines may vainly swell;
But as my subject serves, so hie or low to strain,
And to the varying earth so suit my varying vain,
That Nature in my work thou may thy power avow:
That as thou first found'st Art, and did her rules allow;
So I, to thine own self that gladly near would be,
May herein do the best, in imitating thee:
As thou have here a hill, a vale there, there a flood,
A mead here, there a heath, and now and then a wood,
These things so in my Song I naturally may show;
Now, as the Mountain hie; then, as the Valley low:
Here, fruitful as the Mead, there as the Heath be bare;
Then, as the gloomie wood, I may be rough; though rare.
Through the Dorsetian fields that lie in open view,
My progress I again must seriously pursue,
From Marshwoods fruitful Vale my journey on to make:
(As Phoebus getting up out of the Eastern lake,
Refresht with ease and sleep, is to his labor pressed;
Even so the laboring Muse, here baited with this rest.)
Whereas the little Lim along does easelie creep,
And Car, that coming down unto the troubled Deep,
Brings on the neighboring Bert, whose batning mellowed bank,
From all the British soyles, for Hemp most hugely rank
Does bear away the best; to Bert-port which has gained
That praise from every place, and worthily obtained
By Act of Parliament 21. Hen. 8.
Our cordage from her store, and cables should be made,
Of any in that kind most fit for Marine trade:
Not seuer'd from the shore, aloft where Chesill lifts
Her ridged snake-like sands, in wrecks and smouldring drifts,
Which by the South Wind raysd, are heaved on little hills:
Whose valleys with his flows when foming Neptune fills,
The beauty of the many Swannes upon the Chesills, noted in this Poetical
delicacie.
Upon a thousand Swannes the naked Sea-Nymphes ride
Within the ouzie Pooles, replenisht every Tide:
Which running on, the I Will of Portland points out;
Upon whose moisted skirt with sea-weed fringed about,
The bastard Coral breeds, that drawn out of the brack,
A brittle stalk becomes, from greenish turned to black:
. Which th'Ancients, for the love that they to Isis bare
(Their Goddess most adored) have sacred for her hair.
Of which the Naides, and the blew Sea-Nymphs.
Nereides make
Them A kind of neck-laces worn by country wenches.
Taudries for their necks: when sporting in the Lake,
They to their secret Bowres the Sea-gods entertain.
Where Portland from her top does ouer-peere the Maine;
Her rugged front empal'd (on every part) with rocks,
Though indigent of wood, yet fraught with woolly flocks:
Most famous for her folk, excelling with the fling,
Of any other here this Land inhabiting;
That therewith they in war offensiuelie might wound,
If yet the use of shot Invention had not found.
Where, from the neighboring hills her passage Wey does path:
Whose haven, not our least that watch the midday, has
The glories that belong unto a complete Port;
Though Wey the least of all the Naides that resort
To the Dorsetian sands, from off the higher shore.
Then From (a nobler flood) the Muses does implore
Her mother Blackmores state they sadly would bewail;
Whose big and lordly Oaks once bore as brave a sail
As they themselves that thought the largest shades to spread:
But man's devouring hand, with all the earth not fed,
Has hewed her Timber down. Which wounded, when it fell,
By the great noise it made, the workmen seemed to tell
The loss that to the Land would shortly come thereby,
Where no man ever plants to our posterity:
That when sharp Winter shoots her sleet and hardened hail,
Or sudden gusts from Sea, the harmless Dear assail,
The shrubs are not of power to sheeld them from the wind.
Dear Mother, quoth the Froome, too late (alas) we find
The softness of thy sward continued through thy soil,
To be the only cause of vnrecouer'd spoil:
When scarce the British ground a finer grass does bear;
And wish I could, quoth she, (if wishes helpful were)
. Thou never by that name of White-hart had been known,
But styled Blackmore still, which rightly was thine own.
For why, that change foretold the ruin of thy state:
Lo, thus the world may see what it is to innovate.
By this, her own named Frampton.
Town the wandering Froome had past:
And quitting in her course old Dorcester at last,
Approaching near the Poole, at Warham on her way,
As easelie she does fall into the peaceful Bay,
Upon her nobler side, and to the Southward near,
Fair Purbeck she beholds, which no where has her peer:
So pleasantly in-Il'd on mighty Neptunes marge,
A Forest-Nymph, and one of chaste Dianas charge,
Employed in Woods and Launds her Dear to feed and kill:
. On whom the watrie God would often have had his will,
And often her has wooed, which never would be won;
But, Purbeck (as professed a Huntresse and a Nun)
The wide and wealthy Sea, nor all his power respects:
Her Marble-minded breast, impregnable, reiects
The Monsters of the Sea, supposed Neptunes Guard.
ugly Orks, that for their Lord the Ocean woo.
Whilst Froome was troubled thus where naught she has to do,
The Piddle, that this while bestird her nimble feet,
In falling to the Poole her sister Froome to meet,
And having in her train two little slender rills
(Besides her proper Spring) wherewith her banks she fills,
To whom since first the world this later name her lent,
Who ancientlie was known to be instiled The ancient name of Piddle.
Trent,
Her small assistant Brooks her second name have gained.
Whilst Piddle and the Froome each other entertained,
Often praising lovely Poole, their best-beloued Bay,
Thus Piddle her bespake, to pass the time away;
When Poole (quoth she) was young, a lusty Sea-borne Lass,
Great Albion to this Nymph an earnest suter was;
And bare himself so well, and so in favor came,
That he in little time, upon this lovely Dame
. Begot three maiden Isles, his darlings and delight:
The eldest, Brunksey called; the second, Fursey hight;
The youngest and the last, and lesser then the other,
Saint Hellens name does bear, the dilling of her Mother.
The story of Poole.
And, for the goodly Poole was one of Thetis train,
Who scorned a Nymph of hers, her Virgin-band should stain,
Great Albion (that forethought, the angry Goddess would
Both on the Dam and brats take what revenge she could)
In The bosom of the Poole his little children placed:
First, Brunksey; Fursey next; and little Hellen last;
Then, with his mighty arms does clip the Poole about,
To keep the angry Queen, fierce Amphitrite out.
Against whose lordly might she musters up her waves;
And strongly thence repulst (with madness) scoulds and raues.
When now, from Poole, the Muse (up to her pitch to get)
Her self in such a place from sight does almost set,
As by the active power of her commanding wings,
She (Falcon-like) from far does fetch those plentious Springs.
Where Stour receives her strength from Stour rises from six fountains.
six clear Fountains fed;
Which gathering to one stream from every several head,
Her new-beginning bank her water scarcely weelds;
And fairelie enters first on the Dorsetian feelds:
Where Gillingham with gifts that for a God were meet
(Enameld paths, rich wreaths, and every sovereign sweet
The earth and air can yield, with many a pleasure mixed)
Receives her. Whilst there past great kindness them betwixt,
The Forest her bespoke; How happy floods are ye,
From our predestined plagues that privileged be;
Which only with the fish which in your banks do breed,
And daily there increase, man's gurmandize can feed?
But had this wretched Age such uses to employ
Your waters, as the woods we lately did enjoy,
Your channels they would leave as barren by their spoil,
As they of all our trees have lastly left our soil.
Insatiable Time thus all things does devour:
What ever saw the sun, that is not in Times power?
Ye fleeting Streams last long, out-liuing many a day:
But, on more steadfast things Time makes the strongest pray.
. Now toward the Solent sea as Stour her way does ply,
On Shaftsbury (by chance) she cast her crystal eye,
From whose foundation first, such strange reports arise
. As brought into her mind the Eagles prophecies;
Of that so dreadful plague, which all great Britain swept,
From that which highest flew, to that which lowest crept,
Before the Saxon thence the Britain should expel,
And all that there-vpon successively befell.
How then the bloody Dane subdued the Saxon race;
And, next, the Norman took possession of the place:
Those ages, once expired, the Fates to bring about,
The British Line restored; the Norman lineage out.
. Then, those prodigious signs to ponder she began,
Which afterward again the Britans wrack fore-ran;
How here the Owl at noone in public streets was seen,
As though the peopled Towns had way-less Deserts been.
And whilst the loathly Toad out of his hole does crall,
And makes his fulsome stool amid the Princes hall,
The crystal fountain turned into a gory wound,
And bloody issues brake (like ulcers) from the ground;
The Seas against their course with double Tides return,
And often were seen by night like boiling pitch to burn.
Thus thinking, lively Stour bestirres her toward the Maine;
Which Lidden leads out: then Dulas bears her train
From Blackmore, that at once their watery tribute bring:
When, like some childish wench, she looselie wantoning,
With ^ricks and giddie turns seems to in-Ile the shore.
Betwixt her fishfull banks, then forward she does scowre,
Until she lastly reach clear Alen in her race:
Which calmlie comes down from her dear mother Cranburn Chase.
Chase,
Of Cranburn that is called; who greatly joys to see
A Riueret borne of her, for Stours should reckned be,
Of that renowned flood, a favorite highly graced.
Whilst Cranburn, for her child so fortunately placed,
With Echoes every way applauds her Alens state,
A sudden noise from Holt Forest.
Holt seem to congratulate
With Cranburn for her Brook so happily bestowed:
Where, to her neighboring Chase, the courteous Forest showed
So just conceived joy, that from each rising A wood in English.
hurst,
Where many a goodly Oak had carefully been nursed,
The Syluans in their songs their (...) full meeting tell;
And Satyrs, that in stades and gloomy dimbles dwell,
Run whooting to the hills to clappe their rude^ hands.
As Holt had done before, so Canfords goodly Launds
(Which lean upon the Poole) enricht with Coppras veins,
Rejoice to see them joined. When down from Sarum Plain^d
Clear Auon coming in her sister Stour does call,
. And at New-forrests foot into the Sea do fall,
Which every day bewail that deed so full of dred
Whereby she (now so proud) became first Forrested:
She now who for her site even boundless seemed to lie,
. Her being that received by Williams tyranny;
Providing Laws to keep those Beasts here planted then,
Whose lawless will from hence before had driven men;
That where the harth was warmed with Winters feasting fires,
The melancholy Hare is formed in brakes and briers:
The aged ranpick trunk where Plow-men cast their seed,
And Churches ouer-whelm'd with nettles, fern and weed,
By Conquering William first cut off from every trade,
That here the Norman still might enter to invade;
That on this vacant place, and unfrequented shore,
New forces still might land, to aid those here before.
But she, as by a King and Conqueror made so great,
By whom she was allowed and limited her seat,
Into her owne-selfe praise most insolently brake,
And her less fellow Nymphs, New-forrest thus bespake:
The Forests of Hampshire, with their situations.
Thou Buckholt, bow to me, so let thy sister Bear;
Chute, kneel thou at my name on this side of the Shiere:
Where, for their Goddess, me the Nymphs that live and die with Oaks.
Driads shall adore,
With Waltham, and the Bear, that on the Sea-worne shore
See at the Southern Isles the Tides at tilt to run;
And Woolmer, placed hence upon the rising sun,
With Ashholt thine Allie (my Wood-Nymphs) and with you,
Proud Pamber toward the North, ascribe me worship due.
Before my Princely State let your poor greatness fall:
And veil your top^ to me, the Sovereign of you all.
Amongst the Rivers, so, great discontent there fell.
Th'efficient cause thereof (as loud report does tell)
Was, that the sprightly Test arising up in Chute,
To Itchin, her All^^, great weakeness should impute*
That she, to her own wrong, and every others grief,
Would needs be telling things exceeding all belief:
For, she had given it out South-hampton should not loose
. Her famous Beuis so, went in her power to choose;
. And, for great Arthurs seat, her Winchester preferres,
Whose old Round-table, yet she va^nteth to be hers:
And swore, th'inglorious time should not bereave her right;
But what it could obscure, she would reduce to light.
For, from that wondrous A Poole near unto Alresford, yielding an unusual
abundance of water.
Pond, whence she deriues her head,
And places by the way, by which she is honored
(Old Winchester, that stands near in her middle way,
And Hampton, at her fall into the Solent Sea)
She thinks in all the I Will not any such as she,
And for a Demy-god she would related be.
Sweet sister mine (quoth Test) advise you what you do;
Think this; For each of us, the Forests here are two:
Who if you speak a thing whereof they hold can take,
Be It little, or be it much, they double will it make*
Whom Hamble helps our; a handsome ^ome proper flood,
In courtesy well skild, and one that knew her good,
Consider, quoth this Nymph, the times be curious now,
And nothing of that kind will any way allow.
Besides, the Muse has, next the British cause in hand,
About things later done that now she cannot stand.
The more they her persuade, the more she does persist;
Let them say what they will, she will do what she li^t.
She styles her self the^ Chief, and swears shoe will command;
And, what-so-ere she says, for Oracles must stand!
Which when the Rivers heard, they further speech forbear.
And she (to please her self that only seemed to ear)
To sing th'atchieuement great of B^uis thus began;
Redoubted Knight (quoth she) o most renowned man!
Who, when thou, were but young, thy Mother durst reprove
(Most wickedly seduc't by the unlawful love
Of Mordure, at that time the Almain Emperors son)
That she thy Sire to death disloyally had done:
Each circumstance whereof she largely did relate;
Then, in her song pursued his Mothers deadly hate;
And how (by Sabers hand) when she supposed him dead,
Where long upon the Downe^ a Shepherds life he led;
Till by the great reco^^^, he came at length to know
The Country there about could hardly hold the show
His Mothers marriage feast to fair South-hampton drue,
Be'ing wedded to that Lord who la^^ her husband slew:
Into his noble breast which pierced so wondrous deep,
That (in the poor attire he used to tend the sheep,
And in his hand his hook) unto the Town he went;
As having in his heart a resolute intent
Or manfully to die, or to revenge his wrong:
Where pressing at the gate the multitude among,
The Porter to that place his entrance that forbad
(Supposing him some swain, some boystrous Country-lad)
Upon the head he lent so violent a stroke,
That the poor empty skull, like some thin potsheard broke,
The brains and mingled blood, were spertled on the wall.
Then hasting on he came into the upper Hall,
Where murderous M^rdure sat embraced by his Bride:
Who (guilty in himself) had he no^ Beuis spide,
His boanes had with a blow been shattred: but, by chance
(He shifting from the place, whilst Bre^^ did advance
His hand, with greater strength his deadly foe to hit,
And missing him) his chair he all to shiuers split:
Which struck his Mothers breast with strange and sundry fears,
That Beuis being then but of so tender years
Durst yet attempt a thing so full of death and doubt
And, once before deceived, she newly cast about
To rid him out of sight; and with a mighty ^^ge,
Won such, themselves by oath as deeply dursting age,
To execute her will* who shipping him away
(And making forth their course into the Mid-land-se^)
As they had got before, so now again for gold
To an Armenia^ there that young Alcides ^old*
Of all his gott^n prize, who (as the worthiest thing,
And fittest where-withall to gr^^if^e his King)
Presented that brave youth* the splendour of whose eye
A wondrous mixture showed of grace and majesty*
Whose more then man-like shape and matchless stature, took
The King; that often used with great delight to look
Upon that English Earl. But though the love he bore
To Beuis might be much, his daughter ten times more
Admired the god-like man* who from the hour that first
His beauty she beheld, f^lt her sof^ bosom pierst
With Cupids deadliest shaft* that I^sia^, to her guest,
Already had resigned possession of her breast.
Then sang she, in the field ^how as he went to sport,
And those damned Pani^s heard* who in despightfull sort
Derided Christ the Lord; for his Rede^mers sake
He on those heathen hounds did there such slaughter make,
That whilst in their black mouth^^ their blasphemies they drue,
They headlong went to hell. As also how he ^lue
That cruel Boar, whose tusks turned up whole fields of grain
(And, wrooting, raised hills upon the level Plain;
Digd Cauerns in the earth, so dark and wondrous deep
As that, into whose mouth the desperate Curtius, that for his countries sake
so lauished his life.
Roman leepe):
And cutting off his head, a Trophy thence to bear*
The Forresters that came to intercept it there,
How he their scalps and trunks in chip^ and pee^^s cleft,
And in the fields (like beasts) their mangled bodies left.
As to his further praise, how for that dangerous fight
The great Armenian King made noble Beuis Knight:
And having raised power, Damascus to invade,
The General of his force this English Hero made.
Then, how fair Io^^an gave him Ar^^d^ll his ste^d,
And Morglay his good sword, in many a valiant deed
Which manfully he tried. Next, in a Lofty.
Bu^kind strain,
Sung how himself he bore upon Damascus Plain
(That dreadful battle) where, with Bradamond he fought;
And with his sword and steed such earthly wonders wrought,
As even amongst his fo^s him admiration won*
Incountring in the throng with mighty Radison;
And lopping off his arms, the imperial standard took.
At whose prodigious fall, the conquered Foe forsook
The Field; where, in one day so many Peers they lost,
So brave Commanders, and so absolute an host,
As to the humbled earth took proud Damascus down,
Then tributarie made to the Armenian Crown.
And how at his return, the King (for service done,
The honor to his reign, and to Ar^^nia won)
In marriage to this Earl the Princess Ios^an gave;
As into what distress him Fortune after drove,
To great Damascus sent Ambassador again;
When, in revenge of theirs, before by Beuis slain
(And now, at his return, for that he so despised
Those Idols unto whom they daily sacrifiz'd:
Which he to pieces hewed and scattred in the dust)
They, rising, him by strength into a Dungeon thrust;
In whose black bottom, long two Serpents had remained
(Bred in the common ^ewre that all the City drained)
Empoysning with their smell; which seized him for their pray:
With whom in struggling long (besmeard with blood and clay)
He rent their squallid chaps, and from the prison escaped.
As how adultrous Ioure, the King of Mambrant, raped
Fair Iosian his dear Love, his noble sword and steed:
Which afterward by craft, he in a Palmers weed
Recouerd, and with him from Mambrant bare away.
And with two Lions how he held a desperate fray,
Assayling him at once, that fiercely on him flew:
Which first he tamed with wounds, then by the necks them drew,
And against the hardened earth their laws and shoulders burst;
And that ( G^lia-like) great Ascupart enforced
To serve him for a slave, and by his horse to run.
At Colein as again the glory that he won
On that huge Dragon, like the Country to destroy;
Whose sting struck like a Lance: whose venom did destroy
As does a general plague: his scale^ like shields of brass;
His body, when he moved, like some vnweeldie mass,
Even brus'd the solid Earth. Which boldly having song,
With all the sundry turns that might thereto belong,
Whilst yet she shapes her course how he came back to show
What powers he got abroad, how them he did bestow;
In England here again, how he by dint of sword
Unto his ancient lands and titles was restored,
New-forrest cried enough: and Waltham with the Bear,
Both bad her hold her peace; for they no more would hear.
And for she was a flood, her fellows naught would say*
But slipping to their b^^ks, slid fal^ntlie away.
When as the pliant Muse, with fair and even flight,
Betwixt her silver (...) wasted (...) the I Will of Wight.
Wight:
That I Will, which (...) out into the Sea so far,
Her offspring traineth up in exercise of war*
Those Pirates to put back that often purloine her trade,
Or Spaniards, or the French attemp^ing to (...)
Of all the Southern Isles she (...) the highest place,
And evermore has born the great (...) Britai^^s grace:
Not one of all her Nymphs her Sovereign favors thus,
Embraced in the arms of old Oceanus.
For none of her account, so near her bosom stand,
Twixt The Forelands of Cornwall and Kent.
Penwiths fur^hest point and The Forelands of Cornwall and Kent.
Goodwins queachy sand,
Both for her seat and soil, that farr^ before the other,
Most justly may account great Britain for her Mother.
A finer fleece then hers not Lemsters self can boast,
Nor Newport for her Mart, or marched by any Coast.
To these, the gentle South, with kisses smooth and soft,
Does in her bosom breathe, and seems to court her often.
Besides, her little Rill^, her in-lands that do feed,
Which with their lavish streams do furnish every need:
And Meads, that with their fine soft grafsie towels stand
To wipe away the drops and moisture from her hand.
And to the North, betwixt the fore-land and the firm,
The Solent.
She has that narrow Sea, which we the Solent t^arme:
Where those rough irefull Tides ^^s in her Straits they meet,
With boystrous shock^ and rores each other rudely grect:
Which fiercely when they charge, and sadly make retre^^,
Upon the bulwarkt Forts of Two Castles in the Sea.
Hurst and Calsheat beat,
Then to South-hampton run: which by her shores supplide
Portsmouth*
(As Portsmouth by her strength) does vilify their pride;
Both, Roads that with our best may boldly hold their plea,
Nor Plimmouths self has born^ more brauer ships then they;
That from their anchoring Bays have travailed to find
Large Chi^a^ wealthy Realms, and viewed the either I^de,
The pearlie rich (...)* and with as prosperous fate,
Have borne their ful-spred sails upon the streams of Plate:
Whose pleasant harbors often the Sea-mans hope renew,
To rigge his late-craz'd Bark, to spread a wanton clue;
Where they with lusty Sack, and mirthfull Sailers songs,
Defy their passed storms, and laugh at Neptunes wrongs:
The danger quite forgot wherein they were of late;
Who half so merry now as Master and his Mate*
And victualling again, with brave and man-like minds
To Sea-ward cast their eyes, and pray for happy winds.
But, partly by the floods sent thither from the shore,
And Islands that are set the bordring coast before:
As one amongst the rest, a brave and lusty Dame
Called Portsey, whence that Bay of Portsmouth has her name:
By her, two little Isles, her handmaids (which compared
With those within the Poole, for deftness not out-dar'd)
The greater Haling hight: and fairest though by much,
Yet Thorney very well, but somewhat rough in tuch.
Whose beauties far and near divulged by report,
And by the Neptunes Trumpeters.
Trytons told in mighty Neptunes Court,
Old Proteus, a Sea-god, changing himself into any shape.
Proteus has been known to leave his finny Heard,
And in their sight to sponge his ^oame-bespawled beard.
The Sea-gods, which about the watery ki^^^ome keep,
Have often for their sakes abandoned the Deep;
That Thetis many a time to Neptune has complaind,
How for those wanton Nymphs her Ladies were disdained:
And there arose such rut th'vnrulie rout among,
That soon the noise thereof through all the Ocean rong.
. When Portsey, weighing well the ill to her might grow,
In that their mighty stirs might be her ouer-throw,
She strongly straightneth-in the entrance to her Bay;
That, A poetical description of the Solent Sea.
of their haunt debard, and shut out to the Sea
(Each small conceived wrong helps on distempred rage.)
No counsel could be heard their choler to aswage:
When every one suspects the next that is in place
To be the only cause and means of his disgrace.
Some coming from the East, some from the setting Sun,
The liquid Mountains still together mainlie run;
Wave wounds wave again; and billow, billow gores:
And topsie turuie so, fly tumbling to the shores.
From hence the Solent Sea, as some men thought, might stand
Amongst those things, which we call Wonders of our Land.
When toghing up Tichfield River.
that stream, so negligent of fame,
As till this very day she yet conceales her name;
By Bert and Waltham both, that is equally embraced,
And lastly, at her fall, by Tichfield highly graced.
Whence, from old Windsor hill, and from the aged Another little hill in
Hampshire.
Stone,
The Muse those Countries sees, which call her to be gone.
The Forests took their leave: Bear, Chute, and Buckholt, bid
Adieu; so Wolmer, and so Ashholt, kindly did.
And Pamber shook her head, as grieved at the heart;
When far upon her way, and ready to depart,
As now the wandering Muse so sadly went along,
To her last Farewell, thus, the goodly Forests song.
Dear Muse, to plead our right, whom time at last has brought,
Which else forlorn had lain, and banished every thought,
When thou ascend'st the hills, and from their rising shrouds
Our sisters shall command, whose tops once touched the clouds;
Old The great and ancient forest of Warwickshire.
Arden when thou meet'st, or do fair The goodly forest by Notingham.
Sherwood see,
Tell them, that as they waste, so every day do we:
Wish them, we of our griefs may be each others heirs;
Let them lament our fall, and we will mourn for theirs.
Then turning from the South which lies in public view,
The Muse an oblique course does seriously pursue:
And pointing to the Plains, she thither takes her way;
For which, to gain her breath she makes a little stay.
Illustrations.
THe Muse, yet observing her began course of Chorographicall longitude, traces
Eastward the Southern shore of the Isle. In this second, sing^ Dorser and
Hantshire; fi^ly here joined as they join themselves, both having their South
limits washed by the British Ocean.

Which the Ancients, for the love that they to Isis bare
Iuba remembers Apud Plin. hist. not. lib. 13. cap. ^5.
a like coral by the Troglodytique Isles (as is here in this Sea) and styles
it Isis hair.
Isidi^ plocam^s. True reason of the name is no more perhaps to be given, then
why Adiantum is called Capillus Veneris, or Sengreene Barba Iouis. Only thus:
You have in Plutarch and Apuleius such variety of Isis titles, and, in Clemens
of Alexandria, so large circuits of her travels, that it were no more wonder to
hear of her name in this Northern climat, then in Egypt: especially, Ouse.
we having three rivers of note Leland. ad Cyg. Cant.
synonymies with her. Particularly to make her a Sea-goddesse, which the common
story of her and Osiris her husband (son to Cham, and of whom Bale dares
offer affirmance, that in his traveling over the world, he first taught the
Britons to make Beer in steed of Wine) does not: Isis of the Se^.
Isis Pelagia, after Pausanias testimony, has an Golez. these. antiq.
old coin. The special notice which Antiquity took of her hair is not
only showed by her attribute Philostrat in ein.
of Loosehaird.
(...), but also in that her hair was kept as a sacred relic in Lucian, in
ein.
Memphis, as Geryons bones at Thebes, the Boores skin at Tegea, and such like
elsewhere. And after this to fit our coral lust with her color, Ethiopian
sunneburnt.
Aethiopicis solibus Isis furua, she is called by Aduers. gent. ^. Blacke-haire.
Arnobuis. Gentlewomen of black hair (no fault with breuity to turn to them)
have no simple pattern of that part in this great Goddess, whose name indeed
comprehended whatsoever in the Deity was feminine, and more too; nor will I
swear, but that Anacreou (a man very judicious in the provoking motives of
wanton love) intending to bestow on his sweet Mistress that one of the titles
of women's special ornament, (...) and (...). well haired, and prettyfoo^ed; two
special commendations, dispersed in Gre^ke Poets, joined in Lucilius.
Well-haired, thought of this, when he gave his Painter direction to make her
picture blarke-haired. But thus much out of the way.

Thou never by that name of white-hart had been known.
Very likely from the soil was the old name Blackmore. By report of this
country, the change was from a white heart, reserved here from Chase, by
express will of Hen. III. and afterward killed by Thomas de la Lynd, a
Gentleman of these parts. For the offense, a mulct imposed on the possessors of
Blackmore (called Camden.
white-hart silver) is to this day paid into the Exchequer. The destruction of
woods here bewaild by the Muse, is (upon occasion too often given) often
seconded: Destruction of woods.
but while the Muse bewailes them, it is Maryas and his countrymen, that most
want them.

On whom the watery God would often have had his will.
Purbecke (named, but indeed not, an Isle, being joined to the firm land)
stored with game of the Forest.

Thence alluding to Diana's devotions, the author well calls her an Huntres and
a Nun. Nor does the embracing force of the Ocean (whereto she is adjacent)
although very violent, prevail against her stony cliffes. To this purpose the
Muse is here wanton with Neptune ^ooing.

That he in little time upon this lovely dame,
Begat three maiden Isles his darlings and delight.
Albion (son of Neptune) from whom that first name of this Britain was
supposed, is well fitted to the fruitful bed of this Poole, thus personated
as a Sea Nymph. The plain truth (as words may certify your eyes, saving all
impropriety of object) is, Isles newly out of the Sea.
that in (...) Poole are seated three Isles, Brunkse^, Fursey, and S. Helens,
in situation and magnitude, as I name them. Nor is the fiction of begetting the
Isles improper; seeing Greek Lucian dialog. Pindar. olymp. ^. Strab. Pa^san^^^.
antiquities tell us of diverse in the Mediterranean and the Archipelag, as
Rhodes, Delos, Hi^ra, the Echinades, and others, which have been, as it were,
brought forth out of the salt womb of Amphitrite.

But toward the Solent Sea, as Stour her way does ply,
On Shaftsbury, etc.
The straight twixt the Wight and Hantshire, is titled in Bedes Story, A Sea
three miles over, called Solente lib. 4 hist. eccles. cap. ^6.
Pelagus latitudinic III, millium quod vocatur Solente; famous for the double,
and thereby most violent floods of the Ocean (as Scylla and Charybdi^ twixt
Sicily and Italy in Homer) expressed by the Author toward the end of this
Song, and reckoned among our British wonders. Of it the Author tells you more
presently. Concerning Shaftesbury (which, beside other names, Malmesb. lib. 2.
de Pontific. S. Edwards. DCCCC.LXXIX.
from the corpse of St. Edward, murdered in C^rf^ Castle* through procurement of
the bloody hate of his stepmother Aelfrith, hither translated, and some III.
years lying buried, was once called St. Edwards) you shall hear a piece out
of Harding; Camden takes this Cair for Bath.
Caire Paladoure that now is Shaftesbury
Where an Angel spoke sitting on the wall
While it was in working over all.
Speaking of Rudhudibras his fabulous building it. I recite it, both to mend
it, Harding amended.
reading Aigle for Angel, and also that it might then, according to the
British story, help me explain the author in this, As brought into her mind
the Eagles prophecies.


This Eagle (whose prophecies among the Britons, with the later of Merlin, have
been of no less respect, then those of Bacis were to the Greeks, or the
Sybillines to the Romans) foretold of a reuerting of the crown, alter the
Britons, Saxons, and Normans to the first again, which in Hen. VII. son to
Owen Tyddour, has been, Twin. in Albioni^. 2.

See the 5. Song.


observed, as fulfilled. This in particular is peremptorily affirmed by that
Count Palatine of Basingstoke. He plainly said that there would be a time of
this reuerting of the Crown.
Et aperte dixit tempus aliquando fore vt Britannicum imperium denuo sitad
veteres Britannes post Saxovas and Normannos rediturum; are his words of this
Eagle. But this prophecy in Manuscript I have seen, and without the help of
Albertus secret, Canace's ring in Cha^cer, or reading over Aristophanes Comedy
of Birds I understood the language* neither find I in it any such matter
expressly. Indeed as in Merlin you have in him the white Dragon, the red
Dragon, the black Dragon for the Saxons, Britains, Normanes, and the fertile
tree, supposed for Brute, by one that of later time has given his obscurities
Distinct. Aquil Sceptonia. A prophecy of an Angel to Cadwallader.
interpretation: in which, not from the Eagles, but from an Angelical voice,
almost DCC. years after Christ, given to Cadwallader (whom others call
Cedwalla) that restitution of the crown to the Britons is promised, and
grounded also upon some general and ambiguous words in the Eag^^ text, by the
Author here followed; which (provided your faith be strong) you must believe
made more then M.M.D. years since. For a corrollary, in this not unfit place, I
will transcribe a piece of the Gloss out of an old copy, speaking thus upon
a passage in the prophecy: Henricus A Scepter in steed of a sword first in
Hen, the thirds seal, but believe him not; the seals of those times give no
warrant for it: and even in K. Arthurs, Leland says, there was a fleury
Scepter; but that perhaps as fained, at this false.
IIII. (he means Hen. III. who, by the ancient account in regard of Henry,
son to Henry Fite-lempresse, crowned in his fathers life, is in Bracton and
others called the fourth) concessit omne ius and clameum, prose and heredibus
suis, quod habuit in Ducatu Normannia imperpetuum. Tunc fractum fuit eius
sigillum and mutatum; nam prius tenebat in scepter^gladium, nunc tenet virgam;
qui gladius fuit de conquestu Ducis Willielm^ Bastardi, and ideo dicit Aquila,
separabitur gladius a scepter. Such good fortune have these praedictions, that
either by conceit (although strained) they are applied to accident, or else
ever religiously expected; as Hist. Scot. lib. 5. in Cong allo.
Buchanan of Merlins, Then those prodigious signs to ponder she began.


I would not have you lay to the Authors charge a justification of these signs
at those times: but his liberty herein, it is not hard to justify, Obseditque
frequens castrorum limina bub^:
and such like has Silius Italicus before the Roman overthrow at Canna; and
Historians commonly affirm the like; therefore a Poet may well guess the like.

And at New-forrest foot into the Sea does fall.
The fall of Stour and Auon into the Ocean is the limit of the two shires, and
here limits the Authors description of the first, his Muse now entering
New-forrest in Hantshire.

Her being that received by Williams tyranny.
New-forest (it is thought the newest in England, except that of Hampton Court,
made by Hen. VIII.) acknowledges William her maker, that is, the Norman
Conqueror. His love to this kind of possession and pleasure was such, that he
constituted loss Matthew. Paris post Hen. Hunting ^. and under Will. 11. it was
capital to steal Dear.
of Eyes punishment for taking his Venery: so affirm expressly Florence of
Worcester, Henry of Huntingdon, Walter Mapez, and others, although the Author
of Distenctio Aquilae, with some of later time, falsely laid it to William Rufus
his charge. To justify my truth, and for variety, see these rimes, Robert.
Glocestrensi.
even breathing antiquity: Game of hounds he louede ^^ou, and of wild best,
And His.
is forest, and is wodes, and mest the niwe forest,
That is in Suthamtessire, vor thulke he louede ^now
And astored well With.
mid bestes, and Pastures.
lose mid great wou:
Uor he cast out of house and hom of men a great route,
And Took.
binom their land thritti mile and more thereaboute,
And made it all forest and lose the bests vor to feed,
Of pouer men diserited he nom let el head:
Theruore therein vell money mischeuing,
And is sone was thereine Shot by Walter Tirell.
issote William the red King,
And Shot by Walter Tirell.
is o sone, that het Richard, caght there is death also,
And Richard His own.
is o neuen, brec there is neck thereto,
As he rod an honteth and perauntre his horse sprend,
The unright ^do to pouer men to such mesauntre trend,


But to quit you of this antique verse, I return to the pleasanter Muse.

Her famous Beuis so were in her power to choose;
About the Norman invasion was Beuis famous with title of Earl of
Southhampton; Duncton in Wiltshire known for his residence. What credit you
are to give to the Hyperbolies of Itchin in her relation of Beuis, your own
judgment, and the Authors censure in the admonition of the other rivers here
personated, I presume, will direct. And it is wished that the poetical Monks
in celebration of him, Arthur, and other such Worthies had containd themselves
within bounds of likelihood; or else that some judges, (...)
proportionat to those Lucian. (...).
of the Grecian Games, (who always by public authority pulled down the
statues erected, if they exceeded the true symmetry of the victors) had given
such exorbitant fictions their desert. The sweet grace of an enchanting Poem
(as inimitable Pindar Olymp. ^ and Nem. (...).
affirms) often compels belief; but so far have the indigested reports of
barren and Monkish invention expatiated out of the lists of Truth, that from
their intermixed and absurd fauxeties has proceeded doubt; and, in some, even
denial of what was truth. His sword is kept as a relic in Arundell Castle,
not equalling in length (as it is now worn) that of Edward the thirds at
Westminster.

And for great Arthurs seat her Winchester preferres,
Whose old round table yet, etc.
For him, his table, order, Knights, and places of their celebration, look to
the IV. Song.

When Portsey waighing well the ill to her might grow.
Portsey an Island in a creek of the Solent, coming in by Portesmouth, endures
the forcible violence of that troublesome sea, as the Verse tells you in this
fiction of wooing.



The third Song.
* THE ARGUMENT.
In this third Song, great threatenings are,
And tending all to Nymphish war.
Old Wansdike utters words of hate,
Deprauing Stonendges estate.
Clear Avon and fair Willy strive,
Each pleading her prerogative.
The Plain the Forests does disdain:
The Forests rail upon the Plain.
The Muse then seeks the Shires extremes,
To find the Fountain of great Tames;
Falls down with Avon, and discries
Both Bathes and Bristowes braueries:
Then viewes the Sommersetian soil;
Through Marshes, Mines, and Mores does toil,
To Avalon to Arthurs Grave,
Sadly bemoa^d of Ochy Cave.
Then with delight she bravely brings
The Princely Parret from her Springs:
Preparing for the learned Plea
(The next Song) in the Seuerne Sea.
UP with the iocund Lark (Too long we take our rest.)
Whilst yet the blushing Dawne out of the cheerful East
Is vshering forth the Day to light the Muse along:
Whose most delightful touch, and sweetness of her Song,
Shall force the lusty Swains out of the Country-townes,
To lead the loving Girls in daunces to the Downs.
The Nymphs, in Selwoods shades and Bradens woods that be,
Their Oaken wreathes, o Muse, shall offer up to thee.
And when thou shap'st thy course toward where the soil is rank,
The Sommersetian mayds, by swelling Sabryns bank
Shall strewe the ways with flowers (where thou art coming on)
Brought from the Marshie-grounds by aged Glastenburie.
Avalon.
From Sarum thus we set, removed from whence it stood
By Avon to reside, her dearest loved Flood:
Where her imperious The goodly Church at Salisburie.
Fane her former seat disdaines,
And proudly ouer-tops the spacious neighboring Plains.
What pleasures has this I Will, of us esteemed most dear,
In any place, but poor unto the plenty here?
The chaulkie Two places famous for Hares, the one in Buckinghamshire, the
other in North-hamptonshire.
Chilteru fields, nor Kelmarsh self compares
With Euerley warten of Hares.
Euerley for store and swiftnes of her Hares:
A horse of greater speed, nor yet a righter hound,
Not any where twixt Kent and The furthest part of Scotland.
Calidon is found.
Nor yet the level South can show a smoother Race,
Whereas the Gant.
ballow Nag out-strips the winds in chase;
As famous in the West for matches yeerelie tried,
As A famous Yorkshire hors-race.
Garterley, possessed of all the Northen pride:
And on his match, as much the Western horseman lays,
As the rank-riding Scots upon their The best kind of Scottish nags.
Gallowayes.
And as the Western soil as sound a Horse does breed,
As does the land that lies betwixt the Trent and Tweed:
No Hunter, so, but finds the breeding of the West,
The Western hounds generally the best.
The only kind of Hounds, for mouth and nostrill best;
That cold does sildome fret, nor heat does ouer-haile;
As standing in the Flight, as pleasant on the Traile;
Free hunting, easily checked, and loving every Chase;
Straight running, hard, and tough, of reasonable pase:
Not heavy, as that hound which Lancashire does breed;
Nor as the Northern kind, so light and hot of speed,
Upon the cleerer Chase, or on the foiled Train,
Does make the sweetest cry, in Wood-land, or on Plain.
Where she, of all the Plains of Britain, that does bear
The name to be the first (renowned every where)
Has worthily obtaind that Stonendge there should stand:
She, first of Plains; and Stonendge the greatest Wonder of England.
that, first Wonder of the Land.
She Wansdike also winnes, by whom she is embraced,
That in his aged arms does gird her ampler wast:
Who (for a mighty Mound since long he did remain
. Betwixt the Mercians rule, and the West Saxons reign,
And therefore of his place him self he proudly bare)
Had very often been heard with Stonendge to compare;
Whom for a paltry Ditch, when Stonendge pleased t'vpbraid,
The old man taking heart, thus to that Trophy said;
Dull heap, that thus thy head above the rest do rear,
Precisely yet not know who first did place thee there;
But Traitor basely turned to Merlins skill do fly,
And with his Magiques do thy Makers truth belie:
Conspirator with Time, now grown so mean and poor,
Comparing these his spirits with those that went before;
Yet rather art content thy Builders praise to lose,
Then passed greatness should thy present wants disclose.
Ill did those mighty men to trust thee with their story,
That have forgot their names, who reared thee for their glory:
For all their wondrous cost, thou that have served them so,
What it is to trust to Tombs, by thee we easily know.
In these invectiues thus whilst W^nsdick does complain,
He interrupted is by that imperlous Salisbury-Plaine.
Plain,
. To hear two cry st^ll Floods to court her, that apply
Themselves, which should be seen most gracious in her eye.
First, Willy boasts her self more worthy then the other,
And better far derived: as having to her mother
Fair A Forest betwixt Wiltshire and Sommersetshire.
Selwood, and to bring up Of diuing under the earth.
Diuer in her train;
Which, when the envious soil would from her course restrain,
A mile creeps under earth, as flying all resort:
And how clear Nader waits attendance in her Court;
And therefore claims of right the Plain should hold her dear, Wilton of
Willie, and Wiltshire of Wilton.

Which gives that Town the name; which likewise names the Shire.
The Eastern Avon vaunts, and does upon her take
To be the only child of shadefull A Forest in Wiltshire, as the Map will
tell you.
Sauernake,
As Ambrayes ancient flood; her self and to enstile
The Stonendges best-lov'd, first wonder of the I Will;
And what (in her behoof) might any want supply,
She vaunts the goodly seat of famous Salsburie;
Where meeting pretty Bourne, with many a kind embrace,
Betwixt their crystal arms they clip that loved place.
Report, as lately raised, unto these Rivers came,
. That Bathes clear Avon (waxt imperious through her fame)
Their daliance should deride; and that by her disdain,
Some other smaller Brooks, belonging to the Plain,
A question seemed to make, whereas the Shire sent forth
Two Avons, which should be the flood of greatest worth;
This stream, which to the South the The French Sea, as you have in the note
before.
Celtick Sea does get,
Or that which from the North saluteth Somerset.
This when these Rivers heard, that even but lately strove
Which best did love the Plain, or had the Plains best love,
They straight themselves combine: for Willy wisely waide,
That should her Avon lose the day for want of aid,
If one so great and near were ouerprest with power,
The Foe (she being less) would quickly her devour.
As two contentious Kings, that on each little jar,
Defiances send forth, proclaiming open war,
Until some other Realm, that on their frontires lies,
Be hazarded again by other enemies,
Do then betwixt themselves to composition fall,
To countercheck that sword, else like to conquer all:
So falls it with these Floods, that deadly hate do bear.
And whilst on either part strong preparations were,
It greatly was supposed strange strife would there have been,
Had not the goodly Plain (placed equally between)
Fore-warned them to desist, and off their purpose brake;
When in behalf of Plains thus (gloriously) she spoke;
The Plain of Salisburies speech in defense of all Plains.
Away ye barbarous Woods; How ever ye be placed
On Mountains, or in Dales, or happily be graced
With floods, or marshie Boggy places. A word frequent in Lancashire.
fels, with pasture, or with earth
By nature made to till, that by the yearly birth
The large-bay'd Barn does fill, yea though the fruitfulst ground.
For, in respect of Plains, what pleasure can be found
In dark and sleepie shades? where mists and rotten fogs
Hang in the gloomie thicks, and make unsteadfast bogs,
By dropping from the boughs, the o're-growen trees among,
With Caterpillars kells, and duskie cobwebs hong.
The deadly Screech-owle sits, in gloomie covert hid:
Whereas the smooth-brow'd Plain, as liberally does bid
The Lark to leave her Bower, and on her trembling wing
In climing up toward heaven, her high-pitcht Hymns to sing
Unto the springing Day; when against the Suns arise
The early Dawning strowes the goodly Eastern skies
With Roses every where: who scarcely lifts his head
To view this upper world, but he his beams does spread
Upon the goodly Plains; yet at his Noonesteds hight,
Does scarcely pierce the Brake with his farre-shooting sight.
The gentle Shepherds here survay their gentler sheep:
Amongst the bushie woods luxurious Satyrs keep.
To these brave sports of field, who with desire is won,
To see his Greyhound course, his Horse (in diet) run,
His deep mouthed Hound to hunt, his long-wingd Haulk to fly,
To these most noble sports his mind who does apply,
Resorts unto the Plains. And not a foughten Field,
Where Kingdoms rights have lain upon the spear and shield,
But Plains have been the place; and all those Trophies hie
That ancient times have reared to noble memory:
As, Stonendge, that to tell the British Princes slain
By those false Saxons fraud, here ever shall remain.
It was upon the Plain of Mamre (to the fame
Of me and all our kind) whereas the Angels came
To Abraham in his Tent, and there with him did feed;
To Sara his dear wife then promising the seed
By whom all Nations should so highly honored be,
In which the Son of God they in the flesh should see.
But Forests, to your plague there soon will come an Age,
In which all damned sins most vehemently shall rage.
An Age! what have I said! nay, Ages there shall rise,
So senseless of the good of their posterities,
That of your greatest Groves they scarce shall leave a tree
(By which the harmless Dear may after sheltred be)
Their luxury and pride but only to maintain,
And for your long exc^sse shall turn ye all to pain.
Thus ending; though some h^ls themselves that do apply
To please the goodly Plain, Diverse hills near and about Salisbury Plain.
still standing in her eye,
Did much applaud her speech (as Haradon, whose head
Old Ambry still does awe, and Bagdon from his sted,
Suruaying of the Vies, whose likings do allure
Both Ouldbry and Saint Anne; and they again procure
Mount Marting-sall: and he those hills that stand aloof,
Those brothers Barbury, and Badbury, whose proof
Adds much unto her praise) yet in most high disdain,
The Forests take her words, and swear the prating Plain
Grown old began to doat: and Sauernake so much
Is galled with her taunts (whom they so nearely touch)
That she in spiteful terms defies her to her face;
And Aldburne with the rest, though being but a Chase,
At worse then naught her sets: but Bradon all afloate
When it was told to her, set open such a throat,
That all the country rang. She calls her barren Jade,
Base Queen, and riv'ld VVitch, and wished she could be made
But worthy of her hate (which most of all her grieves)
The basest beggars Baude, a harborer of thieves.
Then Peusham, and with her old Blackmore (not behind)
Do wish that from the Seas some soultrie Southern wind,
The foul infectious damps, and poisned aires would sweep,
And pour them on the Plain, to rot her and her Sheep.
But whilst the sportiue Muse delights her with these things,
She strangely taken is with those delicious Springs
Of Kenet rising here, and of the nobler Stream
Of Isis setting forth upon her way to Tame,
. By Greeklade; whose great name yet vaunts that learned tongue,
Where to great Britain first the sacred Muses song;
Which first were seated here, at Isis bountious head,
As telling that her fame should through the world be spread;
And tempted by this flood, to Oxford after came,
There likewise to delight her bridegroom, lovely Tame:
Whose beauty when they saw, so much they did adore,
That Greeklade they forsook, and would go back no more.
Then Bradon gently brings forth Avon from her source:
Which Southward making soon in her most quiet course,
Receives the gentle Calne: when on her rising side,
First Blackmoore crowns her bank, as Peusham with her pride
Sets out her murmuring sholes, till (turning to the West)
Her, Somerset receives, with all the bounties blessed
That Nature can produce in that Bathonian Spring,
Which from the Sulphury Mines her med'cionll force does bring;
As Physic has found out by color, taste, and smell,
Which taught the world at first the virtue of that Well;
What quickliest it could cure: which men of knowledge drew
From that first mineral cause: but some that little knew
(Yet felt the great effects continually it wrought)
. Ascribed it to that skill, which Blod^d hither brought,
As by that learned King the Bathes should be begun;
Not from the quickened Mine, by the begetting* Sun
Giving that natural power, which by the vigorous sweat,
Does lend the lively Springs their perdurable heat
In passing through the veins, where matter does not need;
Which in that minerous earth insep'rably does breed:
So nature has puruai'd, that during all her reign
The Bathes their native power for ever shall retain:
Where Time that City built, which to her greater fame,
Preserving of that Spring, participates her name;
The Tutilage whereof (as those past worlds did please)
Minerua and Hercules, the protectors of these fountains.
Some to Minerua gave and some to Hercules:
Proud Phoebus loved Spring, in whose Diurnall course,
. When on this point of earth he bends his greatest force,
By his so strong approach, prouokes her to desire;
Stung with the kindly rage of loves impatient fire:
Which boiling in her womb, proiects (as to a birth)
Such matter as she takes from the gross humorous earth;
Till purged of dregs and slime, and her complexion clear,
She smileth on the light, and looks with mirthfull cheer.
Then came the lusti^ Froome, the first of floods that met
Fair Avon entering in to fruitful Somerset,
With her attending Brooks; and her to Bathe does bring,
Much honored by that place, Minerua's sacred Spring.
To noble Avon, next, clear Chute as kindly came,
To Bristow her to bear, the fairest seat of Fame:
To entertain this flood, as great a mind that has,
The delicacies of Bristow.
And striving in that kind far to excel the Bath.
As when some wealthy Lord, prepares to entertain
A man of high account, and feast his gallant train;
Of him that did the like, does seriously enquire
His diet, his device, his service, his attire;
That varying every thing (exampled by his store)
He every way may pass what the other did before:
Even so this City does; the prospect of which place
To her fair building adds an admirable grace;
Well fashioned as the best, and with a double wall,
As brave as any Town; but yet excelling all
For casement, that to health is requisite and meet;
Her piled shores, to keep her delicate and sweet:
Hereto, she has her Tides; that when she is oppressed
With heat or drought, still pour their floods upon her breast.
To Mendip then the Muse upon the South inclines,
Which is the only store, and Coffer of her Mines:
Elsewhere the Fields and Meades their sundry traffiques suit:
The Forests yield her wood, the Orchards give her fruit.
As in some rich man's house his several charges lie,
There stands his Wardrobe, here remains his Treasury;
His large provision there, of Fish, of Fowl, and Neat;
His Cellars for his Wines, his Larders for his meat;
There Banquet houses, Walks for pleasure; here again
Cribs, Graners, Stables, Barnes, the other to maintain:
So this rich country has, it self what may suffice;
Or that which through exchange a smaller want supplies:
Yet Ochyes dreadful Hole still held her self disgraced,
. With A catalog of many wonders of this Land.
th'wonders of this I Will that she should not be placed:
But that which vexed her most, was, that the The Devils art.
Peakish Cave
Before her darkesome self such dignity should have;
And The Salt Wels in Chesshire.
the Wyches for their Salts such state on them should take;
Or Cheshire should prefer her sad Bruertons pond.
Death-boding-lake;
And Stonendge in the world should get so high respect,
Which imitating Art but idly did erect:
And that amongst the rest, the vain inconstant A river by Westchester.
Dee,
By changing of his Foards, for one should reckond be;
As of another sort, wood turned to By sundry soiles of Britain.
stone; among,
Th'anatomized Our Pikes, ripped and sowed up, liu^.
Fish, and Fowls from Barnacles a bird breeding upon old ships.
planchers sprung:
And on the Cambrian side those strange and wondrous Wondrous Springs in Wales.
Springs,
Our Sheep.
beasts that seldom drink; a thousand other things
Which Ochy inly vexed, that they to fame should mount,
And greatly grieved her friends for her so small account;
That there was scarcely Rock, or River, Marsh, or Meare
That held not Ochyes wrongs (for all held Ochy dear)
In great and high disdain: and Froome for her disgrace
Since scarcely ever washed the Colesleck from her face;
But (melancholy grown) to Avon gets a path,
Through sickeness forced to seek for cure unto the Bath:
. And Chedder for mere grief his teene he could not wreake,
Gusht forth so forcefull streams, that he was like to brea^^
The greater banks of Ax, as from his mothers Cave,
He wandered toward the Sea; for madness who does rave
At his drad mothers wrong: but who so woe begone
For Ochy, as the I Will of ancient Aualon?
Who having in her self, as inward cause of grief,
Neglects yet her own, to give her friend relief.
The other so again for her does sorrow make,
And in the Isles behalf the dreadful Cauerne spoke;
O three times famous I Will, where is that place that might
Be with thy self compared for glory and delight,
Whilst Glastenbury stood? exalted to that pride,
Whose Monastery seemed all other to deride?
O who thy ruin sees, whom wonder does not fill
With our great fathers pomp, devotion, and their skill?
Thou more then mortal power (this judgment rightly wai'd)
Then present to assist, at that foundation laid;
On whom for this sad waste, should Justice lay the crime?
Is there a power in Fate, or does it yield to Time?
Or was their error such, that thou could not protect
Those buildings which thy hand did with their zeal erect?
To whom did thou commit that monument, to keep,
That suffers with the dead their memory to sleep?
. When not great Arthurs Tomb, not holy Joseph of Arimathea.
Joseph's Grave,
From sacrilege had power their sacred bones to save;
He who that God in man to his sepulcher brought,
Or he which for the faith twelve famous battles fought.
What? Did so many Kings do honor to that place,
For Avarice at last so vilely to deface?
For reu'rence, to that seat which has ascribed been,
The wondrous tree at Glastenbury.
Trees yet in winter bloome, and bear their Summers green.
This said, she many a sigh from her full stomach cast,
Which issued through her breast in many a boystrous blast;
And with such floods of tears her sorrows does condole,
As into rivers turn within that darkesome hole:
Like sorrow for her self, this goodly I Will does try;
. Embraced by Selwoods son, her flood the lovely Bry,
On whom the Fates bestowed (when he conceived was)
He should be much beloved of many a dainty Less;
Who gives all leave to like, yet of them likes none:
But his affection sets on beauteous Aualon;
Fruitful Moors on the banks of Bry.
Though many a plump-thigh'd moore, and ful-flanck't marsh do prove
To force his chaste desires, so dainty of his love.
First Sedgemore shows this flood, her bosom all vnbrac't,
And casts her wanton arms about his slender wast:
Her lover to obtain, so amorous Audry seeks:
And Gedney softly steals sweet kisses from his cheeks.
One takes him by the hand, entreating him to stay:
Another pluckes him back, when he would feign away:
But, having caught at, length, whom long he did pursue,
Is so intranc't with love, her goodly parts to view,
That altring quite his shape, to her he does appear,
And casts his crystal self into an ample Meare:
But for his greater growth when needs he must depart,
And forced to leave his Love (though with a heavy heart)
As he his back does turn, and is departing out,
The batning marshie Brent enuirons him about:
But lothing her embrace, away in haste he flings,
And in the Seuerne Sea surrounds his plentious Springs.
But, dallying in this place so long why do thou dwell,
So many sundry things here having yet to tell?
Occasion calls the Muse her pynions to prepare.
Which (striking with the wind the vast and open air)
Now, in the finnie Heaths, then in the Champains roues;
Now, measures out this Plain; and then survayes those groves;
The batfull pastures fenc't, and most with quickset mound,
The sundry sorts of soil, diversity of ground;
Where Plow-men cleanse the Earth of rubbish, weed, and filth,
And give the fallow lands their seasons and their tylth:
Where, best for breeding horse; where cattle fitst to keep;
Which good for bearing Corn; which pasturing for sheep:
The lean and hungry earth, the fat and marly mold,
Where sands be always hot, and where the clayes be cold;
With plenty where they waste, some others touched with want:
Here set, and there they sow; here proine, and there they plant.
As Wiltshire is a place best pleased with that resort
Which spend away the time continually in sport;
So Somerset, her self to profit does apply,
As given all to gain, and thriuing huswifrie.
For, whereas in a Land one does consume and wast,
It Is fit another be to gather in as fast:
This likes moorie plots, delights in sedgie Bowres,
The grassy garlands loves, and often attyr'd with flowers
Of rank and mellow gleabe; a sward as soft as wool,
With her complexion strong, a belly plumpe and full.
Thus whilst the active Muse strains out these various things,
Clear Parret makes approach, with all those plentious Springs
Her fruitful banks that bless; by whose Monarchall sway,
She fortifies her self against that mighty day
Wherein her utmost power she should be forced to try.
For, from the Druides time there was a prophecy,
That there should come a day (which now was near at hand
By all forerunning signs) that on the Eastern Strand,
If A supposed prophecy upon Parret.
Parret stood not fast upon the English side,
They all should be suppressed: and by the British pride
In cunning overcome; for why, impartial Fate
(Yet constant always to the Britains crazed state)
Forbad they yet should fall; by whom she meant to show
How much the present Age, and aftertimes should owe
Unto the line of Brute. Clear Parret therefore pressed
Her tributarie Streams, and wholly her addressed
Against the ancient Foe: First, calling to her aid
Two Rivers of Ivel: from which, the town Ivel is denominated.
one name; which seem as though they stayed
Their Empress as she went, her either hand that take.
The first upon the right, as from her source, does make
Large Muchelney an I Will, and unto Ivell lends
Her hardlie-rendred name: That on her left, descends
From Neroch's neighboring woods; which, of that Forest borne,
Her riualls proffered grace opprobriously does scorn.
She by her wandering course does Athelney in-Ile:
And for the greater state, herself she does instile
. The nearest neighboring flood to Arthurs ancient seat,
Which made the Britains name through all the world so great.
Like Camelot, what place, was ever yet renownd?
Where, as at Carlion, often, he kept the Table-round,
Most famous for the sports at Pentecost so long,
From whence all Knightly deeds, and brave atchieuements sprung.
As some soft-sliding Rill, which from a lesser head
(Yet in his going forth, by many a Fountain fed)
Extends it self at length unto a goodly stream:
So, almost through the world his fame flew from this Realm;
That justly I may charge those ancient Bards of wrong,
So idly to neglect his glory in their Song.
For some abundant brain, o there had been a story
Beyond the Homer.
Blind-mans might to have inhanc't our glory.
Toward the Sabrinian Sea then Parret setting on,
To her attendance next comes in the beauteous Tone,
Crowned with embroidred banks, and gorgeously arraid
With all th'enamild flowers of many a goodly Mead:
In Orchards richly clad; whose proud aspyring boughs
Even of the tallest woods do scorn a jot to loose,
Though Selwoods mighty self and Neroch standing by:
The sweetness of her soil through every Coast does fly.
What ear so empty is, that has not heard the sound
Of Tauntons fruitful One of the fruitful places of this Land.
Deane? not matched by any ground;
By Interpreted the noble I Will.
Athelney adored, a neighbourer to her Land;
Whereas those higher hills to view fair Tone that stand,
Her coadiuting Springs with much content behold:
Where Sea-ward Quantock stands as Neptune he controld,
And Blackdown Inland borne, a Mountain and a Mound,
As though he stood to look about the Country round:
But Parret as a Prince, attended here the while,
Inricht with every Moore, and every Inland I Will,
Upon her takes State, well forward toward her fall*
Whom lastly yet to grace, and not the least of all,
Comes in the lively Carre, a Nymph, most lovely clear,
From Somerton sent down the Sovereign of the Sheere;
Which makes our Parret proud. And wallowing in excess,
Whilst like a Prince she vaunts amid the watery press,
The breathless Muse awhile her wearied wings shall ease,
To get her strength to stem the rough Sabrinian Seas.
Illustrations.
DIscontinuing her first course, the Muse returns to Somerset and Wiltshire,
which lie twixt the Seuerne and Hantshire; as the Song here ioynes them: From
Sarum thus we set, removed from whence it stood.


Old Salisbury seated Northeast from the now famous Salisbury, some mile
distant, about Richard Ceur de Lions time had her name and inhabitants, hither
translated, upon the meeting of Auon and Aderborn; where not long after she
enjoyed, among other, that glorious title of admiration for her sumptuous
Church-buildings. Of that, one of my Authors thus: -- in the year of grace
Rob. Glocestrens.

Twelf hundred and to and twenti in the vaire place
Of the noble Munstre of Salesburi hill leide the verste stone
That me not in Christindom vairore work non.
There was (...) the Legate, and as heyt of echon,
He leide vine the verste stone: as vor the Pope put on,
The other vor ure Hen. III.
young King, the thridde as me seye
Uor the good Earl of Salisburi William Wilhelm. de longa spatha.
the Longespei,
The verth vor the Contesse, the vi^te he leide tho
Uor the Richard Poor.
Bishop of Salesburi, and he ne leide na mo.
This work then began, was by Robert of Bingham, next succeeding Bishop to
that excellency, prosecuted.

Has worthily obtaind that Stonehenge there should stand.
Upon Salisbury plain stones of huge weight and greatness, some in the earth
pitched, and in form erected, as it were circular; others lying cross over
them, as if their own poize did no less then their supporters give them that
proper place have this name of Stone-henge; But so confused that neither any eye
Can count them just, nor reason reason try,
What force brought them to so unlikely ground.
As the noble In his Sonets.
Sidney of them.

No man knows, says Histor lib. 1.
Huntingdon (making them the first wonder of this Land, as the Author does)
how, or why they came here. The cause thus take from the British story:
Hengist under color of a friendly treaty with Vortigern at Amesbury, his
falsehoods watch word to his Saxons (provided there privily with long knives)
being ^ Take your swords.
Nime (...).ix. noble Britons, and kept the King prisoner. Some xx^. years
after K. Ambros (to honor with one monument the name of so many murdered,
Worthies) by help of Vter-pen-dragons forces and Merlins magique, got them
transported from off a plain (others say a hill) near Girald. Cambrensis
Topograph. Hib. did. 2. cap. 18. Chorea gigantum.
Naas in Kildare in Ireland, hither, to remain as a trophy, not of victory, not
of wronged innocence. This Merlin persuaded the King that they were
medicinal; and first brought out of the utmost parts of Afri^us by ^^ants
which thence came to inhabit Ireland. Not one of the stones but is good for
somewhat in Physique.
No^ est ibi lapis qui (...) caret, as (...) Merlins person* Geffrey of
Monmouth speaks; whose authority in this treacherous slaughter of the Britons,
I respect not so much as Nennius, Malmesbury, Sigebert, Matthew of Westminster,
and others, who report it as I deliver. Whether they be naturally solid or with
cement artificially composed, I will not dispute. Although the last be of
easier credit; yet I would, with our late Historian White, believe the first
sooner, then that Ulysses ship was by Neptune turned into one stone, as it is in
the Odyssees, and that the Egyptian King Amasis had a house cut out in one
marble (which, by Heredotus description, could not after the workmanship have
less content then M.M.CCC.XCIV. solid cubits, if my Geometry false me not) or
that which the Jews Apud Munster. ad Deuter. 3. If among them there be a
Whetstone, let the Jew have it.
are not ashamed to affirm of a stone, with which K. Og at one throw from his
head purposed to have crushed all the Israelites* had not a La^wing strangely
peck^ such a hole through it, that it fell on his shoulders, and by miracle his
vpper-teeth suddenly extended, kept it there fall from motion. It is possible
they may be of some such earthy dust as that of Puzzole and by Ae^na, which
cast into the water turns stony, as Pliny after Strabo of them and other like
remembers. Powel* ad lib. 2. cap. 9. Girald. itenerarij.
And for certain I find it reported, that in Cairnaruan upon Snowdon hills is a
stone (which miraculously somewhat more then LX. years since, raised it self
out of a lake at the hill foot) equalling a large house in greatness, and
supposed not moveable by (...) yoke of Oxen. For the form of bringing them,
your opinion may take freedom. That great one which Hercules Aristot. (...).
is wondered at for the carriage was but (...)
a Cartload, which he left for a monument in Otranto of Italy: and except
Geffrey of Monmouth, with some which follow him, scarce any affirm or speak
of it* nor Na^^ius, nor Malmesbury; the first living somewhat near the
supposed time.

Betwixt the Mercian rule, and the West Saxons reign.
So thinks our Antiquary and Light of this Kingdom; that, to be a limit of
those two ancient states, sometime divided by Auon, which falls into Seuerne,
Wansdike crossing the shire Westward over the plain was first call up
Wodensdike, the old name is supposed from Woden; of no less (if not greater)
esteem to the Saxons, then Arsaces, P^lops, Cadmus, and other such to their
posterity; but so, that, I guess it went but for their greatest God Mercury
(he is called rather Wonden from Win; that is, gain by Ad Germ. Tacit. Woden
or Wonden.
Lipsius) as the German and English antiquities discover. And very likely, when
this limit was made, that in honor of him, being by name president of ways,
and by his office of Heraldship Pacifex.i. Peacemaker, (...). Sau. Mercury.
Adam Bremens. cap. 5. and Hence Irmingstrea^.
as an old stamp titles him, they called it Wodansdike; as not only the
Greeks, had their (...) (statues erected) for limits and direction of ways,
Pausan sapius and Theocrit. (...).
and the Latins their Terminus, but the ancient Jews also, as upon
interpretation of (...) Proverb. 26. v. 8.
in the Proverbs.i. into an heap of Mercury (in the vulgar) for a heap of
stones in that sense, Goropius in his hieroglyphiques affirms, somewhat boldly
deriuing Mercury from Mere, which signifies a limit in his and our tongue, and
so fits this place in name and nature. Stonh^nge and it not improperly contend,
being several works of two several nations anciently hateful to each other;
Britons and Saxons.

To hear two cristall floods to court her, which apply
Willibourne (by the old name the Author calls her VVilly) derived from near
S^lwood by VVarm^ster, with her creeky passage, crossing to Wilton, naming
both that town and the shire, and on the other side Auon taking her course out
of Sauer^^^ by Marlsborow through the shire Southward, washing Ambresbury and
the Salisburies (new Salisbury being her Episcopal city) both watring the
plain, and furnished with these reasons, are fitly thus personated, striving to
endeare themselves in her love: and prosecuting this fiction, the Muse thus
adds; How that Bathe's Auon waxt imperious through her fame.


Diverse rivers of that name have we; but two of eminent note in Wiltshire: one
is next before showed you, which falls through Dorcet into the Ocean; the other
here mentioned has her head in the edge of Gloucester: and with her snakie
course, visiting Malmesbury, Chippenham, Bradford, and diverse towns of slight
note, turns into Somerset, passes Bath, and casts her self into Seuerne at
Bristow. This compendious contention (whose proportionat example is a special
elegancie for the expressing of diversity* as in the Pastorals of Theocritus
and Virgill) is aptly concluded with that point of ancient politic In
Thucydid. and Li^.
observation, that Outward common fear is the surest band of friendship.

To Greeklade whose great name (...) that learned tongue.
The History of Oxford in the Procto^s book, and certain old verses, L^land,
ad cyg. cant. in Iside.
kept somewhere in this tract, affirm, that with Brute came hither certain
Greek Philosophers, from whose name and profes^ion here it was thus called,
and as an University afterward translated in Oxford (upon like notation a
company of Physicians retiring to i. The Physicians lake.
Lechlade in this shire, gave that its title, as I. Rous adds in his story to
Hen. VII.) But Godwine and a very old Anonymus, cited by Br. Twine, refer it
to Theodore of Tarsus in Cilicia (made Archbishop of Canterbury by P. Vitalian
under Eegbert King of Kent) very skilful in both tongues, and an extraordinary
restorer of learning to the English-Saxons; That he had (among other) Greek
schools, is certain by Bedes affirmation that some of his scholars understood
both Greek and Latin as their mother language. Richard of the Vies Apud Cai de
antiq. Cantabrig. ^ib. 2. and Cod. Ni^^antabr. apud aut. assert. antiq. Oxon.
will that Penda K. of M^^cland, first deduced a colony of Cambridge men hither
and calls it (...) with variety of names: but I suspect all; as well for
omission (...) best authorities, as also that the name is so different in it
self. (...) was never honored with Greek schools, as the ignorant multitude
think says Ad Cyg. Cant. in Iside and Isid. vad. Curuus Graecus sermo
Britanicus Gaifred. Monumeth. lib. 1.
Leland, affirming it should be rather Creclade, Lechelade, or Lath^^ar. Nor we
thinks (of (...)) stands it with the British story, making the tongue then a
kind of Greek a matter, that way reasonable enough, seeing it is questionles
that colonies anciently derived (...), and those continents into the (...) the
Greek with them) that profession of Graecians should make this so particular a
name.

Ascribed (...)
(...) is that, which is (...) the authors opinion, which has warrant enough
in others) or agitation of wind, as some will; but either passage through
metallique, bituminous, and sulphurous veins, or rather a real subterranean
fire, as Senec. Natural, quaest. lib. 3. cap. 24.
Empedocles first thought, and with most witty arguments (according to the
Poetical conceit of Typhon Pynder. Pyth. ^.
, buried in Prochyta; whereto Strabo referres the best Bathes in Italy) my
learned and kind friend M^. Lydiat, that accurat Chronologer, in his ingenious
Philosophy, has lately disputed. But, as the Author tells you, some British
vanity imputes it to Bladuds art, which in a very ancient fragment Ex antiq.
sched.
of rimes I found exprest^ and if you can endure the language and fiction you
may read it, and then laugh at it. Two tun there beth of bras,
And other two imaked of glass
^^eue seats there huth inn
And other thing imaked with ginne:
Quick brimston in them also,
With wild fire imaked thereto:
Sal gemmae and sal pet^ae,
Sal armonak there is eke
Sal albrod and sal alkine
Sal Gemmae is minged with him,
Sal Comin and sal almetre bright
That borneth both day and night,
All this is in the to^n^ ido
And other things many mo,
And borneth both night and day
That never quench it ne way
In but welsprings the loothes (...)
As the Philosophers us ^iggeth Sea the Authors 8. Song.

The (...) within, the water without,
(...) it ho^ al above
The (...) earneth more
And the other two has (...) t^re.
There is (...) ^all (...)
That Kings has ^ripped is.
The rich King Bladud
The Kings son Lud
And when he maked that has (...)
And if him failed ought
Of that that should thereto,
Herkeneth what he would do
From Bath to London he would (...)
And th^^ke day set (...) be
And ^eteh that (...),
He was quick, and swith sell
The the master was (...)
And is soul wend to the Qu^^
For go^ne was not ^o^ poor
Not (...).
I will as soon believe all this as (...). (...). cent. 1.
Deui or Julius Caesar ((...) near it) was author of it, on that he made
Knights of the Bathal. They la^^ no^ wanting which have durst say so.

When on this (...) of earth ne (...) his (...) test (...).
From eight in the morning till three' within which time the (...) make their
strongest angles of incidence) it ^ur (...) clean excrements, nor then does
any enter it; which the Muse here expresses in a fervent sympathy of love twixt
the Water and the Sun, and the more properly because it had the name of Ant
^^nus in Itinerario.
Waters of the Sun.
Aquae Solis.

With the wonders of the I Will that she should not be placed.
Or. Ochy
Wockey hole (so called in my conceit, from poc^ Beat. Rh^nan. lib. 2. ver.
Germany.
, which is the same with pic, signifying a hollow or creekie passage) in Mendip
hills by Wells, for her spacious vaults, stony walls, creeping Labyrinths,
vnimaginable cause of posture in the earth and hi^ neighbors report (all which
almost equal her to that Grotta de la Ortelius theat mundi. The wonders of
England.
Sibylla in the Apenin of Marca Anconitano, and the Dutch song of little
Daniel) might well wonder she had not place among her country wonders. One
that seems to increase Samuel Beaulan upon Nennius, reckons XIII. by that
name, but with vain and false reports (as that of the B^^h to be both hot and
cold, according to the desire of him that washes) and in some the Author of
Polychronicon follows him; neither speaking of this. But the last, and Henry
of Huntingdon reckon only four remarqueable; the Peake, Stonhenge.
Chederhole, and a hill out of which it raines. That wonder of humane
excellence, Sir Philip Sidney, to fit his Sonnet, makes six; and to fit that
number conceitedly adds a froward, but chaste, Lady for the seventh. And the
Author heretels you the chiefest.

-- that Froome for her disgrace,
Since scarcely ever washed the Colesleck from her face.
Out of Mendip hills Froome springs, and through the Colepits after a short
course Eastward turns upward to Bathes Avon. The fiction of her besinea^'d
face happens the better, in that Froome, after our old mother language,
signifies fair, as that paradoxall Becanus Hermathen. lib. 5.
, in exposition of the Egyptian Pyromis in Herodotus, Euterpe.
would by notation teach us.

And Chedder for mere grief his teene he could not wreake.
Near Axbridge, Chedder cleeues, rockey and vauted, by continual distilling,
is the fountain of a forcible stream (driving XII. M^'s within a miles quarter
of its head) which runs into Ax derived out of Wocker.

When not great Arthurs Tomb, nor holy Joseph's Grave
Henry the second in his expedition toward Ireland entertained by the way in
Wales with Bardish songs, wherein he heard it affirmed that in Glastenbury
(made almost an I Will by the Rivers embracements) Arthur was buried twixt two
pillars, gave commandment to Henry of Blois then Abbot, to make search for the
corpse: which was found in a wooden coffin ( Girald says O^^n, Leland thinks
Alder) some sixteen foot deep; but after they had dug nine foot, they
Chronicon. Glasconiens.
found a stone on whose lower side was fixed a leaden cross (Crosses fixed upon
the Tombs of old Christians were in all places ordinary) with his name
inscribed, and the letter side of it turned to the stone. He was then honored
with a sumptuous monument, and afterward the sculs of him and his wife Guineuer
were taken out (to remain as separat relics and spectacles) by Edward
Longshanks and Elianor. Of this, Girald, Leland, Prise, diverse others (although
Polydore make slight of it) have more copious testimony. The Bards Songs
suppose, that after the battle of Camlan in Cornwall, where traiterous Mordred
was slain, and Arthur wounded, Morgain le Fay a great Elfin Lady (supposed his
near kinswoman) conveyed the body hither to cure it: which done, Arthur is to
return (yet expected) to the rule of his country. Read these attributed to the
Talies^in. ap. Pris. desens. hist. Brit.
best of the Bards, expressing as much: -- Morgain suscepit honor,
Inque suis thalamis posuit super aurea regem*
Fulcra, manuque sibi detexit vulnus honesta
Inspexitque diu: tandemque redire salutem
Posse sibi dixit, si secum tempore long
Esset, and ipsius vellet medicamine fungi.


Englisht in meeter for me thus by the Author: -- Morgain with honor took,
And in a chair of State does cause him to repose;
Then with a modest hand his wounds she does unclose:
And having searched them well, she bad him not to doubt,
He should in time be cured, if he would stay it out,
And would the medicine take that she to him would give.


The same also in effect, an excellent Dan Lidgat. lib. 8. verse. Boccat. cap.
24. Nania^ ad has resert Alanus de Insulis illud Merlini vaticinium. Exit^ cius
dubious erit.
Poet of his time thus singing it.

He is a King crouned in Fairie,
With Scepter and sword and with his regally
Shall resort as Lord and Sovereign
Out of Fairie and reign in Britain:
And repair again the Round Table
By prophesy Merlin set the date,
Among Princes King incomparable
His seat again to Carlion to translate
The Parchas sustren sponne to his fate
His Hic lacet Arthurus rex quondam Rexque futurus.
Epitaph records to certain
Here lies K. Arthur that shall reign again.
Worthily famous was the Abbey also from Joseph of Arimathia (that, Noble
Counselor. First Christianity in Britain: but see the VIII. Song.
(...), as S. Mark calls him) here buried, which gives proof of Christianity in
the I Will before our Lucius. Hence in a Charter of liberties by Hen. II. to the
Abbey (made in presence of Heraclius Patriarch of Jerusalem, and others) I
read, It was called the mother and tomb of the Saints. A Hawthorne blossoming
in Winter.
Olim a quibusdam matter sanctorum dicta est, ab alijs tumulus sanctorum, quam
ab ipsis discipulis Domini edificatans and ab ipso Domino dedicatam primo
fuisse venerabilis habet antiquorum authoritas. It goes for current truth that
a Hawthorne thereby on Christmas day always blossometh: which the Author tells
you in that, Trees yet in winter etc. You may cast this into the account of
your greatest wonders.

Embraced by Selwoods son her flood the lovely Bry.
Selwood send^ forth Bry, which after a winding course from Bruton, (so called
of the River) through part of Sedgemore, and Andremore, comes to Glastenbury,
and almost inisles it; thence to Gedney Moore, and out of Brent marsh into
Seuerne.

The nearest neighboring floods to Arthurs ancient seat.
By South Cadbury is that Camelot* a hill of a mile compass at the top, four
trenches circling it, and twixt every of them an earthen wall; the content of
it, within, about xx. acres, full of ruins and relics of old buildings.
Among Roman coins there found, and other works of antiquity, Stow speaks of
a silver Horseshow there dug up in the memory of our fathers: The
workmanship of the Ditches, Walls, and strange steepnes of them, makes it seem
a wonder of Art and Nature.
Dij boni (says Leland) quot hic profundissimarum fossarum? quot hi egestae
terrae valla? quae demum pracipitia? atque vt paucis finiam, videtur mihiquidem
esse and Atis and Naturae miraculum. Antique report makes this one of Arthurs
places of his Round Table, as the Muse here sings. But of this more in the next
Canto.



The fourth Song.
* THE ARGUMENT.
England and Wales strive, in this Song,
To whether, Lundy does belong:
When eithers Nymphs, to clear the doubt,
By Music mean to try it out.
Of mighty Neptune leave they ask:
Each one betakes her to her task;
The Britains, with the Harp and Crowd:
The English, both with still and loud.
The Britains chaunt King Arthurs glory*
The English sing their Saxons story.
The Hills of Wales their weapons take,
And are an uproar like to make,
To keep the English part in awe.
There Is heave, and shoue, and hold, and draw;
That Severne can them scarce divide,
Till Judgment may the Cause decide.
THis while in Sabrin's Court strong factions strangely grew,
Since Cornwall for her own, and as her proper due,
Claimed Lundy, which was said to Cambria to belong,
Who often had sought redress for that her ancient wrong:
But her inveterate Foe, borne-out by Englands might,
O're-swaies her weaker power; that (now in eithers right)
As Severne finds no Flood so great, nor poorly mean,
But that the natural Spring (her force which does maintain)
From England or Wales.
From this or that she takes; so from this Faction free
(Begun about this I Will) not one was like to be.
This Lundy is a Nymph to idle toys inclined;
And, all on pleasure set, does wholly give her mind
To see upon her shores her Foul and Conies fed,
. And wantonlie to hatch the Birds of Ganimed.
Of trafique or return she never takes care:
Not provident of pelf, as many Islands are:
A lusty black-brow'd Girl, with forehead broad and hie,
That often had bewitched the Sea-gods with her eye.
Of all the In-laid Isles her Sovereign Seuerne keeps,
That bathe their amorous breasts within her secret Deepes
(To love her Certain little Isles lying within Seuerne.
Barry much and Silly though she seem,
The Flat Holme and the Steep as likewise to esteem)
This noblest British Severne.
Nymph yet likes her Lundy best,
And to great Neptunes grace preferres before the rest.
Thus, Wales.
Cambria to her right that would her self restore,
And rather then to lose England.
Loegria, looks for more;
The Nymphs of either part, whom passion does invade,
To trial straight will go, though Neptune should dissuade:
But of the weaker sex, the most part full of spleen,
And only wanting strength to wreake their angry teene,
For skill their challenge make, which every one professed,
And in the learned Arts (of knowledges the best,
And to th'heroick spirit most pleasing under sky)
Sweet Music, rightly matched with heavenly Poesy,
In which they all exceed: and in this kind alone
They Conquerers vow to be, or lastly overthrown.
Which when fair Sabrine saw (as she is wondrous wise)
And that it were in vain them better to advise,
Since this contention sprang from Countries like allied,
That she would not be found t'incline to either side,
To mighty Neptune sues to have his free consent
Due trial they might make: When he incontinent
His Trytons sends out the challenge to proclaim.
No sooner that divulged in his so dreadful name,
But such a shout was sent from every neighboring Spring,
That the report was heard through all his Court to ring:
And from the largest Stream unto the lesser Brook,
Them to this wondrous task they seriously betook:
They curle their Ivory fronts, and not the smallest Beck
But with white Pebles makes her Tawdries for her neck;
Lay forth their amorous breasts unto the public view,
Enamiling the white, with veins that were as blew;
Each Moore, each Marsh, each Mead, preparing rich array
To set their Rivers forth against this general day.
Among Forests, Hills, and Floods, was never such heave and shoue
Since Albion, Neptunes son, warred with Hercules.
Albion weelded Arms against the son of Jove.
When as the English part their courage to declare,
Them to the appointed place immediately prepare.
A troop of stately Nymphs proud Avon with her brings
(As she that has the charge of wise The Bathes. All these Rivers you may see
in the third Song.
Mineruas Springs)
From Mendip tripping down, about the tinny Mine.
And Ax, no less employed about this great design,
Leads forth a lusty Rout, when Bry, with all her throng
(With very madness swollen that she had stayed so long)
Comes from the boggie Mears and queachy fens below:
That Parret (highly pleased to see the gallant show)
Set out with such a train as bone so great a sway,
The soil but scarcely serves to give her hugeness way.
Then the Deuonian T^we, from Dertmore decked with pearl,
Unto the conflict come^; with her that gallant Girl
. Clear Towridge, whom they feared would have estranged her fall:
Whose coming, lastly, bred such courage in them all,
As drew down many a Nymph from the Cornubian shore,
That paint their goodly breasts with sundry sorts of Ore.
The British, that this while had stood a view to take
What to her utmost power the public Foe could make,
But slightlie weigh their strength: for, by her natural kind,
As still the Britan hears a brave and noble mind;
So, trusting to their skill, and goodness of their Cause,
For speedy Trial call, and for indifferent Laws*
At length, by both allowed, it to this issue grew;
To make a likely choice of some most expert crew,
Whose number coming near unto the others dowre,
The English should not urge they were o're-borne by power.
. Yet hardly upon Pows^ they dare their hopes to lay,
For that she has commerce with England every day:
. Nor Rosse; for that too much (...) Aliens does respect;
And following them, forgoes her ancient Dialect;
The Floods of North Wales.
Venedotian Floods, that ancient Britans were,
The Mountains kept them back, and shut them in the Rear:
But Brecknock, long time known a Country of much worth,
Unto this conflict brings her goodly Fountains forth:
For almost not a Brook of Glamorgan and M^mouthshires.
Morga^^ nor Gwent,
But from her fruitful womb do f^^ch their hie descent.
For Brecan, was a Prince once fortunate and great
(Who dying, lent his name to that his nobler seat)
With A supposed metamorphosis of Bretans daughters.
twice twel^e daughters blessed, by one and only wife:
Who for their beauties rare, and sanctiue of life,
To Rivers war^ transformed; whose pureness does declare
How excellent they were, by being what they are:
Who dying virgins all, and Rivers now by Ea^^,
To tell their former love to the unmarried state,
To Seuerne ships this course o^ which now their form does bear;
Ere she was made a flood, a virgin as they were.
And from the Irish seas with fear they still do fli^^
So much they yet delight in maiden companie^
Then most renowned Wales thou famous ancient place,
Which still have been the Nurse of all the British ^ace,
Since Nature thee den^es that purple-cluster'd Vine,
Which others Temples chafes with fragrant sparkling Wine;
And being now in hand, to write thy glorious praise;
Fill me a bowl of Mead, my working spirit to raise:
And ere seven Books have end, I Will strike so high a string,
Thy Bards shall stand amazed with wonder, whilst I sing;
. That Taliessen, once which made the Rivers dance,
And in his rapture raiz'd the Mountains from their trance,
Shall tremble at my Verse, rebounding from the skies;
Which like an earthquake shakes the Tomb wherein he lies.
First our triumphing Muse of sprightly Vske shall tell,
And what to every Nymph attending her, befell:
Which Cray and Camlas first for Pages does retenne;
With whom the next in place comes in the tripping Breane,
With Isker; and with her comes Hodny fine and clear,
Of Brecknock best beloved, the Sovereign of the Sheere:
And Grony, at an inch, waits on her Mistress heels.
But entering (at the last) the Monumethian fields,
Small Fidan, with Cledaugh, increase her goodly M^nie,
Short Kebby, and the Brook that christneth Abergeny.
With all her wa^ry ^^^ine, when now at las^ she came
Unto that happy Town which bears her Mo^mouth.
only name,
Bright Birthin, with her friend fair ^h^y, kindly meet her*
Which for her present haste (...) scarcely time to greet her:
But earnest on her way, she needsly will be gone;
So much she longs to ^ee the ancient Carl^^n.
When Avon comes in then which amongst them all
A finer is not found betwixt her head and fall.
Then Eb^ith, and with her slides S^owy; which forelay
Her progress; and for ^ike keep entrance to the Sea.
When Munno, all this while the^^ (for her own behoof)
From this their great recourse had strangely stood aloof,
Made proud by Monmouth^ name appointed her by Fate,
Of all the rest herein observed special st^r^.
For once the Bard^ foretold she should produce a Henry the fifth styled of
Monmouth.
King,
Which everlasting praise to his (...) should bring,
Who by his conquering sword should all the land ^^rprise,
Which twixt the A maritime hill in Caernarnan Shire.
(...) and the (...)
She therefore is allowed (...) by he^*
They win the goodly (...) home strongly she does stir
Her powerful help (...) which (...) had de^ide,
Because her self so (...) England (...)
But b^ing by Munn^ (...) she goe^.
Which when as Thr^ggy (...) her self she (...) throws
Into the wa^ry throng, with many (...)
Repairing to the Welsh, their number up to ^^ll.
That Remny when (...) Nymphe^ of Gw^^^*
On this appointed match, were (...)
Where she of ancient time had (...)
The Monumethian (...)
Entreats the Taffe along (...)
With whom clear Cun^^ (...) Camb^^^^ Less:
Then (...) with (...) hold^ (...) way,
And Ogmore, that would yet (...) soon as they,
By Avon called (...) when (...) anon
(To all the neighboring Nymp^^ for her r^re (...) known;
Besides her double head, to help her stream that ^ath
Her handmaids, Melta sweet, (...) Hepsey, and Tragath)
From Brecknock forth does brea^e* then Dulas and Cl^daugh,
By Glamorgan.
Morgany do drive her through her watery A kind of Trench.
saugh;
With Taw^^ taking (...) ^he Cambria^ power:
. Then Lhu and Logar, given to strengthen them by G^wer*
Among whom, (...) there were, that in their sacred rage
Recorded the Descent^, and acts of every Age.
Some with their nimble loy^ts that struck the ^a^^ling string;
In fingering some (...) but one (...) used to sing
Unto the others Ha^p^: of which you both might find
Great plenty, and of both ^xcelling in their kind,
. That at the Stethva often obtained a Visitors praise,
Had won the Silver H^rpe, and wor^e Apollos ^ayed:
Whose Verses they (...) from those first golden ^imes,
Of sundry sorts of Feet, and sundly su^e^ of Rimes.
In Englins, Coiths, and Adells, British forms of verses. See the
Illustrations.
Englins some there were that on their subject strain;
Some Makers that again affect the lofti^r vain,
Rehearse their high (...) Cowiths: other-some
In Owdells theirs express^* as matter haps to come;
So varying still their Moods, observing yet in all
Their Quantities, their Rests, their Geasures metricall:
For to that sacred skill they most themselves apply*
Addicted from their births so much ^o Poesy,
That in the Mountains those who sen^ce have seen a Book,
Most skilfully will A word, used by the Ancients, signifying to versify.
make, as though from Art they took.
And as Loegria spares not any thing of worth
That any way might set her goodly Rivers forth,
As stones by nature out from the C^r^^bian Strond;
Her Dertmore sends them Pearl^* Rock vincent, Diamond:
So Cambria, of her Nymphs especial ^are will have.
For Conwy sends them Pearl to make them wondrous brave*
The sacred Saint Winifrids Well.
Virgins d^ell, her moss most sweet and rare,
Against infectious damps for Pomander to wear:
And A glistring Rock in Monmouthshire.
Goldeliff of his Or^ in plen^ious sort allows,
To spangle their are yets, and deck their amorous^ routes*
And lastly, holy De^ (whose pray're were highly prized,
As one in heavenly things deuou^lie exercised
Who, See the eight Song.
changing of his Fourds, by divination had
Foretold the neighboring folk of fortune good or bad)
In their intended course since need^ they will proceed,
His Benediction sends in way of happy speed.
And though there were such haste unto this long-lookt hour,
Yet let they not to call upon The Eternal Power.
For, who will have his work his wished end to win,
Let him with hearty prayer religiously begin.
Wherefore the English part, with full deuou^intent,
In meet and godly sort ^o Glastenbury sent,
Beseeching of the Saints in Avalon that were,
There offering at their Tombs for every one a tear,
. And humbly to Saint George their Countries Patron pray,
To prosper their design now in this mighty day.
The Britans, like devout, their Messengers direct
To David, that he would their ancient right protect.
Among Hatterills lofty hills, that with the clouds are crowned,
The Valley In Monmouthshire.
Ewias lies, immured so deep and round,
As they below that see the Mountains rise so hie,
Might think the straggling Herds were grazing in the sky:
Which in it such a shape of solitude does bear,
As Nature at the first appointed it for pray're
Where, in an aged ^ell, with moss and Ivy grown,
In which, not to this day the Sun has ever shown,
That reverent British Saint in zealous Ages past,
To contemplation lived, and did so truly fast,
As he did only drink what crystal Hod^ey yields,
And fed upon the L^^ks he gathered in the fields.
In memory of whom, in the reuoluing year
The Welch-men on his day that sacred herb do wear:
Where, of that holy man, as humbly they do crave,
That in their just defense they might his furtherance have.
Thus either, well prepared the others power before,
Conveniently be'ing placed upon their equal shore;
The Britans, to whose lot the O^set does belong,
Give signal to the Foe for silen^ to their Song.
To tell each various Strain and turning of their Rimes,
How this in compass falls, or that in sharpeness climes
(As where they rest and rise, how take it one from one,
As every several Chord has a peculiar Tone)
Even Memory her self, though striving, would come short:
But the material things Muse help me to report.
As first, t'affront the Foe, in the ancient Britans right,
With Arthur they begin, their most renowned Knight;
The richness of the Arms their well-made Arthur, one of the nine Worthies.
Worthy wore,
The temper of his sword the (tried Escalaboure)
The bigness and the length of Rone, his noble Spear;
With Pridwin his great Shield, and what the proof could bear;
His Baudrick how adorned with stones of wondrous price,
. The sacred Virgins shape he bore for his device;
These monuments of worth, the ancient Britans song.
Now, doubting least these things might hold them but too long,
His wars they took to task; the Land then ouer-layd
With those proud German powers: when, calling to his aid
His kinsman Howell, brought from Britany the less,
Their Armies they unite, both swearing to suppress
The Saxon, here that sought through conquest all to gain.
On whom he chanced to light at Lincoln: where the Plain
Each where from side to side lay scattered with the dead.
And when the conquered Foe, that from the conflict fled,
Betook them to the woods, he never left them there
Until the British earth he forced them to forswear.
And as his actions rose, so raise they still their vein,
In words, whose weight best suit a sublimated strain.
. They sung how he, him self at Badon bore that day,
When at the glorious Gole his British Scepter lay:
Two days together how the battle strongly stood:
K. Arthur.
Pendragons worthy son who waded there in blood,
Three hundred Saxons slew with his own valiant hand.
And after (called, the Pict, and Irish to withstand)
How he, by force of Arms Albania ouer-ran,
Pursuing of the Pict beyond Mount Calidon:
There strongly shut them up whom stoutly he subdued.
How Gillamore again to Ireland he pursued
So often as he presumed the envious Pict to aid:
And having slain the King, the Country waste he laid.
To Goth-land how again this Conqueror maketh-forth
With his so prosperous powers into the farthest North:
Where, Island first he won, and Orkney after got.
To Norway sailing next with his dear Nephew Lot,
By deadly dint of sword did Ricoll there defeat:
And having placed the Prince on that Norwegian seat,
How this courageous King did Denmark then control:
That scarcely there was found a Country to the Pole
That dreaded not his deeds, too long that were to tell.
And after these, in France th'adventures him befell
At Paris, in the Lists, where he with Flollio fought;
The Emperor Leons power to raise his Siege that brought.
Then bravely set they sorth, in combat how these Knights
On horseback and on foot performed their several fights:
As with what maruailous force each other they assaild,
How mighty Flollio first, how Arthur then prevailed;
For best advantage how they trauersed their grounds,
The horrid blows they lent, the world-amazing wounds,
Until the Tribune, tired, sanke under Arthurs sword.
Then sing they how he first ordained the Circled-board,
The Knights whose martial deeds far famed that Table-round;
Which, truest in their loves; which, most in Arms renowned:
The Laws, which long vp-held that Order, they report;
. The Pentecosts prepared at Carleon in his Court,
That Tables ancient seat; her Temples and her Groves,
Her Palaces, her Walks, Baths, Theaters, and Stoues:
Her Academie, then, as likewise they prefer:
Of Camilot they sing, and then of Winchester.
The feasts that underground the Faerie did him make,
And there how he enjoyed the Lady of the Lake.
Then told they, how him self great Arthur did advance,
To meet (with his Allies) that puissant force in France,
By Lucius thither led; those Armies that while-ere
Affrighted all the world, by him struck dead with fear:
Th'report of his great Acts that over Europe ran,
In that most famous Field he with the Emperor wan:
As how great Rython's self he slew in his repair,
Who ravished Howells Niece, young Hellena the fair;
And for a Trophy brought the Giants coat away
Made of the beards of Kings. Then bravely chanted they
The several twelve pitched Fields he with the Saxons fought:
The certain day and place to memory they brought;
Then by false Mordreds hand how last he chanced to fall,
The hour of his decease, his place of burial.
When out the English cried, to interrupt their Song:
But they, which knew to this more matter must belong,
Not out at all for that, nor any whit dismayed,
But to their well-tuned Harps their fingers closely laid:
Twixt every one of which they placed their Countries Crowd,
And with courageous spirits thus boldly sang aloud;
How Merlin by his skill, and Magiques wondrous might,
From Ireland hither brought the Stonendge in a night:
. And for Carmardens sake, would feign have brought to pass,
About it to have built a wall of solid Brass:
And set his Fiends to work upon the mighty frame;
Some to the Anvile: some, that still enforced the flame:
But whilst it was in hand, by loving of an Elfe
(For all his wondrous skill) was coosned by him self.
For, walking with his Fay, her to the Rock he brought,
In which he often before his Nigromancies wrought:
And going in thereat his Magiques to have shown,
She stopped the Cauerns mouth with an enchanted stone:
Whose cunning strongly crossed, amazed whilst he did stand,
She captive him convay'd unto the Fairie Land.
Then, how the laboring spirits, to Rocks by fetters bound,
With bellows rumbling groans, and hammers thundering sound,
A fearful horrid dinne still in the Earth do keep,
Their Master to awake, supposed by them to sleep;
As at their work how still the grieved spirits repine,
Tormented in the Fire, and tired at the Mine.
When now the British side scarce finished their Song,
But the English that repyn'd to be delayed so long,
All quickly at the hint, as with one free consent,
Struck up at once and sung each to the Instrument;
(Of sundry sorts that were, as the Musician likes)
On which the practiced hand with perfect'st fingring strikes,
Whereby their height of skill might liueliest be expressed.
The trembling Lute some touch, some strain the Violl best
In sets which there were seen, the music wondrous choice:
Some likewise there affect the Gamba with the voice,
To show that England could variety afford.
Some that delight to touch the sterner wyerie Chord, The sundry Musiques of
England.

The Cythron, the Pandore, and the Theorbo strike:
The Gittern and the Kit the wandering Fiddlers like.
So were there some again, in this their learned strife
Loud Instruments that loved; the Cornet and the Phife,
The Hoboy, Sagbut deep, Recorder, and the Flute:
Even from the shrillest Shaw me unto the Cornamute.
Some blow the Bagpipe up, that plays the Country-round:
The Taber and the Pipe, some take delight to sound.
Of Germany they sung the long and ancient fame,
From whence their noble Sires the valiant Saxons came,
Who sought by Sea and Land Adventures far and near;
And seizing at the last upon the Britans here,
Surpised the spacious I Will, which still for theirs they hold:
As in that Countries praise how in those times of old,
. Tuisco, Gomers son, from Genesis 11.8.9.
unbuilt Babell brought
His people to that place, with most high knowledge fraught,
And under wholesome Laws established their abode;
Whom his Tudeskt since have honored as a God:
Whose clear creation made them absolute in all,
Retaining till this time their pure Original.
And as they boast themselves the Nation most unmixed,
Their language as at first, their ancient customs fixed,
The people of the world most hardy, wise and strong;
So gloriously they show, that all the rest among
The Saxons of her sorts the very noblest were:
And of those crooked Skaines they used in war to bear,
Which in their thundering tongue, the Germans, Handseax name,
. They Saxons first were called: whose far extended fame
For hardiness in war, whom danger never fraid,
Allured the Britans here to call them to their aid:
From whom they after reft Loegria as their own,
Brutes offspring then too weak to keep it being grown.
This told: the Nymphs again, in nimbler strains of wit,
Next neatly come about, the Englishmen to quit
Of that inglorious blot by Bastard William brought
Upon this conquered I Will: then which Fate never wrought
A fitter mean (say they) great Germany to grace;
To graft again in one, two Remnants of her ra^e:
Upon their several ways, two several times that went
To forage for themselves. The first of which she sent
. To get their seat in Gaul: The Normans and the Saxons of one blood.
which on Nuestria light,
And (in a famous war the Frenchmen put to flight)
Possessed that fruitful place, where only from their name
. Called North-men (from the North of Germany that came,
Who thence expeld the Gauls, and did their rooms supply)
This, first Nuestria named, was then called Normandy.
That by this means, the less (in conquering of the great)
Be'ing drawn from their late home unto this ampler seat,
Resyding here, The Normans lost that name and became English.
resigned what they before had won;
. That as the Conquerors blood, did to the conquered run:
So kindly being mixed, and up together grown,
As severed, they were her^; united, still her own.
But these mysterious things desisting now to show
(The secret works of heaven) to long Descents they go:
How Egelred (the Sire of Edward the last King
Of The English Saxon Line) by nobly marying
With hardy Richards heir, the Norman Emma, bred
Alliance in their bloods. Like Brooks that from one head
Bear several ways (as though to sundry Seas to have)
But by the varying soil, int'one again are cast:
So chanced it in this the neernes of their blood.
For when as Englands right in question after stood,
Proud Harould, Goodwins heir, the Scepter having won
From Edgar Etheling young, the outlawed Edwards son;
The valiant Bastard this his only color made,
With his brave Norman powers this kingdom to invade.
Which leaving, they proceed to Pedigrees again,
Their after-Kings to fetch from that old Saxon strain;
From Margarit that was made the Scottish Malcoms Bride,
Who to her Grandsire had courageous Ironside:
Which out-lawed Edward left; whose wife to him did bring
This Margarit Queen of Scots, and Edgar Etheling:
That Margarit brought forth Maud; which gracious Macolme gave
To Henry Beuclarks bed (so Fate it pleased to have)
. Who him a daughter brought; which heaven did strangely spare:
And for the special love he to the mother bare,
Her Maude again he named, to the Almain Emperor wed:
Whose Dowager whilst she lived (her puissant Caesar dead)
She The Earl of A^ion next to husband does prefer.
The second Henry then by him begot of her,
Into the Saxon Line the Scepter thus does bring.
Then presently again prepare themselves to sing
The sundry foraine Fields the Englishmen had fought.
Which when the Mountains saw (and not in vain) they thought
That if they still went on as thus they had begone,
Then from the Cambrian Nymphs (sure) Lundy would be won.
And therefore from their first they challenged them to fly;
And (idly running on with vain prolixitie)
A larger subject took then it was fit they should.
But, whilst those would proceed, these threatening them to hold,
These and the rest following, the famousest Hills in Brecknocke, Glamorgan,
and Monmouth.
Black-Mountaine for the love he to his Country bare,
As to the beauteous Vske, his joy and only care
(In whose defense t'appeare more stern and full of dread)
Put on a Helm of clouds upon his rugged head.
Mounchdeny does the like for his beloved Tawe:
Which quickly all the rest by their example draw:
As Hatterell in the right of ancient Wales will stand.
To these three Mountains, first of the Erekinnian Band,
The Monumethian Hills, like insolent and stout,
On lostie tip-toes then began to look about;
That Skeridvaur at last (a Mountain much in might,
In hunting that had set his absolute delight)
Caught up his Welch-hook.
Country Hook; nor cares for future harms,
But irefully enraged, would needs to open Arms:
Which quickly put So named of his bald head.
Penvayle in such outrageous heat,
That whilst for very teene his hairelesse scalpe does sweat,
The Blorench looks big upon his bared crown:
And tall Tomberlow seems so terribly to frown,
That where it was supposed with small ado or none
The Event of this debate would easily have been known,
Such strange tumultuous stirs upon this strife ensue,
As where all griefs should end, old sorrows still renew:
That Severne thus forewarned to look unto the worst
(And finds the latter ill more dangerous then the first)
The doom she should pronounce, yet for a while delayed,
Till these rebellious routs by justice might be stayed;
A period that does put to my Discourse so long,
To finish this debate the next ensuing Song.
Illustrations.
OVer Seuerne (but visiting Lundey, a little I Will twixt Hartland and Gouen
point) you are transported into Wales. Your ^rauels with the Muse are most of
all in Monmouth, Glamorgan, and the South maritime shires.

And wantonly to hatch the Birds of Ganymed.
Walter Baker a Canon of Osney (interpreter of Thomas de la Moors life of
Edward the II.) affirms, that it commonly breeds Conies, Pigeons, and
struconas, quos vocat Alexander Necha^^^ (so you must read, Tho. dela Moore
emendatus.
not Nechristuna, as the Francfort print senselesly mistook with Conday, for
Lundey) Ganymodis aues. What he means by his Birds of Ganymed, out of the
name, unless Eagles or Ostriches (as the common fiction of the Ca^amits
rauishment, and this French Latin word of the Translator would) I collect not.
But rather read also Palamedis aues. ^. Cranes) of which De rerum natural. lib.
1.
Necham indeed has a whole Chapter: what the other should be, or whence reason
of the name comes, I confess I am ignorant.

Clear Towridge whom they feared would have estranged her fall.
For she rising near Hartland, wantonly runs to Hat^erlay in Deuon, as if
she would to the Southern Ocean; but returning, there at last is discharged
into the Seuerne Sea.

Yet hardly upon Powse they dare their hopes to lay.
Tripartit division of Wales.
Wales had Girald descript cap. 2. and Powel ad Caradoc. Lancharuan.
her three parts, Northwales, Southwales, and Powis. The last, as the middle
twixt the other, extended from Cardigan to Shropshire; and on the English side
from Chester to Hereford (being the portion of Anarawd, son to great
Roderique) bears this accusation, because it comprehends, for the most, both
Nations and both tongues. But see for this division to the VII. Song.

Nor Rosse for that too much she aliens does respect.
Under Henry I a Colony of Flemings driven out of their country by inundation,
and kindly received here in respect of that alliance which the K. had with
their Earl (for his mother Maude wife to the Conqueror, was daughter to
Baldwin Earl of Flanders) afterward upon difference twixt the K. and Earl
Robert, were out of diverse parts, but especially Northumberland, where they
most of all (as it seems by Houeden) had residence, constrained into Rosse So
called perhaps because it is almost inisled within the Sea, and Lhogor as Rosay
in Scotland* expressing almost an I Will* Buchanan. hist. ^. in Eugenio 4.
in Penbroke, which retains yet in name and tongue express notes of being
aliens to the Cambro-Britains. See the Author in his next Song.

That Taliessen once which made the Rivers dance.
Taliessin (not T^lesin, as Bal^ calls him) a learned Bard, styled Pris. in
descript. Walli^.
Ben Beirdh.i. the chiefest of the Bards, Master to Merlin Syluester, lived
about Arthurs reign, whose acts his Muse has celebrated.

With Lhu and Lhogor given, to strengthen them by Gower.
Twixt Neth and Lhogor in Glamorgan is this Gower, a little province, extended
into the Sea as a Cherronesse; out of it on the West, rise these two Rivers
meant by the Author.

That at the Stethua often obtaind a Victors praise.
Understand this Stethua to be the meeting of the British Poets and Minstrels,
for trial Antiquis huiusmodi certamina fuisse docem^^ a sch^least, Aristoph.
and D. Cypriano sermon. de Alcator. Censure upon books published.
of their Poems and Music sufficiencies, where the best had his reward, a
Silver Harp. Some example is of it under Rees ap Griffith, Prince of
Southwales, in the year M.C.LXX.VI. A custom so good, that, had it been
iudiciously observed, truth of Story had not been so uncertain: for there
was, by suppose, a correction of what was faulty in form or matter, or at
least a censure of the hearers upon what was recited. As (according to the
Roman use* it is Camd. in Epist. Fulconi Greuil. ad edit. Anglie. Norm. etc.
noted, that Girald of Cambria, when he had written his Topography of Ireland,
made at three several days several recitals of his III. distinctions in
Oxford; of which course some have wished a recontinuance, that either amendment
of opinion or change of purpose in publishing, might prevent blazoned errors.
The sorts of these Poets and Minstrels out of Doctor Powels interserted
annotations upon Caradoc Lhancaruan, I note to you; first Beirdhs, otherwise
Pryduids (called in Athenaeus, Lucan and others, Bards) who* somewhat like the
(...) among the Greeks, Did sing the valiant deeds of famous men to the swee^e
melody of the Harp.
fortia virorum illustrium facti^ hero^cis composita versibus cum dulcibus
lyrae modulis Amnian Marcelin. hist. 15.
cantitarunt, which was the chiefest form of the ancientest music among the
Gentiles, as Part seconda cap. ^. and ^.
Zarlino has fully collected. Their charge also as Heraulto, was to describe
and preserve pedegrees, wherein their line ascendent went from the Petruccius
to B. M. thence to Syluius and Ascanius, from them to Adam. Thus Girald
reporting, has his B.M. in some copies by Da^. Pouel. ad Girald* descript.
cap. 3.
transcription of ignorant Monks (forgetting their tenent of perpetual
virginity, and Suid. in I^^.
that relation of Theodosius) turned into S. Mary For the Harp and other
music instruments, their form and antiquity* see to the VI. Song ^ whether a
special occasion compeld it. Quantity of the Bards verses.
. Beatam Mariam, whereas it stands for Belinum Magnum (that was Heli, in their
writers, father to L^d and Cassibelin) to whom their genealogies had always
reference. The second are which play on the Harp and Crowd; their music for
the most part came out of Ireland with Gruffith ap Conan Pr. of Northwales,
about K. Stephens time. This Gruffith reformed the abuses of those Minstrels by
a particular statu^, extant to this day. The third are called Atcaneaid; they
sing to instruments played on by others. For the Engly^s, Cy^dhs and A^dls; the
first are couplets interchanged of XVI. and XIIII. feet called Paladiries and
Pensels, the second of equal tetrameters, the third of variety in both rhyme
and quantity. Subdiuision of them, and better information may be had in the
elaborat institutions of the Cumraeg language by David ap Rees. Of their
music anciently, out of an old writer read this: Form of the British music.
Non vniformitter, vt alibi, sed multipliciter multisque modis and modulis
cantilena^ emittunt, ade^ vt, turba canentium, quo^ videas capita to^ a^dias
carmina, discriminaque vocum varia, in vnam denique, sub B. mollis dulcedine
blanda, consonantiam and organica^ conuenientia melodiam. A good Musician will
better understand it, then I that transcribe it. But by it you see they
especially affected the mind composing Dorique (which is showed in that of an
old Mar^ian, Heracl^ot^i^ (...).
author, affirming that To make them gentle natured.
(...) the Western people of the world constituted use of music in their
assemblies, though the Girald. Topog. did. 3. cap. 11.
Irish (from whence they learned) were wholly for the sprightfull Phrygian. See
the next Canto.

And humbly to S. George their Countries Patron pray.
Our Author (a judgment day thus appointed twixt the Water-Nymphs) seems to
allude to the course used of old with us, that those which were to end their
cause by combat, were sent to several Saints for invocation, as in our 30. Ed.
3. fol. 20.
Law-annals appears. For Tropelophorus dictus in menol^ gie Grate apud
Baronium, sort (...) five (...) quid n. Trope^ophorus?
S. George, that he is patron to the English, as S. Dinis, S. James, S.
Patrique, S. Andrew, S. Antony, S. Mark, to the French, Spanish, Irish,
Scottish, Italian, Venetian, scarce any is, that knows not. Who he was and when
the English took him, is not so manifest. The old Martyrologies give, with us,
to the honor of his birth the XXIII. of April. His passion is supposed in
Diocletian's persecution. His country Cappadoce. His acts are diverse and
strange, reported by his servant Pasicrates, Simeon Metaphrastes, and lately
collected by Surius. As for his Knightly form, and the dragon under him, as he
is pictured in Beryth a City of Cyprus, with a young maid kneeling to him, an
unwarrantable report goes that it was for his martial delivery of the Kings
daughter from the Dragon, as Hesione and Andromeda were from the Whales by
Hercules, and Perseus. Your more neat judgments, finding no such matter in
true antiquity, rather make it symbolicall then truly proper. So that some
account him an allegory of our Savior Christ; and our admired Faery Q lib. 1.
Spencer has made him an emblem of Religion. So Chaucer to the Knights of
that order.

-- but for Gods pleasance
And his mother, and in signifiance
That ye ben of S. Georges liuerie
Does him service and Knightly obeisance
For Christ's cause is his, well known ye.
Others interpret that picture of him as some country or City (signified by
the Virgin) imploring his aid against the Devil, charactered in the Dragon.
Of him you may particularly see, especially in Vsuards martyrologie, and
Baronius his annotations upon the Roman Calendar, with Erhard Celly his
description of Frederique Duke of Wittembergs installation in the Garter, by
favor of our present Sovereign. But what is delivered of him in the Legend,
even the Church of Rome C. Sancta Romans eccles. 3. did. 15. Gelasi^^ PP.
has disallowed in these words; That not so made as any scandal may rise in
the holy Roman Church, the passions of S. George, and such like, supposed to be
written by heretics, are not read in it. But you may better believe the
Legend, then that he was a Couentry man borne, with his Caleb Lady of the
woods, or that he descended from the Saxon race, and such like; which some
English fictions deliver. His name (as generally Ord. Romans de divine. of (...)
apud Baronium in martyrolog.
also S. Maurice and S. Sebastian) was anciently called on by Christians as an
aduocat of victory (when in the Church that kind of doctrine was) so that our
particular right to him (although they say Harding cap. 72.
K. Arthur bare him in one of his Banners) appears not until Ed. III.
consecrated to S. George the Knightly order of the Garter, Th. d^ Walsing. A.M.
C.C.C.L. and XXIV Ed. III. Fabian puts it before this year, but erroniously.
soon after the victory at Caleis against the French, in which his invocation
was Ha S. Edward, Ha S. George. Some authority Ex antiq. ma. ap. Camd. in
Berks^^^.
referres this to Richard Ceur de Lion, who supposed himself comforted by S.
George in his wars against the Turks and Hagarens. But howsoever, since that
he has been a Patron among others, as in that of Frederique the thirds
institution M.CD.XXCVIII. Die ge scelsch ast S. Georgen schilts. Martin. Crus.
anual. (...). part. ^. lib. 9.
of the quadripartit society of S. Georges shield, and more of that nature, you
find. And under Hen. VIII. it was enacted, ^^. Hen. ^ in statuti^ Hibernicis.
that the Irish should leave their Cramaboo and Butleraboo, words of unlawful
patronage, and name themselves as under S. George, and the King of England.
More proper is S. D^wy (we call him S. David) to the Welsh. Reports of him
affirm that he was of that country, uncle to K. Arthur ( Bale and others say,
gotten upon Melaria a Nun, by Xantus Prince of Cardigan) and successor to
Du^rice Archbishop of Caer-leon upon V^ke (whereto Polychronic. lib. 1. cap. 52.
along time the British Bishop riques as to their Metropolitique See were
subject) and thence translated with his nephews consent the Primacie to
Meneuia, which is now S. Deuies in Penbroke. He was a strong oppugner of the
Pelagian heresy. To him our country Calendars give the l. of March, but in the
old Martyrologies I find him not remembered: yet I read that Bal. cent. 1.
Calixtus II. first canonized him. See him in the next Canto.

The sacred Virgins shape he bare for his device.
Arthurs Nennius. histor. Galfred. lib. 6. cap. ^. and lib. 7. cap. 2.
Beginning of arms and crests.
shield Pridwen (or his Banner) had in it the picture of our Lady and his Helm
an engraven Dragon. From the like form was his father called Vter-pen-dragon.
To have terrible crests or engraven beasts of rapine ( Herodotus and Strabo
fetch the beginning of them, and the bearing of arms from the Carians) has
been from inmost antiquity continued; as appears in that Epithet of (...),
proper to Minerua, but applied to others in Aristophanes, and also Aeschyl.
(...). Euripid in Phoeniss. The Dragon supporter and Standard of England.
in the Thoban war. Either hence may you derive the English Dragon now as a
supporter, and usually pitched in fields by the Saxon, English, and Norman Kings
for their Standard (which is frequent in Houeden, Matthew Paris, and
Floril^gus) or from the Romans, who after the Minotaure, Horse, Eagle, and
other their antique ensigns took this beast; or else imagine that our Kings
joined in that general consent, whereby so many nations bare it. For by plain
and good authority, collected by a great critique, Lips. com. ad Polyb 4.
dissert. 5.
you may find it affirmed of the Assyrians, Indians, Scythians, Persians,
Dacians, Romans; and of the Greeks too for their shields, and otherwise:
wherein Lipsius unjustly finds fault with Isidore, but forgets that in a number
of Greek Pindar. Pythieni^. (...). Homer. Iliad. suid. Epaminond Hesiod.
(...). Plutarch. Lysand. Euripid in (...).
authors is copious witness of as much.

They sing how he himself at Badon bare the day.
That is Baunsedowne in Somerset (not Blackmore in Yorkshire, as Polydore
mistakes) as is expressly proved out of a ms. G^ldas Camden.
, different from that published by Iosselin.

That scarcely there was found a country to the pole.
Some, too hyperbolique, stories make him a large conqueror on every adjacent
country, at the Muse recites* and his seal, which Leland says he saw* in
Westminster Abbey, of red wax pictured with a Mound, bearing a cross in his
left hand (which was first Suid in Justinian. No seals before the Conquest.
Justinians device; and surely, in later time, with the seal counterfeited and
applied to Arthur: no King of this Land, except the Confessor, before the
Conquest Ingalph^s.
ever using in their Charters more then subscription of name and crosses) and a
Scepter fleury in his right, calls him Emperor of Britain, Gaul, Germany, and
Danmarke; for so they falsely turned Da^ia.
Britanniae, Galliae, Germaniae, Daciae Imperator. The Bards songs have, with
this kind of unlimited attribut so laden him, that you can hardly guess what
is true of him. Such indulgence to falls report has wronged many Worthies, and
among them even that great Alexander in prodigious suppositions (like Stichus
Plaut. in Stiche.
his Geography, laying Pontus in Arabia) as Strabo often complains; and some
idle Monk of middle time is so impudent to affirm, that at Babylon he
erected a column, inscribed with Latin and Greek verses, as notes of his
victory; of them you shall taste in these two: Anglicus and Scotus Britonum
superque caterua
Irlandus, Flander, Cornwalli^, and quoque Norguey.
Only but that Alexander and his followers were no good Latinists (wherein,
when you have done laughing, you may wonder at the decorum) I should censure my
lubbe^ly versifier to no less punishment then Marsyas his excor^ation. But for
Arthur, you shall best know him in this elogie. This is that Arthur of whom the
Brittons even to this day speak so idly; a man right worthy to have been
celebrated by true story, not false tales, seeing it was he that long time
vpheld his declining country and even inspired martial courage into his
country men; as the Monk of Malmesbury, Knights and Ladies sat in several
rooms.
of him: The Pentecost prepared at Caer-leon in his Court.


At Caer-leon in Monmouth, after his victories, a pompeous celebration was at
Whitsontide, whether were invited diverse Kings and Princes of the neighboring
coasts; he with them, and his Queen Guineuer, with the Ladies keeping those
solemnities in their several conclaues. For so the British story makes it
according to the Trojan custom, that in festival solemnities, both sexes
should not sit together. Of the Trojans I remember no warrant for it: but among
the Greeks one Sphyromachus Scholast. ad Arist ephan. (...). and Suidas. Round
Tables.
first instituted it. Torneaments and jousts were their excercises, nor
vouchsafed any Lady to bestow her favor on him, which had not been thrice
crowned with fame of martial performance. For this order (which herein is
delineated) know, that the old Gauls (whose customs and the British were
near the same) had their Orbicular tables to avoid controversy of presedency
(a form much commended by a late Gemos. halograph. lib. 3. cap. 9.
writer for the like distance of all from the Salt, being center, first, and
last of the furniture) and at them every Knight attended by his Esquire (
A^migeri* which is expressed in the word Schilpors in Paul Warn^red. lib. ^. de
gest. Lo^gobard. cap. ^^.
(...) Athenaeus Dipnosoth. lib. ^.
cal^ them) holding his shield. Of the like in Hen. III. Matthew Paris, of
Mortimers at Kelingworth, under Ed. I. and that of Windsor, celebrated by Edw.
III. Walsingham speaks. Of the Arthurian our Histories have scarce mention.
But Hauillan's Architrenius, Robert of Gloucester, John Lidgat Monk of Bury,
and English rimes in diverse hands sing it. It is remembered by Leland, Camden,
Volateran, Philip of B^rgomo, Lily, Aubert Mir^^, others, but very diversely.
White of Basingstok^ defends it, and imagines the original from an election by
Arthur and Howell K. of Armorique Britain of six of each of their worthiest
Peers to be always assistant in counsel. The antiquity of the Earldom of
Hoppenrod and spangberg. apud Ortc^^^m in Mansfeld. Many places in Wales in
hills and rocks, honored with Arthurs name. Pris desens. hist. Brit. and
Cadair Arthur.i. Arthurs Chair in Brecknock G^rald. I^in. Camb. cap. 2. and
Arthurs Oven in S^ul^ng of Scotland.
Mansfeld in old Saxony is hence affirmed, because Heger Earl thereof was
honored in Arthurs Court with this order; places of name for residence of him
and his Knights were this Caer-leon, Winchester (where his Table is yet
supposed to be, but that seems of later date) and Camelot in Somerset. Some
put his number XII. I have seen them anciently pictured XXIV. in a Poetical
story of him; and in Denbighshire, Stow tells us, in the parish of Lansannan on
the side of a stony hill is a circular plain, cut out of a maine rock, with
some XXIV. seats unequal, which they call Arthurs Round Table. Some Catalogues
of arms have the coats of the Knights, blazoned; but I think with as good
warrant as Liver 2. ch^pit. 30.
Rablais can justify, that Sir Lancelot du Lac rostes horses in hell, and that
The Knights of the Round Table use to ferry spirits over Styx, Acheron, and
other rivers, and for their fare have a fillip on the nose and a piece of
moldy bread.
Tous le^ch^ualiers de la Table ronde esto^ent poures gaigne-deniers tirans la
ram^pur passer les rivers de Coccyte, Phlegeton, Styx, Acheron, and Lethe quand
Mossieurs les diables se voulent esbatre sur leaucome font les Basteliers de
Lyonet gondoliers de Venise, Mais pour chacune passade il^n' ont qu'un Nazarde
and sur le soir qu^lque merceau de pain chaumeny. Of them, their number,
exploits, and prodigious performances you may read Caxtons published volume,
digested by him into XXI. books, out of diverse French and Italian fables, From
such I abstain, as I may.

And for Caermardhin's sake --
Two Girald. I^iner. Camb. 1. cap. 8.
Merlins have our stories: One of Scotland commonly titled Syluester, or
Caledonius living under Arthur; the other Ambrosius (of whom before) borne of a
Nun (daughter to the K. of Southwales) in Caermardhin, nor naming the place
(for rather in British his name is Merdhin) but the place (which in Ptolemy is
Maridunum) naming him; begotten, as the vulgar, by an Incubus. For his burial
(in supposition as uncertain as his birth, actions, and all of those too
fabulously mixed stories) and his Lady of the Lake it is by liberty of
profession laid in France by that Italian Orland. Furi^s. cant. 3. See
Spencers Fa^ry Q. lib. 3. cant. 3.
Ariosto: which perhaps is as credible as some more of his attributes, seeing no
persuading authority, in any of them, rectifies the uncertainty. But for his
birth see the next Song, and, to it, more.

Tuisco Gomers son from unbuilt Babel brought.
According to the Genesis 10.
text, the Jews affirm that All the sons of Noah were dispersed through the
earth, and every ones name left to the land which he possessed. Upon this
tradition, and false Berosus testimony, it is affirmed that Tuisco (son of
Noah, gotten with others after the Munsier. Cosm. lib. 3.
flood upon his wife Arezia) took to his part the coast about Rhine, and that
thence came the name of Teutschland and Teutsch, which we call Dutch, through
Germany. Goropius in Indo^^ythic.
Some make him the same with Gomer, eldest son to Iaphet (by whom these parts
of Europe were peopled) out of notation of his name, deriuing Tuiscon or
Tuiston (for so Tacitus calls him) from The hoodt son.i. the eldest son.
Others (as the author here) suppose him son to Gomer, and take Iodo^.
Willich. comm. ad Tacit. Germaniam. and Pantaleon lib. 1. ^^^sopograph.
him for Aschenaz (remembered by Moses as first son to Gomer, and from whom
the Hebrews call the Germans E^ias Leuit. in Thi^^b. Arias Mont. in Pel^g.
Aschenazim) whose relics probably indeed seem to be in Tuisco, which has
been made of Aschen either by the Dutch prepositiue article die or lie, as our
the (according to Derceto for Strab. lib. (...) and ^^ de aiijs quae hic
congerimus.
Atergatis, which should be Adargada in C^esias; and Danubius for Adubenus in
Festus, perhaps therein corrupted, as Joseph Scaliger observes; as Theudibald
for Ildibald in Procopius, and Diceneus for Ceneus among the Getes) or through
mistaking of (...) for (...) or (...) in the Hebrew, as in Rhodanim (...) for
^roughton in concent. praes.
(...) being Dodanim, and in Chalibes and Alybes for Thalybes from Tubal by
taking (...) or (...) for (...); for in ruder manuscripts by an imperfect
Reader, the first mistaking might be as soon as the rest. I conjecture it the
rather, for that in most Histories diversity with affinity twixt the same-meant
proper names (especially Eastern as this was) is ordinary; as Megabyzus in
C^esias is Bacabasu^ in Justin, who calls Aaron, Aruas, and Herodotus his
Smerdis, Mergidis, Asarhadon, Coras and Esther in the Scriptures are thus
Sardanapalus, Cyrus, and Amestris in the Greek stories, Eporedorix, Ambriorix,
Ariminiu^, in Caesar and Sueton, supposed to have been Frederique, Henry,
Herman: diverse like examples occur; and in comparison of Arrian with Q.
Curtius very many; like as also in the life of S. John the Evangelist,
anciently Pet. Kirstenius Grammaticae Arabic^ subin^^^it.
written in Arabique you have Asubasianuusu, Thithimse, Damthianuusu for
Vespasian, Titus, Domitian, and in our stories Androgeus for Caesar's
Mandubratius. From Tuisco is our name of Tuesday; and in that too, taking the
place of Mars (the most fiery Star, and observe with all that against the
vulgar opinion the planetary account of days is very Scal^^. in prolegom. a^
emendat. temp.
ancient) discouers affinity with Aschenaz, in whose notation (as Melancthon
ap. Becan. in Indoscyth.
some body observes) (...) signifies fire.

They Saxons first were called --
So a Latin rhyme in Ap. Camdenum
Engelhuse also; Quippe breuis gladius apud illos Saxa vocatur,
Vnde sibi Saxo nomen traxisse puta^ur.
Although from the Sacans or Sagans a populous nation in Asia (which were also
Scythians, and of whom an old Dionys Afer. in (...). The English from their
original, excellent Archers. See the VIII. Song.
Poet, as most others in their Epithe^s and passages of the Scythyans, The
shooting Sac^ none can teach them Art: For what they loos't at, never scapes
their dart.
(...)
(...)
A faculty for which the English have had no small honor in their later wars
with the French) both Goropius with long argument in his Becceselana, our
judicious Camden and others will have them, as it were, Saca^'s-sonnes.
According hereto is that name of Strabo lib. ^^.
Sacasena, which a colony of them gave to part of Armenia and the Ptolem.
geograph. lib. ^. cap. ^^.
Sasones in Scythia on this side of Imaus. Howsoever, the Authors conceit thus
chosen is very apt, nor disagreeing to this other, in that some community was
twixt the name of Sacae or Sagae, and a certain sharp weapon called Sagaris,
used by the Amazons, Sacans, and Persians, as the Greek Herodot. Polyhymn.
Xenoph. (...). Strabo lib. ^.
stories inform us.

The Britains here allured to call them to their aid.
Most suppose them sent to by the Britons much subject to the irruptions of
Picts and Scots, and so invited hither for aid: but the stories of Gildas and
Nennius have no such thing, but only that there landed of them (as banished
their country, See the 8. Song
which Geffrey of Monmouth expresses also) III. long boats in Kent with Horse
and Hengist Captains. They afterward were most willingly requested to multiply
their number by sending for more of their country men to help K. Vortigern,
and under that color, and by Ronix (daughter to Hengist, and wife to
Vortigern) her womanish subtilty, in greater number were here planted. Of this,
more large in every common story. But to believe their first arrival rather
for new place of habitation, then upon embassage of the Britons, I am persuaded
by this, that Justin. lib. 24. and 41. Herodot. Clio. Wasingh. Hypodig. Neust.
Gemetie^e^s. lib. 1. cap. 4. Sabnis and Graecis morem hunc suisse memini
legisse me apud Varron^m and Columellam.
among the Cimbrians, Gauls, Goths, Dacians, Scythians, and especially the
Sacans (if Strabo deceive not; from whom our Saxons) with other Northern
people, it was a custom upon numerous abundance to transplant colon^es: from
which use the Parthians (sent out of Scythia, as the Romans did their Festus in
^od. and Mamertinis.
Ver Sacrum) retain that name, signifying banished (says Trogus;) not
unlikely, from the Hebrew Paratz (...) Genesis 28. 14. Iesai. 54.3.
, which is to separat, and also to multiply in this kind of propagation, as it
is used in the promise to Abraham, and in Isay's consolation to the Church.
Here being the maine change of the British name and State, a word or two of the
time and year is not untimely. Most put it under CD.XL.IX. (according to Bedes
copies and their followers) or CD.L. of Christ; whereas indeed by apparent
proof it was in CD.XXVIII. and the IV. of Valentinian the Emperor. So Prise
and Camden (out of an old fragment annexed to Nennius) and, before them, the
author of Fasciculus Temporum have placed it. The error I imagine to be from
restoring of wooren out times in Bid and others, by those which fell into the
same error with Florence of Worcester and Marian the Scot, who begin the
received Christian account but XII. years before the Passion, thereby omitting
XXII. For although Marians published Chronicle (which is but Malmesb. lib. 4.
de Pontificib.
a defloration by Robert of Lorraine Bishop of Hereford under Hen. I. and an
Epitome of Marian) goes near from the ordinary time of Incarnation under
Augustus, yet he lays it also, according to the Roman Abbot Dionysius in the
XXIII. year following, Mistakings in our Chronologies.
which was rather by taking advantage of Dionysius his error then following his
opinion. For when he (about Justinians time) made his Period of D.XXXII. years
of the golden number and cycle of the Sun multiplied, it fell out so in his
computation that the XV. Moon following the Jews Passover, the Dominicall
letter, Friday, and other concurrents according to Ecclesiastical tradition
supposed for the Passion could not be but in the Paul. de Midleburg^ part. 2.
lib. 5.
XII. year after his birth (a lapse by himself much repented) and then
supposing Christ lived XXXIV. years, XXII. must needs be omitted; a
collection directly against his meaning; having only forgotten to fit those
concurren^^. This account (in it self, and by the Abbots purpose, as our
vulgar is now, but with some little difference) erroniously followed, I
conjecture, made them, which too much desired correction, add the supposed
Evangelical XXII. years to such times as were before true, and so came
CCCC.XXVIII. to be CCCC.XL.IX. and CCCC.L. which White of Busingstoke (although
aiming to be accurat) unjustly follows. Subtraction of this number, and, in
some, addition (of addition you shall have perhaps example in amendment of the
C.L.VI. year for K. Lucius his letters to PP. Eleutherius) will rectify many
gross absurdities in our Chronologies, which are by transcribing,
interpolation, misprinting and creeping in of antichronisme^ now and then
strangely disordered.

To get their seat in Gaul which on Nuestria light.
And a little after.

Called Northmen from the North of Germany that came.
What is now Normandy is, in some, styled Neustria and Nuestria corruptly, as
most think, for Westria, that is West-rich.i. the west Kingdom (confined
anciently twixt the Mense and the Loire) in respect of Austrich or Dostrich.i.
the East Kingdom, Westrich.
now Lorraine, upon such reason as the Archdukedome has his name at this day.
Rollo son of a Danish Potentate, accompanied with diverse Danes, Norwegians,
Scythians, Goths, and a supplement of English, which he had of K. Athelstan,
about the year D.CCCC. made transmigration into France, and there, after some
martial discords, honored in holy tincture of Christianity with the name of
Robert, received Paul. Aemilius hist. Franc. 3.
of Charles the Simple with his daughter (or sister) Gilla this Tract as her
dower, containing (as before) more then Normandy. It is Guil. Gemiticens. lib.
2 cap. 17. An unmannerly homage.
reported, that when the Bishops at this donation required him to kiss the
Kings foot for homage, after scornful refusal, he commanded one of his
Knights to do it; the Knight took up the Kings leg, and in strayning it to
his mouth, ouerturned him; yet nothing but honorable respect followed on
either part.

That as the Conquerors blood did to the conquered run.
Our Author makes the Norman invasion a reuniting of severed kindred, rather
then a conquest by a mere stranger, taking argument as well from identitie of
countryship (being all Germans by original, and the people of Marcian.
Hera^leot. in (...)
the Cimbrica Ch^rsonesus, now Danmarch, anciently called Saxons) as from
contingencie of blood twixt the Engle-Saxon Kings, and the Norman Dukes thus
expressed:

G^miticens. lib. 7. cap. 36. and lib. 3. cap. 18.


Object not that Duke Robert got the Conqueror upon Arletta (from whom perhaps
came our name of Harlot) his Concubine, nor that ff. vnde cognati l. 4.
spurius. and tit. de grad. affin. l. 4. non sacile. 8. Sciendum.
Consanguinitatis and aedgnationis iura a patre tantum and legitimis nuptijs
oriuntur, as the Civil Law, and upon the matter the English also defines; but
rather allow it by law of Nature and Nobility, which iustifies the bastards
bearing of his fathers coat, distinguished with a Bend sinister: Nicholas Vpton
calls it Right of blood and kindred comes only by lawful marriage.
Fissura, eo quod finditur a patria haereditate, which is but his conceit: and
read Heuters tract de libera hominis natiuitate, where you shall find a kind
of legitimation of that now disgraceful name Bastard, which in more antique
times was, as a proud title, inserted in the style of great and most honorable
Princes. Pretending this consanguinity, S. Edward's adoption, and K. Harolds
oath, aided by successful arms the Norman acquired the English Crown;
although William of A division, because he is separated from his fathers
inheritance. M.LX.VI.
Poiters affirms, that on his death bed he made protestation, that his right
was not hereditary, but by effusion of blood, and loss of many lives.

Who him a daughter brought, Histor. Cadomens.
which heaven did strangely spare.
After composition of French troubles Hen. I. returning into England, the Ship,
wherein his sons William and Richard were, twixt Barbefleu and South-hampton
was cast away, so that heaven only spared him this issue Maude the Empress,
married, at last, to Geffrey Plantagenest Earl of Aniou, Plantagenest.
from whom in a continued race through Hen. II. (son to this Maude) until
Rich. III. that most Noble surname possessed the royal Throne of England.



The fifth Song.
* THE ARGUMENT.
In this Song, Severne gives the doom
What of her Lundy should become*
And whilst the nimble Cambrian Rills
Dance Hy-day-gies amongst the Hills,
The Muse them to Carmarden brings;
Where Merlins wondrous birth she sings.
From thence to Penbrooke she does make,
To see how Milford state does take:
The scattered Islands there does tell:
And, visiting Saint David's Cell,
Does sport her all the shores along,
Preparing the ensuing Song.
NOw Sabrine, as a Queen, miraculouslie fair,
Is absolutely placed in her Imperial Chair
Of Crystal richly wrought, that gloriously did shine,
Her Grace becoming well, a creature so Divine:
And as her God-like self, so glorious was her Throne,
In which himself to sit great Neptune had been known;
Whereon there were ingrau'd those Nymphs the God had vvoo'd,
And every several shape wherein for love he su'd;
Each daughter, her estate and beauty, every son;
What Nations he had ruled, what Countries he had won.
No Fish in this wide waste but with exceeding cost
Was there in Antique work most curiously imbost.
She, in a watchet weed, with many a curious wave,
Which as a princely gift great Amphitrite gave;
Whose skirts were to the knee, with Coral fringed below
To grace her goodly steps. And where she meant to go,
The path was strewn with Pearl: which though they Orient were,
Yet scarce known from her feet, they were so wondrous clear:
To whom the Mermaids hold her Glass, that she may see
Before all other Floods how far her beauties be:
Who was by Nereus taught, the most profoundly wise,
That learned her the skill of hidden Prophecies,
By Thetis special care; as Chiro^ brought up Achilles, son to Thetis.
Chiron erst had done
To that proud bane of Troy, her god-resembling son.
For her wise censure now, whilst every listening Flood
(When reason somewhat coold their late distempred mood)
Enclosed Seuerne in; before this mighty rout,
She sitting well prepared, with countenance grave and stout,
Like some great learned Judge, to end a weighty Cause,
Well furnished with the force of Arguments and Laws,
And every special proof that justly may be brought;
Now with a constant brow, a firm and settled thought,
And at the point to give the last and final doom:
The people crowding near within the pestred room,
A slow, soft murmuring moves amongst the wondering throng,
As though with open ears they would devour his tongue:
So Seuerne bare her self, and silence so she wanne,
When to the assembly thus she seriously began;
My near and loved Nymphs, good hap ye both betide:
Well Britans have ye sung; you English, well replied:
Which to succeeding times shall memorize your stories
To either Countries praise, as both your endless glories.
And from your listening ears, since vain it were to hold
What all-appointing Heaven will plainly shall be told,
Both gladly be you pleased: for thus the Powers reveal,
That when the Norman Line in strength shall lastly fail
(Fate limiting the time) the ancient Britan race
Shall come again to sit upon the sovereign place.
A branch sprung out of Brute, the imperial top shall get,
Which grafted in the stock of great Plantaginet,
The Stem shall strongly wax, as still the Trunk does wither:
That power which bare it thence, again shall bring it thither
By Tudor, with fair winds from little Britain driven,
. To whom the goodly Bay of Milford shall be given;
As thy wise Prophets, Wales, foretold his wished arrive,
. And how Lewellins Line in him should doubly thrive.
For from his issue sent to Albany before,
Where his neglected blood, his virtue did restore,
He first unto himself in fair succession gained
The Stewards nobler name; and afterward attained
The royal Scottish wreath, upholding it in state.
This Stem, to James the fourth, surnamed Steward, married Margaret, eldest
daughter to Henry the 7. King of England.
Tudors joined (which thing all-powerfull Fate
So happily produced out of that prosperous Bed,
Whose marriages conioynd the White-rose and the Red)
Suppressing every Plant, shall spread it self so wide,
As in his arms shall clip the I Will on every side.
By whom three seuer'd Realms in one shall firmlie stand,
As Britain-founding Brute first Monarchiz'd the Land:
And Cornwall, for that thou no longer shall contend,
But to old Cambria cleave, as to thy ancient friend,
Acknowledge thou thy Brood, of Brutes high blood to be;
And what has hapt to her, the like to have chanced to thee;
The Britains to receive, when Heaven on them did lowre,
Loegria forced to leave; who from the Saxons power
Themselves in Deserts, Creeks, and Mount'nous wastes bestowed,
Or where the fruitless Rocks could promise them a^oad:
Why strive ye then for that, in little time that shall
(As you are all made one) be one unto you all;
Then take my final doom pronounced lastly, (...);
That Lundy like allied to Wales and England is.
Each part most highly pleased, then up the Session brake:
When to the learned Maids again Invention spoke;
O ye Pegasian Nymphs, that hating viler things;
Delight in lofty Hills, and in delicious Springs,
That on Pierus borne, and named of the place,
The Thracian Pimpla love, The seats of the Muses.
and ^indus often grace;
In Aganippas Fount, and in Castalia's brims,
That often have been known to bathe your crystal lims,
Conduct me through these Brooks, and with a fastened clue,
Direct me in my course, to take a perfect view
Of all the wandering Streams, in whose entransing gyres,
Wise Nature often her self her workmanship admires
(So manifold they are, with such Meanders wound,
As may with wonder seem invention to confound)
That to those British names, untaught the ear to please,
Such relish I may give in my delicious lays,
That all the armed Orks of Neptunes grisly Band,
With music of my verse, amazed may listening stand;
As when his Trytons trumps do them to battle call
Within his surging lists to combat with the Whale.
Thus, have we ouer-gone the Glamorganian Gowre,
Whose Promontorie (placed to check the Oceans power)
Kept Seuerne yet her self, till being grown too great,
She with extended arms vnbounds her ancient seat: Seuerne, turned Sea.

And turning lastly Sea, resignes unto the Maine
What sovereignty her self but lately did retain.
Next, Loghor leads the way, who with a lusty crew
(Her wild and wandering steps that ceaseleslie pursue)
Still forward is enforced: as, Amond thrusts her on,
And Morlas (as a maid she much relies upon)
Entreats her present speed assuring her withal,
Her best-beloued I Will, Bachannis, for her fall,
Stands specially prepared, of every thing supplied.
When Guendra with such grace deliberatly does glide
As Tovy does entice: who sets out prepared
At all points like a Prince, attended with a Guard:
Of which, as by her name, the neer'st to her of kin
Is Toothy, tripping down from Verwins rushie A Poole or watery Moore.
Lin,
Through Rescob running out, with Pescouer to meet
Those Rills that Forest loves; and does so kindly greet,
As to entreat their stay she gladly would prevail.
Then Tranant nicelie treads upon the watery traile:
The lively skipping Brane, along with Gwethrick goes;
In Tovies wandering banks themselves that scarcely lose,
But Mudny, with Gledaugh, and Sawthy, soon resort,
Which at Langaddock grace their Sovereigns watery Court.
As when the servile world some gathering man espies,
Whose thriuing fortune shows, he to much wealth may rise,
And through his Princes grace his followers may prefer,
Or by reuenew left by some dead Ancester;
All lowting low to him, him humbly they observe,
And happy is that man his nod that may deserve:
To Tovy so they stoop, to them upon the way
Which thus disp^^ies the Spring within their view that lay.
Near Deneuoir* the seat of the Of South Wales.
Demetian King
Whilst Cambria was herself, full, strong, and flourishing,
There is a pleasant Spring, Ebbing and flowing with the Sea.
that constant does abide
Hard-by these winding shores wherein we nimbly slide;
Long of the Ocean loved, since his victorious hand
First proudly did insult upon the conquered Land.
And though a hundred Nymphs in fair Demetia be,
Whose features might allure the Sea-gods more then she,
His fancy takes her form, and her he only likes
(Who ere knew half the shafts wherewith blind Cupid strikes?)
Which great and constant faith, showed by the God of Sea,
This clear and lovely Nymph so kindly does repay,
As suffering for his sake what love to Lover owes,
With him she sadly ebbs, with him she proudly flows,
To him her secret vows perpetually does keep,
Observing every Law and custom of the Deep.
Now Tovy towa'rd her fall ( Langaddock ouer-gon)
Her Dulas forward drives: and Cothy coming on
The train to ouer-take, the nearest way does cast
Ere she Carmarden get: where Gwilly, making have,
Bright Tovy entertaines at that most famous Town
Which her great Prophet bred who Wales does so renown:
And taking her a Harp, and tuning well the strings,
To Princely Tovy thus she of the Prophet sings;
Of Merlin and his skill what Region does not hear? Merlin, borne in
Caer-merd^in.

The world shall still be full of Merlin every where.
A thousand lingering years his prophecies have run,
And scarcely shall have end till Time it self be done:
Who of a British Nymph was gotten, whilst she played
With a seducing Spirit, which won the goodly maid;
(As all Demetia through, there was not found her peer)
Who, be'ing so much renowned for beauty far and near,
Great Lords her liking sought, but still in vain they proved:
. That Spirit (to her unknown) this Virgin only loved;
Which taking humane shape, of such perfection seemd,
As (all her Suitors scorned) she only him esteemed.
Who, fayning for her sake that he was come from far,
And richly could endow (a lusty Batcheler)
On her that Prophet got, which from his Mothers womb
Of things to come foretold until the general Doom.
But, of his feigned birth in sporting idly thus,
Suspect me not, that I this dreamed Incubus
By strange opinions should licentiously subsist;
Or, selfe-conceited, play the humorous Platonist,
Which boldly dares affirm, that Spirits, themselves supply
With bodies, to commix with frail mortality,
And here allow them place, beneath this lower Sphere
Of the unconstant Moon; to tempt us daily here.
Some, earthly mixture take; as others, which aspire,
Them subt'ler shapes resume, of water, air, and fire,
Being those immortalls long before the heaven, that fell,
Whose deprivation thence, determined their hell:
And loosing through their pride that place to them assigned,
Predestined that was to man's regenerate kind,
They, for th'inveterate hate to his Election, still
Desist not him to tempt to every damned ill:
And to seduce the spirit, often prompt the frailer blood,
Invegling it with tastes of counterfetted good,
And teach it all the sleights the Soul that may excite
To yield up all her power unto the appetite.
And to those curious wits if we our selves apply,
Which search the gloomie shades of deep Philosophy,
They Reason so will clothe, as well the mind can show,
That contrary effects, from contraries may grow;
And that the soul a shape so strongly may conceat,
As to her self the-while may seem it to creat;
By which the abused Sense more easelie often is led
To think that it enioyes the thing imagined.
But, toyld in these dark tracts with sundry doubts repleat,
Calm shades, and cooler streams must quench this furious heat:
Which seeking, soon we find where Cowen in her course,
Toward the Sabrinian shores, as sweeping from her sourse,
Takes Towa, calling then Karkenny by the way,
Her through the waylesse woods of Cardisse to conuaie;
A Forest, with her floods inuiron'd so about,
That hardly she restraines th'vnruly watrie rout,
When swelling, they would seem her Empire to invade:
And often the lus^full Fawnes and Satyrs from her shade
Were by the s^reames entic't, abode with them to make.
Then Morlas meeting Taw, her kindly in does take:
Cair coming with the rest, their watrie tracts that tread,
Increase the Cowen all; that as their general head
Their largess does receive, to bear out his expense:
Who to vast Neptune leads this Courtly confluence.
To the Passage into Penbrokeshire
Penbrokian parts the Muse her still does keep,
Upon that utmost point to the Iberian Deep,
By Cowdra coming in: where clear delightful air,
(That Forests most affect) does welcome her repair;
The Heliconian Maids in pleasant groves delight:
(Floods cannot still content their wanton appetite)
And wandering in the woods, the neighboring hills below,
With wise Apollo meet (who with his Ivory bow
Once in the paler shades, the Serpent Python slew)
And hunting often with him, the heartlesse Dear pursue;
Those beams then laid aside he used in heaven to wear.
Another Forest Nymph is Narber, standing near;
That with her curled top her neighbor would astound,
Whose Groves once bravely graced the fair Penbrokian ground,
When Albion here beheld on this extended land,
Amongst his wel-growne Woods, the shag-haird Satyrs stand
(The Syluans chief resort) the shores then sitting hie,
Which under water now so many fadoms lie:
And wallowing Porpice sport and lord it in the flood,
Where once the portly Oak, and large-limb'd Popler stood:
Of all the Forests kind these two now only left.
But Time, as guilty since to man's insatiate theft,
Transferd the English names of Towns and households hither,
With the industrious Dutch since soiourning together.
When wrathful heaven the clouds so liberally bestowed,
The Seas (then wanting roomth to lay their boystrous load)
Upon the Belgian Marsh their pampred stomachs cast,
That peopled Cities sanke into the mighty wast.
The colony of Flemings here planted. See to the IV. Song.
The Flemings were enforced to take them to their Ores,
To try the Setting Maine to find out firmer shores;
When as this spacious I Will them entrance did allow,
To plant the Belgian stock upon this goodly brow:
These Nations, that their tongues did naturally affect,
Both generally forsook the British Dialect:
As when it was decreed by all-fore-dooming Fate,
That ancient Rome should stoop from her emperious state,
With Nations from the North then altogether fraught,
Which to her civil bounds their barbarous customs brought,
Of all her ancient spoils and lastly be forlorn,
From Tybers hallowed banks to old Now Constantinople.
Bizantium borne:
Th'abundant Latin then old Latium lastly left,
Both of her proper form and elegancie rest;
Before her smoothest tongue, their speech that did prefer,
And in her tables fixed their ill-shap't Character.
A divination strange the Dutch made-English have,
Appropriate to that place (as though some Power it gave)
. By th'shoulder of a Ram from off the right side pared,
Which usually they boil, the spade-boane being barred:
Which then the Wizard takes, and gazing there-vpon,
Things long to come fore-showes, as things done long agon;
Scapes secretly at home, as those abroad, and far;
Murders, adulterous stealths, as the events of war,
The reigns and death of Kings they take on them to know:
Which only to their skill the shoulder blade does show.
You goodly sister Floods, how happy is your state!
Or should I more commend your features, or your Fate;
That Milford, which this I Will her greatest Port does call
Before your eq^all Floods is lotted to your Fall!
Where was sail ever seen, or wind has ever blown,
Whence Penbrooke yet has heard of Haven like her own?
She bids Dungleddy dare Spain.
Iberias proudest Road,
And charge her to send her challenges abroad
Along the coast of France, to prove if any be
Her Milford that dare match: so absolute is she.
And Clethy coming down from Wrenyvaur her Sire
(A hill that thrusts his head into th'etheriall fire)
Her sisters part does take, and dare avouch as much:
And Percily the proud, whom neerlie it does touch,
Said, he would bear her out; and that they all should know.
And there-withall he struts, as though he scorned to show
His head below the Heaven, when he of Milford spoke:
But there was not a Port the prize durst undertake.
So highly Milford is in every mouth renownd,
Noe Haven has ought good, in her that is not found:
Whereas the swelling surge, that with his fomie head,
The gentler looking Land with fury menaced,
With his encountering wave no longer there contends;
But sitting mildly down like perfect ancient friends,
Unmoved of any vvind which way so ere it blow,
And rather seem to smile, then knit an angry brow.
The ships with shattred ribs scarce creeping from the Seas,
On her sleeke bosom ride with such deliberate ease,
As all her passed storms she holds but mean and base,
So she may reach at length this most delightful place,
By nature with proud Cleeues environed about,
. To crown the goodly Road: where builds the Falcon stout,
Which we the Gentill call; whose fleet and active wings,
It seems that Nature made when most she thought on Kings:
Which managed to the lure, her high and gallant flight,
The vacant sportfull man so greatly does delight,
That with her nimble quills his soul does seem to houer,
And lie the very pitch that lusty Bird does cover;
That those proud Airies, bred whereas the scorching sky
The places from whence the highest flying H^wkes are brought.
Does sindge the sandy Wyldes of spicefull Barbary;
Or underneath our Pole, where Norwaies Forests wide
Their high clowd-touching heads in Winter snowes do hide,
Out-braue not this our kind in mettle, nor exceed
The Falcon, which sometimes the British Cleeues do breed:
Which prey upon the Isles in the Vergiuian waste,
That from the British shores by Neptune are embraced;
Which stem his furious Tides when wildliest they do rave,
And break the big-swolne bulk of many a boystrous wave:
As, calm when he becomes, then likewise in their glory
Do cast their amorous eyes at many a Promontorie
That thrust their forehead^ forth into the smiling South;
As Rat and Sheepy, The Islands upon the point of Penbrookeshire.
set to keep calm Milfords mouth,
Exposed to Neptunes power. So Gresholme far does stand:
Scalme, Stockholme, with Saint Bride, and Gatholme, nearer land
(Which with their veinie breasts entice the gods of Sea,
That with the lusty Isles do revel every day)
As Crescent-like the Land her breadth here inward bends,
From Milford, which she forth to old Meneuia sends;
Since, holy David's seat; which of especial grace
Does lend that nobler name, to this vnnobler place.
Of all the holy men whose fame so fresh remains,
To whom the Britans built so many sumptuous Fanes,
This Saint before the rest their Patron still they hold:
. Whose birth, their ancient Bards to Cambria long foretold;
And seated here a See, his Bishopric of yore,
Upon the farthest point of this unfruitful shore;
Selected by himself, that far from all resort
With contemplation seemed most fitly to comport;
That, void of all delight, cold, barren, bleake, and dry,
No pleasure might allure, nor steal the wandering eye:
Where Ramsey with those Rocks, in rank that ordered stand
Upon the furthest point of David's ancient Land,
Do raise their rugged heads (the Sea-mans noted marks)
Called, of their Mytred tops, The Bishop and his Clerks;
Into that Channel cast, whose raging current rores
Betwixt the British Sands, and the Hibernian shores:
Whose grimme and horrid face does pleased heaven neglect,
And bears bleake Winter still in his more sad aspect:
Yet Gwin and Neuern near, two fine and fishfull brooks,
Do never stay their course, how stern so ere he looks;
Which with his shipping once should seem to have commerst,
Where Fiscard as her flood, does only grace the first.
To Newport falls the next: there we a while will rest;
Our next ensuing Song to wondrous things addressed.
Illustrations.
If you ever read of, or vulgarly understand, the form of the Ocean, and
affinity twixt it and Rivers, you cannot but conceive this Poetical description
of Seuern^; wherein Amphitrite is supposed to have given her a precious robe:
very proper in the matter-selfe, and imitating that Iliad. ^. etc. ^. Odyss. ^.
Father of the Muses which deriues Agamemnons Scepter to him by descent joined
with gift from Jupiter, Achilles armor from Vulcans bounty, Helens Nepenthe
from the Egyptian Polydamna, and such like, honoring the possessor with the
giuers judgment, as much as with the gift possessed.

To whom the goodly Bay of Milford should be given.
At Milford haven arrived Henry Earl of Richmont, aided with some forces and
sums of money by the French Charles VIII. but so entertained and strengthened
by diverse of his friends, groaning under the tyrannical yoke of Rich. III.
that, beyond expectation, at Bosworth in Leicester, the day and Crown was soon
his. Every Chron^cle tells you more largely*

And how Lhewelins line in him should doubly thrive.
Turn to the Eagles prophecies in the II. Song, where the first part of this
relation is more manifested. For the rest, thus: About our Confessors time
Macbeth Hector Boet. lib. 12. et Buchanan. in reg. 85. and 86. lib. 7. qui
eosdem aeuo citeriori Stuartos ait dictos, quos olim Thanos nuncupabant. Than^
vero quaestores erant regij per interpretationem, vti Boethius. Certe in Charta
illa qua iure cliente^ari se Henrico II. obstrina^t Wilhelmus Scotoru^ Rex,
leguntur inter testes W^^^elmus de Curcy Seneschaellus, Willielmus Filius
Aldelmi Seneschallus, Al^redus de Sancto Martino Seneschallus, Gilbertus Malet
Seneschallus, vnde honorariu^ fuisse hoc nomen paret. horum bini desunt apud
Houedenum verum ex vetufliss. Anonymon^s. excerpsi.
K. of Scotland (moved by predictions, affirming that, his line extinct, the
posterity of Banqhuo a noble Thane of Loqhuabrie should attain and continue
the Scottish reign) and jealous of others hoped for greatness, murdered Banqhuo,
but mist his d^signe* for, one of the same posterity, Fleanch son to Banqhuo,
privily fled to Gryffith ap Lhe^el^^ then Prince of Wales, and was there kindly
received. To him and Nesta the Princes daughter was issue one Walter. He
(afterward for his worth favorably accepted, and through stout performance
honorably requited by Malcolmb III.) was made L. high Stewart of Scotland; out
of whose loins Robert II* was derived: since whom that royal name has long
continued, descending to our mighty Sovereign, and in him is joined with the
commixt Kingly blood of Tyddour and Plantagenest. These two were united, with
the York and Lancaster
white and red Roses, in those auspicious nuptials of Henry the VII. and
Elizabeth daughter to Edward IV.) and from them, through the Lady Margaret
their eldest daughter, married to James the IV. his Majesty's descent and
spacious Empire observed easily shows you what the Muse here plays withal.
The rest alludes to that; Cambria shall be glad, Cornwall shall flourish, and
the Isle shall be styled with Brutes name, and the name of strangers shall
perish: as it is in Merlins prophecie^.

That Spirit to her unknown this Virgin only loved.
So is the vulgar tradition of Merlins conception. Untimely it were, if I
should slip into discourse of spirits faculties in this kind. For my own part,
unless there be some creatures of such middle nature, as the Rabbinique, Rabbi
Abraham in Zerror Hammor ap. Munst. ad 2. Genes.
conceit upon the creation suppose^; and the same with Hesiods Nymphs, or
Paracelsus his Non-adams, I shall not believe that other then true bodies on
bodies can generate, except by swiftnes of mo^^on in conueying of stolen seed
some unclean spirit might arrogat the improper name of generation. Those which
S. Augustine Lib. 15. de Ciu. Dei cap. 23.
calls Forte Drusij (quod vult Bodinui lib. 2. cap. 7. daemonoman.) quasi
Syluani. aut Dryades.
Dusij, in Gaul, altogether addicted to such filthiness, Faunes, Satyrs and
Syluans have had as much attributed to them. But learn of this, from Divines
upon the Beni-haelobim Genesis 6.2.
in holy Writ, passages of the Fathers upon this point, and the later authors
of disquisition^ in Magique and Sorcery, as Bodin, Wier, Martin del Rio,
others. For this Merlin (rather Mord^in, as you see to the IV. Song, his true
name being Ambrose) his own answer to Vortigern was, that his father was a
Roman Illustres saepius viros indigetant historici nostri Consules, vnde et
Aetium adloquuntur Saxone^ Co^, quem ta^^tsi Consule^ fuisse haut asserent
Fasti, illustriss. tu. and in republica nobilissimum Procopij aliorumque
historiae Gothicae pr^dunt.
Consul (so Nennius informs me) as perhaps it might be, and the fact palliated
under name of a spirit, as in that of Ilia supposing, to save her credit, the
name of Mars for Romulus his Father. But to enterlace the polite Muse with what
is more harsh, yet even therein perhaps not displeasing, I offer you this
antique passage of him. -- the messagers to Kermerdin come
And hou children biuore the yate pleyde hit took gome
Tho sede Durbitius dictus Galfredo.
on to another, Merlin wat is she
Thou faderlese Shrew now a word applied to the shrewish sex, but in Chaucer,
Lidgat, and Go^er to the quieter also.
ssrewe, wy misdost^u me
See to the x. Song.
Uor icham of Kings icome and thou nart naught worth a fille
Uor thou naddest neuere nanne fader, thereuore hold the stille
Tho the messagers hurde this hi^ a stunte there
And ess^e at men about wat the child were
Me sede that he ne had neuere fader that me might understand
And is mother an Kings daughter was of thulke land
And woned at S. Petres in a nonnerie there.
His mother (a Nun, daughter to Pubidius K. of Mathraual, and called Matilda, as
by Spenc^rs Fa^ry Q. lib. 3. cant. 3.
Poetical authority only I find justifiable) and he being brought to the
King, she colors it in these words: -- when ich often was
In chamber mid mine fellawes, there come to me by cas
A suithe vair man mid all, and by clupt me well soft,
And semblance made vaire ynou, and cust me well often.
and tells on the story which should follow so kind a preface. But enough of
this.

Osteomantie.
By the shoulder of a Ram from off the right side pared.
-- Quae te dementia c^pit Qu^rere solicit quod rep^rire tim^s. Th. Mor. Epig.
Take this as a taste of their art in old time. Under Hen. II. one William
Mangunel Girald. Itin. 1. cap. 11.
a Gentleman of those parts finding by his skill of predicton that his wife had
played false with him, and conceived by his own Nephew, formally dresses the
shoulder bone of one of his own Rams; and sitting at dinner (pretending it
to be taken out of his neighbors flock) requests his wife (equalling him in
these diuina^^ons) to give her judgment; she curiously observes* and at last
with great laughter casts it from her: the Gentleman, importuning her rea^son
of so vehement an affection, receives answer of her, that, his wife, out of
whose flock the Ram was taken, had by incestuous copulation with her husbands
Nephew fraughted herself with a young one. Lay all together, and judge,
Gentlewomen, the sequel of this cross accident. But why she could not as well
divine of whose flock it was, as the other secret, when I have more skill in
Osteomantie, I will tell you. Nor was their report less in knowing things to
come, then past; so that jealous Panurge in his doubt Of Cuckoldrie. Rablais.
de la Coquage might here have had other manner of resolution then Rondibilis,
Hippothade, Br^doye, Trouillogan, or the Oracle it self, were able to give him.
Blame me not, in that, to explane my author, I insert this example.

To crown the goodly road, where built that Falcon stout.
In the rocks of this maritime coast of Penbroke are Eiries of excellent
Falcons. H^nry the II. here passing into Ireland, cast off a Norway Go^hauke a^
one of these: but the Goshauke taken at the source by the Falcon, Hawks.
soon fell down at the Kings foot, which performance in this Ramage, made him
yearly afterward send hither for Eye^ses, as Girald is author. Whether these
here are the Haggarts (which they call Peregrin's) or Falcon-gentles, I am no
such Falconer to argue; but this I know, that the reason of the name of
Peregrin's is given, for that they com from remote Albert. de Animal. 23. cap.
8.
and unknown places, and therefore hardly fits these: but also I read in no
less then Imperial Frederic. II. lib. 2. de art Venand. cap. 4.
authority, that Peragrins never bred in less latitude then beyond the VII.
climat Dia Riphaeos, which permits them this place* and that, of true Falcons
gentle an Eiry is never found but in a more Southern and hotter parallel:
which (if it be true) excludes the name of Gentle from ours, breeding near the
IX. Per Rostochium. And the same authority makes them (against common opinion)
both of one kind, differing rather in local and outward accidents, then in
selfe-nature.

Whose birth the ancient Bards to Cambria long foretold.
Of S. Dewy and his Bishoprique you have more to the fourth Song. He was
prognosticated Monume^^. lib. 8. cap. 8. Girald. Itin. 2. cap. 1. Bal. cent. 1.
Vita S. Dewy.
above XXX. years before his birth; which with other attributed miracles
(after the fashion of that credulous age) caused him be almost paralleld in
Monkish zeal with that holy John which, unborn, sprang at presence of the
incarnat Author of our redemption. The translation of the Archbishoprique was
also Alan. de insul. 1. ad Proph. Merlin.
foretold in that of Merlin: Meneuia shall put on the Palle of Caer-^eon; and
the Preacher of Ireland shall wax dumb by an infant growing in the womb. That
was performed when S. Patrique at presence of Melaria then with child suddenly
lost use of his speech; but recovering it after some time made prediction of
Dewies holiness, joined with greatness, which is so celebrated. Upon my Authors
credits only believe me.



The sixth Song.
* THE ARGUMENT.
With Cardigan the Muse proceeds,
And tells what rare things Tivy breeds:
Next, proud Plynillimon she plyes;
Where Severne, Wy, and Rydoll rise.
With Severne she along does go,
Her Metamorphosis to show;
And makes the wandering Wy declame
In honor of the British name:
Then m^sters all the watery train
That those two Rivers entertain:
And viewing how those Rillets creep
From shore to the Vergiuian Deep,
By Radnor and Mountgomery then
To Severne turns her course again:
And bringing all their Riuerets in,
There ends; a new Song to begin.
Since I must stem thy Stream, clear Tivy, yet before
The Muse vouchsafe to s^ise the Cardiganian shore,
She of thy sourse will sing in all the Cambrian coast;
Which of thy Castors once, but now can only boast
The Salmons, of all Floods most plentiful in thee.
Dear Brook, within thy Banks if any Powers there be;
Then Neiads, or ye Nymphs of their like watrie kind
(Unto whose only care, great Neptune has assigned
The guidance of those Brooks wherein he takes delight)
Assist her: and whilst she your dwelling shall recite,
Be present in her work: set her your graces view,
That to succeeding times them lively she may show;
As when great Albions sons, which him a Sea-Nymph brought
Amongst the grisly Rocks, were with your beauties caught
(Whose only love surpised those of the Giants
Phlegrian size,
The Titan^is, that once against high Heaven durst rise)
When as the hoarie vvoods, the climing hills did hide,
And covered every Vale through which you gently glide;
Even for those inly heats which through your loves they felt,
That often in kindly tears did in your bosoms melt,
To view your secret Bowres, such favor let her win.
Then Tivy comes down from her capacious Li^,
Twixt Mirk and Brenny led, two handmaids, that do stay
Their Mistres* as in State she goes upon her way.
Which when Lanbeder sees, her wondrouslie she likes:
Whose untamed bosom so the beauteous Tivy strikes,
As that the Forest feign would have her there abide.
But she (so pure a stream) transported with her pride
The offer idly scorns; though with her flattering shade
The Syluan her entice with all that may persuade
A water-Nymph; yea, though great Thetis self she were:
But nothing might prevail, nor all the pleasures there
Her mind could ever move one minutes sta^e to make.
Mild Mathern then, the next, does Tivy ouer-take:
Which instantly again by Dittor is supplied.
Then, Keach and Kerry help: twixt which on either side,
To Cardigan she comes, the Sovereign of the Shere.
Now Tivy let us tell thy sundry glories here.
When as the Salmon seeks a fresher stream to find
(Which hither from the Sea comes yearly by his kind,
As he in season grows) and stems the watery tract
Where Tivy falling down, does make a Falling of water.
Cataract,
Forced by the rising Rocks that there her course oppose,
As though within their bounds they meant her to enclose;
Here, when the laboring Fish does at the foot arrive,
And finds that by his strength but vainlie he does strive,
His tail takes in his teeth; and bending like a bow,
That Is to the compass drawn, aloft himself does throw*
Then springing at his height* as does a little wand,
That bended end to end, and fler^ed from the hand,
Far off it self does cast; so does the Salmon ^^ut.
And if at first he fail, his second The word in tumbling, when one casts
himself over and over.
Summersau^
He instantly assaies; and from his nimble Ring*
Still yarking, never leaves, until himself he f^^ng,
Above the streamefull top of the surrounded heap.
More famous long agone, then for the Salmons leap,
For Beuers Tivy was, in her strong banks that bred,
Which else no other Brook of Britain nourished:
Where Nature, in the shape of this now-perisht beast
His property did seem to have wondrouslie expressed;
Be'ing bodied like a Boat, with such a mighty tail
As served him for a bridge, a helm, or for a sail,
When Kind did him command the Architect to play,
That his strong Castle built of branched twigs and clay:
Which, set upon the Deep, but yet not fixed there,
He easelie could remove as it he ple^^'d to stere
To this side or to that; the workmanship so rare,
His stuff wherewith to build, first being to prepare,
A forraging he goes, to Groves or bushes ^ie,
And with his teeth cut^ down his Timber: which laid-by,
He turns him on his back, his belly laid abroad,
When with what he has got, the other do him load,
Till lastly by the weight, his burden he have found.
Then, with his mighty tail his carriage having bound
As Carters do with rope^, in his sharp teeth he grip't
Some stronger stick: from which the lesser branches stripped,
He takes it in the midst; at both the ends* the rest
Hard holding with their fangs, unto the labor pressed,
Going backward, toward their home their loaded carriage led,
From whom, those first here borne, were taught the useful Sled.
Then builded he his Fort with strong and several fights*
His passages contrived with such unusual sleights,
That from the Hunter often he issued vndiscern'd,
As if men from this Beast to fortify had learned;
. Whose Kind, in he^ decayed, is to this I Will unknown.
Thus Tivy boasts this Beast peculiarly her own.
But here why spend ^ume these trifles to a r^ed?
Now, with thy former ^aske my M^se again proceed,
To show the other Floods from the Of Cardigan.
Cere^tick shore
To the Verginian Sea contributing their store:
With Bidder first begin, that bends all her force
The Arron to assist, Arth holding on her course
The way the other went, with Werry which does win
Fair Istwid to her aid* who kindly coming in,
Meets Rydoll at her mouth, that (...) and princess maid,
Plynillimons dear child, delicious^ie afraid,
As fits a Nymph so near to Severne and her Queen.
Then come the sister (...) as they before had seen
Those delicater Dames so trippinglie to read:
Then Kerry; Cletur next, and (...) making head
With Enion, that her (...) c^eere (...) brings by her.
Plynillimons high praise no longer Muse defer,
What once the Druids told, how great those Floods should be
That here (most mighty Hill) (...) themselves from (...).
The Bards with fury rap^, the British youth among,
. Unto the charming Harp thy future honor song
In brave and lofty straine^; that in excess of joy,
The Beldam and the Girl, the Grand^^re and the Boy,
With shouts and yearning cries, the troubled air did load
(As when with crowned cups unto the Bacchus.
Elian God
Those Priests his Orgyes held* or when the old world saw
Full Phoebes face eclipst, and thinking her to daw,
Whom they supposed fal^e in some enchanted swound,
Of beaten tinkling Brass still plied her with the sound)
That all the Cambrian hills, which highest their heads do bear
With most obsequious shows of low subjected fear,
Should to thy greatness stoop: and all the Brooks that be,
Do homage to those Floods that issued out of thee:
To princely Severne first; next, to her sister Wy^,
Which to her elders Court her course does still apply.
But Rydoll, young'st, and least, and for the others pride
Not finding fitting roomth upon the rising side,
Alone unto the West directly takes her way.
So all the neighboring Hills Plynillimon obey.
For, though Moylo^dian bear his craggy top so hie,
As scorning all that come in compass of his eye,
Yet greatly is he pleased Plynillimon will grace
Him with a cheerful look: and fawning in his face,
His love to Severne shows us though his own she were,
Thus comforting the Flood; O euer-during heir
The story of Sever^^.
Of Sabrine, Locryns child (who of her life bereft,
Her everliving name to thee fair River left)
Brutes first begotten son, which Gwendeli^ did wed;
But soon th'vnconstant Lord abandoned her bed
(Through his unchaste desire) for beauteous El^treds love*
Now, that which most of all her mighty heart did move,
Her Father, Cornwalls Duke, great Corineus dead,
Was by the lustful King unjustly banished*
When she, who to that time still with a smoothed brow
Had seemed to bear the breach of Locrines former vow,
Perceiving still her wrongs insufferable were;
Grown big with the revenge which her full breast did bear,
And aided to the birth with every little breath
(Alone she being left the spoil of love and death,
In labor of her grief outrageously distract,
The utmost of her spleen on her false Lord to act)
She first implores their aid^ no hat^ him whom she found*
Whose hearts unto the depth she had not left to sound.
To Cornwall then she sends her Country) for supplies*
Which all at over in Arms with Gwend^lin arise.
Then with her warlike power, her husband she pursued,
Whom his unlawful love too vainlie did delude.
The fierce and jealous Queen, then void of all remorce,
As great in power or spirit, whilst he neglects her force,
Him suddenly surpised, and from her irefull heart
All pity clean exiled (whom nothing could convert)
The son of mighty Brute bereaved of his life;
Amongst the Britans here the first intestine strife,
Since they were put a land upon this promised shore.
Then crowning Madan King, whom she to Locrine bore,
And those which served his Sire to his obedience brought;
Not so with blood sufficed, immediately she sought
The mother and the child: whose beauty when she saw,
Had not her heart been flint, had had the power to draw
A spring of pitying tears; when, dropping liquid pearl,
Before the cruel Queen, the Lady and the Girl
Upon their tender knees begged mercy. Woe for thee
Fair Elstred, that thou should thy fairer Sabrine see,
As she should thee behold the prey to her stern rage
Whom kingly L^^rius death sufficed not to assuage:
Who from the bordring Cleeues thee with thy Mother cast
Into thy christened Flood, the whilst the Rocks aghast
Resounded with your shriekes; till in a deadly dream
Your corses were dissolved into that crystal stream,
Your curles to curled waves, which plainly still appear
The same in water ^ow, that once in locks they were:
And, as you wont to clip each others neck before,
Ye now with liquid arms embrace the w^ndring shore.
But leave we Severne here, a little on pursue,
The often wandering Wye (her passage^ to view,
As wantonlie she strains in her lascivious course)
And muster every flood that from her bountiou^ sourse
Attends upon her Stream, whilst (as the famous bound
Twixt the Brecknokia^ earth, and the Radnorian ground)
She every Brook receives* First, (...) comes in,
With Cl^rwy: which to them their consor^ Eland win
To aid their goodly Wye* which (...) get^ again*
She Dulas draws along: and in her wa^ry train
Clow^d^^^ has recourse, and (...), which she brings
Unto their wandering flood from the Radnorian Springs:
As Edwy her attends and (...) forward heaven
Her Mistress. When at last the goodly Wye per^^aues
She now was in that part of Wales, of all the rest
Which (as her very waste) in breadth from East to West,
In length from North to South, her midst is every way,
From Severns bordring banks into the either Sea,
Which she might term the ham. The ancient Britans here
The River calls to mind, and what those British were
Whilst Britain was her self, the Queen of all the West.
To whose old Nations praise whilst she herself addressed,
From the Brecknokian bound when Irvon coming in,
Her Dulas, with Commarch, and Weuery that does win,
Persuading her for them good matter to provide.
The Wood-Nymphs so again, from the Radnorian side,
As Radnor, with Blethaugh, and Kn^ckles Forests, call
To Wye, and bad her now bestirre her for them all:
For, if she stuck not close in their distressed Case,
The Britans were in doubt to undergo disgrace.
That strongly thus prouok't, she for the Britans says;
What spirit can lift you up, to that immortal praise
. You worthily deserve? by whom first Gaul was taught
Her knowledge: and for her, what Nation ever wrought
The conquest you atchieu'd? And, as you were most drad,
So ye (before the rest) in so great reverence had
Your Bards which sung your deeds, that when stern hosts have stood
With lifted hands to strike (in their inflamed blood)
. One Bard but coming in, their murderous swords has staid;
In her most dreadful voice as thundering heaven had said,
Stay Britans: when he spoke, his words so powrefull were.
So to her native Priests, the dreadlesse Druides here,
The nearest neighboring Gaul, that wisely could discern
The Effect their doctrine wrought, it for their good to learn,
Her apt and pregnant Youth sent hither year by year,
Instructed in our Rites with (...) religious fear.
And afterward again, when (...) ancient fear
Her surcrease could not keep, (...) for her soil too great
(But like to casting Bees, so risi^g v^ in swarms)
. Our Cymbri with the Gauls, that their commi^ted Arms
Joined with the German powers (th^^^ Nations of the North
Which ouer-spread the world) together issued forth:
. Where, with our brazen swords, we sto^^ly fought, and long;
And after Conque^^^ go^, residing them among,
First planted in those parts our bra^e courageous b^ood:
Whose natures so adhered unto their ancient blood,
As from them spr^ng those Pries^^, whose praise so far did sound,
Through whom that spacious Gaul was after (...)
Nor could the Saxons sword^ (which many a lingering year
Them sadly did afflict, and that us Britans he^re
Twixt Severne and this Sea) our mighty mind^ (...);
But that even they which (...) our weakness would detect,
Were forced to confess, our wildest beasts that ^^eed
Upon our mighty waste^, or on our Mountaine^ feed,
Were far more sooner tamed, (...) our Welch-men (...)*
Besides, in all the world ^o Na^ion is so dear.
As they unto their own; that here within this I Will,
Or else in foreign parts, yea^, (...) to exile,
The noble Britan still his countryman releeues;
A Patriot, and so true, that it to death him greeues
To hear his Wales disgraced: and on the Saxons swords
Often hazardeth his life, ere with reprochefull words
His Language or his Leeke he will stand to hear abused.
Besides, the Britan is so naturally infused
With true Poetic rage, that in their See to the fourth Song.
measures, Art
Does rather seem precise, then comlie; in each part
Their Meter most exact, in Verse of th'hardest kind.
And some to riming be so wondrouslie inclined,
Those Numbers they will hit, out of their genuine vain,
Which many wise and learned can hardly creattaine.
O memorable Bards, of unmixed blood, which still
Posterity shall praise for your so wondrous skill,
That in your noble Songs, the long Descents have kept
Of your great Heroes, else in Lethe that had slept,
With theirs whose ignorant pride your labors have disdained;
How much from time, and them, how bravely have you gained!
Musician, Herault, Bard, thrice may thou be renowned,
And with three several wreathes immortallie be crowned;
Who, when to Penbrooke called before the English King,
And to thy powerful Harp commanded there to sing,
Of famous Arthur told'st, and where he was interred;
In which, those retchlesse times had long and blindlie erred,
And Ignorance had brought the world to such a pass
As now, which scarce believes that Arthur ever was.
But when King Henry the second.
Henry sent th'reported place to view,
He found that man of men: and what thou said was true.
Here then I cannot choose but bitterly exclame
Against those fools that all Antiquity defame,
Because they have found out, some credulous Ages laid
Slight fictions with the truth, whilst truth on rumor stayed;
And that one forward Time (perceiving the neglect
A former of her had) to purchase her respect,
With toys then trimd her up, the drowsy world t'allure,
And lent her what it thought might appetite procure
To man, whose mind does still variety pursue;
And therefore to those things whose grounds were very true,
Though naked yet and bare (not having to content
The weyward curious ear) gave fictiue ornament;
And fitter thought, the truth they should in question call,
Then coldlie sparing that, the truth should go and all.
And surely I suppose, that which this froward time
Does scandalize her with to be her heinous crime,
That has her most preserved: for, still where wit has found
A thing most cleerlie true, it made that, fictions ground:
Which she supposed might give sure color to them both:
From which, as from a root, this wondered error grow'th
At which our Critics gird, whose judgments are so strict,
And he the brauest man who most can contradict
That which decrepit Age (which forced is to lean
Upon Tradition) tells; esteeming it so mean,
As they it quite reject, and for some trifling thing
(Which Time has pind to Truth) they all away will fling.
These men (for all the world) like our Precisions be,
Who for some Cross or Saint they in the window see
Will pluck down all the Church: Soule-blinded sot^ that creep
In dirt, and never saw the wonders of the Deep.
Therefore (in my conceit) most rightly served are they
. That to the Roman trust (on his report that stay)
Our truth from him to learn, as ignorant of ours
As we were then of his; except it were of his powers:
Who our wise Druides here vnmercifullie slew;
Like whom, great Natures depths no men yet ever knew,
Nor with such dauntlesse spirits were ever yet inspired;
Who at their proud arrive the ambitious Romans fired
When first they heard them preach the souls immortal state;
And even in Romes despite, and in contempt of Fate,
Graspt hands with horrid death: which out of hate and pride
They slew, who through the world were reverenced beside.
To understand our state, no marvel then though we
Should so to Caesar seek, in his reports to see
What ancientlie we were; when in our infant war,
Unskillful of our tongue but by Interpreter,
He nothing had of ours which our great Bards did sing,
Except some few poor words; and those again to bring
Unto the Latin sounds, and easiness they used,
By their most filed speech, our British most abused.
But of our former state, beginning, our descent,
The wars we had at home, the conquests where we went,
He never understood. And though the Romans here
So noble Trophies left, as very worthy were
A people great as they, yet did they ours neglect,
Long reared ere they arrived. And where they do object,
The Ruins and Records we show, be very small
To prove our selves so great: even this the most of all
(Against their objection) seems miraculous to me,
That yet those should be found so general as they be;
The Roman, next the Pict, the Saxon, then the Dane,
All landing in this I Will, each like a horrid rain
Deforming her; besides the sacrilegious wrack
Of many a noble Book, as impious hands should sack
The Center, to extirp all knowledge, and exile
All brave and ancient things, for ever from this I Will:
Expressing wondrous grief, thus wandering Wye did sing.
But, back, industrious Muse; obsequiously to bring
Clear Seuerne from her sourse, and tell how she does strain
Down her delicious Dales; with all the goodly train,
Brought forth the first of all by Brugan: which to make
Her party worthy note, next, Dulas in does take.
Moylvadian his much love to Seuerne then to show,
Upon her Southern side, sends likewise (in a row)
Bright Biga, that brings on her friend and fellow Floyd;
Next, Dungum; Bacho then is busily employed,
Tarranon, Carno, Hawes, with Bec^n, and the Rue,
In Seuern's sovereign Banks, that give attendance due.
Thus as she swoopes along, with all that goodly train,
Upon her other Bank by Newtowne: so again
. Comes Dulas (of whose name so many Rivers be,
As of none others is) with Mule, prepared to see
The confluence to their Queen, as on her course she makes:
Then at Mountgomery next clear Kennet in she takes;
Where little Fledding falls into her broader Bank;
Forkt Vurnway, bringing Tur, and Tanot: growing rank,
She plyes her toward the Poole, from the Gomerian feelds;
Then which in all our Wales, there is no country yields
An excellenter Horse, so full of natural fire,
As one of Phoebus Steeds had been that Stalyons ^ire
Which first their race begun; or of the Asturian kind,
. Which some have held to be begotten by the Wind,
Upon the Mountain Mare; which strongly it receaues,
And in a little time her pregnant part vpheaues.
But, leave we this to such as after wonders long:
The Muse prepares herself unto another Song.
Illustrations.
AFter Penbroke in the former Song, succeedes here Cardigan; both washed by the
Irish Seas. But, for intermixture of rivers, and contiguity of situation, the
inlands of Montgomery, Radnor, and Brecknocke are partly infolded.

Whose Kind in her decaid, is to this I Will unknown.
That these Rivers were in Tivy frequent, anciently is testified by Syluester
Girald Topograph. Hib. did. 1. cap. 21. Itin. Came. 2. cap. 3.
describing the particulars, which the author tells you, both of this, and the
Salmons; but that here, are no Beuers now, as good authority of the present
Pouel. and Camden.
time informs you.

Unto thy charming Harp thy future honor song.
Of the Bards, their Singing, Heraldship, and more of that nature, see to the
fourth Song. Girald. Topograph. 3. did. cap. 11.
Ireland (says one) uses the Harp and Pipe, which he calls tympanum: Scotland
the Harp, Tympan, and Chorus; Wales the Harp, Pipe, and Chorus. Although
Tympanum and Chorus have other significations, yet, this Girald (from whom I
vouch it) using these words as received, I imagine, of S. Hieromes Epistle to
Dardanus* according to whom, for explanation, finding them pictured in Ottomar
Luscinius his Musurgie, as several kind of Pipes, the first dividing itself
into two at the end, the other spread in the middle, as two segments of a
circle, but one at both ends, I guess them intended near the same. But I
refer my self to those that are more acquainted with these kind of British
fashions. For the Harp his word is Cithara, which (if it be the same with
Lyra, as some think, although urging reason and authority are to the contrary)
makes the Bards music, like that expressed in the Horat. Ep. od. 9
Lyrique: -- bibam
Sonante mistum tibijs carmen lyra,
Hac Dorium, illis Barbarum.
Apply it to the former notes, and observe with them, that Plutarch. de Isid.
and Osiride.
the Pythagoreans used, with music of the Harp (which in those times, if it
were Apollo's, was certainly but of Horat. Carm. 3. od. 11. Homer in Hymn. ad
E^u. Seru. Honorat. ad 4. Aeneid. (vbi testudinem primo trium Chordaru^, quam a
Mercurio Caducei precio emisse Apollinem sept^mque discrimina vocum addidisse
legimus, and videndus Diodor. Sleul. lib. a.) vnde (...) etc. dicitur Graecis.
seven strings) when they went to sleep, to charm (as the old Scots were wont
to do, and do yet in their Isles, as Buchanan Hist. Scot. 4. in Fethelmacho.
affirms) and compose their troubled affections. Which I cite to this purpose,
that in co^paring it with the British music, and the attributes thereof
before remembered out of Heracleotes and Girald, you may see conueniency of use
in both, and worth of antiquity in ours; and as well in Pipes as Harp, if you
remember the poetique story of Marsyas. And withal forget not that in one of
the oldest coins that have been made in this Kingdom, the picture of the
Reuers is Apollo having his Harp incircled with Cunebelins name, then chief
King of the Britons; and for Belin and Apollo, see to the VIII. Song.

By whom first Gaul was taught her knowledge.
Understand the knowledge of those great Philosophers, Priests, and Lawyers
called Druid's, (of whom to the X. Song largely.) Their discipline was first
found out in this Isle, and afterward transferred into Gaul; whence their youth
were sent hither as to an University for instruction in their learned
professions: Comment. 6.
Caesar himself is author of as much. Although, in particular law learning, it
might seem that Britain was requi^ed, if the Satyrist Iuuenal. Satyr. 15.
deceive not in that; Eloquent Gaul taught the British Lawiers.
Gallia causidicos docuit facunda Britannos.
Which with excellent Lipsius De pronuntiat. rect. Lat. ling. cap. 3. v.
Viglium ad instit. Justin. tit. quib. non est permiss. fac. ^est. Circ^ DCC.XC.
University of Paris Instituted
, I rather apply to the dispersion of the Latin tongue through Gaul into this
Province, then to any other language or matter. For also in Agicolas time
somewhat before, it appears that matter of good litterature was here in a
far higher degree then there, as Tacitus in his life has recorded. Thus has
our Isle been as Mistress to Gaul twice. First in this Druidian doctrine, next
in the institution of their now famous University of Paris; which was done by
Charlemaine, through aid and industry of our learned Alcuin (he is called also
Albin, and was first sent Ambassador to the Emperor by Offa K. of Mercland)
seconded by those Scots, Bal^us cent. 1.
John Mailr^s, Claudius Clement, and Raban Maurus. But I know great men permit
it not; nor can I see any very ancient authority for it, but infinite of later
times; so that it goes as a received opinion; therefore without more
examination in this no more fit passage, I commit it to my Reader.

One Bard but coming in their murdrous swords has staid.
Such strange assertion find I in story of these Bards powerful enchantments,
that with the amazing sweetness of their delicious Diodor. Sicul. de gest.
fabul^s. antiq. lib. 6.
harmonies, not their own only, but withal their enemies armies have suddenly
desisted from fierce encounters; so, as my author says, did Mars reverence the
Muses. This exactly continues all fitnes with what is before affirmed of that
kind of Music; twixt which (and all other by authentic affirmance) and the
minds affections there are certain Aristot. Polit. ^ cap. 5.
Imitations.
(...), as in this particular example is apparent. But how agrees this with
that in Tacitus which calls a musical incentiue to war among the Germans,
Barditus? Great critiques would there Lips. ad Polyb. 4. Dialog. 11.
read Barrhitus, which in V^getius and Ammian especially, is a peculiar name
for those stirring up alarmes before the battle used in Roman assaults (equal
in proportion to the Greeks (...), the Irish Kerns Pharroh, and that Rolands
Song of the Normans, which has had his like also, in most nations.) But,
seeing Barrhitus (in this sense) is a word of later time, and scarce yet,
without remembrance of his naturalization, allowed in the Latin; Bardus
Galli^e and Britannice Cantor. Fest. and vide Bodin. meth. hist. cap. 9. qui
Robartu^ Dagobartum and similiae vocabula hinc (male vero) deducit.
and, that this use was notable in those Northerns and Gauls, until wars
with whom, it seems Rome had not a proper word for it (which appears by
Festus Pompeius, affirming that the cry of the army was called Barbaricum) I
should think somewhat confidently, that Barditus (as the common copies are) is
the truest Locus Taciti in de morib. Germ.
reading; yet so, that Barditus formed by an unknowing pronunciation is, and,
by original, was the selfsame. For, that Lipsius mending the place, will
have it from Baren in Dutch, which signifies, To cry out, or from Har Har
(which is as Haron in the Norman customs and elsewhere) or from the word Bear
for imitation of that beasts cry, I much wonder, seeing Tacitus makes express
mention of verses harmonically celebrating valiant performers, recital whereof
has that name Barditus, which to interpret we might well call Singing. But to
conioyn this fiery office with that quenching power, of the Bards, spoken of by
the author, I imagine that they had also for this martial purpose skill in
that kind of music, which they call Phrygian, being (as Aristotle says)
(...).i. as it were, madding the mind with sprightfull motion. For so we see
that those which sing the Tempering and mollifying Suid. in (...)
Paeans to Apollo, the (...) and (...) after victory, did among the Greeks in
another strain move with their Paeans to Mars, their (...), and provoking
charms before the encounter; and so meets this in our Bards dispersed
doubtless (as the Druids) through Britain, Gaul, and part of Germany, which
three had especially in warfare much community.

Our Cimbri with the Gauls --
National transmigrations touched to the fourth Song give light hither. The
name of Cimbri (which most of the learned in this later time have made the same
with C^mmerians, Cumerians, Cambrians, all coming from Gomer Genes. 10.
Iaphets son, to whom with his posterity was this North-Westerne part of the
world divided) expressing the Welsh, calling themselves also Kumry. The author
alludes here to that British army, which in our story is conducted under
Brennus and Belinus (sons to Molmutius) through Gaul, and thence prosecuted,
what in the VIII. Song and my notes there more plainly.

Where, with our Brazen swords --
The Author thus teaches you to know, that, among the ancients, Brass, not
Iron, was the metal of most use. In their little Sithes, wherewith they
Sophocles, Carminlus, Virgil. ap. Macrobium Saturnal. lib. 5. cap. 19. Pausan.
in Laconi^. (...). and Arcadic ^. Samuel. lib. 1. cap. 17.
cut their herbs for enchantments, their Priests Rasours, Plow-shares for
describing the content of plotted Cities, their music instruments, and such
like, how special this metal was, it is with good warrant delivered; Nor with
less, how frequent in the making of Swords, Spears, and Armor in the Heroique
times, as among other authorities that in the encounter of Diomedes and Hector
Iliad. (...).
manifests: Brass rebounds from Brass.
-- (...).
Which seems in them to have proceeded from a willingness of avoiding
instruments too deadly in wounding* For from a s^yptique faculty in this, more
then in Iron, the cure of what it hurts is affirmed more easy, and the metal
it self, Of remediall power.
(...), as Problem (...). Sect. (...).
Aristotle expresses. But that our Britons used it also it has been out of
old monuments by our most Camd. in Cornub. See for this more in the X. Song.
learned Antiquary observed.

That to the Roman trust (on his report that stay)
For indeed many are which the author here impugnes, that dare believe nothing
of our story, or antiquities of more ancient times; but only Julius Caesar,
and other about or since him. And surely his ignorance of this Isle was great,
time forbidding him language or conversation with the British. Nor was any
before him of his country, that knew or meddled in relation of us. The first of
them that once to letters committed any word deduced from Britains name was a
Philosophical Lucret. de Rer. Not. 6.
Poet (flourishing some L. years before Caesar) in these verses: Nam quid
Britannum coelum differ putamus,
Et quod in Aegypto'st, qua mundi claudicat axis?
In the somewhat later Poets that lived about August, as Catull^, Virgil, and
Horace, some passages of the name have you, but nothing that discouers any
monument of this Island proper to her inhabitants. I would not reckon Corneli
Cornelius Nepos challenged to an English wit.
Nepos among them, to whose name is attributed, in Print, that polite Poem (in
whose composition Apollo seems to have given personal aid) of the Trojan
war* according to Dares the Phrygians story; where, by Poetical liberty the
Britons are supposed to have been with Hercules at the rape of Hasione: I
should so, besides error* wrong my country, to whose glory the true authors
name of that book will among the worthies of the Muses ever live. Read but
these of his verses, and then judge if he were a Roman: -- Sineremigis vsu
Non nosset Memphis Romam, non Indus Hiberum,
Non Scytha Cecropidem, non Nostra Britannia Gallum.
And in the same book to Baldwin Archbishop of Canterbury: Ar tu dissimulis
long cui front serena
Sanguinis agregij lucrum, pacemque litata
Emptam anima Pater illepius, summumque cacumen
In curam venisse velit, cuicederet ipse
Prorsus, vel proprias laetus sociaret habenas.
Of him a little before: -- quo praeside Flores
Ita. ^. legendu^, non Tantia aut Pontia* vti ineptiunt qui Iosepho nostro
nurenti suam in^iderunt co^onam in Codice Typis excuso.
Cantia, and in priscas respirat libera legos.


Briefly thus: the Author was Joseph of Excester (afterward Archbishop of
Bourdeaux) famous in this and other kind of good learning, under Hen. II. and
Rich. I. speaking among those verses in this form: Te sacrae assument acies
diuinaque bella.
Tunc dignum maiore tuba, tunc pector^ toto
Nitar, and immensum mecum sparg ere per Orbem.
Which must (as I think) be intended of Baldwin whose undertaking of the cross
and voyage with Coeur de Lion into the Holy Land, and death there, is in our
Chronicis add^ and Girald. Itin. Camb. 2. cap. 14.
Stories* out of which you may have large declaration of this holy father (so
he calls Tho. Becket) that bought peace with price of his life, being murdered in
his house at Canterbury, through the urging grieuances intolerable to the King
and Laity, his diminution of common law liberties, and endeavored derogation,
for maintenance of Romish usurped supremacy. For these liberties, see Matthew
Paris before all other, and the Epistles of Sarisburiens. Epist. 159. 210, 220.
and 268.
John of Salisbury, but lately published* and, if you please, my Ianus
Anglorum, where they are restored from senseles corruption, and are indeed
more themselves then in any other whatsoever in print. But thus too much of
this false Cornelius. Compare with these notes what is to the first Song of
Britain and Albion; and you shall see that in Greek writers mention of our
Land is long before any in the Latin: for Polybius that is the first which
mentions it, was more then C. years before Lucretius. The authors plainenes in
the rest of Wies Song to this purpose discharges my further labor.

Comes Dulas, of whose name so many rivers be.
As in England the names of Avon, Ouse, Stoure, and some other; so in Wales,
before all, is Dulas, a name very often of rivers in Radnor, Brecknock,
Caermardbin, and elsewhere.

Which some have held to be begotten of the wind.
In those Western parts of Spain, Gallicia, Portugal and Asturia many
Classique testimonies, both Poets, as Virgil, Silius Italicus, Naturalists,
Historians and Geoponiques, as Varro, Columel, Pliny, Trogus and Solinus have
remembered these Mares, which conceive through seruent lust of Nature, by the
West wind; without copulation with the male (in such sort as the Ona
subuentanea (...), windy eggs, bred without a Cock.
are bred in Hens) but so that the Folles line not over some three years. I
refer it as an Allegory Justin. hist. lib. 44.
to the expressing only of their fertile breed and swiftnes in course; which
is elegantly to this purpose, framed by him that was the Father Iliad. ^^.
of this conceit to his admiring posterity, in these speaking of Xanthus and
Balius, two of Achilles Horses: -- These did fly like the wind, which swift
Podarge foaled to their Sirc Zephyrus, feeding in a Meadow by the Ocean.
(...)
(...)
(...)
Whence withal you may note, that Homer had at least heard of these coasts of
Spain, according as upon the conjecture on the name of Lisbon, the Elysians,
and other such you have in Geographia.
Strabo. But for Lesbon, which may will have from Ulysses, and call it Vlixbon,
being commonly written Olisippo or Vlissippo in the ancients, you shall have
better etymology, if you hence derive and make it (...), (...) Ptolemeo. iota
sublaio vera restat lectio. Paull. Merul. cosmog. part. 2. lib. 2. cap. 26.
as it were, that the whole tract is a Seminary of Horses, as a most learned
man has delivered.



The se^uenth Song.
* THE ARGUMENT.
The Muse from Cambria comes again,
To view the Forest of fair Deane;
Sees Severne; when the Higre takes her,
How Feuer-like the sickness shakes her;
Makes mighty Maluerne speak his mind
In honor of the Mountain kind;
Thence wasted with a merry gale,
Sees Lemster, and the Golden Vale;
Sports with the Nymphs, themselves that ply
At th'wedding of the Lug and Wy;
Viewing the Herefordian pride
Along on Severns setting side,
That small Wigornian part suruaies:
Where for a while herself she stays.
HIgh matters call our Muse, inviting her to see
As well the lower Lands, as those were lately she
The Cambrian Mountains clome, and (looking from aloft)
Survaid coy Severns course: but now to shores more soft
She shapes her prosperous sail; and in this lofty Song,
The Herefordian floods invites with her along,
. That fraught from plentious Powse, with their superfluous waste,
Manure the batfull Mar^h, until they be embraced
In Sabrins Sovereign arms: with whose tumultuous waves
. Shut up in narrower bounds, the Higre wildly raues;
And frights the struggling flocks, the neighboring shores to fly,
A far as from the Maine it comes with hideous cry,
And on the angry front the curled foame does bring,
The billows against the banks when fiercely it does fling;
Hurles up the slimie ooze, and makes the scaly brood
Leap madding to the Land affrighted from the flood;
O returns the toyling Barge^, whose steresman does not lanch,
And thrusts the furrowing beak into her irefull panch:
As when we happily see a sickly woman fall A Simile expressing the Boar or
Higre.

Into a fit of that when we the Mother call,
When from the grieved womb she feels the pain arise,
Breaks into grievous sighs, with intermixed cries,
Bere^ued of her sense* and struggling still with those
That against her rising palne their utmost strength oppose,
Starts, tosses, tumbles, strikes, turns, touses, spurns and spraules,
Casting with furious lims her holders to the walls;
But that the horrid pangs torments the grie^ed so,
One well might muse from whence this sudden strength should grow.
Here (Queen of Forests all, that West of Severne lie)
Her broad and bushie top Deane holds up so hie,
The lesser are not seen* she is so tall and large.
And standing in such state upon the winding marge,
. Within her hollow woods the Satyrs that did won
In gloomie secret shades, not pierct with Summers sun,
Under a false pretense the Nymphs to entertain,
Often ravished the choice of Sabrius watery train;
And from their Mistress banks them taking as a prey,
Unto their wooddie Caves have carried them away:
Then from her inner Groves for succor when they cried,
She retchlesse of their wrongs (her Satyrs scapes to hide)
Unto their just complaint no^ once her ^are enclines:
So fruitful in her Woods, and wealthy in her Mines,
That Leden which her way does through the Desert make,
Though near to Deane allied, determined to forsake
Her course, and her clear lim^ amongst the bushes hide,
Least by the Syluans (should she chance to be espide)
She might vnmaidued go unto her Sovereign Flood:
So many were the rapes done on the watery brood,
That Sabrine to her Sire (great Neptune) forced to sue,
The ryots to repress of this outrageous crew,
His armed Orks he sent her milder stream to keep,
To drive them back to Deane that troubled all the Deep.
. Whilst Malverne (king of Hills) fair Severne ouer-lookes
(Attended on in state with tributatie Brooks)
And how the fertile fields of Hereford do lie.
And from his many heads, with many an amorous eye
Beholds his goodly site, how toward the pleasant rise,
Abounding in excess, the Vale of Eusham lies,
The Mountains every way about him that do stand,
Of whom he is daily seen, and seeing does command;
On tiptoes set aloft, this proudl^e utters he:
Olympus, fayr'st of Hills, that Heaven art said to be,
I not envy thy state, nor less my self do make;
Nor to possess thy name, mine own would I forsake:
Nor would I, as thou do, ambitiouslie aspire
To thrust my forked top into th'ethere all fire.
For, did thou ^iste^s the sweets that on my face do breathe,
Above thou would nor seek what I enjoy beneath:
Besides, the sundry soyles I euerywhere survay,
Make me, if better nor, thy equal every way.
And more* in our defense, to answer those, with spite
That term us barren rude, and void of all delight;
We Mountains, to the Land, like Worts or Wens to be,
By which, fairest living things disfigured often they see;
This strongly to perform, a well (...) brain would need.
And many Hills there be, if they this Choose would heed,
Having their rising tops familiar with the sky
(From whence all wit proceeds) that ^it^er were then I
The task to vnder-rulde. As not a man that sees
Mounchde^ny, Blorench hill, with Breadon, and the Clees,
And many more as great; and nearer me then they,
But thinks, in our defense they far much more could say.
Yet, falling to my lor, This stoutlie^ maintain
Against Forests, Valleys, Fields, Groves, Rivers, Pasture, Plain,
And all their flatter kind (so much that do rely
Upon their feedings, flocks, and the infertilitie)
The Mountain is the King: and he ^t is alone
Above the other soyles that Nature does in throne
For Mountain ^e like Men of brave heroique mind,
With eyes erect to heaven; of whence them selves they find;
Whereas the low lie Vale, as earthly, like it self,
Does never further look then how to purchase pelf.
And of their batfull sites, the Vales that boast them thus,
Nere had been what they are, had it not been for us*
For, from the rising banks that strongly mound them in,
The Valley (as betwixt) her name did first begin:
And almost not a Brook, if she her banks do fill,
But has her plentious Spring from Mountain or from Hill.
If Mead, or lower Sl^de, grieve at the room we take,
Know that the snow or rain, descending often, does make
The fruitful Valley fat, with what from us does glide,
Who with our Wintors waste maintain their Summers pride.
And to you lower Lands if terrible we seem,
And covered often with clouds; it is your foggy steame
The powerful S^nne exhales, that in the cooler day
Unto this Region comne, about our tops does stay.
And, what is the Grove, so much that thinks her to be graced,
If not above the rest upon the Mountain placed,
Where she her curled head unto the eye may show?
For, in the easy Vale if she be set below,
What is she but obscure? and her more dampie shade
And covert, but a Den for beasts of r^vin made
Besides, we are the Marks, which looking from an hie,
The trauailer beholds* and with a cheerful eye
Does thereby shape his course, and freshlie does pursue
The way which long before lay tedious in his view.
What Forest, Flood, or Field, that standoth not in awe,
Of Sina, or shall see the sight that Mountain (...)
To none but to a Hill such grace was ever gi^en:
As on his back it is said, great Atlas bears up heaven.
Endymion found out the course of the Moon.
So Latmus by the wise ^ndymion is renowned,
That Hill, on whose high toplie was the first that found
Pale Phoebes wandering course; so skillful in her Sphere,
As some stick not to say that he enjoyed her there.
And those chaste maids, begot on Memoriebly Jove,
Not Tempe only love delighting in their Grove*
Nor Helicon their Brook, in whose delicious brim^,
They often are used to bathe their cloene and cry stall lims;
But high Parnassus have, their Mountain, whereon they
Upon their golden Lutes continually do play
Of these I more could tell, to prove the place our own,
Then by his spacious Mape are by Ortillius shown.
For Mountains this suffice. Which scarcely had he told,
Along the fertile fields, when Melver^e might behold
The Herefordian Floods* far distant though they be:
For great men, as we find, a great way off can see.
First, From with forhead clear, by Br^myard that does glide;
And taking Laden in, their mixed streams do^ guide,
To meet their Sovereign Lug, from the Rad^^ria^ Plain
At Prestayn coming in; where he does entertain
The Wadell, as along he under Derfold goes:
Her full and lusty side to whom the Forest shows,
As to allure fair Lug, abo^d with her to make.
Lug little Oney first, then Arr^ in does take,
At Lemster, for her Wool whose Staple does excel,
And seems to ouer-match the golden Phrygian Fell.
Had this our Colchos been unto the Ancients known*
When Hono^ was her self, and in her glory shown,
He then that did command the Infantry of Greece,
Had only to our I Will adventured for this Floeoe.
The excellency of Lemster wool.
Where lives the man so dull, on Britains furthest shore,
To whom did never found the name of Lemster Ore?
That with the Silke-wormes web for smalness does compare:
Wherein, the Winder shows his workmanship so rare
As does the Fleece ex^ell, and mocks her looser clew*
As neatlie bottomed up as Nature forth it drew;
Of each in highest account, and reckoned here as fine,
. As there the Appulian fleece, or dainty Tarentyne.
From thence his lovely self for Wye he does dispose,
To view the goodly flocks on each hand as he goes;
And makes his journey short, with strange and sundry tales,
Of all their wondrous things; and, not the least, of Wales;
Of that prodigious Spring (him neighboring as he past)
That little Fishes bones continually does cast.
Whose reason whilst he seeks industriously to know,
A great way he has gone, and Hereford does show
Her rising Spires aloft; when as the Princely Wye,
Him from his Muse to wake, arrests him by and by.
Whose meeting to behold, with how well ordered grace
Each other entertaines, how kindly they embrace;
For joy, so great a shout the bordering City sent,
That with the sound thereof, which thorough Haywood went,
The Wood-Nymphs did awake that in the Forest won;
To know the sudden cause, and presently they ron
With locks vncomb'd* for haste the lovely Wye to see
(The flood that graced her most) this day should married be
To that more lovely Lug; a River of much fame,
That in her wandering banks should lose his glorious name.
For Hereford, although her Wye she hold so dear,
Yet Lug (whose longer course does grace ^he goodly Sheere,
And with his plentious Stream so many Brooks does bring)
Of all hers that be North is absolutely King.
But Marcely, grieved that he (the nearest of the rest,
And of the Mountain kind) not bidden was a guest
Unto this nuptial Feast, so hardly it does take,
As (meaning for the same his station to forsake)
. Enraged and mad with grief, himself in two did riue;
The Trees and Hedges near, before him up does drive,
And dropping headlong down, three days together fall:
Which, bellowing as he went, the Rocks did so appall,
That they him passage made, who Coats and Chapels crushed:
So violently he into his Valley rusht.
But Wye (from her dear Lug whom nothing can restrain,
In many a pleasant shade, her joy to entertain)
To Rosse her course directs; and right he^ Wye or Gwy, so called (in the
British) of her sinuosity, or turning.
name to show,
Often windeth in her way, as back she meant to go.
Meander, who is said so intricate to be,
Has not so many turns* nor crankling nookes as she.
The Herefordian fields when welneare having past,
As she is going forth, two sister Brooks at last
That Soil her kindly sends, to guide her on her way;
Neat Gamar, that gets in swift Garran: which do lay
Their waters in one Bank, augmenting of her train,
To grace the goodly Wye, as she does pass by Deane.
Beyond whose equal Spring unto the West does lie
The goodly Golden Vale, whose lushious sents do fly
More free then Hyblas sweets; and twixt her bordering hills,
The air with such delights and delicacie fills,
As makes it loath to stir, or thence those smells to bear.
The Hesperides scarce had such pleasures as be there:
Which sometime to attain, that mighty son of Jove
One of his Labors made, and with the Dragon strove,
That never closed his ^ies, the golden fruit to guard;
As if to enrich this place, from others, Nature spared:
Banks crowned with curled Groves, from cold to keep the Plain,
Fields batfull, flowrie Meades, in state them to maintain;
Floods, to make fat those Meades, from Marble veins that spout,
To show, the wealth within does answer that without.
So brave a Nymph she is, in every thing so rare,
As to sit down by her, she thinks there is none should dare.
And forth she sends the Doire, upon the Wye to wait.
Whom Munne by the way more kindly does entreat
(For Eskle, her most loved, and Olcons only sake)
With her to go along, till Wye she overtake.
To whom she condiscends, from danger her to shield,
That the Monumethian parts from the Herefordian field.
Which manly Maluern sees from furthest of the Sheere,
On the Wigornian waste when Northward looking near,
On Corswood casts his eye, and on his Maluern Chase.
home-born Chase,
Then constantly beholds, with an unusual pase
Team with her tribute come unto the Seuerne.
Cambrian Queen,
Near whom in all this place a Riuer's scarcely seen,
That dare avouch her name; Teame scorning any Spring
But what with her along from Shrepshire she does bring,
Except one namelesse Stream that Maluern sends her in,
And Laughern though but small: when they such grace that win,
There thrust in with the Brooks enclosed in her Bank.
Teame lastly thither com'n with water is so rank,
As though she would contend with Sabryne, and does crave
Of place (by her desert) precedencie to have:
Till chancing to behold the others godlike grace,
So strongly is surprised with beauties in her face
By no means she could hold, but needsly she must show
Her liking* and her self does into Sabrine throw.
Not far from him again when Maluern does perceive
Two hills, which though their heads so high they do not heave,
Yet duly do observe great Maluern, and afford
Him reverence: who again, as fits a gracious Lord,
Upon his Subjects looks, and equal praise does give
That Woodberry so nigh and neighborly does live
With Abberley his friend, deserving well such fame
That Saxton in his Maps forgot them not to name:
Which, though in their mean types small matter does appear,
Yet both of good account are reckned in the Shiere,
And highly graced of Teame in his proud passing by.
When soon the goodly Wyre, that wonted was so hie
Her stately top to rear, ashamed to behold
Her straight and goodly Woods unto the Furnace sold
(And looking on her self, by her decay does see
The misery wherein her sister Forests be) A Fable in Ouids Metamor.

Of Erisicthons end begins her to be think,
And of his cruel plagues does wish they all might drink
That thus have them dispoil'd: then of her own despite;
That she, in whom her Town fair Beudley took delight,
And from her goodly seat conceived so great a pride,
In Severne on her East, Wyre on the setting side,
So naked left of woods, of pleasure, and forlorn,
As she that loved her most, her now the most does scorn;
With endless grief perplexed, her stubborn breast she struck,
And to the deafened air thus passionately spoke;
You Driades, that are said with Oaks to live and die,
Wherefore in our distress do you our dwellings fly;
Upon this monstrous Age and not revenge our wrong?
For cutting down an Oak that justly did belong
To one of Ceres Nymphs, in Thessaly that grew
In the Dodonean Grove (O Nymphs!) you could pursue
The son of Perops then, and did the Goddess stir
That villainy to wreake the Tyrant did to her:
Who, with a dreadful frown did blast the growing Grain:
And having from him rest what should his life maintain,
She unto Scythia sent, for Hunger, him to gnawe,
And thrust her down his throat, into his stanchlesse mawe:
Who, when nor Sea nor Land for him sufficient were,
With his devouring teeth his wretched flesh did tear.
This did you for one Tree: but of whole Forests they
That in these impious times have been the vile decay
(Whom I may justly call their Countries deadly foes)
Against them you move no Power, their spoil unpunished goes.
How many grieved souls in future time shall starve,
For that which they have rapt their beastly lust to serve!
We, sometime that the state of famous Britain were,
For whom she was renowned in Kingdoms far and near,
Are ransackt; and our Trees so hackt above the ground,
That where their lostie tops their neighboring Countries crowned,
Their Trunkes (like aged folks) now bare and naked stand,
As for revenge to heaven each held a withered hand:
And where the goodly Herds of high-palm'd Hearts did gaze
Upon the passer by, there now does only graze
The gall'd-backe carrion Jade, and hurtful Swine do spoil
Once to the Syluan Powers our consecrated soil.
This uttered she with grief: and more she would have spoke:
When the Salopian floods her of her purpose broke,
And silence did enjoin; a listening ear to lend
To Seuerne, which was thought did mighty things intend.
Illustrations.
THe Muse yet houers over Wales, and here sings the inner territories, with
part of the Seuerne story, and her English neighbors.

That fraught from plentious Powse with their superfluous wast
Manure the batfull March --
Tripartite division of Wales.
Wales (as is before touched) divided into three parts, North Wales,
South Wales and Powise; this last is here meant, comprising part of Brecknock,
Radnor, and Montgomery. The division has its beginning attributed to the three
sons of Girald. Camb. descript. cap. 2. DCCC.LXX.VI.
Roderique the Great, Meruin, Cadel^, and Anarawt, who possessed them for their
portions hereditary, as they are named. But out of an old book of Welsh laws,
David Powel affirms those tripartite titles more ancient. I know that the
division and gift is different in Caradoe Lancharuan from that of Girald; but
no great consequence of admitting either here. Those three Princes were called
in British The three crowned Princes.
Y tritwysoc Lalaethioc, because D. Pouel. ad Caradoc. Lhancaruan. Crowns,
Diadems. Band.
every of them ware upon his Bonet or Helmet, a Coronet of gold, being a
broadlace or headband, indented upward, set and wrought with precious stones,
which in British or Welsh is called Lalaeth, which name Nurses give to the
upper hand on a childs head. Of this form (I mean of a band or wreath) were
the ancientest of crowns, as appears in the description of the Cidaris, and
Tiara of the Persiant in Ctesias, Q. Curtius, and Xenophon, the crowns of
Oak, Grass, Parsley, Olives, Myrtle, and such among the Greeks and Romans,
and in that express name of Diadema, signifying a Band, of which, whether it
have in our tongue community with that Banda, derived out of the Stephan. (...)
v. Gorop. Becceselan. 2. and Pet. Pith^l aduersar. 2. c. ^0. de Banda, cui and
Andatem apud Dionem conferas, and videsis si in altero ^lterius reliquia.
Car^an into Italian, expressing victory, and so, for ominous good words, is
translated to Ensigns and Standards (as in oriental Stories the words (...)
and (...) often show) I must not here inquire. Molmutius first Galfred.
Monumeth. lib. 1. and 9.
used a golden Crown among the British, and, as it seems by the same
authority, Athelstan among the Saxons. But I digress* By the March understand
those limits between England and Wales* which continuing from North to South,
join the Welsh Shires to Hereford, Shropshire and the English part, and were
diverse Baronies, divided from any Shire until 27. Hen. 8. cap. 26. v. 28. Ed.
3. cap. 2.
Hen. VIII. by act of Parliament annexed some to Wales, other to England. The
Barons that lived in them were called Lord Marchers, and by the name of Lib.
Rub. Seat^a^.
Marchiones.i. Marquesses. For so Roger of Matthew. West^^^^^ lib. 2.
Mortimer, James of Andeleg, Roger of Clifford, Roger of Leiburn, Ha^mo
L'estrange, Hugh of Turberuil, (which by sword adventured the ransom of Henry
III. out of Simon of Montfort his treacherous imprisonment, after the battle
of Jews) are called Marquesses, or Lord Marchers of Wales.
Marchiones Walliae* and Edward III. created Roger of Mortimer Earl of March,
as if you should say, of the (...) England, (...), of Merc, signifying a bound
or limit was to the III. Song more largely. For the limits see to the next Song.
And hence is supposed the original of that honorary title of Marquess, which
is as much as a Lord of the Frontiers, or such like; although I know diverse
other are the deriuations which the Ad Constable. Feud. z. it is. qui^ dicatur Dux
and Iurisconsulti saepins.
Feudists have imagined. These Marchers had their laws in their Baronies, and
for matter of sult, if it had been twixt Tenants holding of them, then was it
commenced in their own Courts and determined; if for the Barony it self, then
in the Kings Court at Westminster, by Writ directed to the Shrife of the next
English Shire adjoining, as Gloucester, Hereford, and some other. For the Kings
But see to the IX. Song more particularly.
Writ did not run in Wales as in England, until by Statute the Principality
was incorporated with the Crown; as appears in an old (...) 13. Hen. li^.
Guard. 147.
report where one was committed for esloigning a Ward into Wales, extra
potestarem Regis under Hen. III. Afterward Stat. Ruthland. 12. Ed. 1.
Ed. I. made some Shires in it, and altered the customs, conforming them in some
sort to the English, as in the Statute of Ruthlan you have it largely; and
under Ed. II. to a 14. Ed. 2. d^rs. claus. mem. 13.
Parliament at York were summoned XXIIII. out of North Wales, and as many out
of South Wales. But notwithstanding all this, the Marches continued as
distinct* and in them were, for the most part, those controuerted titles, which
in our Law-annals are referred to Wales. For the divided Shires were, as it
seems, or should have been subject to the English form* but the particulars
here of are unfit for this room: if you are at all conversant in our law, I
send you to my V. 18. Ed. 2. tit. Alsise 382. 13. Ed. 3. Iurisdict. 23.6 Hen.
5. ib. 34. 1. Ed. 3. s. 14. and saepiusm annalibus Iuris nostri.
margin; if not, it searce concerns you.

-- the Higre wildly raues.
This violence, of the waters madness, declared by the Author, is so expressed in
an old Guil. Malmesbur. lib. 4 degest. Pontificum.
Monk, which about CCCC. years since, says it was called the Higre in
English. To make more description of it, were but to resolve the authors Poem.

Within her hollow woods the Satyrs that did won.
By the Satyrs rauishing the Sea-Nymphs into this maritime Forest of Deane
(lying between Wye and Seuerne in Gloucester) with Seuernes suit to Neptune,
and his provision of remedy, you have, poetically described, the rapines which
were committed along that shore, by such as lurked in these shadie receptacles,
which he properly titles Satyr's, that name coming from an Eastern (...).
root* signifying to hide, or lie bid, as that (...) lib. de Satyra. Merito
indigetatur hoc Epitheto long doctissimus a doctissimo Dan. Heinsio in annot
ad Horatium.
All-knowing Isaac Casaubon has at large (among other his unmeasurable
benefits to the state of learning) taught us. The English were also ill
entreated by the Welsh in their passages here, until by act of Parliament
remedi^ was given; as you may see in the Stat. 9. Hen. 6. cap. 5.
statutes preamble, which satisfies the fiction.

Whilst Maluerne K. of Hills fair^ Seuerne ouer-looks.
Hereford and Worcester are by these hills seven miles in length confined; and
rather, in respect of the adjacent vales, then the hills self, understand the
attribute of excellency. Upon these is the supposed vision of Piers Plowma,
don, as is thought, by Robert About time of Edward III.
Langland, a Shropshire man, in a kind of English meeter: which for discovery of
the infecting corruptions of those times, I prefer before many more seemingly
serious inuectiues, as well for invention as judgment.

As there the Apulian fleece, or dainty Tarentine.
In Apuglia and the upper Calabria of Italy, the Wool has been ever famous
for Varr^de re rustic. 2. cap. 2. Columell. lib. 7. cap. 4.
finest excellence: in so much that for preserving it from the injury of earth,
bushes, and weather, the Sheepheards used to clothe their Sheep with skins;
and indeed was so chargeable in these and other kind of pains about it, that
it scarce required cost.

-- him self in two did riue.
Alluding to a prodigious division of Marcly hill, in an earthquake of late
M.D.IXX.V.
time; which most of all was in these parts of the Island.



The eight Song.
* THE ARGUMENT.
The goodly Severne bravely sings
The noblest of her British Kings;
At Caesar's landing what we were,
And of the Roman Conquests here:
Then shows, to her dear Britans fame,
How quickly christened they became;
And of their constancy does boast,
In sundry fortunes strangely tossed:
Then does the Saxons landing tell,
And how by them the Britans fell;
Cheeres the Salopian Mountains hie,
That on the west of Severne lie;
Calls down each Riueret from her Spring,
Their Queen upon her way to bring;
Whom down to Bruge the Muse attends:
Where, leaving her, this Song she ends.
TO Salop when her self clear Sabrine comes to show,
And wisely her bethinks the way she had to go,
South-west-ward casts her course; and with an amorous eye
Those Countries whence she came, survayeth (passing by)
Those Lands in Ancient times old Cambria claym'd her due,
For refuge when to her the oppressed Britans flew;
By England now vsurp't, who (past the wonted Meeres,
Her sure and sovereign banks) had taken sundry Sheeres,
Which she her Marches made: whereby those Hills of fame
And Rivers stood disgraced; accounting it their shame,
. That all without that Mound which Mercian Offa cast
To run from North to South, athwart the Cambrian wast,
Could England not suffice, but that the straggling Wye,
Which in the heart of Wales was some-time said to lie,
Now only for her bound proud England did prefer.
That Severne, when she sees the wrong thus offered her,
Though by injurious Time deprived of that place
Which anciently she held: yet loath that her disgrace
Should on the Britans light, the Hills and Rivers near
Austerely to her calls, commanding them to hear
In her dear childrens right (their Ancesters of yore,
Now thrust betwixt her self, and the Virgi^ian shore,
. Who drove the Giants hence that of the Earth were bred,
And of the spacious I Will became the sovereign head)
What from autentique books she liberally could say.
Of which whilst she bethought her; Westward every way,
The Mountains, Floods, and Meeres, to silence them betake:
When Severne lowting low, thus gravely them bespake;
How mighty was that man, and honored still to be,
That gave this I Will his name, and to his children three,
Three Kingdoms in the same? which, time does now deny,
With his arrival here, and primer Monarchy.
England.
Loegria, though thou can thy Locrine easily lose,
Yet Wales.
Cambria, him, whom Fate her ancient Founder chose,
In no wise will forgo; nay, should Scotland.
Albania leave
. Her Albanact for aid, and to the Scythian cleave.
And though remorselesse Rome, which first did us enthrall,
As barbarous but esteemed, and stickt not so to call;
The ancient Britans yet a sceptred King obeyed
. Three hundred years before Romes great foundation laid;
And had a thousand years an Empire strongly stood,
Ere Caesar to her shores here stemd the circling Flood;
. And long before, borne Arms against the barbarous Hun,
Here landing with intent the I Will to ouer-run:
And following them in flight, their General Humber drowned
In that great arm of Sea, by his great name renowned;
And her great Builders had, her Cities who did rear
With Fanes unto her Gods, and Priests among idolatrous Gentiles.
Flamins every where,
Nor Troynouant alone a City long did stand;
But after, soon again by Ebranks powerful hand
York lifts her Towers aloft: which scarcely finished was,
But as they, by those Kings; so by Rudhudibras,
Kents first and famous Canterbury.
Town, with Winchester, arose:
And other, others built, as they fit places chose.
So Britain to her praise, of all conditions brings;
The warlike, as the wise. Of her courageous Kings,
Brute Green-shield: to whose name we providence impute,
Divinely to reviue the Land's first Conqueror, Brute.
So had she those were learned, endu'd with nobler parts:
As, he from learned Greece, that (by the liberal Arts)
. To Stamford, in this I Will, seemed Athens to transfer;
Wise Bladud, of her Kings that great Philosopher;
Who found our boiling Bathes* and in his knowledge hie,
Disdaining humane paths, here practiced to fly.
Of justly vexed Leire, and those who last did tug
In worie then Civil war, the Ferrex and Porrex.
sons of Gorbodug
(By whose unnatural strife the Land so long was tossed)
I cannot stay to tell, not shall my Britain boast;
But, of that man which did her Monarchy restore,
Her first imperial Crown of gold that ever wore,
And that most glorious type of sovereignty regained;
Mulmutius: who this Land in such estate maintained
As his great Bel-sire Brute from Albions heirs it won.
. This Grandchild, great as he, those four proud Streets begun
That each way cross this I Will, and bounds did them allow.
Like privilege he lent the Temple and the Plow:
So studious was this Prince in his most forward zeal
To the Celestial power, and to the Public weal.
Bellinus he begot, who Dacia proud subdued;
And Brennus, Belinus and Brennus.
who abroad a worthier war pursued,
Ashamed of civil strife, at home here leaving all:
And with such goodly Youth, in Germany and Gaul
As he had gathered up, the Alpin Mountains past,
And bravely on the banks of fatal Allia chas't
The Romans (that her stream distained with their gore)
And through proud Rome, displayed his British Ensign bore:
. There, ballancing his sword against her base^ gold,
The Senators for slaves he in her Forum sold.
At last, by power expelled, yet proud of late success,
His forces then for Greece did instantly address;
And marching with his men upon her fruitful face,
Made Macedon first stoop; then Thessay, and Thrace;
His soldiers there enricht with all P^^onia's spoil;
And where to Greece he gave the last and deadliest foil,
In that most dreadful fight, on that more dismal day,
O'rthrew their utmost prowess at sad Thermopyl^,
And daring of her Gods, adventured to have taken
Those sacred things enshrined in wise Apollo's Fane:
To whom when thundering Heaven pronounced her fearefulst word,
. Against the Delphian Power he shook his irefull sword.
As of the British blood, the native Cambri here
(So of my Cambria called) those valiant Cymbri were
(When Britain with her brood so peopled had her seat,
The soil could not suffice, it daily grew so great)
Of Denmark who themselves did anciently possess,
And to that straightened point, that utmost Chersonesse,
. My Countries name bequeathed; whence Cymbri^^ it took:
Yet long were not comprised within that little nook^,
But with those Almaine powers this people issued forth:
And like some boystrous wind arising from the North,
Came that vnwieldie host; that, which way it did move,
The very burthenous earth before it seemed to shoue,
And only meant to claim the Universe its own.
In this terrestrial Globe, as though some world unknown,
By pampred Natures store too prodigally fed
(And surfeiting therewith) her surcrease vomited,
These roaming up and down to seek some settling room,
First like a Deluge fell upon Illyricum,
And with his Roman powers Papyrius ouer-threw;
Then, by great A great several of those Northren Nations.
Belus brought against those Legions, flew
Their forces which in France Aurelius Sca^rus led;
And afterward again, as bravely vanquished
The Consulls Capio, and stout Manlius on the Plain,
Where Rhodanus was red with blood of Latins slain.
In greatness next succeeds Belinus worthy son,
Gurgustus: who soon left what his great Father won,
To Guyuteline his heir: whose Martia.
Queen, beyond her kind,
In her great husbands peace, to show her upright mind,
. To wise Mulmutius laws, her Martian first did frame:
From which we ours derive, to her eternal fame.
So Britain forth with these, that valiant Bastard brought,
Morindus, Danius son, which with that Monster fought
His subjects that devoured; to show himself again
Their Martyr, who by them selected was to reign.
So Britain likewise boasts her Elidure the just,
Who with his people was of such especial trust,
That ( Archigallo fallen into their general hate,
And by their powerful hand deprived of kingly state)
Unto the Regal Chair they Elidure advanced:
But long he had not reigned, ere happily it chanced,
In hunting of a Heart, that in the Forest wild,
The late deposed King, himself who had exiled
From all resort of men, just Elidure did meet;
Who much unlike himself, at Elidurus feet,
Him prostrating with tears, his tender breast so struck,
That he (the British rule who lately on him took
At th'earnest peoples prayers) him calling to the Court,
There Archigallo's wrongs so lively did report,
Relating (in his right) his lamentable case,
With so effectual speech imploring their high grace,
That him they reinthron'd; in peace who spent his days.
Then Elidure again, crowned with applausiue praise,
As he a brother raised, by brothers was deposed,
And put into the Tower* where miserably enclosed,
Out-liuing yet their hate, and the Usurpers dead,
Thrice had the British Crown set on his reverend head.
When more then thirty Kings in fair succession came
Unto that mighty Lud, in whose eternal name
. Great London still shall live (by him rebuilded) while
To Cities she remains the Sovereign of this I Will.
And when commanding Rome to Caesar gave the charge,
Her Empire (but too great) still further to enlarge
With all beyond the Alps; the aids he found to pass
From these parts into Gaul, showed here some Nation was
Undaunted that remained with Romes so dreadful name,
That durst presume to aid those she decreed to tame.
Wherefore that matchless man, whose high ambition wrought
Beyond her Empires bounds, by shipping wisely sought
(Here proling on the shores) this Island to discry,
What people her possessed, how fashioned she did lie:
Where scarce a Strangers foot defiled her virgin breast,
Since her first Conqueror Brute here put his powers to rest;
Only some little Boats, from Gaul that did her feed
With tryfles, which she took for niceness more then need:
But as another world, with all abundance blessed,
And satisfied with what she in her self possessed;
Through her excessive wealth (at length) till wanton grown,
Some Kings (with others Lands that would enlarge their own)
By innovating Arms an open passage made
For him that gap't for all (the Roman) to invade.
Yet with grim-visag'd War when he her shores did greet,
And terriblest did threat with his amazing Fleet,
Those British bloods he found, his force that durst assail,
And poured from the Cleeues their shafts like showers of hail
Upon his helmed head; to tell him as he came,
That they (from all the world) yet feared not his name:
Which, their undaunted spirits soon made that Conqueror feel,
Often ventring their bare breasts against his oft-bloodied steel;
And in their Chariots charged; which they with wondrous skill
Could turn in their swift'st course upon the steepest hill,
And wheel about his troops for vantage of the ground,
Or else disranke his force where entrance might be found:
And from their Armed seats their thrilling Darts could throw;
Or nimbly leaping down* their valiant swords bestow,
And with an active skip ^emount themselves again,
Leaving the Roman horse behind them on the Plain,
And beat him back to Gaul his forces to supply;
As they the Gods of Rome and Caesar did defy
Cassibalan renowned, the Britans faithful guide,
Who when the Italia^ powers could no way be denied,
But would this I Will subdue; their forces to fore-lay,
Thy Forests thou did fell, their speedy course to stay:
. Those armed stakes in Tames that stuckst, their horse to gore
Which boldly durst attempt to forage on thy shore:
Thou such hard entrance here to Caesar did allow,
To whom (thy self except) the Western world did bow.
. And more then Caesar got, three Emperors could not win,
Till the courageous sons of our Cun^belin
Sunk under Plautius sword, sent hither to discuss
The former Roman right, by Arms again, with us.
Nor with that Consul joined, Vespasian could prevail
In thirty several fights, nor make them stoop their sail.
Yea, had not his brave son, young Titus, past their hopes,
His forward Father fetched out of the British ^roopes,
And quit him wondrous well when he was strongly charged,
His Father (by his hands so valiantly enlarged)
Had never more seen Rome; nor had he ever spilt
The Temple that wise son of faithful David built,
Subverted those high walls, and laid that City wast
Which God, in humane flesh, above all other graced.
No marvel then though Rome so great her conquest thought,
In that the I Will of Wight she to subjection brought,
Our A people the^ inhabiting Hamp. Dorset. Wilt. and Somerset shires.
Belgae and subdued (a people of the West)
That latest came to us, our least of all the rest;
When Claudius, who that time her wreath imperial wore,
Though scarce he showed himself upon our Southern shore,
It scornd not in his style; but, due to that his prais^
Triumphall Arches claimed, and to have yearly Plays,
The noblest Nauall Crown, upon his Palace pitched;
As with the Oceans spoil his Rome who had enricht.
Her Caradock (with cause) so Britain may prefer;
Then whom, a brauer spirit was nere brought forth by her:
For whilst here in the West the Britans gathered head,
This General of the rest, his stout Those of Monmouth, and the adjacent
Shires.
Silures led
Against Ostorius, sent by Oasar to this place
With Romes high fortune (then the highest in Fortunes grace)
A long and doubtful war with whom he did maintain,
Until that hour wherein his valiant Britans slain
He grievously beheld (o'represt with Roman power)
Himself wel-neere the last their wrath did not devour.
When (for revenge, no^ fe^re) he fled (as trusting most,
Another day might win, what this had lately (...)
To Cartismandua, Queen of Those of Yorksshire, and there by.
Brigants, for her aid,
He to his foes, by her, most falsely was betrayed.
Who, as a spoil of war, t'adorne the Triumph seen
To great Ostorius due, when through proud Rome he went,
That had herself prepared (as she had all been eyes)
Our Caradock to view; who in his Countries guise,
. Came with his body nak't, his hair down to his waste,
Girt with a chain of steel; his manly breast inchaste
With sundry shapes of Beasts. And when this Britain saw
His wife and children bound as slaves, it could not awe
His manliness at all: but with a settled grace,
Undaunted with her pride, he looked her in the face:
And with a speech so grave as well a Prince became,
Himself and his redeemed, to our eternal fame.
Then Romes great Nero.
Tyrant next, the lasts adopted heir,
That brave Suetonius sent, the British Coasts to clear;
The utter spoil of Anglesey, the chief place of residence of the Druides.
Mon who strongly did pursue
(Unto whose gloomy strengths, th'reuolted Britans flew)
There entering, he beheld what struck him pale with dread:
The frantic British Froes, their hair disheuelled,
With firebrarnds ran about, like to their furious eyes;
And from the hollow vvoods the fearlesse Druides;
Who with their direful threats, and execrable vows,
Enforced the troubled heaven to knit her angry brows.
And as here in the West the Romans bravely wan,
So all upon the East the Britans ouer-ran:
. The Colony long kept at Mauldon, overthrown,
Which by prodigious signs was many times fore-showne,
And often had dismayed the Roman soldiers: when
Brave Voadicia made with her resolued'st men
To By Saint Albans.
Virolam; whose siege with fire and sword she pli'd,
Till leueld with the earth. To London as she hy'd,
The Consul coming in with his auspicious aid,
The Queen (to quit her yoke no longer that delayed)
Him dared by dint of sword, it hers or his to try,
With words that courage showed, and with a voice as hie
(In her right hand her Lance, and in her left her Shield,
As both the Battles stood prepared in the Field)
Encouraging her men: which resolute, as strong,
Upon the Roman rusht; and she, the rest among,
Wades in that doubtful war: till lastly, when she saw
The fortune of the day unto the Roman draw,
The Queen (t'out-liue her friends who highly did disdain,
And lastly, for proud Rome a Triumph to remain)
. By poison ends her days, unto that end prepared,
As lauishly to spend what Suetonius spared.
Him scarcely Rome recalled, such glory having won,
But bravely to proceed, as erst she had begun,
Agricola here made her great Lieutenant then:
Who having settled Men, that man of all her men,
Appointed by the Powers apparently to see
The wearied Britans sink, and easily in degree
Beneath his fatal sword the North Wales men.
Ordovies to fall
Inhabiting the West, those people last of all
Which stoutl'est him with-stood, renowned for Martial worth.
Thence leading on his powers unto the utmost North,
When all the Towns that lay betwixt our Trent and Tweed,
Sufficed not (by the way) his wasteful fires to feed,
He there some Britans found, who (to rebate their spleen,
As yet with grieved eyes our spoils not having seen)
Him at In the midst of Scotland.
Mount Grampus met: which from his height beheld
Them lavish of their lives; who could not be compeld
The Roman yoke to bear: and Galgacus their guide
Amongst his murdered troops there resolutely di'd.
Eight Roman Emperors reigned since first that war began;
Great Julius Caesar first, the last Domitian.
A hundred thirty years the Northern Britans still,
That would in no wise stoop to Romes imperious will,
Into the straightened Land with theirs retired far,
In laws and manners since from us that different are;
And with the Irish Pict, which to their aid they drew
(On them often breaking in, who long did them pursue)
. A greater foe to us in our own bowels bred,
Then Rome, with much expense that us had conquered.
And when that we great Romes so much in time were grown,
That she her charge durst leave to Princes of our own,
(Such as, within our selves, our suffrage should elect)
. Aviragus, borne ours, here first she did protect;
Who faithfully and long, of labor did her ease.
Then he, our Flamins seats who turned to Bishops seas;
Great Lucius, that good King: to whom we chiefly owe
. This happiness we have, Christ crucified to know.
As Britain to her praise received the Christian faith,
After (that Word-made Man) our dear Redeemers death
Within two hundred years; and his Disciples here,
By their great Master sent to preach him every where,
Most reverently received, their doctrine and preferred;
Interring him, Iosaeph of Arimathea.
who erst the Son of God interd.
So Britans was she borne, though Italy her crowned,
Of all the Christian world that Empress most renowned,
. Constantius worthy wife* who scorning worldly loss,
Her self in person went to seek that sacred Cross,
VVhereon our Savior di'd: which found, as it was sought,
From Jerusalem.
Salem unto Rome triumphantly she brought.
As when the Primer Church her Counsels pleased to call,
Great Britains Bishops there were not the least of all;
. Against the Arian Sect at Aries having room,
At Sardica again, and at Ariminum,
Now, when with various Fate five hundred years had past,
And Rome of her great charge grew weary here at last;
The Vandalls, Goth^, and Huns, that with a powerful head
All Italy and France had wel-neare ou^r-spred,
To much-endanger'd Rome sufficient warning gave,
Those forces that she held, within herself to have.
The Roman rule from us then utterly removed.
Whilst, we, in sundry Fields, our sundry fortunes proved
With the remorselesse Pict, still wasting us with war.
And twixt the froward Sire, licentious Vortiger,
And his too forward son, young Vortimer, arose
Much strife within our selves, whilst here they interpose
By turns each others reigns; whereby, we weakened grow.
The warlike Saxon then into the Land we drew;
A Nation nursed in spoil, and fitt'st to undergo
Our cause against the Pict, our most inveterate foe.
When they, which we had hyr'd for soldiers to the shore,
Perceived the wealthy I Will to wallow in her store,
And suttly had found out how we in feebled were;
They, under false pretense of amity and cheer,
The British Peers invite, the German Healths to view
At Stonehenge, where they them unmercifully slew.
Then, those of Brutes great blood, of Armoriek possessed,
Extremely grieved to see their kinsmen so distressed,
Us offered to relieve, or else with us to die:
We, after, to requite their noble courtesy,
. Eleven thousand mayds sent those our friends again,
In wedlock to be linkt with them of Brute's high Strain;
That none with Brutes great blood, but Britans might be mixed:
Such friendship ever was the stock of Troy betwixt.
Out of whose ancient race, that warlike Arthur sprung:
Whose most renowned Acts shall sounded be as long
As Britains name is known: which spread themselves so wide,
As scarcely has for fame left any roomth beside.
My Wales, then hold thine own, and let thy Britains stand
Upon their right, to be the noblest of the Land.
Think how much better it is, for thee, and those of thine,
From Gods, and Heroes old to draw your famous line,
. Then from the Scythian poor; whence they themselves derive
Whose multitudes did first you to the Mountains drive.
Nor let the spacious Mound of that great Mercian King
(Into a lesser roomth thy burlinesse to bring)
Include thee; The ancient bounds of Wales.
when my Self, and my dear brother Dee,
By nature were the bounds first limited to thee.
Scarce ended she her speech, but those great Mountains near,
Upon the Cambrian part that all for Brutus were,
With her high truths inflamed, looked every one about
To find their several Springs* and bad them get them out,
And in their fullness wait upon their sovereign Flood,
In Britains ancient right so bravely that had stood*
When first the furious Teame, that on the Cambrian side
Does Shropshire as a Mere from Hereford divide,
As worthiest of the rest; so worthily does crave
That of those lesser Brooks the leading she might have;
The first of which is Clun, that to her Mistress came*
Which of a Clun Forest.
Forest borne that bears her proper name,
Unto the Golden Vale and anciently allied,
Of every thing of both, sufficiently supplied,
The longer that she grows, the more renown does win:
And for her greater State, next Bradfield brings in,
Which to her wider banks resignes a weak stream.
When fiercely making forth, the strong and lusty Teame
A friendly Forest Nymph (named Mockery) does embrace,
Her self that bravely bears; twixt whom and Bringwood Chase,
Her banks with many a wreath are curiously (...),
And in their safer shades they long time her protect.
Then takes she Oney in, and forth from them does fling:
When to her further aid, ne^t Bowie, and Warren, bring
Clear Quenny; by the way, which Stradbrooke up does take:
By whose united powers, their Teame they mightier make;
Which in her lively course to Ludlowe comes at last,
Where Corue into her stream her self does headlong cast.
With due attendance next, comes Ledwich and the Rhea.
Then speeding her, as though sent post unto the Sea,
Her native Shropshire leaves, and bids those Towns adieu,
Her only sovereign Queen, proud Severne to pursue.
When at her going out, those Mountains of command
(The Clees, like loving Twins, and Stitterston that stand)
Trans-Seuerned, behold fair England toward the rise,
And on their setting side, how ancient Cambria lies.
Then Stipperston a hill, though not of such renown
As many that are set here toward the going down,
To those his own Allies, that stood not far away,
Thus in behalf of Wales directly seemed to say;
Dear Corndon, my delight, as thou art loved of me,
And Breeden, as thou hop'st a Britain thought to be,
To Cortock strongly cleave, as to our ancient friend,
And all our utmost strength to Cambria let us lend.
For though that envious Time injuriously have wroong
From us those proper names did first to us belong,
Yet for our Country still, stout Mountains let us stand.
Here, every neighboring Hill held up a willing hand,
As freely to applaud what Stipperston decreed:
And Hockstow when she heard the Mountains thus proceed,
With echoes from her Woods, her inward joys expressed,
To hear that Hill she loved, which likewise loved her best,
Should in the right of Wales, his neighboring Mountains stir,
So to advance that place which might them both prefer;
That she from open shouts could scarce her self refrain.
When soon those other Rils to Seuerne which retain,
And 't ended not on Teame, thus of themselves do show
The service that to her they absolutely owe.
First Camlet comes in, a Mountgomerian maid,
Her source in Seuerns banks that safely having laid,
Mele, her great Mistress next at Shrewsbury does meet,
To see with what a grace she that fair town does greet;
Into what sundry gyres her wondered self she throws,
And often in-Iles the shore, as want only she flows;
Of it, often taking leave, often turns, it to embrace;
As though she only were enamored of that place,
Her fore-intended course determined to leave,
And to that most loved Town eternally to cleave:
With much ado at length, yet bidding it adue,
Her journey toward the Sea does seriously pursue.
Where, as along the shores she prosperously does sweep,
Small Maybrooke maketh-in, to her enticing Deep.
And as she lends her eye to Bruge-North.
Bruge's lofty sight,
That Forest-Nymph mild Morffe does kindly her inuit
To see within her shade what pastime she could make:
Where she, of Shropshire; I my leave of Seuerne take.
Illustrations.
STill are you in the Welsh March, and the Chorographie of this song includes
itself, for the most, within Shropshires part over Seuerne.

That all without the Mound that Mercian Offa cast.
Of the Marches in general you have to the next before. The Caradoc Lhancaruan
in Conan Tind^ethwy. Girald. Itinerar. 2. cap. 11. and Descript. cap. 15.
particular bounds have been certain parts of Dee, Wye, Seuerne, and Offas
Dike. The ancientest is Seuerne, but a later is observed in a right line from
By Cheps^ow in Monmouth, Claudh-Offa See to the X. Song for Dee. A. D.CC. LXXX.
Strigoil-Castle upon Wye, to Chester upon Dee, which was so naturally a Mere
between these two Countries Wales and England, that by apparent change of its
channel toward either side superstitious judgment was used to be given of
success in the following years battles of both nations; whence perhaps came
it to be called Holy Dee, as the author also often uses. Twixt the mouth's of
Dee and Wye in this line (almost C. miles long) was that Offas Dike cast,
after such time as he had besides his before possessed Mercland, acquired by
conquest even almost what is now England. King Harold Higden. in Polychronic.
1. cap. 43.
made a law, that whatsoever Welsh transcended this Dike with any kind of
weapon should have, upon apprehension, his right hand cut off; Athelstan after
conquest of Howel Dha K. of Wales made Wye limit of North Wales, as in regard
of his chief territory of West Saxoni^ (so affirms Malmesbury) which well
understood impugnes the opinion received for VVie^ being a general Mere
instituted by him, and withal shows you how to mend the Monks published
text, where you read He compeld Ludwall K. of All Wales, and Constantins K. of
Scots to leave their Crowns. Emendatio histori^ Malmesburiensis lib. 2. cap. 6.
Ludwalum regem Omnium Wallensium, and Constantinum regem Scotorum cedere
regnis compulit. For plainly this Ludwal (by whom he means Howel Dha in other
Chronicles called Huwal) in Athelstans life time was not King of All Wales, but
only of the South and W^sterne parts with Powis, his cozen Edwall Voel then
having Northwales; twixt which and the part of Howell conquered, this limit was
proper to distinguish. Therefore either read West-Wales, DCCCC.XX.VI.
Occidentalium Wallensium (for in Florence of Worcester and Roger of Houeden
that passage is with West-Britons Caratacus Lancarbensis in Edwall. Vo^l
Correctus.
Occidentalium Britonnum) or else believe that Malmesbury mistook Howel to be
in Athelstans time, as he was after his death, sole Prince of all Wales. In
this con^ecture I had aid from Lhancaruans History, which in the same page (as
learned Lhuids edition in English is) says, that Athelstan made the River
Cambalan or Camel.
Cambia the frontier toward Cornwall: but there, in requital, I correct him,
and read Tambra.i. Tamar, dividing Devonshire and Cornwall; as Malmesbury has
it expressly, and the matter-selfe enough persuades.

Who drove the Giants hence, that of the earth were bred.
Somewhat of the Giants to the first Song; fabulously supposed begotten by
Spirits upon Dioclesians or Danaus daughters. But here the Author aptly terms
them bred of the Earth, both for that the antiquities of the Gentiles made the
first inhabitants of most countries as produced out of the soil, calling them
Aborigines and (...), as also for imitation of those Epithets of (...)* and
Callimaeth. in hymn, Iouis.
(...) among the Greeks, Terraefilij among the Latins, the very name of Giants
being thence Orpheus ap. Not. Com. Mytholog 6. cap. 21.
derived, Because they were bred of earth, and the dew of heaven.
(...).
Which misconceit I shall think abused the Heathen upon their ill
understanding of Adams creation (...) terra.
and allegorique greatness, touched before out of Jewish Fiction.

Her Albanact; for aid, and to the Scythian clea^e.
Britains tripartit division by Brutes III. sons, Logrin, Camber and
Albanact, whence all beyond Seuerne was styled Cambria, the now England
Loegria, and Scotland Albania, is here showed you: which I admit, but as the
rest of that nature, upon credit of our suspected Stories followed with
sufficient justification by the Muse; alluding here to that opinion which
deduces the Scots and their name from the Scythians. Arguments of this
likelihood have you largely in our most excellent Antiquary. I only add, that
by tradition of the Scythians themselves, they had very anciently a general
name, titling them Herodot. M^lpomene (...).
Scolots (soon contracted into Scots) whereas the Graecians called the
Northern all Ephor. ap. Strab. (...). See to the IV. Song.
Scythians, perhaps the original of that name being from Shooting; for which
they were especially through the world famous, as you may see in most passages
of their name in old Poets; and that Lucians title of Toxaris, is, as if you
should say, an Archer. For, the word shoot being at first of the T^ntonique
(which was very likely dispersed largely in the Northern parts) anciently was
written nearer Schyth, as among other testimonies, the name of In (...) forsan
reliquia vocabuli (...) ^^arcu^ and punctorum variatio^^. Sagittanus. (...).
Goropium Be^ceselan. 8. sieve Amazoni^.
(...).i. the shooting finger, for the forefinger among our Alur^d. leg. cap.
40.
Saxons.

Three hundred years before Romes great foundation laid.
Take this with latitude: for between Aeneas Syluius King of the Latins, under
whose time Brute is placed, to Numitor, in whose II. year Rome was built,
intercedes above CCC.XL. and with such difference understand the Thousand
until Caesar.

And long before borne arms against the barbarous Hun.
Our stories tell you of Humber King of Huns (a people that being Scythian,
lived about those Agathias lib. ^. Maeotidis Palus.
parts which you now call Mar delle Zabach) his attempt and victory against
Albanact, conflict with Logrin, and death in this River, from whence they will
the name. Distance of his country, and the unlikely relation weakens my
historical faith. Observe you also the first transmigration of the Huns,
mentioned by Procopius, Agathias, others, and you will think this very
different from truth. And well could I think by conjecture (with a great
Leland. ad Cyg. Cant. in Hull.
Antiquary) that the name was first (or thence derived) Abus dictum i^^hoc
aestuarium Ptolemaeo.
Habren or Aber which in British, as appears by the names Abergeuenni,
Abertewt, Aberhodn^ signifying the fall of the River Geuenni, Tewi, Rhodni, is
as much as a Girald. Itinerar. cap. 2. and 4.
Rivers mouth in English, and fits it self specially, in that most of the
Yorkshire Rivers here cast themselves into one confluence for the Ocean. Thus
perhaps was Seuerne first Hafren, and not from the maid there drowned, as you
have before; but for that, this no place.

To Stamford in this Isle seemed Athens to transfer.
Look to the III. Song for more of Bladud and his Bath's. Some testimony
Merlin* apud Hard. cap. 25. ex ijsdem and Balaeus.
is, that he went to Athens, brought thence with him IV. Philosophers, and
instituted by them a University at Stanford in Lincolneshire; But, of any
persuading credit I find none. Only of later time, that profession of
learning was there, authority is frequent. For when through discording parts
among the Scholars (reigning Ed. III.) a division in Oxford was into the
Northern and Southern faction, the Northern (before under Hen. III. also was
the like to Northampton) made secession to this Stamford, and there professed,
until upon humble suite by Robert of Stratford, Chauncelor of Oxford, the K.
Io Cai. antiq. Cant. 2. Br. T^in. lib. 3. apolog. Oxon.. 115. and Seqq.
by edict, and his own presence, prohibited them; whence, afterward, also was
that Oath taken by Oxford Graduate, that they should not profess at Stamford.
White of Basingstoch otherwise guesses at the cause of this difference, making
it the Pelagian heresy, and of more ancient time, but erroniously. Unto this
refer that supposed prophecy of Merlin: Doctrinae studium quod nunc viget ad
Oxen-ford.
vada Boum.
Ante finem secli celebrabitur ad Stane-ford.
vada Saxi.
Which you shall have Englished in that solemnized marriage of Thames and
Medway, by a most admired Spens. Fa^ry Q. lib. 4. Cant. 11. Stanz. 35.
Muse of our nation, thus with advantage: And after him the fatal Welland went,
That, if old sawes prove true (which God forbid)
Shall drown^ all The maritim part of Lincolnshire, where, Welland a River.
Holland with his excrement,
And shall see Stamford, though now homely hid,
Then shine in learning more then ever did
Cambridge or Oxford, Englands goodly beams.
Nor can you apply this, but to much younger time then Bladuds reign.

-- As he those four proud streets began.
Of them you shall have better declaration to the XVI. Song.

There ballancing his sword against her baser gold.
In that story, of Brennus and his Gauls taking Rome, is affirmed, that by
Senatory authority P. Sulpitius (as a Tribune) was Committee to transact with
the enemy for leaving the Roman territory; the price was Li^. d^c. lib. 5.
Plutarch. in Camille.
agreed M. pound of gold; unjust weights were offered by the Gauls, which
Sulpitius disliking, so far were those insolent conquerors from mitigation of
their oppressing purpose, that (as for them all) Brennus to the first injustice
of the balance, added the poiz of his Sword also, whence, upon a murmuring
complaint among the Romans, crying Woe to the Conquered (...). ver^ Stephan.
Forcatulum lib. 2 de Gall. philosoph* qui haec inter examinand^ f^d^, ^st cum
alijs, in historia ipsa Lapsus est.
Va Victis, came that to be as proverb applied to the conquered.

Against the Delphian power yet shakt his irefull sword.
Like liberty as others, takes the Author in affirming that Brennus, which was
General to the Gauls in taking Rome, to be the same which overcame Greece, and
assaulted the Oracle. But the truth of story stands thus: Rome was afflicted
by one Brennus about the year Hal^carnass. (...) Li^. 5.
CCC.LX. after, the building, when the Gauls had such a Cadmeian victory of
it, that fortune converted by martial opportunity, they were at last by
Camillus so put to the sword, that a reporter of the slaughter was not left, as
Liuy and Plutarch (not impugned by Polybius, as Polyd^re has mistaken) tell
us. About CX. years after, were tripartit excursions of the Gauls; of an
army under C^rethrius into Thrace; of the like under Belgius or Belgius into
Macedon and Illyricum; of another under one Brennus and Acichorius into
Pannonia. What success Belgius had with Ptolemy, surnamed Thunderbolt.
(...), is discovered in the same Pausanias in Ph^^i^.
authors which relate to us Brennus his wasting of Greece, with his violent,
but somewhat voluntary, death; but part of this army, either divided by
mutiny, or left, after Apollo's revenge, betook them to habitation in Thrace
about the now Constantinople, where first under their King Comontorius (as
Polybius, but Liuy says under Lutatius and Lomnorius, which name perhaps you
might correct by Polybius) they ruled their neighboring States with imposition
of tribute, and at last, growing too populous, sent (as it seems) those
colonies into Asia, which in Strab. lib. ^st.
Gallograecia left sufficient steps of their ancient names. My compared
classique Polyb. l. a. (...). and (...). and Li^der. ^ lib. 5. dec. 4. lib. 8.
Strab. (...). Pausan. Phocic. 1. Appian. Illyric. Justin. lib. 24. and 25.
Plutarch. Ca^^llo. Ca^erum plerisque Delphis in^ecta a Pha^b^ grandiu^
perempt^s, qui fuerunt, relics in Aegyptum conductor sub stipendijs Ptolemai
Philadelphi meruisse alt vetus Scholiastes Gra^. ad hymn. Callimach. in De^um.
authors will justify as much; nor scarce find I material opposition among
them in any particulars; only Trogus, epitomized by Iustine, i^ therein, by
confusion of time and actions, somewhat abused; which has caused that error of
those which take Historical liberty (Poetical is allowable) to affirm
Brennus which sacked Rome, and him, that died at Delphos, the same. Examination
of time makes it apparently false; nor indeed does the British Chronology
endure our Brennus to be either of them, as Polydore and Buchanan have
observed. But want of the British name moves nothing against it* seeing the
people of this Western part were all, until a good time after those wars,
styled by the name of Gauls or C^lts; and those which would have ransackt the
Oracle are said by Callimachus to have come -- From the utmost West.
(...).
Which as well fit^^^ as Gaul. And thus much also observe, that those names of
Brennus and Belin^us, being of great note, both in signification and personal
eminency; and, likely enough, there being many of the same name in Gaul and
Britain, in several ages such identity made confusion in story. For the
first in this relation appears what variety was of it; as also Urenhin and
Brennin in the British are but significant words for King; and peradventure
almost as ordinary a name among these Westernes, as Pharaoh and Ptolemy in
Egypt, Agag among the Amalekits, Arfaces, Nicomedes, Aleuada, Soph^, Caesar,
Oising, among the Parthians, Bithynians, Thessalian^, Persians, Romans, and our
Kentish Kings, which the course of History shows you. For the other, you may
see it usual in names of their old Kings, as Cassi-Belin in Caesar, Cuno-Belin
and Cym-Belin in Tacitus, and Dio, and perhaps Cam-Baules in Pausanias, and
Belin (whose steps seem to be in Vet. Inscript. in Cumbria, and apud ^os.
Scalig. ad Auson. 1. cap. 9. and V. Rhodigin. lib. 17. cap 28. Plura de Belino,
sieve Beleno. i. Apolline Galli^o Pet. Pithaeus Advers. subsec. lib. 1. cap. 3.
qui Belenum (...) Phoebie epitheton autumat. (...). notas Camd. ad N^mismata.
and Nos ad Cant. IX.
Abellius a Gaulish and Bela-tucadre a British God) was the name among them of
a worshipped Idol, as appears in Ausonius; and the same with Apollo, which also
by a most ancient British coin, stamped with Apollo playing on his Harp,
circumscribed with CV NO-BELIN, is showed to have been expressly among the
Britons. Although I know, according to their use, it might be added to Cuno
(which was the first part of many of their regal names, as you see in
Cuneglas, Cyngetorix, Congolitan, and others) to make a significant word, as if
you should say, the yellow King; for Belin in British is yellow. But seeing the
very name of their Apollo so well fitted with that color, (...).
which to Apollo is commonly attributed (and observe that their names had
usually some note of color in them, by reason of their custom of painting
themselves) I suppose they took it as a fortunat concurrence to bear an
honored Deity in their title as we see in the names of Merodach and
Euil-Merodach among the Babilonian Kings from Merodach lir^^e. cap. 50.
one of their false gods; and like examples may be found among the old
Emperors. Observe also that in British genealogies, they ascend always to
Belin the great (which is supposed Heli father to Lud and Cassibelin) as you
see to the IV. Song* and here might you compare that of Hell Cael. Rhodig.
Antiq. Lect. 1. cap. 6.
in the Punique tongue signifying Phoebus, and turned into Belus: but I will
not therewith trouble you. Howsoever, by this I am persuaded (whenever the
time were of our Belinus) that Bolgus in Pausanias, and Belgius in Iustine were
mistook for Belinus, as perhaps also Prausus in Strabo ((...). supplying
Eustath. ad Dionys. (...).
oftimes the room of (...).) generated of Br^nnus corrupted. In the story I
dare follow none of the Modern erroniously transcribing Relaters or seeming
Correctors, but have, as I might, took it from the best selfe-fountaines, and
only upon them, for trial, I put my self.

-- whence Cymbrica it took.
That Northern promontory now Iu^land, part of the Danish Kingdom, is called
in Geographers Cymbrica Chersonesus from name of the people inhabiting it. And
those which will the Cymbrians, Cambrians, or Cumrians from Camber may with
good reason of consequence imagine that the name of this Chersones is thence
also, as the author here, by liberty of his Muse. But if, with Goropius,
Camden, and other their followers, you come nearer truth and derive them from
Transmutation of G. into C. was, anciently, often and easy, as Lipsius shows.
lib. de pronunciat. ling. Latin. cap. 13.
Gomer, son to Iaphet* who* with his posterity, had the North-westerne part
of the world; then shall you set, as it were* the accent upon Chersones giving
the more significant note of the Country; the name of Cymbrians, Cimmerians,
Cambrians, and Cumrian^, all as one insubstance being very comprehensiue in
these climats; And perhaps, because this promontory lay out so far, Plutarch.
in Mario. and Herodot. lib. (...).
under near LX. degrees latitude (almost at the utmost of Ptolemies
geographie) and so had the first Winter days no longer then between V. and
VI. hours, therein somewhat (and more then other neighboring parts of that
people, Odyss. (...) --
having no particular name) agreeing with Homers attribute of darkness to the
Cimmerians, it had more specially this title.

To wise Molmutius laws her Martian first did frame.
Particulars of Molmutius laws, of Church-liberty, freedom of ways,
husbandry, and diverse other are in the British story, affirming also that Q.
Martia made a book of laws, translated afterward, and titled by K. Alfred
Mercen-lage. Indeed it appears that there were three sorts of Look to the XI.
Song.
laws in the Saxon Heptarchy, Mercan-lage, Dan-lage and estsaxen-lage.i. the
Mercian, Gernas. Tilburiensis de Scaccario.
Danish, and West Saxon law; all which three had their several territories,
and were in diverse things compiled into one volume by Cnut, and examined in
that Norman constitution of their new Commonwealth. But as the Danish and
West Saxon had their name from particular people* so it seems, had the Mercian
from that Kingdom of Mercland, limited with the Lancashire River Mersey toward
Northumberland, and ioining to Wales, having either from the River that name,
or else from the word A limit or bound.
Marc, because it bounded upon most of the other Kingdoms; as you may see to
the XI. Song.

-- in whose eternal name,
Great London still shall live --
King Luds reedifying Troinouant (first built by Brute) and thence leaving the
name of Caer Lud afterward turned (as they say) into London is not unknown,
scarce to any that has but looked on Ludgates inner frontispice; and in old
Rob. Glocestrens.
rimes thus I have it expressed: Walls But it is affirmed that K Coils, daughter,
mother to Constantine the great, wailed this first, and Colchester also,
Huntingdon lib. 1. (...) Simon Dunelmens. ap. Stou. in notiti^ Londini. I shall
presently speak of her also.
he let make al about and yates up and down
And after Lud that was is name he clupede it Luds town.
The heart yate of the town that ^ut stout there and is
He let hit clupie Ludgate after is owe name ^wis.
He let him tho he was ded bury at thulke yate
Therefor yut after him me clupeth it Ludegate.
The town me clupeth that is wide couth
And now me clupeth it London that is lighter in the mouth.
And new Troy it ^et ere, and nou it is so ago
That London it is now icluped and worth euere mo.


Judicious reformers of fabulous report I know have more serious deriuations of
the name: and seeing conjecture is free, I could imagine, it might be called at
first Lhan Dien.i. the Temple of Diana, as Lhan Dewi, Lhan Stephan, Lhan Padern
Uanwr, Lhan Uair.i. S. Dewy's, S. Stephans, S. Pattern the great, S. Marie; and
Verulam is by H. Lhuid, derived from Uer-lhan.i. the Church upon the River Ver,
with diverse more such places in Wales: and so afterward by strangers turned
into Londinium, and the like. For, that Diana and her brother Apollo (under
name of Belin) were two great Deities among the Britons, London derived.
what is read next before, Caesar's testimony of the Gauls; and that she had
her Temple there where Paul's is, relation in Camden discloses to you. Now,
that the antique course was to title their Cities oftimes by the name of their
power adored in them, is plain by Beth-el among the Hebrews, Heliopolis
(which in holy Writ is Iirme cap. 43. comm. vlt.
called (...)) in Egypt, and the same in Greece, Phaenicia, elsewhere; and by
Athens, named from Minerua. But especially from this supposed deity of Diana
(whom in substance Homer no less gives the Epithet of Patron of Cities. v.
Homer, hymn. ad Dian.
(...) then to Pallas) have diverse had their titles: as Artemistum in Italy,
and Eubaea, and that B^bastis in Egypt, so called from the same word,
signifying in Egyptian, both a Cat and Diana.

Those armed stakes in Thames --
He means that which now we call Coway stakes by Otelands, where only, the
Thames being without Boat passable, the Britons fixed both on the bank of their
side, and in the water Bed. lib. 1. cap. 2
sharp stakes, to prevent the Romans coming over; but in vain, as the
stories tell you.

And more then Caesar got, three Emperors could not win.
Understand not that they were resisted by the Britons, but that the three
successors of Julius.i. Augustus, Tiberius, and Caligula never so much as with
force attempted the Isle, although the last after K. Cunobelins-sonne Adminius
his traitorous reuolting to him, in a seeming martial vehemency, made Sueton.
lib. 4. cap. 44. and 46. and Dio Cassius.
all arm to the British voyage, but suddenly in the German shore (where he
then was) like himself, turned the design to a jest, and commanded the army
to gather Cockles.

Came with his body nak't, his hair down to his wast.
In this Caradoe (being the same which at large you have in Tacitus and Dio,
under name of Caratacus and Cataracus, and i^ by some Scottish Historians
drawn much too far Northward) the author expresses the ancient form of a
Britons habit. Yet I think not that they were all nak't, but, as is affirmed
Polybi^s hist. (...).
of the Gauls, down only to the Nauill; so that on the discovered part might
be seen (to the terror of their enemies) those pictures of Beasts, with which
Solin. polyhist. cap. 35.
they painted themselves. It is justifiable by Caesar, that they used to shave
all except their head and upper lip, and ware very long hair; but in their old
Coins I see no such thing warranted: and in later Girald. descript. cap. 10.
times about CCCC. years since, it is especially attributed to them that they
always cut their heads close for avoiding Absalons misfortune.

The Colony long kept at Maldon --
Old Historians and Geographers call this Camalodunum, which some Hector. Boet.
lib. 3.
have absurdly thought to be Camelot in the Scottish Shrifedome of Stirling,
others have sought it elsewhere: but the English Light of antiquity ( Camden)
has surely found it at this Maldon in Essex, where was a Romish Colonie, as
also at Antiq. Inscript. Lapid^ae and Numm.
Gloucester, Chester, York, and perhaps at Colchester, which proves expressly
(against vulgar allowance) that there was a time when in the chiefest parts of
this Southern Britany the Roman laws were used, V. Fortiscut. de laud. leg.
Ang. cap. 17. and Vitu^ Basing stoch. lib. 4. not. 36. Roman laws used in
Britain.
as every one that knows the meaning of a Colony (which had all their rights
and institutions Agellius lib. 16. cap. 13.
deduced with it) must confess. This was destroyed upon coffeehouse taken
by the Iceus and Trinobants (now Norfolk, Suffolk, Middlesex, and Essex men)
for intolerable wrongs done to the wife and posterity of Prasutagus King of
the Iceus by the Tacitus. annal. 14 Dio lib ^.
Romans, which the K. (as others in like form) thought, but vainly, to have
prevented by instituting Nero, then Emperor, his heir. The signs, which the
author speaks of, were, a strange, and, as it were, voluntary falling down of
the Goddess Victories statue, erected by the Romans here; women, as
distracted, singing their overthrow; the Ocean looking bloody; uncouth howlings
in their assemblies and such like. Petilius Corealis, Lieutenant of the IX.
Legion, coming to aid, lost all his footmen, and betook himself with the
rest to his fortified Tents. But for this read the History.

By poison end her days. --
So Tacitus; but Dio, that she died of sickness. Her name is written diversely
Voadicia, Boodicia, Bunduica, and Boudicea: she was wife to Prasutagus, of whom
last before.

A greater foe to us in our own bowels bred.
Pictorum in Britannia (potius Pictonum ita. n. legitur) primus meminit
Romanorum Panegyristes ille inter alios, qui Constantinum encomijs adloquitur,
and si placet adeas Humfred. L^uid. Breu. Brit. and Buchanan. lib. 2. rer.
Scotic. aut Camdeni Scotos and Pictos. Rob. Glocestrensi dicuntur Picars.
Every story, of the declining British state, will tell you what miseries were
endured by the hostile irruptions of Scots and Picts into the Southern part.
For the passage here of them, know, that the Scottish stories, which begin
their continued Monarchique government at Ferguze, affirm the Picts (from the
Scythian territories) to have arrived in the now Iutland, and thence passed
into Scotland some CCL, years after the Scots first entering Britain, which
was, by account, about LXXX. years before our Saviors birth, and thence
continued these a State by themselves, until K. Kenneth about DCCC.XL. years
after Christ utterly supplanted them. Others, as Bede and his followers, make
them elder in the Isle then the Scots, and fetch them out of Ireland; the
British story (that all may be discords) says, they entered Albania under
conduct of one Roderic their King (for so you must read in Galfredus
Monumethensis Correctus, and ibidem vice (...) Maesmarius lega Vestmaria.
Monmouth and not Londric, as the Print in that and much other mistakes) and
were valiantly opposed by Marius then King of Britons, Roderic slain, and
Cathenes given them for habitation. This Marius is placed with Vespasian, and
the gross differences of time make all suspicious; so that you may as well
believe none of them, as any one. Rather adhere to learned Camden, making the
Picts very genuine Britons, distinguished only by accidental name, as in him
you may see more largely.

Aruiragus of ours first taking to protect.
His marriage with (I know not what) Genissa, daughter to Claudius, the
habitude of friendship twixt Rome and him, after composition with Vespasian
then, under the Emperor, employed in the British war, the common story
relates. This is Armitagus, which Iuuenal Satyr. 4.
speaks of. Polydore referres him to Nero's time, others rightly to Domitian,
because indeed the Poet Suidas in Iuuenali.
then flourished. That fabulous Hector Boethius makes him the same with
Phasuiragus, as he calls him, in Tacitus; he means Prasutagus, having misread
Tacitus his copy.

This happiness we have Christ crucified to know.
Near C.LXXX. after Christ (the Chronology of Bid herein is plainly false and
observe what I told you of that kind to the IV. Song) this Lucius upon request
to Pope Eleutherius received at the hands of These names are very differently
written. S. Georges cross.
^ugatius and Damianus, holy Baptism; yet so, that by Joseph of Arimathia (of
whom to the III. Song) seeds of true Religion were here before sown: by some I
find it Ex Ne^nio Harding. cap. 48. Ast Codicesij, quos consuluisse me Nennij
antiquos con^igit huiusce rei parum sunt memores.
without warrant, affirmed that he converted Aruiragus, And gave him then a
shilde of silver white.
A Cross endlong and overthwart full perfect,
These arms were used through all Britain
For a common sign each man to know his nation
From enemies, which now we call certain.
S. Georges arms --


But thus much collect, that, although until Lucius we had not a Christian
King (for you may well suspect, rather deny, for want of better authority,
this of Aruiragus) yet (unless you believe the tradition of Gundafer K. of
Indy, First Christian King in the world.
Abdias hist. Apostolic. lib. 9. Eusebius. lib. 1. cap. 13.
converted by S. Thomas, or Abagar Nicet. Choniat. in Andronic. Comnen. lib. 2.
K of Edessa, to whom those letters written, as is supposed, by our Saviors
own hand, kept as a precious relic in Nicephor. Callist. lib. 2. cap. 7. and
8.
Constantinople until the Emperor Isaacius Angelus, as my authors say, were
sent) it is apparent that This Island had the first Christian King in the
world, and clearly in Europe, so that you cite not Tiberius his private
seeming Christianity (which is observed out of Distinct. 80 c. in illis.
Clemens PP.
Tertullian) even in whose time also Gildas affirms, Britain was comforted
with wholesome beams of religious Light. Not much different from this age was
Donald first King Christian of the Scots; so that if Priority of time swayed
it, and not custom (derived from a communicable attribute given by the Popes)
that name of Most Christian should better fit our Soueraigns then the French.
This Lucius, by help of those two Christian aids, is said to have, in room of
III. Arch- Flamius and XXVIII. Flamins (through whose doctrine, polluting
sacrifices, and idolatry reigned here in stead of true service) instituted III.
Archbishopriques at London, York, and Caer-leon upon Vske, and XXVIII.
Bishopriques; of them, all beyond Humbre subject to York; all the now Wales to
Caer-leon; to London, the now England with Cornwall. And so also was the custom
in other Countries, even grounded upon S. Peter's own command, to make
substitution of Archbishops or Patriarchs to Arch- Flamins, and Bishops to
Flamins. if you believe a Distinct. 80 c. in illis. Clemens PP.
Popes assertion. For York, there is now a Metropolitan Sea; Caerleon had so
until the change spoken of to the V. Song. And London, the Cathedral Church
being at S. Peter's in Cornhill, until translation of the Pall V. Kenulph in
Epist. ad Leonem PP. apud G. Malmesb. lib. 1. de reg. and 1. de Pontifie. vide
Basingstoch. hist. 9. not. 11. Stou. Suruay of London. page 479.
to Canterbury by Augustine, sent hither by Gregory the I. under K. Ethelbert,
according to a prophecy of Merlin, that Christianity should fail, and then
revive when the Sea of London did adorn Canterbury, as, after coming of the
Saxons, it did. This moved that ambitious Gilbert of Folioth Bishop of London
to challenge the Primacy of England; for which he is bitterly taxed by a great
Ioann. Carn^tens. in Epistol. 272.

Helen mother to Constantine.

Constantine born in Britain.


Clerk of the same time. If I add to the British glory that this Lucius was
cause of like conversion in Bauaria and Rhetia, I should out of my bounds. The
learned Mark Velser, and others, have enough remembered it.

Constantius worthy wife --
That is Helen, wife to Constantius or Constans Chlorus the Emperor, and
mother to Constantine the great, daughter to Coile King of Britain, where
Constantine was by her brought forth. Do not object Nicophorus Callistus that
erroniously affirms him borne in Dropanum of Bithynia, or Iul. Firmicus,
Matheseus lib. 1. cap. 4.
, that says at Tarsus, upon which testimony (not uncorrupted) a great Critique
Lips. de Romans magnitud. lib. 4. cap. 11. nimium Lapsus.
has violently offered to deprive us both of him and his mother, affirming her
a Bithynian, nor take advantage of Cedrenus, that will have Dacia his birth
soil. But our Histories, and, with them, the Latin Ecclesiastique relation
(in passages of her invention of the Cross, and such like) allowed also by
Cardinal Baronius, make her thus a British woman. And for great Constantines
birth in this land you shall have authority; against which I wonder how Lipsius
durst oppose his conceit. In an old Panegyrist, Panegyric. dixerint licet
Maximiano, etc.
, speaking to Constantine: He freed Britain of bondage, Thou enobledest it
with thy birth.
Liberauit ille (he means his father) Britannias seruitute, tueti^m nobiles
illic Oriendo f^cisti; and another, O happy Britain that first of all saw
Constantine. Panegyric. ^acerem. Constantine.
O fortunata and nunc omnibus beatior terris Britannia, qua Constantinum
Caesarem prima vidisti. These might persuade, that Firmicus were corrupted,
seeing they lived when they might know as much of this as he. Nicephorus and
C^dr^nus are of much later time, and deserve no undoubted credit. But in
certain oriental admonitions Constantin. Perphyrogennet. de administ. twist
imperio cap. 29.
of State (newly published by John Meursius professor of Greek story at
London) the Emperor Constantine Perphyrogennetes aduises his son Romanus, that
he should not take him a wife of alien blood, Io. L^uin^um ad Panegyric 5. haut
multum hic moramur.
because all people dissonant from the government and manners of the Empire by
a law of Constantine, established in S. Sophies Church, were prohibited the
height of that glory, excepting only the Franks, allowing them this honor
Because he was borne in their parts.
(...), which might make you imagine him borne in Gaul; let it not move you, but
observe that this Porphyrogennetes lived about DCC. years since, when it was
(and among the Turks still is) ordinary with these Greeks to call Histor.
Orientales passim and Themata Constantini, cum supra citato libro. Europeans
called Franks.
all (especially the Western) Europeans by the name of Frankes, as they did
themselves Romans. Why then might not we be comprehended, whose name, as
English, they scarce, as it seems, knew of, calling us Nicet. Choniat. 2.
Isaac. Angel.. vlt. (...).
Inclins; and indeed the indefinit form of speech, in the author I cite,
shows as if he meant some remote place by the Franks, admitting he had
intended only but what we now call French. If you can believe one of our
contrymen G. Stephanides de Londino. Basingstoch. hist. 6. not. 10.
that lived about Hen. II. he was borne in London; others think he was borne
at York: of that, I determine not. Of this Helen, her Religion, finding the
Cross, good deeds in walling London and Colchester (which in honor of her,
they say, bears a Cross between four Crowns, and for the Invention she is
yet celebrated in Holy-rood day in May) and of this Constantine her son, a
mighty and religious Emperor (although I know him taxt for no small faults by
Ecclesiastique writers) that in this air received his first light and life,
Rob. Glocestrins.
our Britons vaunt not unjustly: as in that spoken to K. Arthur. Now it worth
iended that Sibile the sage sede hinore
That there ssold of Brutaine three men be ybore
That ssolde win the aumpyr of Rome; of tweye ydo it is
As of Belinus.
Belly and Constantin, and thou art the thredde y wis.
For this Sibylle who she was, I must take day to tell you.

Against the Arrian Sect at Arles having run.
In the II. Council at Arles in Prouence, held under Constantine and
Syluester, is subscribed the name of Restitutus Bishop of London, I. Tom.
Council.
the like respectively in other Councels; spoken of by the Author. It is not
unfit to note here that in later time the use has been (when and where Romes
Supremacy was acknowledged) to send always to general Councels, out of every
Christian State, some Bishops, Abbots and Priors* and I find it affirmed by the
Clergy under Roger Houeden. fol. 332.
Hen. II. that, to a general Council, only four Bishops are to be sent out
of England. So, by reason of this course added to State-allowance afterward at
home, were those Canons received into our law; as of Bigamie in the Council of
Lions, interpreted by Parliament under Ed. I. Of Pluralities in the Council of
Lateran, held by Innocent III. reigning our K. John; and the law of Laps in
Benefices had so its ground from that Council of Lateran in M.C.LXXIX. under
Alexander the III. whither, for our part, were sent Hugh Bishop of Durham, John
Bishop of Norwich, Robert Bishop of Hereford, and Rainold Bishop of Bath, with
diverse Abbots, where the G. Nubrigens. (cuius editionem nuperam and Io. Picardi
annotationes consulas) lib 3. cap. ^. and Houedenus habent ipsas, quae sunt,
Constitutiones.
Canon was made for presentation within six months, and title of Laps, given
to the Bishop in case the Chapter were Patron, from the Bishop to them if he
were Patron: which, although, in that, it be not law with us, not also their
difference between a lay Extrauag. Concess. praebend. c. ^.
and Ecclesiastique patron for number of the months, 6. Dicret. tit. iure
patronat.. Verunt. c. vnic.
allowing the layman but four, yet shows it self certainly to be the
original of that custom anciently and now used in the Ordinaries collation.
And hither Henry of Bracton referres it expressly; by whom you may amend John le
Briton, Lib. 4. tract. 2. cap. 6.

Brittonus emendatus cap. des exceptions 92


and read Lateran in stead of Lions about this same matter. Your conceit, truly
ioining these things, cannot but perceive that Canons and constitutions, in
Popes Councels, absolutely never bound us in other form then, fitting them by
the square of English law and policy, our reverend Sages and Baronage allowed
and D. Ed. Coke lib. de iure Regis ecclesiastic.
interpreted them, who in their formal Regist. Orig. fol. 42.
Writs would mention them as law and custom of the Kingdom, and not otherwise.

Eleven thousand maids sent those our friends again.
Our common story affirms, that in time of Gratian the Emperor, Conan King of
Armorique Britain: (which was filled with a Col^ny of this Isle by this Conan
and Maximus, otherwise Maximian that slew Gratian) having war with the
neighboring Gauls, See to the IX. Song.
desired of Dinoth Regent of Cornwall, or (if you will) of our Britain (by
neerenes of blood; so to establish and continue love in the posterity of both
countries) that he might himself match with Dinoth's daughter Vrsula, and with
her a competent multitude of Virgins might be sent over to furnish his vnwiu'd
Batchelers: whereupon were XI.M. of the nobler blood with Vrsula and LX.M. of
meaner rank (elected out of diverse parts of the Kingdom) Shipped at London for
satisfaction of this request. But see to the XIIII. Song, of Couentry.
In the coast of Gaul, they were by tempest dispersed; some ravished by the
Ocean; others for chaste denial of their maiden-heads to Guaine and Melga,
Kings of Huns and Picts (whom Gratian had animated against Maximus, as usurping
title of the British Monarchy) were miserably put to the sword in some German
coast, whither misfortune carried them. Rob. Glocestrens.
But because the Author slips it over with a touch, you shall have it in such
old Verse, as I have.

This maidens were ygadred and to London come
Mani were glad there of and well sorrisome
That They.
hii ssold of land wend and neuest There.
hor friend yse
And some to lose hor maidenhod wives vor to be.
Tho hii were in ssipes ydo, and in the se ver were
So great tempest there come that drof hem here and there.
So that the Most part.
Mestedel adreined were in the se
And to other londs some ydriue, that ne come never Again.
age.
A King there was of Hungry, Guaine was his name
And Melga K. Of the Picts.
Picardie that coushe inou of fame,
The waters vor to loki about the se hii were
A company of this maidens so that hii met there,
To hor folly hii would Them take.
home nime and hor men also
Ac the maidens would rather die than concenty thereto
Tho wend vorth the Lewd.
luther men and the maidens slow echone
So that to the las^e Brutaine there ne come alive none.
Some lay all this wickedness absurdly (for time endures it not) to Atilla's
Hector. Boet. hist. Scotic. 7. ex antiquioribus, verum falsi reis.
charge, who reigned King of Huns about CCCC.L. (above LX. years after
Gratian) and affirm their suffering of this (as they call it) matryrdome at
Cologne, whither, in at the mouth of Rhine, they were carried; others also
particularly tell you that there were four companions to Vrsula, in greatness
and honor, their Vsuard. Martyrolog. 21. October.
names being Pynnosa. Cordula, Eleutheria, Florentia, and that under these were
to every of the XI.M. one President, Iota, Benigna, Clementia, Sapientia,
Carpophora, Columba, Benedicta, Odilia, Celyndris, Sibylla and Lucia: and that,
custom at Cologne has excluded all other bodies from the place of their
burial. The strange multitude of LXXI.M. Virgins thus to be transported, with
the difference of time (the most excellent note to examine truth of history
by) may make you doubt of the whole report. I will not justify it, but only
admonish thus, that those our old Stories are in this followed by that great
Historian Baronius, allowed by Francis de Bar, White of Basingstoch; and before
any of them, by that learned Abbot Tritemius, beside the Martyrologies, which
to the honor of the XI.M. have dedicated the XI. day of our October. But indeed
how they can stand with what in some copies of Nennius Sunt enim antiqui
Codices quibus hoc merito deest nec. n. vt glossema illud non irreptasse,
sentire sum potis.
we read, I cannot see: it is there reported, that those Britons which went
thither with Maximus (the same man and time with the former) took them Gaulish
wives, and cut out their tongues, left they should possess their children of
Gaulish language; whence our Welsh called them afterward Half silent.
Lehit-Widion, because they spoke confusedly. I see Paul. Merul. Cosmog. part^
2. lib. 3. cap. 15.
that yet there is great affinity twixt the British Armorique, and the Welsh,
the first (to give you a taste) saying, Hon tad pehunii sou en efaou, the other,
En tad yr hwn ydwit in y ne foedd for Our Father which art in heaven; but I
suspect extremely that fabulous Tongue-cutting, and would have you, of the two,
believe rather the Virgins, were it not for the exorbitant number, and that,
against infallible credit, our Historians mix with it Gratians suruiuing
Maximus; a kind of fault that makes often the very truth doubtful.

That from the Scythian poor whence they themselves derive.
He means the Saxons, whose name, after learned men, is to the IV. Song
derived from a Scythian nation. It pleases the Muse in this passage to speak
of that original, as mean and unworthy of comparison with the Trojan British,
drawn out of Jupiters blood by Venus, Anchises, and Aeneas; I justify her
phrase, for that the Scythian was indeed poor, yet voluntarily, not through
want, living commonly in field-tents; and (as our Germans in Tacitus) so
Stoicall, as not to care for the future, having provision for the present, from
natures liberality. But, if it were worth examining, you might find the
Scythian as noble and worthy a nation as any red of; and such a one as the
English and others might be as proud to derive themselves from, as any which do
search for their ancestors glory in Trojan ashes. If you believe the old report
Herodot. Melpom..
of themselves, then can you not make them less then descended by Targitaus
from Jupiter and Borysthenes; if what the Greeks, who, as afterward the
Romans, accounted and styled all barbarous, except themselves; then you must
draw their pedigree through Agathyrsus, Gelonus and Scytha, from Hercules;
neither of these have, in this kind, their superior. If among them you desire
learning, remember Zamolxis, Diceneus, and Anacharsis before the rest. For
although to some of these, other Patronymiques are given, yet know that
anciently (which for the present matter observe seriously) as all, Southward,
were called Aethiopians, all Eastward, Indians, all West, Celts, so all
Northernes were styled Scythians; as Apud Strab. lib ^.
Ephorus is Author. I could add the honorable allegories, of those their
golden Yoke, Plough, Hatchet, and Cup sent from heaven, wittily enough
delivered by Amazonic. Becceselan. 8.
Goropius, with other coniecturall testimonies of their worth. But I abstain
from such digression.



The ninth Song.
* THE ARGUMENT.
The Muse here Merioneth vaunts,
And her proud Mountains highly chaunts.
The Hills and Brooks, to bravery bent,
Stand for precedence from Descent:
The Rivers for them showing there
The wonders of their Pimblemere.
Proud Snowdon gloriously proceeds
With Cambria's native Princes deeds.
The Muse then through Carnarvan makes,
And Mon (now Anglesey) awakes
To tell her ancient Druides guise,
And manner of their Sacrifice.
Her Rillets she together calls;
Then back for Flint and Denbigh falls.
OF all the Cambrian Shires their heads that bear so hie,
And farth'st survay their soyles with an ambitious eye,
Mervinia Merionethshire.
for her Hills, as for their matchless crowds,
The nearest that are said to kiss the wandering clouds,
Especial Audience craves, offended with the throng,
That she of all the rest neglected was so long:
Alleging for her self; When through the Saxons pride,
The God-like race of Brute to Severns setting side
Were cruelly enforced, her Mountains did relieve
Those, whom devouring war else euery-where did grieve.
And when all Wales beside (by Fortune or by might)
Unto her ancient foe resigned her ancient right,
A constant Maiden still she only did remain,
. The last her genuine laws which stoutly did retain.
And as each one is praised for her peculiar things;
So only she is rich, in Mountains, Meres, and Springs,
And holds her self as great in her superfluous wast,
As others by their Towns, and fruitful tillage graced.
And therefore, to recount her Rivers, from their Meeres or Pooles, from whence
Rivers spring.
Lins,
Abbridging all delays, Mervinia thus begins;
Though Dovy, which does far her neighboring Floods surmount
(Whose course, for hers alone Mountgomery does account)
Has Angel for her own, and Keriog she does clear,
With Towin, Gwedall then, and Dulas, all as dear,
Those tributary streams she is maintained withal:
Yet, boldly may I say, her rising and her fall
My Country calls hers, with many another Brook,
That with their crystal eyes on the Vergiuian look.
To Dovy next, of which Desunny sea-ward drives,
Lingorrill goes alone: but plentious Avon strives
The first to be at Sea; and faster her to hie,
Clear Kessilgum comes in, with Hergum by and by.
So Derry, Moothy draws, and Moothy calls Caine,
Which in one channel meet, in going to the Maine,
As to their utmost power to lend her all their aids:
So Atro by the arm Lanbeder kindly leads.
And Velenrid the like, observing the others law,
Calls Cunnell; she again, fair Drurid forth does draw,
That from their mother Earth, the rough Mervinia, pay
Their mixed plentious Springs, unto the lesser Bay
. Of those two noble arms into the Land that bear,
Which through North Wales.
Gwinethia be so famous every where,
On my Carnarvan side by nature made my Mound,
As Dovy does divide the Cardiganian ground.
The peatly Conwayes head, as that of holy Dee,
Renowned Rivers both, their rising have in me:
So, Lauern and the Lue, themselves that headlong throw
. Into the spacious Lake, where Dee unmixed does flow.
Trowerrin takes his stream, here from a native Lin;
Which, out of Pimblemere when Dee him self does win,
Along with him his Lord full courteously does glide:
So Rudock rises here, and Cletor that do guide
Him in his rugged path, and make his greatness way,
Their Dee into the bounds of Denbigh to convay.
The lofty Hills, this while attentively that stood,
As to survey the course of every several Flood,
Sent forth such ecchoing shoutes (which every way so shrill,
With the reverberate sound the spacious air did fill)
That they were easily heard through the Vergiuian Maine
To Neptunes inward Court; and beating there, constrain
That mighty God of Sea t'awake: who full of dread,
Thrice threw his three-forkt Mace about his griefly head,
And thrice above the Rocks his forehead raised to see
Amongst the high-topt Hills what tumult it should be.
So that with very sweat Cadoridric did drop,
And mighty Raran shook his proud sky-kissing top,
Amongst the furious rout whom madness did enrage;
Until the Mountain Nymphs, the tumult to assuage,
Upon a modest sign of silence to the throng,
Consorting thus, in praise of their Mervinia, song;
Thrice famous Saxon King, on whom Time nere shall pray,
O Edgar! who compeldst our Ludwall hence to pay
Three hundred Wolves a year for trybute unto thee:
And for that tribute paid, as famous may thou be,
O conquered British King, by whom was first destroyed
. The multitude of Wolves, that long this Land annoyed;
Regardlesse of their rape, that now our harmless Flocks,
Securely here may sit upon the aged Rocks;
Or wandering from their walks, and straggling here and there
Amongst the scattred Cleeues, the Lamb needs never fear;
But from the threatening storm to save it self may creep
Into that darksome Cave where once his foe did keep:
That now the clambring Goat all day which having fed,
And clyming up to see the sun go down to bed,
Is not at all in doubt her little Kid to lose,
Which grazing in the Vale, secure and safe she knows.
Where, The wondrous Mountains in Merionethshire.
from these lofty hills which spacious heaven do threat,
Yet of as equal height, as thick by nature set,
We talk how we are stored, or what we greatly need,
Or how our flocks do fare, and how our herds do feed,
When else the hanging Rocks, and Vallyes dark and deep,
The Summers longest day would us from meeting keep.
Ye Cambrian Shepherds then, who^ these our Mountains please,
And ye our fellow Nymphs, ye light Nymphs of the Mountains.
Oreades,
. Saint Hellens wondrous way, and Herberts let us go,
And our divided Rocks with admiration show.
Not meaning there to end, but speaking as they were,
A sudden fearful noise surprised every ear.
The water-Nymphs (not far) Lin-Teged that frequent,
With brows besmeared with ooze, their locks with dew besprent,
Inhabiting the Lake, in sedgy bowres below,
Their inward grounded grief that only sought to show
Against the Mountain kind, which much on them did take
Above their watery brood, thus proudly them bespake;
Tell us, ye haughty Hills, why vainly thus you threat,
Esteeming us so mean, compared to you so great.
To make you know your selves, you this must understand,
That our great Maker laid the surface of the Land,
As level as the Lake until the general Flood,
When over all so long the troubled waters stood:
Which, hurried with the blasts from angry heaven that blew,
Upon huge massy heaps the loosened gravel threw:
From hence we would ye knew, your first beginning came.
Which, since, in tract of time, your selves did Mountains name.
So that the earth, by you (to check her mirthfull cheer)
May always see (from heaven) those plagues that poured were
Upon the former world; as it were by scarres to show
That still she must remain disfigured with the blow:
And by the infectious slime that doomefull Deluge left,
Nature herself has since of purity been reft;
And by the seeds corrupt, the life of mortal man
Was shortened. With these plagues ye Mountains first began.
But, ceasing you to shame; What Mountain is there found
In all your monstrous kind (seek ye the Island round)
That truly of him self such wonders can report
As can this spacious Lin, the place of our resort?
The wonders of Lin-teged, or Pemble-mere
That when Dee in his course feign in her lap would lie,
Commixtion with her store, his stream she does deny,
By his complexion proved, as he through her does glide.
Her wealth again from his, she likewise does divide:
Those White-fish that in her do wondrously abound,
Are never seen in him; nor are his Salmons found
At any time in her: but as she him disdaines;
So he again, from her, as wilfully abstaines.
Down from the neighboring Hills, those plentious Springs that fall,
Nor Land-floods after rain, her never move at all.
And as in Summers heat, so always is she one,
Resembling that great Lake which seems to care for none:
. And with stern Eolus blasts, like Thetis waxing rank,
She only ouer-s^ells the surface of her bank.
But, whilst the Nymphs report these wonders of their Lake,
Their further cause of speech the mighty The most famous Mountain of all
Wales, in Carnarvanshire.
Snowdon brake;
Least, if their watery kind should suffered be too long,
The license that they took, might do the Mountains wrong.
For quickly he had found that straightened point of Land,
Into the Irish Sea which puts his powrefull hand,
Puffed with their watery praise, grew insolently proud,
And needs would have his Rills for Rivers be allowed:
Short Dorent, neer'st unto the utmost point of all
That th'Ile of Gelin greets, and Bardsey in her fall;
And next to her, the Saw, the Gir, the Er, the May,
Must Rivers be at least, should all the world gainsay:
And those, whereas the Land lies Eastward, amply wide,
That goodly Conway grace upon the other side,
Borne near upon her banks, each from her proper Lin,
Soon from their Mothers out, soon with their Mistress in.
As Ledder, her Allie, and neighbor Legwy; then
Goes Purloyd, Castle next, with Giffin, that again
Observe fair Conway's course: and though their race be short,
Yet they their Sovereign Flood enrich with their resort.
And Snowdon, The wonders upon the Snowdon.
more then this, his proper Mere did note
(. Still Delos like, wherein a wandering I Will does floate)
Was peremptory grown upon his higher ground;
That Poole, in which (besides) the one-eyed fish are found,
As of her wonder proud, did with the Floods partake.
So, when great Snowdon saw, a Faction they would make
Against his general kind; both parties to appease,
He purposes to sing their native Princes praise.
For Snowdony, The glory of Snowdon-hill.
a Hill, imperial in his seat,
Is from his mighty foot, unto his head so great,
That were his Wales distressed, or of his help had need,
He all her Flocks and Herds for many months could feed.
Therefore to do something were worthy of his name,
Both tending to his strength, and to the Britans fame,
His Country to content, a signal having made,
By this Oration thinks both Parties to persuade:
Whilst here this general I Will, the ancient Britans owed,
Their valiant deeds before by Severn have been showed:
But, since our furious Foe, these powrefull Saxon swarms
(As merciless in spoil, as well approved in Arms)
Here called to our aid, Loegria us bereft,
Those poor and scattered few of Brutes high lineage left,
For succor hither came; where that unmixed race
Remains unto this day, yet owners of this place:
Of whom no Flood nor Hill peculiarly has song.
These, then, shall be my Theme: least Time too much should wrong
Such Princes as were ours, since seuer'd we have been;
And as themselves, their fame be limited between
The Severne and our Sea, long pent within this place,
. Till with the term of Welsh, the English now embase
The nobler Britains name, that welneere was destroyed
With Pestilence and War, which this great I Will annoyed;
Cadwallader that drove to the Armorick shore:
To which, drad Conan, Lord of Denbigh, long before,
His Countrymen from hence auspiciously convay'd:
Whose noble feats in war, and neuer-fayling ay'd,
Got Maximus (at length) the victory in Gaul,
Upon the Roman powers. Where, after Gratians fall,
Armorica to them the valiant Victor gave:
Where Conan, their great Lord, as full of courage, drove
The Celts out of their seats, and did their room supply
. With people still from hence; which of our Colony
Was little Britain called. Where that distressed King,
Cadwallader, himself awhile recomforting
With hope of Alans aid (which there did him detain)
. Forewarned was in Dreams, that of the Britans reign
A sempiternall end the angry Powers decreed,
A Recluse life in Rome inioyning him to lead.
The King resigning all, his son young Edwall left
With Alan: who, much grieved the Prince should be bereft
Of Britains ancient right, rigged his unconquered Fleet;
And as the Generals then, for such an Army meet,
His Nephew Iuor chose, and Hi^er for his pheere;
Two most undaunted spirits. These valiant Britans were
The first who The West Saxons country, comprehending Deuo^shire, Somers^t,
Wiltshire, and their adiacents.
West-sex won. But by the lingering war,
When they those Saxons found to have succor still from far,
They took them to their friends on Severns setting shore:
Where finding Edwall dead, they purposed to restore
His son young Rodorick, whom the Saxon powers pursued:
But he, who at his home here scorned to be subdued,
With Aldred (that on Wales his strong invasion brought)
Garthmalack, and Pencoyd (those famous battles) fought,
That North and South Wales sing, on the West-Sexians won.
Scarce this victorious task his bloodied sword had done,
But at Mount A hill near Aber-geuenny in Monmouth.
Carno met the Mercians, and with wounds
Made Ethelbald to feel his trespass on our bounds;
Prevailed against the Pict, before our force that flew;
And in a valiant fight their King Dalargan slew.
Nor Conan's courage less, nor less prevailed in ought
Renowned Rodoricks heir, who with the English fought
The Herefordian Field; as Ruthlands red with gore:
Who, to transfer the war from this his native shore,
Marched through the Mercian Towns with his reuengefull blade;
And on the English there such mighty hauock made.
That Offa (when he saw his Countries go to wrack)
From bick'ring with his folk, to keep us Britains back,
Offa's Ditch
Cast up that mighty Mound of eighty miles in length,
Athwart from Sea to Sea. Which of the Mercians strength
A witness though it stand, and Offa's name do bear,
Our courage was the cause why first he cut it there:
As that most dreadful day at Gauelford can tell,
Where under eithers sword so many thousands fell
With intermixed blood, that neither knew their own;
Nor which went Victor thence, unto this day is known.
Nor Kettles conflict then, less martial courage showed,
Where valiant Mervin met the Mercians, and bestowed
His nobler British blood on Burthreds recreant flight.
As Rodorick his great son, his father following right,
Bare not the Saxons scorns, his Britans to out-braue;
At Gwythen, but again to Burthred battle gave;
Twice driving out the Dane when he invasion brought.
Whose no less valiant son, again at Conway fought
With Danes and Mercians mixed, and on their hateful head
Down-showr'd their dire revenge whom they had murdered.
And, were not that of us the English would report
(Abusing of our Tongue in most malicious sort
As oftentimes they do) that more then any, we
(The Welsh, as they us term) love glorified to be,
Here could I else recount the slaught'red Saxons gore
Our swords at Crosford spilt on Severns wandering shore;
And Griffith here produce, Lewellins valiant son
(May we believe our Bards) who five pitched Battles won;
And to revenge the wrongs the envious English wrought,
His vvell-train'd martial troops into the Marches brought
As far as Wor'ster walls: nor thence did he retire,
Till Powse lay wel-neere spent in our reuengefull fire;
As Hereford laid waste: and from their plentious soyles,
Brought back with him to Wales his prisoners and his spoils.
Thus as we valiant were, when valor might us steed:
With those so much that dared, we had them that decreed.
For, what Mulmutian laws, or Martian, ever were
. More excellent then those which our good Howell here
Ordayn'd to govern Wales? which still with us remain.
And when all-powerfull Fate had brought to pass again,
That as the Saxons erst did from the Britains win;
Upon them so (at last) the Normans coming in,
Took from those Tyrants here, what treacherously they got
(To the perfidious French, which the angry heavens allot)
Nere could that Conquerors sword (which roughly did decide
His right in England here, and prostrated her pride)
. Us to subjection stoop, or make us Britains bear
Th'vnwieldy Norman yoke: nor basely could we fear
His Conquest, entering Wales; but (with stout courage) ours
Defied him to his face, with all his English powers.
And when in his revenge, proud Rufus hither came
(With vows) us to subvert; with slaughter and with shame,
Over Severn him we sent, to gather stronger aid.
So, when to Englands power, Albania hers had laid,
By Henry Beauclarke brought (for all his devilish wit,
By which he raught the Wreath) he not prevailed a whit:
And through our rugged straits when he so rudely pressed,
Had not his proved Maile ^ate surely to his breast,
A skillful British hand his life had him bereft,
As his stern brothers heart, by Tirrills hand was cleft.
And let the English thus which vilify our name,
If it their greatness please, report unto our shame
The foil our Gwyneth gave at Flints so deadly fight,
To Maud the Empress son, that there he put to flight;
. And from the English power the imperial Ensign took:
About his plumed head which valiant Owen shook.
As when that King again, his fortune to advance
Above his former foil, procured fresh powers from France,
A surely-leveld shaft if Sent-cleare had not seen,
And in the very loose, not thrust himself between
His Sovereign and the shaft, he our revenge had tried:
Thus, to preserve the King, the noble subject died.
As Madock his brave son, may come the rest among;
Who, like the God-like race from which his Grandsires sprung,
Whilst here his Brothers tired in sad domestic strife,
On their unnatural breasts bent eithers murtherous knife;
This brave aduenturous Youth, in hot pursuit of fame,
With such as his great spirit did with high deeds inflame,
Put forth his well-rigg'd Fleet to seek him foreign ground,
And sailed West so long, until that world he found
To Christians then unknown (save this adventrous crew)
Long ere Columbus lived, or it Vesputius knew;
And put the now-nam'd Welsh on India's parched face,
Unto the endless praise of Brutes renowned race,
Ere the Iberian Powers had touched her long-sought Bay,
. Or any ear had heard the sound of Florida.
. And with that Croggens name let the English us disgrace;
When there are to be seen, yet, in that ancient place
From whence that name they fetch, their co^quer'd Grandsires Graves:
For which each ignorant sot, unjustly us depraues.
And when that Tyrant John had our subversion vowed,
. To his unbridled will our necks we never bowed:
Nor to his mighty son; whose host we did enforce
(His succors cutting off) to eat their warlike horse.
Until all-ruling Heaven would have us to resign:
When that brave Prince, the last of all the British Line,
Lewellin, Griffiths son, unluckily was slain,
. As Fate had spared our fall till Edward Longshanks reign.
Yet to the stock of Brute so true we ever were,
We would permit no Prince, unless a native here.
Which, that most prudent King perceiving, wisely thought
To satisfy our wills, and to Carnarvan brought
His Queen be'ing great with child, even ready down to lie;
Then to his purposed end does all his powers apply.
Through every part of Wales he to the Nobles sent,
That they unto his Court should come incontinent,
Of things that much concerned the Country to debate:
But now behold the power of vnauoyded Fate.
When thus unto his will he fitly them had won,
At her expected hour the Queen brought forth a son.
And to this great design, all happening as he would,
He (his intended course that clearkly manage could)
Thus queintly trains us on: Since he perceived us prone
Here only to be ruled by Princes of our own,
Our naturalnes therein he greatly did approve; A King both valiant and
politic.

And publicly protests, that for the ancient love
He ever bare to Wales, they all should plainly see,
That he had found out one, their sovereign Lord to be;
Com'n of the race of Kings, and (in their Country borne)
Could not one English word: of which he durst be sworn.
Besides, his upright heart, and innocence was such,
As that (he was assured) black Envy could not ^uch
His spotless life in ought. Poor we (that not epsy
His subtilty herein) in plain simplicity,
Soon bound ourselves by oath, his choice not to refuse:
When as that crafty King, his little child does choose,
Young Edward, borne in Wales, and of Carnaruan called.
Thus by the English craft, we Britans were enthralled:
Yet in thine own behalf, dear Country dare to say,
Thou long as powerful were as England every way.
And if she overmuch should seek thee to imbase,
Tell her thou art the Nurse of all the British race;
And he that was by heaven appointed to unite
(After that tedious war) the red Rose and the white,
A Tudor was of thine, and native of thy Mon,
From whom descends that King now sitting on her Throane.
This speech, by Snowdon made, so luckie was to please
Both parties, and them both with such content to appease;
That as before they strove for sovereignty and place,
They only now contend, which most should other grace.
Into the Irish Sea, then all those Rilles that run,
In Snowdons praise to speak, immediately begone;
Lewenny, Lynan next, then Gwelly gave it out,
And Kerriog her compeere, soon told it all about:
So did their sister Nymphs, that into Mena strain;
The flood that does divide Mon from the Cambrian Maine.
It Gorway greatly praised, and Seint it lowdly song.
So, mighty Snowdons speech was through Carnaruan rong;
That scarcely such a noise to Mon from Mena came,
When with his puissant troops for conquest of the same,
On Bridges made of Boats, the Roman powers her sought,
Or Edward to her sack his English Armies brought:
That Mona strangely stird great Snowdons praise to hear,
Although the stock of Troy to her was ever dear;
Yet (from her proper worth) as she before all other
Was called (in former times) her Country Cambria's mother,
Persuaded was thereby her praises to pursue,
Or by neglect, to lose what to her self was due,
A sign to Neptune sent, his boystrous rage to slake;
Which suddenly becalmed, thus of her self she spoke;
What one of all the Isles to Cambria does belong
(To Britain, I might say, and yet not do her wrong)
Does equal me in soil, so good for grass and grain?
As should my Wales (where still Brutes offspring does remain)
That mighty store of men, yet more of beasts does breed,
By famine of by war constrained be to need,
And Englands neighboring Shires their succor would deny;
My only self her wants could plentiously supply.
What Island is there sound upon the Irish coast,
In which that Kingdom seems to be delighted most
(And seek you all along the rough Vergiuian shore,
Where the incountring tides outrageously do rore)
That bows not at my beck, as they to me did owe
The duty subjects should unto their Sovereign show;
So that the Eubonian Man, a kingdom long time known,
Which wisely has been ruled by Princes of her own,
In my alliance joys, as in the Albanian Seas
The Isles upon the West of Scotland.
Arrans, and by them the scatt'red Isles upon the West of Scotland.
Eubides
Rejoice even at my name; and put on mirthfull cheer,
When of my good estate, they by the Sea-Nymphs hear.
Sometimes within my shades, in many an ancient wood,
Whose often-twined tops, great Phoebus fires withstood,
. The fearelesse British Priests, under an aged Oak,
Taking a milk-white Bull, vnstrained with the yoke,
And with an Axe of gold, from that Ioue-sacred tree
The Missleto cut down; then with a bended knee
On th'vnhew'd Altar laid, put to the hallowed fires:
And whilst in the sharp flame the trembling flesh expires,
As their strong fury moved (when all the rest adore)
Pronouncing their desires the sacrifice before,
Up to the eternal heaven their bloodied hands did rear:
And, whilst the murmuring woods even shuddred as with fear,
Preached to the beardlesse youth, the souls immortal state;
To other bodies still how it should transmigrate,
That to contempt of death them strongly might excite.
To dwell in my black shades the Wood-gods did delight,
Untrodden with resort that long so gloomy were,
As when the Roman came, it struck him sad with fear
To look upon my face, which then was called the Dark;
Until in after time, the English for a mark
Gave me this hateful name, which I must ever bear,
And Anglesey from them am called every where.
My Brooks (to whose sweet brimmes the Syluans did resort,
In glyding through my shades, to mighty Neptunes Court,
Of their huge Oaks bereft) to heaven so open lie,
That now there is not a root discerned by any eye:
My Brent, a pretty Beck, attending Menas mouth,
With those her sister Rills, that bear upon the South,
Guint, forth along with her Lewenny that does draw;
And next to them again, the fat and moory Frawe,
Which with my Princes Court I some-time pleased to grace,
As those that to the West directly run their race.
Smooth Allo in her fall, that Lynon in does take;
Mathanon, that amain does toward Moylroniad make,
The Sea-calfes to behold that bleach them on her shore,
Which Gweger to her gets, as to increase her store.
Then Dulas to the North that straineth, as to see
The I Will that breeds Mice: whose store so loathsome be,
That she in Neptunes brack her bluish head does hide.
When now the wearied Muse her burden having plied,
Her self a while betakes to bathe her in the Sound;
And quitting in her course the goodly Monian ground,
Assayes the Penmenmaur, and her clear eyes does throw
On Conway, toward the East, to England back to go:
Where finding Denbigh fair, and Flint not out of sight,
Cries yet afresh for Wales, and for Brutes ancient right.
Illustrations.
MOre Western are you carried into Merioneth, Carnaruan, Anglesey, and those
maritime coasts of Northwales.

The last her genuine laws which stoutly did retain.
Under William Rufus, the Norman-English (animated by the good success which
Robert Fitz-hamon had first against Rees ap Tiddour, Prince of Southwales, and
afterward against Iestin, Lord of Glamorgan) being very desirous of these
Welsh territories; Hugh, Pouel. ad Carad^c. Lhancaru. and Camd.
surnamed Wolf, Earl of Chester, did homage to the King for Tegengl and
Ryuonioc, with all the Land by the Sea unto Conwey. And thus pretending title,
got also possession of Merioneth, from Gruffith ap Conan, Prince of Northwales:
but he soon recovered it, and thence left it continued in his posterity,
until Lhewelym ap Gruffith, under Edward 1. lost it, himself, and all his
dominion. Whereas other parts (of South and Westwales especially) had before
subjected themselves to the English Crown; this, through frequency of craggie
Mountains, accessible with too much difficulty; being the last strong refuge
until that period of fatal conquest.

Of those two noble arms into the land that bear.
In the confines of Merioneth and Cardigan, where these Rivers jointly pour
themselves into the Irish Ocean, are these two arms or creekes of the Sea,
famous, as he says, through Guinethia (that is one of the old titles of this
North Wales) by their names of Traeth Mawr and Traeth Bachan.i. as it were, the
great haven, and the little haven; Traeth Girald. Itenerar. 2. cap. 6.
, in British, signifying a tract of Sand whereon the Sea flows, and the ebb
discouers.

Into that spacious Lake where Dee unmixed does flow.
That is Lhin-tegid (otherwise called by the English Pemelsmere) through which,
Dee rising in this part runs whole and unmixed, neither Lake nor River
communicating to each other water or fish; as the Author anon tells you. In the
Ammian. Marcel. hist. 15. Po^p. Mel. lib. 2. Plin. hist. Not. ^. cap. 103.
ancients, is remembered specially the like of Rhosne running unmixed, and (as it
were) over the Lake of Geneua; as, for a greater wonder, the most learned
Casaubon Ad Strabon. lib. ^.
has delivered also of Arua, running whole through Rhosne; and diverse other
such like are in Plini's collection of Natures most strange effects in waters.

The multitude of Wolves that long this land annoyed.
Our excellent Edgar (having first enlarged his name with diligent and
religious performance of charitable magnificence among his English, and
confirmed the farre-spred opinion of his greatness, by receipt of homage at
Chester from VIII. Kings; as you shall see in and to the next Song) for
increase of his benefits toward the Isle, joined with preservation of his
Crowne-dueties, converted the tribute of the Welsh into CCC. Wolves a year, as
the Author shows; The King that paid it; Three yer he huld is term rent ac the
vershe was behind
Uor he send the King word that he ne might ne mo vinde,
As, according to the story my old Rimer delivers it. Whom you are to account
for this Ludwall K. of Wales in the Welsh history, except Howel ap Ieuaf, that
made war against his uncle Iago, delivered his father, and took on himself
the whole Principality toward the later years of Edgar, I know not. But this
was not an utter destruction of them; for, since that I^in. Leicest. 27. Hen.
3. in Archiu. Turr. Londin.
time, the Manor of Piddlesley in Leicester shire was held by one Henry of
Angage, per serieantiam capiendi lupos, as the inquisition delivers it.

S. Helens wondrous way --
By Festeneog in the confines of Caernaruan and Merioneth is this high way of
note; so called by the British, and supposed made by that Helen, mother to
Constantine (among her other good deeds) of whom to the last Song before.

As level as the lake until the general flood.
So is the opinion of some Divines His post alios refragatur B. Pe^erius ad
Genes. 1. quaest. 101.
, that, until after the flood, were no Mountains, but that by congestion of
sand, earth, and such stuff as we now see hills strangely fraughted with, in
the waters they were first cast up. But in that true Secretary of Divinity and
nature, Selomoh Proverb. 8.
speaking as in the person of Wisdom, you read; Before the Mountains were
founded, and before the hills I was formed, that is, before the worlds
beginning; and in holy Psalm. 104.
Writ elsewhere, the Mountains ascend, and the Valleys descend to the place
where thou did found them; good authorities to justify Mountains before the
Flood. The same question has been of Isles, but I will peremptorily determine
neither.

And with stern Eolus blasts, like Thetis waxing rank.
The South-West wind constrained between two hills on both sides of the Lake,
sometimes so violently fills the River out of the Lakes store, that both have
been affirmed (but somewhat against truth) never to be disturbed, or ouerflow,
but upon tempestuous blasts, whereas indeed (as Powel delivers) they are
ouerfilled with rain and land-flouds, as well as other Waters; but most of all
moved by that impetuous wind.

Still Delos like wherein a wandering Isle does floate.
Of this Isle in the water on top of Snowdon, and of One-eide Eeles, Trouts,
and Perches, in another Lake there, Girald is witness. Let him perform his
word; I will not be his surety for it. The Author alludes to that state of
Delos, which is fained Pindar. ap. Strabon. lib. 10.
before it was with pillars fastened in the Sea for Latona's childbirth.

That with the term of Welsh the English now imbase.
For this name of Welsh is unknown to the British themselves, and imposed on
them, as an ancient and common opinion is, by the Saxons, calling them Walsh.i.
strangers. Others fabulously have talk of Wallo and Wandolena, whence it should
be derived. But you shall come nearer truth, if upon the community of name
customs, and original, twixt the Gauls and Britons, you conjecture them
called Walsh, as it were, Gualsh (the W. oftentimes being in steed of the Gu.)
which expresses them to be Gauls rather then strangers; although in the Saxon
(which is Buchanan. Scotic. Hist. 2.
observed) it was used for the name of Gauls, Strangers, and Barbarous perhaps
in such kind as in this Kingdom the name of Bract. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 15.
Leg. G. Conquest. and D Coke in Cas. Calvin.
Frenchman, has by inclusion comprehended all kind of Aliens.

Was little Britain called --
See a touch of this in the passage of the Virgins to the VIII. Song. Others
affirm, that under Ma^mesb de gest. reg. 1.
Constantine, of our Britons Colonies were there placed; and from some of these
the name of that now Dukedom, to have had its beginning. There be Paul Merul.
Cosmog. part. 2. lib. 3. cap. 31.
also that will justify the British name to have been in that tract long
before, and for proof cite Dionysius V. Eustath. ad eundem.
Afer, and Hist. Not. lib. 4. cap. 17 quem super Ligerim Britanos hos Sit^^
dixisse, miror P. Merulam tam constanter affirmasse.
Pliny; But for the first, it is not likely that he ever meant that Continent,
but this of Ours, as the learned tell you; and for Pliny, seeing he reckons his
Britons of Gaul in the confines of the now France, and lower Germany, it is as
unlikely that twixt them and little Bretaigne should be any such habitude. You
want not authority, affirming that Our Britons from them Bed. lib. 1. cap. 3.
quem secutus P. Merula.
, before they from ours, had deduction of this national title; but my belief
admits it not. The surer opinion is to refer the name unto those Britons,
which (being expelled the Island at the entry of the Saxons) got then new
habitation in this maritim part, as beside other authority an express
assertion is in an old Fragment of a French history E^ Ms. Coenoh. Floriac.
edit. per P. Pit^aeum.
, which you may join with most worthy Camdens treatise on this matter; whither
(for a learned declaration of it) I send you.

Forewarned was in dreams that of the Britons reign.
Cadwallader driven to forsake this land, especially by reason of plague and
famine, tyrannizing among his subjects, joined with continual irruptions of
the English, retired himself into little Bretaigne, to his cozen Alan there
King: where, in a dream he was admonisht by an Angel (I justify it but by the
story) that a period of the British Empire was now come, and until time of
Merlins prophecy, given to King Arthur, his country or posterity should have
no restitution; and further, that he should take his journey to Rome, where,
for a transitory he might receive an eternal Kingdom. Alan, upon report of
this vision, compares it with the Eagles prophesies, the Sibylles verses, and
Merlin; See to the II. Song.
nor found he but all were concording in praediction of this ceasing of the
British Monarchy. Through his advice therefore, and a prepared affection,
Cadwallader takes voyage to Rome, received of PP. Sergius, with holy tincture,
the name of Peter, and within very short time there died; his body very lately
under Pope Gregory the XIII. was found Anton. Mayor. ap. Basingstoch. lib. 9.
not. 32.
buried by S. Peter's Tomb, where it yet remains; and White of Basingstoch
says, he had a piece of his raiment of a Chestnut color, taken up (with the
corpse) uncorrupted; which he accounts, as a Romish Pupil, no slight miracle.
It was added among British traditions, that, when Cadwalladers bones Ranulph.
Higden. lib. 5. cap. ^0.
were brought into this Isle, then should the posterity of their Princes have
restitution: concerning that, you have enough to the II. Song. Observing
concurrence of time and difference of relation in the story of this Prince, I
know not well how to give my self or the Reader satisfaction. In Monmouth,
Robert of Gloucester, florilegus, and their followers, Cadwallader is made the
son of Cadwallo K. of the Britons before him, but so, that he descended also
from English-Saxon blood; his mother being daughter to Penda K. of Mercland.
Our Monks call him K. of West Saxons, successor to Kentwine, and son to
Kenbrith. And where Caradoc Lhancaruan tells you of wars twixt Ine or Iuor
(successor to Cadwallader) and Kentwine, it appears in our Chronographers that
Kentwine must be dead above three years before. But howsoever these things
might be reconcilable, Cadwalla Rex Britonum Bed. Hist. Eccles 3. cap. 1.
caeterum v. Nennium ap. Camd. in Ottadinis page 664. and 665. and Bed. lib. 5.
cap. 7.
I think clearly that Cadwallader in the British, and Cedwalla K. of
West Saxons in Bid, Malmesbury, Florence, Huntingdon, and other stories of the
English, are not the same, as Geffrey, and, out of Girald, Randall of Chester,
and others since erroniously have affirmed. But strongly you may hold, that
Cadwallo or Caswallo, living about DC.XL. slain by Oswald K. of
Northumberland, was the same with Bedes first Cedwalla, whom he calls K. of
Britons, and that by misconceit of his two Cedwals (the other being, almost L.
years after, K. of West Saxons) and by communicating of each others attributes
upon indistinct names, without observation of their several times, these
discordant relations of them, which in story are too palpable, had their first
being. But to satisfy you in present, I keep my self to the course of our
ordinary stories, by reason of difficulty in finding an exact truth in all.
Touching his going to Rome; thus: Some will, that he was Christian before, and
received of Sergius only confirmation; others, that he had there his first
Baptism, and lived not above a month after; which time (to make all
dissonant) is extended to VIII. years in Lhancaruan. That, one K. Cedwall went
to Rome, is plain by all, with his now imposed name and burial there: For his
baptism before, I have no direct authority but in Polychronicon; many
arguments proving him indeed a well-willer to Christianity, but as one that had
not yet received its holy testimony. The very phrase in most of our Historians
is plain that he was baptized; and so also his Epitaph then made at Rome, in
part here inserted. Bed eccles. hist. lib. 5. cap. 7 Englisht in substance, if
you say, He was baptized, and soon died.

A. CHR.DC.LXXX.VIII. Judicious conjecture cannot but attribute all this to the
West Saxon Cedwall, and not the British.

See to the XI. Song.


Percipiensque alacer rediuinae praemia vitae,
Barbaricam rabiem, nomen and inde suum,
Conuersus conuertit ouans, Petrumque vocari,
Sergius antistes, Iussi^ vt ipse pater
Font r^nascontis; quem Christi gratia purgans
Pretinus ablatum vexit in arce Poli.
This shows also his short life afterward, and agrees fully with the English
story. His honorable affection to Religion, before his clensing mark of
regeneration, is seen in that kind respect given by him to Wilfrid first
Bishop of Selesey in Sussex; where the Episcopal See of Chichester (hither was
it translated from Selesey, under William the Conqueror) acknowledges in
public monuments, rather him founder then Edilwalch the first Christian King
of that Province, from whom Cedwalla violently took both life and Kingdom: nor
does it less appear, in that his paying T^nths of such spoils, as by wars
fortune, accrued to his greatness; which notwithstanding, although done by one
then not received into the Church of either Testament, is not without many
examples among the ancient Gentiles, who therein imitating the Hebrews, Tithed
much of their possessions, and acquired substance to such Deities as unhallowed
religion taught them to adore; which* whether they did upon Mystery in the
Number, or, therein as paying first fruits (for the word (...) which was for
Abels offerings, and (...) for Melchisedechs tithes, according to that loss
Ratio Cabalistica Minor secundum quam e Centenario quolibet and Denario
vnitatem acci^iunt, reliquos numeros in vtroque vocabulo retinentes vti
Archangel. Burgonouens in Dog. Cabalisticis.
calculation in Cabalistique Concordance of identity's in different words, are
of equal number, and by consequent of like interpretation) I leave to my
Reader. Speaking of this, I cannot but wonder at that very wonder of learning
Ad Festum. verb. Dec^ma.
Joseph Scaliger, affirming, tithes among those Ancients only payable to
Hercules: whereas by express witness of an Clemens Alexand. Strom ^ and Steph.
(...). in (...) tantundem: praeter alios quam plurimos.
old inscription at Delphos, and the common report of Camillus, it is
justified, that both Greeks and Romans did the like to Apollo, and no less,
among them and others together, was to Mars Lucian (...). and Varro ap. Macrob.
3. cap. 1.
, Jupiter Herodot. a.
, Juno Samij apud Herodot. (...).
, and the number of Gods in general, to whom the Athenians dedicated the Tenth
parts of Lesbos. He which the Author, after the British, calls here Iuor, is
affirmed the same with Ine K. of Westsex in our Monkish Chronicles* although
there be scarce any congruity twixt them in his descent. What follows is but
historical and continued succession of their Princes.

More excellent then those which our good Howel here.
For, Howel Dha first Prince of Southwales and Powis, after upon death of his
cozen Edward Voel, of Northwales also, by mature advise in a full Council of
Barons and Bishops, Thucydid hist (...)
made diverse universal constitutions. By these, Wales (until Edward I.) was
ruled. So some say; but the truth is, that before Ed. I. conquered Wales, and,
as it seems, from XXVIII. but especially XXXV. of Hen. III. his Empire
enlarged among them, the English Kings Writ did run there. For when Ed. I.
sent Commission to Rot. Claus. de ann. 9. Ed. 1 an Archin. Turr. Londin.
Reginald of Gray, Thomas Bishop of S. Dewies, and Walter of Hopton, to enquire
of their customs, and by what Jaws they were ruled, diverse Cases were upon
oath returned, which by, and according to, the Kings law, if it were between
Lords or the Princes themselves, had been determined; if between Tenants,
then by the Lords seizing it into his hands, until discovery of the title in
his Court; but also that none were decided by the laws of Howel Dha. Of them,
in Lhuyd's annotations to the Welsh Chronicle, you have some particulars, and
in the Roll which has aided me. Touching those other of Molmutius and Martia,
somewhat to the IX. Song.

Us to subjection stoup, or makes us Britons bear
Th'vnweldy Norman yoke --
Snowdon properly speaks all for the glory of his country, and follows
suppositions of the British story, discording herein with ours. For in Matthew
Paris, and Florilegus under the year M.LXXVIII. I read that the Conqueror
subdued Wales, and took homage and hostages of the Princes; so of Hen. I.
M.C.XIII. Hen. II. in M.C.LVII. and other times; Of this Hen. II. has been
understood that prophecy of Merlin, When the freckle faced Prince (so was the
King) passes over, The Foord at the Rocks head.
Rhyd Pencarn, then should the Welsh forces be weakened. For he in this
expedition against Rees ap Gryffith into South Wales, coming mounted near
that Foord in Glamorgan, his Steed madded with sudden sound of Trumpets, on the
bank violently, out of the purposed way, carries him through the Ford: which
compared with that of Merlin gave to the British army no small discomfiture;
as a Girald. Itin^rar. 1. cap. 6.
Cambro-Briton, then living, has delivered. But, that their stories and ours
are so different in these things, it can be no marvel to any that knows how
often it is used among De quo si placet, videas compend^o^^ apud Alberic.
Gentil. de Arm. Romans 1. cap. 1.
Historians, to flatter their own nation, and wrong the honor of their
enemies. See the first note here for Rufus his time.

And from the English Power the Imperial Standard took.
Henry of Essex, at this time Standard bearer to Hen. II. in a straight at
Counsylth near Flint, cast down the Standard, thereby animating the Welsh,
and discomfiting the English, adding much danger to the dishonor. He was
afterward accused by Robert of Montfort, of a traiterous design in the action.
To clear himself, he challenges the combat: they both, with the royal assent
and judicial course by law of arms, enter the lists; where Montfort had the
victory, and Essex pardoned for his life; but forfeyting Guil. de Nouo Burgo
lib. 2. cap. 5.
all his substance, entered Religion, and professed in the Abbey of Reding, where
the combat was performed. I remember a great Ioa^n. Sarisburiens. Ep. 159.
Clerk of those times says, that Montfort spent a whole night of devotions to
S. Denis (so I understand him, although his copy seem corrupted) which could
make Champions invincible; whereto he referres the success. That it was usual
for Combatants to pray over night to several Saints, is plain by 30. Ed. 3.
^ol. 20.
our Law-annals.

Or any ear had heard the sound of Florida.
About the year M.C.LXX. Madoc, brother to David ap Owen, Prince of Wales,
made this Sea voyage; and, by probability, those names of Capo de Breton in
Norumbeg, and Pengwin in part of the Northern America, for a white Rock and a
white headed Bird, according to the British, were relics of this discovery.
So that the Welsh may challenge priority, of finding that new world, before the
Spaniard, Genoway, and all other mentioned in Lopez, Marinaeus, Cortez, and the
rest of that kind.

And with that Croggins name let the English us disgrace.
The first cause of this name, take thus: In one of Henry the II. his
expeditions into Wales, diverse of his Camp sent to assay a passage over
Offa's-Dike, at Crogen Castle were entertained with prevention by British
forces, most of them there slain, and, to present view, yet lying buried.
Afterward, this Gutyn Owen in Lhewelin ap Iorwerth.
word Crogen, the English used to the Welsh, but as remembering cause of revenge
for such a slaughter, although time has made it usual in ignorant mouths for
a disgraceful attribute.

To his unbridled will our necks we never bowed.
Sufficiently justifiable is this of K. John, although our Monks therein not
much discording from British relation, deliver, that he subdued all Wales;
especially this Northern Note that North Wales was the chief Principality, and
to it South Wales and Powis paid a tribute, as out of the laws of Howel Dha is
noted by Doctor Powel.
part unto Snowdon, and received XX. hostages for surety of future obedience.
For, at first, Lhewelin ap Iorwerth P. of North Wales, had by force joined with
stratagem the better hand, and compeld the English Camp to victual themselves
with Horseflesh; but afterward indeed upon a second rode made into Wales, K.
John had the conquest. This compared with those changes ensuing upon the Popes
wrongful vncrowning him, his Barons rebellion, and advantages in the mean
time taken by the Welsh, proves only that, his winnings here were little
better then imaginary, as on a Tragique Stage. The stories may, but it fits not
me to inform you of large particulars.

As Fate had spared our fall till Edward Longshankes reign.
But withal observe the truth of Story in the mean time. Of all our Kings
until John, somewhat you have already. After him, Hen. III. had wars with
Lhewelin ap Iorwerth; who (a most worthy Prince) desiring to bless his feebler
days, with such composed quiet, as inclining age affects, at last put himself
into the Kings protection. Within short space dying, left all to his sons,
David and Gruffyth; but David only being legitimat, had title of government.
He by Charter Charta Dauidis 25. Hen. 3. Seven, wife to Gryffith then
imprisoned, was with others a pledge for her husbands part.
submits himself and his Principality to the English Crown acknowledges that
he would stand to the judgment of the Kings Court, in controversies twixt his
brother and himself, and that what portions soever were so allotted to either
of them, they would hold of the Crown in Chief; and briefly makes himself
and his Barons (they joining in doing homage) Tenants, and subjects of England.
All this was confirmed by oath, but the oath, through favor, purchased at Rome,
and delegat authority in that kind to the Abbots of Cowey and Remer, was
(according to persuasion of those times, the more easily induced, because gain
of Regal liberty was the consequent) soon released, In Archiu. Scaccar. and
Polydor. hist. Angl. 16.
and in lieu of obedience, they all drew their rebellious swords; whereto they
were the sooner urged, for that the King had transferred the Principality of
Wales (by name of vna cum Conquestu nostro Walliae) to Pr. Edward Longshankes
(afterward Edward I.) since when our Sovereigns eldest sons have borne that
hopeful Title. But when this Edward, after his father, succeeded in the
English Crown, soon came that fatal conversion, here spoken of by the
Author, even executed in as great and worthy a Prince, as ever that third part
of the Isle was ruled by; that is Lhewelin ap Gruffyth, who (after uncertain
fortune of war, M.CC.LXX.VII.
on both sides, and reuolting of Southwales) was constrained to enter a truce
(or rather subjection) resigning his Principality to be annexed wholly to the
Crown, after his death, and reserving, for his life only, the Isle of Anglesey
and five Baronies in Snowdon, for which the Kings Exchequer should receive a
yearly rent of M. Marks, granting also that all the Baronies in Wales should
be held of the King, excepting those five reserved, with diverse other
particulars in Walsingham, Matthew of Westminster, Nicholas Trivet, and Humfrey
Lhuyd, at large reported. The Articles, of this instrument were not long
observed, but at length the death of Lhewelin, spending his last breath for
maintenance of his Ancestors rights against his own covenant, freely cast upon
K. Edward all that, whereof he was, as it were, instituted there. What ensued,
and how Wales was governed afterward, and subject to England, Stories and the
Statute of XII. Ed. I.
Ruthlan will largely show you; and see what I have to the VII. Song. In all
that follows concerning Edward of Carnaruan, the Author is plain enough. And
concluding, observe this proper personating of Snowdon Hill, whose limits and
adjacent territories are best witnesses, both of the English assaults, and
pacifying covenants between both Princes.

Was called in former times her country Cambria's mother.
In the Welsh Proverb M^n ^he mothe^ of Wales.
Mon mam Cymbry Girald. Itinerar. 2. cap. 7. and 9.
; in such sense as Sicile was styled Italies Strabo. lib. ^.
Storehouse, by reason of fertile ground, and plentious liberality of corn
thence yearly supplied. And Girald tells me, that this little Isle was wont to
be able to furnish all Wales with such provision, as S^^wdon Hills were for
Pasture. Of its antiquities and particulars, with plain confutation of that
idle opinion in Polydore, Hector Boethius, and others, taking the (now called)
Isle of Man for this Mon (now Anglesey) learned Lhuyd in his Epistle to
Ortelius has sufficient. Although it be divided as an Isle (but rather by a
shallow Forde, then a Sea: and in the Roman times, we see by Tacitus, that
Paulinus and Agricola's soldiers swamme over it) yet is it, and of ancient
time has been, a County by it self, as Caernaruan, Denbigh, and the rest
neighboring.

That the Eubonian Man, a Kingdom long time known.
It is an Isle lying twixt Cumberland, and the Irish Down County, almost in the
mid-Sea, as long since Julius Caesar could affirm, calling it Commentar. 5.
Mona, which being equivalent, as well for this, as for Anglesey, has with
imposture blinded some knowing men. Nennius (the eldest Historian amongst us
extant) gives it the name of Eubonia-manay, like that here used by the Author.
It was of ancient time governed by Kings of its own, as you may see in the
Chronicle of Russin, deduced from time of S. Edward, into the reign of Edward
the second. After this, the government of the English and Scots were now and
then interchanged in it, being at last recovered, and with continuance, ruled
by such as the favor of our Sovereigns (to whose Crown Walsingh. in Ed. II.
it belonged) honored with that title King of Man. It is at this day, and
since time of Henry IIII. has Camden. in Insulu.
been, in that Noble family of the Stanley's Earls of Derby; as also is the
patronage of the Bishoprique of Sodor, whereto is all judicial government of
the Isle referred. There was long since a Controversy, whether it belonged to
Ireland or England (for you may see in the Civil Vlpian^ff de Iudicijs. l. 9
and verb. sig. l. 99.
law, with which, in that kind, ours somewhat agrees, that all lesser Isles are
reckoned part of some adjoining continent, if both under the same Empire) and
this by reason of the equal distance from both. To decide it, they tried if it
would endure venomous beasts, which is certainly denied of Ireland; and,
finding that it did, Topograph. Hib^rn. did. 2. cap. 15.
adjudged it to our Britain. The other Isles here spoken of, lie further North
by Scotland, and are to it subject.

The fearles British Priests under an aged Oak.
He means the Druids; because they are indeed, as he calls them, British
Priests, and that this Island was of old their Mother: whence, as from a
Seminary, Gaul was furnished with their learning. Permit me some space more
largely to satisfy you in their NAME, PROFESSION, SACRIFICE, PLACES of
Assembling, and lastly, SVBVERSION. The name of Druids has been drawn from
(...). i. an Oak, because of their continual Plin. hist. not. 16. cap. 44.
using that Tree as superstitiously hallowed: according as they are called also
(...) or Diodor. Sicul. de Antiquorum gestis ^ab. ^.
(...), which likewise, in Greek, is Old Oaks. To this compare the British
word Derw of the same signification, and, the Original here sought for, will
seem surely found. But one, Goropius Gallic. 5.
that deriues all from Dutch, and prodigiously supposes that the first tongue
spoken, makes them so styled from Trow wis.1. truly wise, so expressing their
nature in their name. Nor is this without good reason of conjecture (if the
ground were true) seeing that their like in proportion among ^he Jews and
Gentiles were called (until Pythagoras his time) Wise Men (...) ^. dixerunt
Sapientes Capnio de Art. Cabalistic. l. 3. quod Hebraeu in vsu vt (...)
Pythagoraen, nec Drui^um Discipulis refragart sententijs Magistroru^ ^as erat.
, and afterward by him turned into the name of Philosophers..i. Lovers of
wisdom; and perhaps the old Dutch was, as some learned think, communicated
to Gaul, and from thence hither; the conjecture being somewhat aided in that
attribute which they have in Pomponius Geograph. 3. cap. 2.
, calling them Masters of wisdom. A late great Paul. Merula Cosmog. part. 2.
lib. 3. cap. 11.
Scholar draws it from Trutin, in an old Dutch copy of the Gospel,
signifying, as he says, God; which might be given them by Hyperboly of
superstitious reverence: nay, we see that it is justifiable by holy Writ, so to
call great Magistrates and Judges; as they were among the people. But that word
Trutin or Truchtin in the old Angelical salutation, Zacharies Song, and
Simeons, published by Vulcan, is always Lord; as this Giwihit si truchtin got
Israelo.i. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, and so in the Saxon ten
Commandments, Praefat. ad Leg. Aluredi Saxonic.

Berosus (ille Annianus subdititius) Chaldaic. Antiquitat. 5.


(...) in God.i. I am the Lord thy God. These are the etymologies which savor
of any judgment. To speak of King Druis or Sarron, which that Praesat. ad
Leg. Aluredi Saxoni^.

Berosus (ille Annianus subdititius) Chaldaic. Antiquitat. 5.


Dominican Friar has cozened vulgar credulity withal, and thence fetch their
name, according to Doctor White of Basingstoke, were with him to suffer, and,
at once, offer imposture. Of them all, I incline to the first, seeing it meets
in both tongues Greek and British; and somewhat the rather too, because
Antiquity did crown their infernal Deities, (and from Di^, if you trust
Caesar, the Gauls, and by consequence our Britons, upon tradition of these
Priests, drew their descent) with Oak; as In (...) apud Scholiast. Apollonij
vti Primum didici a Iosepho S^aligero in Coniectaneis.
Sophocles has it of Hecate, and De nuptijs Pelei and Thetidos.. His
Corp^abus; tremulum. etc. vbi vulgatis deest ista, quae, antiquorum Codicu^
fide, est vera lectio. vti Scalig.
Catullus of the three Destinies. Neither will I desire you to spend conceit
upon examination of that supposition which makes the name Hector Boeth Scot.
hist. 2.
corrupted from Durcergliis, which in Scottish were such as had a holy charge
committed to them; whereupon, perhaps, Bale says S. Columban was the chief of
the Druids: I reckon that among the infinite Fables and gross absurdities,
which its Author has, without judgment, stuffed himself withal. For their
PROFESSION, it was both of learning Profane and Holy (I speak in all, applying
my words to their times:) They sat as Judges, and determined all causes
emergent, civil and criminal, subiecting the disobedient, and such as made
default to interdicts, and censures* prohibiting them from sacred assemblies,
taking away their capacities in honorable offices, and so disabling them, that
(as our now Out-lawes, excommunicats, and attainted persons) they might not
commence suit against any man. In a multitude of verses they delivered what
they taught, not suffering it to be committed to writing, so imitating both
Cabalist^, Pythagoreans and ancient Call. Rhodigin. Antiq. lect. 10. cap. 1.
Christians; but used in other private and public business Greek letters, as
Caesar's copies have: but hereof see more to the X Song. Their more private and
sacred learning consisted in Divinity, and Philosophy (see somewhat of that to
the I. Song,) which was such, that although I think you may truly say with
Origin Ad Iehezkel. 4.
, that, before our Saviors time, Britain acknowledged not one true God, yet it
came as near to what they should have done, or rather nearer, then most of
other, either Greek or Roman, as by their positions in Caesar, Strabo, Lucan,
and the like discoursing of them, you may be satisfied. For although Apollo,
Mars, and Mercury were worshipped among the vulgar Gauls, yet it appears that
the Druids invocation was to one Plin. Hist. Not. 16. cap. 44.
All-healing or All-sauing power. In Morality, their instructions, were so
perswasiue, and themselves of such reverence, that the most fiery rage of Mars
kindled among the people, was by their grave counsels Strab. Geograph. (...).
often quenched. Out of Pliny receive their form of rituall SACRIFICE (here
described by the Author) thus: In such gloomy shadows, as they most usually for
contemplation retired their ascending thoughts into, after exact search,
finding an Oak, whereon a Mistletoe grew, on the VI. day of the Moon (above
all other times) in which, was beginning of their year, they religiously and
with invocation brought with them to it a ceremonial banquet, materials for
sacrifice, with two white Bulls, filleted on the horns, all which they placed
under the Oak. One of them, honored with that function, clothed all in white,
climbs the tree, and with a golden Knife or Since cuts the Mistletoe, which they
solemnly wrapped in one of their white garments. Then did they sacrifice the
Bulls, earnestly calling on the Omnia Sanantem.
All-healing Deity, to make it prosperous and happy on whom soever they shall
bestow it, and accounted it both preservative against all Poisons, and a remedy
against Barrennes. If I should imagine by this All-healing Deity, to be meant
Apollo, whom they worshipped under name of Belin (as I tell you to the VIII. Song)
my conjecture were every way receiueable; seeing that Apollo Macrob. Saturnal.
cap. 17.
had both among Greeks and Latins the Divine titles of All three words as much
as Physician.
(...), Medicus, and to him the invocation was Heal Apollo.
(...) all concurring in the same proofs but also if they had (as probability
is enough to conjecture it) an Altar inscribed for this devotion, and used
Greek letters (which to the next Song shall be somewhat examined) I could well
think the dedication thus conceived. To All healing Apollo: and Salutaris
Apollo in Numm. Apud Goltzium. in These.
BELINO. TO, PHANAKEL OR, To God Belin.
BELINO. THEO. Which, very probably, was meant by some, making in Latin
termination, and nearer Apollo's name To God Abellio.
DEO ABELLIONI. As, an Inscription, in Gaul, to abiding memory committed by
that most noble Joseph Ausoniarum. Lect. 1. cap. 9.
Scaliger is red; and perhaps some relics or allusion to this name is in that
DEO SANCTO BELATVCADRO...... Yet remaining in Camd. ibid.
Cumberland. Nor is it strange that Apollo's name should be thus far of
ancient time, before communication of Religion twixt these Northern parts and
the learned Gentiles, seeing that Caesar affirms him for one of their Deities;
and, long before that, Abaris (about the beginning of the (...) ap. Suid. in
Aba^.
Olympiads) an Hyperborean is recorded for Malchus. vit. Pythagorae.
Apollo's Priest among the utmost Scythian^, being further from Hellenisme then
our British. But I return to the Mistle: Hereto has some referred Virgil
Aeneid. 6. Petr. Crinit. Hist. Poet. 6. cap. 10.
that which the Sibyll counseled Aeneas to carry with him to Proserpine; --
She directs him to seek a golden branch in the dark woods, consecrate to
Proserpine.
latet arbore opaca
Aureus and folijs and lento vimine ramus
Iunoni inferna dictus sacer: hunc tegit omnis
Lucus, and obscuris claudunt conuallibus vmbrae.
Which may as well be so applied, as to Bracesch. in Ligno vitae.
Chemistry; seeing it agrees also with what I spoke before of Dis, and that,
Virgil expressly compares it to the Mistle, -- Which grows not of it self.
quod non sua seminat arbos.
for it springs out of some particular Nature of the Oaken stem, whereupon it
is called by an old Poet (...): Sweat of the Oak. Ion apud Athenaeum
Dipnosoph. 10.
and although it be not ordinarily found upon Oaks, yet, that oftimes it is
any Apothecary can tell, which preserves it for medicine, as the Ancients used
to make Lime of it to catch birds: of which Antholog. (...). cap. (...).
Argentarius has an admonitory Epigram to a Blacke-bird, that she should not
sing upon the Oak, because that -- Bred Lime to catch her.
(...),
but on the Vine, dedicated to Bacchus, a great fauorit of Singers. Upon this
Druidian custom Io. Goropius Gallic. 5. and ali^.
, some have grounded that unto this day used in France, where the younger
country fellows, about New-yeares tide in every Village give the wish of good
fortune at the Inhabitants doors, with this acclamation, To the Mistle, this
new year.
Au guy l'an neuf; which, as I remember, in Rablais is read all one word, for
the same purpose. Whether this had any community with the institution of that
Plutarch. Problem. Romans (...). Coelius Rhodigin. Antiq. lect. 18. cap. 14.
Temple As if you should say of Mistled Fortune To the Mistle, the Druids used
to cry.
(...) in Antium, or that Ovid alluded to it in that verse, commonly cited out
of him, Lord King a health.
At ( some read ad) Viscum Druida, Viscum clamare solebant;
I cannot assure you, yet it is enough likely. But I see a custom in some
parts among us, in our language (nor is the digression too faulty) the same in
effect; I mean the yearly was-haile in the country on the vigil of the New
year, which had its beginning, as some Galfred. Monameth l. 3. cap. 1.
say, from that of Ronix (Daughter to Hengist) her drinking to Vortigern, by
these words Drink the health.
Louerd king was-heil, he answering her by direction of an Interpreter,
Drinc-heile, and Rob. Glocestrens.
then, Kust^ hire and sit hire adoune and glad drunk hire heil
And that was tho in this land the verst was-hail
As in langage of Saxoyne that me might euere iwite
And so well he paith the fool about, that he is not yut voryute.
Afterward it appears that was^haile and Drin^-heil were the usual phrases of
quaffing among the English, as we see in Vita Edwardi II.
Thomas de la Moore, and before him that old In Architren. lib. 2.
Hauillan, thus: Ecce vagante cifo distento gutture wass-heil
Ingeminant wass-heil --
But I rather conjecture it a usual ceremony among the Saxons before Hengist,
as a note of health-wishing (and so perhaps you might make it wish-heil which
was expressed among other nations in that form of drinking to the Health of their
Mistresses and friends, Been Subintellige (...) aut quid simile.
vos, been nos, been te, been me, been nostram etiam
Stephanium.
in In Sticho.
Plautus, and infinite other testimonies of that nature (in him Martial, Ovid,
Horace, and such more) agreeing nearly with the fashion now used; we calling
it a Health, as Propino tibi Salutem plenis faucibus, Plautus eadem comoedia.
they did also in direct terms; which, with an Idol called He^l, anciently
worshipped, at Cerne in Camdenus. The Wasshailboll.
Dorsetshire, by the English-Saxons, in name expresses both the ceremony of
Drinking, and the New Years acclamation (whereto in some parts of this Kingdom
is joined also solemnity of drinking out of a * cup, ritually composed, decked,
and filled with country liquour) just as much and as the same which that
All-healing Deity, or All-helping medicine did among the Druids. Yo may to all this add, that, as an Earnest of good luck to follow the New-yeare beginning,
it was Ovid. Fastor. 1. Fest. in Strena.
usual among the Romans, as with us, and I think, in all Europe, at this day
is, to greet each other with auspicious gifts. But hereof you say I unfitly
expatiat: I omit, therefore their sacrificing of humane bodies, and such like,
and come to the PLACES of their assembly. This was about Chartres in Gaul, as
Caesar tells us; Paul Merula (for affinity of name) imagines it to be Dreux,
some eight miles on this side Chartres. And peradventure the Galatians public
Council called Strab. Geograph. (...).
Drymenetum had hence Original. The British Druids took this Isle of Anglesey
(then well stored with thick Woods, and religious Groves, in so much that it
was called The Dark Isle Brit.
Inis-Dowil) for their chief residence; as, in the Roman Tacit. Annal. 14. and
Vit. Agricolae.
story of Paulinus and Agricola's aduenturing on it, is delivered. For their
SVBVERSION; under Augustus and Tiberius they were prohibited Sueton. lib. 5.
cap. 24. and Plin. Hist. Not. 30. cap. 1.
Rome; and Claudius, endeavored it in Senec. in Apo^oloc. and Sueton. vbi supra.
Gaul; yet in the succeeding Emperors times there were of them left, as
appears in Lampridius and Vopiscus, mentioning them in their lives; and, long
since that, Procopius, De bell. Gothic. (...).
writing under Justinian above D. years after Christ, affirms that then the
Gauls used sacrifices of human flesh, which was a part of Druidian doctrine. If
I should upon testimony Hector. Boet. Scotor. hist. 2. and 6.
of, I know not what, Veremund Campbell, and the Irish Cornell, tell you that
some C.LX. years before Christ, Finnan K. of Scotland first gave them the
Isle, or that K. Crathlint in Diocletians persecution, turned their Religion
into Christianisme, and made Amphibalus first Bishop of Sodor, I should
fabulously abuse time, as they have ignorantly mistook that Isle of Man, for
this. Or to speak of the supposed their Druttenfuss.i. a Pentagonall figure,
engraven with (...) or (...). (it is the same, in fashion, with the victorious
seal of Antiochus Soter Lucian (...); Alij and habetur apud Agrippam in 3. d^
Occulta Philosoph. cap. 31. atque ex Antiochi nammis apud I. Reuchlinum in 3.
de art Cabalistica.
, being admonished by Alexander in a dream, to take it) which in Germany they
reckon for a preservative against Hobgoblins, were but to be indulgent to old
wives traditions. Only thus much for a corollary, I will note to you; Conrad
Tract. de Hercy^ia Sylua.
Celtes observes, to be in an Abbey at the foot of Vichtelberg hill, near
Voitland, six Statues, of stone, set in the Church-wall, some VII. foot every
one tall, bare head and foot, cloakt and hooded, with a bag, a book, a
staff, a beard hanging to his middle, and spreading a Mustachio, an austere
look and eyes fixed on the earth; which he conjectures to be Images of them.
Upon mistaking of Strabo, and applying what he says in general, and bracelets
and gold chains of the Gauls, to the Druids, I once thought that Conrad had
been deceived. But I can now upon better advice incline to his judgment.

Which with my Princes Court I sometimes pleased to grace.
For, as in Southwales, Caermardhin, and afterward Dineuowr; in Powis,
Shrewsbury, and then Mathraual, so in Northwales was Aber-fraw, in Anglesey,
chief place of the Princes Pris. in descript. Wall.
residence.

Least (by reason of the Composition in Print) some pages should have been
idle, and because also here is so much of the Welsh Story, I inserted this
Chronology of the Kings and Princes of Wales, from Arthur, until the end of
the British blood in them.

Of Christ.
D.XVI. Arthur succeeded his father Other Pendragon: of his death, see to the
III. Song. I will not justify the times of this Arthur, nor the rest, before
Cadwallader; so discording are our Chronologers: nor had ^ time to examine, nor
think that any man has sufficient means to rectify them.
D.XLII. Constantine, son to Cador Duke of Cornwall (understand Governor or
L. Lieutenant; for, neither in those times nor long after, was any such title
particularly Honorary:) he lies buried at Stonehenge. DXLV. Aurelius Conan.
D.LXXVIII. Vortipor. D.LXXXI. Malgo. D.LXXXVI. Catherie. In his time the
Britons had much adverse fortune in War with the Saxons; and then, most of
all, made that secession into Wales and Cornwall, yet in name retayning hereof
remembrance. About DC. Cadwan. About DC.XXX. Cadwalin or Cadwallo: the Britons
as in token of his Powerful resistance and dominion against the Saxons, put
This report is, as the British story tells, hardly justifiable, if examined.
him, being dead, into a brazen Horse, and set it on the top of the West gate
of London; it seems he means Ludgate. DC.LXXVI. Cadwallader, son to
Cadwallo. Of him and his name, see before. Nor think I the British and English
Chronicles, concerning him, reconcilable. In him the chief Monarchy and Glory
of the British failed. DC.LXXXVIII. Iuor son to Alan, K. of Armorique
Britain. This Iuor they make (but I examine it not now) Ine K. of West Saxons
in our Monks; that is, he which began the Petter-pence to Rome. DCC.XX.
Roderique Molwinoc son of Edwal The Roo.
Ywrch. DCC.LV. Conan Tindaethwy, son of Roderique. Near DCCC.XX. Meruin
Vrich, in right of his wife Esylht, daughter and heir to Roderique.
DCCC.XLIII. Roderique Mawr, son to Mervin and Esyhlt. Among his sons was
the tripartit division of Wales (as to the VII. Song) into Powise, North, and
Southwales. DCCC.LXXVII. Anarawd son to Roderique. DCCCC.XIII. Edward Voel,
son of Anarawd. DCCCC.XL. Howel Dha, cozen German to Edwal, having before,
the Principality of Southwales and Powis. This is he whose Laws are so famous
and inquired of in Rot. Claus. Wall. 9. Ed. 1. in the Tower. DCCCC.XLVIII.
Ieuaf and Iago, sons of Edwal Voel. DCCCC.LXXXII Howel ap Ieuaf. DCCCC.XXCIV.
Cadwalhon ap Ieuaf. DCCCC.XXCVI. Meredith ap Owen. DCCCC.XCII. Edwal ap Meiric.
M.III. Aedan ap Blegored. M.XV. Lhewelin ap Sitsylht. M.XXI. Iago ap Edwal ap
Meyric. M.XXXVII. Gruffyth ap Lhewelin. M.LXI. Blethin and Rhywallon ap Connin.
M.LXXIII. Trahaern ap Caradoc. M.LXXVIII. Gruffyth ap Conan. He reformed the
Welsh Poets and Minstrels, and brought over others out of Ireland to instruct
the Welsh, as to the IV. Song. M.CXXXVII. Owen Gwineth ap Gruffyth ap Conan.
M.C.LXIX. David ap Owen Gwineth. In his time, Madoc his brother discovered part
of the West Indus. M.C.XCIV. Lhewelin ap Iorwerth ap Owen Gwineth. M.CC.XL.
David ap Lhewelin ap Iorwerth. M.CC.XLVI. Lhewelin ap Gruffyth ap Lhewelin ap
Iorwerth, the last Prince of Wales of the British blood. M.CC.LXXXII. Ed. I.
Conquered Wales, and got the Principality, Lhewelin then slain; and since that
( Henry III. before gave it also to his son Prince Edward) it has been in
the eldest sons, and heirs apparent of the English Crown.
But note, that after the Division among Roderique Mawr's sons, the
Principality was chiefly in Northwales, and the rest as Tributary to Prince of
that Part: and for him as supreme K. of Wales, are all these deductions of time
and Persons, until this last Lhewelin.



The tenth Song.
* THE ARGUMENT.
The serious Muse her self applies
To Merlins ancient prophecies,
At Dinas Emris; where he showed
How Fate the Britains rule bestowed.
To Conway next she turns her tale,
And sings her Cluyds renowned Vale;
Then of Saint Winifrid does tell,
And all the wonders of her Well;
Makes Dee, Bruit's history pursue:
At which, she bids her Wales Adieu.
AWhile thus taking breath, our way yet fair in view,
The Muse her former course does seriously pursue.
From Penmens craggy height to try her saily wings, Penmenmaure.

Herself long having bathed in the delicious Springs
(That trembling from his top through long-worne crannies creep,
To spend their liquid store on the insatiate Deep)
She meets with Conway first, Pearl in the River Conway.
which lies next at hand:
Whose precious orient Pearl that breeds in her sand,
Above the other floods of Britain does her grace:
Into the Irish Sea which making out her race,
Supplied by many a Mere (through many several Rills
Into her bosom poured) her plentiously she fills.
O goodly River! near unto thy sacred Spring
. Prophetique Merlin sat, when to the British King
The changes long to come, auspiciously he told.
Most happy were thy Nymphs, that wondering did behold,
His grauer wrinkled brow, amazed and did hear
The dreadful words he spoke, that so ambiguous were.
Thrice happy Brooks, I say, that (every way about)
Thy tributaries be: as is that Town, where-out
Into the Sea thou fall'st, which Conway of thy name
Perpetually is called, to register thy fame.
For thou, clear Conway, heard'st wise Merlin first relate
The Destinies Decree, of Britains future fate;
Which truly he foretold proud Vortiger should lose:
As, when him from his seat the Saxons should depose:
The forces that should here from Little Britain in France.
Armorick arrive,
Yet far too weak from hence the enemy to drive:
And to that mighty King, which rashly undertook
A strong-wall'd Tower to rear, those earthly spirits that shook
The great foundation still, in Dragons horrid shape,
That dreaming Wisard told; making the Mountain gape
With his most powerful charms, to view those Caverns deep;
And from the top of Part of the Snowdon.
Brith, so high and wondrous steep,
Where Dinas Emris stood, showed where the Serpents fought,
The White that tore the Red; from whence the Prophet wrought
The Britains sad decay then shortly to ensue.
O! happy ye that heard the man who all things knew
Until the general Doom, through all the world admyr'd:
By whose Prophetic Sawes ye all became inspyr'd;
As well the forked Neage, that neer'st her Fountain springs,
With her beloved maid, Melandidar, that brings
Her flow, where Conway forth into the Sea does slide
(That to their Mistress make from the Denbighian side)
As those that from the hills of proud Carnarvan fall.
This scarce the Muse had said, but Cluyd does quickly call
Her great recourse, to come and guard her while she glide
Along the goodly Vale (which with her wealthy pride
Much beautifies her banks; so naturally her own,
The situation of Dyfferen Cluyd.
That Dyffren Cluyd by her both far and near is known)
With high embatteld hills that each way is enclosed
But only on the North: and to the North disposed,
Fierce Boreas finds access to court the dainty Vale:
Who, whispering in her ear with many a wanton tale,
Allures her to his love (his Leman her to make)
As one that in himself much suffers for her sake.
The Isles upon the North-east and West of Scotland.
Orcades, and all those Isles upon the North-east and West of Scotland.
Eubides embraced
In Neptunes aged arms, to Neptune seeming chaste,
Yet prostitute themselves to Boreas; who neglects
The Calidonian Downs, nor ought at all respects
The other inland Dales, abroad that scattred lie,
Some on the English earth, and some in Albany;
But, courting Dyffren Cluyd, her beauty does prefer.
Such dalliance as alone the North Wind has with her,
In the vj. book of Ouids Metamorph.
Orithya not enjoyed, from Thrace when he her took,
And in his saylie plumes the trembling Virgin shook:
But through the extreme love he to this Vale does bear,
Grows jealous at the length, and mightily does fear
Great Neptune, whom he sees to smug his horrid face:
And, fearing least the God should so obtain her grace,
From the Septentrion cold, in the breem freezing air,
Where the bleake North Wind keeps, still dominering there,
From Shetland stradling wide, The Tides out of the North and South Seas,
meeting in S. Georges chanel.
his foot on Thuly sets:
Whence storming, all the vast Deucalidon he threts,
And bears his boystrous waves into the narrower mouth
Of the Vergiuian Sea: where meeting, from the South,
Great Neptunes surlier tides, with their robustious shocks,
Each other shoulder up against the griesly Rocks;
As strong men when they meet, contending for the path:
But, coming near the Coast where Cluyd her dwelling has,
The North Wind (calm become) forgets his Ire to wreake,
. And the delicious Vale thus mildly does bespeake;
Dear Cluyd, th'aboundant sweets, that from thy bosom flow,
When with my active wings into the air I throw,
Those Hills whose hoarie heads seem in the clouds to dwell,
Of aged become young, enamored with the smell
Of th'odoriferous flowers in thy most precious lap:
Within whose veluit leaves, when I my self enwrap,
They suffocate with sents; that (from my native kind)
I seem some slow perfume, and not the swistest wind.
With joy, my Dyffren Cluyd, I see thee bravely spread,
Survaying every part, from foot up to thy head;
Thy full and youthful breasts, which in their meadowy pride,
Are brancht with riuery veins, Meander-like that glide.
I further note in thee, more excellent then these
(Were there a thing that more the amorous eye might please)
Thy plumpe and swelling womb, whose mellowy gleabe does bear
The yellow ripened sheafe, that bends with the care.
Whilst in this sort his suit he amorously preferred,
Moylvennill near at hand, the North Wind ouer-heard:
And, vexed at the heart, that he a Mountain great,
Which long time in his breast had felt loves kindly heat,
As one whom crystal Cluyd had with her beauty caught,
Is for that Rivers sake near of his wits distraught,
With inly rage to hear that Valley so extold;
And yet that Brook whose course so batfull makes her mould,
And one that lends that Vale her most renowned name,
Should of her meaner far, be ouer-gone in fame.
Wherefore, Riueret^ running into Cluyd out of Denbigh and Flintshire.
Moylevennill willed his Cluyd her self to show:
Who, from her native Fount, as proudly she does flow,
Her handmaids Manian has, and Hespin, her to bring
To Ruthin. Whose fair seat first kindly visiting,
To lead her thence in state, Lewenny lends her sourse:
That when Moylvennill sees his Rivers great recourse,
From his entrenched top is pleased with her supplies.
Claweddock comes in, and Istrad likewise hies
Unto the Queene-like Cluyd, as she to Denbigh draws:
And on the other side, from whence the Morning dawes,
Down from the Flintian hills, comes Wheler, her to bear
To sacred Asaph's See, his hallowed Temple; where
Fair Elwy having won her sister Aleds power,
They entertain their Cluyd near mighty Neptunes bower:
Who likewise is sustained by Senion, last that falls,
And from the Virgins Well does wash old Ruthlands walls.
Moylvennill with her sight that never is sufficed,
Now with excessive joy so strongly is surpised,
That thus he proudly spoke; On the Gwynethian ground
(And look from East to West) what Country is there crowned
As thou Part of the Vale called Tag-Engle.i. Fair England.
Tegenia art? that, with a Vale so rich
(Cut thorough with the Cluyd, whose graces me bewitch)
The fruitfulst of all Wales, so long have honored bin:
As also by thy Spring, such wonder who do win,
. That naturally remote, six British miles from Sea,
A Fountain ebbing and flowing, contrary to the course of the Sea.
And rising on the Firm, yet in the natural day
Twice falling, twice does fill, in most admired wise.
When Cynthia from the East unto the South does rise,
That mighty Neptune flows, then strangly ebs thy Well:
And when again he sinks, as strangely she does swell;
. Yet to the sacred fount of Winifrid gives place;
Of all the Cambrian Springs of such especial grace,
That often the Of Dee.
Deuian Nymphs, as also those that keep
Amongst the Corall-Groues in the Verginian Deep,
Have left their watery bowers, their secret safe Retire,
To see her whom report so greatly should admire
(Whose waters to this day as perfect are and clear,
As her delightful eyes in their full beauties were,
A virgin while she lived) chaste Winifrid: who chose
Before her mayden-gem she forcibly would lose,
To have her harmless life by the lewd Rapter spilt:
For which, still more and more to aggrauate his guilt,
The liuelesse tears she shed, into a Fountain turn.
And, that for her alone the water should not mourn,
The pure vermillion blood, that issued from her veins,
Unto this very day the pearly Gravel stains;
As erst the white and red were mixed in her cheek.
And, that one part of her might be the other like,
Her hair was turned to moss; whose sweetness does declare,
In liveliness of youth the natural sweets she bare:
And of her holy life the innocence to show,
What-euer living thing into this Well you throw,
She strongly bears it up, not suffering it to sink.
Besides, the wholesome use in bathing, or in drink.
Does the diseased cure, as thereto she did leave
Her virtue with her name, that time should not bereave.
Scarce of this tedious tale Moylevennill made an end,
But that the higher A place mou^tainous, and somewhat inaccessible.
Yale, whose being does ascend
Into the pleasant East, his loftier head advanced.
This Region, as a man that long had been intranc't
(Whilst thus himself to please, the mighty Mountain tells
Such Strange things.
farlies of his Cluyd, and of his wondrous Wells)
Stood thinking what to do: least fair Tegenia, placed
So admirably well, might hold her self disgraced
By his so barren site, being Mountainous and cold,
To nothing more unlike then Dyffren's batfull mould;
And in respect of her, to be accounted rude.
Yale, for he would not be confounded quite by Cluyd
(And for his common want, to coin some poor excuse)
Unto his proper praise, discreetly does produce
A Valley, for a Vale, of her peculiar kind;
In goodness, breadth, and length, though Dyffren far behind:
On this yet dare he stand, that for the natural frame,
. That figure of the Cross, of which it takes the name,
Is equal with the best, which else excel it far:
And by the power of that most sacred Character,
Respect beyond the rest unto herself does win.
When now the sterner Dee does instantly begin
His ampler self to show, that (down the verdant Dale)
Strains, in his nobler course along the rougher Yale,
T'invite his favoring Brooks: where from that spacious Lin*
Through which he comes unmixed, The Rivers in the East of Denbigh, falling into
Dee.
first Alwin falls in:
And going on along, still gathering up his force,
Gets Gerrow to his aid, to hasten on his course.
With Christioneth next, comes Keriog in apace.
Out of the leaden Mines, then with her sullied face
Claweddock casts about where Gwenrow she may greet,
Till like two loving friends they under Wrexam meet.
Then Alen makes approach (to Dee most inly dear)
Taking Tegiddog in; who, earnest to be there,
For haste, twice under earth her crystal head does run:
When instantly again, Dee's holiness begun,
By his contracted front and sterner waves, to show
That he had things to speak, might profit them to know;
A Brook, that was supposed much business to have seen,
Which had See to the VIII. Song.
an ancient bound twixt Wales and England been,
And noted was by both to be an ominous Flood,
That changing of his Foards, the future ill, or good,
Of either Country told; of eithers war, or peace,
The sickness, or the health, the dearth, or the increase:
And that of all the Floods of Britain, he might boast
His stream in former times to have been honored most,
When as at Chester once king Edgar held his Court,
. To whom eight lesser Kings with homage did resort:
That mighty Mercian Lord, him in his Barge bestowed,
And was by all those Kings about the River rowed.
For which, the hallowed Dee so much upon him took.
And now the time was come, that this imperious Brook,
The long traduced Brute determined to awake,
And in the Britains right thus boldly to them spoke;
O ye the ancient race of famous Brute that be,
. And thou the Queen of Isles, great Britain; why do ye
Your Grand-sires God-like name (with a neglectfull ear)
In so reproachful terms and ignominy hear,
By every one of late contemptuously disgra'ct;
That he whom Time so long, and strongly has embraced,
Should be rejected quite? The reason urged why,
Is by the general foe thus answered by and by:
That Brutus, as you say, by Sea who hither came,
From whom you would suppose this I Will first took the name,
Meerelie fictitious is; nor could the Romans hear
(Most studious of the truth, and neer'st those times that were)
Of any such as he: nay, they who most do strive,
From that great stock of Troy their lineage to derive,
In all the large descent of Iulus, never found
That Brute, on whom we might our first beginning ground.
To this Assertion, thus I faithfully reply;
And as a friend to Truth, do constantly deny
Antiquity to them, as nearer to those times;
Their writings to precede our ancient British Rimes:
But that our noble Bards which so divinely sung
That remnant of old Troy, of which the Britains sprung,
Before those Romans were, as proof we can produce;
. And learning, long with us, ere it was with them in use.
And they but idly talk, vpbrayding us with lies.
. That Geffray Monmouth, first, our Brutus did devise,
Not heard of till his time our Adversary says:
When pregnantlie we prove, ere that Historians days,
A thousand lingering years, our Prophets clearly song
The Britaine-founding Brute, most frequent them among.
From Taliessen wise (approved so with us,
That what he spoke, was held to be oraculous,
So true his writings were) and such immortal men
As this now-waning world shall hardly hear again
In our own genuine tongue, that natives were of Wales
Our Geffray had his Brute. Nor were these idle tales
(As he may find, the truth of our descents that seeks)
Nor fabulous, like those devised by the Greeks:
But from the first of Time, by Judges still were heard,
Discreetlie every At the Stethua: see to the fourth Song.
year correcting where they erred.
And that whereon our Foe his greatest hold does take,
Against the handled Cause and most does seem to make,
Is, that we show no Book our Brutus to approve;
But that our idle Bards, as their fond rage did move,
Sang what their fancies pleased. Thus do I answer these;
That the ancient British Priests, The Druides would not commit their mysteries
to writing.
the fearlesse Druides,
That ministered the laws, and were so truly wise,
That they determined states, attending sacrifice,
. To letters never would their mysteries commit,
For which the breasts of men they deemed to be more fit.
Which questionless should seem from judgment to proceed.
For, when of Ages past we look in books to read,
We retchlesly discharge our memory of those.
So when injurious Time, such Monuments does lose
(As what so great a Work, by Time that is not wrackt?)
We utterly forgo that memorable act:
But when we lay it up within the minds of men,
They leave it their next Age; that, leaves it hers again:
So strongly which (me thinks) does for Tradition make,
As if you from the world it altogether take,
You utterly subvert Antiquity thereby.
For though Time well may prove that often she does lie,
Posterity by her yet many things has known,
That ere men learned to write, could no way have been shown:
For, if the spirit of God, did not our faith assure
The Scriptures be from heaven, like heaven, divinely pure,
Of Moses mighty works, I reverently may say
(I speak with godly fear) Tradition put away,
In power of humane wit it easily does not lie
To prove before the Flood the Genealogy.
Nor any thing there is that kindlier does agree
With our descent from Troy (if things compared may be)
Then peopling of this place, near to those Ages, when
Exiled by the Greeks, those poor world-wandring men
(Of all hope to return into their Country reft)
Sought shores whereon to set that little them was left:
From some such God-like race we questionless did spring,
Who soon became so great here once inhabiting.
So barbarous nor were we as many have us made,
And Caesar's envious pen would all the world persuade,
His own ambitious ends in seeking to advance,
When with his Roman power arriving here from France,
If he the Britains found experienced so in war,
That they with such great skill could weeld their armed Carre;
And, as he still came on, his skillful march to let,
Cut down their aged Oaks, and in the Rivers set
The sharp steele-poynted stakes, as he the Foards should pass;
I feign would understand how this that Nation was
So ignorant he would make, and yet so knowing war.
But, in things past so long (for all the world) we are
Like to a man embarqu't, and traveling the Deep:
Who sailing by some hill, or promontory steep
Which iuts into the Sea, with an amazed eye
Beholds the Cleeues thrust up into the lofty sky.
And th'more that he does look, the more it draws his sight;
Now at the craggy front, then at the wondrous weight:
But, from the passed shore still as the swelling sail
(Thrust forward by the wind) the floating Barque does hail,
The mighty Giant-heape, so less and lesser still
Appears to the eye, until the monstrous hill
At length shows like a cloud; and further being cast,
Is out of kenning quite: So, of the Ages past;
Those things that in their Age much to be wondered were,
Still as wing-footed Time them farther off does bear,
Do lessen every hour. When now the mighty prease,
Impatient of his speech, entreat the Flood to cease,
And cry with one consent, the Saxon state to show,
As angry with the Muse such labor to bestow
On Wales, but England still neglected thus to be.
And having past the time, the honorable Dee
At Chester was arrived, and bad them all adieu:
When our intended course, with England we pursue.
Illustrations.
REturning into the land, the Muse leads you about Denbigh and Flint, most
Northern and Maritim shires of Wales; which conclude these seven last books
dedicated to the glory of that third part of Great Britain.

Prophetique Merlin sat, when to the British King.
In the first declining State of the British Empire (to explane the Author in
this of Merlin) Vortigern, by advice of his Magicians, after diverse unfortunate
successes in war, resolved to erect a strong Fort in Snowdon hills (not far
from Conwey's head in the edge of Merioneth) which might be as his last and
surest Refuge, against the increasing power of the English. Masons were
appointed, and the work begun; but what they built in the day, was always
swallowed up in the earth next, night. The King asks counsel of his
Magicians, touching this prodigy: they advise that he must find out a child
which had no father, and with his blood sprinkle the stones and mortar, and
that then the Castle would stand as on a firm foundation. Search was made, and
in Caer-Merdhin (as you have it to the V. Song) was Merlin Ambrose found: he,
being hither brought to the King, slighted that pretended skill of those
Magicians as palliated ignorance; and with confidence of a more knowing spirit,
undertakes to show the true cause of that amazing ruin of the stone-worke;
tells them that in the earth was a great water, which could endure continuance of
no heavy superstruction. The workmen dug to discover the truth, and found it
so. Heathen beseeches the King to cause them make further inquisition, and
affirms, that in the bottom of it were two sleeping Dragons: which proved so
likewise, the one white, the other red; the white he interpreted for the
Saxons* the red for the Britons: and upon this event here in Ambroses Bury.
Itinerar. 2. cap. 8.
Dinas Emrys, as they call it, began he those prophecies to Vortigern, which
are common in the British story. Hence questionles was that Fiction of the
Muses best pupil, the noble Spenser Faery Q lib. 1. Cant. 9. Stanz. 4.
, in supposing Merlin usually to visit his old Timon, whose dwelling he places
-- low in a valley green
Under the foot of Rauran mossie hoar
From whence the River Dee as silver cleene
Has tumbling billows rols with gentle rore.


For this Rauran-Vaur hill is there by in Merioneth: but observe with-all, the
difference of the Merlins, Ambrose, and Syluester, which is before to the IV
Song; and permit it, only as Poetical, that he makes K. Arthur and this Merlin
of one time. Merlins Prophecies.
These prophecies were by Geffrey ap Arthur at request of Alexander Bishop of
Lincoln under Hen. I. turned into Latin, and some CCC. years since had
interpretation bestowed on them by a German Doctor, one Alanus de Insulis, who
never before, but twice since that happy inauguration and mighty increase of
Dominion in our Present Sovereign has been imprinted. It is certain that
oftimes they may be directly and without constraint applied to some event of
succeeding time* as that which we have before to the V. Song of Caerleon, and
this, the Isle shall again be named after Brute; Great Britain.
which is now seen by a public Edict, and in some of his Majesty's present
Coins, and with more such: yet seeing learned Wier de praestiijs Demon. 2. cap.
16. a^ij.
men account him but a professor of unjustifiable Magique, and that all
prophecies either fall true, or else are among the affecters of such vanity
perpetually expected, and that of later time the Council of Trent have by
their Expurgatories, prohibited it, I should abuse you, if I endeavored to
persuade your belief to to conceit of a true foreknowledge in him.

And the delicious Vale thus mildly does be speak.
If your conceit yet see not the purpose of this Fiction, then thus take it.
This Vale of Cluid (for so is the English of Dyphryn Clwyd.) extended from the
middle of Denbigh-shire to the Sea, about XVIII. miles long, and some V. in
breadth, having those three excellencies, a fertile soil, healthful air, and
pleasant seat for habitation, washed through the middle with this River, and
encompast on the East, West, and South with high Mountains, freely receives
the wholesome blasts of the Northwinde (much accounted of among builders and
Geoponiques for immission of pure air) coming in from that part which lies
open to the Sea: whereupon the Muse very properly makes the Vale here Boreas
his beloved; and in respect of his violence against the waters, supposes him
jealous of Neptune; whose rauishing waves in that troubled Irish Sea and the
deprest state of the Valley warrants it. And for that of Moluennils love to the
River, wantonly running by him; I know your conceit cannot but apprehend it.

That naturally remote six British miles from Sea.
It is in the Parish of Kilken in Flintshire, where it ebbeth Hum. Lhuid.
descript.
and flows in direct opposite times to the Sea, as the Author describes; they
call it Pouel. ad Girald. Itinerar. 1. cap. 10.
Finon Leinw: Such a one is there about a furlong from the Seuerne Sea, by
Newton in Stradling. ap Camd.
Glamorganshire, and another ebbing and flowing (but with the common course of
the Moon, ascending or setting) by Dineuor Girald. Itinerar. 1. cap. 10.
in Caermerdhinshire. Nor think I any reasons more difficult to be given, then
those which are most specially hidden, and most frequently strange in
particular qualities of Floods, Wells, and Springs; in which (before all
other) Nature seems as if she had, for man's wonder, affected a not
intelligible variety, so different, so remote from conceit of most piercing
wits; and such unlooked for operations both of their first and second qualities
(to use the School phrase of them) are in every Chronographer, Naturalist, and
Historian.

Yet to the sacred fount of Winifrid gives place.
At Haliwell a Maritime village, near Basingwerke in Flint, is this Winifreds
Well, whose sweetness in the Moss, wholsomnes for bath, and other such useful
qualities* have been referred to her martyrdom in this place. But D. Powel
upon Girald, in effect thus: Hen. II. in his first Welsh expedition fortified
the Castle of Basingwerke, and near by, made a Cell for Templers, which
continued there until their dissolution under 5. Ed. 2.
Edward II. and was after converted to a neast of lubberly Monks, whose
superstitious honoring her, more then truth, caused this dedication of the
Fountain; so much to their profit (in a kind of merchandise then, too
shamefully in request) that they had large guerdons (it belonging to the Celle)
of those, which had there any medicine, beside increasing rents which accrued
to them yearly out of Pardons to such as came thither in solemn Pilgrimage.
This title of exaction they purchased of PP. Martin V. under Henry the V. and
added more such gaigning pretenses to themselves in time of Hen. VII. by like
authority; nor, until the more clear light of the Gospel, yet continuing its
comfortable beams among us, dissipated those foggie mists of error and
smoake-selling imposture, ended these collected revenues. The Author follows
the Legend; but observe times compared, and you shall find no mention of this
Well, and the healthful operations of it, until long after the supposed time
of S. Winifreds martyrdom.

That figure of the Cross of which it takes the name.
Deprest among Mountains this Valley expresses the form of a Cross, and so
is called the Cross vale, and in British Lhan Gwest.

To whom eight lesser Kings with homage did resort.
Upon comparing our Stories, I find them to be Kenneth of Scotland, Malcolme of
Cumberland, Malcuze K. of the Isles (whom Malmesbury gives only the name of
Archpirat) Donald, Siffreth, Howel, Iago, and Inchith^ll Kings of Wales. All
these, he (thus touched with imperious affection of glory) sitting at the
Stern, compelled to row him over Dee; his greatness as well in fame as truth,
daily at this time increasing, caused multitudes of aliens, to admire and visit
his Court, as a place honored above all other by this so mighty and worthy a
Prince: and, through that abundant confluence, such vicious courses followed by
example, that, even now was the age, when first the more simple and frugall
natures, of the English, grew infected with what (in some part) yet we
languish. For, before his time, the Angles hither traduced, being Honest men,
by simplicity of nature, looking only to their own, neglecting others
Malmesbur.
homines integri, and using naturals simplicitate sua defensare, aliena non
mirart, did now learn from the stranger-Saxons an uncivil kind of fiercenes,
of the Flemings effeminacy, of the Danes drunkenness, and such other; which so
increast, that, for amendment of the last, the King was driven to constitute
quantities in quasting boules by little pinnes of metal, set at certain
distances, beyond which, none durst swallow in that provocation of good
fellowship.

As thou, the Q. of Isles, great Britain --
Both for excellence in soil and air, as also for large continent she has
this title. And although in ancientest time of the Greeks (that has any story
or Chorography) Sardinia was accounted the Scylax. Caryand. in (...). Edit. per
D. Hoe schelium.
greatest Isle, and by some Sicily, as the old verses of the Eustath. ad
Dionys. Asrum.
Seven tell us, and that by Geograph. lib. ^. cap. ^.
Ptolemy the East- Indian Tapobran, now called Sumatra, had pre-eminence of
quantity before this of ours; yet certainly, by comparison of that with this,
either according to the measure took of it by Onesicrit Solin poly^ist. cap.
66.
upon Alexanders commandment, or what later time teaches us, we cannot but
affirm with the Author here in substance, that -- No other Isle is equal to
Britain.
(...)
(...).
as, long since, Dionysius Afer of our Britain, which has given cause to call
it Another world, as the attibutes of it in Virgill, Horace, Claudian, and
others justify.

And learning long with us ere 'twas with them in use.
For the Druids, being in profession very proportionat in many things to
Cabalistique and Pythagorean doctrine, may well be supposed much ancienter then
any that had note of learning among the Romans, who V. Liu. Decad. 1. lib. 6.
before Liuius Salinator, and Naeuius, Ennius, Pacnuius, Accius, and others,
not much preceding Caesar, can scarce show steps of Poesy, nor before Fabius
Pictor, Valerius Antias, and some such now left only in their names (although
by pretense of Annius there be a piece of Pictor published) can produce the
title of a story; whereas we have Bal. centur. 1.
some that make that supposed eldest Historian (of the Gentiles) extant, Dares
Phrygius, translated by Cornelius Nepos, and dedicated to Salust, to have lived
here, but indeed upon no such warrant, as I dare trust.

Our Geffrey Monmouth first our Brutus to devise.
It was so laid to Geffrey's charge (he was Bishop of S. Asaphs, under K.
Stephen) by John of Whethamsted, Abbot of S. Albons, William Petit, called
William of Newborough and some other: but plainly (let the rest of his story,
and the particulars of Brute be as they can) the name of Brute was long before
him in Welsh (out of which his story was partly translated) and Latin
testimonies of the Britains, as I have, for the Author, more largely spoken, to
the I. Song. And (a little to continue my first justification, for this time)
why may not we as well think that many stories and relations, anciently written
here, have been by the Picts, Scots, Romans, Danes, Saxons and Normans,
devoured up from posterity, which perhaps, had they bin left to us, would have
ended this controversy? Shall we doubt of what Liuy, Polybius, Halicarnasseus,
Plutarch, Strabo, and many others have had out of Fabius, Antias, Chereas,
Solylus, Ephorus, Theopompus, Cato, Quadrigarius, with infinite other, now lost,
writers, because we see not the self Authors? No, Time has ransackt more
precious things, and even those superexcellent books, wherein that incomparable
Solomon wrote from the Cedar to the Hyssop, were (upon fear of the facile
multitudes too much respecting natural causes in them divinely handled) by K.
Ezechias suppressed from succeeding ages, if my In Zerror Hammor. apud Mi^st. a^
Exodus 15.
Authority deceive not. So that the losle in this, and all kinds, to the
Commonwealth of letters, has been so grievous and irreparable, that we may
well imagine, how error of conceit in some envy in others, and hostile
invasion has bereft us of many monuments most precious in all sorts of
literature, if we now enjoyed their instructing use: and to conclude, the
antiquities of these Original ages are like those of Rome, between it built
and burnt by the Gauls; Worn away by devouring time, and the enemies
ransacking the City, etc. Of the Druid* see fully to the IX. Song.
Cum vetustate nimia obscurae, velut quae (as Dec. 1. lib. 6.
Liuy says) magno ex interuallo locivix cernuntur: tum quod perrarae, per
eadem tempora Literae fuere, vna custodia ^idelis memoriae rerum gestarum; and,
quod etiam, si quae in commentariss Pontificum alijsque publicis priuatisque
erant monumentis, incensa vrbe, pleraque interiere. But all this in effect the
Muse tells you in the VI. Canto.

To letters never would their mysteries commit.
What they taught their Scholars for matter of law, Heathenish Religion, and
such learning as they here were presidents of, was delivered Caesar. de Bell.
Gallic. lib. 6.
only by word of mouth; and, lest memory unused might so fail, they permitted
not commission, of their Lectures and instructions, to the cus^ody of writing,
but delivered all in a multitude of Verses and Pythagorean precepts, exactly
imitating the Cabalists; which, until of late time, wrote not, but taught and
learned by mouth and diligent hearing of their Rabbis. In other matters,
private and public (so is Caesar's assertion) they Graecis literis vtuntur.
What language and letters the Druids used.
used Greek letters, which has made some think that they wrote Greek. But
^e not easily thereto persuaded. Perhaps they might use Greek Characters,
seeing that those which the Greeks then had* and now use, were at first
received from Varro de ling. lat. 7.
strangers, and as likely from the Druids as from any other; for it is
sufficiently justifiable out of old Coins, inscriptions, and express Plin.
Hist. Not. 7. cap. 58: and si placet, vide. as Annianos illos, Archilochum, de
Temporibus, and Xenophontem in Aequinocis.
assertion, that the ancient Character among the Greeks was almost the same
with that which is now the Latins. But thence to collect that therefore they
wrote or spoke Greek, is as if you should affirm the Syriaque Testament to be
Hebrew, because published in Hebrew letters; or some Latin Treatises, Saxon,
because in that Character; or that the Saxons wrote Irish, because they used
the Camd in Hibernia. and, Per Graecas literas in ara Vessi^ in consinio Rhetis
and Germaniae, apud Tacitum, Lapsius Characteres selummodo intelligit.
Irish form of writing; or that those books which are published in Dutch by
some Jews in a special kind of Hebrew letter, should also be of the same
tongue. Observe but this passage in Caesar: He sends by a Gaul (allured to
this use against his country by large rewards) a letter to Q. Cicero, being
then besieged about Neruij. de bello Gallic. 5.
where now is Tourney, and Wrote it in Greek, lest the enemy might, by
intercepting the letters, discover his design.
Graecis conscripsit literis, ne, intercepta Epistola, nostra (says he
himself) ab hostibus Consilia cognoscantur. To what purpose did he thus, if the
Gauls, or their Statesmen the Druids understood Greek? I know what he De
Bell. Gallic. 1.
writes of those Tables of account found in the now Suitzerland, but shall not
soon believe that they had much more Greek in them then the Character. If you
object Geograph. ^l.
Strabo his affirmance, that the Gauls (for as long as I speak of them in
general in this kind, I well include our Druids, as sufficient reason is
elsewhere given) were grown such lovers of that tongue, That they wrote their
instruments of Contract in Greek.
(...), It is soon answered, that he speaks only of those about Marsilles,
which was, and is well known to all men, to have been a Colony of Phocians,
out of the now Natolia (which were Greeks) by appointment of Fate arriving at
the mouth of Rhosne, about time of Tarquin the Proud; where Protis, one of
their chief Leaders, entertained by Nannus K. of that coast, was chosen
(according to their custom) in a banquet by Gyptis the Kings daughter for her
husband; Hereto success grew so fortunat, that houorable respect on both sides
joined with imitation of Greek Ciuility (after this City built near their
arrive) it seemed, as my author Trog. Pomp. Hist. 43.
says, as if Gaul had been turned into Greece, rather then Greece to have
travailed into Gaul. Wonder not then why, about Marsilles, Greek was so
respected, nor why in the Romgunt-French now such Hellenismes are: here you see
apparent Original of it; yet conclude, upon the former reasons, that the
Druids and Gauls used a peculiar tongue, and very likely the same with the now
Welsh, as Most learned Camden has even demonstrated; although I know some
great Scholars there are, which still suspend their judgment, and make it a
doubt, as ever things of such antiquity will be. But (if you will) add heereto
that of the famous and great Lawier Franco-Gall. cap. 2. quem ^. etiam ad
Caesar. Com.
Hotoman, who presumes that the word Greek.
Graecis in Caesar's text is crept in by ignorance of transcribers, as he well
might, seeing those Commentaries, titled with name of I. Caesar, commonly
published, and in diverse Mss. with I. Celsus, are very imperfect, now and then
abrupt, different in style, and so variable in their own form, that it has
been much feared by that great Elect. 2. cap. 7. Epistolic quaest. 2 cap. 2.
Critique Lipsius, lest some more impolite hand has sowed many patches of base
cloth into that more rich web, as his own Metaphore expresses it. And if those
Characters which are in the pillars at Y-Voellas in Denbighshire, are of the
Druids, as some imagine (yet seeming very strange and uncouth) then might you
more confidently coucurre in opinion with Hotoman. In sum, I know that
Graecis literis may be taken as well for the language (as in Hist. lib. 20. in
extrema.
Justin I remember, and elsewhere) as for the Character: but here I can never
think it to be understood in any but the last sense, although you admit
Caesar's copy to be therein not interpolated. It is very justifiable which the
author here implies, by slighting Caesar's authority in British Originals, in
respect that he never came further into the Isle then a little beyond Thames
toward Caesarem si legas, tibi ipsi satisfaci^^, verum and ita Leland. ad Cyg.
Cant in Baln.
Barkeshire; although some of Ours idly talk of his making the Bath, and being
at Chestar, as the Scottish Historians most senslesly of their Iulis Hoff built
by him, which others refer Veremund. ap. Hect. B^^t. hist. 3.
to Vespasian, some affirm it a Temple Buchanan. hist. 4. in Donaldo.
of God Terminus; whereas it seems expressly to be built by Carausius, in time
of Dioclesian, if Nennius deceive us not. But, this out of my way.



The eleventh Song.
* THE ARGUMENT.
The Muse, her native earth to see,
Returns to England over Dee;
Visits stout Cheshire, and there shows
To her and hers, what England owes;
And of the Nymphets sporting there
In Wyrrall, and in Delamere.
Weeuer, the great devotion sings
Of the religious Saxon Kings;
Those Riuerets does together call,
That into him, and Mersey fall;
Thence bearing to the side of Peake,
This zealous Canto off does break.
WIth as unwearied wings, and in as high a gate
As when we first set forth, observing every state,
The Muse from Cambria comes, with pinions summed and sound:
And having put her self upon the English ground,
First ^eiseth in her course the noblest Cestrian shore;
. Of our great English bloods as careful here of yore,
As Cambria of her Brutes, now is, or could be then;
For which, our proverb calls her, Cheshire, chief of men.
. And of our Countries, place of Palatine does hold,
And thereto has her high Regalities enrold:
Besides, in many Fields since Conquering William came,
Her people she has proved, to her eternal fame.
All, children of her own, the Leader and the Led,
The mightiest men of boane, in her full bosom bred:
And neither of them such as cold penurious need
Spurs to each rash attempt; but such as soundly feed,
Clad in warm English cloth; and maym'd should they return
(Whom this false ruthless world else from their doors would spurn)
Have liuelihood of their own, their ages to sustain.
Nor did the Tenants pay, the Landlords charge maintain:
But as abroad in war, he spent of his estate;
Returning to his home, his hospitable gate
The richer and the poor stood open to receive.
They, of all England, most to ancient customs cleave,
Their Yeomanry and still endeavored to uphold.
For rightly whilst her self brave England was of old,
And our courageous Kings us forth to conquests led,
Our Armies in those times (near through the world so dred)
Of our tall Yeomen were, and footmen for the most;
Who (with their Bills, and Bows) may confidently boast,
. Our Leopards they so long and bravely did advance
Above the Flower-delice, even in the heart of France.
The general bounds of Cheshire.
O! thou thrice happy Shire, confined so to be
Twixt two so famous Floods, as Mersey is, and Dee.
Thy Dee upon the West from Wales does thee divide:
Thy Mersey on the North, from the Lancastrian side,
Thy natural sister Shire; and linkt unto thee so,
That Lancashire along with Cheshire still does go.
As toward the Derbian Peake, and Moreland (which do draw
More mountainous and wild) the high-crown'd Shutlingslawe
And Molcop be thy Mounds, with those proud hills whence roue
The lovely sister Brooks, the siluery Dane and Dove;
Clear Dove, that makes to Trent; the other to the West.
But, in that famous Town, most happy of the rest
(From which thou take thy name) fair Chester, called of old
. Carelegion; whilst proud Rome her conquests here did hold
Of those her legions known the faithful station then,
So stoutly held to tack by those near North Wales men;
Yet by her own right name had rather called be,
. As her the Britain termed, The Fortress upon Dee,
Then vainly she would seem a Miracle to stand,
Th'imaginary work of some huge Giants hand:
Which if such ever were, Tradition tells not who.
But, back awhile my Muse: to Weeuer let us go,
Which (with himself compared) each British flood does scorn;
His fountain and his fall, both Chesters rightly borne;
The Country in his course, that clean through does divide,
Cut in two equal shares upon his either side:
And, what the famous Flood far more then that enriches,
The bracky Fountains are, those two renowned Wyches,
The Nant-wyche, and the North; whose either brynie Well,
For store and sorts of Salts, make Weeuer to excel.
Besides their general use, not had by him in vain,
. But in him self thereby does holiness retuine
Above his fellow Floods: whose healthful virtues taught,
Has of the Sea-gods often, caused Weeuer to be sought.
For physic in their need: and Thetis often has seen,
When by their wanton sports her Ner^ides have been
So sick, that Glaucus self has failed in their cure:
Yet Weeuer, by his Salts, recovery durst assure.
And Amphitrite often this Wisard River led
Into her secret walks (the Depths profound and dread)
Of him (supposed so wise) the hid events to know
Of things that were to come, as things done long ago.
In which he had been proved most exquisite to be;
And bare his fame so far, that often twixt him and Dee,
Much strife there has arose in their prophetic skill.
But to conclude his praise, our Weeuer here does will
The Muse, his sourse to sing; as how his course he steres:
Who from his natural Spring, as from his neighboring Meres
Sufficiently supplied, shootes forth his silver breast,
As though he meant to take directly toward the East;
Until at length it proves he loytreth, but to play
Till Ashbrooke and the Lee o're-take him on the way,
Which to his iourneys end him earnestly do haste^
Till having got to Wyche, he taking there a taste
Of her most sauory Salt, is by the sacred tuch,
Forced faster in his course, his motion quickened much
To North-wyche: and at last, as he approaches near,
Dane, Whelock draws, then Crock, from that black ominous Mere,
Accounted one of those that Englands wonders make;
Of neighbors, Black-mere named, of strangers, Breretons-Lake;
Whose property seems far from Reasons way to stand:
For, near before his death that is owner of the Land,
She sends up stocks of trees, that on the top do float;
By which the world her first did for a wonder note.
His handmayd Howty next, to Weeuer holds her race:
When Peever with the help of Pickmere, make apace
To put-in with those streams his sacred steps that tread,
Into the mighty waste of Mersey him to lead.
Where, when the Rivers meet, with all their stately train,
Proud Mersey is so great in entering of the Maine,
As he would make a show for Empery to stand,
And wrest the three-forkt Mace from out grym Neptunes hand;
To Cheshire highly bound for that his watery store,
As to the grosser Meres, or standing Lakes.
Loughs on the Lancastrian shore.
From hence he gets Goyt down from her Peakish spring,
And Bollen, that along does nimbler Birkin bring
From Maxfields mighty wilds, of whose shagg'd Syluans she
Has in the Rocks been wooed, their Paramour to be:
Who in the darksome holes, and Cauerns kept her long,
And that proud Forest made a party to her wrong.
Yet could not all entreat the pretty Brook to stay;
Which to her sister stream, sweet Bollen, creeps away.
To whom, upon their road she pleasantly reports
The many mirthfull jests, and wanton woodish sports
In Maxfield they have had; as of that Forests fate:
Until they come at length, where Mersey for more state
Assuming brother banks, himself so proudly bears,
That at his stern approach, extended Wyrrall fears,
That (what betwixt his floods of Mersey, and the Dee)
In very little time devoured he might be:
Out of the foaming surge till ^ilbre lifts his head,
To let the fore-land see how richly he had sped.
Which Mersey cheeres so much, that with a smyling brow^
He fawnes on both those Floods; A poetical description of Wyrrall.
their amorous arms that throw
About his goodly neck, and barred their swelling breasts:
On which whilst lulled with ease, his pleased cheek he rests,
The Naiades, sitting near upon the aged Rocks,
Are busied with their combs, to brayd his verdant locks,
Whilst in their crystal eyes he does for Cupids look:
But Delamere from them his fancy quickly took,
Who shows her self all dressed in most delicious flowers;
And sitting like a Queen, sees from her shady Bowers
The wanton Wood-Nymphs mixed with her light-footed Fawnes,
To lead the rural routs about the goodly Lawnds,
As over A wood growing on a hill or knole.
Holt and Heath, as thorough High wood.
Frith and Low coppis.
Fell;
And often at Barly-breake, and Prison-base, to tell
(In carrolds as they course) each other all the joys,
The passages, deceits, the sleights, the amorous toys
The subtle Sea-Nymphs had, their Wyrralls love to win.
But Weeuer now again to warn them does begin
To leave these triuiall toys, which inly he did hate,
That neither them beseem'd, nor stood with his estate
(Being one that gave him self industriously to know
What Monuments our Kings erected long ago:
To which, the Flood himself so wholly did apply,
As though upon his skill, the rest should all rely)
And bent himself to show, that yet the Britains bold,
Whom the laborious Muse so highly had extold,
Those later Saxon Kings excelled not in their deeds,
And therefore with their praise thus zealously proceeds;
Whilst, the celestial Powers th'arriued time attend
When over this general I Will the Britains reign should end,
And for the spoiling Pict here prosp'rously had wrought,
Into the afflicted Land which strong invasion brought,
And to that proud attempt, what yet his power might want,
The ill-disposed heavens, Brutes offspring to supplant,
Their angry plagues downe-pour'd, insatiate in their waste
(Needs must they fall, whom heaven does to destruction haste.)
And that which lastly came to consummate the rest,
Those prouder Saxon powers (which liberally they pressed
Against th'invading Pict, of purpose hired in)
From those which paid them wage, the Island soon did win;
And sooner ouerspred, being Masters of the Field;
Those, first for whom they fought, too impotent to wield,
A Land within it self that had so great a Foe;
And therefore thought it fit them wisely to bestow:
Which over Severne here they in the Mountains shut,
And some upon that point of Cornwall sorth they put.
Yet forced were they there their stations to defend.
Nor could our men permit the Britains to descend
From Jove or Mars alone; but brought their blood as hie,
. From Woden, by which name they styled Mercury.
Nor were the race of Brute, which ruled here before,
More zealous to the Gods they brought unto this shore
Then Hengists noble heirs; their Idols that to raise
. Here put their German names upon our weekly days.
These noble Saxons were a Nation hard and strong,
On sundry Lands and Seas, in warfare nuzzled long;
Affliction thoroughly knew; and in proud Fortunes spite,
Even in the jaws of Death had dared her utmost might:
Who under Hengist first, and Horsa, their brave Chiefes,
From Germany arrived, See, concerning their coming, to the I. IV. and VIII.
Songs.
and with the strong reliefes
Of the Angles and the l^tes, them ready to supply,
Which anciently had been of their affinity,
By Scythia first sent out, which could not give them meat,
Were forced to seek a soil wherein themselves to seat.
Them at the last on Dansk their lingering fortune drove,
Where Holst unto their troops sufficient harbor gave.
These with the Saxons went, and fortunatly wan:
Whose Captain, Hengist, first a kingdom here began
In Kent; where his great heirs, ere other Princes rose
Of Saxonies descent, their fullness to oppose,
With swelling Humbers side their Empire did confine.
And of the rest, not least renowned of their Line,
. Good Ethelbert of Kent, th'first christened English King,
To preach the faith of Christ, was first did hither bring
Wise Augustine the Monk, from holy Gregory sent.
This most religious King, with most devout intent
That mighty Fane to Paul, in London did erect,
And privileges gave, this Temple to protect.
His equal then in zeal, came Ercombert again,
From that first christened King, the second in that reign.
The gluttony then used severely to suppress,
And make men fit to prayer (much hindered by excess)
. That abstinence from flesh for forty days began,
Which by the name of Lent is known to every man.
As mighty Hengist here, by force of Arms had done,
. So Ella coming in, soon from the Britains won
The Countries neighboring Kent: which lying from the Maine,
Directly to the South did properly obtain
The Southern Saxons name; and not the last thereby
Amongst the other reigns which made the Heptarchy:
So in the high descent of that South- Saxon King,
We in the bead-roule here of our religious bring
Wise Ethelwald: alone who Christian not became,
But willing that his folk should all receive the name,
. Saint Wilfrid (sent from York) into his Realm received
(Whom the Northumbrian folk had of his See bereaved)
And on the South of Thames, a seat did him afford,
By whom that people first received the saving Word,
As likewise from the loins of Erehinwin (who raised
The East- Saxons kingdom first) brave Sebert may be praised:
Which, as that King of Kent, had with such cost and state
Built Paul's; his Greatness so (this King to imitate)
Began the goodly Church of Westminster to rear:
The Primer English Kings so truly zealous were.
Then Sebba, a Monk in Paul's.
Sebba of his seed, that did them all surpass,
Who fitter for a shryne then for a scepter was,
(Above the power of flesh, his appetite to sterue
That his desired Christ he strictly might observe)
Even in his height of life, in health, in body strong,
Persuaded with his Queen, a Lady fair and young,
To separate themselves, and in a sole estate,
After religious sort themselves to dedicate.
Whose Nephew Vffa next, inflamed with his high praise
(Enriching that proud Fane his Grandsire first did raise)
Abandoned the world he found so full of strife,
And after lived in Rome a strict religious life.
Nor these our Princes here, of that pure Saxon strain,
Which took unto themselves each one their several reign,
For their so godly deeds, deserved greater fame
Then the Angles their Allies, that hither with them came;
Who sharing-out themselves a kingdom in the East,
With th'Easterne Angles name their circuit did invest,
By Vffa in that part so happily begun:
Whose successors the Crown for martyrdom have won
From all before or since that ever suffered here;
. Redwalds religious sons: who for their Savior dear,
By cruel heathenish hands unmercifully slain,
Amongst us euer-more remembered shall remain,
And in the roll of Saints must have a special room,
Where Derwald to all times with Erpenwald shall come.
When in that way they went, next Sebert them succeeds,
Scarce seconded again for sanctimonious deeds:
Who for a private life when he his rule resigned,
And to his Cloister long had strictly him confined,
A Corslet for his Cowle was glad again to take
His Country to defend (for his religions sake)
Against proud Penda, com'n with all his Pagan power,
Those christened Angels then of purpose to devour:
And suffering with his folk, by Penda's heathenish pride,
As he a Saint had lived, a constant Martyr died.
When, after it fell out, that Offa had not long
Held that by cruel force, which Penda got by wrong,
. Adopting for his heir young Edmond, brought him in,
Even at what time the Danes this Island sought to win:
Who christened soon became, and as religious grown
As those most heathenish were who set him on his throne,
Did expiate in that place his predecessors guilt,
Which so much Christian blood so cruelly had spilt.
For, taken by the Danes, who did all tortures try,
His Savior Jesus Christ to force him to deny;
First beating him with bats, but no advantage got,
His body full of shafts then cruelly they shot;
The constant martyred King, a Saint thus justly crowned.
To whom even in that place, that Monument renowned
Those after-Ages built to his eternal fame.
What English has not heard In Suffolk.
Saint Edmonds Buries name?
As of those Angles here, so from their loins again,
Whose hands hewed out their way to the West-Sexian reign
(From Kenrick, or that claim from Cerdick to descend)
A partnership in fame great Ina might pretend
With any King since first the Saxons came to shore.
Of all those christened here, who highlier did adore
The Godhead, then that man? or more that did apply
His power to advance the Church in true sincerity?
Great Glastenbury then so wondrously decayed,
Whose old foundation first the ancient Britains laid,
He gloriously rebuilt, enriching it with plate,
And many a sumptuous Cope, to uses consecrate:
Ordayning godly laws for governing this Land,
Of all the Saxon Kings the Solon he shall stand.
From Otta Otta* brother to Hengist.
(borne with him who did this I Will invade)
And had a conquest first of the Northumbrians made,
And tributarie long of mightier Hengist held,
Till Ida (after borne) the Kentish power expeld,
And absolutely sat on the Dierian seat,
But afterward resigned to Ethelfrid the Great:
An Army into Wales who for invasion led,
At Chester and in fight their forces vanquished;
Into their utter spoil, then public way to make,
The long Religious house of goodly Bangor brake,
. And slew a thousand Monks, as they devoutly prayed.
For which his cruel spoil upon the Christians made
(Though with the just consent of Christian Saxons slain)
His blood, the hethenish hands of Redwald did distaine.
That murderers issue next, this kingdom were exiled:
And Edwyn took the rule; a Prince as just and mild
As the other faithless were: nor could time ever bring
In all the seauen-fold rule an absoluter King*
And more t'aduance the faith, his utmost power that lent:
. Who reordained York a Bishops government;
And so much loved the poor, that in the ways of trade,
Where Fountains fitly were, he Iron dishes made,
And fastened them with chains the way farer to ease,
And the poor Pilgrims thirst, there resting, to appease.
As Mercia, among the rest, sought not the least to raise
The saving Christian says, nor merits humbler praise.
. Nor those that from the stem of Saxon Creda came
(The Britains who expulst) were any whit in fame,
For piety and zeal, behind the others best;
Though heathenish Penda long and proudly did infest
The christened neighboring Kings, and forced them all to bow;
Till Oswy made, to God, a most religious vow,
Of his abundant grace would he be pleased to grant,
That he this Panim Prince in battle might supplant,
A Recluse he would give his daughter and delight,
Sweet Alfled then in youth, and as the Morning, bright:
And having his request, he gave as he obtayn'd;
Though his unnatural hands succeeding Wulpher stayn'd
In his own childrens blood, whom their dear mother had
. Confirmed in Christ's belief, by that most reverent Chad:
Yet to embrace the faith when after he began
(For the vnnaturalst deed that e're was done by man)
If possible it were to expiate his guilt,
Here many a goodly house to holy uses built:
And she (to purge his crime on her dear children done)
A crowned Queen, for him, became a vased Nun.
What Age a godlier Prince then Etheldred could bring?
Or then our Kindred here, a more religious King?
Both taking them the Cowle, the one here his flesh did tame,
The other went to Rome, and there a Monk became.
So, Ethelbald may well be set the rest among:
Who, though most vainly given when he was hot and young;
Yet, by the wise reproof of godly Bishops brought
From those vnstay'd delights by which his youth was caught,
He all the former Kings of Mercia did exceed,
. And (through his Rule) the Church from taxes strongly freed.
Then to the Eastern sea, in that deep watery Fen
(Which seemed a thing so much impossible to men)
He that great Abbey built of Crowland; as though he
Would have no others work like his foundation be.
As, Offa greater far then any him before:
Whose conquests scarcely were sufficed with all the shore;
But over into Wales adventurously he shot
His Mercia's spacious Offa's Ditch.
Mere, and Powsland to it got.
This King, even in that place, where with rude heaps of stones
. The Britains had interred their Proto-martyrs bones,
That goodly Abbey built to Alban; as to show
How much the sons of Brute should to the Saxons owe.
But when by powerful heaven, it was decreed at last,
That all those seauen-fold Rules should into one be cast
(Which quickly to a head by (...)
Britriks death was brought)
Then Egbert, who in France had carefully been taught,
Returning home, was King of the West-Sexians made.
Whose people, then most rich and potent, him persuade
(As once it was of old) to Monarchize the Land.
Who following their advise, first with a warlike hand
The Cornish ouer-came; and thence, with prosperous sails,
Over Severne set his powers into the heart of Wales;
And with the Mercians there, a bloody battle waged:
Wherein he wan their Rule; and with his wounds enraged,
Went on against the rest. Which, sadly when they saw
How those had sped before, with most subiectiue awe
Submit them to his sword: who prosperously alone
Reduced the seauen-fold Rule, to his peculiar throne
. (Extirping other styles) and gave it Englands name
Of the Angles, from whose race his nobler fathers came.
When scarcely Egbert here an entire Rule began,
But instantly the Sea to the first Song.
Dane the Island ouer-ran;
A people, that their own those Saxons paid again.
For, as the Britains first they treacherously had slain,
This third upon their necks a heavier burden laid
Then they had upon those whom falsely they betrayed.
And for each others states, though often they here did toil,
. A people from their first bent naturally to spoil,
That cruelty with them from their beginning brought.
Yet when the Christian faith in them had thoroughly wrought,
Of any in the world no story shall us tell,
Which did the Saxon race in pious deeds excel:
That in these drowsy times should I in public bring
Each great peculiar Act of every godly King,
The world might stand amazed in this our Age to see
Those goodly Fanes of theirs, which irreligious we
Let every day decay; and yet we only live
By the great Freedoms then those Kings to these did give.
Wise Segbert (worthy praise) preparing us the seat
. Of famous Cambridge first, then with endowments great
The Muses to maintain, those Sisters thither brought.
By whose example, next, religious Alfred taught,
Renowned Oxford built to Apollo's learned brood;
And on the hallowed bank of Isis goodly Flood,
Worthy the glorious Arts, did gorgeous Bowres provide.
. He into several Shires the kingdom did divide.
So, valiant Edgar, first, most happily destroyed
The multitudes of Wolves, that long the Land annoyed.
And our good Edward here, the Confessor and King
(Unto whose sumptuous Shrine our Monarchs offerings bring)
That cankred Evil cured, bred twixt the throat and jaws.
When Physic could not find the remedy nor cause,
And much it did afflict his sickly people here,
He of Almighty God obtained by earnest prayer,
This Tumor by a King might cured be alone:
. Which he an heyre-^oome left unto the English Throne.
So, our Saint Edward here, for Englands general use,
. Our Countries Common laws did faithfully produce,
Both from the old British writ, and from the Saxon tongue.
Of Forests, Hills, and Floods, when now a mighty throng
For Audience cried aloud; because they late had heard,
That some high Cambrian hills the Wrekin proudly dared
With words that very much had stirred his rancorous spleen.
Where, though clear Severne set her Princely self between
The English and the Welsh, yet could not make them cease.
Here, Weeuer, as a Flood affecting godly peace,
His place of speech resignes; and to the Muse refers
The hearing of the Cause, to stickle all these stirs.
Illustrations.
NOw are you newly out of Wales, returned into England: and, for conueniency of
situation, imitating therein the ordinary course of Chorography, the first
Shire Eastward (from Denbigh and Flint, last sung by the Muse) Chesshire, is
here surueyed.

Of our great English bloods as careful --
For, as generally in these Northern parts of England, the Gentry is from
ancient time left preserved in continuance of Name, Blood, and Place; so most
particularly in this Cheshire, and the adjoining Lancashire: which, out of
their numerous families, Camden. in Cornan, and Brigar^.
of the same name, with their chief Houses and Lordships, has Stat. 14. Eliz.
cap. 13.
been observed.

And, of our Counties, Place of Palatine does hold.
We have in England III. more of that title, Lancaster, Durham, and Ely: and,
until later C. de Osfi^. Com. Sa^. Palate. v. Eusebius. de vit. Constantin. ^. and
Cod. lib. 12.
time, Hexamshire in the Western part of Northumberland, was so reputed.
William the Conqueror, first created one Hugh Wolf a Norman, Count Palatine of
Chester, and gave the Earldom to hold, as freely as the King held his Crown.
By this supremacy of liberty he made to himself Barons, which might assist him
in Counsel, and had their Courts and Con^sans of Pleas in such sort regarding
the Earldom, as other Barons the Crown. I Earl Hugh and my Barons have
confirmed all this.
Ego Comes Hugo and mei Barons confirma^imus ista omnia, is subscribed to a
Charter, whereby he founded the Monastery of S. Werburg there. For the Name of
Palatine, know, that in ancient time under the Emperors of declining Rome, the
title of Count Palatine was; but so, that it extended first only to him In
Paratit. C. 1 tit. 34.
which had care of the Household and Imperial reuenew; which is now (so says
Liver 1. des Comtes de Champagne and Brie.
Wesembech: I affirm it not) as the Marshall in other Courts: but was also
communicated by that Honorary attribute of Comitiua Dignitas, to many others,
which had any thing proportionat, place or desert, as the Code teaches us. In
later times both in Germany (as you see in the Palsgrane of Rhine) in France,
(which the Earldom of Champagne shows long time since in the Crown; yet
keeping a distinct Palatine Government, as Pe^ter P^^hou De Palatinorum
nostroru^ nomine Sarisbur. Policrat. 6. cap. 16. and Epist. 263.
has at large published) and in this Kingdom such were hereditarily honored
with it, as being near the Prince in the Court (which they, as we, called the
Palace) had by their State-carriage, gained full opinion of their worth, and
ability in government, by delegat Power of territories to them committed, and
here after titled Countes de Palais* as our Law annals call them. If you
desire more particulars of the Power and great State of this Palatine
Earldom, I had rather (for a special reason) send you to the marriage of
Hen. III. and Q. Ellanor in Matthew Paris; where John Scot, then Earl of
Chester bare, before the King, S Edwards Sword, called Curtein, which the
Prince at Coronation of Henry IV. is recorded to have done as Archiu. in Tur.
Land iam v^ro and typis commiss apud Cro^pt. Iurisdict. Cu^.
Duke of Lancaster; and wish you to examine the passges there, with what,
Bracton De acq. ver. d^m. cap. 16.. 3.
has of Earls, and our year 6. Hen. 8. Kelaway and v. Brook. tit. Prerugat.
31.
books of the High Constable of England, then here offer it my self. To add
the royalties of the Earledom, as Courts, Officers, Franchises, forms of
Proceeding, even as at Westminster, or the diminution of its large liberties by
the Statute of 27. Hen. 8. cap. 24.
Resumption, were to trouble you with a harsh digression.

Our Leopards they so long and bravely did advance.
He well call's the Coat of England, Leopards. Neither can you justly object
the common blazon of it, by name of Lions, or that assertion of Polydores
ignorance, A gross error of Polydore.
telling us that the Conqueror bare three Fleurs de lis, and three Lions, as
quartred for one Coat, which has bin, and is as al men know, at this present
born in our Sovereigns arms for France and England; and so, that the
quartering of the Fleurs was not at all until Ed. III. to publish his title,
and gain the Flemish forces (as you have it in Froissart) bare the French V.
Stat. 14. Ed. 3.
arms, being then Azure semy with Fleurs delis, and were afterward contracted
to III. in time of Hen. V. by Charles VI. because he would bear different from
the English King, who notwithstanding presently seconded the change, to this
hour continuing: Nor could that Italian have fallen into any error more
palpable, and in a pro^est Antiquary so ridiculous. But to prove them anciently
Leopards, The Emperor sent to Hen. III. three Leopards, as alluding to the
arms of England.
Misit ergo (says Matthew 19. Hen. 3.
Paris) Imperator (that is Frederique II.) Reg^ Anglorum tres Leopardos in
signum Regalis Clypei, in quo tres Leopardi transeuntes ^igurantur. In a M^. of
I. Gowers Confessio Amantis, which the Printed books have not, Adlaud^m
Christi, quem tu Virgo perperiste,
Sit laus RICHARDI, quem sceptra colunt Leopardi.


And Edward Pat. 12. Ed. 4. part. 1 memb. 12.
IV. granted to Jews of Bruges Earl of Winchester, that he should bear a
Azure, a dix Mascles enarme d'un Canton de Nostre Propre arms d' Engleterre,
Cestassauoir de Goules vng Leopard passant d'or, armed Azur, as the Patent
speaks: and likewise Pat 27. Hen. 6 number. 46.
Hen. VI. to Kings College in Cambridge, gave a Coat Armor, III. Roses, and
Summ^ scuti Partitum Principale de Azoreo cum Francorum flore deque Rubeo cum
peditante Leopardo, and calls them Parcellae Armorum, quae nobis (...) regnis
Anglia and Francia iure debenturregio. I know it is otherwise now received, but
withal, the Princes, being supreme Judges of Honor and Nobility, may
arbitrarily change their Arms in name and Nature; as was done Pont. Heuter. de
Vet. Belgio. 2.
upon return out of the Holy war in Godfrey of Bolognes time; and it seems
it has bin taken indifferently, whether you call them the one or other, both
for similitude of delineaments and composture (as in the Bearing of Normandy,
the County of Zu^phen and such more) being blazoned in Hi^rom de Bara, and
other French Heralds, Lion-Leopard; and for that even under this Hen. VI. a
great Nichol. Vpton. de re Militari lib. 3.
Student in Heraldry, and a writer of that kind, makes the accession of the
Lion of Guienne, to the Coat of Normandy (which was by Hen. II. his marriage
with Q. Elianor, divorced from Jews of France) to be the first three Lions,
Borne by the English Kings.

Caerlegion whilst Proud Rome her conquests here did hold.
You have largely in that our most learned Antiquary, the cause of this name
from the Tents of Roman Legions, there, about Vespasians time. I will only note,
that Leland In Deus ad Cyg. Cant.
has long since found fault with William of De Pontificib. lib. 4.
Malmesbury for affirming it so called, Because the old Soldiers of Julius his
legions resided there.
quod ibi Emerit^ Legionu^ Iulianaru^ resedere; whereas it is plain, that Julius
Caesar never came near this Territory. Perhaps, by Julius, he meant Agricola
(then Lieutenant here) so named, and then is, the imputation laid on that best
of the Monks, Coniectura in Malmesburiensem.
unjust: to help it with reading Militarium for Iulianarum, as the Printed
book pretends, I find not sufficiently warrantable, in respect that my Ms.
very ancient, as near Malmesbury's time as (it seems) may be, and heretofore
belonging to the Priory of S. Augustines in Canterbury, evidently persuades the
contrary.

-- the fortress upon Dee.
At this day in British she is called Humf. Lhuid in Breuiario.
Cair Lheon ar dour diuy. i. the City of Legions upon the river Dee. Some
vulgar Antiquaries have referred the name of Leon to a Giant builder of it: I,
nor they, know nor who or when he lived. But indeed ridiculously they took A
great legion.
Leon Uaur for K. Leon the great; to whom the Author alludes presently.

But in himself thereby does Holiness retain.
He compares it with Dee's title presently, which has its reason given before
to the VII. Song. Weuer by reason of the salt pits at Northwich, Nantwich, and
Middlewich, (all on his bank^) has this attribut, and that of the Sea-gods
suite to him, and kind entertainment for his skill in physique, and prophecy;
justifiable in general, as well as to make Tryphon their Surgeon which our
excellent Spenser has done; and in particular cause, upon the most respected
and divinely honored name of Salt; of which, if you observe it used in all
sacrifices by express commandment Leuit. 2. comm. 13. and Number. 18.
of the true God, the (...) Salt of the Covenant.
in holy writ, the religion of the Salt, set first, and last taken away as a
symbol Cael. Rhodigin. Antiq. Lect. 12. cap. 1. V. Plutarch Sympol. ^. cap. 10.
of perpetual friendship, that in Homer Iliad. ^V. Lips. Saturnal. 1. cap. 2.
(...), the title of He sprinkled it with divine Salt.
(...) given it by Lycophron, and In Cassandra.
passages of the Oceans medicinable Cael. Ant. Lect. 11. cap. 22.
Epithets because of his saltness, you shall see apparent and apt testimony.

From VVoden, by which name they styled Mercury.
Of the Britons descent from Jove, if you remember but Aeneas son to
Anchises, and Venus, with her deriuation of blood from Jupiters parents,
sufficient declaration will offer it self. For this of Woden, see somewhat to
the III. Song. A Clenser.
To what you read there, I here more fitly add this: Woden, in Saxon
Genealogies, is ascended to, as the chief Ancestor of their most Royal
Progenies; so you may see in Nennius, Bid, Ethelwerd, Florence of Worcester,
an Anonymus de Regali Prosapia, Huntingdon, and Houeden, yet in such sort that
in some of them they go beyond him, through Frithwald, Frealaf, Frithulf, Fin,
Godulph, Geta, and others, to Seth; But with so much uncertainty, that I
imagine many of their descents were just as true as the Theogonie in Hesiod,
Appollodorus, or that of Prester John's, sometimes deriuing Damian. a Goes de
morib. Aethorpum.
himself very near from the loins of Solomon. Of this Woden, beside my
Authors named, special mention is found in Paul De Longobard. 1. cap. 8.
Warnfred who makes Frea his wife (others call her Frieco, and by her
understand Venus) and Adam Hist. Ecclesiast. lib. 4. cap. 91.
of Breme, which describe him as Mars, but in Geffrey of Monmouth, and
Florilegus, in Hengists own person, he is affirmed the same with Mercury, who
by Tacitu: report was their chief Deity; and that also is warranted in the
denomination of our Wodensday (according to the Dutch Wodensdagh) for the
fourth day of the week titled by the ancient Planetary account with Name of
Mercury. If that allusion in the Illustrations of the III. Song to Mer^, allow
it him not, then take the other first taught me by Ad Tacit. Germ. not 32
Lipsius fetching Wodan from Won or Win which is to Gain, and so make his name
Wondan expressing in that sense the self Lucian. in Timone.
name Mercury president of Gain.
(...) used by the Greeks. But without this inquiry you understand the Author.

Here put the German names upon the Weekly days.
From their Sunnan for the sun Monan, for the Moon, Tuisco, or Tuisto (of
whom see to the IV Song) for Mars, Woden for Mercury, Thor for Jupiter, Fre,
Fry, or Frigo for Venus, Saetern for Saturn, they styled their days
Sunnan-(...), Mona (...): thence came our names now used Sunday, Monday,
Tuesday, Wodensday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday; which Planetary account was
very ancient among the Dion. Hist. Romans (...).
Egyptians (having much Hebrew discipline) but so superstitious, that, being
great Astronomers and very obseruant of mysteries produced out of number and
quantity, they began on the Jewish Sabbath and imposed the name of Saturn, on
the next the Sun, then the Moon, as we now reckon omitting two Planets in
every Nomination, as you easily conceive it. One might seek, yet miss the
reasons of that form; but nothing gives satisfaction equal to that, of
All-penetrating Joseph Scaliger, De Emendat. Temp. 1. Eundem de hac re
Prol^gom. and lib. 7. Doctorem merito agnosci^^^.
whose intended reason for it is thus. In a Circle describe an Heptagonall and
Equilaterall figure; from whose every side shall fall equilaterall Triangles,
and their angles respectively on the corners, of the inscribed figure, which
are noted with the Planets after their not interrupted order. At the right side
of any of the Bases begin your account, from that to the oppositly noted
Planet, thence to his opposite, and so shall you find a continued course in
that Order (grounded perhaps among the Ancients upon mysteries of number, and
interchanged government by those superior bodies over this habitable Orb) which
some have sweated at, in inquiry of Proportions, Music distances, and referred
it to Planetary howrs: whereas They (the very name of Hour for a XXIIII. part
of a day, being unusual till about the Peloponesiaque war) had their
original of later time, then this Hebdomadall account, whence the Hourly from
the morning of every day had his breeding, and not the other from this, as
Pretending and Vulgar Astrologers receive in supposition. At last, by
Constantine the great, and Pope Syluester, the name of Sunn-day, was turned into
the Nicephor. Call. li^t. Eccles Hist. (...). Polyd. Invent. Rer. 6. cap. 5.
Lords d^y; as it is styled Dominicus and (...); of Saturday, into the Saboth;
and the rest not long afterward named according to their Numerall order, as the
First, Second, or Third Feria (that is Holiday, thereby keeping the remembrance
of Easterweek, the beginning of the Ecclesiastique year, which was kept every
day Holy) For Sunday, Monday, Tuesday. You may note here that Caesar Comment.
Gall^^. 6.
was deceived in telling us, the Germans worshipped no other Gods Whom they see
and have daily use of, as he Sun, Moon and the Fire, by name of Vulcan.
but quos cernunt and quorum opibus aperte iuuantur, Solemn, Vulcanum, and
Lunam, reliquos ne fama quidem accepisse; For you see more then those thus
honored by them, as also they had Bed. lib. de Temporibus.
their (...) Mona^^h for April, dedicated to some adored Power of that name:
but blame him not; for the discovery of the Northern parts, was but in
weakest infancy, when he delivered it.

Good Ethelbert of Kent first Christened English King.
About the year DC. Christianity was received among the Saxons; this
Ethelbert (being first induced to taste that happiness by Berta his Queen, a
Christian, and daughter to Hilperic (or Lothar the II.) K. of France) was
afterward baptized by Augustine a Monk sent hither, with other work men for
such a harvest, by PP. Gregory the I. zealously being moved to conversion of
the English nation: so that after the first coming of Hengist they had lived
here C.L. years by the common account without tincture of true religion: nor
did the Britons who had long before (as you see to the VIII. song) received it,
at all impart it by instruction, which Gildas imputes to them for merit of
divine revenge. White Hist. 7 not. 14.
of Basingstoke (I must cite his name, you would laugh at me, if I affirmed it)
refers to Kents Paganism, and British Christianity before this conversion, the
original of our vulgar byword Nor in Christendom, Nor in Kent.

That abstinence of Flesh for forty days began.
DC.XL.
Began it here, (so understand him; for plainly that fasting time was long
before in other Churches, as appears in the Decreeing Did. 4. c. 4 statuimus
and ibid. D. Ambrosius.
Epistle of PP. Telesphorus, constituting that the Clergy should fast from
Quinquagesima (that is, Shroue-sunday) to Easter, whereas the Laity, and they
both were before bound but to VI. weeks accounted, as now from the first
Sunday in Lent; so that, even from the Ita etiam Baronius; sed and vide Eusebij
Chronic. in Sixto. 1.
first of Christianity, for remembrance of our Savior, it seems, it has
been observed, although I know it has been, referred to Telesphorus, as first
author. He died in C.XL. of Christ. But if you compare this of him with Did.
4. de Consecrat. c. 14. I^iunium.
that of PP. Melchiades (some C.LXX. years after) taking aware the fast upon
Sunday, and Thursday, you will loose therein forty days, and the common name
of Quadragesi^^; but again find it thus. S. In Homil. did. 5. de. Consecrat.
c. 16.
Gregory (after both these) makes Lent to be so kept, that yet no fasting be
upon Sundaies; because (among other reasons) he would have it as the Tenth of
Time consecrated to God in Prayer and abstinence (and the Canonists,
Rebusf^ract. de decim quaest. 3. number. 31.
how justly I argue not, put it in their division of Personal tithes.) then,
in this form, after the exception, calculates out his Number. From the first
Sunday in Lent to Easter* are VI. Weeks, that is, XLII. dates, whence VI.
Sundaies subtracted, remain XXXVI. which (fractions avoided) is the quotient
of CCC.LXV. being the number of the common year, divided by X. But seeing
that holy number (as he calls it) of XL. which our Savior honored with his
fasting, is by this reckoning excluded, he adds, to the first week, the four
last days of the Quinquagesima that is Ashwednesday, Thursday, Friday, and
Saturday; so keeping both his conceit of Tithing, and also observation of that
number, which we remember only (not able to imitate) in our assaied abstinence.
For proof of this in Erconbert, both Bid and Malmesbury, beside their later
followers, are witnesses. Their Saxon name near ours was Canut. leg. 16
(...), as the other Four Fasts (...).

So Ella coming in soon from the Britons won.
Near XL. years after the Saxons first arrival, Aella (of the same nation)
with his sons Pleucing, or Pleting, Cimen, and Cissa landed at Cimenshore in
the now Sussex (it is supposed Ex antiq. Charta Eccles. Selesens. ap. Camden.
to be near the witterings by Chichester) and having his forces increast by
supply, after much blood shed twixt him and the Britons, and long siege of the
City Andredceaster, now Newenden in Kent (as learned Camden conjectures) got
supreme dominion of those Southern parts, with title of K. of Sussex, whose
son and successor Cissa's name, is yet there left in So is it called in
Florent. Wigorn page 331. Kingdom of Sussex.
(...) for Chichester and in a Hill incircled with a deep trench for military
defense, called Ciss-burie, by Offing^^^. The Author fitly begins with him
after the Kentish; for he was the first that made the number of the Saxon
Kings plural, by Planting and here reigning over the South Saxons: and as one
was always in the Heptarchie, which had title of First, or chief King of the
Angles and Saxons, so this Aella not only was honored with Ethelwerd. hist. 3.
cap. 2. Bed. hist. 2. cap. 5.
it, but also the prerogative by priority of time, in first enjoying it, before
al other Princes of his nation: But his dominion afterward was for the most
part still under the Kentish, and West Saxon Kings.

Saint Wilfrid sent from York into his realm received.
This Wilfrid Archbish. of York expelled that See by Egfrid king of
Northumberland, was kindly received by Edilwalch (otherwise Ethelwalch, being
before Christened through religious persuasion of his Godfather Wulpher K. of
Mercland) and converted the South Saxons to the Gospel. He endowed this
Wilfrid with Selser a Cherronese in Sussex, and was so founder of a
Bishoprique, afterward translated under the Norman Conqueror, to Chichester,
whose Cathedral Church in public Monuments honors the name of Cedwalla (of
whom see to the IX. Song) K. of West Sex for her first Creator: but the reason
of that was rather because Cedwalla after death of Edilwalch (who^ he slew) so
honored Wilfrid, Malmes b. de gest. Pontific. 3.
That he committed the supreme government of that Province to him
vt Magistru^ and Dominu^ omni Prouinciae eu^ praefecit, nihilin tota Prouincia
sine illius assensu faciendum arbitratus; whereupon it was, as it seems,
thought fit (according to course of yielding with the sway of fortune) to
forget Edilwalch, and acknowledge Cedwalla (then a Pagan) for first Patron of
that Episcopal dignity. It is reported that III. years, before this general
receipt there of Christ's profession, continued without rain; in so much that
Famine, and her companion Pestilence, so vexed the Province, that in multitudes
of XL. or L. at a time, Sussex men taught to catch Fish.
they used hand in hand, to end their miseries in the swallowing waves of their
neighboring Ocean: But, that all ceased upon Wilfrids preaching; who taught
them also first (if Henry of Huntingdons teaching deceive me not) to catch all
manner of Fish, being before skilled only in taking of Eeles. I know, Matthew.
Westmonasterienses.
some make Eadbert Abbot of the Monastery in Selsey, under K. In^, first Bishop
there, adding, that before his time the province was subject to Winchester; but
that rightly understood discords not; that is, if you refer it to
instauration of what was discontinued by Wilfrids return to his
Archbishoprique.

Adopting for his heir young Edmund. --
Penda K. of Mercland had slain Sigebert (or Sebert) and Anna Kings of
East Angles, and so in Dominion might be said to have possessed that kingdom; But
Anna had diverse successors of his blood, of whom, Ethelberth was traitorously
slain in a plot dissembled by Offa K. of Mercland, and this part of the
Heptarchy confounded in the Mercian Crown. Then did Offa adopt this S. Edmund
a Saxon, into name of successor in that kingdom: which he had not long enjoyed
but that through barbarous cruelty, chiefly of one Hinguar a Dane ( Polydore
will needs have hi^ name Agner) he was with miserable torture martyred,
DCCC.LXX.
upon the XIX. of November, whither his Canonization directs us for holy
memory of him.

And slew a thousand Monks as they devoutly prayed.
You may add CC. to the Authors number. This Ethelfrid or Edilfrid K. of
Northumberland, aspiring to increase his territory's, made war against the
bordering Britons. But as he was in the field, by Chester, near the onset, he
saw, with wonder, a ^ultitude of Monks assembled, in a place by, somewhat
secure; demanded the cause, and was soon informed that they were there ready
to assist his enemies swords with their devout Orizons, and had one called
Brocmail, professing their defense from the English forces. The King no sooner
heard this, but If they pray to their God against us, then plainly they fight
against us.
Ergo (says he being a Heathen) siaduersus nos, ad Dominum suum clamant,
profecto and ipsi quamuis arma non ferant, contra nos pugnant, qui aduersis nos
imprecationibus persequutur; presently commands their spoil: which so was
performed by his Soldiers, that M.CC. were in their devotions put to the
sword. A strange slaughter of Religious persons, at one time and place; but not
so strange as their whole number in this one Monastery, which was M.M.C. not
such idle ^ubberly sots as later times pestered the world vvithall, truly
pictured in that Rob. de Langland sieve Ioannes Maluerne Past. 5.
description of (their Character) Sloth. -- With two slimy eyne
I must ^t said the Segge, or else I must needs nap,
I may not stond ne stoop, ne without mi stole kneel,
Were I brought a bed (but if my talende it made)
Should ne ringing do me rise, or I were ripe to dine.
He began Benedicite with a belke, and his breast knoked
And raskied, and roted, and rut at the last;
If I should dye by this day, melyste not to look,
I can not perfitly my Pater nost, as the Priest it sings
But I can rimes of Robin Hod, and Randall of Chester,
But of our Lord or our Lady I learn nothing at all.
I am occupied every day, holy day and other
With idle tales at the Ale, and other while in Churches.
Gods pain and his passion full selde think I thereon
I visited never feblemen, ne fettred folk in pittes,
I have lever here an Harlotrie, or a summers game,
Or leasings to laugh at and bilye my neighbors,
Then all that ever Mark made, Math, John and Lucas.
And Uigiles and fasting days all these let I pass
And lie in bed in Lent, and mi Lemman in mine arms.
I have been Priest and Parson passing thyrtie winter
Yet can I nether Sol fe ne sing, ne Saints lives read
But I can find in a field, or in a furlong an hare
Better then in Beatus Vir, Or in Beati Omnes.
Not such were those Bangor Monks: but they All lived of handy labor.
Omnes de labor manuum suarum viuere solebant. Observe here the difference
twixt the more ancient times and our corrupted neighbor ages, which have been
so branded, and not unjustly, with dissembled bestiall sensualities of
Monastique profession, that in the universal visitation under Hen. VIII. every
Monastery afforded shameful discovery of Sodomites and Incontinent Friars;
in Canterbury Priory of Benedictius IX. Sodomites; in Battle Abbey XV. and, in
many other, like proportion; larger reckoning will not satisfy if you account
their Wenches, which married and single (for they affected that variety)
supplied the wants of their counterfeited solitariness, so that, hereupon,
after an account of DC. Couents of Monks and Friars, with Mendicants, in this
kingdom, when time endured them, I leave it to the Reader to guess, how many
Bastards the Monks and Friars got for the Laity.
I^ laisseray, says H. Stephen en l'Entroduct. au traite de la conformite etc.
1. chap. 21.
one, maintenant au Lecteur calculer combien pur le moins denoint estre de fills
de Putains on Angletere, ie di seulement fills de Moines and de Putaines. These
were they who admired all for Hebrew or Greek which they understood not, and
had at least (as many of our now professing Formalists) Latin enough to make
such a speech as Rablais has to Gargantua for Paris Bells, and call for their
Vinum Cos; which, in one of them personated, receive thus from a Noble Ian.
Donz. Satyr. 5.
Poet. Fac Extra: nihil hoc: extratotum sit oportet,
Sobrie.^. just atque pie potare iubet Lex.
Vinum laerificat Cor hominis, praecipue Cos.
Gratia sit Domino, Vinum Cos, inquit, habemus.
How my Reader tastes this, I know not; therefore I willingly quit him; and add
only, that William of Malmesbury grossly erres in affirming that this Bangor
In hist. and lib. 4. de Pontificib. in Dorcecestrensibus.
is turned into a Bishoprique; but pardon him, for he lived in his Cloister and
perhaps was deceived by Equivocation of Name, there being in Carenaruan a
Bishoprique of the same title to this day, which some body later Aut lib.
Academ. per Europ. edit. 1590.
has on the other side ill taken for this.

Who reordained York a Bishops government.
For in the British times it had a Metropolitique See (as is noted to the IX.
Song) and now by Edwine (converted to Christian discipline both through means
of his Wife Ethelburg, daughter to Ethelbert K. of Kent, and religious
persuasion of Gods Ministers) was restored to the former Dignity, and Paulinus,
in it, honored with name of Archbishop being afterward banished that Province,
and made Bishop of Rochester, which, some have ignorantly made him before.

Nor those that in the stem of Saxon Crida came.
Most of our Chronologers begin the Mercian race royal with Penda; But Henry
of Huntingdon (not without his proofs and followers) makes Crida (Grandfather
to Penda) first in that kingdom.

Confirmed in Christ's belief by that most reverend Chad.
This Wulpher, son to Penda* restored to his Fathers kingdom, is Robert de
Swapl^ in Hist. Petroburgens. ap. Camd. in Stafford, and Northampton. and I
Stou sum.
reported with his own hands to have slain his two sons Wulphald and Rusin,
for that they privily withdrew themselves to that famous S. Chad, or Cedd ^
Bishop of Lichfield, for instruction in the Christian faith; and all this is
supposed to be done where the now Stone in Staffordshire is seated. Hereupon
the Author relies. But, the credit of it is more then suspicious, not only for
that in Classique authority I find his issue only to be Kenred, and S. Werburge
(by Ermengild daughter to Erconbert of Kent) but withal that he was both
Christian, and a great Benefactor to the Church. For it appears by concent of
all, that Peada, Weda, or Penda (all these names he has) eldest son of the
first Penda, first received in Middle Engle (part of Mercland) the faith, and
was Baptized by Finnan Bishop of It is that now called Holy Island, by East the
utmost ^ arts of Northumberland, whence the Bishoprique about DCCCCXCV. was
transferred to Durham. DC. LX.
Lindisfarne: after whose violent death, in spite of Oswy King of
Northumberland, Immin, Ebba, and Edberth, Gentlemen of Power in Mercland
saluted Wulpher (Brother to Peada) King of all that Province, who was then, as
it seems, (by Florence of Worcester, and Bedes reporting of IV. Bishops in
succession preferred by him) of Christian name; But howsoever he was at that
time, it is certain that in the II. or III. years of his reign, he was
Godfather to K. Edilwalch of Sussex, and bestowed on him as a gift, in token of
that spiritual adoption, the* Isle of Wight with an other territory in West
Saxony, and gave also to S. Cedda (made, by consent of him and K. Oswy, Bishop
of Lindisfarne) L. Hides of land (a Hide, Ita.n. apud Matthew. Paris, Huntingdo^.
Th. Walsingham. docemur, licet alij 100. Acris alij a iter definiunt, Caterum
quod me maxim mouet and absquehasitatione in hanc sententiam pedibuo ire
cogit, en ribrex Dunstam Chatta ( An DCCCC.LXIII) qua Terrae partem concedit
leptem Aratroru quod Angice dicitur leptem Hidas. Nec immomorem hic te vellem
vocabull illius apud l. C. tos nostros, Hide and Gain; quod Aruum restib^le
interpretars haut ignorant Dupondius quispiam.
a plough land, or a Carue, I hold clearly equivalent) toward foundation of a
Monastery. All this compared, and his life, in our Monks, observed, hardly
endures this note of persecution; which in respect of his foundership of
Peeterborough Abbey, Robert of Swapham a Monk there reporting it, or those from
whom he had it, might better in silence have buried it, or rather not so
ungratefully feigned it. I only find one thing notably ill of him; that he,
first of the English Kings, by Simonie made a Bishop which was Wine of London,
as Malmesbury is Author.

And (through his Rule) the Church from taxes strongly freed.
Ethelbald K. of Mercland, Founder of Crowland Abbey in Lincolneshire, a great,
Martial, and religious Prince, in a Synod held Cuthbert then Archbishop of
Canterbury (enlarged) Ecclesiastique liberty in this form, Donationem meam,
me viuente concedo, vt omnia Monasteria and Ecclesia Regnimei a publicis
Vectigalibus, Operibus, and Oneribus absoluantur, nisi Instructionibus Arcium
vel Pontium, quae nunquam vlli possunt relaxari.i. He discharged all
Monasteries and Churches of all kind of taxes, works, and imposts, excepting
such as were for building of Forts, and Bridges; being (as it seems the law
was then) not Releasable. For, beside the authority of this statut of
Ethelbald, it appears frequent in Charters of the Saxou times, that, upon
Endowment, and Donations, to Churches with largest words of exemption, and
liberty from all secular charges, the conclusion of the Habendum, was,
Excepting those three, Aid in war, mending of Bridges, and Forts. V. Chart'd
huiusmodi apud D Ed. Coq. in Epist. ad lib. 6.
Exceptis is it is tribus, Expeditione, Pontis Arcisue Constructione, which among
common Notaries, or Scriueners, was so well known, that they called it by one
general name, A three knotted necessity. DC.LXXX.
Trinoda Necessit as, as out of Cedwalla's Charter, to Wilfrid, first Bishop of
Selsey, of the Manor of Pagenham (now Pagham) in Sussex, I have seen
transcribed; whereupon in a Deliberatiue (concerning Papal exactions, and
subjection of Church-liuing) held under Hen. Math. Paris page 838.
III. after examination of Ancient Kings indulgence to the Clergy, it was
found, that; They always reserved those that so they might the better be
furnished against the enemiesinuasion.
Non ad^o libertati dederunt huiusmode possessiones, quin Tria sibi reseruarent
semper propter publicam regnivtiltatem, videlicet, Expeditionem Pontis, and
Arcis reparationes, velrefectiones, vt per earesisterent. Hostiu^
incursionibus; although by words of a statute of Ethelulph King of West Saxons
in the year DCCC.LV. made by advise both of Laity, and Spirituality, the
Church was quitted also of those three Commonwealth causes of Subsidy, but
inioy'd it not; For even the Gregor. decret. tit. de Imm. Eccles.c. Peruenit. 2.
Canons themselves subject their Possessions to these services and duties, and
upon interpretation of a Charter made by Henry Beanclerc, Founder of the
Priorie of S. Oswald in Yorkshire, containing words of immunitie and liberty of
Tenure, as general and effectual as might be, a great Lawyer Kniuet 44. Ed.
3. fol. 25. a.
long since affirmed that yet the House was not freed of repairing Bridges and
Causies. But all lands, as well in hands of Clerks as Lay, were subjected to
particular tenures after the Conquest: and so these kind of charges and
discharges being made rather feodall (as De Acquir. rer. Dom. 2. cap. 16. 8.
Ingulphus Eme^datus.
Bracton calls them) then personal, use of them in Charters consequently
ceased. I note here to Students of Antiquity, that, where the printed Ingulph
says this was done by Ethelbald in the III. year of his reign, they must
with correction make it the XXXIII. as is, without scruple, apparent in the
date of Malmesh. lib. de gest. Pontis. 1.
thesynod which was DCC.XLV. of our Savior.

The Britons had interred their Proto-martyrs bones.
In that universal persecution under Dioclesian, and Herculius, this Isle
gave, See the Author in the XVI. Song. DCC.LX. ^^t circiter.
in S. Alban, testimony of Christian profession; even to his last breath drawn
among tormenting enemies of the Cross. His death (being the first Martyr, as the
Author here calls him, that this Country had) was at Werlamcester (.i. the old
Verulam) where, by, the Abbey, of S. Albons, was afterward erected.

(Extirping other styles) and gave it A. Circa DCCC.
Englands name.
Look back to the last note on the I. Song. Thus, as you see, has the Muse
compendiously run through the Heptarchie, and united it in name and Empire
under Egbert K. of West Saxons: afterwhom, none, but his successors, had
absolut power in their kingdoms, as course of story shows you. Likely enough
I imagine, See the XVI. Song.
that, as yet, expectation of the Reader is not satisfied in these VII.
Kingdoms, their beginnings, territory, and first Christianity: therefore as a
Corollary receive this for the eyes more facile instruction.

Began in First received Faith in Comprohe^ded in
I. Kent the now Kent. II. South Sex
Sussex. Surrey.
I follow here the ordinary Chronology of our Monks.
III. West-Sex
Cornwall. Devonshire. Dorset. Somerset. Wilton. Southampton. Berkshore.
IV. Northumberland.
Lancaster. York. Durham. Westmerland. Northumberland, and the neighboring
territory, to Edinburgh Frith; whither from Tine was the name of Bernieland,
and what lay on this side Tine, called D^irland.
V. Est-Sex
Essex. Midlesex. Part of Hereford.
VI. Est-Angle
Norfolk. Suffolk. Cambridgeshire. Part of Ely.
VII. Mercland.
Gloucester. Hereford. Worcester. Warwick Leicester. Rutland. Northampton.
Lincoln. Huntingdon. B^dford. Buchingham. Oxford. Stafford. Derbie. Salop.
Notingham. Chester. The Northern part of Hereford. But in these the Inhabitat
of the^ Inlands were called Middle-Engles, and the Mercians divided into names
of there local quarters.

I. Hengist C.D. LVI. from whose son Oise the succeeding Kings were called
Oiscings I Ethelbert, D. XCVII. of Augustine from Gregory I. II. In Aella
about CD. XCI. II. Edilwatch DC. LXI. and the whole Contry converted by
Wilfrid DC. LXXIX. III. Cersie, D. XIX. whose Grandfather was Gewise, and
thence his people and Posterity called Gewises. Kinegils DC. XXXV. baptized by
Birin first Bishop of Dorchester in Oxfordshire. IV. Ida D.XLVII. taking all
Bernieland, as Aella XII. year after began in Deirland; but both kingdoms;
soon were confounded in one. Edwin DC.XXVI. Christened by Paulin first
Archbishop (in the Saxon times) of York. V. Sleda after some (others say in
Erchinwin before him) about D. LXXX. both uncertain, and their successors.
Sebert D C.IV. dipped in holy tincture by Mellitus, first Bishop of London. VI.
Redwald about DC. But some talk of one Vuffa (whence these Kings were called
Vuffings) to be Author of it near XXX. years before. Eorpwald DC. XXXII.
although Redwald were Christened, for he soon fell to Apostasy, by persuasion of
his wife, and in the same Chapel made one altar to Christ, another to the
Devil. VII. In Penda DC. XXVI. Others will in Crida, some XL. before. Peada K.
of MidleEngle * DC.LIII. baptized by Finna bishop of Lindisfarne, but enlarged
the profession of it in Vulpher next K. there.

Perhaps as good authority may be given against some of my proposed
Chronology, as I can justify my self with. But although so, yet I am
therefore freed of error, because out old Monks exceedingly in this kind
corrupted, or deficient, astoord nothing able to reclifie. I know the
East Angles, by both ancient and later authority, begin above C. years before;
but if with Synchronisme you examine it, it will be found most absurd. For,
seeing it is affirmed expressly, that Redwald was slain by Ethelfrid K. of
Northumberland, and being plain by Eccles. hist 2. cap. 9. vb legendu^
ex^entesimo vice (...) quinge^tesimo.
Bid (take his Story together, and rely not upon Syllables and false printed
copies) that it must needs be near DC. (for Edwin succeeded Ethelfrid) and
that, Vffa was some XXX. years before: what calculation will cast this into
less then D. years after Christ? Forget not (if you desire accurat times) my
admonition to the IV. Song, of the XXII. years error upon the Dionysian
account, especially in the beginning of the Kingdoms, because they are for the
most part reckoned in Old Monks from the coming of the Saxons. Where you find
different names from these, attribute it to misreading old copies, by such as
have published Carpenwald for Eorpenwald, or Earpwald; Penda also perhaps for
Wenda, mistaking the Saxon p. for our P. and other such, variably both Written
and Printed. How in time they successively came under the West Saxon rule. I
must not tell you, unless I should untimely put on the person of an Historian.
Our common Annals manifest it. But know here, that although seven were, yet
but five had any long continuance of their supremacies: The Saxons tho in sher
power (tho thii were so riue)
Seue kingdoms made in Engelonde and Afterward.
suthe but viue,
The King of Northomberlond, and of Eastangle also
Of Kent and of Westsex, and of the March there to.
as Robert of Gloucester, according to truth of Story has it; for Estsex and
Southsex were not long after their beginnings (as it were) annexed to their
Ruling neighbor Princes.

A Nation from their first bent naturally to spoil.
Indeed so were universally the Germans (out of whom our Saxons) as Tacitus
relates to us; You could not so easily-perswade them to husbandry, as to
Martial conflict; Nor thought they it better then slouthful, to get that by
s^eat, which they might have by blood.
Nec arare terram aut exspectare annum tam facile persuaseris, quam vocare
hosts and vulnera mereri. Pigrum quinimo and iners videtur sudore acquirere
quod possis sanguine parare, and more of that nature we read in him.

Of famous Cambridge first --
About the year DC.XXX. Sigebert (after death of Eorpwald) returning out of
France, whither his father Redwald had banished him, and receiving the
Eastangle Crown, assisted by Foelix a Burgognone, and first Bishop of Dunwich
(then called Dunmoe) in Suffolk; desiring to imitate what he had seen
obseruable in France, for the common good, Instituted a School for children.
Instituit scholam (read it scholas, if you will, as some do, I see no
consequence of worth) in qua Pueri literis erudirentur, as Bede writes. Out of
these words thus general, Cambridge being in Eastangle, has been taken for
this School, and the School for the University. I will believe it (in so much
as makes it then a University) not much sooner then that (I know not what)
Gurguntius with Cantaber, some CL. years before Christ, founded it; or, those
Chatters of K. Arthur, Bulls of Pope Honorius and Sergius sent thither;
Anaximander or Anaxagoras their studies there, with more such pretended and
absurd vnlikelyhoods; unless every Grammar School be an University, as this
was, where children were taught by To Schoolmasters, according to the fashion
at Canterbury.
Paedagogi and Magistri iux^a M^rem Cantuariorum, as Bede has expressly: which
so makes Canterbury an University also. But neither is there any touch in
authentic and ancient story, which iustifies th^se Schools instituted at
Cambridge, but generally somwhere in East-angle. Reasons of inducement are
framed in multitudes on both sides. But, for my own part, I never saw any
sufficiently probable, and therefore most of all rely upon what authorities
are affoorded. Among them I ever preferred the Appendix to the Story of
Crowland* supposed done by Peeter of Blois, affirming that under Hen. I. (he
lived very near the same time: therefore believe him in a matter not subject
to causes of Historians temporizing) Ioffred Abbot of Crowland, with one
Gilbert his Commoigne, and III. other Monks came to his Manor of Cotenham, as
they used of times, to read; and thence daily going to Cambridge, Hired a barn
to read in, and so continued, til the number of their Scholars exceeded the
content ^^ that, or any Church.
Conducto, quodam horreo publico suas scientias palam profitentes, in breus
temporis excursu, grandem discipulorum numerum contraxerunt. Anno vero secundo
aduentus illorum, tantum accrenit discipulorum numerus, tam ex tota patria,
quam ex oppido, quod quaelibet domus maxima, horreum, nec vlla ecclesia
sufficeret eorum receptaculo; and so goes on with an ensuing frequencie of
Schools. I^ before this there were an University, I imagine that in it was not
professed Aristotl's Ethiques, which tell us * (...): for, then would they not
have permitted learned Readers of the sciences (whom all that hated not the
Muses could not but love) to be compelled into a Barn, in steed of Schools.
Nor is it tolerable in conceit, that for near D. years (which interceded twixt
this, and Sigebert) no fitter place of profession should be erected. To this
time others have referred, the beginning of that famous Seminary of good
literature: and, if room be left for me, I offer subscription; but always
under reformation of that most honored Tutresses Pupils, which shall (omitting
fabulous trash) iudiciously instruct otherwise. But the Author here out of
Polydore, Leland, and others of later time relying upon conjecture, has his
warrant of better credit then Cantilup, an other relater of that Arcadian
Original, which some have so violently patronized.

Renowned Oxford built to Apollo's learned brood.
So is it affirmed (of that learned K. yet knowing not a letter until he was
past XII.) by Polydore, Bale, and others; grounding themselves upon what
Alfreds beneficence and most deserving care has manifested in Royal Provision
for that sacred Nourice of Learning. But justly it may be doubted, lest they
took instauration of what was deficient, for institution: for although you
grant that he first founded University College; yet it follows not, but there
might be common Schools, and Colleges, as at this day in Leyden, Giesse, and
other Places of High and Low Germany. If you please, fetch hither that of
Greeklade (to the III. Song) which I will not importune you to believe: but
without scruple you cannot but credit that of a Monk Asser. Meneuen^. de g^st.
Alfred.
of S.^ Dewi's (made Grammar and Rhetorique Reader there by K. Alfred) in these
words, of the year DCCC.LXXXVI. A great controversy grew twixt those new
Scholars which Alfred brought thither, and those which of ancient time were
there before, etc.
Exorta est pessima ac teterrima Ox^niae discordia inter Grimboldum (this was a
great and devout Scholar, whose aid Alfred used in his disposition of
Lectures) doctissimosque illos viros secu^ illuc adduxit, and veteres illos
scholasticos quos ibide^ invenisset: qui ei^ aduentu, leges, modos, ac
praelegendi formulas ab eode^ Grimboldo institutas, omni ex part amplecti
recusabant. And a little after, Quinetiam probabant and oftendebant idque
indubitato veterum annalium testimonio illius loci Ordines ac Instituta, a
nonnulis pijs and eruditis hominibus, fuisse sancita, vt a Gilda, ( Melkino he
was a great Mathematician, and as Gildas also, lived between D. and DC.) Nenni^
(the Printed book has falsely Nemrio) Kentigerno (he lived about D. LX.) and
alys, qui omnes literis illic consenuerunt, omnia ibid^ foelic^ pace and
co^cordia administrantes; and affirmed also that Letters had there been
happily professed in very ancient time, with frequency of Scholars, until
irruptions About Alfreds time before his instautation a Grammarian was not
found in his Kingdom to teach him Florent. Wigorn. page 309.
of Pagans (they meant D^no^) had brought the^ to this lately restored
deficiency. After this testimony, greater the^ al exception, what can be more
plain, the^ Noble worth and Fame of this Pill^r of the Muses long before K.
Alfreds. Neither make I any great question, but that, where in an old Copy of
Gildas his life (published lately by a French Ioann. a Bosco Parisiensis in
Bibliothec. Floriacens. vit. Gild. cap. 6.
man) it is printed, hat he studied at Iren, which clearly he took for a place
in this Land, it should be Ichen (and I confess, before me one has well
published the conjecture) for Ryd-Ichin the Welsh name of that City, expressing
as much as Oxenford, Yet I would not willingly fall into the extrems of making
it Memprikes, as some do; that were but vain affectation to dote on my Reverend
Mother. But because in those remote ages, not only Universities and Public
Schools (being Bri. Tuin Apolog. Oxon. 2. 84
for a time prohibited by P P. Gregory for fear of breeding Pelagians and
Arrians) but diverse Monasteries and Cloisters were great Auditories of learning
as appears in Theodor and Adrians Professing at Canterbury, Leland ad C^g.
Cant. in Granta.
Maldulph and Aldelm at Malmesbury (this Aldelm first taught the English to
write Latin Prose and Verse) Alcuin at York, Camd in Wiltonia.
Bid at Iarrow, and such other mo I guess that hence came much obscurity to
their name, omitted or suppressed by envious Monks of those times* then whose
traditions descending through many hands of their like, we have no credible
authorities. But which soever of these two sisters have prerogative of
Primogeniture (a matter too much controuerted twixt them) None can give them
less attribute, then to be two Radiant Eyes six in this Island, as the
beauteous face of the earths Body: To what Others have by industrious search
communicated, I add concerning Oxford out of an Constitutiones Fratrum. cap de
Studijs and Magist, Student.
ancient Ms. (but since the Clementines) what I there read: At Mompelier,
Paris, Oxford, Cologne. Bologna we institute general Studies.
Apud Monte^ Pessulanum, Parisios, Oxoniam, Colonias, Boloniam, generalia
studia ordinamus. Ad que Prior Prouincialis quilibet possit mittere duos
fratres qui habeant Studentium libertate^; And also admonish the Reader of an
imposture thrust into the world this last Autumn Martin a Provincial
Catalogue of Bishopriques, by a Professed Antiquary Aubert. Mirae^. in Notit.
Episcopat edit. Parisijs 1610.
and Popish Canon of Antwerp, telling us; that the Ms. Copy of it, found in S.
Victors Library at Paris, was written D. years since, and in the number of
Canterbury Province, it has Oxford; which being written Oxoniensis, I imagined
might have bin mistaken for Exoniensis (as Exonia for Oxonia sometimes) until
I saw Exoniensis joined also; by which stood * Petroburgensis, which bruised all
the credit of the monument, but especially of him that published it. For, who
knows not that Peeterborough was no Bishoprique till Hen. VIII? nor indeed was
Oxford, which might be easily thought much otherwise, by incidence of an
ignorant eye on that vainly promising title, I abstain from expatiating in
matter of our Muses seats so largely, and too largely treated of by others.

And into several Shires the Kingdom did divide.
To those Shires he Histor. Crowlandensis.
constituted Justices and Sherifes, called (...) and (...), the office of those
two being before confounded in Vice-Domini. i. Lieutenants; but so, that
Vicedominus and Vicecomes remained indifferent words for name of Sheriff, as,
in a Charter of K. Edred DCCCC.L. Ego Bingulph Vice domin^ Consului * Ego Alfer
Vicecomes audiui. I find together subscribed. The Justices were, as I think,
no other then those whom they called (...) man number, being the same with (...),
now Earls, in whole disposition and government upon delegatio^ from the King
(the title being Officiary, not Hereditary, except in some particular Shire, as
V ad Cant. XIII.
Leicester, etc.) the County was; with the Bishop of the Diocese: the Earl
Edgar. leg. Human. cap. 5. Edward. cap. 11. Canut cap 17.
sat in the (...) twice every year, where, charge was given touching Rot
Chart. 2. Rich. 2. pro Decan. and capit. Lincoln, transcripsimus in Iano
Anglorum lib. 2.. 14 and videas apud ^ex. hist. eccles. 4.
(...): But by the Gods right and the worlds.
Conqueror, this meddling of the Bishop, in Turns was prohibited. The Sheriff
had then his Monthly Court also, as the now County Court, instituted by the
Saxon Ed. I. as that other of the Turn by K. Edgar. The Sheriff is now
immediate officer to the Kings Court, but it seems that then the Earl (having
always the third part of the shires profits, both See to the XIII. Song.
before and since the Normans) had charge upon him. For this division of
Countries: how many he made, I know not, but Malmesbury, under Etbehed,
affirms, there were XXXII. ( Robert of Gloucester XXXV.) about which time
Winchelcomb was one, Code^ Wigorniensis apud Came in Dobu^^^.
but then joined to Glocestershire* those XXXII. Polychronicon lib. 1. cap. de
Proni^^^s.
were Kent, IX. Governed by the West Saxon law. Essex, Sussex, IX. Governed by
the West Saxon law. Middlesex. Surrey, IX. Governed by the West Saxon law.
Suffolk, Hantshire, IX. Governed by the West Saxon law. Norfolk, Berkshire,
IX. Governed by the West Saxon law. Hertford, Wiltshire, IX. Governed by the
West Saxon law. Cambridge, Somerset, IX. Governed by the West Saxon law.
Bedford, Dorset, IX. Governed by the West Saxon law. Buckingham, Denonshire,
IX. Governed by the West Saxon law. Huntingdon, XV. by the Danish law. Oxford,
VIII. by the Mercian Law. Northam^^n, XV. by the Danish law. Warwick, VIII. by
the Mercian Law. Leicester, XV. by the Danish law. Gloucester, VIII. by the
Mercian Law. Derby, XV. by the Danish law. Hereford, VIII. by the Mercian Law.
Notingham, XV. by the Danish law. Shro^shire, VIII. by the Mercian Law.
Lincoln. XV. by the Danish law. Stafferd, VIII. by the Mercian Law. York^. XV.
by the Danish law. Cheshire, VIII. by the Mercian Law. XV. by the Danish law.
Worcester, VIII. by the Mercian Law.


Here was none of Cornwall, Cumberland (styled also Carlileshire)
Northumberland, Lancaster, Westmerland (which was since titled Aplebyshire)
Durham, Monmouth, nor Rutland, which at this day make our number (beside the
XII. in Wales) XL. Cornwall (because of the Britons there planted) until the
Conqueror gave the County to his brother Robert of Moreton, continued out of
the division. Cumberland, Northumberland, Westmerland, and Durham, being all
Northern, seem to have bin then under Scottish or Danish power. But the two
first received their division, as it seems before the Conquest; for Cumberland
had its particular Matthew. West. fol. 366.
governors and Northumberland Ingulph. hist. Crowland.
Earls: Westmerland perhaps began when K. John gave it Robert Vipont, ancestor
to the Cliffords, holding by that Patent to this day the inheritance of the
Sherifdome. Durham religiously was with large immunities given to the Bishop,
since the Norman invasion. Lancaster, until Hen. III. created his younger son
Edmund Crooke-backe Earl of it, I think, was no County: for, in one of our old
year Thorp. 17. Ed. 3 sol. 56. b.
books a learned Judge affirms, that, in this Henry's time, was the first
Sherifes Turn held there. Nor until Edward (first son to Edmund of Langley
D. of York, and afterward D. of Anmerle) created by Rich. II. had Rutland any
Earls. I know for number and time of those, all authority agrees not with me;
but I conjecture only upon selected. As Alured divided the Shires first; so to
him is owing the constitution of Hundreds, Tithings, Lathes, and Wapentakes, to
the end that whosoever were not lawfully, upon credit of his Boroughes.i.
pledges, admitted in some of them for a good Subject, should be reckoned as
suspicious of life and loyalty. Some steps thereof remain in our Bract. lib.
3. tract. de Corona cap. 10 Quamplurimi ^as^^ ^n a^^is Ed. 3. and 5. Jacob.
apud Them. Ed. Cok. lib. 6. sol. 77. maxim vero hu^ faciunt Itinera illa H. 3.
and. Ed. 1.
ancient and later Law books.

Which he an heireloome left unto the English throne.
The first healing of the Kings Evil is referred to this Edward Po^yder. hist.
8.
the Confessor: and, of a particular example in his cur^ng a young married
woman, an old Eilred. Rhinallens. ap. Took in Charismat. Sanat. cap. 6.
monument is left to Posterity. In France such a kind of Cure is attributed to
their Kings also; both of that and this, if you desire particular inquisition,
take Dr. Tookers Charisma Sanationis.

Our Countries common laws did faithfully produce.
In Lambards Archaonomy and Roger of Houedens, Hen. II. are laws under name of
the Confessor and Conqueror joined, and deduced for the most part out of their
predecessors; but those of the Confessor seem to be the same, if Malmesbury De
gest. Reg. 2. cap. 11.
deceive not, which K. Cnu^ collected, of whom his words are, He commanded all
laws made by the ancient Kings to be kept, especially those of Ethelred, to
which the Kings swear under name of K. Edwards laws, not that he made them,
but observed them.
Omnes leges ab antiquis regibus and maxima antecessore suo Ethelredo latas,
sub interminatione Regiae mulcta, perpetuis te^mporibus obseruaripraecepit, in
quarum custodia^ etiam nunc tempore Bonorum sub nomine Regis Edward^ iuratur,
non quod ille Statuerit, sed quod obseruauerit: and under this name have they
bin humbly desired by the subject, granted with qualification, and
controuerted, as a maine and first part of liberty, in the next age, following
the Norman Conquest.

The twelfth Song.
* THE ARGUMENT.
The Muse, that part of Shropshire plyes
Which on the East of Severne lies:
Where mighty Wrekin from his hight,
In the proud Cambrian Mountains spite,
Sings those great Saxons ruling here,
Which the most famous warriors were.
And as she in her course proceeds,
Relating many glorious deeds,
Of Guy of Warwicks fight does strain
With Colebrond, that renowned Dane,
And of the famous Battles tryde
Twixt Knute and Edmond-Ironside;
To the Staffordian fields does roue;
Visits the Springs of Trent and Dove;
Of Moreland, Cank, and Needwood sings;
(...) which to this Canto brings.
THE haughty Cambrian Hills enamored of their praise
(As they who only sought ambitiously to raise
The blood of god-like Brute) their heads do proudly bear:
And having crowned themselves sole Regents of the Air
(An other war with Heaven as though they meant to make)
Did seem in great disdain the bold affront to take,
That any petty hill upon the English side,
Should dare, not (with a crouch) to vale unto their pride.
When Wrekin, as a hill his proper worth that knew,
And understood from whence their insolency grew,
For all that they appeared so terrible in sight,
Yet would not once forgo a jot that was his right.
And when they star'd on him, to them the like he gave,
And answered glance for glance, and brave again for brave:
That, when some other hills which English dwellers were,
The lusty Wrekin saw himself so well to bear
Against the Cambrian part, respectlesse of their power;
His eminent disgrace expecting every hour,
Those Flatterers that before (with many cheerful look)
Had graced his goodly site, him utterly forsook,
And mu^fled them in clouds, like Mourners vayl'd in black,
Which of their utmost hope attend the ruinous wrack:
That those delicious Nymphs, fair Tearne and Rodon clear
(Two Brooks of him beloved, and two that held him dear;
He, having none but them, they having none but he,
Which to their mutual joy, might eithers object be)
Within their secret breasts conceived sundry fears,
And as they mixed their streams, for him so mixed their tears.
Whom, in their coming down, when plainly he discernes,
For them his nobler heart in his strong bosom earnes:
But, constantly resolved, that (dearer if they were)
The Britains should not yet all from the English bear;
Therefore, quoth he, brave Flood, though forth by Out of Plinili^^on, in the
confines of Cardigan and Montgomery.
Cambria brought,
Yet as fair Englands friend, or mine thou would be thought
(O Severne!) let thine ear my just defense partake:
Which said, in the behalf of the English, thus he spoke;
Wise Weeuer (I suppose) sufficiently has said
Of those our Princes here, which fasted, watched, and prayed,
Whose deep devotion went for others ventrous deeds:
But in this Song of mine, he seriously that reads,
Shall find, ere I have done, the Britain (so extold,
Whose height each Mountain strives so mainly to vp-hold)
Matched with as valiant men, and of as clean a might,
As skillful to command, and as inured to fight.
Who, when their fortune willed that after they should scorse
Blows with the big-boan'd Dane, eschanging force for force
(When first he put from Sea to forage on this shore,
Two hundred See to the 1. Song.
years distained with eithers equal gore;
Now this aloft, now that: often did the English reign,
And oftentimes again depressed by the Dane)
The Saxons, then I say, themselves as bravely showed,
As these on whom the Welsh such glo^ious praise bestowed.
Nor could his angry sword, who Egbert ouer-threw
(Through which he thought at once the Saxons to subdue)
His kingly courage quell: but from his short retire,
His reinforced troops (new forged with sprightly fire)
Before them drove the Dane, and made the Britain run
(Whom he by liberal wage here to his aid had won)
Upon their recreant backs, which both in flight were slain,
Till their huge murdered heaps manured each neighboring Plain.
As, Ethelwolfe again, his utmost powers that bent
Against those fresh supplies each year from Denmark sent
(Which, proling up and down in their rude Danish ores,
Here put themselves by stealth upon the pestred shores)
In many a doubtful fight much fame in England wan.
So did the King of Kent, courageous Athelstan,
Which here against the Dane got such victorious days.
So, we the Wiltshire men as worthily may praise,
That buckled with those Danes, by Ceo^le and Osrick brought.
And Etheldred, with them nine sundry Fields that fought,
Recorded in his praise, the conquests of one year.
You right-nam'd English then, courageous men you were
When Redding ye regained, led by that valiant Lord:
Where Basrig ye out-brau'd, and Halden, sword to sword;
The most redoubted spirits that Denmark here addressed.
And Alured, not much inferior to the rest:
Who having in his days so many dangers past,
In seven brave foughten Fields their Champion Hubba chac't,
And slew him in the end, at Abington, that day
Whose like the Sun nere saw in his diurnall way:
Where those, that from the Field sore wounded sadly fled,
Were wel-neere ouer-whelm'd with mountains of the dead.
His force and fortune made the Foes so much to fear,
As they the Land at last did utterly forswear.
And, See to the next Song, of Rollo.
when proud Rollo, next, their former powers repaired
(Yea, when the worst of all it with the English fared)
Whose Countries near at hand, his force did still supply,
And Denmark to her drew the strengths of Normandy,
This Prince in many a fight their forces still defied.
The goodly River Lee he wisely did divide,
By which the Danes had then their full-fraught Navies tew'd:
The greatness of whose stream besieged Harford rew'd.
This Alfred whose foresight had politiquely found
Betwixt them and the Thames advantage of the ground,
A puissant hand thereto laboriously did put,
. And into lesser Streams that spacious Current cut.
Their ships thus set on shore (to frustrate their desire)
Those Danish Hulkes became the food of English fire.
Great Alfred left his life: when Elflida vp-grew,
That far beyond the pitch of other women flew:
Who having in her youth of childing felt the woe,
. Her Lords embraces vowed she never more would know:
But differing from her sex (as, full of manly fire)
This most courageous Queen, by conquest to aspire,
The puissant Danish powers victoriously pursued,
And resolutely here through their thick Squadron showed
Her way into the North. Where, Darby having won,
And things beyond belief upon the Enemy done,
She saved besieged York; and in the Danes despite,
When most they were vp-held with all the Eusterne might,
More Towns and Cities built out of her wealth and power,
Then all their hostile flames could any way devour*
And, when the Danish here the Country most destroyed,
Yet all our powers on them not wholly were employed;
But some we still reserved abroad for us to roame,
To fetch-in foreign spoils, to help our loss at home.
And all the Land, from us, they neeuer clearly wan:
But to his endless praise, our English Athelstan,
In the Northumbrian fields, with most victorious might
Put Alaffe and his powers to more inglorious flight;
And more then any King of the English him before,
Each way from North to South, from West to th'Easterne shore,
Made all the I Will his own; his seat who firmly fixed,
The Calidonian hills, and Cathnes point betwixt,
. And Constantine their King (a prisoner) hither brought;
Then over Severns banks the warlike Britains sought:
Where he their Princes forced from that their strong retreat,
In England to appear at his Imperial seat.
But after, when the Danes, who never wearied were,
Came with intent to make a general conquest here,
They brought with them a man deemed of so wondrous might,
As was not to be matched by any mortal wight:
For, one could scarcely bear his Ax into the field;
Which as a little wand the Dane would lightly wield:
And (to enforce that strength) of such a dauntlesse spirit,
A man (in their conceit) of so exceeding merit,
That to the English often they offered him (in pride)
The ending of the war by combat to decide:
Much scandal which procured unto the English name.
When, some out of their love, and some spurred on with shame,
By envy some provokt, some out of courage, feign
Would undertake the Cause to combat with the Dane.
But Athelstan the while, in settled judgment found,
Should the Defendant fail, how wide and deep a wound
It likely was to leave to his defensive war.
Thus, whilst with sundry doubts his thoughts perplexed are,
It pleased all-powerfull heaven, that Warwicks famous Guy
(The Knight through all the world renowned for Chivalry)
Arrived from foreign parts, where he had held him long.
His honorable Arms devoutly having hong
In a Religious house, the offerings of his praise,
To his Redeemer Christ, his help at all assayes
(Those Arms, by whose strong proof he many a Christian freed,
And bore the perfect marks of many a worthy deed)
Himself, a Palmer poor, in homely Russet clad
(And only in his hand his Hermits staff he had)
Toward Winchester alone (so) sadly took his way,
Where Athelstan, that time the King of England lay;
And where the Danish Camp then strongly did abide,
Near to a goodly Meade, which men there call the Hide.
The day that Guy arrived (when silent night did bring
Sleep both on friend and foe) that most religious King
(Whose strong and constant heart, all grievous cares suppressed)
His due devotion done, betook himself to rest.
To whom it seemed by night an Angel did appear,
Sent to him from that God whom he invoak't by prayer;
Commanding him the time not idly to for-slowe,
But rathe as he could rise, to such a gate to go,
Whereas he should not fail to find a goodly Knight
In Palmers poor attire: though very meanly dight,
Yet by his comely shape, and limbs exceeding strong,
He easily might him know the other folk among;
And bad him not to fear, but choose him for the man.
No sooner brake the day, but up rose Athelstan;
And as the Vision showed, he such a Palmer found,
With others of his sort, there sitting on the ground:
Where, for some poor repast they only seemed to stay,
Else ready to depart each one upon his way:
When secretly the King revealed to the Knight
His comfortable dreams that lately passed night:
With mild and princely words be speaking him; quoth he,
Far better you are known to heaven (it seems) then me
For this great Action fit: by whose most drad command
(Before a world of men) it is laid upon your hand.
Then stout and valiant Knight, here to my Court repair,
Refresh you in my bathes, and mollify your care
With comfortable wines and meats what you will ask:
And choose my richest Arms to fit you for this task.
The Palmer (gray with age) with countenance lowting low,
His head even to the earth before the King does bow,
Him softly answering thus; Drad Lord, it fits me ill
(A wretched man) to oppose high heavens eternal will:
Yet my most sovereign Liege, no more of me esteem
Then this poor habit shows, a Pilgrim as I seem;
But yet I must confess, have seen in former days
The best Knights of the world, and scuffled is some frayes.
Those times are gone with me; and, being aged now,
Have offered up my Arms, to Heaven and made my vow
Nere more to bear a Shield, nor my declining age
(Except some Palmers Tent, or homely Hermitage)
Shall ever enter roof: but if, by Heaven and thee,
This Action be imposed great English King on me,
Send to the Danish Camp, their challenge to accept,
In some convenient place proclaiming it be kept:
Where, by The Almighty's power, for England I Will appear.
The King, much pleased in mind, assumes his wonted cheer,
And to the Danish power his choicest Herault sent.
When, both through Camp and Court, this Combat quickly went.
Which suddenly divulged, whilst every listening ear,
As thirsting after news, desirous was to hear,
Who for the English side durst undertake the day;
The puissant Kings accord, that in the middle way
Betwixt the Tent and Town, to eithers equal sight,
Within a goodly Mead, most fit for such a fight,
The Lists should be prepared for this material prize.
The day prefixed once com'n, both Dane and English rise,
And to the appointed place th'vnnumbred people throng:
The weaker female sex, old men, and children young
Into the windows get, and up on stalls, to see
The man on whose brave hand their hope that day must be.
In noting of it well, there might a man behold
More sundry forms of fear then thought imagine could.
One looks upon his friend with sad and heavy cheer,
Who seems in this distress a part with him to bear:
Their passions do express much pity mixed with rage.
Whilst one his wives laments is laboring to assuage,
His little infant near, in childish gibbridge shows
What adds to his grief who sought to calm her woes.
One having climbed some roof, the concourse to discry,
From thence upon the earth deiects his humble eye,
As since he thither came he suddenly had found
Some danger them amongst which lurkt upon the ground.
One stands with fixed eyes, as though he were aghast:
Another sadly comes, as though his hopes were past.
This harkneth with his friend, as though with him to break
Of some intended act. Whilst they together speak,
Another stands near to listen what they say,
Or what should be the end of this so doubtful day.
One great and general face the gathered people seem:
So that the perfect'st sight beholding could not deem
What looks most sorrow showed; their griefs so equal were.
Upon the heads of two, whose che^kes were joined so near
As if together grown, a third his chin does rest:
Another looks over his: and others, hardly pressed,
Looked underneath their arms. Thus, whilst in crowds they throng
(Led by the King himself) the Champion comes along;
A man well struck in years, in homely Palmers gray,
And in his hand his staff, his reverent steps to stay,
Holding a comely pase: which at his passing by,
In every censuring tongue, as every serious eye,
Compassion mixed with fear, distrust and courage, bred.
Then Colebrond for the Danes came forth in irefull red;
Before him (from the Camp) an Ensign first displayed
Amidst a guard of gleaues: then sumptuously arrayed
Were twenty gallant youths, that to the warlike sound
Of Danish brazen Drums, with many a lofty bound,
Come with their Countries march, as they to Mars should dance.
Thus, forward to the fight, both Champions them advance:
And each without respect does resolutely choose
The weapon that he brought, nor does his foes refuse.
The Dane prepares his Axe, that ponderous was to feel,
Whose squares were laid with plates, and riuited with steel,
And armed down along with pykes; whose hardened points
(Forced with the weapons weight) had power to tear the joints
Of Curas or of Mayle, or what-so-ere they took:
Which caused him at the Knight disdainfully to look.
When our stout Palmer soon (unknown for valiant Guy)
The cord from his straight loins does presently untie,
Puts off his Palmers weed unto his trusse, which bore
The stains of ancient Arms, but showed it had before
Been costly cloth of Gold; and off his hood he threw:
Out of his Hermits staff his two-hand sword he drew
(The unsuspected sheath which long to it had been)
Which till that instant time the people had not seen;
A sword so often tried. Then to himself, quoth he,
Arms let me crave your aid, to set my Country free:
And never shall my heart your help again require,
But only to my God to lift you up in prayer.
Here, Colebrond forward made, and soon the Christian Knight
Encounters him again with equal power and spite:
Whereas, betwixt them two, might easily have been seen
Such blows, in public throngs as used had they been,
Of many there the least might many men have slain:
Which none but they could strike, nor none but they sustain;
The most relentlesse eye that had the power to awe,
And so great wonder bred in those the Fight that saw,
As verily they thought, that Nature until then
Had purposely reserved the utmost power of men,
Where strength still answered strength, on courage courage grew.
Look how two Lions fierce, both hungry, both pursue
One sweet and selfsame prey, at one another fly,
And with their armed paws ingrappled dreadfully,
The thunder of their rage, and boystrous struggling, make
The neighboring Forests round affrightedly to quake:
Their sad encounter, such. The mighty Colebrond stroke
A cruel blow at Guy: which though he finely broke,
Yet (with the weapons weight) his ancient hilt it split,
And (thereby lessened much) the Champion lightly hit
Upon the reverent brow: immediately from whence
The blood dropped softly down, as if the wound had sense
Of their much inward woe that it with grief should see.
The Danes, a deadly blow supposing it to be,
Sent such an ecchoing shoute that rent the troubled air.
The English at the noise, went all so wan with fear,
As though They lost the blood their aged Champion shed:
Yet were not these so pale, but the other were as red;
As though the blood that fell, upon their cheeks had staid.
Here Guy, his better spirits recalling to his aid,
Came fresh upon his foe; when mighty Colebrond makes
An other desperate stroke: which Guy of Warwick takes
Undauntedly aloft; and followed with a blow
Upon his shorter ribs, that the excessive flow
Streamed up unto his hilts: the wound so gap't withal,
As though it meant to say, Behold your Champions fall
By this proud Palmers hand. Such claps again and cries
The joyful English gave as cleft the very skies.
Which coming on along from these that were without,
When those within the Town received this cheerful shout,
They answered them with like; as those their joy that knew.
Then with such eager blows each other they pursue,
As every offer made, should threaten imminent death;
Until, through heat and toil both hardly drawing breath,
They desperately do close. Look how two Boares, being set
Together side to side, their threatening tusks do whet,
And with their gnashing teeth their angry foame do bite,
Whilst still they shouldring seek, each other where to smite:
Thus stood those irefull Knights; till flying back, at length
The Palmer, of the two the first recovering strength,
Upon the left arm lent great Colebrond such a wound,
That whilst his weapons point ^ell wel-neere to the ground,
And slowly he it raised, the valiant Guy again
Sent through his cloven scalpe his blade into his brain.
When downward went his head, and up his heels he threw;
As wanting hands to bid his Countrymen Adieu.
The English part, which thought an end he would have made,
And seeming as they much would in his praise have said,
He bad them yet forbear, whilst he pursued his fame
That to this passed King next in succession came;
That great and puissant Knight (in whose victorious days
Those knight-like deeds were done, no less deserving praise)
Brave Edmond, Edwards son, that Stafford having taken,
With as succesfull speed won Darby from the Dane.
From Lester then again, and Lincoln at the length,
Drove out the Dacian Powers by his resistlesse strength:
And this his England cleared beyond that raging Humber.
Flood,
Which that proud King of Hunnes once christened with his blood.
By which, great Edmonds power apparently was shown,
The Land from Humber South recovering for his own,
That Edgar after him so much disdained the Dane
Unworthy of a war that should disturb his reign,
As generally he seemed regardlesse of their hate.
And studying every way magnificence in State,
At Chester whilst he lived at more then kingly charge,
Eight tributary See to the X. Song.
Kings there rowed him in his Barge:
His shores from Pirates sack the King that strongly kept:
. A Neptune, whose proud sails the British Ocean swept.
But after his decease, when his more hopeful son,
. By cruel Stepdam's hate, to death was lastly done,
To set his rightful Crown upon a wrongful head
(When by thy fatal curse, licentious Etheldred,
Through dissolutenes, sloth, and thy abhorred life,
As grievous were thy sins, so were thy sorrows rife)
The Dane, possessing all, the English forced to bear
A heavier yoke then first those Heathen slaueries were;
Subjected, bought, and sold, in that most wretched plight,
As even their thraldom seemed their neighbors to affright.
Yet could not all their plagues the English height abate:
But even in their low'st Eb, and miserablest state,
Courageously themselves they into action put,
. And in one night, the throats of all the Danish cut.
And when in their revenge, the most insatiate Dane
Vnshipt them on our shores, under their puissant Swane:
And swollen with hate and ire, their huge vnweeldy force,
Came clustring like the Greeks out of the Woodden-horse:
And the Norfolcian Towns, the neer'st unto the East,
With sacrilege and rape did terriblest infest;
Those Danes yet from the shores we with such violence drove,
That from our swords, their ships could them but hardly save.
And to renew the war, that year ensuing, when
With fit supplies for spoil, they landed here again,
And all the Southern shores from Kent to Cornwall spread,
With those disordred troops by Alaffe hither led,
In seconding their Swane, which cried to them for aid;
Their multitudes so much sad Ethelred dismayed,
As from his Country forced the wretched King to fly.
An English yet there was, when England seemed to lie
Under the heauiest yoke that ever kingdom bore,
Who washed his secret knife in Swane's relentlesse gore,
Whilst (swelling in excess) his lavish Cups he plied.
Such means t'redeeme themselves the afflicted Nation tried.
And when courageous Knute, th'late murdered Swanus son,
Came in t'reuenge that act on his great father done,
He found so rare a spirit that here against him rose,
As though ordained by Heaven his greatness to oppose:
Who with him foot to foot, and face to face durst stand.
When Knute, which here alone affected the Command,
The Crown upon his head at fair South-hampton set:
And Edmond, loath to lose what Knute desired to get,
At London caused himself inaugurate to be.
King Knute would conquer all, King Edmond would be free.
The kingdom is the Prize for which they both are pressed:
And with their equal powers both meeting in the West,
The green Dorsetian fields a deep vermillion died:
Where Gillingham gave way to their great hosts (in pride)
Abundantly their blood that each on other spent.
But Edmond, on whose side that day the better went
(And with like fortune thought the remnant to suppress
That Sarum then besieged, which was in great distress)
With his victorious troops to Salsbury retires:
When with fresh bleeding wounds, Knute, as with fresh desires,
Whose might though somewhat maym'd, his mind yet vnsubdu'd,
His lately conquering Foe, courageously pursued:
And finding out a way, sent to his friends with speed,
Who him supplied with aid: and being helped at need,
Tempts Edmond still to fight, still hoping for a day.
Toward Worstershire their Powers both well upon their way,
There, falling to the Field, in a continual fight
Two days the angry hosts still parted were by Night:
Where twice the rising Sun, and twice the setting, saw
Them with their equal wounds their wearied breath to draw.
Great London to surprise, then (next) Canutus makes:
And thitherward as fast King Edmond Ironside takes.
Whilst Knute set down his siege before the Eastern gate,
King Edmond through the West, past in tryumphall state.
But this courageous King, that scorned, in his pride,
A Town should be besieged wherein he did abide,
Into the fields again the valiant Edmond goes.
Kanutus, yet that hopes to win what he did lose,
Provokes him still to fight: and falling back where they
Might field-roomth find at large, their Ensigns to display,
Together flewe again; that Brentford, with the blood
Of Danes and English mixed, discolored long time stood.
Yet Edmond, as before, went Victor still away.
When soon that valiant Knute, whom nothing could dismay,
Recalled his scattered troops, and into Essex hies,
Where (as ill fortune would) the Dane with fresh supplies
Was lately come a-land, to whom brave Ironside makes;
But Knute to him again as soon fresh courage takes:
And Fortune (as her self) determining to show
That she could bring an Eb, on valiant Edmonds Flow,
And easily cast him down from off the top of Chance,
By turning of her wheel, Canutus does advance.
Where she beheld that Prince which she had fauor'd long
(Even in her proud despite) his murdered troops among
With sweat and blood besmeared (Dukes, Earls, and Bishops slain,
In that most dreadful day, when all went to the Dane)
Through worlds of dangers wade; and with his Sword and Shield,
Such wonders there to act as made her in the Field
Ashamed of her self, so brave a spirit as he
By her unconstant hand should so much wronged be.
But, having lost the day, to Gloucester he draws,
To raise a second power in his slain soldiers cause.
When late-encourag'd Knute, whilst fortune yet does last,
Who often from Ironside fled, now followed him as fast.
Whilst thus in Civil Arms continually they toil,
And what the one strives to make, the other seeks to spoil,
With threatening swords still drawn; and with obnoxious hands
Attending their revenge, whilst either enemy stands,
One man amongst the rest from this confusion breaks,
And to the irefull Kings with courage boldly speaks;
Yet cannot all this blood your ravenous outrage fill?
Is there no law, no bound, to your ambitious will,
But what your swords admit? as Nature did ordain
Our lives for nothing else, but only to maintain
Your murders, sack, and spoil? If by this wastfull war
The Land unpeopled lie, some Nation shall from far,
By ruin of you both, into the I Will be brought,
Obtaining that for which you twain so long have fought.
Unless then through your thirst of Emperie you mean
Both Nations in these broils shall be extinguished clean,
Select you Champions fit, by them to prove your right,
Or try it man to man your selves in single fight.
When as those warlike Kings, prouokt with courage hie,
It willingly accept in person by and by.
And whilst they them prepare, the shapelesse concourse grows
In little time so great, that their unusual flows
Surrounded Severns banks, whose stream amazed stood,
Her Birlich to behold, in-Iled with her flood,
That with refulgent Arms then flamed; whilst the Kings,
Whose rage out of the hate of eithers Empire springs,
Both armed, Cap a Pe, upon their barred horse
Together fiercely flew; that in their violent course
(Like thunder when it speaks most horribly and loud,
Tearing the ful-stuft panch of some congealed clowd)
Their strong hoofes struck the earth: and with the fearful shock,
Their spears in splinters flew, their Beuers both unlock.
Canutus, of the two that furthest was from hope,
Who found with what a Foe his fortune was to cope,
Cries, noble Edmona, hold; Let us the Land divide.
Here the English and the Danes, from either equal side
Were Echoes to his words, and all aloud do cry,
Courageous Kings divide; twere pity such should die.
When now the neighboring Floods, willed Wrekin to suppress
His style, or they were like to surfeit with excess.
And time had brought about, that now they all began
To listen to a long told Prophecy, which ran
Of Moreland, that she might live prosperously to see
A River borne of her, who well might reccon'd be
The third of this large I Will: which Saw did first arise
From Arden, in those days delivering prophecies.
The Druids (as some say) by her instructed were.
In many secret skills she had been cond her lere.
The ledden of the Birds most perfectly she knew:
And also from their flight strange Auguries she drew;
Supreamest in her place: whose circuit was extent
From Avon to the Banks of Severne and to Trent:
Where Empress like she sat with Natures bounties blessed,
And served by many a Nymph; but two, of all the rest,
That Staffordshire calls hers, there both of high account.
The eld'st of which is Canke: though Needwood her surmount,
In excellence of soil, by being richly placed,
Twixt Trent and batning Dove; and, equally embraced
By their abounding banks, participates their store;
Of Britains Forests all (from th'lesse unto the more)
For finenesse of her turfe surpassing; and does bear
Her curled head so high, that Forests far and near
Often grutch at her estate; her flourishing to see,
Of all their stately tyers disrobed when they be.
But (as the world goes now) o woeful Canke the while,
As brave a Wood-Nymph once as any of this I Will;
Great Ardens eldest child: which, in her mothers ground
Before fair Feck'nhams self, her old age might have crowned;
When as those fallow Dear, and huge-hancht Stags that grazed
Upon her shaggy Heaths, the passenger amazed
To see their mighty Herds, with high-palmd heads to threat
The woods of o'regrowne Oaks; as though they meant to set
Their horns to the others heights. But now, both those and these
Are by vile gain devoured: So abject are our days.
She now, unlike her self, a Neatheards life does live,
And her dejected mind to Country cares does give.
But Muse, thou seem to leave the Morelands too too long:
Of whom report may speak (our mighty wastes among)
She from her chilly site, as from her barren feed,
For body, horn, and hair, as fair a Beast does breed
As scarcely this great I Will can equal: then of her,
Why should thou all this while the prophecy defer?
Who bearing many Springs, which pretty Rivers grew,
She could not be content, until she fully knew
Which child it was of hers (borne under such a fate)
As should in time be raised unto that high estate.
(I feign would have you think, that this was long ago,
When many a River, now that furiously does flow,
Had scarcely learned to creep) and therefore she does will
Wise Arden, from the depth of her abundant skill,
To tell her which of these her Rills it was she meant.
To satisfy her will, the Wisard answers; Trent.
For, as a skillful Seer, the aged Forest wist,
A more then usual power did in that name consist,
Which thirty does import; by which she thus divined, Trent signifies thirty.

There should be found in her, of Fishes thirty kind;
And thirty Abbeys great, in places fat and rank,
Should in succeeding time be builded on her bank;
And thirty several Streams from many a sundry way,
Unto her greatness should their watery tribute pay.
This, Moreland greatly liked: yet in that tender love,
Which she had ever borne unto her darling Dove,
She could have wished it his: because the dainty grass
That grows upon his bank, all other does surpass.
But, subject he must be: as Sow, which from her Spring,
At Stafford meets Penk, which she along does bring
To Trent by Tixall graced, the Astons ancient seat;
Which often the Muse has found her safe and sweet retreat.
The noble Owners now of which beloved place,
Good fortunes them and theirs with honored titles grace:
May heaven still bless that House, till happy Floods you see
Your selves more graced by it, then it by you can be.
Whose bounty, still my Muse so freely shall confess,
As when she shall want words, her signs shall it express.
So Blyth bears easily down toward her dear Sovereign Trent:
But nothing in the world gives Moreland such content
As her own darling Dove his confluence to behold
Of Floods in sundry strains: as, crankling Many-fold
The first that lends him force: of whose meandred ways,
And labyrinth-like turns (as in the Mores she straies)
She first received her name, by growing strangely mad,
Or'e-gone with love of Hanse, a dapper More-land Lad.
Who near their crystal springs as in those wastes they played,
Bewitched the wanton heart of that delicious maid:
Which instantly was turned so much from being coy,
That she might seem to dote upon the Morish boy.
Who closely stole a way (perceiving her intent)
With his dear Lord the Dove, in quest of Princely Trent,
With many other Floods (as, Churnet, in his train
That draws Dunsmore on, with Yendon, then clear Taine,
That comes alone to Dove) of which, Hanse one would be.
And for himself he feign of Many-fold would free
(Thinking this amorous Nymph by some means to beguile)
He closely under earth convayes his head awhile.
But, when the River fears some policy of his,
And her beloved Hanse immediately does miss,
Distracted in her course, improuidently rash,
She often against the Cleeues her crystal front does dash:
Now forward, then again she backward seems to bear;
As, like to lose her self by straggling here and there.
Hanse, that this while supposed him quite out of her sight,
No sooner thrusts his head into the cheerful light,
But Many-fold that still the Runaway does watch,
Him (ere he was aware) about the neck does catch:
And, as the angry Hanse would feign her hold remove,
They struggling tumble down into their Lord, the Dove.
Thus though the industrious Muse has been employed so long,
Yet is she loath to do poor little Smestall wrong,
That from her Wilfrunes Spring near Hampton plyes, to pour
The wealth she there receives, into her friendly Stowr.
Nor shall the little Bourne have cause the Muse to blame,
From these Staffordian Heathes that strives to catch the Tame:
Whom she in her next Song shall greet with mirthfull cheer,
So happily arrived now in her native Shire.
Illustrations.
TAking her progress into the Land, the Muse comes Southward from Cheshire
into adjoining Stafford, and that part of Shropshire, which lies in the English
side, East from Seuerne.

And into lesser streams the spacious current cut.
In that rageing deuastation over this Kingdom by the Danes, they had gotten
diverse of their Ships fraught with provision out of Thames into the river Ley,
(which diuides Middlesex and Essex) some XX. miles from London; Alfred holding
his tents near that territory, especially to prevent their spoil of the
instant Harvest, observed that by dividing the River, then Nauigable between
them and Thames, their Ships would be grounded, and themselves bereft of what
confidence their Navy had promised them. He thought it, and did it, by parting
the water into three channels. The Danes betook themselves to flight, their
Ships left as a prey to the Londoners.

Her Lords embraces vowed she never more would know.
This Alured left his son Edward successor, and, among other children, this
El^led, or Ethelfled his daughter, married to Ethelred Earl of Mercland. Of
Alfreds worth and troublous reign, because here the Author leaves him, I offer
you these of an ancient English wit: Nobilitas innata tibi probitatis honorem
Armipotens Alfrede dedit, probitasque laborem
Perpetuumque labor nomen. Cui mixta dolori
Gaudia semper erant spes semper mixta timori.
Si modo Victor ^ras ad Crastina bella pau^bas:
Si modo victus eras ad crastina bella parabas
Cui vestes sudore iugi, Cui sica cruore
Tincta iugi, quantum sit Onus regnare probarunt.
Huntingdon cites these as his own; and if he deal plainly with us (I doubted
it because his Ms. Epigrams, which make in some copies the XI. and XII. of his
History, are of most different strain, and seem made when Apollo was either
angry, or had not leisure to ouerlooke them) he shows his Muse (as also in an
other written by him upon Edgar, beginning Auctor opum, vindex scelerum
Largitor honorum, etc.) in that still declining time of learnings-state, worthy
of much precedence. Of Ethelfled in William of Malmesbury, is the Latin of
this English: She was the love of the subject, fear of the enemy, a woman of a
mighty heart; having once endured the grievous pains of childbirth, ever
afterward denied her husband those sweeter desires; protesting, that, yielding
indulgence toward a pleasure, having so much consequent pain, was unseemly in
a Kings daughter. She was buried at S. Peter's in Gloucester; her name laden by
Monks, with numbers of her excellencies.

For Constantine their King, an hostage hither brought.
After he had taken Wales and Scotland (as our Historians say) from Howel,
DCCCC.XXVI.
Malmesbury call's him Ludwal, and Constantine; he restored presently their
Kingdoms, affirming, that, it was more for his Majesty to make a King then be
one. The Scottish Hector Boeth. lib. 11. and Buchanan. Hist. 6. reg. 85.
stories are not agreeing, here, with ours; against whom Buchanan storms, for
affirming what I see not how he is so well able to confute, as they to
justify. And for matter of that nature, I rather send you to the collections
in Ed. I. by Thomas of Walsingham, and thence for the same and other to Edw.
Halls Hen. VIII.

A Neptune, whose proud sails the British Ocean swept.
That Flower and delight of the English world, in whose birth-time S. Dunstane
(as is said) at Glastenbury, heard this Rob. Glocestrens.
Angelical voice; To holy Church and to the Lord Pays is ybore and blis
By thulke Child's time, that nouthe ybore is.
(among his other innumerable benefits, and royal cares) had a Navy of Some
say M M.M.M.
M.M.M.DC. Sail; which by tripartit division in the East, West, and Northern
coasts, both defended what was subject to Pirates rapine, and so made strong his
own Nation against the enemies invasion.

By civil Stepdames hate to death was lastly done.
Edgar had by one woman (his greatest stains showed themselves in this variety
and unlawful obtaining of Lustful sensuality, as Stories will tell you, in
that of Earl Ethelwald, the Nun Wulfrith, and the young less of Andeuer)
called Eg^l^led, surnamed Ened, daughter to Odmer a great Nobleman, Edward; and
by Q. Elfrith, daughter to Orgar Earl of Devonshire, Ethelred of some VII.
years age at his death. That, Egelfled was a professed Ex Osberno in Vita
Dunstan, ^ox. E^cles. hist. 4 Anointed Princes.
Nun, some have argued and so make Ethelred the only legitimat heir to the
Crown: nor do I think that, except Alfrith, he was married to any of the
Ladies, on whom he got children. Edward was anointed King (for in those days
was that use of Anointing among the Saxon Princes, and began in K. Alfred) but
not without disliking grudges of his Stepmothers faction, which had nevertheless
in substance, what his vain name only of King pretended: but her bloody hate,
bred out of womanish ambition, strayning to every point of Sovereignty,
DCCCC.LXXVIII.
not thus satisfied, compeld in her this cruelty. K. Edward not suspecting her
dissembled purposes with simple kindness of an open Nature, wearied after the
Chase in Pu^beck I Will in Dorsetshire, without guard or attendance, visits her at
Corfe Castle; she, under sweet words and saluting kisses, palliating her
hellish design, entertaines him: but while he being very hot and thirsty
(without imagination of treason) was in pledging her, she Vide Malmesb. lib. 2
cap. 9. and Huntingdon. hist. 5.
or one of her appointed servants, stabbed the innocent King. His corpse, within
little space expiring its last breath, was buried at Warham, thence afterward
by Alfer Earl of Mercland, translated into Shaftsbury, which (as to the II.
Song I note) was hereby for a time called Malmesb. lib. de Pontisic. 2.
S. Edwards. Thus did his brother in law Ethelred (according to wicked Elfriths
cruel and traiterous Project) succeed him. As, of Constantine Copronymus, the
Greeks, so, of this Ethelred, is affirmed, that, in his holy tincture he
abused the Font with natural excrements, which made S. Dunstan, then
Christning him, angrily exclaim, By God and his mother, he will be a slouenly
fellow.
Per Deum and Matrem eius ignauus homo erit. Some ten years of age was he,
when his brother Edward was slain, and, out of childish affection, wept for
him bitterly; which his mother extremely disliking, being author of the murder
only for his sake, most cruelly beat him her self with Rob. Glocestrensis.
an handful of Wax -- Candlen long and towe
She.
Heo ne bileued noght ar he lay at her Feet in woe.
vet yswowe:
War thoru this child afterward such hey mon as he was
Was the worse wan he Saw.
ysey Candlen vor this cas.
But I have Vit. S. Edwardi apud Ranulph. Cestrens. lib. 6.
read it affirmed, that Ethelred never would endure any Wax Candles, because he
had seen his mother unmercifully with them whip the good S. Edward. Its not
worth one of the Candles, which be the truer; I incline to the first. To expiat
all, she afterward built two Nunneries, one at Werwell, the other at
Ambresbury; and by all means of Penitence and Satisfaction (as the doctrine
then directed) endeavored her freedom out of this horrible offense.

And in one night the throats of all the Danish cut.
History, not this place, must inform the Reader of more particulars of the
Danes; and let him see to the I. Song. But, for this slaughter, I thus ease his
Inquisition. Ethelred (after multitudes of miseries, M II.
long continued through their exactions and deuastations, being so large, that
XVI. Shires had endured their cruel and even conquering spoils) in the XXIII.
of his reign, strengthened with provoking hopes, grounded on alliance, which,
by marriage with Emma, daughter of Richard I. Duke of Normandy, he had with his
neighbor Potentate, sent privy letters into every place of note, where the
Danes by truce peaceably resided, to the English, commanding them, all as one,
on the selfsame day and hour appointed (the day was S. Brictius, that is,
the XIII. of November) suddenly to put them, as respective occasion best
fitted, to fire or sword; which was performed.

A Chronologicall order and descent of the Kings here included in Wrekins Song.
A. CHR.
DCCC. Egbert son to Inegild (others call him Alhmund) grandchild to K. Ine.
After See to the last Song before. Because in Westsex all the rest were at last
confounded. These are most commonly written Kings of Westsex, although in
Seigniorie (as it were) or, as the Ciuilians call it, Direct Property, all the
other Provinces (except some Northern, and what the Danes unjustly possessed)
were theirs.
him scarce any, none long, had the name of King in the Isle, but Governors or
Earls; the common titles being Duces, Comites, Consules, and such like; which
in some writers after the Conquest were indifferent names, and William the I.
is often called Earl of Normandy. DCCC.XXXVI. Ethelulph son to Egbert.
DCCC.LV. Ethelbald and Ethelbert, sons to Ethelulph, dividing their Kingdom,
according to their fathers Testament. DCCC.LX. Ethelbert alone, after
Ethelbalds death. DCCC.LXVI. Ethelred, third son of Ethelulph. DCC.LXXI.
Alfred youngest son to Ethelulph, brought up at Rome; and there, in Ethelreds
life time, Anointed by PP. Leo IV. as in ominous hope of his future Kingdom.
DCCCC.I. Edward I. surnamed in Story The elder.
Senior, son to Alfred. DCCCC.XXIV. Athelstan, eldest son to Edward, by
Egwine a Shepherds daughter; but, to whom Beauty and Noble spirit denied, what
base Parentage required. She, before the K. lay with her, dreamed (you remember
that of Olympias, and many such like) that out of her womb did shine a Moon,
enlightening all England, which in her Birth ( Athelstan) proved true. DCCCC.XL.
Edmund I. son of Male enim and inepte Veremundi sequax Hector ille Boeth.
lib. 11. qui Ed^. and Edredum Aethelstano scribit prognatos.
Edward by his Q. Edgi^e. DCCCC.XLVI. Edred brother to Edmund. DCCCC.LV. Edwy
first son of Edmund. DCCCC.LIX. Edgar (second son of Edmund) The Minion of
his subjects.
Honor ac Deliciae Anglorum. DCCCC.LXXV. Edward II. son to Edgar by Egelfled,
murdered by his Stepmother Alfrith, and thence called S. Edward. DCCCC.I XXIX
Ethelred II. son to Edgar, by Q. Alfrith, daughter to Orgar Earl of
Devonshire. M.XVI. Edmund II. son to Ethelred by his first wife Elfgine,
surnamed Ironside.
Between him and Cnut (or Canutus) the Dane, son to Swain, was that
intended single combat; so by their own particular fortunes, to end the
miseries, which the English soil bore recorded in very great Characters,
written with streams of her childrens blood. It properly here breaks off; for
(the composition being, that Edmund should have his part Westsex, Estsex,
Estangle, Middlesex, Surrey, Kent, and Sussex, and the Dane (who durst not
fight it out, but first moved for a Treaty) Mercland and the Northern
territories) Edmund died the same year (some report was, that traiterous
Edrique Stre^na Earl of Mercland poisoned him) leaving sons Edmund and
Edward: but they were, by Danish ambition, and traiterous perjury of the
unnatural English State, disinherited, and all the Kingdom cast under Cnut.
After him reigned his son Harold I. Lightfoot a Shoomakers Marian. Scot. and
Florent. Wigorn.
son (but dissembled, as begotten by him on his Q. Alfgine:) then, with
Harold, Hardc^^t, whom he had by his wife Emma, K. Ethelreds Dowager. So that
from Edmund, of Saxon blood (to whose glory Wrekin has dedicated his endeavor;
and therefore should transcend his purpose, if he exceeded their Empire) until
Edward the Confessor, following Hardc^^t, son to Ethelred, by the same Q.
Emma, the Kingdom continued under Danish Princes.



The thirteenth Song.
* THE ARGUMENT.
This Song our Shire of Warwick sounds;
Reviues old Ardens ancient bounds.
Through many shapes the Muse here roues;
Now sporting in those shady Groves,
The tunes of Birds often stays to hear:
Then, finding Herds of lusty Dear,
She Huntresse-like the Heart pursues;
And like a Hermit walks, to choose
The Simples every where that grow;
Comes Ancors glory next to show;
Tells Guy of Warwicks famous deeds;
To th'Vale of Red-horse then proceeds,
To play her part the rest among;
There shuts up her thirteenth Song.
Upon the Mid-lands now the industrious Muse does fall;
That Shire which we the heart of England well may call, Warwickshire the
middle Shire of England.

As she her self extends (the midst which is decreed)
Betwixt S. Michaels Mount, and Barwick-bord'ring Tweed,
Brave Warwick; that abroad so long advanced her The ancient Coat of that
Earldome.
Bear,
. By her illustrious Earls renowned every where;
Above her neighboring Shires which always bore her head.
My native Country then, which so brave spirits have bred,
If there be virtue yet remaining in thy earth,
Or any good of thine thou breathd'st into my birth,
Accept it as thine own whilst now I sing of thee;
Of all thy later Brood th'vnworthiest though I be.
Muse, first of Arden tell, Diverse Towns expressing her name: as Henly in
Arden, Ha^pton in Arde^. etc.
whose footsteps yet are found
In her rough wood-lands more then any other ground
. That mighty Arden held even in her height of pride;
Her one hand touching Trent, the other, Severns side.
The very sound of these, the Wood-Nymphs does awake:
When thus of her own self the ancient Forest spoke;
My many goodly sites when first I came to show,
Here opened I the way to mine own ouer-throwe:
For, when the world found out the fitness of my soil,
The gripple wretch began immediately to spoil
My tall and goodly woods, and did my grounds enclose:
By which, in little time my bounds I came to lose.
When Britain first her fields with Villages had filled,
Her people wexing still, and wanting where to build,
They often dislodged the Heart, and set their houses, where
He in the Broom and Brakes had long time made his leyre.
Of all the Forests here within this mighty I Will,
If those old Britains then me Sovereign did instile,
I needs must be the great'st; for greatness it is alone
That gives our kind the place: else were there many a one
For pleasantnes of shade that far does me excel.
But, of our Forests kind the quality to tell,
We equally partake with Wood-land as with Plain,
Alike with Hill and Dale; and every day maintain
The sundry kinds of beasts upon our copious wast's,
That men for profit breed, as well as those of chase*
Here Arden of her self ceast any more to show;
And with her Sylvan joys the Muse along does go.
When Phoebus lifts his head out of the Winters wave,
No sooner does the Earth her flowerie bosom brave,
At such time as the Year brings on the pleasant Spring,
But Hunts-vp to the Morn the feath'red Sylvans sing:
And in the lower Grove, as on the rising Knole,
Upon the highest spray of every mounting pole,
Those Quirristers are pearcht with many a speckled breast.
Then from her burnisht gate the goodly glittring East
Guilds every lofty top, which late the humorous Night
Bespangled had with pearl, to please the Mornings sight:
On which the mirthfull Quires, with their clear open throats,
Unto the joyful Morn so strain their warbling notes,
That Hills and Valleys ring, and even the ecchoing Air
Seems all composed of sounds, about them every where.
The Throstell, with shrill Sharps; as purposely he song
T'awake the lustlesse Sun; or chyding, that so long
He was in coming forth, that should the thickets thrill:
The Woosell near at hand, that has a golden bill;
As Nature him had marked of purpose, t'let us see
That from all other Birds his tunes should different be:
For, with their vocal sounds, they sing to pleasant May;
Upon his Of all Birds, only the Blackbird whistleth.
dulcet pype the Merle does only play.
When in the lower Brake, the Nightingale hard-by,
In such lamenting strains the joyful hours does ply,
As though the other Birds she to her tunes would draw.
And, but that Nature (by her all-constraining law)
Each Bird to her own kind this season does invite,
They else, alone to hear that Charmer of the Night
(The more to use their ears) their voices sure would spare,
That moduleth her tunes so admirably rare,
As man to set in Parts, at first had learned of her.
To Philomell the next, the Linet we prefer;
And by that warbling bird, the Wood-Larke place we then,
The Red-sparrow, the Nope, the Red-breast, and the Wren,
The Yellow-pate: which though she hurt the blooming tree,
Yet scarce has any bird a finer pype then she.
And of these chaunting Fowls, the Goldfinch not behind,
That has so many sorts descending from her kind.
The Tydie for her notes as delicate as they,
The laughing Hecco, then the counterfetting lay,
The Softer, with the (Shrill some hid among the leaves,
Some in the taller trees, some in the lower greaues)
Thus sing away the Morn, until the mounting Sun,
Through thick exhaled fogs, his golden head has run,
And through the twisted tops of our close Covert creeps
To kiss the gentle Shade, this while that sweetly sleeps.
And near to these our Thicks, the wild and frightfull Herds,
Not hearing other noise but this of chattering Birds,
Feed fairly on the Launds; both sorts of seasoned Dear:
Here walk, the stately Red, the freckled Fallowe there:
The Bucks and lusty Stags amongst the Rascals strewn,
As sometime gallant spirits amongst the multitude.
Of all the Beasts which we for our Of hunting, or Chase.
veneriall name,
The Heart amongst the rest, the Hunters noblest game:
Of which most Princely Chase since none did ere report,
Or by description touch, to express that wondrous sport
(Yet might have well beseem'd th'ancients nobler Songs)
To our old Arden here, most fitly it belongs:
Yet shall she not invoke the Muses to her aid;
But thee Diana bright, a Goddess and a maid:
In many a huge-growne Wood, and many a shady Grove,
Which often have borne thy Bow (great Huntresse) used to roue
At many a cruel beast, and with thy darts to pierce
The Lion, Panther, Ounce, the Bear, and Tiger fierce;
And following thy fleet Game, chaste mighty Forests Queen,
With thy disheueld Nymphs attyr'd in youthful green,
About the Launds have scowr'd, and Wastes both far and near,
Brave Huntresse: but no beast shall prove thy Quarries here;
Save those the best of Chase, the tall and lusty Red,
The Stag for goodly shape, and stateliness of head,
Is fitt'st to hunt at force. For whom, when with his hounds
A description of hunting the Heart.
The laboring Hunter tufts the thick vnbarbed grounds
Where harbor'd is the Heart; there often from his feed
The dogs of him do find; or thorough skillful heed,
The Huntsman by his The tract of the foot.
slot, or breaking earth, perceaues,
Or entering of the thick by pressing of the greaues
Where he has gone to lodge. Now when the Heart does hear
The often-bellowing hounds to vent his secret leyre,
He rouzing rusheth out, and through the Brakes does drive,
As though up by the roots the bushes he would riue.
And through the combrous thicks, as fearfully he makes,
He with his branched head, the tender Saplings shakes,
That sprinkling their moist pearl do seem for him to weep;
When after goes the Cry, with yellings loud and deep,
That all the Forest rings, and every neighboring place:
And there is not a hound but falls to the Chase.
One of the Measures in winding the horn.
Rechating with his horn, which then the Hunter cheeres,
Whilst still the lusty Stag his high-palm'd head vp-beares,
His body showing state, with unbent knees upright,
Expressing (from all beasts) his courage in his flight.
But when the approaching foes still following he perceiues,
That he his speed must trust, his usual walk he leaves;
And over the Champaine flies: which when the assembly find,
Each follows, as his horse were footed with the wind.
But being then imbost, the noble stately Dear
When he has gotten ground (the kennell cast arere)
Does beat the Brooks and Ponds for sweet refreshing soil:
That serving not, then proves if he his sent can foil,
And makes amongst the Herds, and flocks of shag-wooll'd Sheep,
Them frighting from the guard of those who had their keep.
But when as all his shifts his safety still denies,
Put quite out of his walk, the ways and fallowes tryes.
Whom when the Plowman meets, his teame he lets stand
T'assaile him with his goad: so with his hook in hand,
The Shepherd him pursues, and to his dog does halow:
When, with tempestuous speed, the hounds and Huntsmen follow;
Until the noble Dear through toil bereaved of strength,
His long and sinewy legs then failing him at length,
The Villages attempts, enraged, not giving way
To any thing he meets now at his sad decay.
The cruel ravenous hounds and bloody Hunters near,
This noblest beast of Chase, that vainly does but fear,
Some bank or quick-set finds: to which his hanch opposed,
He turns upon his foes, that soon have him enclosed.
The churlish throated hounds then holding him at bay,
And as their cruel fangs on his harsh skin they lay,
With his sharp-poynted head he deals deadly wounds.
The Hunter, coming in to help his wearied hounds,
He desperately assailes; The Heart weepeth at his dying: his tears are held to
be precious in medicine.
until oppressed by force,
He who the Mourner is to his own dying Corse,
Upon the ruthlesse earth his precious tears lets fall.
To Forests that belongs; but yet this is not all:
With solitude what sorts, that here is not wondrous rife?
Whereas the Hermit leads a sweet retired life,
From Villages repleate with ragg'd and sweating Clownes,
And from the loathsome airs of smoky cittied Towns.
Suppose twixt noone and night, A description of the afternoon.
the Sun his halfe-way wrought
(The shadows to be large, by his descending brought)
Who with a fervent eye looks through the twyring glades,
And his dispersed rays commixeth with the shades,
Exhaling the mil^h dew, which there had tarried long,
And on the ranker grass till past the noone-sted hong;
When as the Hermet comes out of his homely Cell,
Where from all rude resort he happily does dwell: Hermits have often had their
aboads by ways that lie through Forests.

Who in the strength of youth, a man at Arms has been;
Or one who of this world the vileness having seen,
Retyres him from it quite; and with a constant mind
Man's beastliness so loathes, that flying humane kind,
The black and darksome nights, the bright and gladsome days
Indifferent are to him, his hope on God that stays.
Each little Village yields his short and homely fare:
To gather wind-falne sticks, his great'st and only care;
Which every aged tree still yields to his fire.
This man, that is alone a King in his desire,
By no proud ignorant Lord is basely ouer-aw'd,
Nor his false praise affects, who grossly being clawed,
Stands like an itchy Moyle; nor of a pin he ways
What fools, abused Kings, and humorous Ladies raise.
His free and noble thought, nere envies at the grace
That often times is given unto a Baud most base,
Nor stirs it him to think on the Impostour vile,
Who seeming what he is not, does sensually beguile
The sottish purblind world: but absolutely free,
His happy time he spends the works of God to see,
In those so sundry herbs which there in plenty grow:
Whose sundry strange effects he only seeks to know.
And in a little Maund, being made of Oziars small,
Which serves him to do full many a thing withal,
He very choicely sorts his Simples got abroad.
Here finds he on an Oak Rheume-purging Polipode;
And in some open place that to the Sun does lie,
He Fumitorie gets, and Eyebright for the eye:
The Yarrow, where-with-all he stops the wound-made gore:
The healing Tutsan then, and Plantan for a sore.
And hard by them again he holy Vervaine finds,
Which he about his head that has the Megrim binds.
The wonder-working Dill he gets not far from these,
Which curious women use in many a nice disease.
For them that are with Newts, or Snakes, or Adders stong,
He seeks out an herb that is called Adders-tong;
As Nature it ordained, its own like hurt to cure,
And sportiue did her self to niceties invre.
Valerian then he crops, and purposely does stamp,
T'apply unto the place that is haled with the Crampe.
As Century, to close the wideness of a wound:
The belly hurt by birth, by Mugwort to make sound.
His Chickweed cures the heat that in the face does rise.
For Physic, some again he inwardly applies.
For comforting the Spleen and Liver, gets for iuce,
Pale Hore-hound, which he holds of most especial use.
So Saxifrage is good, and Hart's-tongue for the Stone,
With Agrimony, and that herb we call S. John.
To him that has a flux, of Sheepheards purse he gives,
And Mous-eare unto him whom some sharp rupture grieves.
And for the laboring wretch that is troubled with a cough,
Or stopping of the breath, by fleagme that is hard and tough,
Campana here he crops, approved wondrous good:
As Comfrey unto him that is bruised, spetting blood;
And from the Falling-ill, by Fiue-leafe does restore,
And Melancholy cures by sovereign Hellebore.
Of these most helpful herbs yet tell we but a few,
To those unnumbered sorts of Simples here that grew.
The Authors of two famous Herbal^.
Which justly to set down, even Dodon short does fall;
Nor skillful Gerard, yet, shall ever find them all.
But from our Hermit here the Muse we must enforce,
And zealously proceed in our intended course:
How Arden of her Rills and Riuerets does dispose;
By Alcester how Alne to Arro easily flows;
And mildly being mixed, to Avon hold their way:
And likewise towered the North, how liuely-tripping Rhea,
To Attend the lustier Tame, is from her Fountain sent:
So little Cole and Blyth go on with him to Trent.
His Tamworth at the last, he in his way does win:
There playing him awhile, till Ancor should come in,
Which trifleth twixt her banks, observing state, so slow,
As though into his arms she scorned her self to throw:
Yet Arden willed her Tame to serve Ancor.
her on his knee;
For by that Nymph alone, they both should honored be.
The Forest so much fallen from what she was before,
That to her former height Fate could her not restore;
Though often in her behalf, the Genius of the Land
Importuned the Heavens with an auspicious hand.
Yet granted at the last (the aged Nymph to grace)
They by a Ladies birth would more renown that place
Then if her Woods their heads above the Hills should seat;
And for that purpose, first made Couentry so great
(A poor thatcht Village then, or scarcely none at all,
That could not once have dreamed of her now stately wall)
. And thither wisely brought that goodly Virgin-band,
Th'eleuen thousand maids, chaste Vrsula's Command,
Whom then the Britain Kings gave her full power to press,
For matches to their friends in Britanny the less.
At whose departure thence, each by her just bequest
Some special virtue gave, ordayning it to rest
With one of their own sex, that there her birth should have,
Till fullness of the time which Fate did choicely save;
Until the Saxons reign, when Couentry at length,
From her small, mean regard, recovered state and strength,
. By Leofrick her Lord yet in base bondage held,
The people from her Marts by tollage who expeld:
Whose Duchess, which desired this tribute to release,
Their freedom often begged. The Duke, to make her cease,
Told her that if she would his loss so far enforce,
His will was, she should ride stark nak't upon a horse
By day light through the street: which certainly he thought,
In her heroic breast so deeply would have wrought,
That in her former suit she would have left to deal.
But that most princely Dame, as one devoured with zeal,
Went on, and by that mean the City clearly freed.
The first part of whose name, Godiua, does forereed
Th'first syllable of her^, and Goodere half does sound;
For by agreeing words, great matters have been found.
But further then this place the mystery extends.
What Arden had begun, in Ancor lastly ends:
For in the British tongue, the Britains could not find,
Wherefore to her that name of Ancor was assigned:
Nor yet the Saxons since, nor times to come had known,
But that her being here, was by this name fore-shown,
As prophesying her. For, as the first did tell
Her Surname, so again does Ancor lively spell
Her Christened title Anne. And as those Virgins there
Did sanctify that Place: so holy Edith here
A Recluse long time lived, in that fair Abbey placed
Which Alured enricht, and Powlesworth highly graced.
A Princess being borne, and Abbess, with those Maids,
All Noble like her self, in bidding of their Beads
Their holiness bequeathed, upon her to descend
Which there should after live: in whose dear self should end
The Intent of Ancors name, her coming that decreed,
As hers (her place of birth) fair Couentry that freed.
But whilst about this tale smooth Ancor tryfling stays,
Unto the lustier Tame as loath to come her ways,
The Flood entreats her thus; Dear Brook, why do thou wrong
Our mutual love so much, and tediously prolong
Our mirthfull mariage-howre, for which I still prepare?
Haste to my broader banks, my joy and only care.
For as of all my Floods thou art the first in fame;
When frankly thou shall yield thine honor to my name,
I will protect thy state: then do not wrong thy kind.
What pleasure has the world that here thou may not find?
Hence, Muse, divert thy course to Dunsmore, by that The Highcrosse, supposed
to be the midst of England.
Cross
Where those two mighty See to the xvj. Song.
ways, the Watling and the Fosse,
Our Center seem to cut. (The first does hold her way,
From Dover, to the farth'st of fruitful Anglesey:
The second South and North, from Michaels utmost Mount,
To Cathnesse, which the furth'st of Scotland we account.)
And then proceed to show, how Avon from her Spring,
Newnham Wells
By Newnhams Fount is blessed; and how she, blandishing,
By Dunsmore drives along. Whom Sow does first assist,
Which takes Shirburn in, with Cune, a great while mist;
Though Otherwise, Cune-tre: that is, the Town upon Cune.
Couentry from thence her name at first did raise,
Now flourishing with Fanes, and proud Piramides;
Her walls in good repair, her Ports so bravely built,
Her halls in good estate, her Cross so richly gilt,
As scorning all the Towns that stand within her view:
Yet must she not be grieved, that Cune should claim her due.
Toward Warwick with this train as Avon trips along,
To Guy-cliffe being come, her Nymphs thus bravely song;
To thee renowned Knight, continual praise we owe,
And at thy hallowed Tomb thy yearly Obijts show;
Who, thy dear Phillis name and Country to advance,
Left'st Warwicks wealthy seat: and sailing into France,
At Tilt, from his proud Steed, Duke Otton threw'st to ground:
And with th'invalewed Prize of Blanch the beauteous crowned
(The Almaine Emperors heir) high acts did there atchieue:
As Lovaine thou again did valiantly relieve.
Thou in the Soldans blood thy worthy sword imbru'dst;
And then in single fight, great Amerant subdu'dst.
It Was thy Herculian hand, which happily destroyed
That Dragon, which so long Northumberland annoyed;
And slew that cruel Bore, which waste our wood-lands laid,
Whose tusks turned up our Tilths, and Dens in Meadows made:
Whose shoulder blade remains at Couentry till now;
And, at our humble suit, did quell that monstrous Cow
The passengers that used from Dunsmore to affright.
Of all our English (yet) o most renowned Knight,
That Colebrond ouercam'st: at whose amazing fall
The Danes removed their Camp from Winchesters sieg'd wall.
Thy statue Guy-cliffe keeps, the gazers eye to please;
Warwick, thy mighty Arms (thou English Hercules)
Thy strong and masly sword, that never was controld:
Which, as her ancient right, her Castle still shall hold.
Scarce ended they their Song, but Avons winding stream,
By Warwick, entertaines the high complection'd Leame:
And as she thence along to Stratford on does strain,
Receives little Heile the next into her train:
Then takes in the Stour, the Brook, of all the rest
Which that most goodly Vale of Red-horse loves best;
A Valley that enioyes a very great estate,
Yet not so famous held as smaller, by her fate:
Now, for Report had been too partial in her praise,
Her just conceived grief, fair Red-horse thus bewraies;
Shall every Vale be heard to boast her wealth? and I,
The needy Countries near that with my Corn supply
As bravely as the best, shall only I endure
The dull and beastly world my glories to obscure;
Near way-lesse Ardens side, since my rety'rd abode
Stood quite out of the way from every common road?
Great Eushams fertile Gleabe, what tongue has not extold?
As though to her alone belongd the The Sheafe.
Garb of Gold.
Of Beuers batfull earth, men seem as though to feign,
Reporting in what store she multiplies her grain:
And folk such wondrous things of Alsburie will tell,
As though Abundance strove her burdened womb to swell.
Her room amongst the rest, so White-horse is decreed:
She wants no setting forth: her brave Pegasian Steed
(The wonder of the West) exalted to the skies:
My Red-horse of you all contemned only lies.
The fault is not in me, but in the wretched time:
On whom, upon good cause, I well may lay the crime:
Which as all noble things, so me it does neglect.
But when the industrious Muse shall purchase me respect
Of Countries near my site, and win me foreign fame
(The Eden of you all deservedly that am)
I shall as much be praysd for delicacie then,
As now in small account with vile and barbarous men.
For, from the lofty The Edge-hil
Edge that on my side does lie,
Upon my spacious earth who casts a curious eye,
As many goodly seats shall in my compass see,
As many sweet delights and rarities in me
As in the greatest Vale: from where my head I couch
At Cotswolds Countries foot, till with my heels I touch
The bands of the Vale of Red-horse.
The North-hamptonian fields, and fatning Pastures; where
I ravish every eye with my enticing cheer.
As still the Year grows on, that Ceres once does load
The full Earth with her store; my plentious bosom strow'd
With all abundant sweets: my frim and lusty flank
Her bravery then displayes, with Meadows hugely rank.
The thick and well-growne fogge does matt my smoother slades,
And on the lower Leas, as on the higher Hades
The dainty Clouer grows (of grass the only silk)
That makes each Vdder strout abundantly with milk.
A Similie of the place and people.
As an unlettered man, at the desired sight
Of some rare beauty moved with infinite delight,
Not out of his own spirit, but by that power divine,
Which through a sparkling eye perspicuously does shine,
Feels his hard temper yield, that he in passion breaks,
And things beyond his height, transported strangely speaks:
So those that dwell in me, and live by frugall toil,
When they in my defense are reasoning of my soil,
As rapted with my wealth and beauties, learned grow,
And in wel-fitting terms, and noble language, show
The Lordships in my Lands, from Rolright (which remains
. A witness of that day we won upon the Danes)
To Tawcester wel-neere: twixt which, they use to tell
Of places which they say do Rumneys self excel.
Wondrous fruitful places in the Vale.
Of Dasset they dare boast, and give Wormlighton prize,
As of that fertile Flat by Bishopton that lies.
For showing of my bounds, if men may rightly guess
By my continued form which best does me express,
On either of my sides and by the rising grounds,
Which in one fashion hold, as my most certain Mounds,
In length near thirty miles I am discerned to be.
Thus Red-horse ends her tale; and I therewith agree
To finish here my Song: the Muse some ease does ask,
As wearied with the toil in this her serious task.
Illustrations.
INto the heart of England and Wales, The Muse here is entered, that is,
Warwickshire her Native Country; whose territory you might call Middle-Engle
(for here was that part of Mercland, spoken of in Story) for equality of
distance from the inarming Ocean.

By her Illustrious Earls renowned every where.
Permit to yourselfe credit of those, laden with Antique fables, as Guy (of
whom the Author in the XII. Song, and here presently) Morind and such like, and
no more testimony might be given, to exceed. But, More sure justification
hereof is, in those Great Princes Henry Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, and Chief
Earl of England.
Praecomes Angliae (as the Record call's him) under Parl. rot. 23. Hen. 6. ap.
Came.
Hen. VI. and Richard Neuill making it (as it were) his gain to Crown, and
depose Kings in that bloody dissension on twixt the White and Red Roses.

That mighty Arden held --
What is now the Woodland in Warwickeshire, was heretofore part of a larger
Weald or Forest called Arden. The relics of whose name in Dene of Monmouth
Shire, and that Arduenna or La Forest d' Ardenne, by Henault and Luxembourg,
shows likelihood of interpretation of the yet used English name of Woodland.
And, whereas, in old inscriptions, Hubert. Goltz. Thesauran Aris.
Diana Diana of the wood.
Nemorensis, with other additions, has been found among the Latins, the like
seems to be expressed in an old Marble, now in Italy, Iul. Iacobon. ap. Paull.
Merul. Cosmog. part. 2. lib. 3. cap. 11.
graven under Domitian, in part thus: To the separated souls, Q Caesius, etc.
Priest of Diana of Arden, or surnamed Arden.
DIS. MANIBVS. Q. CAESIVS. Q. F. CLAVD. ATILIAN US. SACERDOS. DEANA E.
ARDVINNAE. That comprehensiue largenes which this Arden once extended (before
Ruin of her Woods) makes the Author thus limit her with Seuerne and Trent. By
reason of this her greatness joined with Antiquity. He also made choice of this
place for description of the Chase, the English simples, and Hermit, as you
read in him.

And thither wisely brought that goodly Virgin band.
Sufficient justification of making a Poem, may be from tradition, which the
Author here uses; but see to the VIII. Song, where you have this incredible
number of Virgins, shipped at London, nor skils it much on which you bestow your
faith, or if on neither. Their request (as the Genius prayer) are the Authors
own fictions, About clo. L.
to come to express the worth of his Native soiles City.

By Leofrique her Lord, yet in base bondage held.
The ensuing Story of this Leofrique and Godiua, was under the Confessor. I
find it reported in Matthew of Westminster, that As she was on horseback, her
hair loose hung so long, that it covered all her body, to her thighs.
Nuda, equum ascendens, crines capitis and tricas dissoluens corpus suum totum,
praeter Crura candidissima, inde velauit. This Leofrique (buried at Couentry)
was Earl of Leicester, not Chester (as some ill took it by turning
Legecestra, being indeed sometimes for Chester, of old called Vrbs Legionum, as
to the XI* Song already) which is without scruple showed in a Ingulphu^, Hist.
sol. 519.
Charter, of the Manor of Spalding in Lincolneshire, made to Wulgat Abbot of
Crowland, beginning thus: Ego Thoroldus De Buckenhale co^a Nobilissimo `Domino
meo Leo^rico Comite Leicestrae, and Nobilissima Comitissa sua Domina Godiua
sorore mea, and cum consensu and bona voluntate Domini and Cognati mei Comitis
Algari primogeniti and Haeredis eorum, donaui, etc. The Algar succeeded him;
and, as a special title, Government, and honor, this Earledom was therein among
the Saxons so singular, that it was hereditary with a very long pedigree, til
the Conquest, from K. Ethelbalds time, above CCC. years. In Malmesbury, Power
of Earls anciently.
he is styled Earl of Hereford; and indeed, as it seems, had large dominion
over most part of Mercland, and was a great Protector of good K. Edward, from
ambitious Godwins faction. You may note in him, what power the Earls of those
times had for granting releasing, or imposing liberties and exactions, which
since only the Crown has, as unseparably, annexed to it. Nay, since the
Normans, I find that Malmes^ de gest. reg. 3.
William Fitz-Osbern, Earl of Hereford, made a law in his County, That no
Knight should be am^rcied above VII. shillings.
vt Nullus miles pro qualicunque commisso plus septem solidis soluat, which was
observed without Controversy, in Malmesburies time; and I have seen original
letters of Protection (a perfect and uncommunicable power Royal) by that great
Prince Richard Earl of Poiters and Cornwall, brother to Hen. III. sent to the
Shirif of Rutland, for and in behalf of a Nonnery about Stanford: and it is
well known, that his successor Edmund left no small tokens of such supremacy
in Constitutions liberties, and imposed Subsidies in the Stanna^ies of
Cornwall; with more such like extant in Monuments. But whatsoever their power
heretofore was, I think, it then ceased with that Lib. ^etust. Monast. de
Bell^ ap. Camd.
custom of their having the third part of the Kings profit in the County,
which was also in the Saxon times usual, as appears in that; Lib. Domes day
in Scacc^^^. Third part of the Counties ^rofits to the (...). See to the XI.
In Ipswich Regina Edena II. parts habuit and Comes Guert tertiam; Norwich
reddebat XX. libras Regi, and Comiti X. libras: Of the Borough of Jews; its
profits erant II. parts Regis, tertia Comitis; and Oxford reddebat Regi XX.
libras, and sex sextarios mellis, Comiti vero Algaro X. libras. And under K.
Iobn, Geffrey Fitz-Peeter, Earl of Essex, and William le Marshall Earl of
Striguil, Had rule or their Counties. and v. 10. Carno^^ns Epist. 263. N^^o
Vicecouat^ Ellexiae.
Administrationem suorum Comitatuum habebant, says Houeden. But Time has,
with other parts of Government, altered all this to what we now use.

A witness of that day we won upon the Danes.
He means Rollritch stones in the Confines of Warwick and Oxfordshire; of
which the vulgar there have a fabulous tradition, that they are an army of Men,
and I know not what Great General amongst them, converted into Stones:
Inquisitio^ in the Norman Story, partly touched to th. IV. Canto.
a tale not having his superior in the rank of vntruth's. But (upon the
conceit of a most learned Man) the Muse refers is to some battle of the Danes,
about time of Rollo's Piracie and incursion, and for her Country takes the
better side (as justifiable as the contrary) in affirming the day to the
English. But, to suppose this a Monument of that battle, fought at Hochnorton,
seems to me in matter of certainty, not very probable: I mean, being drawn
from Rollo's name: of whose Story, both for a passage in the last Song, and
here, permit a short examination. The Norman Guil. Gemeta^ens de Ducib. Norm 2.
cap. 4. and seqq Thom. de W^lsingham in Hypodig. Neust. secundum quos. in
quantum ed Chronologiea^ rationem spectas, plerique alij.
tradition is, that lie, with diverse other Danes transplanting themselves, as
well for dissension twixt him and his King, as for new seat of habitation,
arrived here, had some skirmishes with the English, defending their
territories; and soon afterward being admonisht in a Dream, aided and advised
by K. Athelstan, entered Seine in France; wasted and won part of it about Paris,
Baieux, elsewhere; returned upon request by Embassage to assist the English
King against Rebels; and afterward in the year DCCCC.XI. or XII. received his
Dukedom of Normandy, and Christianity, his name of Robert, with Aegidia or
Gilla (for wife) daughter to Charles, surnamed the Simple; as to the IV. Song I
have, according to the credit of the Story, touched it. But how came such
habitude twixt Athelstan and him, before this DCCCC.XII. when as it is plain,
that Athelstan was not King till DCCCC.XXIV. or near that point? Neither is
any concordance twixt Athelstan and this Charles, whose Kingdom was taken from
him by Rodulph D. of Burgundy, II. years before our K. Edward I. (of the
Saxons) died. In the ninth year of whose reign, falling under DCCCC.VI. was
that battle of Hochnorten; so that, unless the name of Athelstan be mistook for
this Edward, or, be wanting to the Dominicall year of those XXII. of the
Dionysian calculation (whereof to the IV. Song) I see no means to make their
Story stand with it self, nor our Monks; in whom (most of them writing about
the Norman times) more mention would have been of Rollo, Ancester to the
Conqueror, and his acts here, had they known any certainty of his name or
wars: which I rather guess to have been in our Maritime parts, then
Inlands, unless when (if that were at all) he assisted K. Athelstan. Read
Frodoard, and the old Annals of France, written nearer the supposed times, and
you will scarce find him to have been, or else therevnder Ita quida^ apud P.
Emiliu^ hist. ^ranc.; quem de hac re vide, and Polydor. eiusdem sequacem Hist.
5.
some other name; as Godfrey, which some have coniectur'd, to be the same with
Rollo. You may see in Aenilius what uncertainties if not contrarieties, were,
in Norman traditions of this matter; and, I make no question, but of that
unknown Nation so much mistaking has been of names and times, that scarce
any undoubted truth therein now can justify it self. For, observe but what is
here delivered, and compare it with Floren. Wigorn. page 335. and Roger.
Houeden. part. 1. sol. 241.
them which say in DCCC.XCVIII. Rollo was ouerthrown at Chartres by Richard
Duke of Burgundy, and Ebal Earl of Poiters, assisting Walzelm Bishop of that
City; and, my question is, Where have you hope of Reconciliation? Except only
in Equivocation of name; for plainly Hastings, Godfrey, Hrorne and others (if
none of these were the same) all Danes, had to do, and that with Dominion in
France about this age; wherein it is further reported, that Frodoard. Presbyt.
Annal. Franc.
Robert Earl of Paris, and in some sort a King twixt Charles and Rodulph, gave
to certain Normans that had entered the Land at L^ire (they first
Reicherspergens.
entered there in clo. CCC.LIII.) all Little Bretagne and Nan^s, and this in
DCCCC.XXII. which agrees, with that gift of the same tract to Rollo by Charles,
little better then harshest discords. And so does that of Rollo's being aided
by the English King, and in league with him against the French, with another
received truth: which is, that Charles was (by marriage with Oginis dicta P.
Aemilio.
Edgith of the English Kings loins) son in law to Edward, and brother in law
to Athelstan, in whose Membran. Vetust. Caenob. Floriacens. edit. a P. Pithaeo.
protection here Jews (afterward the IV.) was, while Roldulph of Burgundy held
the Crown. For that unmannerly homage also, spoken of to the IV. Song by one
of Rollo's Knights, it is reported by Malmesbury and others, to be done by
Rollo himself; and, touching that Egidia wife to Rollo, the judicious French
Historiographer P. Emilius (from who^ the Italian Polydore had many odd pieces
of his best context) tells clearly, that she was daughter to Lothar K. of
Romans, and given by his cozen Charles the Gross, to Godfrey King of Normans,
with Westrich (that is Neustria) about DCCC.LXXX.VI. and imagines that the
Norman Historians were deceived by equivocation of name, mistaking Charles the
Simple for Charles the Gross, living near one time; as also that they finding
Egidia a Kings daughter (being indeed Lothar's) supposed her Charles the
Simple's. This makes me think also that of Godfrey and Rollo, has been like
confusion of name. But both Times, Reigns and Persons are so disturbed in the
Stories, that being insufficient to rectify the Contrarieties, I leave you to
the liberty of common report.



The fourteenth Song.
* THE ARGUMENT.
Her sundry strains the Muse to prove,
Now sings of homely Country love;
What moan the old Heardsman Clent does make,
For his coy Wood-Nymph Feckn'hams sake;
And, how the Nymphs each other greet,
When Avon and brave Severne meet.
The Vale of Eusham then does tell,
How far the Vales do Hills excel.
Ascending, next, fair Cotswolds Plains,
She revels with the Shepherds swains;
And sends the dainty Nymphs away,
Against Tame and Isis Wedding day.
AT length, attained those Lands that South of Severne lie,
As to the varying Earth the Muse does her apply,
Poor Sheep^hook and plain Goad, she many times does sound:
Then in a Buskind strain she instantly does bound.
Smooth as the lowly stream, she softly now does glide:
And with the Mountains straight contendeth in her pride.
Now back again I turn, the Land with me to take,
From the Staffordian heaths as Running by Sturbridge in Worstershire, toward
Severne.
Stour her course does make.
Which Clent, from his proud top, contentedly does view:
But yet the aged Hill, immoderatly does rue
His loved Feckn'hams fall, and does her state bemoane;
To please his amorous eye, whose like the world had none.
For, from her very youth, he (then an aged Hill)
Had to that Forrest-Nymph a special lyking still:
The least regard of him who never seems to take,
But suffers in herself for Salwarp's only sake;
And on that River doats, as much as Clent on her.
Now, when the Hill perceived, the Flood she would prefer,
All pleasure he forsakes; that at the full-bagd Cow,
Or at the curle-fac't Bull, when venting he does low,
Or at the unhappy wags, which let their Cattle stray,
At Nine-holes on the heath whilst they together play,
He never seems to smile; nor ever takes keep
To hear the harmless Swain pype to his grazing sheep:
Nor to the Carters tune, in whistling to his Teame;
Nor lends his listening ear (once) to the ambling Stream,
That in the evening calm against the stones does rush
With such a murmuring noise, as it would seem to hush
The silent Meads asleep; but, void of all delight,
Remedilesly drowned in sorrow day and night,
Nor Licky his Allie and neighbor does respect:
And therewith being charged, thus answers in effect;
That The Lickey, supposed to be the highest ground of this I Will not being a
Mountain.
Lickey to his height seemed slowly but to rise,
And that in length and breadth he all extended lies,
Nor does likes other hills to sudden sharpness mount,
That of their kingly kind they scarce can him account;
Though by his swelling soil set in so high a place,
That Malverns mighty self he seems to outface.
Whilst Clent and Licky thus, do both express their pride,
As Salwarpe slips along by Feck'nhams shady side,
The Salt Fountain of Worcestershire.
That Forest him affects in wandering to the Wych:
But he, himself by Salts there seeking to enrich,
His Feck'nham quite forgets; from all affection free.
But she, that to the Flood most constant means to be,
More prodigally gives her woods to those strong fires
Which boil the source to Salts. Which Clent so much admires,
That love, and her disdain, to madness him provoke:
When to the Wood-Nymph thus the jealous Mountain spoke;
Fond Nymph, thy twisted curles, on which were all my care,
Thou lett'st the Furnace waste; that miserably bare
I hope to see thee left, which so do me despise;
Whose beauties many a morn have blessed my longing eyes:
And, till the weary Sun sunk down unto the West,
Thou still my object wast, thou once my only best,
The time shall quickly come, thy Groves and pleasant Springs,
Where to the mirthfull Merle the warbling Mavis sings,
The painful laborers hand shall stock the roots, to burn;
The branch and body spent, yet could not serve his turn.
Which when, most wilful Nymph, thy chance shall be to see,
Too late thou shall repent thy small regard of me.
But Saltwarpe down from Wyche his nimbler feet does ply,
Great Severne to attend, along to Teuksbury,
With others to partake the joy that there is seen,
When beauteous Avon comes unto her sovereign Severne.
Queen.
Here down from Eushams Vale, their greatness to attend,
Comes Swilliat sweeping in, which Cotswold down does send:
And Garran there arriues, the great recourse to see.
Where thus together met, with most delightful glee,
The cheerful Nymphs that haunt the Valley rank and low
(Where full Pomona seems most plentiously to flow,
And with her fruitery swells by Pershore, in her pride)
Amongst the batfull Meads on Severns either side,
To these their confluent Floods, full Boaules of Pery brought:
Where, to each others health past many a deep-fetcht draught,
And many a sound Carouse from friend to friend does go,
Thus whilst the mellowed Earth with her own juice does flow,
Inflamed with excess the lusty pampred Vale,
In praise of her great self, thus frames her glorious tale;
I doubt not but some Vale enough for us has said,
To answer them that most with baseness us vpbray'd;
Those high presumptuous Hills, which bend their utmost might,
Us only to deiect, in their inveterate spite:
But I would have them think, that I (which am the Queen
Of all the British Vales, and so have ever been
Since Gomers Giant-brood inhabited this I Will,
And that of all the rest, my self may so enstile)
Against the highest Hill dare put my self for place,
That ever threatened Heaven with the austerest face.
And for our praise, then thus; What Fountain send they forth
(That finds a Rivers name, though of the smallest worth)
But it invales it self, and on it either side
Does make those fruitful Meads, which with their painted pride
Imbroader his proud Bank? whilst in lascivious Gyres
He swiftly sallieth out, and suddenly retyres
In sundry works and trailes, now shallowe, and then deep,
Searching the spacious shores, as though it meant to sweep
Their sweets with it away, with which they are repleat.
And men, first building Towns, themselves did wisely seat
Still in the bountious Vale: whose burdened Pasture bears
The most abundant swathe, whose Gleabe such goodly cares,
As to the weighty sheafe with sithe or sickle cut,
When as his hardened hand the Labourer comes to put,
Sinks him in his own sweat, which it but hardly wields:
And on the Corne-strew'd Lands, then in the stubble fields,
There feed the Herds of Neat, by them the Flocks of Sheep,
Seeking the scatt'red Corn upon the ridges steep:
And in the furrowe by (where Ceres lies much spild)
Th'vnweldy larding Swine his mawe then having filled,
Lies wallowing in the mire, thence able scarce to rise.
When as those monstrous Hills so much that us despise
(The Mountain, which forsooth the lowly Valley mocks)
Have nothing in the world upon their barren Rocks,
But greedy clambring Goats, and Conies, banished quite
From every fertile place; as Rascals, that delight
In base and barren plots, and at good earth repine.
And though in Winter we to moisture much incline,
Yet those that be our own, and dwell upon our Land,
When twixt their burly Stacks, and full-stuft Barnes they stand,
Into the softer Clay as easily they do sink,
Pluck up their heavy feet, with lighter spirits, to think
That Autumn shall produce, to recompense their toil,
A rich and goodly croppe from that unpleasant soil.
And from that envious Foe which seeks us to deprave,
Though much against his will this good we clearly have,
We still are highly praised, and honored by his hight,
For, who will us survey, their clear and judging sight
May see us thence at full: which else the searchingst eye,
By reason that so flat and leuelied we lie,
Could never thoroughly view, our selves nor could we show.
Yet more; what lofty Hills to humble Valleys owe,
And what high grace they have which near to us are placed,
In A Hill environed on every side with the Vale of Eusham.
Breedon may be seen, being amorously embraced
In cincture of mine arms. Who though he do not vaunt
His head like those that look as they would Heaven supplant:
Yet let them wisely note, in what excessive pride
He in my bosom sits; while him on every side
With my delicious sweets and delicates I trym.
And when great Malvern looks most terrible and grym,
He with a pleased brow continually does smile.
Here Breedon, having heard his praises all the while,
Grew insolently proud; and does upon him take
Such state, as he would seem but small account to make
Of Malvern, or of Mein. So that the wiser Vale,
To his instruction turns the process of her tale.
T'avoyd the greaters wrath, and shun the meaners hate,
Quoth she, take my advice, abandon idle state;
And by that way I go, do thou thy course contriue:
Give others leave to vaunt, and let us closely thrive.
Whilst idly but for place the lofty Mountains toil,
Let us have store of grain, and quantity of soil.
To what end serve their tops (that seem to threat the sky).
But to be rent with storms? whilst we in safety lie.
Their Rocks but barren be, and they which rashly clime,
Stand most in Envies sight, the fairest prey for Time.
And when the lowely Vales are clad in Summers green,
The grisled Winters snow upon their heads is seen.
Of all the Hills I know, let Mein thy pattern be:
Who though his site be such as seems to equal thee,
And destitute of naught that Arden him can yield;
Nor of th'especiall grace of many a goodly field;
Nor of dear Cliffords seat (the place of health and sport)
Which many a time has been the Muses quiet Port.
Yet brags not he of that, nor of himself esteems
The more for his fair site; but richer then he seems,
Clad in a gown of Grass, so soft and wondrous warm,
As him the Summers heat, nor Winters cold can harm.
Of whom I well may say, as I may speak of thee;
From either of your tops, that who beholds me,
To Paradise may think a second he had found,
If any like the first were ever on the ground.
Her long and zealous speech thus Eusham does conclude:
When straight the active Muse industriously pursued
This noble Countries praise, as matter still did rise.
For Gloucester in times past her self did highly prize,
When in her pride of strength she nourisht goodly Vines,
. And often her cares represt with her delicious Wines.
But, now th'All-cheering Sun the colder soil deceaues,
. And us (here toward the Pole) still falling Southward leaves:
So that the sullen earth the effect thereof does prove;
According to their Books, who hold that he does move
From his first Zeniths point; the cause we feel his want.
But of her Vines deprived, now Gloucester learnes to plant
The Peare-tree every where: whose fruit she strains for iuce,
That her pur'st Pery is, which first she did produce
From Worstershire, and there is common as the fields;
Which naturally that soil in most abundance yields.
But the laborious Muse, which still new work assaies,
Here sallyeth through the slades, where beauteous Severne plays,
Until that River gets her Glosters wished sight:
Where, she her stream di^ides, that with the more delight
She might behold the Town, of which she is wondrous proud:
Then takes she in the From, then Came, and next the Strowd,
As thence upon her course she wantonly does strain.
Supposing then her self a Sea-god by her train,
She Neptune-like does float upon the bracky Marsh.
Where, least she should become too combersome and harsh,
Fair Micklewood (a Nymph, long honored for a Chase,
Contending to have stood the highest in Severns grace,
Of any of the Dryad's there bordring on her shore)
With her cool amorous shades, and all her Sylvan store,
To please the goodly Flood* imployes her utmost powers,
Supposing the proud Nymph might like her woody Bowers.
But Severne (on her way) so large and headstrong grew,
That she the Wood-Nymph scorns, and Avon does pursue;
A River with no less then goodly Kings-wood crowned,
A Forest and a Flood by eithers fame renowned;
And each with others pride and beauty much bewitched;
Besides, with Bristowes state both wondrously enricht.
Which soon to Severne sent th'report of that fair Road
Kings Road.
(So burdened still with Barks, as it would ouer-load
Great Neptune with the weight) whose fame so far does ring.
When as that mighty Flood, most bravely flourishing,
Like Thetis goodly self, maiestically glides;
Upon her spacious breast tossing the surgefull Tides,
To have the River see the state to which she grows,
And how much to her Queen the beauteous Avon owes.
But, noble Muse, proceed immediately to tell
How Eushams fertile Vale at first in liking fell
With Cotswold, that great King of Shepherds: whose proud site
When that fair Vale first saw, so nourisht her delight,
That him she only loved: for wisely she beheld
The beauties clean throughout that on his sur-face dweld:
A nice description of Cotswold.
Of just and equal height two banks arising, which
Grew poor (as it should seem) to make some Valley rich:
Betwixt them thrusting out an Elbowe of such height,
As shrowds the lower soil; which, shadowed from the light,
Shootes forth a little Grove, that in the Summers day
Invites the Flocks, for shade that to the Covert stray.
A Hill there holds his head, as though it told a tale,
Or stooped to look down, or whisper with a Vale;
Where little purling winds like wantons seem to dally,
And skip from Bank to Bank, from Valley trip to Valley.
Such sundry shapes of soil where Nature does devise,
That she may rather seem fantastical, then wise.
T^whom Sarum's Plain gives place: though famous for her Flocks,
Yet hardly does she tithe our Cotswolds wealthy locks.
Though Lemster him exceed for finenesse of her ore,
Yet quite he puts her down for his abundant store.
A match so fit as he, contenting to her mind,
Few Vales (as I suppose) like Eusham hapt to find:
Nor any other Would, like Cotswold ever sped,
So fair and rich a Vale by fortuning to wed.
He has the goodly Wool, and she the wealthy Grain:
Through which they wisely seem their household to maintain.
He has pure wholesome Air, and dainty crystal Springs.
To those delights of his, she daily profit brings:
As to his large expense, she multiplies her heaps:
Nor can his Flocks devour th'aboundance that she reaps;
As the one with what it has, the other strove to grace.
And, now that every thing may in the proper place
Most aptly be contrived, the Sheep our Would does breed
(The simplest though it seem) shall our description need,
And Shepheard-like, the Muse thus of that kind does speak;
No brown, nor sullyed black the face or legs does streak,
Like those of Mor^land, Cank, or of the Cambrian hills
That lightly laden are: but Cotswold wisely fills
Her with the whitest kind: whose brows so woolly be,
As men in her fair Sheep no emptiness should see.
The Staple deep and thick, through, to the very grain,
Most strongly keeps out the violentest rain:
A body long and large, the buttocks equal broad;
As fit to undergo the full and weighty load.
And of the flee^ie face, the flank does nothing lack,
But euery-where is stored; the belly, as the back.
The fair and goodly Flock, the Shepherds only pride,
As white as Winters snow, when from the Rivers side
He drives his new-washt Sheep; or on the Sheering day,
When as the lusty Ram, with those rich spoils of May
His crooked horns has crowned; the Bell-weather, so brave
As none in all the Flock they like themselves would have.
But Muse, return to tell, how there the Sheepheards King,
Whose Flock has chanced that year the earliest Lamb to bring,
In his gay Bauldrick sits at his low grassie Board,
With Flawns, Curds, Clowted-creame, and Country dainties stored:
And, whilst the Bag-pipe plays, each lusty iocund Swain
Quaffes Sillibubs in Kans, to all upon the Plain,
And to their Country-Girles, whose Nosegayes they do wear.
Some Roundelayes do sing: the rest, the burden bear.
But Cotswold, The fountain of Thames, rising in the South of Cotswold.
be this spoke to the only praise of thee,
That thou of all the rest, the chosen soil should be,
Fair Isis to bring-forth (the Mother of great Tames)
With those delicious Brooks, by whose immortal streams
Her greatness is begun: so that our Rivers King,
When he his long Descent shall from his Bel-sires bring,
Must needs (Great Pastures Prince) derive his stem by thee,
From kingly Cotswolds self, sprung of the third degree:
As the old worlds Heroes wont, that in the times of yore,
On Neptune, Jove, and Mars, themselves so highly bore.
But easily from her source as Isis gently dades;
Unto her present aid, down through the deeper slades,
The nimbler footed Churne, by Cisseter does slide;
And first at Greeklade gets pre-eminence, to guide
Queen Isis on her way, ere she receive her train.
Clear Colne, and lively Leech, so down from Cotswolds Plain,
At Leechlade linking hands, come likewise to support
The Mother of great Tames. When, seeing the resort,
From Cotswold Windrush scowres; and with her self does cast
The Train to ouer-take, and therefore hies her fast
Through the Oxfordian fields; when (as the last of all
Those Floods, that into Tames out of our Cotswold fall,
And farth'st unto the North) bright Enload forth does bear.
For, though it had been long, at length she came to hear
That Isis was to Tame in wedlock to be ti'd:
And therefore she prepared to attend upon the Bride;
Expecting, at the Feast, past ordinary grace.
And being near of kin to that most Spring-full place,
Where out of Blockleys banks so many Fountains flow,
That clean throughout his soil proud Cotswold cannot show
The like: as though from far, his long and many Hills,
There emptied all their veins, wherewith those Founts he fills,
Which in the greatest drought so brimfull still do float,
Sent through the rifted Rocks with such an open throat,
As though the Cleeues consumed in humor; they alone,
So crystalline and cold, as hardneth stick to stone.
But whilst this while we talk, the far divulged fame
Of this great Bridale towered, in Phoebus mighty name
Does bid the Muse make haste, and to the Bride-house speed;
Of her attendance there least they should stand in need.
Illustrations.
Permitted Vines to the Gauls, Spaniards and Britons, and leave to make Wines.
SOmewhat returning now near the way you descended from the Northern parts, the
Muse leads you through that part of Worcestershire, which is on this side
Seuerne, and the neighboring Stafford, viewing also Cotteswold, and so
Gloucester. The fictions of this Song are not so convert, nor the allusions so
difficult, but that I presume your conceit, for the most part, willingly
discharges my labor.

And of her cares represt with her delicious wines.
In this tract of Glocestershire (where to this day many places are styled
Vine^ards) was of ancient time among other fruits of a fertile soil, great
store of Vines* and more then in any other place of the Kingdom. Now in many
parts of this Realm we have some: but what comes of them in the Press is
scarce worth respect. Long since, the Emperor Fla^. Vopiscus in eiusd. vita.
Probus A soil fruitful enough, except of Olives and Vines, which are for
not^er ^lim^ts.
Gallis omnibus and Hispanis ac Britannis permisit vt vites haberent vinumque
consicerent: But In Iul. Agrico^a.
Tacitus, before that, speaking of this Island commends it with One Park and
^ixe Arpens of Vineyard, and brings forth some XX. firkins of Wine, if the
year prove well.
Solum praeter Oleam vitemque and caetera calidioribus terris oriri sueta,
patiens frugum, foecundum. Long since Probus, England had its Vineyards also,
and some store of Wine, as appears by that in Domesday, One Park and ^ixe
Arpens of Vineyard, and brings forth some XX. firkins of Wine, if the year
prove well.
Vnus and Parcus and VI. Arpenni Vineae (that is between V. and VI. Acres;
Arpent in French signifying a Content of ground of C. Rods square, every Rod
XVIII. foot) and reddit XX. medios vni si been procedit, being recorded of a
place Camd. in Trinobantibus.
by Ralegh in Essex. This was under William I: and since him in time of Hen. I.
Malmesb. de Pontificum gestis 4.
much Wine was made herein Glocestershire. That now the Isle enioyes not
frequencie of this benefit, as in old time, whether it be through the soiles
old age, and so like a woman growing sterile (as Ap. Columell. de re Rustic. 2.
cap. 1.
in another kind Tremellius many hundred years since thought) or by reason of
the earths change of place, as upon difference in Astronomicall observations
Stadius guest, or that some part of singular influence, whereon Astrology
hangs most of inferior qualities, is altered by that slow course (yet of great
power in alteration of Heavens System) of the eight Sphere (or pr^cession of
the Aequinoctiall) or by reason of industry wanting in the Husbandman, I leave
it to others examination.

-- still falling Southward leaves.
He alludes to the difference of the Zodiaques obliquity from what it was of
old. For, in Ptolemies time about M.CD.LX. years since the utmost Declination
of the Sun in the I. of Cancer (where she is nearest to our Vertical point)
was XXIII. Gr. and about LII. Minut. since that, Copernic. Re. 3. cap. 3.
Albategin (about Charlemaines time) observed it some XV. Scruples less: after
him (near M. of Christ) Arzacheld found it XXIII. Gr. XXXIV. Scr. and in this
later age John of Comigs-burg and Copernicus brought it to XXIII. Gr. XXVIII.
Scrup. which concords also with the Prutenique account, and as many as thence
traduce their Ephemerides. So that (by this calculation) about XXIIII. Minutes
the Sun comes not now so near our Zenith, as it did in Ptolemies time. But
in truth (for in these things I account that truth, which is warranted by most
accurat Observation; and those learned Mathematicians, by omitting of Paralax
and Refractions, deceived themselves and posterity) and declination in this age
is XXIII. Gr. XXXI. Scrup. and as that Noble Dane, and most Honored Restorer of
Astronomical Motions, Tyche Brahe, has taught us: which, although it be
greater then that of Copernicus and his followers; yet is much less then what
is in Ptoleme; and by two Scruples different from Arzachels, so justifying the
Authors conceip^, supposing the cause of our Climats not now producing Wines,
to be the Suns declination from us, which for every Scruple answers in earth,
about one of our Miles; but a far more large distance in the Celestial
Globe. I can as well maintain this high-fetcht cause, being upon difference
of so few Minutes in one of the slowest motions (and we see that greatest
effects are always attributed to them, as upon the old conceit of the
Platonique year, abridged into near his half by Copernicus, those
consequents foretold upon the change of Cardan. ad 2. Tetrabibl. and de
Varietat. Rer. 2. qui profane nimium, a Motibus Octauae Sphaerae, ijs scilicet
quos circa M.DCCC. contrario velut fieri modo supponit sacrosanctae Religionis
mutatione^ inepte simul et impie praedixit, and huius generu sexcenta.
E'ccentriques out of one sign into an other, the Equinoctial praecession,
and such like; as others may their conversion of a Planets state into Fortunat,
Oppressed or Combust, by measuring or missing their XVI. Scruples of Cazimi,
their Orbs moities, and such curiosities. Neither can you salve the effect of
this declination, by the Suns much nearer approach to the earth, upon that
decrease of his Eccentricity which Copernicus and his followers have published.
For, admitting that were true, yet judicial Astrology relies more upon Aspect
and beams falling on us with Angles (which are much altered by this change of
Obliquity in the Zodiaque) then distance of every singular star from the
Earth. But indeed, upon mistaking the Poles altitude, and other error in
Observation, Cui, hoc nomine, grauiter minitatus est Iul. Scal^g Exercitat. 90
sect. 2.
Copernicus was deceived, and in this present age the Suns Eccentricity (in
Ptolemy, being the XXIV. of the Eccentriques semidiameter, divided into LX.)
has been Tycho Brahein Progym asm.
found between the XXVII. and XXVIII. P. which is far greater then that in
Copernicus, erroniously making it but near the XXXI. But this is too heavenly
a language for the common Reader* and perhaps too late I leave it.



The fifteenth Song.
* THE ARGUMENT.
The guests here to the Bride-house hie.
The goodly Vale of Al'sbury
Sets her son (Tame) forth, brave as May,
Upon the joyful Wedding day:
Who, decked up, toward his Bride is gone.
So lovely Isis coming on,
At Oxford all the Muses meet her,
And with a Prothalamion greet her.
The Nymphs are in the Bridal Bowres,
Some strowing sweets, some sorting flowers:
Where lusty Charwell himself raises,
And sings of Rivers, and their praises.
Then Tames his way towered Windsore tends.
Thus, with the Song, the Marriage ends.
NOw Fame had through this I Will divulged, in every ear,
The long-expected day of Marriage to be near, Tame, arising in the Vale of
Alsbury, at the foot of the Chilterne.

That Isis, Cotswolds heir, long wooed was lastly won,
And instantly should wed with Tame, old Chiltern's son.
And now that Wood-mans wife, the mother of the Flood,
The rich and goodly Vale of Alsbury, that stood
So much upon her Tame, was busied in her Bowres,
Preparing for her son, as many suits of Flowers,
As Cotswold for the Bride, his Isis, lately made;
Who for the lovely Tame, her Bridegroom, only staid.
Whilst every crystal Flood is to this business pressed,
The cause of their great speed and many thus request;
O! whither go ye Floods? what sudden wind does blow,
Then other of your kind, that you so fast should flow?
What business is in hand, that spurs you thus away?
Fair Windrush let me hear, I pray thee Charwell say:
They suddenly reply, What lets you should not see
That for this Nuptial feast we all prepared be?
Therefore this idle chat our ears does but offend:
Our leisure serves not now these trifles to attend.
But whilst things are in hand, old Chiltern (for his life)
From prodigal expense can no way keep his wife;
Who feeds her Tame with Marle, in Cordiall-wise prepared,
And thinks all idly spent, that now she only spared
In setting forth her son: nor can she think it well,
Unless her lavish charge do Cotswold's far excel.
The richness of the Vale of Alsbury.
For, Alsbury's a Vale that walloweth in her wealth,
And (by her wholesome air continually in health)
Is lusty, frim, and fat, and holds her youthful strength.
Besides her fruitful earth, her mighty breadth and length,
Does Chiltern fitly match: which mountainously hie,
And being very long, so likewise she does lie;
From the Bedfordian fields, where first she does begin,
To fashion like a Vale, to th'place where Tame does win
His Isis wished Bed; her soil throughout so sure,
For goodness of her Gleabe, and for her Pasture pure,
That as her Grain and Grass, so she her Sheep does breed,
For burden and for boane all other that exceed:
And she, which thus in wealth abundantly does flow,
Now cares not on her Child what cost she do bestow.
The Chiltern-Country beginning also to want wood.
Which when wise Chiltern saw (the world who long had tried,
And now at last had laid all garish pomp aside;
Whose hoare and chalkie head discry'd him to be old,
His Beechen woods bereft that kept him from the cold)
Would feign persuade the Vale to hold a steady rate;
And with his curious Wife, thus wisely does debate:
Quoth he, you might allow what needs, to the most:
But where as less will serve, what means this idle cost?
Too much, a surfeit breeds, and may our Child annoy:
These fat and lushious meats do but our stomachs cloy.
The modest comely mean, in all things likes the wise,
Apparel often shows us womanish precise.
And what will Cotswold think when he shall hear of this?
He Will rather blame your waste, then praise your cost iwiss.
But, women wilful be, and she her will must have,
Nor cares how Chiltern chides, so that her Tame be brave.
That Ouze arising near Brackley, running into the German Sea.
Alone which toward his Love she easily does convay:
For the Oxonian Ouze was lately sent away
From Buckingham, where first he finds his nimbler feet;
Toward Whittlewood then takes: where, past the noblest Watling.
Street,
He to the Forest gives his farewell, and does keep
His course directly down into the German Deep,
To publish that great day in mighty Neptunes Hall,
That all the Sea-gods there might keep it festival.
As we have told how Tame holds on his even course,
Return we to report, how Isis from her sourse
Comes tripping with delight, down from her daintier Springs;
And in her princely train, Rivers arising in Cotswold, spoke of in the former
Song.
to attend her Marriage, brings
Clear Churnet, Colne, and Leech, which first she did retain,
With Windrush: and with her (all outrage to restrain
Which well might offered be to Isis as she went)
Came Yenload with a guard of Satyrs, which were sent
From Whichwood, to await the bright and God-like Dame.
So, Bernwood did bequeath his Satyrs to the Tame,
For Sticklers in those stirs that at the Feast should be.
These preparations great when Charwell comes to see,
To Oxford got before, to entertain the Flood,
Apollo's aid he begs, with all his sacred brood,
To that most learned place to welcome her repair.
Who in her coming on, was wext so wondrous fair,
That meeting, strife arose betwixt them, whether they
Her beauty should extol, or she admire their Laurel for Learning.
Bay.
On whom their several gifts (to amplify her dowre)
The Muses there bestow; which ever have the power
Immortal her to make. And as she past along,
Those modest The Muses.
Thespian Maids thus to their Isis song;
Ye Daughters of the Hills, come down from every side,
And due attendance give upon the lovely Bride:
Go strewe the paths with flowers by which she is to pass.
For be ye thus assured, in Albion never was
A beauty (yet) like hers: where have ye ever seen
So absolute a Nymph in all things, for a Queen?
Give instantly in charge the day b^ wondrous fair,
That no disorderd blast attempt her braided hair.
Go, see her State prepared, and every thing be fit,
The Bride-chamber adorned with all beseeming it.
And for the princely Groom, who ever yet could name
A Flood that is so fit for Isis as the Tame?
Ye both so lovely are, that knowledge scarce can tell,
For feature whether he, or beauty she excel:
That ravished with joy each other to behold,
When as your crystal wastes you closely do enfold,
Betwixt your beauteous selves you shall beget a Son,
That when your lives shall end, in him shall be begun.
The pleasant Surryan shores shall in that Flood delight,
And Kent esteem her self most happy in his sight.
The Shire that London loves, shall only him prefer,
And give full many a gift to hold him near to her.
The They al three, Rivers, of greatest note in the Lower Germany, cast
themselves into the Ocean, in the Coast opposite to the mouth of Thames.
Skeld, the goodly Mose, the rich and Viny Rheine,
Shall come to meet the Thames in Neptunes watery Plain.
And all the Belgian Streams and neighboring Floods of Gaul,
Of him shall stand in awe, his tributaries all.
As of fair Isis thus, the learned Virgins spoke,
A shrill and sudden brute this Marriage Song.
Pr^thalamion brake;
That White-horse, for the love she bare to her Ally,
And honored sister Vale, the bountious Alsbury,
Sent Presents to the Tame by Ock her only Flood,
Which for his Mother Vale, so much on greatness stood.
From Oxford, Isis hasts more speedily, to see
That River like his birth might entertained be:
For, that ambitious Vale, still striving to command,
And using for her place continually to stand,
Proud White-horse to persuade, much business there has been
T'acknowledge that great Vale of Eusham for her Queen.
And but that Eusham is so opulent and great,
That thereby she herself holds in the sovereign seat,
This White-horse strives for sovereignty with all the Vales of Britain.
White-horse all the Vales of Britain would over bear,
And absolutely sit in the imperial Chair;
And boasts as goodly Herds, and numerous Flocks to seed;
To have as soft a Gleabe, as good increase of seed;
As pure and fresh an air upon her face to flow,
As Eusham for her life: and from her Steed does show,
Her lusty rising Downs, as fair a prospect take
As that imperious Cotswold.
Would: which her great Queen does make
So wondrously admyr'd, and her so far extend.
But, to the Marriage, hence, industrious Muse descend.
The Naiads, and the Nymphs extremely ouer-ioy'd,
And on the winding banks all busily employed,
Upon this joyful day, some dainty Chaplets twine:
Some others chosen out, with fingers neat and fine,
Brave Crowns of Flowers.
Anadems do make: some Bauldricks up do bind:
Some, Garlands: and to some, the Nosegaies were assigned;
As best their skill did serve. But, for that Tame should be
Still man-like as him self, therefore they will that he
Should not be dressed with Flowers, to Gardens that belong
Flowers of the Meadows and Pastures.
(His Bride that better fit) but only such as sprung
From the replenisht Meads, and fruitful Pastures near.
To sort which Flowers, some sit; some making Garlands were;
The Primrose placing first, because that in the Spring
It is the first appears, then only flourishing;
The azur'd Hare-bell next, with them, they neatly mixed:
T'allay whose lushious smell, they Woodbind placed betwixt.
Amongst those things of sent, there prick they in the Lilly:
And near to that again, her sister Daffadilly.
To sort these Flowers to show, with the other that were sweet,
The Cowslip then they couch, and th'Oxslip, for her meet:
The Columbine amongst they sparingly do set,
The yellow King-cup, wrought in many a curious fret,
And now and then among, of Eglantine a spray,
By which again a course of Lady-smocks they lay:
The Crow-flower, and there-by the Clouer-flower they stick,
The Daysie, ouerall those sundry sweets so thick,
As Nature does her self; to imitate her right:
Who seems in that her Margarita, is both a Pearl and a Daisy.
pearl so greatly to delight,
That every Plain therewith she powdreth to behold:
The crimsin Darnell Flower, the Blew-bottle, and Gold:
Which though esteemed but weeds; yet for their dainty hewes,
And for their sent not ill, they for this purpose choose.
Thus having told you how the Bridegroom Tame was dressed,
I Will show you, how the Bride, fair Isis, they invest;
Sitting to be attyr'd under her Bower of State,
Which scorns a meaner sort, then fits a Princely rate.
In Flowers of Gardens.
Anadems for whom they curiously dispose
The Red, the dainty White, the goodly Damask Rose,
For the rich Ruby, Pearl, and Amatist, men place
In Kings Imperial Crowns, the circle that enchase.
The brave Carnation then, with sweet and sovereign power
(So of his color called, although a Iuly-flower)
With the other of his kind, the speckled and the pale:
Then th'odoriferous Pink, that sends forth such a gale
Of sweetness; yet in sents, as various as in sorts.
The purple Violet then, the Pansie there supports:
The Mary-gold above t'adorne the arched Bar:
The dubble Daysie, Thrift, the Button-batcheler,
Sweet William, Sops in wine, the Campion: and to these,
Some Lauander they put, with Rosemary and Bays:
Sweet Marjoram, with her like, sweet Basil rare for smell,
With many a flower, whose name were now too long to tell:
And rarely with the rest, the goodly Fower-delice.
Thus for the nuptial hour, all fitted point-deuice,
Whilst some still busied are in decking of the Bride,
Some others were again as seriously employed
In strewing of those herbs, at Bridalls used that be;
Which every where they throw with bountious hands and free. Strewing herbs.

The healthful Balm and Mint, from their full laps do fly,
The sent-full Camomill, the verdurous Costmary.
They hot Muscado often with milder Maudlin cast:
Strong Tansey, Fennel cool, they prodigally waste:
Clear Isop, and therewith the comfortable Thyme,
Germander with the rest, each thing then in her prime;
As well of wholesome herbs, as every pleasant flower,
Which Nature here produced, to fit this happy hour.
Amongst these strewing kinds, some other wild that grow,
As Burnet, all abroad, and Meadow-wort they throw.
Thus all things falling out to every ones desire,
The ceremonies done that Marriage does require,
The Bride and Bridegroom set, and served with sundry cates,
And every other placed, as fitted their estates;
Amongst this confluence great, wise Charwell here was thought
The first to cheer the guests: who thoroughly had been taught
In all that could pertain to Court-ship, long agon,
As coming from his Sire, the fruitful A Hill betwixt Norhamptonsh^re and
Warwick.
Helidon,
He trauelleth to Tames; where passing by those Towns
Of that rich Country near, whereas the mirthfull clownes,
With Taber and the pipe, on holidays do use,
Upon the May Pole Green, to trample out their shoes:
And having in his ears the deep and Famous rings of Bells in Oxfordshire,
called the Crossering.
solemn rings,
Which sound him all the way, unto the Oxford.
learned Springs,
Where he, his Sovereign Ouze most happily does meet,
And him, the thrice-three maids, Apollos offspring, greet
With all their sacred gifts: thus, expert being grown
In music; and besides, a A fine Poet.
curious Maker known:
This Charwell (as I said) the first these Floods among,
For silence having called, thus to the assembly song;
Stand fast ye higher Hills: low valleys easily lie:
And Forests that to both you equally apply
(But for the greater part, both wild and barren be)
Retire ye to your wastes; and Rivers only we,
Often meeting let us mix: and with delightful grace,
Let every beauteous Nymph, her best loved Flood embrace,
An Alien be he borne, or near to her own Spring,
So from his native Fount he bravely flourishing,
Along the flowery Fields, licentiously do strain,
Greeting each curled grove, and circling every Plain;
Or hasting to his fall, his sholy gravel scowr's,
And with his Crystal front, then courts the climing Towers.
Let all the world be Judge, what Mountain has a name,
Like that from whose proud foot, their springs some Flood of Fame:
And in the Earth's suruay, what seat like that is set,
Whose Streets some ample Stream, abundantly does wet?
Where is there Haven found, or Harbor, like that Road,
Int'which some goodly Flood, his burden does unload?
By whose rank swelling Stream, the far-fetcht foreign fraught,
May up to Inland Towns conveniently be brought.
Of any part of Earth, we be the most renowned;
That countries very often, nay, Empires often we bound.
As Rubicon, much famed, both for his Fount and Fall,
The ancient limit held, twixt Italy and That which was called Gallia
Cisalpina, and is Lombardy, Romagnia and the Western part of Italy.
Gaul.
Europe and Asia keep on Tanais either side.
Such honor have we Floods, the World (even) to divide.
Nay: Kingdoms thus we prove are christened often by us;
Iberia takes her name of Crystal Iberus.
Such reverence to our kind the wiser Ancients gave,
As they supposed each Flood a Deity to have:
But with our fame at home return we to proceed.
In Britanne here we find, our Seuerne, and our Tweed,
The tripartited I Will do generally divide,
To England, Scotland, Wales, as each does keep her side.
Trent cuts the Land in two, so equally, as tho
Nature it pointed-out, to our great Brute to show
How to his mighty Sons the Island he might share.
A thousand of this kind, and nearer, I will spare;
Where if the state of Floods, at large I list to show,
I proudly could report how Pactolus does throw
Up grains of perfect gold; and of great Ganges tell,
Which when full India's showers inforceth him to swell,
Gilds with his glistering sands the ouer-pampered shore:
How wealthy Tagus first by tumbling down his ore,
The rude and slothful Moors of old Iberia taught,
To search into those hills, from which such wealth he brought.
Beyond these if I pleased, I to your praise could bring,
In sacred Tempe, how (about the hoofe-plow'd Spring)
The Heliconian Maids, upon that hallowed ground,
Recounting heavenly Hymns eternally are crowned.
And as the earth does us in her own bowels nourish;
So every thing, that grows by us, does thrive and flourish.
To godly virtuous men, we wisely likened are:
To be so in themselves, that do not only care;
But by a sacred power, which goodness does awaite,
Do make those virtuous too, that them associate.
By this, the wedding ends, and brake up all the Show:
And Tames, got, borne, and bred, immediately does flow,
To Windsor-ward amain (that with a wondering eye,
The Forest might behold his awful Emperie)
And soon becomes great, with waters wext so rank,
That with his wealth he seems to retch his widned Bank:
Till happily a^tayn'd his Grandsire Chilterns grounds,
Who with his Beechen wreaths this king of Rivers crowns.
Amongst his holts and hills, as on his way he makes,
At Reading once arrived, clear Kennet ouertakes:
Her Lord the stately Tames, which that great flood again,
With many signs of joy does kindly entertain.
Then Loddon next comes in, contributing her store;
As still we see, The much runs ever to the more.
Set out with all this pomp, when this Imperial Stream,
Himself established sees, amidst his watery Realm,
His much-loved Henly leaves, and proudly does pursue
His Wood nymph Windsors feate, her lovely site to view.
Whose most delightful face when once the River sees,
Which shows her self attired in tall and stately trees,
He in such earnest love with amorous gestures wooes,
That looking still at her, his way was like to loose;
And wandering in and out so wildly seems to go,
As headlong he himself into her lap would throw.
Him with the like desire the Forest does embrace,
And with her presence strives her Tames as much to grace.
No Forest, of them all, so fit as she does stand.
When Princes, for their sports, her pleasures will command,
No Wood-nymph as her self such troops has ever seen,
Nor can such Quarries boast as have in Windsor been.
Nor any ever had so many solemn days;
So brave assemblies viewd, nor took so rich Breaking up of Dear brought into
the Qu^^ry.
assaies.
Then, hand in hand, her Tames the Forest softly brings,
To that supreamest place of the great English Kings,
The Garters Royal seat, from him who did advance
That Princely Order first, our first that conquered France;
The Temple of Saint George, whereas his honored Knights,
Upon his hallowed day, observe their ancient rites:
Where Eaton is at hand to nurse that learned brood,
To keep the Muses still near to this Princely Flood;
That nothing there may want, to beawtifie that seat,
With every pleasure stored: And here my Song complete.
Illustrations.
I Shall here be shorter then in the last before. The Muse is so full in her
self, employed wholly about the Nuptials of Tame, and Isis. In the Ghirlands
of Tame are vvreathed most of our English Field-flowers: in them of Isis, our
more sweet and those of the Garden; Yet upon that, The Garters Royal seat,
from him who did advance.


I cannot but remember the institution, (touched to the IV. Song) of his most
honorable Order, dedicated to S. George (in XXIV. Ed. III.) it is yearly at
this place celebrated by that Noble company of XXVI. Whether the cause were
upon the word of Garter given in the French wars among the English, or upon the
Queens, or Countes of Salisburies Garter fallen from her leg, or upon different
and more ancient Original whatsoever, know clearly (without unlimited
affectation of your Countries glory) that it exceeds in Majesty, honor, and
fame, all Chiualrous Orders in the world; and (excepting those of Templars, S.
James, Calatraua, Alcantara, and such like other, which were more Religious
then Military) has precedence of Antiquity before the eldest rank of honor, of
that kind any where established. The Anunciada ( V. Aubert. Mir. Orig. Equest.
2. cap. 4. and Sansonim. Orig. de Caualieri.
instituted by Amades VI. Earl of Sauoy, about M CCCC.IX. although others have
it by Amades IV. and so creat it before this of the Garter) and that of the
Golden Fleece, by Philip, Duke of Burgundy M.CCCC.XXIX. of S. Michael by Jews
XI. Della Banda, by Alfonso of Spain, and such like, ensued it, as imitating
Institutions, after a regard of the far extended fame, worth, and glory of S.
Georges Knights.



The sixteenth Song.
* THE ARGUMENT.
Old Ver, near to Saint Albans, brings
Watling to talk of ancient things;
What Verlam was before she fell,
And many more sad ruins tell.
Of the four old Imperial Ways,
The course they held, and too what Seas;
Of those seven Saxon Kingdoms here,
Their sites, and how they bounded were.
Then Pure-vale vants her rich estate:
And Lea bewraies her wretched Fate.
The Muse, led on with much delight,
Delivers Londons happy site;
Shows this loose Ages lewd abuse:
And for this time there stays the Muse.
THe Brydall of our Tame and Princely Isis past:
And Tamesis their son, begot, and wexing fast,
Inuiteth Crystal The river running by V^bridge and Colbrooke.
Colne his wealth on him to lay,
Whose beauties had intic't his Sovereign Tames to stay,
Had he not been enforced, by his unruly train.
For Brent, a pretty Brook, allures him on again,
Great London to salute, whose hie-rear'd Turrets throng
To gaze upon the Flood, as he does pass along.
Now, as the Tames is great, so most transparent Colne
Feels, with excessive joy, her amorous bosom swollen,
That Ver of long esteemed, a famous ancient Flood
(Upon whose aged Bank old Verlamchester stood,
Before the Roman rule) here glorified of yore,
Unto her cleerer banks contributed his store;
Enlarging both her stream, and strengthening his renown,
Where the delicious Meads her through her course do crown.
This The little clear river by Saint Albans.
Ver (as I have said) Colnes tributary brook,
On Verlams ruined walls as sadly he does look,
Near Holy Albans Town, where his rich shrine was set,
Old Watling in his way the Flood does ouer-get.
Where after reverence done, Ver quoth the Ancient Street
It Is long since thou and I first in this place did meet.
And so it is quoth Ver, and we have lived to see
Things in far better state then at this time they be:
But he that made, amend: for much their goes amiss.
Quoth Watling, gentle flood, yea so in truth it is:
And since of this thou speakst; the very sooth to say,
Since Great Mulmutius, first, made me the noblest Way,
The soil is altered much: the cause I pray thee show.
The time that thou have lived, has taught thee much to know.
I feign would understand, why this delightful place,
In former time that stood so hie in Natures grace
(Which bare such store of grain, and that so wondrous great,
That all the neighboring Coast was called the Whethamsted.
soil of wheat)
Of later time is turned a hot and hungry sand,
Which scarce repayes the seed first cast into the the Land.
At which the silent brook shrunk-in his silver head,
And feigned as he away would instantly have fled;
Suspecting, present speech might passed grief renew.
Whom Watling thus again does seriously pursue;
I pray thee be not coy, but answer my demand:
The cause of this (deer Flood) I feign would understand.
. Thou saw when Verlam once her head aloft did bear
(Which in her cinders now lies sadly buried here)
With Alablaster, Tuch, and Porphery adorned,
When (welneare) in her pride great Troynouant she scorned.
. Thou saw great-burthen'd Ships through these thy valleys pass,
Where now the sharp-edg'd Sith sheeres up the spyring grass:
That where the ugly Seal and Porpose used to play,
The Grasshopper and Ant now lord it all the day:
Where now Saint Albans stands was called Holme-hurst then;
Whose sumptuous Fane we see neglected now again.
This rich and goodly Fane which ruind thou do see,
Quoth Ver, the motive is that thou importun'st me:
But to another thing thou cunningly do fly,
And reason seem to urge of her sterilitie.
With that he fetched a sigh, and ground his teeth in rage;
Quoth Ver even for the sin of this accursed Age.
Behold that goodly Fane, which ruind now does stand,
To holy Look before to the XI. Song.
Albon built, first Martyr of the Land;
Who in the faith of Christ from Rome to Britanne came,
And dying in this place, resigned his glorious Name.
In memory of whom, (as more then half Divine)
Our English Offa reared a rich and sumptuous shrine
And Monastary here: which our succeeding kings,
From time to time endowed with many goodly things.
And many a Christian Knight was buried here, before
The Norman set his foot upon this conquered shore;
And after those brave spirits in all those balefull stowres,
That with Duke With the eldest son of the Conqueror, into the Holy Land.
Robert went against the Pagan powers,
And in their Countries right at Cressy those that stood,
And that at Poyters bathed their bilbowes in French blood;
Their valiant Nephews next at Agin-court that fought,
Whereas rebellious France upon her knees was brought:
In this religious house at some of their returns,
When nature claym'd her due, here placed their hallowed vrnes:
Which now deuowring Time, in his so mighty waste,
Demolishing those walls, has utterly defaced.
So that the earth to feel the ruinous heaps of stones,
That with the burth'nous weight now press their sacred boanes,
Forbids this wicked brood, should by her fruits be fed;
As loathing her own womb, that such loose children bred.
Herewith transported quite, to these exclaimes he fell:
Lives no man, that this world her grievous crimes dare tell?
Where be those noble spirits for ancient things that stood?
When in my prime of youth I was a gallant flood;
In those free golden days, it was the Satyrs use
To tax the guilty times, and rail upon abuse:
But soothers find the way preferment most to win;
Who serving Great men's turns, become the bauds to sin.
When Watling in his words that took but small delight,
Hearing the angry Brook so cruelly to bite;
As one that feign would drive these fancies from his mind,
Quoth he, I Will tell thee things that suit thy gentler kind.
My Song is of my self, and my three sister Streets,
Which way each of us run, where each her fellow meets,
Since us, his Kingly Ways, Mulmutius first began,
From Sea, again to Sea, that through the Island ran.
Which that in mind to keep posterity might have*
Appointing first our course, this privilege he gave,
That no man might arrest, or debtors goods might seize
In any of us four his military Ways.
And though the Fosse in length exceed me many a mile,
That holds from shore to shore the length of all the I Will,
From where Rich Cornwall points, to the Iberian Seas,
Till colder Cathnes tells the scattered Orcades,
I measuring but the breadth, that is not half his gate;
Yet, Watling, the chiefest of the four great Ways.
for that I am graced with goodly Londons state,
And Tames and Seuerne both since in my course I cross,
And in much greater trade; am worthier far then Fosse.
But o unhappy chance! through times disastrous lot,
Our other fellow Streets lie utterly forgot:
As Icning, that set out from Yarmouth in the East,
By the Iceni then being generally possessed,
Was of that people first termed Icning in her race,
Upon the Not far from Dunstable.
Chiltern here that did my course embrace:
Into the dropping South and bearing then outright,
Upon the Solent Sea stopped on the Ile-of- Wight.
And Rickneld, forth that raught from Cambria's farther shore,
Where South Wales now shoots forth Saint Dauid's Promontore.
And, on his midway near, did me in England meet;
Then in his oblique course the lusty straggling Street
Soon ouertook the Fosse; and toward the fall of Tine,
Into the Germane Sea dissolved at his decline.
Here Watling would have ceast, his tale as having told:
But now this Flood that feign the Street in talk would hold,
Those ancient things to hear, which well old Watling knew,
With these entising words, her fairly forward drew.
Right Noble Street, quoth he, thou have lived long, gone far,
Much trafique had in peace, much travailed in war;
And in thy larger course suruay'st as sundry grounds
(Where I poor Flood am locked within these narrower bounds,
And like my ruined self these ruins only see,
And there remains not one to pity them or me)
On with thy former speech: I pray thee somewhat say.
For, Watling, as thou art a military Way,
Thy story of old Streets likes me so wondrous well,
That of the ancient folk I feign would hear thee tell.
With these perswasiue words, smooth Ver the Watling wan:
Stroking her dusty face, when thus the Street began;
When once their seauen-fold Rule the Saxons came to rear,
And yet with half this I Will sufficed scarcely were,
Though from the Inland part the Britans they had chas't,
Then understand how here themselves the Saxons placed.
Where in Great Britans state four people of her own
Were by the several names of their abodes well known
(As, in that horn which iuttes into the Sea so far,
Wherein our Devonshire now, and furthest Cornwall are,
The old Daumonij dwelt: so hard again at hand,
The Durotriges sat on the Dorsetian Sand:
And where from Sea to Sea the Belgae forth were let,
For a more plain division of the English kingdoms see to the XI. Song.
Even from Southhamptons shore, through Wilt and Sommerset,
The Attrebates in Bark unto the Bank of Tames,
Betwixt the Celtick sleeue and the Sabrinian streams)
The Saxons there set down one Kingdom: which installed,
And being West, they it their Western kingdom called.
So Eastward where by Tames the Trinobants were set,
To Trinouant their Town, for that their name in debt,
That London now we term, the Saxons did possess,
And their East kingdom called, as So called, of the East Saxons.
Essex does express;
The greatest part thereof, and still their name does bear;
Though Middlesex therein, and part of Hartford were;
From Colne upon the West, upon the East to A River upon the Confines of Suff.
and Essex.
Stour,
Where mighty Tames himself does into Neptune pour.
As to our farthest Rise, where forth those Fore-lands lean,
Which bear their chaulky brows into the German Maine,
The Angles which arose out of the Saxon race,
Allured with the delights and fitnes of that place,
Where the Iceni lived did set their kingdom down,
From where the wallowing Seas those queachy Washes drown
That Ely do in-Ile, to martyred Edmonds Ditch,
Till those Norfolcian shores vast Neptune does intich:
Which (farthest to the East of this divided I Will)
The East Angles kingdom, then, those English did instile.
And Sussex seems still, as with an open mouth,
Those Saxons Rule to show that of the utmost South
The name to them assumed, who rigorously expeld
The Kentish Britans thence, and those rough wood-lands held
From where the goodly Tames the Surrian grounds does sweep,
Until the smiling Downs salute the Celtick Deep.
Where the Dobuni dwelt, their neighboring Cateuclani,
Cornauij more remote, and where the Coritani,
Where Dee and Mersey shoot into the Irish Sea;
(Which welneere over this part, now called England, lay,
From Seuerne to the Ditch that cuts New Market Plain,
And from the Banks of Tames to Humber, which contain
So many goodly shires of Mersey, Mercia hight)
Their mightier Empire, there, the middle English pight.
Which farthest though it raught, yet there it did not end:
But Offa, king thereof, it after did extend
Beyond the Bank of Dee; and by a Ditch he cut
Through Wales from North to South, into wide Mercia put
Welneere the half thereof* and from three peoples there,
To whom three special parts divided justly were
(The Ordouices, now which North Wales people be,
From Cheshire which of old divided was by Dee:
And from our Marchers now, that were Demetae then;
And those Silures called, by us the South Wales men)
Beyond the Seuerne, much the English Offa took,
To shut the Britans up, within a little nooke.
From whence, by Merseyes Banks, the rest a kingdom made:
Where, in the Britanes Rule (before) the Brigants swayed;
The powerful English there established were to stand:
Which, North from Humber set, they termed North-humberland;
Two Kingdoms which had been, with several thrones installed.
Bernitia hight the one; Diera the other called.
The first from Humber stretched unto the Bank of Tine:
Which River and the Frith the other did confine.
Bernitia bears through the spacious Yorkish bounds,
From Durham down along to the Lancastrian Sea-depths n^er the shores.
Sounds,
With Mersey and clear Tine continuing to their fall,
To England-ward within the Pict's renowned Wall,
And did the greater part of The Cymbries Land.
Cumberland contain:
With whom the Britans name for ever shall remain;
Who there amongst the rocks and mountains lived long,
When they Loegria left, enforced through powerful wrong.
Diera over Tine, into Albania lay,
To where the A river running by Edenbrough into the Sea.
Frith falls out into the German Sea.
This said, the aged Street sagd sadly on alone:
And Ver upon his course, now hasted to be gone
T'accompany his Colne: which as she gently glides,
Does kindly him embrace: whom soon this hap betides;
As Colne come on along, and chanced to cast her eye
Upon that neighboring Hill where Harrow stand^ so hie,
She Peryvale perceived prankt up with wreaths of wheat, Peryuale, or
Pure-va^^, yields the finest meal, of England.

And with exulting terms thus glorying in her seat;
Why should not I be coy, and of my Beauties nice,
Since this my goodly grain is held of greatest price?
No manchet can so well the courtly palate please,
As that made of the meal fetched from my fertile Leaze.
Their finest of that kind, compared with my wheat,
For whiteness of the Bread, does look like common Cheat.
What Barley is there found, whose fair and bearded ear
Makes stouter English Ale, or stronger English Beer.
The Oate, the Bean, and Pease, with me but Pulses are;
The course and browner Rye, no more then Fitch and Tare.
What seed does any soil, in England bring, that I
Beyond her most increase yet cannot multiply.
Besides; my sure abode next goodly London is,
To vent my fruitful store, that me does never miss.
And those poor baser things, they cannot put away,
How ere I set my price, nere on my chap-men stay.
When presently the Hill, that makes her a Vale,
With things he had in hand, did interrupt her tale,
With Hampsted being fallen and Hie-gate at debate;
As one before them both, that would advance his State,
From either for his height to bear away the praise,
Besides that he alone rich Peryvale suruaies.
But Hampsted pleads, Hampsted excellent for Simples.
himself in Simples to have skill,
And therefore by desert to be the noblest Hill;
As one, that on his worth and knowledge does rely
In learned Physics use, Hampsted-hill, famous for Simples.
and skillful Surgerie;
And challenges, from them, the worthiest place her own,
Since that old Watling once, over him, to pass was known.
Then Hie-gate boasts his Way; Which men do most frequent;
His long-continued fame; his hie and great descent;
Appointed for a gate of London to have been,
When first the mighty Brute, that City did begin.
And that he is the Hill, next Enfield which has place,
A Forest for her pride, though titled but a Chase.
Her Purlewes, and her Parks, her circuit full as large,
As some (perhaps) whose state requires a greater charge.
Whose High woody Banks.
Holts that view the East, do wistly stand to look
Upon the winding course of Lee's delightful Brook.
Where Mimer coming in, inuites her Sister Bean,
Amongst the chalky Bankst increase their Mistress train;
Whom by the dainty hand, obsequiously they lead
(By Hartford gliding on, through many a pleasant Mead.
And coming in her course, to cross the common Fare,
For kindness she does kiss that hospitable Ware.)
Yet scarsely comfort Lee (alas!) so woe begone,
Complaining in her course, thus to her self alone;
How should my beauty now give Waltham such delight,
Or I poor silly Brook take pleasure in her sight?
Antiquity (for that it stands so far from view,
And would her doting dreams should be believed for true)
Dare lowdly lie for Colne, that sometimes Ships did pass,
To Verlam by by her Stream, when Verlam famous was;
But, by these later times, suspected but to feign,
She Planks and Anchors shows, her error to maintain;
Which were, indeeds, of Boats, for pleasure there to row
Upon her (then a Lake) the Roman Pomp to show,
When Rome^ her forces here did every year supply,
And at old Verlam kept a warlike Colony.
But I distressed Lee, whose course does plainly tell,
That what of Colne is said, of me none could refell,
Whom See to the XII. Song.
Alfred but too wise (poor River) I may say
(When he the cruel Danes, did cunningly betray,
Which Hartford then besieged, whose Navy there abode,
And on my spacious breast, before the Castle road)
By vantage of my soil, he did divide my Stream*
That they might never return to Neptunes watery Realm.
And, since, distressed Lee I have been left forlorn*
A byword to each Brook, and to the World a scorn.
When Sturt, a Nymph of hers (whose says she often had proved,
And whom, of all her train, Lee most entirely loved)
Least so excessive grief, her Mistress might invade,
Thus (by fair gentle speech) to patience does persuade:
Though you be not so great to others as before,
Yet not a jot for that dislike your self the more.
Your ense is not alone, nor is (at all) so strange;
Since every thing on earth subjects it self to change.
Where rivers sometime ran, is firm and certain ground:
And where before were Hills, now standing Lakes are found.
And that which most you urge your beauty to dispoile,
Does recompense your Bank, with quantity of soil,
Beset with ranks of Swans that, in their wonted pride,
Do prune their snowy plumes upon your pleasant side.
And Waltham wooes you still, and smiles with wonted cheer:
And Tames as at the first, so still does hold you deer.
To much beloved Lee, this scarcely Sturt had spoke,
But goodly Londons sight their further purpose broke:
When Tames his either Banks, adorned with buildings fair,
The City to salute does bid the Muse prepare.
Whose Turrets, Fanes, and Spyres, when wistly she beholds,
Her wonder at the site, thu^ strangely she unfolds:
At thy great Builders wit, who is he but wonder may?
Nay: of his wisdom, thus, ensuing times shall say;
O more then mortal man, that did this Town begin!
Whose knowledge found the plot, so fit to set it in.
What God, or heavenly power was harbourd in thy breast,
From whom with such success thy labors should be blessed?
The goodly situation of London.
Built on a rising Bank, within a Vale to stand,
And for thy healthful soil, chose gravel mixed with sand.
And where fair Tames his course into a Crescent casts
(That, forced by his Tides, as still by her he hasts,
He might his surging waves into her bosom send)
Because too far in length, his Town should not extend.
And to the North and South, upon an equal reach,
Two Hills their even Banks do somewhat seem to stretch,
Those The North and South winds.
two extreamer Winds from hurting it to let;
And only level lies* upon the Rise and Set.
Of all this goodly I Will, where breathes most cheerful air
And every way there-to the ways most smooth and fair;
As in the fittest place, by man that could be thought,
To which by Land, or Sea, provision might be brought.
And such a Road for Ships scarce all the world commands,
As is the goodly Tames, near where Brute's City stands.
Nor any Haven lies to which is more resort,
Commodities to bring, as also to transport:
Our Kingdom that enricht (through which we flourisht long)
E're idle Gentry up in such abundance sprung.
Now pestring all this I Will: whose disproportion draws
The public wealth so dry, and only is the cause
Our gold goes out so fast, for foolish foraine things,
Which vpstart Gentry still into our Country brings;
Who their insatiate pride seek chiefly to maintain
By that, which only serves to uses vile and vain:
Which our plain Fathers carst would have accounted sin,
Before the costly Coach, and silken stock came in;
Before that Indian weed so strongly was embraced; Tobacco.

Wherein, such mighty sums we prodigally waste;
That Merchants long trained up in Gayn's deceitful school,
And subtly having learned to sooth the humorous soole,
Present their painted toys unto this frantique gull,
Disparaging our Tin, our Leather, Corn, and Wool;
When Forrainers, with ours them warmly cloth and feed,
Transporting trash to us, of which we nere had need.
But whilst the angry Muse, thus on the Time exclames,
Since every thing therein consists in extremes;
Lest she enforced with wrongs, her limits should transcend,
Here of this present Song she briefly makes an end.
Illustrations.
IN wandering passage the Muse returns from the Wedding, somewhat into the
Land, and first to Hartford; whence, after matter of description, to London.

Thou saw when Verlam once her head aloft did bear.
For, under Nero, the Britons intollerably laden with weight of the Roman
government, and especially the Icens (now Norfolk and Suffolk men) prouok't by
that cruel servitude, into which, not themselves only, but the wise also and
Posterity of their King Prasutagus were, even beyond right of victory,
constrained, at length breathing for liberty (and in a further continuance of
war having for their General R. Boudicea, Bunduica, or as the difference of
her name is) rebelled against their foreign Conqueror, and in Martial
opposition committing a slaughter of no less then LXXX M. (as Dio has,
although Tacitus miss. of this number) ransackt and spoild Maldon (then
Camalodunum) and also this Verulam (near S. Albons) which were the two Sueton.
lib. 6. cap. 39.
chief Towns of the I Will; The first a Colony (whereof the VIII. Song:) this a
Municipium Tac^t. Annal. 14.
Municipal City, called expressly in a Catalogue at the end of Nennius,
Caer-Municip. Out of Noct. Attic. 16. cap. 13.
Agellius I thus note to you its Nature. Such as lived in them were free of
Rome, but using their own laws, capable only of honorarie titles in the Roman
state, and thence had their name.
Municipes sunt Ciues Romani ex Municipijs suo iure and Legibus suis vtentes,
Mune^is tantum cum Pop Romans honorary participes, a quo Munere capessendo
appell^ts videntur; nullis alijs necessitatibus neque vlla Pop. Romans lege
astricti, quum nunquam Pop. Romans ^oru^ sundus factus esset. It differed from a
Colony, most of all in that a Colony as a Progeny of the City, and this of
such were as received into State^fauour and friendship by the Roman.
Personating the Genius of Verlam, that ever famous In his Ruins of Time.
Spenser sung I was that City, which the Garland wore
Of Britains Pride, delivered unto me
By Roman Victors, which it won of yore;
Though naught at all but Ruins now I be,
And lie in mine own ashes, as ye see:
Verlam I was; what boots it that I was,
S^th now I am but weeds and wastfull grass?


DCC.XCV.
As under the Romans, so in the Saxon times afterward it endured a second
Ruin: and, out of its corruption, after the Abbey erected by K. Offa, was
generated that of Saint Albons; whither, Leland. ad Cyg. Cant.
in later times most of the stone-workes and whatsoever fit for building was
by the Abbots translated. So that, -- Spenser bisupra.
Now remains no Memory,
Nor any little moniment to see,
By which the Traveler that fares that way,
This once was she, may warned be to say.


The name has bin thought from the River there running called Ver, and Humfrey
In Breu. Brit.
Lhuid makes it, as if it were Uer-sha^. i. a Chruch upon Ver.

Thou saw great burdened ships through these thy valleys pass.
Lay not here vnlikelihoods to the Authors charge; he tells you more
iudiciously toward the end of the Song. But the cause why some have thought
so, is, for that, In Epist. de Excid. Britan.
Gildas, speaking of S. Albons martyrdom and his miraculous passing through
the River at Verlamcestre, calls it An unknown passage over Thames.
iter ignotum trans Thamesis fluuij alneum: so by collection they guest that
Thames had then his full course this way, being thereto further moved by
Anchors and such like here digd up. This conjecture has been followed by that
Spenser.
Noble Muse thus in the person of Verlam; And where the Crystal Thamis wont to
slide
In silver channel down along the lee,
About whose flowery banks on either side
A thousand Nymphs, with mirthfulliollity,
Were went to play from all annoyance free:
There now no Rivers course is to be seen,
But Moorish Fennes, and Marshes ever green.
There also where the winged ships were seen,
In liquid waves, to cut their fomie way;
A thousand Fishers numbered to have been
In that wide Lake looking for plentious pray
Of fish, with baits which they used to betray,
Is now no Lake, nor any Fishers store,
Nor ever Ship shall sail there any more.


But, for this matter of the Thames, those two great Antiquaries, Leland and
Camden, have ioind in judgment against its and for the Anchors, they may be
supposed of fish-boats in large pooles, which have here bin; and yet are left
relics of their name.

Since us his Kingly ways Molmutius first began.
Near D. years before our Savior, this K. Molmutius (take it upon credit of
the British story) constituted diverse laws; especially that Churches,
Plough's, and Highways should have liberties of Sanct^arie, by no authority
violable. That Churches should be free and enjoy liberty for refuge,
consenting allowance of most Nations have tolerated, and in this Kingdom (it
being affirmed also by constitution of Flor^^egus.
K. Lucius a Christian) every Churchyard was a Sanctuary, until by act 22.
Hen. 8. cap. 14.
of Parliament under Hen. VIII. that license, for protection of Offenses, being
too much abused, was taken away; but, whether now restored in the last Jacob.
Sess. 1. cap. 25.
Parliament, wherein all statutes concerning Abiuration or Sanctuary made
before XXXV. Eliz. are repealed* I examine not. The Plough and Husbandmen have
by our West. 2. cap. 20 and 21. Ed. 1. District. Scaccarij.
statutes and especially by C. Quae res pignor^ oblig. l. 7. Executores and
alibi.
Civil and Xenopli. Cyroped. ^.
Persian law, great freedoms. Highways, being without exception, necessary,
as well for Peace as War, have bin defended in the Roman ff. de via public.
laws, and are taken in ours, to be in that respect (as they are by
implication of the name) the Kings Highways, and Bract. lib. 4. tract. Assis.
Non. diss. c. 16.. 8.
Privileged places, and he which trespasses there commits purpresture upon the
King.
res sacrae: and quialiquid inde occupancrit excedendo sines and terminos
terrae suae dicitur fecisse Purprestur am super ipsum Regem. According to this
privilege of Mulmutius in the statute of Marlebridge 52. Hen. 3. cap. 16. and
V. Artic. Cler. cap. 9. Statutum Marlbridge sibi restitutum.
it is enacted, that none should distraine in the Kings Highway, or the common
Street, but the King and his Ministers, specialem authoritatem ad hoc
habentibus; which I particularly transcribe, because the printed books are
therein so generally corrupted by addition of this here cited in Latin; You
see it alters the Law much, and we have diverse judgments, that in behalf of
the King by common Bailifs without special authority Distres may be 34. Ed. ^.
Auoury 232.8. Rich. 2 ibid. 194 11. Hen. 4. ^ol. 1. 19. Ed. 2. Auoury 221. and
225. alibi.
taken, as for an amerciament in the Shrifes Torn or Leere, or for Parliament
Knights fees. But the old Rolls of the statute (as I have seen in a fair Ms.
examined by the exemplification, for the Record it self is with many other
lost) had not those words, as the Original sol. 97. b. charta de Foresta ad Ms.
^m^dala.
Register also specially admonishes, nor is any part of that Chapter in some
Mss. which I marvel at, seeing we have a formal writ grounded upon it. Not
much amiss were it here to remember a worse fault, but continually received,
in the Charter of the Forest Art. VII. where you read Nullus Forestarius etc.
aliquam collectam faciat nisi per Visum and Sacramentum XII. Regardatorum
quando faciunt R^gardum. Tot Forestarij etc. the truth of the best Copies (and
so was the Record) being in this digestion Nullus Forestarius etc. aliquam
collectam faeciat. Et per visum Sacramentum XII. Regardatoru^, quando faciunt
Regardu^, tot Forestarij ponantur etc. as, beside authentic Mss. it is
expressly in the like Charter, almost word, for word, given first by K. John,
and printed in Matthew Paris; twixt which, and that of ours commonly read, may
he be made a time-deseruing comparison. Were it not for digression, I would
speak of the sensles making of Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury witness to the
graund Charter in IX. Hen. III. When as it is plain that he was not Archbishop
until XXV. The best copy that ever I saw had Simon Archbishop of
Canterbury: which indeed was worse, there being no such Prelate of that See,
in those times; but the mistaking was by the transcriber turning the single S.
(according to the form of writing in that age) into Simon for Stephen, who was
( Stephen of Langton) Archbishop at that time. But I forget my self in
following matter of my more particular study, and return to Molmutius. His
constitution being general for liberty of Highways, controversy grew about
the course and limits of them: whereupon his son K. Belin to quit the subject
of that doubt caused more specially these four, here presently spoken of, to
be made, which might be for interrupted passage, both in War and Peace; and
hence by the Author, they are called Military (a name given by the Romans to
such Highways, as were for their marching armies) and indeed by more polit
conceit V. Camden Roman.
and judicious authority these our ways have bin thought a work of the Romans
also. But their courses are differently reported, and in some part their names
also. The Author calls them Watling-street, the Fosse, Ikinild, and Rickeneld.
This name of Rickeneld is in Randall of Chester, and by him derived from S.
Dewies in Penbroke into Hereford, and so through Worcester, Warwick, Derby, and
York-shires to Tinmouth, which (upon the Authors credit reporting it to me) is
also justifiable by a very ancient deed of Lands, bounded near Bermingham in
Warwickshire by Rickeneld. To endeavor certainty in them, were but to obtrude
unwarrantable conjecture, and abuse time and you. Of Watling (who is here
personated, and so much the more proper because Verlam was called also, by the
English, Lhuld. Bronier. Brit.
Watling-chester) it is said that it went from Dover in Kent, and so by West of
London (yet part of the name seems to this day left in the middle of the City)
to this place, and thence in a crooked line through Shropshire by Wrekin hill
into Polichronie, lib. 1. cap de Plat. reg.
Cardigan; but Henry. Huntingd. hist. 1.
others say from Verlam to Chester; and where all is referred to Belin by
Geffrey ap Arthur, and Polychronicon, another Roger Honeden path 1. sol. 248
tells you that the sons of (I know not what) K. Wetble made, and denominated
it. The Fosse is derived, by one consent out of Cornwall into Devonshire,
through Somerset, over Cotes-wold by Teukesburie, along near Couentry, to
Leicester, through Lincoln to Berwick, and thence to Cathnes the utmost of
Scotland. Of Restitution of the other you may be desperate; Rickeneld I have
told you of; In Henry of Huntingdon, no such name is found, but with the first
two, Ickenild and Ermingstreet. Ickenold, says he, goes from East to West:
Ermingstreet, from South to North: Another tells me that Ermingstreet begins at
S. Dewies, and conuaies it self to Southampton; which the Author has
attributed to Ichning, begun (upon the words community with Icons) in the
Eastern parts. Its not my power to reconcile all these, or elect the best; I
only add, that, Ermingstreet (which being of English, Idions, seems to have had
its name from (...) in that signification whereby it Adam Brem^s. hist. Eccles.
cap. 5. and see to the III. Song.
interprets an universal pillar worshipped for Mercury president of ways, is
like enough (if Huntingdon be in the right, making it from South to North) to
have left its part in Stanstreet in Surrey, where a way made with stones and
grauel in a soil on both sides very different continues near a mile; and
thence toward the Eastern shore in Sussex are some places seeming as other
relics of it. But I here determine nothing.



The seventeenth Song.
* THE ARGUMENT.
To Medway, Tames a suter goes,
But fancies Mole, as forth he slowes.
Her Mother, Homesdale, holds her in:
She digs through Earth, the Tames to win.
Great Tames, as King of Rivers, sings
The Catalogue of The English Kings.
Thence the light Muse, to th'Southward soars,
The Surrian and Sussexian shores;
The Forests and the Downs suruaies,
With Rillets running to those Seas;
This Song of hers then cutteth short,
For things to come, of much import.
AT length it came to pass, that Isis and her Tame
Of Medway understood, a Nymph of wondrous fame;
And much desirous were, their princely Tames should prove
If (as a wooer) he could win her Maiden-loue;
That of so great descent, and of so large a Dower,
Might well-allie their House, and much increase his power:
And striving to prefer their Son, the best they may,
Set forth the lusty Flood, in rich and brave array,
Bankt with imbrodered Meads, of sundry suits of flowers,
His breast adorned with Swans, often washed with silver showers:
A train of gallant Floods, at such a costly rate
As might beseem their care, and fitting his estate.
Attended and attyr'd magnificently thus,
They send him to the Court of great Oceanus,
The Worlds huge wealth to see; yet with a full intent,
To woo the lovely Nymph, fair Medway as he went.
Who to his Dame and Sire, his duty scarce had done,
And whilst they sadly wept at parting of their Son,
See what the Tames befell, when it was suspected least.
As still his goodly train yet every hour increast,
And from the Surrian shores clear Wey came down to meet
His Greatness, whom the Tames so graciously does greet,
That with the Coming by Fernham, so called of ^em^ there growing.
Fearne-crown'd Flood he Minion-like does play:
Yet is not this the Brook, entiseth him to stay.
But as they thus, in pomp, came sporting on the shole,
Against Hampton Court he meets the soft and gentle Mole.
Whose eyes so pierced his breast, that seeming to ^reslowe
The way which he so long, intended was to go,
With trifling up and down, he wandreth here and there;
And that he in her sight, transparent might appear,
Applies himself to Fords, and sets his delight
On that which most might make him gracious in her sight.
Then Isis and the Tame from their conjoined bed,
Desirous still to learn how Tames their son had sped
(For greatly they had hoped, his time had so been spent,
That he ere this had won the goodly heir of Kent)
And sending to enquire, had news returned again
(By such as they employed, on purpose in his train)
How this their only heir, the Isles imperial Flood,
Had loytered thus in love, neglectfull of his good.
No marvel (at the news) though Isi^
Ouse and Tame were sad,
More comfort of their son expecting to have had.
Nor blame them, in their looks much sorrow through they showed:
Who fearing least he might thus meanly be bestowed,
And knowing danger still increased by delay,
Employ their utmost power, to hasten him away.
But Tames would hardly on: often turning back to show,
From his much loved Mole how loath he was to go.
The mother of the Mole, old A very woody Vale in Surry.
Homesdale, likewise bears
The Affection of her child, as ill as they do theirs:
Who nobly though derived, yet could have been content,
Thaue matched her with a Flood, of far more mean descent.
But Mole respects her words, as vain and idle dreams,
Compared with that high joy, to be beloved of Tames:
And headlong holds her course, his company to win.
But, Homesdale raised Hills, to keep the straggler in;
That of her daughters stay she need no more to doubt:
(Yet never was there help, but love could find it out.)
. Mole digs her self a Path, by working day and night
(According to her name, to show her nature right)
And underneath the Earth, for three miles space does creep:
Till gotten out of sight, quite from her mothers keep,
Her foreintended course the wanton Nymph does run;
As longing to embrace old Tame and Isis son.
When Tames now understood, what pains the Mole did take,
How far the loving Nymph aduentur'd for his sake;
Although with Medway matched, yet never could remove
The often quickening sparks of his more ancient love.
So that it comes to pass, when by great Natures guide
The Ocean does return, and thrusteth-in the Tide;
Up toward the place, where first his much-loved Mole was seen,
. He ever since does flow, beyond delightful Sheene.
Then Wandal comes in, the Moles beloved mate,
So amiable, fair, so pure, so delicate,
So plump, so full, so fresh, her eyes so wondrous clear:
And first unto her Lord, at Wandsworth does appear,
That in the goodly Court, of their great sovereign Tames,
There might no other speech be had amongst the Streams,
But only of this Nymph, sweet Wandal, what she wore;
Of her complexion, grace, and how herself she bore.
But now this mighty Flood, upon his voyage pressed
(That found how with his strength, his beauties still increast,
From where, brave Windsor stood on tip-toe to behold
The fair and goodly Tames, so far as ere he could,
With Kingly houses Crowned, of more then earthly pride,
Upon his either Banks, as he along does glide)
With wonderful delight, does his long course pursue,
Where Orlands, Hampton Court, and Richmond he does view,
Then Westminster the next great Tames does entertain;
That vaunts her Palace large, and her most sumptuous Fane:
The Lands tribunal seat that challenges for hers,
The crowning of our Kings, their famous sepulchers.
Then goes he on along by that more beauteous Strand,
Expressing both the wealth and bravery of the Land.
(So many sumptuous Bowres, within so little space,
The All-beholding Sun scarce sees in all his race.)
And on by London leads, London lying like a halie Moon.
which like a Crescent lies,
Whose windows seem to mock the Star-befreckled skies;
Besides her rising Spyres, so thick themselves that show,
As do the bristling reeds, within his Banks that grow.
There sees his crowded Wharfes, and people-pestred shores,
His Bosom ouer-spread, with shoales of laboring ores:
With that most costly Bridge, London Bridge the Crown of Tames.
that does him most renown,
By which he clearly puts all other Rivers down.
Thus furnished with all that appertained to State,
Desired by the Floods (his Greatness which awayt)
That as the rest before, so somewhat he would sing.
Both worthy of their praise, and of himself their King;
A Catalogue of those, the Scepter here that swayd,
The Princely Tames recites, and thus his Song he laid;
As Bastard William first, by Conquest hither came,
And brought the Norman Rule, upon the English name:
So with a redious war, and almost endless toils.
Throughout his troubled reign, here held his hard-got spoils.
Deceasing at the last, through his vnse^led State,
. Left (with his ill-got Crown) unnatural debate.
For, dying at his home, his eldest son abroad
(Who, in the Holy-warre, his person then bestowed)
His second Rufus next usurped the wronged reign:
And by a fatal dart, in his New Forest slain,
Whilst in his proper right religious Robert slept,
Through craft into the Throne, the younger Bean-cleark crept.
From whom his Scepter, then, whilst Robert strove to wrest,
The other (of his power that amply was possessed)
With him in battle joined: and, in that dreadful day
(Where Fortune showed her self all humane power to sway)
Duke Robert went to wrack; and taken in the flight,
. Was by that cruel King deprived of his sight,
And in close prison put; where miserably he died:
But Henry's whole intent was by just heaven denied.
For, as of light, and life, he that sad Lord bereft;
So his, to whom the Land, he purposed to have left,
The Sea the last note to the IV. Song.
raging Seas deuowr'd, as hitherward they saild.
When, in this Line direct, the Conquerors issue faild,
Twixt Henry's Daughter Mauld, the Almayne Emperors Bride
(Which after to the Earl of Aniou was affi'd)
And Stephen Earl of Bloys, the Conquerors Sisters son,
A fierce and cruel war immediately begun;
Who with their several powers, arrived here from France,
By force of hostile Arms, their Titles to advance.
But, Stephen, what by coin, and what by foreign strength,
Through Worlds of danger gained the glorious goal at length.
But, left without an heir, the Empress issue next,
No Title else on foot; upon so fair pretext,
The second Henry soon upon the Throne was set,
(Which Mauld to Ieffrey bare) the first Plantaginet.
Who held strong wars with Wales, that his subjection spurned:
Which oftentimes he beat; and, beaten often, returned:
With his stern Children vexed: who (whilst he strove t'aduance
His right within this I Will) raised war on him in France.
With his hie fame in fight, what cold breast was not fired?
Through all the Western world, for wisdom most admyr'd.
Then Richard got the Rule, his most renowned son.
Whose courage, him the name of Cure De Lion won.
With those first earthly Gods, had this brave Prince been borne,
His daring hand had from Alcides shoulders torn
The Nemean Lyon's hyde: who in the Holy Land
So dreadful was, as though from Jove and Neptunes hand,
The thundering three-forkt Fire, and Trident he had reft,
And him to rule their charge they only then had left.
Him John again succeeds; who, having put-away
Young Arthur ( Richards son) the Scepter took to sway.
Who, of the commonwealth first hauock having made,
. His sacrilegious hands upon the Churches laid,
In cruelty and rape continuing out his reign;
That his outrageous lust and courses to restrain,
. The Baronage were forced defensive Arms to raise,
Their daughters to redeem, that he by force would seize.
Which the first Civil war in England here begun.
And for his sake such hate his son young Henry won,
That to depose their Prince, th'reuengefull people thought:
And from the Line of France young Jews to have brought,
To take on him our Rule: but, Henry got the Throne,
By his more forcefull friends: who, wise and puissant grown,
. The general Charter seized: that into slavery drew
The freest borne English blood. Of which such discord grew,
And in the Barons breasts so rough combustions raised,
With much expense of blood as long was not appeaz'd,
By strong and tedious gustsheld up on either side,
Betwixt the Prince and Peers, with equal power and pride.
He knew the worst of war, matched with the Barons strong;
Yet victor lived, and reigned both happily and long.
This long-liu'd Prince expyr'd: the next succeeded; he,
Of us, that for a God might well related be.
Our Long shanks, Scotlands scourge: who to the Oreads raught
His Scepter, and with him from wild Albania brought
The relics of her Crown (by him first placed here)
. The seat on which her Kings inaugurated were.
He tamed the desperate Welsh, that out so long had stood,
And made them take See before to the IX. Song.
a Prince, sprung of the English blood.
This I Will, from Sea to Sea, he generally controld,
And made the other parts of England both to hold.
This Edward, first of ours, a second then ensues;
Who both his Name and Birth, by loosenes, did abuse:
Fair Ganimeds and Fools who raised to Princely places;
And chose not men for wit, but only for their faces.
In parasites and knaves, as he reposed his trust,
Who soothed him in his ways apparently unjust;
For that preposterous sin wherein he did offend,
In his posteriour parts had his preposterous end.
A third then, of that name, amends for this did make:
Who from his idle sire seemed naught at all to take.
But as his Grand-sire did his Empires verge advance:
So led he forth his powers, into the heart of France.
And fastening on that Right, he by his mother had,
Against the Salique law, which utterly forbad
Their women to enherite; to propagate his Cause,
At Cressey with his sword first cancelled those Laws:
Then like a furious storm, through troubled France he ran;
And by the hopeful hand of brave Black-Edward wan
Proud Poytiers, where King John he valiantly subdew'd,
The miserable French and there in mammocks hewed*
Then with his battering Rams made Earthquakes in their Towers,
Till trampled in the dust her self she yielded ours.
As mighty Edwards heir, to a second Richard then
(Son to that famous Prince Black Edward, Man of Men,
Untimely that before his conquering father died)
Too soon the Kingdom fell: who his vain youth applied
To wantonness and spoil, and did to favor draw
Unworthy ignorant sots, with whose dull eyes he saw:
Who placed their like in Court, and made them great in State
(Which wise and virtuous men, beyond all plagues, might hate.)
To whom he blindly gave: who blindly spent again,
And often oppressed his Land, their riot to maintain.
He hated his Allies, and the deserving steru'd;
His Minions and his will, the Gods he only served:
And finally, deposed, as he was ever friend
To Rybaulds, so again by Villains had his end.
Henry the Son of Gaunt, supplanting Richard, then
Ascended to the Throne: when discontented men,
Desirous first of change, which to that height him brought,
Deceived of their ends, into his actions sought;
And, as they set him up, assayed to pluck him down:
From whom he hardly held his ill-atchieued Crown;
That, Treasons to suppress which often he did disclose,
And raising public Arms, against his powerful foes,
His usurpation still being troubled to maintain,
His short disquiet days scarce raught a peaceful reign.
A fifth succeeds the fourth: but how his father got
The Crown, by right or wrong, the Son respects not.
Nor further hopes for that ere leaves to pursue;
But does his claim to France, courageously renew';
Upon her wealthy shores vn-lades his warlike fraught;
And, showing us the fields where our brave fathers fought,
First drew his sun-bright Sword, reflecting such a light,
As put sad guilty France, into so great a fright,
That her pale Ge^i^s sank, which trembling seemed to stand,
When first he set his foot on her rebellious Land.
That all his Grand-sires deeds did over, and thereto
Those hie atcheeuements add the former could not do:
At Agincourts proud fight, that quite put Poytiers down;
Of all, that time who lived, the King of most renown.
Whose too untimely end, the Fates too soon did have:
Whose nine years noble acts, nine Worlds deserve to last.
A sixth in name succeeds, borne great, the mighty son
Of him, in Englands right that spacious France had won.
Who coming young to reign, protected by the Peers
Until his Nonage out: and grown to riper years,
Proved upright, soft, and meek, in no wise loving war;
But fitter for a Cowle, then for a Crown by far.
Whose mildnes overmuch, did his destruction bring:
A wondrous godly man, but not so good a King.
Like whom yet never man tried fortunes change so often;
So many times throwne-down, so many times aloft
(When with the utmost power, their friends could them afford,
The Yorkists, put their right upon the dint of sword)
As still he lost and won, in that long bloody war,
. From those two Factions styled, of York and Lancaster.
But by his foes enforced to yield him to their power,
His wretched reign and life, both ended in the Tower.
Of the Edwards name the fourth put on the Regal Wreath:
Whom furious bloody war (that seemed a while to breath)
Not utterly forsook. For, Henry's Queen and heir
(Their once possessed reign still seeking to repair)
Put forward with their friends, their title to maintain.
Whose blood did Barnets Streets and Te^ksburyes distaine,
Till no man left to stir. The Title then at rest,
The old Lancastrian Line, being utterly suppressed,
Himself the wanton King to amourous pleasures gave;
. Yet jealous of his right descended to his Grave.
His Son an infant left: who had he lived to reign,
Edward the fifth had been. But justly see again*
As he a King and Prince before had cau'd to die
(The father in the Tower, the son at Teuksbury)
So were his children young, being left to be protected
By Richard; who nor God, nor humane laws respected.
This Viper, this most vile deuowrer of his kind
(Whom his amb^tious ends had struck so grossly blind)
From their dear mothers lap, them seizing for a pray
(Himself in right the next, could they be made away)
Most wrongfully usurped, and them in prison kept;
Whom cruelly at last he smothered as they slept.
As his unnatural hands, were in their blood imbrued:
So (guilty in himself) with murder he pursued
Such, on his heinous acts as looked not fair and right;
Yea, such as were not his expressly, and had might
To Oppose him in his course; till (as a monster loathed,
The man, to hell and death himself that had betrothed)
They brought another in, to thrust that Tyrant down;
In battle who at last resigned both life and Crown.
A seventh Henry, then, th'emperiall seat attained,
In banishment who long in Britanne had remained,
What time the Yorkists sought his life to have bereft,
Of the Lancastrian House then only being left
(Derived from John of Gaunt) whom Richmond did beget,
. Upon a daughter borne to John of Sommerset.
Elizabeth of York this Noble Prince affi'd,
To make his Title strong, thereby on either side.
And grafting of the White and Red Rose firm together,
Was first, that to the Throne advanced the name of Tether.
In Besworths fatal Field, who having Richard slain,
Then in that prosperous peace of his successful reign,
Of all that ever ruled, was most precise in State,
And in his life and death a King most fortunate.
This Seventh, that was of ours, the Eightth succeeds in name:
Who by Prince Arthurs death (his elder Brother) came
Unto a Land with wealth abundantly that flowed:
Abundantly again, so he the same bestowed,
In Banquets, Mask's, and Tilts, all pleasures prone to try,
Besides his secret scapes who loved Polygamy.
The Abbayes he suppressed; a thousand lingering year,
Which with revenues large the World had sought to rear.
And through his awful might, for temporal ends did save,
To other uses erst what srank devotion gave;
And here the papal power, first utterly denied,
Defender of the Faith, that was instil'd and died.
His son the Empire had, our Edward sixth that made;
Untimely as he sprang, untimely who did fade.
A Protestant being bred; and in his infant reign,
Th'religion then received, here stoutly did maintain:
But e're he raught to man, from his sad people reft,
His Scepter he again unto his Sisters left.
Of which the eldest of two, Queen Mary, mounts the Chair:
The ruined Roman State who striving to repair,
With persecuting hands the Protestants pursew'd;
Whose Martyred ashes often the wondering Streets bestrew'd.
She matched her self with Spain, and brought King Philip hither,
Which with an equal hand, the Scepter swayed together.
But issuless she died; and under six years reign,
To her wise Sister gave the Kingdom up again.
Elizabeth, the next, this falling Scepter hent;
Digressing from her Sex, with Man-like government
This Island kept in awe, and did her power extend
Afflicted France to aid, her own as to defend;
Against the Iberian rule, the Flemming; sure defense:
Rude Ireland's deadly scourge; who sent her Nau^es hence
Unto the either, Jude, and to that shore so green,
Virginia which we call, of he^ Virgin Queen:
In Portugal against Spain, her English onsignes spread;
Took Cales, when from her aid the braved Iberia fled*
Most flourishing in State: that, all our Kings among,
Scarce any ruled so well: but two, that reigned so long. Henry III. and Edward
III. the one reigned 56. the other. 50.

Here suddenly he staid: and with (...) Song,
Whilst yet on every side the City loudly rong,
He with the Eddy turned, a space to lookabout:
The Tide, retiring soon, did strongly (...) him out.
And soon the pliant Muse, does her bra^^ wing advance,
Toward those Sea-bordring shords of ours, that point at France;
The harder Surrian Heath, and the Sussexian Down.
Which with so great increase though Nature do not crown,
As many other Shires, of this mui^on'd (...):
Yet on the The Sun in Aries.
Weathers held, when as the sun does smile,
Nursed by the Southern Wind, that soft and gently blow,
Here does the lusty sap as soon begin in to ^^we;
The Earth as soon puts on her gaudy Summers sure;
The VVoods as soon in greon, and orchards great with fruit.
To Sea-ward, from the sent where first our Song begun,
Exhaled to the South by the ascending sun,
Four stately* VVood Nymphs stand on the Sussexian ground,
Great A Forest, containing most part of Kent, Sussex, and Surrey.
Andredsweld's sometime: who, when she did abound,
In circuit and in growth, all other quite suppressed:
But in her wane of pride, as she in strength deercast,
Her Nymphs assumed them names, each one to her delight.
As, Water-downe, so called of her depressed site:
And Ash-Downe, of those Trees that most in her do grow,
Set higher to the Downs, as the other stands low.
Saint Leonards, of the seat by which shonext is plac'^;
And Whord that with the like delights to be graced.
These Forests as I say, the daughters of the Weald
(That in their heavy breasts, had long their greefs concealed)
Foreseeing, their decay each hour so fast came on,
Under the axes stroke, forch^ many a grievous groan,
When as the anuiles weight, and hammers dreadful sound,
Even rent the hollow VVoods, and shook the queachy ground.
So that the trembling Nymphs, oppressed through ghastly fear,
Ran madding to the Downs, with loose dishev'ld hair.
The Syluans that about the neighboring woods did dwell,
Both in the tufty Brith and in the mossy Fell,
Forsook their gloomy Bowres, and wandered far abroad,
Expeld their quiet feats, and place of their abode,
When laboring carts they saw to hold their daily trade,
Where they in summer wont to sport them in the shade.
Could we, say they, suppose, that any would us cherish,
Which suffer (every day) the holiest things to perish?
Or to our daily want to minister supply?
These iron times breed none, that mind posterity.
It Is but in vain to tell, what we before have been,
Or changes of the world, that we in time have seen;
When, not devising how to spend our wealth with waste,
We to the savage swine, let fall our larding mast.
But now, alas, ourselves we have not to sustain,
Nor can our tops suffice to shield our Roots from rain.
Jove's Oak, the warlike Ash, veyn'd Elm, the softer Beech,
Short Hazell, Maple plain, light Aspe, the bending Wych,
Tough Holly, and smooth Birch, must altogether burn:
What should the Builder serve, supplies the Forgers turn;
When under public good, base private gain takes hold,
And we poor woeful Woods, to ruin lastly sold.
This uttered they with grief: and more they would have spoke,
But that the envious Downs, int'open laughter broke;
As ioying in those wants, which Nature them had given,
Since to as great distress the Forests should be driven.
Like him that long time has another state enuy'd,
And sees a following Ebb, unto his former Tide;
The more he is deprest, and bruiz'd with fortunes might,
The larger Reane his foe does give to his despite:
So did the envious Downs* but that again the Floods
(Their fountains that derive, from those vnpittied Woods,
And so much grace thy Downs, as through their Dales they creep,
Their glories to convey unto the Celtick deep)
It very hardly took, much murmuring at their pride.
Clear Lauant, that does keep the Southamptonian side
(Dividing it well-neere from the Sussexian lands
That Selsey does suruay, and Solents troubled sands)
To Chichester their wrongs impatiently does tell:
. And Arun (which does name the beauteous Arundell)
As on her course she came, it to her Forest told.
Which, nettled with the news, had not the power to hold:
But breaking into rage, wished Tempests them might riue;
And on their barren scalps, still flint and chauke might thrive,
The brave and nobler Woods which basely thus vpbraid.
. And Adur coming on, to Shoreham softly said,
The Downs did very ill, poor Woods so to debase.
But now, the Ous^, a Nymph of very scornful grace,
So touchy waxt therewith, and was so squeamish grown,
That her old name she scorn^d should publicly be known.
Whose haven out of mind when as it almost grew,
The lately passed times denominate, the New. New-Hauen.

So Cucmer with the rest put to her utmost might:
As Ashburne undertakes to do the Forests right
(At Pemsey, where she powers her soft and gentler Flood)
And Asten once distained with native English blood:
(Whose Soil, when yet but wet with any little rain,
Does blush; as put in mind of those there sadly slain,
When Hastings harbor gave unto the Norman powers,
Whose name and honors now are denizend for ours)
That boding ominous Brook, it through the Forests rung:
Which ecchoing it again the mighty Weald along,
Great stir was like to grow; but that the Muse did charm
Their furies, and her self for nobler things did arm.
Illustrations.
AFter your travails (thus led by the Muse) through the Inlands, out of the
Welsh coast maritime, here are you carried into Surrey and Sussex; the
Southern shires from London to the Ocean: and Thames, as K. of all our Rivers,
summarily sings the Kings of England, from Norman William to yesterdaies age.

Mole digs her self a path, by working day and night.
This Mole runs into the earth, about a mile from Darking in Surrey, and
after some two miles sees the light again, which to be certain has been
affirmed by Inhabitants thereabout reporting trial made of it. Of the River
Deuerill near Warmister in Wilshire is said as much; and more of Alpheus
running out of Elis (a part of the now Morea anciently Peloponnesus in Greece)
through the vast Ocean to Arethusa in a little Isle (close by Syracuse of
Sicily) called Ortygia, and thither thus coming unmixed with the Sea, which
has been both tried by a Strab. Geograph. ^.
cup, lost in Elis, and other stuff of the Olympian sacrifices there cast up,
and is justified also by express assertion of an old Pansan, Elias. 1.
Oracle to Archias, a Corinthian, aduising him he should hither deduce a
Colony. -- (...)
(...)
Like this, There Alphers springs again, embraceing fair Arethusa.
Pausantas reckons more; Herodot. hist. ^
Erasin in Greece, Lycus Idem. ^ Polihym.
that runs into Meander, Justin. hist. 42.
Tiger, and diverse others, some remember for such quality. And Gaudiana (the
ancient limit of Portugal and the Baetique Spain) is specially famous for
this form of subterranean course: which although has been thought fabulous,
yet by some learned and judicious of that Ludoui^. Nonius in Fl^^. Hispan.
Country, is put for an unfeigned truth.

He ever since does flow beyond delightful Sheene.
Moles fall into Thames is near the utmost of the Flood, which from the German
Ocean, is about LX. miles, scarce equalled (I think) by any other River in
Europe: whereto you may attribute its continuing so long a course, unless to
the Diurnall motion of the Heavens, or Moon, from East to West (which hardly
in any other River of note falling into so great a Sea, will be found so
agreeable, as to this, flowing the same way) and to the easiness of the
Channel being not over creeky, I cannot gues^e. I incline to this of the
heavens, because such Scalig. de subtilit. exercitat. ^2.
testimony is of the Oceans perpetual motion in that kind; and whether it be
for frequencie of a winding, and thereby more resisting shore, or for any other
reason iudicially not yet discovered, it is certain, that our coasts are most
famous for the greatest differences, by ebbs and floods, before all other
whatsoever.

Left with his ill got Crown unnatural debate.
See what the matter of Descent to the IV. Song tells you of his title; yet even
out of his own mouth as part of his last will and testament, these words are
reported; ^uil. Pictauens. inlust. Cademens.
I Constitute no heir of the Crown of England: but to the universal Creator,
whose I am, and in whose hand are all things, I commend it. For I had it not by
inheritance, but, with direful conflict, and much effusion of blood; I took
it from that perjured Harold* and by death of his favorites, have I subdued it
to my Empire. And somewhat after: Therefore I dare not bequeath the scepter of
this kingdom to any but to God alone, least after my death worse troubles
happen in it, by my Occasion. For my son William (always, as it became him,
obedient to me) I wish that God may give him his graces, and that, if so it
please the Almighty, This is the bequest understood by them which say he
devised his kingdom to William II.
he may reign after me. This William the II. (called Rufus) was his second
son, Robert his eldest having upon discontent (taken because the Dukedom of
Norman^ie, then as it were by birthright, nearly like the principality of
Wales, anciently, or Duchy of Cornwall at this day, belonging to our Kings
Heirs apparent, was denied him) revolted unnaturally, and moved war against
him, aided by Philip I. of France, which caused his merited dishinheritance.
Twixt this William and Robert, as also twixt him and Henry I. all brothers (and
sons to the Conqueror) were diverse oppositions for the Kingdom and Dukedom,
which here the Author alludes to. Our stories in every hand inform you: And
will dicouer also the Conquerors adoption by the Confessor, Harolds oath to him,
and such institutions of his lawful title enforst by a case Antiq (...) in
(...). Camd.
reported of one English, who, deriuing his right from Scism before the
Conquest, recovered by judgment of K. William I. the Manor of S^a^ born in
Norfolk against one Warren a Norman to whom the King had before granted it:
which had been unjust, if he had by right of war only gotten the kingdom; for
then had Atqui ad han^ rem enuecitatius dilu^^d it. dam* Iure and Gent^^ and
Anglicano, visendsi sunt Hoteman. Iliust, quaest. 5. Alb^ric. Gentil. de Iure
Belli. 3. cap. 5. and. cas. Calvin D. Coke lib. 7.
all titles, of subjects before. been utterly extinct. But, (admit this case as
you please, or any cause of right beside his sword) It is plain that his will
and impetious affection (moved by their rebellions which had stood for the
sworn Harold) disposed all things as a Conqueror: Upon observation of his
subjection of all Lands to tenures, his change of Laws, disinheriting the
English, and such other reported (which could be but where the profitable
Dominion, as Ciuillians call it, was universally acquired into the Princes
hand) and in reading the disgraceful account then made of the English name, it
will be manifest.

Who by a fatal dart in vast New Forest slain.
His death by an unfortunate loosing at a Dear out of one Walter Tirrels hand
in New Forest, See the II. Song.
his brother Richard being blasted there with infectio^, and Richard, Duke
Robert^ Son, having his neck broken therein a boughs twist catching him from
his horse, have been thought as divine reuenges on William the first, who
destroyed in Hantshire XXXVI. parish Churches to make dens for wild beasts;
although its probable enough, that it was for security of landing new forces
there, if the wheel of fortune, or change of Mars, should have dispossessed him
of the English Crown. Our Stories will of these things better instruct you:
but, if you seek Matthew Paris for it, are amend the absurdity of both the
London and Tigurin Prints in An. M. LXXXVI. and for Rex magnificus and bonae
indolis Adolesc^^s, Matthei Paris locus sibi restitutus.
read Rich. magnificus etc. for Richard brother to this Red William

Was by that cruel King deprived of his sight.
Thus did the Conquerors Posterity unquietly possess their Fathers
inheritance. William had much to do with his brother Robert, justly grudging at
his usurping the Crown from right of Primogeniture; but so much the less, in
that Robert with diverse other German and French Princes left all private
respects for the Holy war, which after the Cross undertaken (as those times
used) had most fortunate success in Recovery of Palestine. Robert had no more
but the Duchy of Normandy, nor that without swords often drawn, before his
Holy expedition: about which (having first offer of, but refusing the Kingdom
of Jerusalem) after he had some V. years been absent, he returned into
England, finding his younger brother ( Henry I.) exalted into his hereditarie
throne. For, although it were undoubtedly agreed that Robert was eldest son of
the Conqueror; yet the pretense which gave Henry the Crown (beside the means
of his working favorites) was, that Solus omnium natus esset regie. Malme^^.
For he was borne the III. year after the Conquest.
he was the only Issue borne after his Father was a King^ upon which point a
great question is disputed among Ho^tom. Ilust. quaest. 2.
Ciuilians. Robert was no sooner returned into Normandy, but presently (first
animated by Randall, Bishop of Durham, a great disturber of the common peace
twixt the Prince and subject by intolerable exactions and unlimited injustice
under William II. whose Plaecitator, and Exactoriotius regni Flor. Wig. and
Monathorie turba.
chief Justice it seems he was, newly escaped out of prison (whither for those
state-misdemeanors he was committed by Henry) he dispatches and entercha^ges
intelligence with most of the Baronage, claiming his Primogeniture-right, and
thereby the kingdom. Having thus gained to him most of the English Nobility, he
lands with forces at Partesmouth, thence marching toward Winchester: but
before any encounter the two Brothers were persuaded to a Peace; Covenant was
made and confirmed by oath of XII. Barons, on both parts, that Henry should pay
him yearly M.M. pounds of silver, and that the suruiuor of them should inherit,
the other dying without issue. This Peace, upon denial of payment (which had
the better color, because, at request of Q. Maude, the Duke prodigally
released his M.M. pounds the next year after the Covenant) was soon broken.
The K. (to prevent what mischief might follow a second arrival of his brother)
assisted by the greatest favors of Normandy and Aniou, besieged Duke Robert in
one of his Castles, took him, brought him home Captive, and at length using
that course (next secure to death) so often red of in Choniates, Cantucuzen,
and other Oriental stories, put out his eyes, being all this time imprisoned
in Card^ff^ Castle in Glamorgan, where he miserably breathed his last. It is by
Polydore added, out of some authority, that K. Henry after a few years
imprisonment released him, and commanded that within XL. days and 12. hours
(these hours have in them time of two Floods, or a Flood and an Ebb) he
should, abiuring England and Normandy, pass the seas as in perpetual Exile;
and that in the mean time, upon new Treasons attempted by him, he was secondly
committed, and endured his punishment and death as the common Monks relate. I
find no warrantable authority that makes me believe it: Yet, because it gives
some kind of example of our Obsolet law of Abiuration (which it seems had its
beginning from one of the statutes published under name of the Confessor) a
word or two of the time prescribed here for his passage: which being examined
upon Bractons credit, makes the report therein faulty. For he seems confident
that the XL. days in abiuration, were afterward induced upon the statute of
Hen. 2. ap. Rog. Ho^^d. sol. 314.
Cla^^don! which gave the accused of felony or Treason although quitted by the
Ordell (that is judgment by Water or Fire, but the Satute published, speaks
only of Water, being the common trial of meaner Glanuil. lib. 14. cap. 1.
caeteru^. si placet, adeas lan^^ nostrum li. 2.. 67.
persons) XL. days to pass ou^ of the Realm with his substance, which to
other Felons taking sanctuary and confessing to the Coroner, he affirms not
grantable; although John ^e Bret^^n is against him, giving this liberty of
time, accounted after the abiuration to be spent in the Sanctuary, for
provision of their voyage necessaries, after which complete, no man, on pain
of life and Member, is to supply any of their wants. I known a point very
intricat to determine, observing these opposite Authors and no express
resolution. Since them, the Oath of Abiuration published among our Manual
Statutes nearly agrees with this of Duke Robert, but with neither of those old
Lawyers. In it, after the Felon confesses, and abiures, and has his Port
appointed; I will (proceeds the Oath) diligently endeavor to pass over at that
Port, and will, not delaie time ^eere above a Flood, and an Ebb, if I may have
passage in that space; if not, I will every day go into the Sea up to the
knees, ^ussaying to go over, and unless I may do this within Forty continual
days I will return to the Sanctuary. As a Felon of our Lord the King; So God
nice help, etc. So here the XL. days are to be spent about the passage and not
in the Sanctuary: Compare this with other Itin. North. 3. Ed. 3. Coron. 313.
Lectur. ap Er. tit. Ceron. 181 V. Stamserdum lib. 2. cap 40. quide his
grauiter, and modests (...).
authorities, and you shall find all so dis^onant, that Reconciliation in
impossible, Resolution very difficult. I only offer to their consideration,
which can here judge, why Hubert de Burch (Earl of Kent, and chief Justice of
England under Hen. III.) having incurred the Kings high displeasure, and
grievously persecuted by great Enemies, taking Sanctuary, was, after his being
violently drawn out, restored; yet that the Sheriffs, of Hereford and Essex,
were commanded toward him there, and prevent all sustenance to be brought him,
which they did, decornentes Math. Par. page 507.
(...) XL. Dierum excubij^ obsern^re: And whether also the same reason (now
unknown to us) bred this XL. days for expectation of embarquement out of the
kingdom, which gave it in an other kind for re^orne? as in case of Disseisin,
the law has Bract lib. 4. tract assis. Nou. Diss. cap. 5. and lib. 5. tract.
de Esson. cap. 3. V. de Consuetudine in Oxenta^ 21. Ed. 3. fol. 46. b.
b^^ that the Disseisor could not reenter without action, unless he had as it
were made a present and Continual Claim, yet if he had been out of the
Kingdom in single Pilgrimage (that is not general voiages to the Holyland) or
in the Kings service in France, or so, he had allowance of XL. days II.
Floods, and I. Ebb, to come home in, and XV. days, and four days, after his
return, and if the tenant had been so beyond Sea he might have been Essoin'd de
vltra Mare, and for a year and a day, after which he had XL. days, One Flood,
and one Ebb (which is easily understood as the other for two Floods) to come
into England. This is certain that the space of XL. days (as a year and a
day) has had with us diverse applications, as in what before, the Assise of
Freshforce in Cities and Boroughs, and the Widows Quarentine, which seems to
have had beginning either of a deliberatiue time granted to her, to think of
her conueniencie in taking letters of administration, as in an other Cust.
Generaulx. de Artois art. 164.
Country the reason of the like is given; or else from the XL. days in the
es^oine of Childbirth allowed by the Norman Customs. But you mislike the
digression. It is reported that when William the Conqueror in his deathbed,
left Normandy to Robert, and England to William the Red, this Henry asked him
what he would give him,. pounds of silver (says he) and be contented my son;
for, in time, thou shall have all which I possess, and be greater then either
of thy brethren.

His sacrilegious hands upon the Churches laid.
The great controversy about electing the Archbishop of Canterbury (the K. as
his right bad him, commanding that John Bishop of Norwich should have the
Prolacie, the Pope, being Innocent III. for his own gain, aided with some
disloyal Monks of Canterbury, desiring, and at last consecrating Stephen of
Langson a Cardinal) was first cause of it. For K. John would by no means endure
this Stephen, nor permit him the dignity after his unjust Election at Rome, but
banished the Moonks and stoutly menaces the Pope. He presently makes
delegation to William Bishop of London, Eustace of Ely, and Malgers of
Worcester that they should, with monitory advice, offer persuasion to the K. of
conformity to the Romish behel^; if he persisted in Constancy, they should
denounce England under an interdict. The Bishops tell K. John as much, who
suddenly, 9. Ioann. Reg.
moved with imperious affection and scorn of Papal usurpation, swears, by Gods
tooth, if they or any other, with unadvised attempt, subject his Kingdom to an
interdict, he would presently drive every Prelate, and Priest of England to
the Pope, and confiscat all their substance, and of all the Romans amongst
them, he would first pull out their eyes, and cut off their noses, and then
send then all packing, with other like threatening terms, which
notwithstanding were not able to cause them desist; but within little time
following in public denuntiation they performed their authority; and the
King, in some sort, his threatenings; committing all Abbeyes and Priories, to Lay
men's custody, and compelling every Priests Concubine so is grievous fine. Thus
for a while continued the Realm without divine Sacraments or Exercise,
excepted only Confession, Extreme unction, and Baptism; the King being also
excommunicated and burials allowed only in high^waies, and ditches without
Ecclesiastique Ceremony, and (but only by indulgence procured by Archbishop
Langton which purcha'st favor that in all the Monasteries, excepting of
White-Friers, might be divine service once a week) had no change, for some IV.
or V. years, when the Pope in a solemn Council of Cardinals according to his
pretended plenary power, deposed K. John, and immediately by his Legate Pandulph
offered to Philip II. of France the kingdom of England. This with suspicion of
the subjects heart at home, and another cause then more esteemed then either of
these, that is, the prophecy of one Peter an Hermit in Yorkshire foretelling
to his face that before Holy Thursday following he should be no King, altered
his stiff, and resolute, but too disturbed affections; and persuaded him by
Oath of himself and XVI. more of his Barons, to make submission to the church of
Rome, and condiscended to give for satisfaction,.M.M.M. pounds sterling (that
name of Sterling Io Ston. in Notit. Land in page 52. V. Camd. in Scot. Buchan.
alio^.
began, as I am instructed, in time of Hen. II. and had its Original of name
from some Esterling, making that kind of money, which has its essence in
particular weight, and finenesse, not of the Starling bird, as some, not of
Sterlin in Scotland under Ed. I. as others absurdly; for in Polydor. hist. 16.
records much more ancient the express name Sterlingoru^ I have red) to the
Clergy, and subject Norff. 6. Rich. Fin. Rod. 13. and alibi in eisdem Archiuis
V.
all his dominions to the Pope; and so had absolution, and after more then IV.
years release of the Interdict. I was the willinger to insert it all, because
you might see what injurious opposition, by Papal usurpation, he endured; and
then conjecture that his violent dealings against the church were not without
intolerable prouocatio^, which madded rather then amended his trobled spirits.
Easily you shall not find a Prince more beneficial to the holy cause then he if
you take his former part of reign before this ambitious Stephen of Langtons
election exasperated desire of revenge. Ante alio^ de hijsconsulondus at Matthew.
Paris.
Most kind habi^ude then was twixt him and the Pope, and for aims toward
Ierusalems aid he gave the XL. part of his reuenew, and caused his Baronage to
second his example* Although therefore he be no ways excusable of many of those
faults, both in government and religion which are laid on him, yet it much
exrenuats the ill of his action, that he was so besieged with continual and
vndigestable incentiues of the Clergy with traiterious confidence striking at
his Crown, and in such sort, as humanity must have exceeded itself, to have
endured it with any mixture of patience. Nor ever shall I impute that his
wicked attempt of sending Ambassadors, Thomas Hardington, R^l^sh Fi^^-Nicholas,
and Robert of London, to Amiramuily, King of Morocco, for the Mahome^an
Religion, so much to his own will and Nature, as to the persecuting Bulls,
Interdicts, Excommunications, Deposings, and such like, published and acted by
them which counterfeiting the vain name of Pastors, sheereing, and not feeding
their Sheep, made this poor King (for they brought him so poor, that he was
called John Hadland.
Johannes sieve terra) even as a Phronetique, commit what posterity receives now
among the worst actions (and in themselves they are so) of Princes.

His Baronage were forced defensive Arms to raise.
No sooner had Bandulph, transacted with the King, and Stephen of Langton was
quietly possessed of his Archbishoprique, but he presently, in a Council of both
Orders at Paul's, stirs up the hearts of the Barons against John, by producing
the old Charter of liberties granted by Hen. I. comprehending an instauration
of S. Edwards laws, as they were amended by the Conqueror, and provoking them
to challenge observation thereof as an absolute duty to subjects of free State.
He was easily heard, and his thoughts seconded with rebellious designs: and
after denials of this purposed request; armies were mustred to extort these
Liberties. 16. Ioh. Reg.
But at length by treaty in ^uingn^d near Stanes, he gave them two Charters;
the one, of Liberties general, the other of the Forest^ both which were not
very different from our Graund Charter of the Forest. K. John's grand Charter.
The Pope at his request confirmed all: but the same year, coffeehouse
(through too much favor and respect given by the King to diverse strangers,
whom since the composition with the Legate, he had too frequently, and in too
high esteem entertained) renewing among the Barons, Ambassadors were sent to
advertise the Pope what injury the Sea of Rome had by this late Exaction of
such liberties out of a Kingdom, in which it had such great interest (for King
John had been very prodigal to it, of his best and most maiesticall Titles)
and with what commotion the Barons had rebeld against him, soon obtained a Bull
cursing in Thunder all such as stood for any longer maintenance of those
granted Charters: This (as how could it be otherwise?) bred new but almost
incurable broiles in the State twixt King and subject: But in whom more, then
in the Pope and his Archbishop, was cause of this dissension? Both, as wicked
Boutefeus applying themselves to both parts; sometimes animating the subject by
censorious exauthorizing the Prince, then assting and moving forward his
pronenesse, to faithless abrogation, by pretense of an interceding universal
authority.

The general Charter seized --
The last note somewhat instructs you in what you are to remember, that is, the
Grand Charters granted and (as matter of fact was) repealed by K. John; M.
cc.xxv.
his son Henry III. of some IX. years age (under protection first of William
Mareshall Earl of Penbroke, after the Earls death. Peter de Rodes Bishop of
Winchester) in the ninth year of his reign, in a Parliament held at
Westminster desired of the Baronage (by mouth of Hubert de Burch proposing it)
a Fifteen: whereto upon deliberation, they gave answer, That they would
willingly grant his request, if he would vouchsafe them those Liberties so long
desired.
quod Regis Petitionibus gratamter adquiesceren^ si illis diu petitas
Libertat^s concedere voluisset. The King agreed to the Condition, and presently
under the great seal delivered Charters of them into every county of England,
speaking as those of K. John (says Paris) So that the Charter of both Kings
are just alike.
ita quod Chartae vtrorumque Regum in nullo inuennintur dissimiles. Yet those,
which we have, published want of that which is in K. John's, wherein you have a
special Chapter that, if a Jews debtor die, and leave his heir within age
subject to payment, the Usury during the nonage should cease, which explaines
the meaning of the Statut of Merton Chap. V. Otherwise but ill interpreted in
some of our year 35. Hen. 6. fol. 61. and 3. Fliz. Plowd. 1. fol. ^36. atqui.
V. Eract. lib. 8. cap. 26.. 2.
books: After this, follows further, that no Aid, except, to reedem the Kings
person out of Captivity (example of that was in Richard I. whose Ransom, out
of the hands of Leopeld Duke of Austria, was near 100000. pounds of silver,
collected from the subject) make his eldest son Knight, or marry his eldest
daughter, should be levied of the subject, but by Parliament. Yet, reason, why
these are omitted in Hen. III. his Charter, it seems, easily may be given;
seeing X. years before time of Edward Longshanks exemplification (which is
that whereon we now rely, and only have) all Jews were banished the kingdom:
and among the Petitions, and Grieuances of the Commons at time of his
instauration of this Charter to them, one was thus consented to; No Talla^e or
Aid without consent of Parliament should after be exacted.
Nullum Tallagium vel Auxilium, per nos vel Heredes nostros de catero in regno
nostro imponatur s^uleuetur sine voluntate and Consensu communi
Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, Abbatum and aliorum Praelatorum, Comitum,
Baronum, Militum, Burgensium, and aliorum liberorum hominum: which although
compared with that of Aides by Tenure, be no law, yet I conjecture that upon
this article was that Chapter of Aides omitted. Thom. de Walsingham in ^6. Fd.
1. Polyd. hist. 17.
But I return to Henry: He, within some three years, summons a Parliament to
Oxford, and declares his full age, refusing any longer Peter de Roches his
Protection; but taking all upon his personal government, by pretense of past
nonage, caused all the Charters of the Forest to be cancelled, and repealed
the rest, (for so! take it, although my Author speak chiefly of that of the
Forest) and made the subject with price of great sums, rated by his chief
Justice Hugh de Burch, renew their liberties, affirming that his grant of them
was in his Minority, and therefore so defesible: which, with its like (in
disenheriting and seizing on his Subjects possessions, without Judicial
course, beginning with those two great Potentates Richard Earl of Cornwall,
his brother, and William le Marshall Earl of Pembrooke) bred most intestine
trouble twixt him and his Barons, although sometime discontinued; yet not
extinguished even till his declining days of enthroned felicity. Observe among
this, that where our Historians and Chronologers, talk of a desire by the
Baronage, to have the Constitutions of Oxford restored, you must understand
those Charters cancelled at Oxford; whereafter many rebellious, but provoked,
oppositions the King at last, by oath of himself and his son Edward, in full
Parliament 42. Hen. 3.
(having nevertheless often times before made show of as much) Granted again
their desired freedom: which in his spacious reign, was not so much impeacht
by himself, as through ill Counsel of Alien caterpillars crauling about him,
being as scourges then sent over into this Kingdom. But Robert of Gloucester
shall summarily tell you this, and give your Palate variety.

The mess woe that here vel by King Henry's day
In this land Icholle biginne to tell yus Ich may,
He add Guy of Lusignan, William of Valence, and Athelmar, his half brothers,
Sons of Isabel K. John's Dowager, daughter to Armar ^^rle of Engolisme, married
to Hugh Brown Earl of March in Poiters
three Brethren that is Modres sons were
And the Richard Earl of Cornwall son to K John.
King of Almaine she verthe that to heie them here,
At sir William de Valence and sir Athelmarus.
Eimer thereto,
Elit of Wincetre and sir Guy de Lisewi also
Thoru hom and thoru the Elianor daughter to Raimund Earl of Provewe.
Nuene was so much Frensi sole i brought
That of English men me told as right naught,
And the King hom let her will that each was as King
And nome pour men god, and ne paiede nothing.
To eni of this brethren yus there pleinide any wight
Hii sede, yuf we does ou wrong, woe ssall ou do right:
As woe seith we both Kings, vr will we mow do,
And many Englisse alas hulde mid hom also.
So that thorou Gods grace the Earls at last,
And the Bishops of the land, and Barons bespeake vaste,
That the kind Englissemen of Land hii would out cast,
And that long bring adoun, yus her poer last.
Thereof They took.
hii no^^e consell, and to the King hii send,
To Have.
abbe pite of his land and suiche manners amend.
So there at last hii brought him thereto
To make a Purueiance amendment to do,
And made it was at Oxenford, that land vor to seyte,
Tuelf hundred as in yer of Grace and fifty and eyghte.
Right abouts Missomer fourtene night it last
The Earls and the Barons were well Steadfast.
stude vaste
Uor to amendt that Land as the Earl of Gloucetre,
Sir Richard, and sir Simond Earl of Leicetre
And sir John le Fiz-Geffry and other Barons inowe
So that at last the K. thereto hii drowe,
To temue the Frensse men to Live.
libbe beyond se
By hor londs her and there and ne come noght Again.
age.
And to grantt Good.
god laws and the Old Charter also
That so often was igranted er, and so often undo.
Hereof was the Chartre ^made and aseled vast there
Of the King and of other heye men that there were:
Tho nome Kindled tapers.
tend tapers the Bishops in hor hond
And the K. himnselfe and other heye men of the land,
The Bishops Cursed.
amansed all that there agon were
And ever est vndude the laws that doked nere there,
Mid berninge taperes; and suth as last,
The King and others seide Amen and the Tapers adoun casts.
If particulars of the story, with precedents and consequents, be desired,
above all I send you to Matthew Paris, and William Rishanger, and end in adding
that this so controuerted Charters had not their settled surety until Ed. I.
Since whom they have been more then XXX. times, in Parliament confirmed.

The seat on which her Kings inaugurated were.
Which is the Chair and stone at Westminster, whereon our Sovereigns are
inaugurated. The Hector Boeth. hist. 1.10. and 14. Buchanan. Rer. Scotie. 6.
and 8.
Scottish stories (on whose credit, in the first part hereof, I importune you
not rely) affirm that the Stone was first in Gallicia of Spain at Brigantia
(whether that be Compostella, as Francis Tarapha wills, or Coronna as Florian
del Campo conjectures, or Betansos according to Mariana, I cannot determine)
where Gathel, King of Scots there, sat on it as his throne: Thence was it
brought into Ireland by Simon Brech first K. of Scots transplanted into that
Isle, about DCC. years before Christ: Out of Ireland K. Forguz^ (in him by
some, is the beginning of the now continuing Scottish reign) about CCC.LXX.
years afterward, brought it into Scotland, K. Kenneth some DCCC.L. of the
Incarnation, placed it at the Abbey of Scone (in the Shrifdome of Perth) where
the Coronation of his successors was usual, as of our Monarch's now at
Westminster, and in the Saxon times at Kingston upon Thames. This Kenneth, some
say, first caused that Distich to be engraven on it.

Ne fallat Fatum, Scoti, quocunque locatum*
Iuuenient lapidam, Regnare tonentur ibidem.
(Whereupon it^ called The fatal Marble.
Fatale marmor in Hector Boethius) and enclosed it in a woden Chair. It is now
at Westminster, and on it are the Coronations of our Sovereigns; thither first
brought (as the Author here speaks) among infinite other spoils, M.CC.XCVII 24.
Ed. l.
by Edward Longshanks after his wars and victories against K. John Balliol.

Their women to enherite --
So they commonly affirm: but that denial of sovereignty to their women cost
the life of many thousands of their men, both under this victorious Edward, and
his son the Black Prince, and other of his successors. His case stood
briefly thu^s Philip IV. surnamed the Fair, Salique Law.
had issue III. sons, Jews the Hutin.
Contentious, Philip the Long, and Charles the Fair, (All these successively
reigned after him, and died without issue inheritables) he had likewise a
daughter Isabell (I purposely omit the other, being out of the present matter,)
married to Edward II. and so was mother to Edward III. The issue male of Philip
the Fair thus failing, Philip son and heir of Charles Earl of Valois,
Beaumont, Alenson, etc. (which was brother to Philip the Fair,) challenged the
Crown of France as next heir male against this Edward, who answered to the
objection of the Salique law, that (admitting it as their assertion was, yet)
he was Heir Male although descended of a daughter: and in a public assembly
of the Estates first about the Protectorship of the womb, (for, Queen Ione
Dowager of the Fair Charles, was left with child, but afterward delivered of
a daughter, Blanch, afterward Duchess of Orleans) was this had in solemn
disputation by Lawiers on both sides and applied at length also to the direct
point of enheriting the Crown. What followed upon judgment given against his
Right, the valiant and famous deeds of him and his English, recorded in
Walsingham, Froissars, Aemilius, and the multitude of later collected stories
make manifest. But for the Law itself; every mouth speaks of it, few I think
understand at all why they name it. The opinions are, that it being part of the
ancient Laws made among the Salians (the same with Franks) under King
Pharamond about M.CC. years since, has thence denomination; and, G^ropius
(that fetches all out of Dutch, and more tolerably perhaps this then many other
of his Etymologies) deriuing the Salians name from Sal, which in contraction he
makes from Franel^. lib. 2.
As our word Saddle.
Sadel (Inuentors whereof the Franks, says he, were) interprets them, as it
were, Horsemen, a name fitly applied to the warlike and most Noble of any
Nation, as Knights.
Chiualers in French, and Equites in Latin allows likewise. So that, upon
collection, the Salique law by him is as much as a Chiualrous law, and Salique
land Which belo^ged to the preservation of chiualrous state in the possessors.
quae ad equestris Ordinis Dignitatem and in Capitae sum, and in cateris
membris conseruandam pertinebat: which very well agrees with a Bodin. de Repub.
6. cap. 5. V. Barth. Chaessan. Cons. Burgand. Rubric. 3. 5. number. 70. as it were.
sentence given in the Parliament at Burdeux upon an ancient Testament devising
all the Testators Salique lands, which was, in point of judgment, interpreted
Knights fees, or Lands held.
Fief. And who knows not, that Fiefs, were Originally, military gift. But
then, if so, how come Salique to extend to the Crown, which is merely without
Tenure? Therefore Paul. Merul. Cosmog. part. 2. lib. 3. cap. 17.
Egoscio (says a later I know that the Salique law intends only Private
possessions.
Lawyer) legem salieam agere de Private Patrimonis tantum. It was composed (not
this alone, but with others as they say) by Wisogast, Bodogast, Salogast, and
Windogast, wise Counselors about that Pharamunds reign. The text of it in
this part is offered us by Claude de Scissell Bishop of Marsillot, Bodin, and
diverse others of the French, as it were as ancient as the Origin of the name,
and in these words No part of the Salique Land can descend to the daughter, but
all to the mas^e.
De Terra Salica nulla Porito Haereditatis Musteriveniat, sed advirilem sexum
Tota terrae Hereditas perueniat, and in substance, as referred to the person of
the Kings heir female; so much is remembered by that great Ciuilian Ad l. ss.
de (...).
Ballus, and diverse others, but rather as Custom then any particular law, as
one Hierome dignon. De L' Excel. des Roies Liver. 3. * this is no law written,
but learned of Nature.
of that kingdom also has expressly and newly written; Ce n'est point vne loy
e critte, ^ais nee autenous, que nous n'auons pointinuentee, mais l'auons
puisie de la nature meme, qui le nous a ainsi apris and donnecet instinct; But
why, the same author dares affirm that King Edward yielded upon this point to
the French Philip de Valois, I wonder, seeing all story and carriage of state
in those times is so manifestly opposite. Becaulis undertakes a conjecture of
the first cause which excluded Gynaecocracie among them, guessing it to be upon
their observation of the misfortune in war, which their neighbors the
Bructerans (a people about the now Over Issel in the Netherlands, from near
whom he as, many other first derive the Franks) endured in time of Vespesian,
under Conduct and Empire of one V. Tacit. Histor. 4.
Vellida, a Lady even of Divine esteem amongst them. But howsoever the law be
in truth, or interpretable, (for it might ill beseem me to offer determination
in matter of this kind) it is certain, that to this day, they have an use of
ancient Rodulph. B^ter. Commentar. 8.
time which commits to the care of some of the greatest Peers, that they, when
the Queen is in Childbirth, be present, and warily observe lest the Ladies
privily should counterfeit the enheritable Sex, by supposing some other made
when the true Birth is femall, or, by any such means, wrong their ancient
Custom Royal, as of the Birth of this present Jews the XIII. on the last of
September, in M.DC.I. is, after other such remembered.

Of these two factions styled, of York and Lancaster.
Briefly their beginning was thus. Edward the III. had VII. sons, Ex Archiu.
Parl. 1 Ed. 4. in luce^ Edit. 9. Ed. 4. fol. 9.
Edward the Black Prince, William of Hatfeild, Lionel D. of Clarence, John of
Gaunt, D. of Lancaster, Edmund of Langley D. of York, Thomas of Woodstocke,
and William of Windsor, in prerogative of birth as I name them. The Black
Prince died in life of his Father, leaving Richard of Burdeux (afterward the
II.) William of Hatfield died without issue; Henry D. of Lancaster (son to
John of Gaunt the fourth brother) deposed Richard the II. and to the V. and VI.
of his name left the kingdom descending in right line of the family of
Lancaster. On the other side, Lionel D. of Clarence the third Brother had only
issue Philip a daughter married to Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March (who upon
this title was designed Heir apparent to Rich. II.) Edmund, by her had Roger;
to Roger was issue II. sons, and II. daughters: but all died without
posterity, excepting Anne; through her married to Richard Earl of Cambridge,
son to Edmund of Langley was conveyed (to their Issue Richard D. of York
Father to K. Eward IV.) that right which Lionell (whose heir she was) had
before the rest of that Royal stemm. So that Lancaster derived it self from
the IV. brother; York, from the blood of the III. and V. united. And in time
of the VI. Henry was this fatal and enduring misery over England, about
determination of these titles, first conceived in XXX. of his reign by Richard
D. of York, whose son Ed. IV. deposed Henry some IX. years after, and having
reigned near like space, was also, by readoption of Henry, deprived for a time,
but restored and died of it possessed, in whose family it continued until after
death of Rich. III. Henry Earl of Richmond, and Heir of Lancaster marrying
Elizabeth the Heir of York made that happy union. Some have referred the
vemost Ap. Polydor. hist. 16.
root of the Lancastrian title to Edmund, indeed eldest son to Hen. III. but
that by reason of his unfit deformity, his younger brother Edward had the
succession, which is absurd and false. For, one whom I believe before most of
our Monks, and the K. Name of Plantagenest.
. Chronologer of those times, Matthew Paris, tells expressly and days and
years of both their births, See to the end of the IV. Song.
and makes Edward above IIII. years elder then Crook-back. All these had that
most honored surname 33. Hen. 8. I. Slou. page 717. White and Red Roses, for
York and Lancaster. Romans page ^61.
Plantagenest; which has bin extinct among us ever since Margaret Countess of
Salisbury (daughter to George Plantagenet D. of Clarence) was beheaded in the
Tower. By reason of John of Gaunts device being a Red Rose, and Edmund of
Langleys a white Rose, these two factions afterward, as for Cogniscanes of
their descent and inclinations, were by the same Flowers distinguished.

Yet jealous of his right descended to his grave.
So jealous, that toward them of the Lancastrian faction naught but death (as,
there, reason of State was enough) was his kindness. Toward strangers, whose
slipping words were in wrested sense, seeming interpretable to his hurt, how he
carried himself, the Relations of Sir John Markham, his chief Justice, Thomas
Burdet an Esquire of Warwickshire, and some Citizens; for idle speeches are
testimony. How to his own blood in that miserable end of his brother George,
D. of Clarence, is showed: Whose death has diverse reported causes, as our late
Chroniclers tell you. One is supposed upon a prophecy for speaking that
Edwards successors name should begin with G; which made him suspect this George
(a kind of superstition not exampled, Of George D. of Clarence.
as I now remember, among our Princes; but in proportion very frequent in the
Oriental Empire, as passages of the names in Alexius, Manuel, and others,
discover in Nicetas Chroniates) and many more serious, yet insufficient faults
(rafting of Richard D. of Glocesters practices) are laid to his charge. Let
Polydore, Hall, and the rest disclose them. But, of his death, I cannot omit,
what I have newly seen. You know, it is commonly affirmed, that he was drowned
in a hogs-head of Malmsey at the Tower. One, Francise. Matenes De Rit^ Bibend.
1. cap. 1. edit. superioribus Nundinis.
that very lately would needs dissuade men from drinking healths to their
Princes, Friends, and Mistresses, as the fashion is a Bachelor of Divinity and
Professor of Story and Greek at Cologne, in his duuision of Drunken natures,
makes one part of them, Which would wish themselves Whales, ^o the Sea were
strong liquor.
Qui in balaenas mutari cuperent, du^^^odo ma^e in generosissimum vinum
transformaretur, and for want of an other example, dares deliver, that, such a
one was George Comes Clarentia. Caterum Aeuo Normanico indiscriminatim Comes
and Du^ vsurpantur, and Will. Conquestor sapius dictus Comes Nor^^.
Earl of Clarence, who, when, for suspicion of Treason, he was judged to die,
by his brother Edward IV. and had election of his form of death, given him,
made choice to be drowned in Malmsey. First, why he calls him Earl of Clarence,
I believe not all his Professed History can justify; neither indeed was ever
among us any such Honor. Earls of From Clare in Suffolk. V. Polydor. hist. 19
and Camd. in I^enis.
Clare long since were: but the title of Clarence began when that Earldom was
converted into a Dukedom by creation of Lionell (who married with the heir of
the Clares) Duke of Clarence. III. son to Ed. III. since whom never have
been other then Dukes, of that Dignity. But, unto what I should impute this
inexcusable injury to the dead Prince, unless to Icarius shadow, dazzling the
writers eyes, or Bacchus his reuengefull causing him to slip in matter of his
own Profession, I know not. Our Stories make the death, little better then a
tyrannous murder, privily committed without any such election. If he have other
Authority for it, I would his margin had bin so kind, as to have imparted it.

Upon a Daughter borne to John of Somerset.
John of Gaunt, D. of Lancaster, had issue by Catharine Swinford, John of
Beufort Earl of Somerset, and Marquis Dorset: To him succeeded his second son,
John ( Henry the eldest dead) and was created first D. of Somerset by Hen. V.
Of this John's ^oines was Margaret, Mother to Henry VII. His Father was Edmund
of Has me (made Earl of Richmond, by Hen. VI.) son to Owen Tyddeur
(deriuing himself from the British Cadwallader) by his wife Q. Catherine,
Dowager to Hen. V. and hence came that royally ennobled name of Tyddeur; which
In the late Queen of happy memory ended.

Defender of the Faith --
When amongst those turbulent commotions of Lutherans and Romanists under
Charles V. such oppositions increased, that the Popes three Crowns even
tottered at such Arguments as were published against his Pardons, 13. Hen. 8.
Mass, Monastique profession, and the rest of such doctrine; This K. Henry
(that Luther might want no sorts of Antagonists) wrote particularly against him
in Defense of Pardons, the Papacy, and of their VII. Sacraments: of which is
yet remaining the Original in the Fra^cise. Swe^t. in Debt. Orbis Christ.
Vatican at Rome, and with the Kings own hand thus inscribed, Henry, K. of
England, sends this to Pope Leo X. as a testimony of his Faith, and love to
him.
Anglorum Rex, HENRICUS, LEONI X. mittit hoc Opus, and Fideitestem and Amicitia.

Hereupon, this Leo sent him the title of Defensor Ecclesia I. Sloidams
Comment. 3.
Defender of the faith: which was, as Ominous to what ensued. For toward the
XXV. year of his reign, he began so to examine their Traditions, Doctrine,
Lives, and the numerous faults of the corrupted Time, that he was indeed
founder of Reformation for Inducement of the true ancient faith: which by his
Son Edward VI. Q. ELIZABETH, and our present Sovereign has been to this day
piously established and Defended.

To ease your conceit of these Kings here sung, I add this Chronology of them.

M.LXVI. William I. conquered England. M.LXXXVII. William the Red ( Rufus)
second Son to the Conqueror. M.C. Henry I. surnamed Beuclerc, third son to
the first William. M.C.XXXV. Stephen Earl of Moreton, and Bologne, son to
Stephen Earl of Blois by Adela daughter to the Conqueror. In Matthew. Paris
disputation.
In both the prints of Math. Paris, ( An. M.LXXXVI.) You must mend Beccensis
Comitis, and read Blesensis Comitis; and howsoever it coms to pass, he is, in
the same Author, made Son to Tedbald Earl of Blois, which indeed was his
brother. M.C.LIVE. Henry II. Son to Geffery Plantagenest Earl of Anio^, and
Maude the Empres, daughter to Henry Beuclere. M.C.LXXXIX. Richard I. Ceur de
Lion, Son to Henry II. M.C.CXIX. John, Brother to Ceur de Lion. M.CC.XVI.
Hen. III. Son to K. John. M.CC.LXXIII. Edward I. Longshanks, Son to Hen.
III. M.CCC.VIII. Edward II. of Caernaruan, Son to Ed. I. deposed by his Wife
and Son. M.CCC.XXVI. Edward III. Son to Edward. II. M.CCC.LXXXVII. Richard
II. of Bordeaux (son to Ed. the Black Prince, son to Ed. III.) deposed by
Henry D. of Lancaster. M.CCC.XCIX. Henry IV. of Bolingbroke; son to John of
Gaunt D. of Lancaster fourth son to Ed. III. M.CD.XIII. Henry V. of Monmouth,
son to Hen. IV. M.CD.XXII. Henry VI. of Windsor, son to Hen. V. deposed by
Edward Earl of March, son and heir to Richard D. of York, deriuing title
from Lionel D. of Clarence and Edmund of Langley III. and V. Sons of Ed. III.
M.CD.LX. Edward IV. of Roane, son and heir of York. In the X. of his reign
Hen. VI. got again the Crown, but soon lost both it, and life. M.CD.XXCIII.
Edward V. son to the IV. of that name, murdered with his brother Richard D. of
York, by his Uncle Richard D. of Gloucester. M.CD.XXCIII. Richard III. Brother
to Edward IV. slain at Bosworth field, by Henry Earl of Richmond. In him
ended the name of Plantagenet in our Kings. M.CD.XXCV. Henry VII. Heir to the
Lancastrian family, married with Elizabeth, Heir to the house of York. In
him the name of Tyddour, began in the Crown. M.D.IX. Henry VIII. of Greenwich,
son to Hen. VII. M.D.XLVI. Edward VI. of Hampton Court, son to Hen. VIII.
M.D.LIII. Mary, sister to Edward VI. M.D.LVIII. Elizabeth, Daughter to Hen.
VIII.
Great Andredswalde sometime --
All that Maritime Tract comprehending Sussex, and part of Kent (so much as was
not Mountains, now called the Down's which in Dunum vti ex Clitophonte apud
Plut. habet Ca^d. and Duynen Belgis dicuntur T^muli Aenarij Oceane objects.
Gorop. Gal^c. 1. Alij.
British, old Gaulish, Low Dutch, and our English signifies but Hills) being
all woody, was called Andredsweald We yet call a Desert, a wilderness from
this root.
^. Andredswood, often mentioned in our stories, and Newenden in Kent by it
Andredcester (as most learned Camden upon good reason guesses) whence perhaps
the Wood had his name. To this day we call those woody Lands, by North the
Downs, the Weald: and the Channel of the River that coms out of those parts,
and disco^tinues the Downs about Bramber, is yet known in Shorham Ferry, by the
name of Weald-dich; and, in another Saxon word equivalent to it, are many of
the Parishes Terminations on this side the Downs. that is, Herst, or Hurst. i.
a wood. It is called by Ethelwerd Lib. 4. cap. 3.
expressly Wood, called Andredswood.
Immanis sylua, que vulgo Andredsuuda nuncupatur, and was Henric. Huntingdon
hist. 5. in Alfredo.
CXX. miles long, and XXX. broad. The Authors conceit of these Forests being
nymphs of this Great Andredsuuda, and their complaint for loss of Woods, in
Sussex, so decai'd, is plain enough to every Reader.

As Arun which does name the beutious Arundel.
So it is coniectured, and is without controversy justifiable if that be the
name of the River. Some, fable it from Arundel, the name of Beuis horse: It
were so as tolerable as Plutarch in Alex. and R. Curt. lib 9.
Bucephalon, from Alexanders horse, Steph. (...).
Tymenna in Lycia from a Goat of that name, and such like, if time would
endure it: But Beuis was about the Conquest, and this Town, is by name of
Erundele, known in time of King Alfred Testament. Alfred. vbi etiam.
Ritheramfeild, Diccalingum, Angmeringum. Feltha^. and aliae in hoc agro Villae
lega^tur O^fertho eiusdem Cognato.
who gave it with others to his Nephew Athelm. Of all men, Goth^danic. lib. 7.
Goropius had somewhat a violent conjecture, when he derived Harondell, from a
people called Charudes (in Ptolemy, toward the utmost of the now Iuitland)
part of whom he imagines (about the Saxon and Danish irruptions) planted
themselves here, and by difference of dialect, left this as a branch sprung of
their Country title.

And Adur coming on to Shoreham.
This River that here falls into the Ocean might well be understood in that
Portus Adurni in Notit. Pro^ius.
Port of Adur, about this coast, the relics whereof, learned Camden takes to
be Edrington, or Adrington, a little from Shoreham. And the Author here so
calls it Adur.

Does blush, as put in mind of those there sadly slain.
In the Plain near Hastings, where the Norman William after his victory
found King Harold slain, he built Battle Abbey, which at last (as diverse
other Monasteries) grew to a Town enough populous. Thereabout is a place which
after rain always looks red, which some Guil. Parum hist. 1. cap. 1.
have (by that authority, the Muse also) attributed to a very bloody sweat of
the earth, as crying to heaven for Revenge of so great a slaughter.



The eighteenth Song.
* THE ARGUMENT.
The Rother through the Weald does roue,
Till he with Oxney fall in love:
Rumney, would with her wealth beguile,
And win the River from the I Will.
Medway, with her attending Streams,
Goes forth to meet her Lord great Tames:
And where in breath she her disperses,
Our Famous Captains she rehearses,
With many of their valiant deeds.
Then with Kents praise the Muse proceeds.
And tells when Albion over Sea road,
How he ^is daughter-Iles bestowed;
And how grim Goodwin fames and frets:
Where to this Song, an end she sets.
Our Argas scarcely yet delivered of her son,
When as the River down, through Andredsweald does run:
Nor can the aged Hill have comfort of her child.
For, living in the VVoods, her Rother w^xed wild;
His Banks with aged Oaks, and Bushes ouer-growne,
That from the Syluans kind* he hardly could be known:
Yea, many a time the Nymphs, which hapt this Flood to see,
Fled from him, whom they sure a Satyr thought to be;
As Satyre-like he held all pleasures in disdain,
And would not once vouchsafe, to look upon a Plain*
Till chancing in his course he to view a goodly plot,
Which Albion in his youth, upon a Sea Nymph got,
For Oxney's love he pines* who being wildly chaste,
And never wooed before, was coy to be embraced.
But, what obdurate heart was ever so perverse,
Whom yet a lovers plaints, with patience, could not pearce?
For, in this conflict she being lastly o^erthrowne,
In-Iled in his Arms, he clips her for his own.
Who being gross and black, she liked the River well.
Of Rothers happy match, when Rumney Marsh heard tell,
Whyl'st in his youth full course himself he does apply,
And falls in her sight into the Sea at Rye,
She thinks with her self, how she a way might find
To put the homely I Will quite out of Rothers mind; A description of Rumney
Marsh.

Appearing to the Flood, most bravely like a Queen,
Clad (all) from head to foot, in gaudy Summers green;
Her mantle richly wrought, with sundry flowers and weeds;
Her moystfull temples bound, with wreaths of quiuering reeds:
Which loosely flowing down, upon her lusty thighs,
Most strongly seem to tempt the Rivers amorous eyes.
And on her loins a frock, with many a swelling pleate,
Embost with well-spread Horse, large Sheep, and full-fed Neat.
Some wallowing in the grass, there lie a while to batten;
Some sent away to kill; some thither brought to fatten;
With Villages amongst, often powthred here and there;
And (that the same more like to The natural expressing of the surface of a
Country in Painting.
Landscape should appear)
With Lakes and lesser Foards, to mitigate the heat
(In Summer when the Fly does prick the gadding Neat,
Forced from the Brakes, where late they brouz'd the velvet buds)
In which, they lick their Hides, and chew their sauoury Cuds.
Of these her amourous toys, when Oxney came to know,
Suspecting least in time her rival she might grow,
Th'allu^rments of the Marsh, the jealous I Will do move,
That to a constant course, she thus persuades her Love:
With Rumney, though for dower I stand in no degree;
In this, to be beloved yet liker far then she:
Though I be brown, in me there does no favor lack.
The foul is said deformed: and she, extremely black.
And though her rich attire, so curious be and rare,
From her there yet proceed^ unwholesome putrid air:
Where my complexion more suits with the higher ground,
Upon the lusty Weald, where strength does still abound.
The Wood-gods I refused, that s^'d to me for grace,
Me in thy watery Arms, thee suffering to embrace*
Where, to great Neptune she may one day be a pray:
The Sea-gods in her lap lie wallowing every day.
And what, though of her strength she seem to make no doubt?
Yet put unto the proof she will hardly hold him out.
With this perswasiue speech which Oxney lately used,
With strange and sundry doubts, whilst Rother stood confused,
Old See to the XVII. Song.
Andredsweald at length does take her time to tell
The changes of the world, that since her youth befell,
When yet upon her soil, scarce humane foot had trod;
A place where only then, the Syluans made abode.
Where, feareless of the Hunt, the Heart securely stood,
And every where walked free a Burgess of the VVood;
Until those Danish routs, whom hunger-staru'd at home,
(Like Woolues pursuing prey) about the world did roame.
And stemming the rude stream dividing us from France,
Into the spacious mouth of Rother fell (by chance)
. That Lymen then was named, when (with most irksome care)
The heavy Danish yoke, the servile English bare.
And when at last she found, there was no way to leave
Those, whom she had at first been forced to receive;
And by her great resort, she was through very need,
Constrained to provide her peopled Towns to feed.
She learned the churlish axe and twybill to prepare,
To steel the coulters edge, and sharp the furrowing share:
And more industrious still, and only hating sloth,
A huswife she became, most skild in making cloth. Kentish Cloth.

That now the Draper comes from London every year,
And of the Kentish sorts, make his provision there.
Whose skirts (it is said) at first that fifty furlongs went,
Have lost their ancient bounds, now The Weald of Kent.
limited in Kent.
Which strongly to approve, she Medway forth did bring,
From Sussex who (it is known) receives her silver Spring.
Who towar'ds the lordly Tames, as she along does strain,
Where Teise, clear Beule, and Len, bear up her limber train
As she remoues in state: so for her more renown,
Her only name she leaves, t'her only Maidstone. i. Medway's town.
christened Town;
And Rochester does reach, in entering to the Bower
Of that most matchless Tames, her princely Paramoure.
Whose bosom does so please her Sovereign (with her pride)
Whereas the royal Fleet continually does ride,
That where she told her Tames, she did intend to sing
What to the English Name immortal praise should bring;
To grace his goodly Queen, Tames presently proclaims,
That all the Kentish Floods, resigning him their names,
Should presently repair unto his mighty Hall,
And by the posting Tides, toward London sends to call
Clear Rauensburne (though small, remembered them among)
At Detford entering. Whence as down she comes along,
She Darent thither warnes: who calls her sister Cray,
Which hasten to the Court with all the speed they may.
And but that Medway then of Tames obtained such grace,
Except her country Nymphs, that none should be in place,
More Rivers from each part, had instantly been there,
Then at their marriage, first, by In the Faiery Queen.
Spenser numbered were.
This Medway still had nursed those nauies in her Road,
Our Armies that had often to conquest borne abroad;
And not a man of ours, for Arms has famous been,
Whom she not going out, or coming in has seen:
Or by some passing Ship, has news to her been brought,
What brave exploits they did; as where, and how, they fought.
Wherefore, for audience now, she to the assembly calls,
The Captains to recite when seriously she falls.
Of noble warriors now, says she, shall be my Song;
Of those renowned spirits, that from the Conquest sprung,
Of The English Norman blood: which, matchless for their might,
Have with their flaming swords, in many a dreadful fight,
Illustrated this I Will, and bore her fame so far;
Our Heroes, which the first wanne, in that Holy war,
Such fear from every foe, and made the East more red,
With splendour of their Arms, then when from Tithons bed
The blushing Dawne does break; toward which our fame begone,
By Robert ( Curt-hose called) the Conquerours eldest son,
Peter, the Hermit.
Who with great Godfrey and that holy Hermit went
The Sepulcher to free, with most deuoutintent.
And to that title which the Norman William got,
When in our Conquest here, he strove t'include the Scot,
The General of our power, that stout and warlike Earl,
Who English being borne, was styled of Aubemerle;
Those Lacyes then no less courageous, which had there
The leading of the day, all, brave Commanders were.
Sir Walter Especk, matched with Peuerell, which as far
Aduentur'd for our fame: who in that Bishops war,
Immortal honor got to Stephens troubled reign:
That day ten thousand Scots upon the field were slain.
The Earl of Strigule then our Strong-bowe, first that won
Wild Ireland with the sword (which, to the glorious sun,
Lifts up his nobler name) amongst the rest may stand.
In Cure de Lyon's charge unto the Holy Land,
Our Earl of Lester, next, to rank with them we bring:
And Turnham, ^e that took th'impost'rous Ciprian King.
Strong Tuchet chose to weeld the English standard there;
Poole, Gourney, Neuill, Gray, Lyle, Ferres, Mortimer:
And more, for want of pens whose deeds not brought to light,
It grieves my zealous soul, I can not do them right.
The noble Penbrooke then, who Strong-bowe did succeed,
Like his brave Grand-sire, made th'reuolting Irish bleed,
When yielding often, they often their due subjection broke;
And when the Britans scorned, to bear the English yoke,
Lewellin Prince of Wales in Battle ouerthrewe,
Nine thousand valiant Welsh and either took or slew.
Earl Richard, his brave son, of Strong-bowes matchless strain,
As he a Marshall was, did in himself retain
The nature of that word, being Martial, like his name:
Who, as his valiant Sire, the Irish often did tame.
With him we may compare Marisco (King of Men)
That Lord chief Justice was of Ireland, whereas then
Those two brave Burrowes, John, and Richard, had their place,
Which through the bloodied Bogs, those Irish often did chase;
Whose deeds may with the best deservedly be read.
As those two Lacyes then, our English Powers that led:
Which twenty thousand, there, did in one Battle quell,
Amongst whom (trodden down) the King of Conaugh fell.
Then Richard, that loved Earl of Cornwall, here we set:
Who, rightly of the race of great Plantaginet,
Our English Armies shipped, to gain that hallowed ground,
With Long-sword the brave son of beauteous Rosamond:
The Pagans through the breasts, like thunderbolts that shot;
And in the utmost East such admiration got,
That the shril-sounding blast, and terror of our fame
Has often conquered, where, our swords yet never came:
As Gifford, not forgot, their stout associate there.
So in the wars with Wales, of ours as famous here,
Guy Beuchamp, that great Earl of Warwick, place shall have:
From whom, the Cambrian Hills the Welsh-men could not save;
Whom he, their general plague, impetuously pursued,
And in the British gore his slaughtering sword imbrued.
In order as they rise (next Beuchamp) we prefer
The Lord John Gifford, matched with Edmond Mortimer;
Men rightly molded up, for high aduentrous deeds.
In this renowned rank of warriors then succeeds
Walwin, who with such skill our Armies often did guide;
In many a dangerous straight, that had his knowledge tried.
And in that fierce assault, which caused the fatal flight,
Where the distressed Welsh resigned their Ancient right,
Stout Frampton: by whose hand, their Prince Lewellin fell.
Then follows (as the first who have deserved as well)
Great Saint-Iohn; from the French, which twice recovered Guyne:
And he, all him before that clearly did outshine,
Warren, the puissant Earl of Surrey, which led forth
Our English Armies often into our utmost North;
And often of his approach made Scotland quake to hear,
When Tweed has sunk down flat, within her Banks for fear.
On him there shall attend, that most aduenturous Twhing,
That at Scambekin fight, the English off did bring
Before the furious Scot, that else were like to fall.
As Basset, last of these, yet not the least of all
Those most renowned spirits that Fowkerk bravely fought;
Where Long-shanks, to our lore, Albania lastly brought.
As, when our Edward first his title did advance,
And led his English hence, to win his right in France,
That most deserving Earl of Darby we prefer,
Henry's third valiant son, the Earl of Lancaster,
That only Mars of Men; who (as a general scurge,
Sent by iust-iudging Heaven, outrageous France to purge)
At Cagant plagued the Power of Flemmings that she raised,
Against the English force: which as a hand-sell seas'd,
Into her very heart he marched in warlike wise;
Took Bergera, Langobeck, Mountdurant, and Mountguyse;
Leau, Po^dra, and Punach, Mount-Segre, Forsa, won;
Mountpesans, and Beumount, the Ryall, Aiguillon,
Rochmillon, Mauleon, Franch, and Ang^lisme surpised;
With Castles, Cities, Forts, nor Provinces sufficed.
Then took the Earl of Leyle: to conduct whom there came
Nine Vicounts, Lords, and Earls, astonished at his name.
To Gascoyne then he goes (to plague her, being pressed)
And manfully himself of Mirabell possessed;
Surgeres, and Alnoy, Benoon, and Mortaine struck:
And with a fearful siege, he Taleburg lastly took;
With prosperous success, in lesser time did win
Maximien, Lusingham, Mount-Sorrell, and Bonin;
Sacked Poytiers: which did, then, that Countries treasure hold;
That not a man of ours would touch what was not gold.
With whom our Sr Walter Ma^^y.
Maney here deservedly does stand,
Which first Inuentor was of that courageous band,
Who closed their left eyes up; as, never to be freed,
Till there they had achieved some high aduenturous deed.
He first into the preasse at Cagant conflict flue;
And from amidst a grove of gleaues, and halberds drew
Great Darby beaten down; t'amaze the men of war,
When he for England cried, S. George, and Lancaster:
And as mine author tells (in his high courage, proud)
Before his going forth, unto his Mistress vowed,
He would begin the war: and, to make good the same,
Then setting foot in France, there first with hostile flame
Forced Mortain, from her Towers, the neighboring Towns to light;
That suddenly they caught a Fever with the fright.
Thin Castle (near the Town of Cambray) ours he made;
And when the Spanish powers came Britanne to invade, Little Brittanne in
France.

Both of their aids and spoils, them utterly bereft.
This English Lion, there, the Spaniards never left,
Till from all air of France, he made their Jews fly,
And Fame her self, to him, so amply did apply,
That when the most unjust Calicians had forethought,
Into that Town (then ours) the Frenchmen to have brought,
The King of England's self, Edward III. and the Black-Prince.
and his renowned son
(By those perfidious French to see what would be done)
Under his Guydon marched, as private soldiers there.
So had we still of ours, in France that famous were;
Warwick, of England then High-constable that was,
As other of that race, here well I cannot pass;
That brave and god-like brood of Beuchamps, which so long
Them Earls of Warwick held; so hardy, great, and strong,
That after of that name it to an Adage grew,
If any man himself adventrous hapt to show,
Bold Beuchampe men him termed, Bold Beuchamp; a Proverb.
if none so bold as he.
With those our Beuchamps, may our Bourchers reckned be.
Of which, that valiant Lord, most famous in those days,
That hazarded in France so many dangerous frayes:
Whose blade in all the fights betwixt the French and us,
Like to a Blazing-starre was ever ominous;
A man, as if by Mars upon Bellona got.
Next him, stout Cobham comes, that with as prosperous lot
The English men has led; by whose auspicious hand,
We often have been known the Frenchmen to command.
And Harcourt, though by birth an Alien; yet, ours won,
By England after held her dear adopted son:
Which often upon our part was bravely proved to do,
Who with the hard'st attempts Fame earnestly did woo:
To Paris-ward, that when the Amyens fled by stealth
(Within her mighty walls to have enclosed their wealth)
Before her bulwarkt gates the Burgesses he took;
Whilst the Parisians, thence that sadly stood to look,
And saw their faithful friends so woefully bestead,
Not once durst issue out to help them, for their head.
And our John Copland; here courageously at home
Whilst every where in France, those far abroad do roame)
That at New Castle fight (the Battle of the Queen,
Where most the English hearts were to their Sovereign seen)
Took David King of Scots, his prisoner in the fight.
Nor could these wars employ our only men of might:
But as the Queen by these did mighty things atchieue;
So those, to Britain sent the Countess to relieve,
As any yet of ours, two knights as much that dared,
Stout Dangorn, and with him strong Hartwell honor shared;
The dreaded Charles de Bloyes, that at Rochdarren bet,
And on the Royal seat, the Countess Mountfort set.
In each place where they came so fortunate were ours.
Then, Audley, most renowned amongst those valiant powers,
That with the Prince of Wales at conquered Poyters fought;
Such wonders that in Arms before both Armies wrought;
The first that charged the French; and, all that dreadful day,
Through still renewing worlds of danger made his way;
The man that scorned to take a prisoner (through his pride)
But by plain downright death the title to decide.
And after the retreat, that famous Battle done,
Wherein, rich spacious France was by the English won,
Five hundred marks in Fee, that noblest Prince bestowed
For his so brave attempts, through his high courage showed.
Which to his four Esquires The honorable bounty of the Lord Audley.
he freely gave, who there
Vy'd valor with their Lord; and in despite of fear,
Often fetched that day from death, where wounds gap't wide as hell;
And cries, and parting groans, whereas the Frenchmen fell,
Even made the Victors grieve, so horrible they were.
Our Dabridgcourt the next shall be remembered here,
At Poyters who brake in upon the Alman Horse
Through his too forward speed: but, taken by their force,
And after, by the turn of that so doubtful fight,
Being reskew'd by his friends in Poyters fearful sight,
Then like a Lion ranged about The Enemies host:
And where he might suppose the danger to be most,
Like Lightning entered there, to his French-foes dismay,
To gratify his friends which reskew'd him that day.
Then Chandos: whose great deeds found Fame so much to do,
That she was lastly forced, him for her ease to woo;
That Minion of drad Mars, which almost ouer-shone
All those before him were, and for him none scarce known,
At Cambray's scaled wall his credit first that won;
And by the high exployts in France by him were done,
Had all so ouer-aw'd, that by his very name
He could remove a siege: and Cities where he came
Would at his Summons yield. That man, the most beloved,
In all the ways of war so skillful and approved,
The The Black-Prince.
Prince at Poyters chose his person to assist.
This stout Herculean stem, this noble Martialist,
In battle twixt brave Bloys and noble Mountfort, tried
At Array, then the right of Britain to decyde,
Raged like a furious storm beyond the power of man,
Where valiant Charles was slain, and the stern English wan
The royal British rule to Mountforts nobler name.
He took strong Tarryers in, and Aniou often did tame.
Gavaches he regayn'd, and us Rochmad^r got.
Where ever laid he siege that he invested not?
As this brave Warrior was, so no less dear to us,
The rival in his fame, his only amulus,
Renowned Sir Robert Knowles, that in his glories shared,
His chiualry and often in present perils dared;
As Nature should with Time, at once by these consent
To show, that all their store they idly had not spent.
He Vermandoise or'e-ranne with skill and courage hie:
Notoriously he plagued revolting Picardy:
That up to Paris walls did all before him win,
And dared her at her gates (the King that time within)
A man that all his deeds did dedicate to fame.
Then those stout Percyes, John, and Thomas, men of name.
The valiant Gourney, next, deservedly we grace,
And Howet, that with him assumes as high a place.
Strong Trivet, all whose ends at great adventures shot:
That conquered us Mount Pin, and Castle Carcilot,
As famous in the French, as in the Belgique war;
Who took the Lord Brimewe; and with the great Navarre,
In Papaloon, attained an everlasting praise.
Courageous Carill next, then whom those glorious days
Produced not any spirit that through more dangers swam.
That princely Thomas, next, the Earl of Buckingham,
To Britany through France that our stout English brought,
Which under his Command with such high fortune fought
As put the world in fear Rome from her cynders rose,
And of this Earth again meant only to dispose.
Thrice valiant Hackwood then, out-shining all the rest,
From London at the first a poor mean soldier pressed
(That time but very young) to those great wars in France,
By his brave service there himself did so advance,
That afterward, the heat of those great Battles done
(In which he to his name immortal glory won)
Leading six thousand Horse, let his brave Guydon fly.
So, passing through East France, and entering Lombardie,
By th'greatnes of his fame, attayn'd so high Command,
That to his charge he got the white Italian Band.
With The Marquess of Mountferato.
Mountferato then in all his wars he went:
Whose clear report abroad by Fames shrill trumpet sent,
Wrought, that with rich rewards him Milan after won,
To aid her, in her wars with Mant^a then begone;
By Brother to Galeazo, Vicount of Milla^.
Barnaby, there made the Milanezes guide:
His daughter, who, to him, fair Domina, affy'd.
For Gregory then the twelfth, he dangerous Battles struck,
And with a noble siege revolted Pauia took.
And there, as Fortune rose, or as she did decline,
Now with the Pisan served, then with the Florentine:
The use of The English Bows to Italy that brought;
By which he, in those wars, seemed wonders to have wrought.
Our Henry Hotspur next, for hie atchieuements meet,
Who with the thundering noise of his swift Coursers feet,
Astund the earth, that day, that he in H^lmdon's strife
Took Douglas, with the Earls of Anguish, and of Fyfe.
And whilst those hardy Scots, upon the firm earth bled,
With his reuengefull sword swicht after them that fled.
Then Caluerley, which kept us Calice with such skill,
His honored room shall have our Catalogue to fill:
Who, when th'rebellious French, their liberty to gain,
From us our ancient right unjustly did detain
(T'let Bullen understand our just conceived ire)
Her Suburbs, and her Ships, sent up to heaven in fire;
Estaples then took in that day she held her Fair,
Whose Merchandise he let his soldiers freely share;
And got us back Saint Marks, which loosely we had lost.
Amongst these famous men, of us deserving most,
In these of great'st report, we gloriously prefer,
For that his nauall fight, John Duke of Excester;
The puissant Fleet of Ieane (which France to her did call)
Who mercilesly sunk, and slew her Admiral.
And one, for single fight, amongst our Martial men,
Deserves remembrance here as worthily again;
Our Clifford, that brave, young and most courageous Squire:
Who thoroughly provokt, and in a great desire
Unto the English name a high report to win,
Slew Bockmell hand to hand at Castle Iocelin,
Supposed the noblest spirit that France could then produce.
Now, forward to thy task proceed industrious Muse,
To him, above them all, our Power that did advance;
John Duke of Bedford, styled the firebrand to sad France:
Who to remove the Foe from sieged Harflew, sent,
Affrighted them like death; and as at Sea he went,
The huge French Navy fier'd, when horrid Neptune ror'd,
The whilst those mighty Ships out of their scuppers poured
Their traiterous cluttred gore upon his wrinkled face.
He took strong ^very in: and like his kingly race,
There down before Vernoyle the English Standard stuck:
And having on his Helmo his conquering Brothers luck,
Alanzon on the field and doughty Douglasse laid,
Which brought the Scottish power unto the Dauphins aid;
And with his fatal sword, gave France her fill of death,
Till wearied with her wounds, she gasping lay for breath.
Then, as if powerful Heaven our part did there abet,
Still did one noble spirit, a nobler spirit beget.
So, Salsbury arose; from whom, as from a sourse
All valor seemed to flow, and to maintain her force.
From whom not all their Forts could hold our treacherous Foes.
Pontmelance he regayn'd, which ours before did lose.
Against the envious French, at Cravant, then came on;
As sometime at the siege of high-rear'd Ilion,
The Gods descending, mixed with mortals in the fight:
And in his leading, showed such valor and such might,
As though his hand had held a more then earthly power;
Took Stuart in the field, and General Vantadour,
The French and Scottish force, that day which bravely led;
Where few at all escaped, and yet the wounded fled.
Mount Aguilon, and Mouns, great Salsbury surpised:
. What time (I think in hell) that instrument devised, Great Ordinance.

The first appeared in France, as a prodigious birth
To plague the wretched world, sent from the envious Earth;
Whose very roaring seemed the mighty Round to shake,
As though of all again it would a Chaos make.
This famous General them got Gwerland to our use,
And Malicorne made ours, with Loupland, and La Suise,
Saint Bernards Fort, S. Kales, S. Susan, Mayon, Lyle,
The Hermitage, Mountseure, Baugency, and Yanvile.
Then he (in all her shapes that dreadful War had seen,
And that with Danger often to conversant had been,
As for her threats at last he seemed not once to care,
And Fortune to her face adventurously durst dare)
The Earl of Suffolk, Poole, the Marshall that great day
At Agincourt, where France before us prostrate lay
(Our Battles every where that Hector-like supplied,
And marched over murdered pyles of Frenchmen as they died)
Invested Aubemerle, rich Cowey making ours,
And at the Bishops Park or'ethrew the Dolphins powers.
Through whose long time in war, his credit so increast,
That he supplied the room of Salsbury deceast.
In this our warlike rank, the two stout Astons then,
Sir Richard, and Sir John, so truly valiant men,
That Ages yet to come shall hardly ouer-top am,
Vmfreuill, Peachy, Branch, Mountgomery, Felton, Popham.
All men of great Command, and highly that deserved:
Courageous Ramston next, so faithfully that served
At Paris, and S. James de Beneon, where we gave
The French those deadly foyles, that Ages since deprave
The credit of those times, with these so wondrous things,
The memory of which, great Warwick forward brings.
Who (as though in his blood he conquest did inherit,
Or in the very name there were some secret spirit)
Being chosen for these wars in our great Regents place
(A deadly Foe to France, like his brave Roman race)
The Castilets of Loyre, of Maiet, and of Land,
Mountdublian, and the strong Pountorson beat to ground.
Then he, above them all, himself that sought to raise,
Upon some Mountain top, like a Piramides;
Our Talbot, to the French so terrible in war,
That with his very name their Babes they used to scarre,
Took-in the strong Lavall, all Main and ouer-ran,
As the betrayed Mons he from the Marshall wan,
And from the treacherous Foe our valiant Suffolk freed.
His sharp and dreadful sword made France so often to bleed,
Till fainting with her wounds, she on her wrack did fall;
Took Ioing, where he hung her Traitors on the wall;
And with as fair success wan Beumont upon Oyse,
The new Town in Esmoy, and Crispin in Valoyes:
Creile, with Saint Maxines bridge; and at Auranches aid,
Before whose battered walls the Foe was strongly laid,
Marched in, as of the siege at all he had not known;
And happily relieved the hardly-gotten Roan:
Who at the very hint came with auspicious feet,
Whereas the trayt'rous French he miserably beet.
And having ouer-spred all Picardy with war,
Proud Burgaine to the Field he lastly sent to darre,
Which with his English friends so often his faith had broake:
Whose Countries he made mourn in clouds of smouldring smoke;
Then Gysors he again, then did Saint Denise, raze.
His Parallel, with him, the valiant Scales we praise;
Which often put sword to sword, and foot to foot did set:
And that the first alone the Garland might not get,
With him has hand in hand leapt into Dangers jaws;
And often would forward put, where Talbot stood to pause:
Equality in fame, which with an equal lot,
Both at Saint Denise siege, and batt'red Guysors got.
Before Pont-Orsons walls, who, when great Warwick lay
(And he with soldiers sent a forraging for pray)
Six thousand French or'e-threw with half their numbered powers,
And absolutely made both Main and Aniou ours.
To Willoughby the next, the place by turn does fall;
Whose courage likely was to bear it from them all:
With admiration often on whom they stood to look,
Saint Valeries proud gates that off the hindges shook:
In Burgondy that forced the recreant French to fly,
And beat the Rebels down disordering Normandy:
That Amiens near laid waste (whose strengths her could not save)
And the perfidious French out of the Country drove.
With these, another troop of noble spirits there sprung.
That with the foremost preast into the warlike throng.
The first of whom we place that stout Sir Phillip Hall,
So famous in the fight against the Count S. Paul,
That Crotoy us regained: and in the conflict twixt
The English and the French, that with the Scot were mixed,
On proud Charles Cleremont won that admirable day.
Strong Fastolph with this man compare we justly may,
By Salsbury who often being seriously employed
In many a brave attempt, the general For annoyed;
With excellent success in Main and Anio^ fought:
And many a Bulwark there into our keeping brought;
And, chosen to go forth with Vadamont in war,
Most resolutely took proud Renate, Duke of Bar.
The valiant Draytons then, Sir Richard, and Sir John,
By any English spirits yet hardly ouer-gone;
The same they goo in France, with costly vvounds that bought:
In Gascony and Guyne, who often and stoutly fought.
Then, valiant Matthew Gough: for whom the English were
Much bound to noble Wales in all our Battles there,
Or sieging or besieged that never fayl'd our force,
Often hazarding his blood in many a desperate course.
He beat the Bastard Balm with his selected band,
And at his Castle-gate surpised him hand to hand,
And spite of all his power away him prisoner bare.
Our hardy Burdet then with him we will compare,
Besieged within Saint James de Bencon, issuing out,
Crying Salsbury, S. George, with such a horrid shout,
That cleft the wandering clouds; and with his valiant crew
Upon the envied French like hungry Lions flew,
And Arthur Earl of Eure and Richmont took in fight:
Then following them (in heat) the Army put to flight:
The Britan, French, and Scot, received a general sack,
As, flying, one fell still upon another back;
Where our six hundred slew so many thousands more.
At our so good success that once a Frenchman swore
That God was wholly turned unto the English side,
And to assist the French, the devil had denied.
Then here our Kerrill claims his room amongst the rest,
Who justly if compared might march our very best.
He in our wars in France with our great Talbot often,
With Willoughby and Scales, now down, and then aloft,
Endured the sundry turns of often varying Fate;
At Cleremont seized the Earl before his City gate,
Eight hundred faithless French who took or put to sword;
And, by his valor, twice to Artoyse us restored.
In this our service then great Arondell does ensue,
The Marshall Bousack who in Beuvoy^ overthrew;
And, in despite of France and all her power, did win
The Castles Darle, Nellay, S. Lawrence, Bomelin;
Took Silly, and Count Lore at Sellerin subdued,
Where with her owners blood, her buildings he imbrued:
Revolted Loveers sacked, and manfully suppressed
Those Rebels, that so often did Normandy molest.
As Poynings, such high praise in Gelderland that got,
On the Savoyan side, that with our English shot
Struck warlike Aiske, and Straule, when Flanders shook with fear.
As Howard, by whose hand we so renowned were:
Whose great success at Sea, much famed our English Fleet:
That in a navall fight the Scottish Barton beet;
And setting foot in France, her horribly did fright:
(As if great Chandos ghost, or feared Talbots spright
Had com'n to be their scourge, their fame again to earne)
Who having stoutly sacked both Narbin and Deverne,
The Castles of De Boys, of Fringes, took us there,
Of Columburge, of Rewe, of Dorlans, and Daveere;
In Scotland, and again the Murches East to West,
Did with invasiue war most terribly infest.
A nobler of that name, the Earl of Surry then,
That famous Hero fit both for the Spear and Pen
(From Floddens doubtful fight, that forward Scottish King
In his victorious ^roupe who home with him did bring)
Rebellious Ireland scou^g'd, in Britany and wan
Us Morles. Happy time, that bredst so brave a man!
To Cobham, next, the place deservedly does fall:
In France who then employed with our great Admiral,
In his succesfull Road blow Sellois up in fire,
Took B^ttingham and Bruce, with Samkerke and Mansier.
Our Peachy, nor our Carre, nor Thomas, shall be hid,
That at the Field of Spurs by Tirwyn stoutly did.
Sands, Guyldford, Palmer, Lyle, Fitzwilliams, and with them,
Brave Dacres, Musgraue, Bray, Coe, Wharton, Ierningham,
Great Martialists, and men that were renowned far
At Sea; some in the French, some in the Scottish war.
Courageous Randolph then, that served with great Command,
Before Newhauen first, and then in Ireland.
The long-renown'd Lord Gray, whose spirit we often did try;
A man that with drad Mars stood in account most hie.
Sir Thomas Morgan then, much fame to us that wan,
When in our Maiden reign the Belgique war began:
Who with our friends the Dutch, for England stoutly stood,
When Netherland first learned to lavish gold and blood.
Sir Roger Williams next (of both which, Wales might vaunt)
His marshall Compere then, and brave Commilitant:
Whose conflicts, with the French* and Spanish manly fought,
Much honor to their names, and to the Britains brought.
Th'Lord Willoughby may well be reccond with the rest,
Inferior not a whit to any of our best;
A man so made for war, as though from Pallas sprung.
Sir Richard Bingham then our valiant men among,
Himself in Belgia well, and Ireland, who did bear;
Our only Schools of War this later time that were.
As, Sir Edw. Sta^ley.
Stanly, whose brave act at Zutphens service done,
Much glory to the day, and him his Knighthood won.
Our noblest Norrice next, whose fame shall never die
Whilst Belgia shall be known; or there is a Britany:
In whose brave height of spirit, Time seemed as to restore
Those, who to the English name such honor gayn'd of yore.
Great Essex, of our Peers the last that ere we knew;
The Old worlds Heroes lives who likely'st did renew;
The soldiers only hope, who stoutly served in France;
And on the Towers of Cales as proudly did advance
Our English Ensigns then, and made Iberia quake,
When as our warlike Fleet road on the surging Lake,
T'receiue that Cities spoil, which set her battered gate
Wide open, t'affrighted Spain to see her wretched state.
Next, Charles, Lord Mountioy, sent to Ireland to suppress
The envious Rebel there; by whose most fair success,
The trowzed Irish led by their unjust Tyrone,
And the proud Spanish force, were justly overthrown.
That still Kinsall shall keep and faithful record bear,
What by the English prowess was executed there.
Then lived those valiant Veres, Sir Francis, and Sir Horace.
both men of great Command
In our employments long: whose either Marshall hand
Reached at the highest wreath, it from the top to get,
Which on the proudest head, Fame yet had ever set.
Our Sir Henry.
Dokwray, Sir Edmond.
Morgan next, Sir Samuel Bagnall, then
Stout Sir Oliver.
Lambert, such as well deserve a living pen;
True Martialists and Knights, of noble spirit and wit.
The valiant Cicill, last, for great employment fit,
Deservedly in war the lat'st of ours that rose:
Whose honor every hour, and fame still greater grows.
When now the Kentish Nymphs do interrupt her Song,
By letting Medway know she tarried had too long
Upon this warlike troop, and all upon them laid,
Yet for their nobler Kent she naught or little said.
When as the pliant Muse, straight turning her about,
And coming to the Land as Medway goes out,
Saluting the dear soil, o famous Kent, quoth she,
What Country has this I Will that can compare with thee,
Which have within thy self as much as thou can wish?
Thy Conyes, Venson, Fruit; thy sorts of Foul and Fish:
As what with strength comports, thy Hay, thy Corn, thy Wood:
Nor any thing does want, that any where is good*
Where Thames-ward to the shore, which shoots upon the rise,
Rich Tenham undertakes thy Closets to suffize
With Cherries, which we say, the Summer in does bring,
Wherewith Pomona crowns the plump and lustful Spring;
From whose deep ruddy cheek, sweet Zephyre kisses steals,
With their delicious touch his loue-sicke heart that heales.
Whose golden Gardens seem the Hesperides to mock:
Nor there the Damzon wants, nor dainty Abricock,
Nor Pippin, which we hold of kernell-fruits the king,
The Apple-Orendge; then the sauory Russetting:
The Peare-maine, which to France long ere to us was known,
Which careful Frut'rers now have denizend our own.
The Renat: which though first it from the Pippin came,
Grown through his pureness nice, assumes that curious name,
Upon the Pippin stock, the Pippin being set;
As on the Gentle, when the Gentle does beget
(Both by the Sire and Dame being anciently descended)
The issue borne of them, his blood has much amended.
The Sweeting, for whose sake the Plow-boyes often make war:
The Wilding, Costard, then the wel-known Pomwater,
And sundry other fruits, of good, yet several taste,
That have their sundry names is sundry Countries placed:
Unto whose dear increase the Gardener spends his life,
With Percer, VVimble, Saw, his Mallet, and his Knife;
Often covers, often does bare the dry and moystned root,
As faintly they mislike, or as they kindly suit:
And their selected plants does workman-like bestow,
That in true order they conveniently may grow.
And kills the slimie Snayle, the Worm, and laboring Ant,
Which many times annoy the graft and tender Plant:
Or else maintains the plot much starued with the wet,
Wherein his daintiest fruits in kernels he does set:
Or scrapeth off the moss, the Trees that often annoy.
But, with these tryfling things why idly do I toy,
Who any way the time intend not to prolong?
To those Thamisian Isles now nimbly turns my Song,
Fair Shepey and the Greane sufficiently supplied,
To beautify the place where Medway shows her pride.
But Greane seems most of all the Medway to adore,
And Tenet, standing forth to the Near Sandwich.
Rhutopian shore,
By mighty Albion placed till his return again
From Gaul; where, after, he by Hercules was slain.
For, Earth-borne Albion then great Neptunes eldest son,
Ambicious of the ^ame by stern Alcides won,
Would over (needs) to Gaul, with him to hazard fight,
Twelve Labors which before accomplished by his might;
His Daughters then but young (on whom was all his care)
Which Doris, Thetis Nymph, unto the Giant bare:
With whom those Isles he left; and willed her for his sake,
That in their Grandsires Court she much of them would make:
But Tenet, th'eldst of three, when Albion was to go,
Which loved her Father best, and loath to leave him so,
There at the Giant raught; which was perceived by chance:
This loving I Will would else have followed him to France;
To make the channel wide that then he forced was,
. Whereas (some say) before he used on foot to pass.
Thus Tenet being stayed, and surely settled there,
Who nothing less then want and idleness could bear,
Does only give her self to tillage of the ground.
With sundry sorts of Grain whilst thus she does abound,
She falls in love with Stour, which coming down by Wye,
And toward the goodly I Will, his feet does nimbly ply.
To Canterbury then as kindly he resorts,
His famous Country thus he gloriously reports;
O noble Kent, quoth he, this praise does thee belong,
The hard'st to be controld, impatientest of wrong.
Who, when the Norman first with pride and horror swayed,
Threw'st off the servile yoke upon the English laid;
And with a high resolve, most bravely did restore
That liberty so long enjoyed by thee before.
. Not suffering foreign Laws should thy free Customs bind,
Then only showd'st thy self of the ancient Saxon kind.
Of all the English Shires be thou surnamed the Free,
. And foremost ever placed, when they shall reckned be.
And let this Town, which Chief of thy rich Country is,
Of all the British Sees be still Metropolis.
Which having said, the Stour to Tenet him does hie,
Her in his loving arms embracing by and by,
Into the mouth of Tames one arm that forth does lay,
The other thrusting out into the Celtique Sea.
. Grym Goodwin all this while seems grievously to lowre,
Nor cares he of a straw for Tennet, nor her Stour;
Still bearing in his mind a mortal hate to France
Since mighty Albions fall by wars incertaine chance.
Who, since his wished revenge not all this while is had,
Twixt very grief and rage is fallen extremely mad;
That when the rouling Tide does stir him with her waves,
Straight foming at the mouth, impatiently he raues,
And strives to swallow up the Sea-marks in his Deep,
That warn the wandering ships out of his laws to keep.
The Surgions of the Sea do all their skill apply,
If possibly, to cure his grievous malady:
As Amphitrites Nymphs their very utmost prove,
By all the means they could, his madness to remove.
From Greenwich to these Sands, some Scurvigrasse do bring,
Simples frequent in these places.
That inwardly applied 's a wondrous sovereign thing.
From Shepey, Sea-mosse some, to cool his boiling blood;
Some, his ill-seasond mouth that wisely understood,
Rob Dovers neighboring Cleeues of Sampyre, to excite
His dull and sickly taste, and stir up appetite.
Now, Shepey, when she found she could no further wade
After her mighty Sire, betakes her to his trade,
With Sheephooke in her hand, her goodly flocks to heed,
And cherishes the kind of those choice Kentish breed.
Of Villages she holds as husbandly a port,
As any British I Will that neighboreth Neptunes Court,
But Greane, as much as she her Father that did love
(And, then the Inner Land, no further could remove)
In such continual grief for Albion does abide,
That almost vnder-flood she weepeth every Tide.
Illustrations.
OVt of Sussex, into its Eastern neighbor, Kent, this Canto leads you. It
begins with Rother, whose running through the woods, inisling Oxney, and such
like, poetically here described is plain enough to any apprehending conceit;
and upon Medway's Song of our Martial and Heroique spirits, because a large
volume might be written to explane their glory in particular action, and in
less comprehension without wrong to many worthies its not performable, I have
omitted all Illustration of that kind, and left you to the Muse her self.

That Limen then was named --
So the Author conjectures; that Rothers mouth was the place called Limen, at
which the Danes in time of K. Alfred made irruption; which he must (I think)
maintain by adding likelihood that Rother then fell into the Ocean about Hith;
where (as the relics of the name in Lime, and the distance from Canterbury in
Antoninus making Lemannis in Nout. Vtr. Prouinc.
Portus Lemanis* which is misprinted in Surita's Edition, Pontem Lemanis. XVI.
Miles off) it seems Limen was; and if Rother were Limen, then also, there was
it discharged out of the Land. But for the Authors words read this; The Danes
with 250. sail, came into the mouth of the River Limen, which runs out of
Andredswald: from whence IV. miles into the wood they got in their ships, and
built them a Fort at Apledore DCCC.XCIII
Equestris Paganorum exercitus cum suis equis CCL. na^ibus Cantiam transu^ctus
in Ostio Amnis Limen qui de sylua magna Andred nominata decurrit, applicuit, a
cuius ostro IIII. milliarys in candem syluam naues suas sursum traxit, vbi
quandam arcem semistructans, quam panci inhabitabant villani, diruerunt,
altamque, sibi firmiorem in loco qui dicitur Apultrea co^struxerunt, which are
the syllables of Florence of Worcester; and with him in substance fully agrees
Matthew of Westminster: nor can I think but that they imagined Rye (where now
Rother has its mouth) to be this Port of Limen, as the Muse here; if you
respect her direct terms. Henry of Huntingdon names no River at all, but lands
them At Port Limen by Andredswald in the East of Kent.
ad Portum Limene cum 250. nauibus qui portus est in Orientali part Cent iuxta
magnu^ nemus Andredslaige. How Rothers mouth can be properly said in the East
(but rather in the South part) of Kent, I conceive not, and am of the adverse
part, thinking clearly that Hith must be Portus Lemanis, which is that coast,
as also learned Camden teaches, whose authority cited out of Huntingdon, being
near the same time with Florence might be perhaps thought but as of equal
credit; therefore I call another witness (that Ethelwerd. lib. 4. cap. 4.
lived not much past L. years after the arrival) in these words, They leave
their Ships in Port- Limen, making their Rendezvous at Appledoure in the East
of Kent (for this may better endure that name) and there destroyed one Castle
and built another.
In Limneo portu constituunt puppes, Apoldre (so I read for the Print is
corrupted) loco condicto Orientali Cantia part, destruu^^que, ibi prisco opera
castrum propter quod rustica manus exigma quippe intrinsecus erat, Illicque
hiberna castra confirmant. Out of which you note both that no River, but a Port
only, is spoken of, and that the Ships were left in the shore at the Haven,
and thence the Danes conveyed their companies to Apledowre. The words of this
Ethelwerd I respect much more then these later Stories, and I would advise my
Reader to incline so with me.

What time I think in hell that instrument devised.
He means a Gunne; wherewith that most Noble and right Martial Thomas
Montagne Earl of Salisbury at the siege of Orleans in time of Hen. VI. was
slain. The first inuentor of them (I guess you dislike not the addition) was
one v. Polyd. de Invent. rer. 2 cap 2. and Sa. muth. ad G. Pan^^roll. 2. tit.
18.
Berthold Swartz (others say Constantine Anklitzen a Dutch Monk and Chemist,
who having in a Mortar, sulphurous powder for Medicine, covered with a stone, a
spark of fire by chance falling into it, fired it, and the flame removed the
stone; which he observing, made use afterward of the like in little pipes of
Iron, and showed the use to the Venetians in their war with the Genowayes at
Chi^gg^^ about M.CCC.LXXX. Thus is the common assertion: but I see as good
Achilles Gassar. ap. Munst. Cosmog 3.
authority, that it was used above XX. years before in the Danish Seas. I will
not dispute the conueniency of it in the world, compare it with Salm^neus
imitation of Thunder, Archimedes his Engines, and such like; nor tell you that
the Chinois had it, and Printing, so many ages before us, as Mendoza, Muffy,
and others deliver; but not with persuading credit to all their Readers.

Whereas some say before he used on foot to pass.
The allusion is to Britains being heretofore joined to Gaul in this straight
twixt Dover and Calais (some XXX. miles over) as some Modernes have
coniectur'd. That learned Antiquary I. Twine is very confident in it, and
deriues the Name for Brith signifying (as he says) as much as Guith. i. a
separation in Welsh, whence the Sam. Beulan. ad. Nennium.
Isle of Wight was so called; Guith and Wight being soon made of each other.
Of this opinion is the late Verstegan, as you may read in him* and for
examination of it, our Great light of Antiquity Camden has proposed diverse
considerations, in which, experience of particulars must direct. Howsoever this
was in truth, it is as likely, for ought I see, as that Cyprus was Once joined
to Syria, Euboea (now Negroponte) to Boe^tia, Atalante to Euboea, B^l^icum to
Bithynia, Leucosia to Thrace, as is Plin. Hist. Not. 2. cap. 88.
affirmed: and Sicily (whose like our Island is) was certainly broken off from
the continent of Italy, as both Virgil expressly, Strabo and Pliny delivers; and
also the names of Rhegium, From breaking off. Trogus. hist. 4. and Strab. ^.
(...), and of the self Sicily; which, rather then from To cut off.
Secare, I derive from Varr. de Re Rustie. 1. cap. 49.
Sicili^e, which is of the same signification and nearer in Analogy: Claudian
call's the Isle -- Britain pulled from the w^rld.
Diducta Britannia Mund^.
and Virgil has -- Brita^ne divided from the whole world.
Toto diuisos Orb Britannes;
Where Seruius is of opinion, that, for this purpose, the learned Poet used
that phrase. And it deserves inquisition, how beasts of Rapine, as Foxes and
such like came first into this Island (for England and Wales, as now Scotland
and Ireland, had store of Wolves, until some CCC. years since) if it were not
joined to a firm land, that either by like conjunction, or narrow passage of
swimming might receive them from that Continent where the Arc rested, which is
Armenia. That, men desired to transport them, is not likely: and a learned
Joseph. Acost. De nature. Noui Orbis ^. cap. 20. and 21.
Jesuit has coniectured, that the West Indies are therefore, or have been,
joined with firm land, because they have Lions, Wolves, Panthers and such
like, which in the Barmudez, Cuba, Hispaniola, S. Domingo, and other remote
Isles, are not found. But no place here to dispute the question.

Not suffering foreign laws should thy free customs bind.
To explane it, I thus English you a fragment of an old The Spot^^ ap. Lamb in
Explit Verb.
Monk: When the Norman Conqueror had the day, he came to Dover Castle, that he
might with the same subdue Kent also; wherefore, Stigand Archbishop, and
Egelsin Abbot, at the chief of that Shire; observing that now whereas
heretofore no Villeins (the Latin is Nullus fuerat seruus, and applying it to
Our Law phrase, I translate it) had been in England, they should be now all in
bondage to the Normans, they assembled all the County and showed the imminent
dangers, the insolence of the Normans, and the hard condition of Villenage:
They, resolving all rather to die then lose their freedom, purpose to
encounter with the Duke for their Countries liberties. Their Captains are the
Archbishop and the Abbot. Upon an appointed day they meet all at Swanescomb,
and harboring themselves in the woods, with Boughs in every man's hand, they
incompasse his way. The next day, the Duke coming by Swanescomb, seemed to see
with amazement, as it were a wood approaching toward him, the Kentish men at
the sound of a Trumpet take themselves to Arms, when presently the Archbishop
and Abbot were sent to the Duke and saluted him with these words: Behold, Sir
Duke, the Kentish men come to meet you, willing to receive you as their Liege
Lord, upon that condition, that they may for ever enjoy their ancient Liberties
and Laws used among their ancestors; otherwise, presently offering war; being
ready rather to die, then undergo a yoke of Bondage, and loose their ancient
Laws. The Norman in this narrow Pinch, not so willingly, as wisely granted the
desire: and hostages given on both sides, the Kentish men direct the Normans to
Rochester, and deliver them the County and the Castle of Dover. Hither is
commonly referred the retayning of ancient liberties in Kent. Indeed it is
certain that special customs they have in their Gaue^kind (although now many
of their Gentlemen's Possessions Stat. 31. Hen. 8. cap. 3.
are altered in that part) suffering for F^lony, without forfeiture of estate,
and such like, as in particular, with many other deligent traditions you have
in Lambards Perambulation: yet the report of Thomas Spot, is not, me thinks,
of clear credit, as well by reason that no warrant of the Historians about the
Conquest affirms it (and this Monk lived under Ed. I.) as also for his
commixture of a fauxete about Villenage, saying it was not in England before
that time, which is apparently false by diverse testimonies. If a Villain work
on Sunday by his Lords command, he shall be free.
(...) (says King Ines laws) (...) on Sunnan (...). be (...) he (...) and,
under Edward the Confessor Colgrin my Baylife and his issue, with all goods and
chattels, etc.
, Thorold of Beuchenale grants to the Abbey of Crowland his Manor of Spalding,
with all the Appurtenances, Scilicet Itin. Cornub. 30. Ed. 1. Uillenage 46. and
Mich. 5. Ed. 2. Ms. in Bibliothec. Int. Templ cas. John de Garton.
Colgrinum praepositum meum, and totam sequelam suam, cum omnibus bonis and
catallis, quae babet in dicta Villa, etc. Item Hardingum Fabrum and totam
sequelam suam; and the young wench of Andeuer, that Edgar was in love with, was
a Nief. But for Kent, perhaps it might be true, that no villeins were in it,
seeing since that time it has been adiudg'd in our Law, that One Borne there
could not without Conisans of Record be a Villein.

And foremost ever placed when they shall reckoned be.
For this honor of the Kentish, hear one Ioann. Sarisbur. De Nugis Curial. 6.
cap. 18.
that wrote it about Hen. II. What performance K Cnut did among the Danes, and
Norwegans by English valor, is apparent in that until this day, the Kentish
men for their singular virtue then shown, have prerogative always to be in
the Van^gard; as Writshire, Devonshire, and Cornwall in the Rere.
Enudus (as some Copics are, but others, Cinidus; and perhaps it should so be,
or rather Cnudus, for K. Cnut; or else I cannot conjecture what) quanta virtute
Anglorum, Dacos Danosque fregerit motusque, compescuerit Noricorum, vel ex eo
perspicuum est, quo. lob egreg^ae virtutis meritum quam ibidem potenter and
patenter exercuit, Cantia Nostra, primae Cohortis honorem and primus Congressus
Hostium vsque in Hodiernum diem en omnibus praelijs obtinet. Prouincia quoque
Seueriana, quae moderno vsu and nomine ab incolis Wiltesira vocatur, cadem iure
sibi vendicat Cohortem subsidiariam, adiecta sibi Deuoma and Cornubia. Briefly,
it had the first English King, in it was the first Christianity among the
English, and Canterbury then honored with the Metropolitique See: all which
give note of Honorable Prerogative.

Grim Godwin but the while seems grievously to lowre.
That is Godwin-sand^, which is reported to have been the Patrinomy Hect.
Boeth. Hist. Scotic. 12. and 10. Twin Albionic. 1.
of that Godwin Earl of Kent, under Edward the Confessor, swallowed into the
Ocean by strange Tempest somewhat after the Conquest, and is now as a floating
Isle or Quicksand, very dangerous to Sailers, sometime as fixed, sometime
moving, as the Muse describes.

FINIS.

