A CONFERENCE HELD AT PARIS between Father Gontier a Jesuit, and DOCTOR Du
Moulin: SECONDED BY THE LADY OF SALIGNAC. Together with Doctor Du Moulin his
answer to GONTIER his letter to the KING concerning the subject of this
CONFERENCE. By Peter Du Moulin Doctor of Divinity, and Minister of the Word of
GOD in the Church of PARIS.

Translated according to the French Copy printed in PARIS.

LONDON Printed for JOHN BARNES and are to be sold at the sign of the
Pyde-Bull near Saint Austines gate. 1615.

TO THE VERY GODLY AND RIGHT NOBLE Lady, my Lady ELIZABETH WINVVOOD: Wife to
the Right honorable Sir RALPH WINVVOOD Knight, one of his Majesty's Privy
Counsel, and Principal Secretary to the State.
MAdam, it may be thought a double recompense in you, amongst many works and
many writers, if you would only spare employments to peruse and give (in
charity) a mild opinion of this. But I (intending to your self a recompense,
for late and early loves vouchsafed by your honorable Husband) dare honestly
prefixe your name to this, and think it worth your patronage. When as indeed
omnipotence it self cannot be well entitled to any thing but truth: then
certainly it should be triumph, to defend a truth conuincing. And such a truth
is now commended to your favor: which if it may acquit my zeal unto your
Knight and You, of thanks though not of satisfaction. For having thought your
self most worthy to defend this truth, opposed by one of your own sex, and
almost of the same rank, I shall according to my wish esteem it suitable to
your person, whom with your honorable Husband, I do now leave to Heavens
disposal; which may enable me to discharge a further duty.

Your Ladyships most deeply bound, JOHN BARNES.

A TRVE NARRATION of the conference between Du Moulin and Gontier, seconded by
my Lady BARONESS of Salignac.
PETER Du Moulin happening about three of the clock in the afternoon to meet
with Monsieur de Liembrune before his gate in Marsh street, was requested by
him to step up along with him unto his chamber, where he was no sooner come,
but he saw the room full of Ladies; among which, one of them, at the first on
set, entreated him to explain the 31. article, in the confession of the faith
of the reformed Churches. Du Moulin answered, that if it pleased her to take
the pains to come home to his house, he would do the best he could to satisfy
her. Presently upon that another Lady replied and said, that we ought at all
times be ready to give an account of our faith: that Du Moulin ought not deny
to instruct them herein which did demand it of him: whereunto Du Moulin
answered, that he knew well enough, they did not ask this for any desire they
had to be instructed; and to dispute about religion with women, which tattle
altogether; and after they are gone publish what they please, were to wrong the
truth of religion. One among them replied, that she could not satisfy her
self as concerning this Article, and that it was often objected to her, how
that our Ministers were not able to give an account of their Mission and
Vocation. Du Moulin answered, that he wondered much how she forgot to ask a
reason of them for the justifying of theirs: and that had she so done, she
should have found them less able to satisfy her: that every one which
presumes to ask a reason of another for the maintaining of his vocation, ought
to be sure that he is able to justify his own, and be ready at any time to
yield a reason. He had no sooner spoken these words, but in comes Gontier,
with two others, which brought many books along with them; Gontier at his
first entrance asked what was the matter? what it was that was said there? Why
my Lady here (said Du Moulin) requires a reason of me to justify my Mission:
and I told her, that she should have demanded the like of you, for the
justifying of yours.

Gontier. This is only a shift to rid your neck out of the collar.


Du Moulin. It is no shift at all: for whosoever is so bold, as to demand a
reason of another for his vocation, binds himself thereby to give an account
of his own. But if you will confess that you are not able to defend yours, I
will presently here take upon me to defend mine.


Gont. Pray sir, be not choleric; you do not hear me acknowledge any such
matter.


Du Moul. I speak nothing, but what is apparently true; and do here undertake
to prove that you have no vocation.


Gont. Who has given you authority to speak so saucily to your superiors.


Du Moul. As for your dignity I deny that you have any such superiority over
me. But to the point, I here maintain that you have no commission; for you
call your selves Priests, and have received this order of priesthood in this
manner: which is, that the Bishop, having anointed your fingers, and imposed
his hands, says unto you; Receive power to offer up sacrifice to God, and to
celebrate the Mass, as well for the living as the dead: By this means he has
made you Sacrificers to sacrifice Jesus Christ. I demand of you therefore in
what place of Scripture Bishops are authorized to establish such sacrificing
Priests in the Church.


Gont. That is easily proved, out of the second and fifth Chapters of the
first Epistle to Timothy; bring me a new Testament hither: hereupon a
Testament was brought him, wherein he read these two Chapters, which was not a
little tedious to the standers by; and finding nothing there that he desired,
said to one of his company (which was his assistant) go and fetch me my He did
the like at Amiens against Monsieur Hucher being troubled to answer, he sent to
fetch his concordance.
Concordaunce, which being brought, he stood turning the leaves along time
without saying a word: Du Moulin being weary of staying for his answer, said
unto him, if this disgrace had lighted upon me to have been put to silence,
and to send for my Concordaunce, I should be ashamed ever to show my face more
in any honest company: whereupon Monsieur de Liembrune told Gontier, Sir I am
ashamed to see, that which I do: for you have often told me that the Ministers
durst not speak a word before you, and now I see you driven to such straites,
that you have not a word to say: After half an hours silence, I sought (said
Gontier) a place of Scripture, wherein there is mention made of imposition of
hands: I will ease you, said Du Moulin, of the pains and presently turned to
the place, which is in the 4. Chapter of the first Epistle to Timothy. Gontier
red the words which were these, Despise not the gift that is in thee, which was
given thee by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the company of the
elders: Note withal that these elders were Priests, and that Greek word
imports as much.

Du Moul. This does not prove at all that Bishops have authority from God to
establish sacrificers in the Church.


Gontier in steed of answering, took a Bible, and turning himself toward
Monsieur de Liembrune, said that he would show, that under the old law, the
Church was never without Sacrificers.

Du Moul. That is nothing to the purpose, we speak of the authority which
Bishops have to make Sacrificers under the new Testament.


Gont. Whereupon Gontier being at a stand, asked for pen and ink, which being
brought, he falls a writing without speaking a word, and then blotted out that
which he had written, which made the company wonder at him.

Du Moul s.aid unto him, you gain time, and under the color of writing take
leisure to think upon some thing to save your self.

Gont. Laying aside his writing entreated Du Moulin to set down his
proposition in writing.

Du Moul. Then at his entreatie writ these words. Let any man show me out of
the word of God, that the Bishops of the Romish Church have authority to
establish Sacrificers in the Church.

Gont. I will prove unto you that the Apostles were Sacrificers.


Du Moul. This is not the thing in question, neither does it prove that which I
demand.


Gont. It is sufficient if I prove that the Apostles were Priests and did offer
up sacrifices.


Du Moul. Since you are at a stay, and that I cannot draw any proof from you
of the power that Bishops have, to establish sacrificing Priests in the Church,
let us see how you prove that the Apostles were sacrificers. Hereupon Gontier
took his pen and wrote that which follows.


Gont. This word, to Sacrifice, in his primary signification imports as much as
to do an holy thing; but the Apostles were ordained to do an holy thing,
therefore the Apostles were ordained to sacrifice.


Du Moul. We have nothing to do here with Etymologies, but with the sense of
this word, to sacrifice, as it is taken in the Church of Rome, to wit, to offer
up really unto God the body of Jesus Christ in a propitiatory sacrifice for
the living and the dead. To pray unto God is to do an holy thing, yet
nevertheless every one that prays is not therefore a sacrificer in this
sense: whereupon it follows that the conclusion is nothing to the purpose,
since the word, to sacrifice, is taken therein in another sense then we take it.


Gont. I have proved that which I was to prove.


Du Moul. I deny it, this is nothing to the purpose, you tie your selves to
the word, so to avoid the thing.


Gont. I have done enough, and you have granted what I demanded.


Du Moul. I do not agree with you in that, and do call the company to
witness, if there be any one here which has hitherto heard Master Doctor
speak one word to prove that Bishops have authority from God to establish
Sacrificers in the Church: or that the Apostles were Sacrificers, to sacrifice
Jesus Christ.


Gont. Whereat all holding their tongues, Gontier answered and said that Jesus
Christ had said unto his Apostles: Do this, and thereby commanded them to
sacrifice.

Du Moul. I deny that, to do this, signifies to sacrifice.


Gont. This word, Do, is referred to his body.


Du Moul. Suppose it were so; yet to do his body is not to sacrifice it.


Gont. In the 26. of Saint Matthew it is said that the blood of Christ is shed
for the remission of sins, now where the blood of Christ is shed there is a
sacrifice; and all that is available to the remission of sins is a sacrifice.


Du Moul. That I deny: if it were so, Baptism should be a sacrifice seeing
that that also is auailable for the remission of sins: nor is it true, that
wheresoever any blood is shed for the remission of sin, there should of
necessity be a sacrifice, except this blood be offered to God, for without
this it is no sacrifice: Also it is requisite that this shedding of blood be
made by death, but in the Eucharist you cannot show me, either that this blood
is offered unto God, or that this shedding of blood is made by death.


Gont. In the 26. of Matthew it is expressly said that the blood of Christ is:
and withal he went to write this argument the blood shed which is joined with
death, is a sacrifice, but the blood shed in the sacrament is joined with
death, therefore it is a sacrifice.


Du Moul. You take that for granted which you are to prove, to wit, that the
blood which you say to have been shed in the Sacrament has been offered unto
God; Secondly I answer, that you do fallaciously add this same word, Join,
to that which I have said: that in the 26. of Matthew it is truly said of the
shedding of blood which by nature is joined with death, But I say that when the
very blood of Christ is really shed in the Sacrament, yet it is nevertheless
not shed by death.


Gont. By this answer you seem to allow of my Mayor.


Du Moul. You speak nothing, neither have you produced any thing yet, to prove
that Jesus Christ has offered his blood to God in the Eucharist.


Gont. I have proved it sufficiently, I need not prove it again.


Du Moul. Prove this, or confess that you cannot.


Gont. Gontier hereupon took his pen and writ as follows: The blood shed for
the remission of sins is contained in the institution of the Eucharist: in
the 26. Chap. 28. verse of Saint Matthew.

Du Moul. This does not enforce at all, that Jesus Christ did offer his blood
unto God in the Eucharist.


Gont. Hereupon after some silence, and complainte of the Ladies, desiring us
to confer about some other matter, at last Gontier stood up upon his legs,
and framed an argument; which he would not write, but Du Moulin writ it as he
told it him: the argument was this, The blood of Jesus Christ which is shed for
the remission of sins, must of necessity be offered unto God, but in the
institution of the Eucharist contained in 26 Chapt. 28. verse of Saint Matthew
the blood is shed for the remission of sins, therefore it must needs be
offered unto God.

Du Moul. I deny that the mayor proposition is always true, for should the
very blood of Christ Jesus be shed in that same action of the Eucharist, it
would not follow, that it were offered unto God for a sacrifice: for it might
be offered or presented to the Communicants, and not unto God: It is sufficient
that he has been offered on the cross: As for the second proposition, I
acknowledge that the blood of Jesus Christ was shed, but upon the cross: Saint
Matthew says truly that the blood of the Lord is shed, but he means upon the
cross; as the Romish Bible witnesses; and the very Mass, which turn it in
the future, effundetz, that the blood of the Lord shall be shed, I ask of Mr.
Doctor whether he will renounce his Bible, and his Mass.


Gont. Gontier taking pen and ink to answer blotted out part of that which Du
Moulin had writ; Du Moulin complained thereof, and showed it to the company,
Gontier exeused himself, and said he did it unwittingly, afterward he began to
write these words this offering cannot be made unto the people. Afterward he
paused upon it, and blotted out that which he had written; then passing that
over, he posts to the second article of Du Moulins answer; who required him to
answer to the first article: Gontier answered that he would not answer to it
at all: and that in his answering he would have to do with those parts which
he thought most feeblest: Du Moulin pressed him again, saying that his
conclusion was weak, whilst that one of his propositions remained still
denied: Gontier refused again: Some that sat there coming unto him, whilst
he did thus delay, urged him unto it, yet he persisted in his refusal; but
upon the second article he said, that Du Monlin denied his own Bible; which
says, is shed, and not shall be shed.

Du Moul. Answered that our translation was turned faithfully according to the
Greek, and that this did prove nothing, but that the exposition of the Romish
Church which the bibles approved by the counsel of Trent and the Mass it
self does carry, is false.

Gont. Gontier then made one of Robert Stephens Greek Testaments be brought
unto him, and for to weaken the authority of the Greek text said that many
things there had been changed, and that at the end of the book there was a
table of more then five hundred several readings.

Du Moul. Answered that these diverse readings did not alter the sense at all;
that all this inueighing against the original of the new testament did not
help him a jot to prove that which as yet he could not prove: to wit, that
Jesus Christ offered up his blood to God in the Eucharist, and he called upon
Gontier to prove it, Gontier continuing in denying to prove it to him, and the
disputation being there at a stay, all the Ladies to gratify him entreated
them to talk of some other subject, and said that this matter was to deep for
their capacities.

A new matter proposed.
ONe of the Ladies therefore requested that these words might be expounded,
This is my body. Du Moulin. Answered and said: That no man doubted of the truth
of these words, and that we should believe the Scripture according to the
exposition that it carries of it self: that these words, This is my body, were
thus expounded by the Apostle Saint Paul 1. Cor. 10. chap. 16. verse. The bread
which we break is the communion of the body of Christ; An exposition which
the Church of Rome does reject, not believing at all that it is bread, nor that
we break bread; nor that this bread so broken is the communion of the body of
Christ, seeing that it is his very body: Hereunto add, that the Evangelists do
with a joint consent witness, that Jesus Christ broke bread and gave it: He
took bread broke it, and gave it: Therewith the Church of Rome, denies, not
believing that he gave bread: Nay which is more, it denies these words; This
is my body: For seeing the word, This, signifies that which he gave, and seeing
that he gave bread, the sense of these words, This is my body, is, This bread
is my body, the which the Church of Rome denies.

Gontier on the contrary opposed against this, that Saint Paul had said in the
Eucharist, that the body of our Lord is broken for us: that the bread whereof
he speaks, saying The bread which we break is his flesh, as it is said in
the sixth of Saint John, The bread which I will give is my flesh.

Du Moul. Replied and said that herein Gontier contradicted the Church of Rome,
which does not believe at all, that the Lords body is broken in the Eucharist,
and asked of Gontier whether he would subscribe to this: That the Church of
Rome does believe that the body of the Lord is broken in the Eucharist: that
Gontier by this word, Bread, meaning the body of Christ makes the words of
Saint Paul ridiculous, making him to say, that, the body of Christ, which we
break, is the communion of the body of Christ. That in that place of Saint
John he speaks not at all of the Eucharist, but promises to yield himself
unto death, as he makes manifest by the words following: The bread which I will
give, is my flesh which I will give for the life of the world, now he did not
give himself for the life of the world, but in his death.

Gont. Hereunto Gontier answered nothing, but only this, that these words, I
will give, being twice repeated were taken in two several significations.
Afterward being required to subscribe, that the Church of Rome does believe
that the body of Christ is broken in the Sacrament; He took paper and writ:
Christ has broken his body in the Eucharist: Saint Paul: 1. Cor. 11. verse. 14.
which was not that which was demanded of him: Hereupon being required to speak
his mind freely, and tell in his conscience, whether he thought the Apostle
Saint Paul did speak truth, saying, that we break bread: He answered flatly
that he would answer no more then he had done already; which moved one of the
Gentlemen that sat by (Master Paupart by name) who came in at the latter end
of the conference, to say unto him, we have brought our ears but it seems
you want a mouth.

This done Gontier being pressed a new, to prove, that Jesus Christ has offered
his blood to God in the Eucharist, forsook the battle, and being ashamed of
himself, and clean out of heart retired into one of the corners of the
chamber, where being all alone he falls a writing what he thought best in a
paper apart, which when he had showed upon the table, a little after he toare
in pieces snatching it out of the hands of my Lady of Liembrune who was
willing to have kept it.

He therefore giving room my Lady Baroness of Salignac succeeded in his place.

The vpshot of the conference.
MY Ladies discourse tended to this end: I have (said she) withdrawn my self
from the religion wherein I was bred, after I came once to the through
discussing of the cause; I have spent four whole years in sounding of this; I
have looked upon all the Fathers Latin and Greek, I kept a man of purpose to
translate them; I have found that the Fathers of the four first ages are
conformable in all things to the faith of the Church of Rome, hereupon I was
confirmed in mine opinion, and my conversation has turned diverse others.

Du Moul. Said, Madame since you understand that which you do so well, give me
leave to ask you, if you do not call upon the Virgin Mary, and if the form
of your prayer, wherein you call upon her, be not Aue Maria etc. yes said she:
Then Du Moulin said unto her, you do not therefore understand what you do, for
by speaking thus you think you pray to the Virgin Mary, but indeed you pray
unto God for her, saying unto her, Mary the Lord protect thee, the Lord be
with thee etc. Also Madam, I think you have not forgot the causes, which moved
you to this change. For example can you show us any places of the Scripture,
wherein we are commanded to paint God, and to make carved images of the
trinity in stone: The Lady answered that she would not take upon her to prove
that in the presence of a Doctor: Du Moulin then showed her the 4. Chapter of
Deuteron. at the 15. verse. and following, where God forbids any image to be
made like unto him; She on the contrary alleged the images of the Cherubins;
But Du Moulin told her that she spoke of the images of God, and that a Cherubin
was no God.

As for the images of Creatures, he asked her, if since her change of religion,
she had seen any commandment of God for the worshipping of creatures images:
Gontier did relieve her a far of, crying out of his corner where he was
retired; Madame, instance in the brazen Serpent, being the image of Christ, who
was both God and man, tell him withal, that there was sacrifice and incense
offered before the Cherubins.

Du Moul. Answered that the brazen Serpent, was no image of Jesus Christ, but a
figure of his office, and saving virtue; that suppose it were his image, yet it
was not an image of his divinity: that he could never find that the Israelites
did worship it, but that they were taxed for idolatry: and lastly that there
was never any sacrifice or incense offered up before the Cherubins, there being
always a veil interposed. She hereupon had recourse again to the Fathers;
affirming that she had read them all. Du Moulin told her that it was
impossible, first in respect of the multitude of books, and then because of
the difficulty thereof to her, which understood neither Greek nor Latin. That
twenty years were too little for him to do it: and that she must needs ask
twice as long: He entreated her to name some Father among others, which she
had read: she named Chrysostom for an example. Du Moulin said, pray Madam
show me but one place in him which you do best understand: then she strained
courtesy, saying that being as she was a mother of a family, she could not be
wholly at leisure: Afterward she brought forth a whole bedroll of the
Fathers, wherein she took the Greek for the Latin, saying that Tertullian
was the disciple of the Apostles; that Cyprian was his disciple in the 150.
year of our Lord, for which she was taken up by Gontier which heard it a
far off. Who raising himself up, gently took his leave of the company: Du
Moulin told him as he was going forth, that if we were castawayes and damned
creatures, as they reported, they should then by the laws of Ch^istian charity
have compassion upon us: and I am amazed that you which here show your self
to be of so yielding a nature, should yet nevertheless preach blood and
sedition (as all those tell me which go to hear you) Gontier answered, you
are misinformed: I have given an accoun^ to the King for that which I did, I
would hazard my life for your good; After some complement the company departed.
Two days after, my Lord of Liembrune meeting with the same Ladies in Saint
Nicholas des Chamans, he enquired of them what the reason was that father
Gontier was so astonished, and did stay at a st^nd in his answering, who said
that (as he himself told them) he did this to cheer up my Lady of Liembrune
who wept for fear he should else have afflicted her a new.

PETER DV MOVLINS ANSWER TO THE Letters of M. Gontier written to the King,
concerning the Subject of this Conference.
SInce the religion of Rome is become a merchandise, they which teach it study
how to put tricks upon men, but they do them so slouenly, and perform them
with so little slight, that (as it seems) they are willing to do us a pleasure
in disgracing themselves; The letters of Monsieur Gontier upon this subject
show this which I say to be true; wherein he bragges of the conversion of my
Lady of Mazancourt, as the prize of his victory; though she in the year 1596.
in the month of June, in the Church of Sechelles publicly forswore our
religion on her marriage day, and protested that she would live in the Church
of Rome: and never since has she turned to us, or made any show of professing
our religion. See then what a new conquest here is, he has spoiled us of that
which we never had, he has killed a person already dead, he has made a
Lady forswear our religion, which had done it a douzen years before; and
gained so excellent a victory, to the end the people should say, This was done
by the dexterity of venerable Father Gontier: Not unlike him, who having bought
an hare, tied it with a chain unto his saddle bow, that so the people might
say, this is the hare which he has taken; which opinion makes the dish to
relish the better: These Doctors could never yet catch any, but such like
preyes as these: She surely is a Lady of honor, whose person and family I
reverence, yet she nevertheless, either to gratify her husband, or else
through simplicity, had willingly forsaken the truth before our conference: In
which she was so far from profiting any thing, that whilst it was a doing,
she often professed that she did not listen to that which was said, nay more
then this; since that has she written letters to my Lady of Liembrune her
sister, where she speaks thus; I was not in any manner in the world instructed,
because the points, which Du Moulin proposed to be discussed, were above the
reach of my understanding: A little after she says, that when the conference
was done, she went to consult with Father Gontier, who showed her all the
Fathers of the first 600. years to be on his side; where as (she reports)
she has found true salvation, that hereupon she has fixed her resolution.

But if Master Gontier behaved himself so manfully as he says, without
showing how; how comes it then to pass, that the Ladies there present were
feign to excuse him to Monsieur de Liembrune, for bearing himself so dastardly
in the fight, saying that he did this to comfort my Lady of Liembrune which
wept? why was I constrained to turn for him to a passage of Scripture which
he could not find? why did he stand so many times so long, together without
speaking a word? why (he being at a nonplus, and not able to justify the
authority of Bishops for the ordaining of sacrificing Priests) was I forced to
change my question, for to gratify him? why did he withdraw himself out of
my presence to hide himself in a corner? why did he blot out that which I had
written? why did he tear the papers which himself had written? whereof I can
yet for aneede produce some pieces: And note that he took me unawares then,
when I thought of nothing less then conferring with him; but he came prepared
and furnished with books having agreed on this conference before hand with the
Ladies; I am also given to understand by the report of men worthy of credit,
that a few days after the conference, Gontier dining with my Lord the Prince
of Conde, and my Lord the Duke of Espernon, that the Prince asked Gontier as
concerning this matter, telling him there went a speech abroad thereof which
tended little to his praise; and that the said Jesuit imputed his little
resistance to the great noise there was made: but especially to the earnest
entreatie of an advocate; yet there was no advocate nor any stir, but only
toward the latter end, the three first hours being past over with a great
silence, every one looking that Master Gontier should speak, whilst he did
nothing but turn the leaves of his Concordance, and made as though he did
write.

Now to justify this which I speak to be true, I call the assistants for
witnesses which sat there from the beginning to the end, and God knows that
in the discourse which I have published, I have dealt as faithfully as I cold
possible, having showed it ready written to those which were present at it; to
the end that if I had forgotten my self in any thing, they should correct what
was amiss; yea I have yet some part of Mr. Gontiers arguments written with his
own hand, of the which he does not so much as repeat one word in his letter;
wherein he reduces our conference to a douzen lines, not for breuities sake,
for he breaks out into other unprofitable discourses, but by an apparent
shift: for in our conference there were two points above others that we
chiefly handled: one, whether Bishops were authorized from God to establish
Sacrificers for to sacrifice Jesus Christ: the other, whether it could possibly
be proved that Jesus Christ did offer up his blood to God in the Eucharist:
because, that although his blood were really shed, yet it is not a sacrifice
if the blood be not offered unto God.

These two points being of such importance, how comes it to pass that Mr.
Gontier writing to the King, does not satisfy them, nor so much as mention a
word of them at all? did he think his Majesty unworthy to be thoroughly
informed in the truth of the matter? or why does he frustrate the people of
this their expectation. And if in the conference he had not a word to speak
hereupon, why does he not yet repair his credit herein by his writings upon
farther study? why is he so loath to speak any more of the passage in Saint
Cyprian, which is in the 9. Epist. of the first book alleged by my Lady
Baronnesse of Salignac, does he not perceive by this that he has spoken
nothing worth the considering, but that a lady has spoken that which deserves
to be weighed? Nay, he shows that he never read the place, seeing that he
produces it so disguised, and which is more, says in the margent of his book
that this is the 66. chapter; when Saint Cyprians Epistles are not
distinguished by chapters; doubtless my Lady of Salignac, who has ten times
more learning for a Lady, then he for a Doctor, could have taken him up for
this: Saint Cyprian indeed speaks in the place alleged, of alters and
sacrifices, but by sacrifices he understands the presents which the people
offered on the table, of which one part was laid aside for the celebration of
the Eucharist; wherefore in his Sermon of alms he takes up the rich men which
men which came to receive without offering any sacrifice: Do thou come
(says he) to the Lords Table without a sacrifice, do thou take part of the
sacrifice which the poor has offered? and in the same ninth Epistle, in the
honor of the brethren which offer up offerings, as if they did receive the
tithes of fruits, Let them not depart from the Altar, and sacrifices.

As concerning prayer for the dead, which began to be in use in the time of
Tertullian, and of which Saint Cypryan speaks in this Epistle, this is a
prayer which at this day the Church of Rome does allow of no more then we;
seeing that then they prayed for the Saints and Martyrs, and that it shall
never be found that any one prayed for the delivery of souls out of
purgatory, but only for the enfranchisement of souls kept in prison, and
sleeping in the bosom of peace, of which you have a feeling in your mass,
where the Priest prays in this manner for the dead: Lord think on thy
servants which sleep in the bosom of peace; Amongst the number of which the
ancient Church does reckon the Saints: who also as they thought in the next age
to St. Cyprian, should be purged by fire in the last day of judgment, not
exempting so much as the virgin Mary herself, as we have showed by a great
number of proofs in the last chapter of a book entitled, The waters of Silo.
Nevertheless Master Goutier least he should have nothing at all to say, does
accuse me for denying our own Bible; How so? because says he, that when he
did allege these words unto me, which is shed for us, I said this was to be
understood in the future: A ridiculous calumny: Rather on the contrary I say
that our Bible does turn the words more faithfully then that of the Church of
Rome, seeing that it is in the Greek (...), which is shed, and not shall be
shed, as the Bible of the Church of Rome and the mass have it: But it is one
thing to ask what is the best translation of the words of Jesus Christ,
another thing to ask what is the meaning of the words; for our translation
only is true: but the Romish Bible does expound the meaning and intention of
Jesus Christ, which is to promise that his blood shall be shed for us on the
cross, failing in the turning, but not in the drift of his words: as if when
Jesus Christ says, Ioh. 10. ver. 15. I lay down my life for my sheep, one
should translate it thus, I will lay down or leave my life: he indeed should
lay down the true meaning of his words, which although it were true, yet ought
it not to be inserted in the text: Let this suffice for an answer to Master
Gontiers letters, letters without sinews, without joints, puffed up with a
childishly affected kind of swelling, which we do therefore here prick to the
end we might bring it down. Had he no body to present them to, but his
Majesty. The Pagans in their sacrifices did never offer an Ape unto their
gods, but these men presume to offer apish to yes to so great a Prince, which
holds the place of God among us: who being wonderful in his patience since he
suffers himself to be thus served, is no less wonderful in the clearenesse
of his judgment. For he knows well that, if his royal virtues were not
above al envy, and out of the danger of forgetfulness, they must needs lose
some of their luster by being mixed with the impurenesse of their pamphlets, as
pearls that are wrapped in smoke: neither does he like of these seditious
preachers, which now preach in their Sermons before his Majesty, that we hate
dominion, and set al kind of government at naught: for his Majesty is not
ignorant that this is so far from being true, that on the contrary, this is
the principal cause for which we are hated, to wit, because we have not taken
on oath of allegiance to any other then to the King, because we hold that the
Pope cannot give or take away realms, nor dispense with subjects for the oath
of fealty; because we teach that he should not have here any other laws,
any other judges, any other prisons, then those of the King, because that we
show that his realm is spoiled of silver, which passes over into Italy for
the payment of first fruits dispensations, absolutions, matrimonial contracts
etc. And that cousenage and tyranny are established under the show of
religion. Finally, because we complain that the Pope makes Kings kiss his
feet, and tramples on their Crowns: would we but stick to the Pope in these
things, he would easily dispense with us for our belief in the Gospel: or
by a special privilege would permit us to believe thereon, in the things
which were not prejudicial to his profit. Is there any one that can accuse the
reformed Churches of rebellion or attempting ought against our Kings, or of
conspiring to blow them up with gunpowder, and yet to dare to preach this in
the presence of his Majesty: which reproach, the only consideration, and many
proofs that he has had of our fidelity do sufficiently confute: For that
the Jesuits go about to persuade him that we are rebellious, or ill-minded
toward him, is all one as if Caiphas should defend Jesus Christ against his
Apostles, or as if Catiline should accuse Cicero of sedition.

At the end of Master Gontiers Epistle there is a discourse annexed, subscribed
with the name of Corbozon Mount-gommeri, which was not present at the
conference, but says that he heard of it at the Vicaridge of Saint Nicholas:
This so honorable a name of Mount-gommeri does unhappily come to be written
under so base a pamphlet, and I cannot believe, that so false and ridiculous
piece of stuff, should come from under the hands of a Gentleman of that honor
as he is; without doubt some paltry Jesuit composed this writing at his
pleasure, which comes no more near the truth of that which past between us,
then Ovid his Metamorphosis does to that of the Gospel. And indeed, the
recital that Master Gontier has made of our conference in his letter to the
King, has nothing like unto this; but Monsieur de Corbozon is willing to honor
it, in covering it under his name, as with a cloak, which will scarce ever be
brought him back again clean: It would be time lost to go about to confute
this writing; for if I should convince the Author of absurdity, Master Gontier
would renounce him as one that had written upon false information, and so I
should have done as good as nothing. As for the defiance and threatenings of
Master Gontier, we never yet refused upon any occasion that was offered, to
enter the lists upon just and equal terms; But this people loves to set on
men in corners, that they may a little after publish the contrary the more
freely; especially when they have one in hand to deal withal which is
already converted; and which has promised to yield himself before the
combat, only they make it defer it a little, till the time they have plotted
a conference.

Now for to justify this which I say to be true, Master Gontier a few days
after all this ado, ill befitting the gravity of a Doctor, will not yet let
me scapeso, saying that he will enter in conference with me concerning the
antiquity of our Church; and I meaning to enter the lists with him, have at
this time sent him a writing, of which this is the substance.

I maintain that M. Gontier can not show me in the four first ages after
Christ, any Church, or any man which held the same religion as the Church of
Rome does at this day: and for this purpose.
1 He should show me any ancient Church that celebrated the Communion without
Communicants, as they do ordinarily in the Church of Rome. 2 That he should
show me that any ancient Church did bar the people of the Communion of the
cup. 3 Or that in any ancient Church, the common service was read in a tongue
which the people understood not. 4 Or that any ancient Church did forbid the
people to read the holy Scriptures, as it is by no means permitted without a
special privilege in the countries, where the Pope is absolute Commander. 5
Or that in any ancient Church there were ever made any images of God, and
representation of the Trinity in stone, or in painting. 6 Or that in any
ancient Church the people were taught to pray without understanding that which
they said. 7 Or that any ancient Church did do service to the images of
Creatures, in kissing them, in clothing them, by bowing themselves down before
them, and offering up sacrifices unto them. 8 Or that any ancient Church ever
believed that the Virgin Mary is crowned Queen of heaven, and Empress of the
world, as it is painted throughout all their Churches. 9 Or that any ancient
Church did assign diverse offices to Saints; to one over this Country, to
another over that, to one over this sickness, to another over that, to one
over this trade etc. 10 Or that any ancient Church did ever believe that the
Pope could give and take away realms, and free subjects from their oath of
allegiance, canonize Saints, dispense with vows and promises made unto God. 11
Or that in the ancient Church, the Pope by his pardons did distribute the
superabundant satisfactions of the Saints, for the remission of the punishment
of the sins of others. 12 Or that the Pope did then lay his pardons on one
Church and not on another, on one village and not on another, and this
sometimes for one hundred and two hundred years of true pardon. 13 Or that the
ancient Church did believe a Lymbus of little infants. 14 Or that the ancient
Church did ever adore the host, which the Priest holds, with divine worship,
and that this is the cause, why the Priest does use to hold up the host in the
Mass. 15 Or that the books of the Machabees were held for Canonical in the
ancient Church. 16 Or that the ancient Church did believe that the Bishop of
Rome could not err in the faith. 17 Or that the ancient Church did believe
that Jesus Christ by his death and suffering did indeed discharge us from the
punishment of sin before baptism, but as for the punishment of sin
committed after baptism, he has changed it from eternal, unto temporal, and
that it lies us upon to satisfy the justice of God for this.
That Master Gontier should tell us, if in these points he will admit of the
Fathers for judges, we will ask but half a douzen clear passages upon every
point.

FINIS.

