Imprimatur. Tho Weeks. Episcop Londinensi Cappellanus domesticus.

A WITTY ENCOUNTER Between Monsieur du Moulin, and Monsieur De BALZAC.

Esteemed two the most Elegant Pens of their nation.

Wherein they deliver things weighty, and important both in Religion and STATE.

Faithfully translated out of the french copy by A. S. Gent.

Imprinted at London for B. Fisher and are to be sold at his shop in
Aldersgate-streete. 1636.

TO THE HONORABLE, MY MVCH Honored Friend Sir WILLIAM HOWARD, Son to the
Illustrious THOMAS EARL Of Suffolk.
Sir,
I dare adventure to commend to you, and the Age, these ensuing Letters,
written by two esteemed great in the Learned Republique. Truth commands me to
answer for them, that there is no proportion between their bulk, and value,
being defective in nothing but length. For the Authors themselves Monsieur du
Moulin, and Monsieur de Balzac, their Pens are justly ranked amongst the most
excellent of their Nation. The Logic, and many worthy Divine works of the
former have gained him a great name even amongst his adversaries: the latter
(though of the like abillity) has made himself Master of a more glorious
Fame; but in my judgment, Imp'd out with many a false Feather; neither his
great Cardinal, nor Monsieur du Moulin shall with their most cunning
Rhetoric lull me into such a gross error as to believe him Master of that*
Eloquence which Antiquity desired, yet despaired of. O! that any man who has
had the least cast of Cicero's, and Livy's flowing, or Seneca's distilling
Eloquence should give so sinister a judgment! Great praise is due to the man,
and it is by all deservedly paid him, but what is in him most elegant you can
term, at the best but the Scraps of Cicero's abundant Eloquence, whose Zany if
we call him we do him a grace, if we introduce him a Corrivall, we do
Cicero an affront.

I confess the times are infinitely bound to him, and his like, for keeping
civil Language from degenerating into Barbarism, and most men from hackings,
hewing, and enterfaring in their discourse, but I will never allow them as
Emendators of the Ancients, it is enough if as happy Imitators I admit them.

O Marcus! Marcus! did thy Ghost now walk amongst us, thy bloodlesse face
would essay to blush after death, to hear thy all-convincing, charming Tongue,
(which has made Guilt tremble, and shook Tyrany it self) compared with the
faint, Hectic Eloquence of Balzac, which now even in its Birth is near utter
extinction, whereas thy Rhetorical Flowers shall budde, and flourish till fire
consumes the World, and all Terrestrial Oratory gives way to the Celestial.
Nor would thy shame be less, Anaeus Seneca, to have (after all the glories thy
Penn has purchased) such a competitor as Balzac, who holds the same place with
thee, and Cicero, that in the Triumvirat with Anthony and Octavius did Lepidus,
who in the Government of the World stood only for a Cipher.

But to justify my assertion I will take so much pains as to compare their
styles. That of Cicero is not composed for the Scene, only to delight, but for
the Sand also, and the Fight. it is like a Tree which produces not only the
Foliage, as an Ornament, but the Fruit too, as food.

Here you may detect Venus, and Minerva, kissing in every line. With the
reading of him the most prostrate, grovelling wit must needs be raised, the
most benumbed take fire. This is none of those lukewarm Spirits, which can
infuse no heat into others because they have none themselves; for as we cannot
light a Taper at another not already lighted: so we can not take flame from a
wit not already fired.

The mind of this Writer enflames his Style, his Style his Reader. Now for that
of Seneca; his words are choice, proper, and so Significant, that at the first
view a man would think they employed more, then indeed they do. It is
peculiar to his Genius alone to comprehend plenty, and solidity of sense in
parcimony of Speech, Perspicuity in Brevity. Then his matter is always grave,
and weighty, drawn out from the very Center of History, and Philosophy.

To come to the Style of Balzac. You may at first sight discover in it not a
becoming care, and a neat dress, but a vain affectation, and the Fucus it
self. And as his Language is affected, so his conceptions are for the most
part idle, and shallow, no way able to satisfy the expectation of a full, and
knowing man. They consist for the most part of Hyperbolicall Complements, and
malicious Invectives: witness with me the supreme Spirit, that I tax him
not as a detracting Enemy, but an impartial Examiner. Justice her self will
warrant me to pull that Palm out of his usurping hand, which Ignorance had
there placed. I confess I can not endure to see him borne by the vulgar breath
to so high a pitch, as to out-soare all Antiquity, who has not written so many
Pages as he has modern equals, nay Superiors in that persuasive Art. The
reason of this their so immoderate praise, is no other then that their infant
knowledge derides the Simplicity of their Ancestors, whose Science it should
have in admiration. My own indignation, and the Printers petition, (who
complains much of the Books brevity,) have caused me to spin out this Epistle
to an unvsuall length. My comfort is (if this way I deserve censure) I am
faulty with Seneca, and many brave Authors, who have delivered their minds in
Letters far more prolixe. I am now only a Petitioner to the Reader for a
license to add so many words only as will let you know, (Noblest Sir,) that I
truly honor You, and and that I create you (who understand well the
Original) Judge of the Translation, which has already been Honored with
many great Approbations. I am confident that you will make use of your mercy
rather then your Justice toward him, who into your hands has voluntarily put
the life of his Reputation in good Letters, to him far, far dearer then his
Natural, during which he vows to remain

Sir, Your most humble Servant, A. S.

THE LETTER OF Monsieur de Moulin, to Monsieur de Balzac.
SIR,
I Received your Book, which it pleased you out of your free grace to send
me, assuring you that you could not have bestowed it on any man that more
esteemed, or less merited the honor: for though I number my self amongst the
most unworthy to obtain even the lowest place in your memory; yet I rank my
self amongst the foremost in praising your virtue, by which you have ascended
to the summity of elegancy of Phrase, and drawing the Bridle after you, have
left at once Admiration, and despair to posterity. Of the description of
eloquence made by the Ancients (which was reputed no other then an Idaea) you
have formed a Body, and showed that there is a Plus ultra in that Art which
they never arrived at. The force and dexterity of your Wit, having passed the
limits of their imagination, you at once inform, and ravish the understanding,
and link together two things rarely sociable, Solidity and Ornament. This Age
cannot boast of a greater felicity then to have produced a man that has by
effect expressed how far Eloquence can extend: but I had rather discourse of this
subject with others then your self., who (without affecting praise) are
content only to merit it, which the more you shun, the closer it follows
you. He that would praise your Pen to the full, must borrow it, which to
exercise, I vow you have chosen a subject answerable to your ability: for as
the actions of the King could not be performed by any but himself, so they
could not worthily be discrib'd by any but you. Indeed you insult over our
Mo^sieur de Balzac in writing the late troubles in France, taxed the Protestant
party with disloyalty.
miseries, yet are not blameable, in that you write out of your own feeling
and apprehension, as also that without this Maister-stroake, the Picture of the
King could not be perfectly finished. Of whose power, though GOD has made use
in our humiliation, yet has not his Mty forgotten our ancient services, nor
that the dead King his father, of glorious memory, in the time of his
affliction, had no other Sanctuary then our Churches. You will not be offended,
Sir, if I tell you that in my conceit the Lord presents you with another
subject, suitable to so excellent a spirit as is yours, viz. the valor and
happy success of the King of Sweed. For (since the King whom you draw with so
rich colors can not any way be sulled or darkened by the praise of this other)
you shall follow, I believe, his inclination, in Limming the Picture of the
King, an Emulatour of his Virtue. In the mean time this Work of yours shall
not be to me only a proof of your sufficiency, but a testimony of your bounty,
which when I shall behold amongst my other books I shall begin to think my
self some body, since by such a present you testify the good opinion you have
of me, which shall oblige me to wish you all happiness, and to remained,

Mounsieur, Your thrice humble, and thric affectionate Servant, DV MOVLIN.

The Answer of Monsieur de Balzac, to Monsieur du Moulin.
Sir,
NO Modesty can resist praise proceeding from you, and I should much dissemble
should I deny that I took pleasure in being taken with the first lines of
your Letter. But I knew my self too well to remain long in that error. I am
now awakned out of this plesing dream and clearly see that when you speak so
much in honor of my industry, you lay aside the severity of your Judgment. You
have done me more favor then Justice, and to praise me, you have run the
hazard of offending Truth her self. Now that you your self are arrived at the
Gole, you encourage both with hands and voice those that are in the Carriere,
and to persuade them to follow you, make them believe they may go beyond you.
And this was (without Lying) an admirable device, which at first sight I
discovered not: But be it as it will, from what principle soever this Glorious
approbation of me is derived, sure I am, I value it at no lower a rate then a
man ambitious does a Crown, and without penetrating into your design. I glory
in my Fortune, which is not small, Sir, in that I am beloved of you, whom I ever
perfectly honored, and whom I have a long time beheld in the Huguenot party as
an excellent Pilot, who braves a whole Fleet in a single Brigandine. We have
the right, and authority, but you the Subtilty, and the Stratagems, and you
repose as great trust in your Wit, as we in our cause. It is certain that this
way you are able to give Sedition the Countenance of a just War, and to a
multitude of Mutiniers, the face of an Army well disciplined. By this you
endeere to many an opinion, which has lost the grace of its Verdure, and
though it incline to it is declination, yet must we acknowledge that it retains
both features, and color in your Writings, and that never man knew better the
Art of giving Weakness a shadow, or of supporting Ruin with a greater
strength. I speak always in this Phrase, when you are my Theme, and side not
with the Vulgar, who never keep entire the liberty of their Judgment, nor are
apprehensive of their own defects, or other men's Virtues. For my own part,
out of what Cloud so ever the Day breaks it is fair in my Eye and I assure my
self that even in Rome the more honest, and well bred People praised Haniball,
and that none but Rogues reviled him. It is no other then a kind of Sacrilege,
to ravish from any man the gifts of GOD, and should I not confess that you
have received, much, I should Judge my self jniurious to him, who has
conferred much on you, and in a different cause, should offend our common
Benefactor. True it is that sometimes I have not flattered your party, and that
I was a little incensed against the Authors of these last Troubles. But having
observed in your books, that our Judgments are conformable, and that the
subjection due to Sovereignty makes a part of the Religion you teach, and
profess, I thought I might well deliver your consent as I did, being in that
no other then your simple Interpreter. Whether the Tempest arise ftom the
North, or the South, it is to me alike odious, and I profess not to take a
pattern of my Duty either from England, or Spain. My Humor is not to combat
the Times, but to oppose some present occurrences. I have enough to do to
conceive the Idaea of Cato, and Brutus, and living under the command of
another, I find not amore commodious Virtue then obedience. Were I a Smisse, I
would content my self to be the Kings Godfather, and would by no means be his
Subject, nor change my liberty for the best Master of the World, but since GOD
has caused me to be borne in Chains, I will carry them cheerfully, and being
neither cumbersome nor heavy, I will not hurt my Teeth in essaying to bite them
asunder. There is a great appearance that Heaven approves a Government which it
has preserved during the succession of twelve Ages. Had an evil continued so
long, it would have become in a manner legittimate. If antiquity in men be
venerable, in States it ought to be Sacred. Those great Spirits I describe in
my work, which were of your party should have lived at the beginning of the
World, and have given Laws to a new people, and labored to establish a new
Government. But as the invention of good things is necessary, so the mutation
even of bad is dangerous. I have not a Cruel thought, but such as aim at the
Heads of your party, against whom I inveigh as Enemies, nor is it my intent to
insult over your miseries, with which inhumanity, though civilly, you reproach
me. Should I be guilty this way, who have published that the King should be
blessed by all the World, if (having once abated the pride of the Rebels) he
trampled not on the infortunity of the afflicted? The Persecutors of those that
submit themselves are with me in the same execration with the Violaters of
Tombs. I do not only pity, but in some sort reverence affliction. I know
that heretofore it was the Custom to consecrate the places stricken with
Lightning. The finger of GOD is to be reverenced in the persons of the
miserable, and great adversities should rather produce Religion, then receive
reproaches. But I should speak improperly should I give the Kings success
such an Epithet. In his Victory we all are winners. All the penalty imposed on
those of your party, is to be as happy as we our selves, and they are at this
day possessors, and enioyers of that security, whereof before the taking of
their Cities they were even fond, and jealous. Our King will not compel the
Consciences of his Subjects to put on the Yoke, neither desires he to have
them receive by force that which ought not to be admitted but by persuasion, nor
to make use of such remedies against the French as are only proper against the
Moors. If the King of Swede demean himself thus in his prosperity, and that
he do not sully so pure a gift with proscriptions, and punishments, I here
promise you to perform what you desire of me, and to employ all my Art, and
Tools in erecting him a Statue. You hit my inclination on the head in
entreating me to praise this Prince, in whose Scarf if all the Crowns
Imbroydered were turned into so many Kingdoms, they would not in my opinion,
be too much to recompense a Virtue so rare, or to busy a spirit so vast: As I
expect nothing, but what is great from his Ualour, so I hope for nothing but
what is just from his Equity; and though in Spain they have declared him to be
the true Antichrist, I am not devout enough to believe this News, nor
fearful enough to be daunted at it. I only answer the scrupulous who
question me thereupon, that the King has in the mean time a Second that does
him good service, and that one could not present the House of Austria any thing
to study on that better diverted it from the care it took of our affairs. I
will pass no further, Sir, it is better to rest at the door of holy places,
then enter without preparation, besides this discourse is become already very
long, for the beginning of our acquaintance. It may please you to pardon the
content I take to entertain you, which is the cause I have neither been
mindful of your affairs, nor my own custom, which is not to Preach to my
friends: but you gave me the Text that I handled, and I thought that in laying
my heart open to you, even to the very bottom, and not dissembling my thoughts
you would repose hence forward, confidence in my freedom, with which I protest
truly that I am

Monsieur, Your thrice humble, and thrice Obedient Servant, De Balzac.

THE REPLY OF Monsieur du Moulin, To Monsieur de Balzac.
SIR,
I Had long ere this answered your Letters, had they bin in my custodye, but
they ran up and down the City a long time, every Man being desirous of a
Coppie, and from the City they passed to the Villages, where the Plague had
scattered us. For although in all your writings the force, and vivacity of your
Wit shines forth being seasoned with grace, and sweetness, yet in these Letters
we find you have surpassed your self, so elaborate is the style, and the
conception strong, lofty and delightful. They are both conspicuous, and the
Solidity takes not away the clearenes, in which you are most unlike many writers
of these times, who through many thorns give a small light, such as a glass
sends forth being placed in a Bryer. Wherefore in rejecting the praises which I
ascribed to your Pen, you show by effect that you merit them: For you refuse
the title of Eloquent with so much Eloquence, that it seems you have
endeavored to prove that your modesty is unjust, and to accuse me as defective
in your praise. If you desire belief, you must change your Style, and that you
may be persuasive become Barbarous. It would be much to my disadvantage to
insist upon every part of your Letter. I dare not enter with you into these
lists, for I never made profession of Elegant speech, it suffices me to be
understood, the Scope of my writing, not being to tickle the Ear, but to
pierce the Conscience. It is a privilege they have who maintain the true
Doctrine, that their Incongruities pass for Elegancies, making Barbarism, and
Truth sociable: for as the Red, and Blew Flowers growing amid'st the Corn are
pleasing to the sight, but detrimentall to the Harvest: So the insertion of
Rethoricall ornaments into good, and sound Doctrines diminishes the fruit of
instruction, and makes us instead of relishing the matter to dwell upon the
words, and poize the Periods. These flowers must fall before the Fruit
Flourish. A down right phrase often times makes a far greater impression. I
may add that it is be hoofefull in such cases sometimes to apply strong
reprehensions. Here to use flowers of Retoricke is as if a man should whip his
Children with a Nose-gay. It is for false Religions to borrow these evasions.
As in their Churches and Ceremonies they desire splendour, so they require a
lofty and artificial Language. They are in this like to a Woman all glistering
with Diamonds, but wanting her eyes. I speak this Sir, in way of answer to the
offensive praises which you too liberally bestow upon me. You applaud in me the
rare quality of lying, and of defending a bad cause with dexterity, and
Stratagems, having neither right, nor authority. You affirm also that I uphold
an opinion which has lost its Verdure, being in the declination, and to praise
me to the height you say, I am able to give Sedition the face of a just War,
which dexterity in sedusing you rank amongst the gifts of God, and have in it
great esteem. Thus in tickling you prick me, and raise me to a high and
Eminent Seat, having first begrim'd and disfigured me. Pardon me Sir, if I
tell you that there is no blame which is not more tolerable then these
praises. To employ Art and industry, to defend Error serves to no other
purpose, then to go to Hell with a better grace, to sweeten poison, and to
damn himself, and others with greater dexterity. It were a thousand times
better for such a man to be dumb then so unfortunatly Eloquent, and to be the
most sottish amongst men, then to be Master of such an ingenious perversity. He
should make a wrong estimate who should number a fradulent Eloquence, amongst
the gifts of God, whereas, indeed, it is the Devil himself, who sharpens the
tongue and Pen of such a Man, and lends him Arms to War against God
himself. In a word, you give me such praises as Homer bestowed on Paris when
he commended the fairness of his hair, but withal makes him the ruin of his
country. If Riches, Benefices, and Pensions were on our side to be obtained,
then you had some color to think that a Spirit ambitious of Eminency might be
intifed by these baits to defend a bad cause. But ( Poverty, and ignominy
being the inseparable companions of our profession) to abandon Virtue, without
receiving a reward, were to loose Piety, and common sense together. Whereas you
say our Religion has lost the lovely title of new: I answer, that it is
impossible it should loose that it never had: But if it were, or had bin new,
this can not be ascribed to it as a grace, but as a mark, or Scarre, left it
by Novelty, which may impart a grace to habits, or sauces, but not to the
Doctrine of Salvation. Italy is deservedly upbraided with it, where the New
Saints rob the Old of Glory, and the Romish Church, in which the Pope vaunts, he
has power to alter that which God has commanded in his word, and to make new
Articles of Faith who not being able to say with St Peter, Silver, and Gold
have I none, makes use of his Fisher-boate to trafique, and causes his Keys
to Iingle, whose Locks he has changed. From this head the defluction is
fallen upon the Body of the Clergy. He has brought again the Bank into the
Temple, and leaving out the Dominicall letter, gives him self over to the
Golden number. From hence it proceeds that all things with him are vendible,
even God himself, and the remission of Sins, and that private Masses are only
said for the Souls of those who have been beneficial to the Church. A rich
man can not dye at a cheap rate, ingenious Avarice having found out a way to
extract from the very Sepulchers. There scarcely can be a greater change then
of a spiritual Monarchy, to make a Temporal. But our Religion is the pure,
and ancient Christianity, being only new in this, that it rejects all Novelty,
and esteems all Doctrine as new, which was not from the beginning. Celestial
Truth being brought into the world by the Son of GOD himself, the violence,
and commotion of the people have no more strength to withstand it, then have
the Winds to divert the rays of the Sun. Wherefore I make an Augury clean
contrary to yours, and in steed of the declination you speak of assure my
self that it will flourish, and with its luster penetrate, and disperse the
darkness of the Age. And I wonder how you can flatter your self, with so
vain a hope in a time wherein our Religion receives so ample an increase in
the Nether-lands, and in Germany, even in the Greek Churches, conforming
themselves to our confession, drawn thereto by the clear Evidence of Truth.
It is without doubt one part of the praise you reserve for the King of Sweed,
that he did contribute to so good a work, whose Clemency (besides his Valor
and success) you will extol in that in all places by him conquered, he used
no violence against the Roman Clergy, but spared the Jesuits themselves,
although they teach the Murder of Princes, and that their Schools have
Produced so many King-killers. These have not long ago called this King
Antichrist, now in their Colleges compose panegyricks in his praise. If our
Churches in France suffer any diminution, that is not caused by virtue of the
contrary party, but by the avarice of some of our Nobility, which impaires
their Dignity, in making them listen to this, Tibi Dato, propounded by that
grim Docter to the Son of God. Against the force of Iron and Steel many have
sufficiently armed themselves, but not against that of Silver, and in this
Golden Age a bag of Pistolets is of great weight, and put in balance against
Conscience it self often outweighs it. But the Church is no more weakened by
this, then is a Body by Vomiting a worm, or voiding putrefaction. Pride,
Vanity, and Avarice, are more conveniently lodged in the Temple of an Jdol,
then in the House of God. True it is that they of your party, do speak of our
Religion with great disdain, as of a Cause deplored, which notwithstanding
has often raised it self from the very ground. They speak of us, as if we
enterprised to undermine the Alps with a Pin, or to run a Lion through with a
straw. They defile, and deforme us with Injuries, and deal with us, as Whilome
did the Enemies of the Gospel, who clad the Martirs in skins of wild Beasts,
to animate the Dog to tear, and devour them. Thus they disfigure us, and
set us out like Monsters, to incense the People against us. But the Son of
GOD has prepared us to endure this disgrace, he himself having passed through
the like trialls. And we ought not to lessen, much less loose our Courage,
since it is Gods cause, who can turn hindrances into helps, and through
impossibilities cut out, and plain himself a way. I promise my self so much
from your goodness and Prudency, that you will bear with me if I be very
sensible in this Point, for you are too clear sighted not to discern the
weakness of your cause, having a long time lived in Rome, where examples of
Vices mingle themselves with Decisions of faith, where the Jews (Enemies to
the name of Christ) live in peace, but the Christians, and the Faithful are
condemned to the Fire; where in Lent the Shambles are shut, and the Stews
open, where the Penitents whip themselves in public for the sins of others;
where there is an Ordinary Traffic of Annats, Benefices, Dispensations, and
Absolutions, and I remember to have read in one of your Letters, that it is
good fishing there, and that you distinguish between the Roman Religion and the
Papal Court, least the corruption of the one should prove a prejudice to the
othet. Yet does this Court Govern, and give rules to that Religion. An
excellent Wit as yours, will not be fettered with such Childish opinions. You
have no doubt a more nice, and delicate Religion then the Vulgar, and of that
which your Church ordaines take but so much as is agreeable to your humor.
Without question you laugh at the Hipocondriacall devotion of them who adore
Bones, and kiss, and cloth, Images, and turning the Consecrated Grains repeat
prayers by Art, in words which they understand not. Assuredly you judge it not
fit, that Service should be said in an unknown Tongue, as if God were become
to men a Barbarian, or the Pope had forbidden God himself to speak French. At
Rome you might have seen Altars to which the Pope has fastened Pardons of a
hundred and two hundred Thousand years, with as many Quarantaines, and the
faculty of delivering a Soul out of Purgatory. You have seen the
Superstitious madness of the People, who come two or three hundred Leagues to
a Iubily, to have remission of their Sins, which God presents to us at home by
the Doctrine of the Gospel. You are not ignorant from what ground the Pope
derives this Liberality, which is that he treasures up the superabundancy of
Fasts, of Buildings, of Pilgrimages, of Saints, and of Munkes, and turns them
into satisfaction for the Sins of others. When at Rome you cooled your Chamber
with an artificial Gale, able to give a Ship way, and ascended your Coach
only to cross the street, you thought little of these Superstitions. If you
will be so curious as to peruse the Missall, and read there the cautions, and
Rubriques, which provide for inconveniences, in case the Wind should carry God
away, or the Rats eat Jesus Christ, or the Priest disgorge him, certainly you
will then excuse us, and say, It is no wonder that these poor people can
hardly digest these things, being noe way correspondent to the dignity of the
son of God. Upon two Points we chiefly insist, the one is the succession of
the Pope in the Apostolate, and Primacy of Saint Peter: and the other is the
office which the Priests assume to themselves, of being Sacrificers of the Body
of Christ, yet could we never obtain a proof of the institution of these two
tenants by the word of God. But of these matters too much is already said, from
which superfluity I had abstained, had not you provoked me to it, To the
remainder of your Letter I subscribe. Obedience to our Sovereigns is a thing
just, and necessary. To find out occasion of Rebellion either in a man's own
Religion or in that of his King is to make insurrections to defend Religion by
courses condemned by the same Religion. Such as these being perplexed in their
own particular affairs, hope to find ease in troubled waters, and to save
themselves amidst a Confusion. Never yet did the cause of God advance it self
that way. Moses had power to inflict greiuious punishments on Egypt, and her
King, notwithstanding he would never deliver the children of Israel out of
Egypt without the permission of the King. I am of opinion that in Civil
affairs it is more expedient for the people to have a bad Master, then none at
all. How much then are we bound ( having a good and merciful Prince) to tender
him faith and obedience? who in pardoning us has not done like those, whose
Clemency is attended by disdain, esteeming their offenders not worthy their
anger. But he has in this followed his own natural inclination, which leads
him not only to Pardon, but to benefit, so that to be Conquered by him is an
advantage. For the rest, I never believed that there can be a worse State then
an Anarchy, where every one is a Slave, because every one is a Master, and
where excess of Liberty is cause of servitude: For this Liberty brings with it
Licentiousness, and Licentiousness Confusion, and Confusion servitude. As the
hand were an improper member, if all the Fingers were of a just length: so a
multitude of equal persons can not move without discommodity. Your Maxim that
the change even of the worst Laws is dangerous, holds good in all save in
matters of Religion. To subject our selves by docility to Laws which lead
directly to Hell were to break the Laws Divine; neither can they who make
such Laws secure before GOD those that obey them. But where only the loss of
Goods, and Life is in question, there it is better to put on an unjust Yoke,
then to be freed by the disturbance of the Public Peace, and rebellion
against our Sovereign: for the force of humane Laws does not consist in this,
that they are just, but in this, that they are Laws, and ordained by him, who
has authority. And though some things in them are unjust, yet it is just to
obey them. There are many States which have enjoyed a long time Peace, and
prosperity under unjust Laws duly observed, and other some there are, who
living under good Laws ill observed, have fallen into Ruin and confusion.
This Peace, and Prosperity is ever to be found more firm and durable in a
Monarchy, then in any other form of State, for this is the only civil
government which imitates the universal government of the world, where there is
but one Master, and all other states when they are come to a full growth, must
of necessity be reduced to this. And amongst the Monarchies which at this day
have a subsistence, that of France excells both for antiquity and good laws.
That this State is well composed, the unstable humor of our Nation addicted to
Innovation is an evident proof which (had not the frame been firm and the
edifice well cimented) had ere this utterly subverted the Kingdom. Being borne
under this Monarchy, we desire the prosperity of it, and wish that the Crown
of our Kings, may be like that of an Egg, which always as in Age, so in
growth increases. Were our Religion generally received in France, the royal
Majesty would be the more exalted, and his power more then by half augmented:
for then the Pope would pretend no longer to have power over the Life, and
Crown of our Kings, nor would boast any more that their deposition depends on
his Beck. There would then be in France no other Justice then the Kings,
Contentions arising on this side the Alps would no more be decided at Rome*
their Clergy should be subject to the Civil Laws and should be iusticeable
before the Royal Judges. The Silver of the Kingdom should no longer be
exhausted, and be sent to Rome in Exchange for Annates, Dispensations, and
Pardons. So much Land of the Nobles possessed by the Clergy now lying dead,
should owe the same service, and Tributes to the King, as do other Lands in
the possession of the Nobility. To be brief, I dare affirm, that the
principal cause why we are hated, is, that we defend by the word of GOD, the
right of our Kings against the Usurpation of Popes, who make them kiss their
Pantaple, and under color of Penance, inflict on them Corporal punishments.
But this is our unhappines, that as the Scripture is a book hidden from our
Kings, so in that which concerns the liberty, and independency of their
Crowns, they learn nothing, but from those the Pope holds tied by the Belly.
But I have proceeded too far The pleasure that I take in entertaining you,
makes me forge that I write an Epistle, not a book, and has carried me beyond
my lymitts. That clause of your Letter wherein you say I am able to give
Sedition the face of a just War, has incited me to take a kind of Revenge in
tormenting you with the length of my Letters. That shall not hinder me from
admiring the Beauty and Vigor of yout Wit. I honor the gifts of GOD where
ever I find them. On the other side I hope the small tartnes, and sharpness of
my style shall not deprive him of your good Graces who honors you, and is
Monsieur,

Your thrice Humble* and thrice Obedient Servant, Du Moulin.

FINIS.
Errata.
EPistle p. 2. line 12. for of the likabillity, r. not of the like ability
ibid. l. 16. A full point after Fe^ther. Epist. p. 7. l. 20. a full point after
Inuectives. p. 3. l. 4. for Bridle r. bridg^ p. 10. l. 6. read. Sweade. p. 11.
l. 3.4. r. (...) limming the picture of a King. p 16 l. 11 a full point after
not. p 48. l. 2 fo^mies r. times p. 71. l. 9. for, even in the Greek Churches,
r. even the Greek Churches. p. 73. l. 11, for these have read, these who
have. p. 78. l 3. for dog. r. dogs. p. 85. l. 11. r. Hypocondriacall. p. 88.
l. 7. read, hindered.


