THE BEAVTY OF HOLINESS.

A Sermon, preached at the Court By JOHN ARCHBOLD, Dr. of Divinity, And
Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty.

LONDON Printed by William Stansby for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at
his shop near S. Austines Gate, at the sign of the Pyde Bull. 1621.

THE BEAVTY OF HOLINESS.
1. PET. 1. 16. Be ye holy; for I am holy.
Holiness, the delight of God, the beauty of Angels, the riches of the
Saints, is here the Subject of my Text. A Text which God himself preaches
eternally to Angels, to Saints, to Men; to al understanding and rational
Creatures, capable of so divine a perfection, Be ye holy; for I am holy.

The parts of which Text are three.
1. Holiness in God. I am holy. 2. Holiness required in Man. Be ye holy. 3.
Holiness therefore required in man, because found in God. Be ye holy, for I
am holy.
1. Holiness in God. I am holy.

ALl excellencies and perfections whatsoever, may be distinguished into two
kinds, Natural and Moral; as is manifest in these Creatures, which have the
one kind and not the other. Such are wicked men, who may excel in some
natural perfections, of strength, understanding, policy, beauty, and yet want
all moral perfection of virtue, of grace, of holiness; But more manifest is
this in Devils, who excelling all men in natural abilities of strength,
understanding, agilitie, and the like; yet retain not one dram of goodness,
virtue, righteousness, truth, purity, holiness, or any other moral
perfection, wherein they were at first created.

But are justly called immundi spiritus, unclean Tho. Summae, p. 1. q. 63. a.
2. in c.
spirits, because howsoever they are not unclean secundum affectum, they are
not in themselves affected with carnal uncleanness, being spiritual natures;
yet they are unclean secundum reatum, they are certainly most guilty of all
carnal impuritie; Peucer. de diuinat. p. 15.
it being one of their special employments, and chiefest delights to provoke
and stir up mankind, to all fleshly, and libidinous pollutions.

But in opposition to them, Our God is a most pure and chaste Spirit.

For as in the Creatures, so also in God, per viam eminentiae, we do conceive
two kinds of perfections and excellencies; the one Natural, and the other
Moral.

When we think of Gods natural perfections, we conceive in our thoughts an
infinite light, an infinite life, an infinite power, an infinite wisdom, an
infinite beauty, an infinite sweetness, an infinite riches, an infinite
bliss, an infinite glory and Majesty.

But besides these natural perfections, we conceive also in God many moral
perfections of Holiness, of Purity, of Righteousness, of Truth, of
Goodness, of Clemency, of Hatred of all sin and uncleanness.

All which perfections, whether natural or moral, though we cannot conceive
them otherwise, then as so many various, and distinct qualities, or habits of
God: yet indeed are one simple, absolute, and indiuided Essence, which is God
himself.

It is then in this Moral attribute of Holiness, as in all other perfections
of God. God is almighty, wise, good, just, holy, not by any quality
superadded to his Essence: But his might, his wisdom, his goodness, his
justice, his holiness, is his very Essence. Nay, all these are himself,
according to the Rule, In Deo non differt quod est, and Sum. p. 1. q. 29. a.
4. ad. 1.
quo est. As equally then, and necessarily as God may say of himself, I am, so
equally and necessarily Exodus 3. 14.
for truth may he say of himself, as here, I am holy.

A truth which may be cleared by two reasons taken from the very Nature of
Holiness.

For 1. What is Holiness, but a rectitude in affection, in action conformable
in all points to the will of God, as to the eternal Law, and Rule of
Holiness?

And what is the will of God, but his essence?

As essentially then does God in affection, in action will that which is Holy,
as the Rule of all Holiness, his own will, is intrinsecall, and essential to
him.

And as essentially does he also hate all Sin, and Impuritie; the Nature
whereof is, to be repugnant to his will, non vt forma formae, sed vt
inordinatum, and distortum suae regulae and mensurae, not as one form to
another, but as an aberration, and obliquitie, swaruing from the straight and
even Line, and Level of his will.

As opposite then as obliquitie is to rectitude, disconformitie to conformity,
deformity to beauty, darkness to light, filthiness to purity, death to
life, evil to good; So opposite, and hateful to the holiness of God is the
impuritie of all Sin. Thou art of pure eyes and can not see evil; thou
Hab. 1. 13.
can not behold wickedness.

2. What is Holiness, but Purity? and What is Purity, but a freeness from
all contagion, and touch of inferior things? For as that Gold is impure, that
is any whit embased with dross, and as a beautiful face, or pure white
garment is defiled with aspersion of dyrt or filth; So the Soul becomes
impure, and unholy, ex contactu inferiorum, by inordinate adherence, and
affection to the base and inferior things of the World: Again, it becomes
pure, and holy ex contactu superiorum, by eleuating and raising the affection
and love thereof to things above, to things heavenly and divine.

But above all things God is most high, most noble, most pure, most heavenly.
And therefore the purity and holiness of all Spirits consists in their
adherence by love and affection to God, in their conjunction and union with him.

Now who more adherent to God by love and affection then himself? Who more
conjoined to him by nature and essence then himself? As essentially then as
God is adherent, and conjoined to himself, so essential to him is his
Holiness; and as necessarily as he loves himself, who only can love
himself, quantum est amabilis, as far as he is worthy love, and that is
infinitely, so necessarily is He Holy.

And thus this truth runs clear, That as equally and necessarily as God may
say of himself, I am; so equally and necessarily for truth, may he say of
himself, as here, I am Holy.

But Our God, that is holy essentially in himself, is also Holy Causaliter,
the Original and Fountain of all Holiness in the Creatures. It is he that
infuseth all holiness into his Angels, and Saints. Unto whose Sanctification
the three Persons do jointly concur, The Father as the Author and Fountain
of holiness; The Son as the Type and pattern of holiness; The holy Ghost
as the immediate stamper of this impression of Holiness in the Spirits of Men
and Angels.

In a great mystery of which holy Trinity the Seraphims cry one to another,
Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, Isa. 6. 3.
Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hoasts, the whole World is full of thy glory.

But upon this, that God is holy essentially in himself; and the cause of all
holiness in the creatures, it follows thirdly that He is holy Eminenter,
eminently, and incomparably Holy before, and above all Creatures. For as all
the power, and wisdom, and beauty, and excellency of all the Creatures,
compared to the power, and wisdom, and beauty, and excellency of God, is as
nothing; So the Holiness and purity of all Creatures capable of so divine a
perfection, compared to the Holiness of God, is as nothing, or rather it is
mere impuritie and uncleanness. Behold he found Job 4. 18.
no purity in his servants, and laid folly upon his Angels.

It is an Aphorism of Divines, Totum vniuersum vna cum Deo sumptum, non esse
quid praestantius Deo Solo: That the whole world considered together with God,
is no whit more excellent then God considered sole and alone, both because the
whole World does not add aliquid notabile Deo, makes no notable addition to
God, no more then one small sand of dust adds any thing to the vastness of
the whole earth, or one drop of water to the infinite abundance of the Sea: As
also because whatsoever excellency God produces in the Creatures, it is
already contained more eminently, and the same in God, and so adds nothing to
God. Therefore our Savior, There is none good, Matthew. 19. 17.
but one, even God. And our Church in her highest strain of devotion,
immediately upon receiving the blessed Sacrament, sings unto God, as the
ancient Church did (and both have warrant for it.) Tu solus Sanctus, tu solus
Dominus: Thou only art Revel. 15. 4.
holy, thou only art the Lord; Thou only, O Christ, art most high, etc.

Hitherto the first part of my Text, Holiness in God. I am holy.

The second follows, Holiness required in Man. Be ye holy.

Holiness in this Text is attributed to God, to Man; but in a far different
manner: To God ascribed, I am: To Man prescribed, Be ye.

Whence first note the vast difference between the increated Holiness of God;
and the created holiness of Angels, and Men.

First, God is essentially holy, and by nature as before: I am holy. Men and
Angels are made holy by qualities and graces accessorie, and superadded to
their essence. I am. Be ye.

Secondly, it was never said to God, Be thou holy. His Holiness, as it had no
beginning, so is incapable of increase, of diminution, of end. He remaynes in
an eternal and immutable consistence of holiness. I am holy. But the
holiness of Men and Angels, as it has beginning, so is capable of increase,
of diminution; I may also say, of end. For that the Elect, both Angels and Men,
fall not either finally or totally from that grace, and holiness, wherein they
are stated, is not from themselves, or from the nature of any created
holiness, which in it self is apt to defect, and finally to decay; but from
that stabilitie, and confirmation which they have from without in Christ. Unto
Men therefore it is here said; Ye that are as yet unholy, Be ye holy: Ye
that have attained any degrees of holiness be ye more holy: He that is
righteous, Revel. 22. 11.
let him be righteous still, and he that is holy, let him be holy still. I
am. Be ye.

Thirdly, God is holy by and of himself independently. Men are holy deriuedly,
and by participation from God. I am by and of my self, Be ye, by and from
me. I am. Be ye.

But the second and most remarkable point of difference is, between this of
Holiness and other attributes of God: for there are many other divine
perfections of which God says, I am; and yet of them does no where say to us,
Be ye; as, I am Infinite, Eternal, Omnipotent, Wise, Glorious, Great: But of
none of them does he say any where to us, Be ye thus, or thus.

The reason whereof is, because not in his Power, not in his Wisdom, not in
his Knowledge, not in his Greatness, not in his Glory: but in his Holiness,
but in his Purity, does he propose himself as a Pattern, or Sampler, to be
imitated and followed of us. So that as Bernard once, Potestas Sermon. 1. in die
Natal. Domini.
subiectionem, Maiestas admirationem, neutra imitationem; Other excellencies of
God, may some of them challenge from us Subjection, some Adoration and
Reverence, others Admiration and Astonishment: None of them imitation, but this
of his Holiness. Of this Holiness God no sooner says, I am, but he seconds
it immediately, with, Be ye.

And this is further confirmed by a second reason. There are in other Creatures
many Vestigia, footsteps and impressions of other attributes of God, of his
Greatness, of his Wisdom, of his Power, of his Glory, and yet they are not
therefore said to be made ad Imaginem, after the Image of God: It is the
prerogative only of rational Creatures, Men, and Angels, to be made after
Gods Image, in that they were made capable of resembling and expressing God in
this Moral perfection of Holiness. Holiness being no other then that
glorious Image of God, which at first he stamped in the Soul of man in our
creation, and which being after defaced by Sin, is daily renewed in us by
Grace, and shall be fully restored in us by Glory. We all behold, as in a
mirror, the glory of the Lord 2. Cor. 3. 18.
with open face, and are changed into the same Image from glory to glory, as
by the Spirit of the Lord.

Be it then the point in question, What that is wherein a man may ascend
highest, and approach nearest to the similitude and likeness of God: and I find
the competition stands chiefly between these three, Greatness, Knowledge,
Holiness.

1. The profane World is all for Greatness. This they affect, this they
applaude: affect in themselves, applaud in others. But where greatness is not
subseruient to Holiness, one dram of Holiness is to be preferred before a
World of Greatness, because (as before) God may cast what beams of his
greatness he will, and upon whom he will; but he requires us to endeavor to
pattern him, not in his Greatness, but in his Holiness.

The Philosophers, as Caietan delivers their Com. in 1. Ioh. 4. 8.
judgment, they are all for Knowledge. Penes scire maxim attenditur
similitudo hominum ad Deum. Knowledge is that which makes men come nearest to
the Similitude of God: just as the Tempter to our first Parents, Eritis Sicut
Dij Scientes, Ye shall be as Gods knowing good and evil. But the Genesis 3. 5.
Scriptures give Sentence for Holiness; for by it, and by it alone, we are
made (...), Partakers 2. Pet. 1. 4.
of the divine nature, not by being transformed into identitie of substance
with God, but by being conformed to similitude of like affection with God.
Being holy as he is holy. I am. Be ye.

Hitherto the second part; Holiness required in man. Be ye holy. Now follows
the third part. Holiness therefore required in man, because found in God. Be
ye holy, for I am holy.

For look by how many titles of Relation we are Sacred and holy to God, by so
many ties of Obligation are we bound to be holy as God. For what is once
consecrate to God, must not be profaned; and Holiness in relation, requires
Holiness in quality.

Now we are Sacred and Holy to God in a threefold Relation: first, of Nature as
Men: secondly, of Grace as men Regenerate: thirdly, of Glory, as they who
shall hereafter be Blessed Saints in heaven.

By nature as Men, we were created for God, and made capable of communion with
him: By Grace, as Men Regenerate, we are actually entered into communion with
him, though but in part, as yet and a far off: By Glory, we shall with the
blessed Saints be admitted to full Communion, or rather union and conjunction
with God.

And the rule is general, The nearer Communion we have with God, the more
Conformity required in us unto God: for what fellowship has righteousness 2.
Cor. 6. 14.
with unrighteousness, and what communion has light with darkness?
Wherefore come out from among them, and separate your selves, and touch none
unclean thing. Be ye holy, for I am holy.

1. We are Sacred to God in the general Relation of Nature, as Men: for God
passing by all other Creatures, though never so great, never so glorious, did
from among them all, call out unto himself Men and Angels in the day of their
Creation, and by giving them understanding, and rational Spirits, made them
capable of the holiness to glorify God in this life, and of the happiness to
be glorified of him in the life to come. O blessed Prerogative conferred on us
men above all visible Creatures in heaven or earth.

And indeed those other Creatures were made for the use of Man: But man for the
immediate use and service of God. And therefore other creatures may praise God
in their kind, that is, passive and ipsa sua specie, only passiuely, and
because in their natures appear certain footsteps and impressions of Gods
power and wisdom; for so The heavens declare the glory of God, and the Earth
Psalm. 19. 1.
shows forth his handy-worke. But men being in the day of their creation
endued with those three faculties, of Understanding, Memory, Will, (a created
Trinity the image of the increated) were made capable of the holiness and
happiness to praise God active, actiuely, understandingly, rationally, freely,
affectionately.

So that howsoever all Creatures in their creation did alike come forth from
God as their first Original; yet not all, but only Men and Angels were in
their creation made capable of a blessed return to God, as their last end and
happiness. Other Creatures when they are come forth from God, they rest
satisfied and content with those particular degrees of perfection they received
from God; but men and Angels rest not, but remain unsatisfied, till they
return to that fullness and universality of good that is only to be found in
God.

And if we be men, we must know that in our very nature, as men (for, Naturalia
substrata sunt gratiae) we were made for the Holiness, to desire, to affect,
to seek the face of God; and for the Happiness, to see his face, to find him,
to enjoy him, and to stand about his Throne for ever.

But we are sacred to God by a second and more near Relation of grace: for as
God by creating us capable of grace, advanced us above all other Creatures; so
by actual infusing grace into us, has advanced us above all other men; so
far that in the phrase of Saint Paul, they which are no more then men by
mere nature, they stand as yet a long far off; but when from nature they are
advanced to grace, then ye which were a-farre off, facti estis prope, are made
nigh. Before (...), nothing Ephesians. 2. 13.
to do with God, mere Forreiners and Aliens; but now Citizens with the
Saints, admitted to be of the family and house of God: yea made the very House
and Temple of God, wherein he dwells not as every where, per Diuinitatis
praesentiam, by the presence of his Deity, but as Augustine well expresses
it, Per inhabitationis gratiam, Epist. 57. ad Dardanum.
by the special grace of inhabitation, so, as no where else, but in the
spirits of his Elect.

And if to be admitted into the House of God, be so binding an obligation of
Holiness, for Domum Psalm. 92. 5.
tuam decet sanctitudo Domine: Holiness becomes thine House, O Lord, for
ever: What an enforcing Obligation to Holiness is it, to be the very House,
Habitation, and Temple of God, wherein he will rest and take up his Mansion
for ever? Ye are the Temple of the living God, and I 2. Cor. 6. 16.
will dwell among them, and walk there. Whereupon what follows? Seeing then
that we have such Cap. 7. 1.
promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of
the flesh, and spirit; and grow up unto full holiness, in the fear of God.
Lest otherwise we grieve the holy Spirit of God, and cause him, Ephesians. 4. 30.
who cannot depart from us in essence and power, yet to depart from us both
affectu, and effectu; affectu, because he cannot but hate so nasty an
habitation: and effectu, because he will not infuse the precious ointment of
his sanctifying grace, into so impure a vessel.

In malevolam animam non introibit Sapientia; Wised. 1. 4.
Wisdom cannot enter into a wicked soul, nor dwell in the body subject to
sin.

But if the second relation of grace be so strong a tie to Holiness, what
think you of the third, of Glory?

By Grace, facti sumus prope, we were made near unto God, but by Glory, we
shall be not near only by blessed Communion, but one with God by immediate
union and conjunction.

God being the Fountain of Holiness, the Saints are more or less holy,
according as they do more or less approach, and draw near to God.

As the Moon has her increases and decreases of light differently, according
as she stands in different aspect to the Sun from whom she borrows her
light.

Now, the Saints on earth are holy but in part, because though God do by
gracious aspect look on them in the face of Jesus Christ, yet they being
absent from God, cannot answerably respect, and look back unto him. But the
blessed Angels and Saints are perfectly Holy, because both God by gracious
aspect looks on them, and they also do again fully respect and look back
unto God, being immediately joined to that wel-head and fountain of holiness
in him: and being received into that Sanctu^ Sanctoru^, that Holy of Holies,
into which none unclean thing shall enter. Revel. 21. 5. vltimo.


In the mean time, the hope of so near a communion with God, to see him as he
is, must wake in us an endeavor of so near conformity to God, to be pure as
he is pure.

We know that when he shall appear, we shall be 1. John 3. 3.
like him, for we shall see him as he is: And every man that has this hope in
him, purifieth him self even as he is pure. For the Rule is firm, Without
holiness Heb. 13. 14. Matthew. 5. 8.
no man shall see God, and Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see
God. Quis enim eloqui valeat, quam purum esse oporteat cor illud, quod diuinae,
increataeque Carthus. in loc.
luci immediate, atque beatifice vnietur: For who can express, how pure that
heart ought to be, that shall be immediately and beatifically united to that
divine and increated light?

And thus you have the third part of my Text, Holiness required in man,
because found in God. Be ye holy, for I am holy.

And now (for Application) Who am I that in so great a presence do plead the
cause of Holiness, and advance it above all Greatness? How unworthy I, to
hold forth before you, as in a glass, the luster of that Beauty which were it
discernable with mortal eyes, Mirabiles sui amores excitaret; would draw all
hearts and affections to the liking and love thereof? yet even my weak and
rude delineation thereof, has presented thus much to your view: That Holiness
has in it a Beauty, though spiritual, yet, 1. Pleasing to God. 2. Glorious
in the sight of his Angels and Saints. 3. Venerable even in the eyes of the
wicked. 4. Comfortable, and full of contentation to our own Souls.

1. Pleasing and acceptable to God, even as the lively Image, and Character of
his own divine nature: and therefore as a Father delights to look upon the
express and viue image of himself in his Son: so God our heavenly Father
does with greatest complacence, behold the Image and resemblance of his own
increated Holiness, in the created Holiness of Men and Angels. Even as an
Heathen could bring in God, saying;

(...). Hierodes.
Heaven it self the place of mine own Residence, yields me not so much
content as I take in them who are holy among men: No marvel then that God say
to us as here in my Text, Be ye holy, for I am holy.

Secondly, Holiness has a Beauty in it, glorious in the sight of the Angels
and our fellow-Saints: for they having Spiritual eyes to discern the beauty
thereof, are rapt with admiration, and inflamed with the love thereof; as
knowing, that by this divine quality, we approach to the nearest, and highest
participation of the divine nature. And as they apprehend God to be above all
infinitely, and incomprehensibly glorious; So they comprehend no higher Glory
in the creatures, then to be conspicuous, and visible Images of the invisible
Holy God. And therefore the blessed Angels and Saints cry out unto us, Be ye
holy, for our God and your God is holy.

Thirdly, Holiness has a Beauty in it venerable even in the eyes of the
wicked and profane: for there is ingrafted in the Soul of man, even from the
beginning, Discrimen honesti and turpis: A natural light, whereby it
apprehends even without a teacher, the difference between that which is
honest, and dishonest: and sooner can a man pull his heart out of his body,
then command his heart and inward conscience, seriously to approve the
turpitude of Sin, or not to see, and acknowledge the Beauty of Holiness.

Seneca could say, Virtus in Omnium animos lumen suum immittit: etiam qui non
sequuntur eam, vident; Virtue sheddes forth her light into the souls of all.
Even they which list not to follow it, cannot but see it. There is no Adulterer
so impure, but his Conscience says unto him, The chaste body is better.
(...). Chrysostom. Ephesians. 4.

Such a thing is Holiness, the very enemies thereof admire it. Such a thing
is sin, the very followers thereof condemn it. Therefore even the wicked
themselves say to us, that which they cannot say to themselves, Be ye holy, for
your God is holy.

Fourthly and lastly, Holiness has in it a Beauty, comfortable and full of
contentation to our own souls. For though our Conscience cannot present unto
us an Holiness complete: yet it may and ought to present to us a sincere
endeavor of Holiness, doing the good that is (...), though not (...),
accepted of God in Christ, though not perfect. And if accepted of God, then
also such as the conscience thereof fills our hearts with admirable and
unspeakable content.

It is reported of Saint Augustine, that he did Possid. in vita August.
often and much commend those last words of Ambrose; Non sic vixi, vt me
pudeat inter vos viuere: Sed nec mori timeo, quia bonum habemus Dominum. As if
he had said: The righteousness of a good Conscience makes me not shame to
live: and the righteousness of Faith makes me not fear to die. Even that
Heathen could say,

Non nisi sapienti omnia sua placent: Seneca.
The good man only finds that at home in himself, which gives him abundant
content: Stultitia autem laborat fastidio sui; But the wicked man is ever
loathing and abhorring himself. I conclude all with that divine exhortation;
Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are venerable, Philip. 4. 8.
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
of good report; if there be any virtue, if there be any praise, think on these
things; these things do, and the God of peace shall be with you. The God of
peace, and the peace of God, even that divine peace of a good Conscience, which
passes all understanding, and can more exhilarate our souls then all the
world beside.

Thus God, thus the Angels, and Saints, thus even the wicked themselves, thus
even our selves, thus all things in Heaven and Earth, within and without us,
do call and cry unto us,

Be ye holy, for God is holy. FINIS.

