A LEARNED TREATISE OF TRADITIONS, LATELY SET FORTH in French by PETER DU
MOULIN, And faithfully done into English by G. C.

(...),

Ioh. 5. 34. Si aut Evangelio praecipitur, aut in Apostolorum Epistolis, aut
Actibus continetur, etc. Observetur divina haec and sancta Traditio,

Cypr. Epist. 74. ad Pomp. LONDON, Printed by Aug. Mathewes for Humphrey
Robinson, at the sign of the three Pigeons in Paul's Churchyard.

1631.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable my singular good Lord, ROBERT Earl of Lindsey, Baron
of Willough by B^ak^. and Ershy, Lord great Chamberlain of England, and Lord
high- Constable for this time being: Lord Lieutenant of Lincolne-Shire. and
Vice-Admi^a^^ for the Coasts of that County; Lord Worden of the Forest of
Waltham, Knight of the most noble Order of the (...), and of his Majesty's most
Honorable privy Counsel.
My most honored LORD,
IT is well known that your Lord ship can as readily interpret my Author in
his own language and iaiome, as being thus changed into our native and most
familiar tongue. Nevertheless I have adventured (asking pardon if my boldness
give distaste) to style your Lordship the Maecenas of this my handiworke. My
weakness and want of skill in every respect, together with my forwardness
and presumption to intermeddle out of my element, have prompted me, to fly to
the sanctuary of your Lordships protection. Such as expect that I should rather
dedicate some Tacticks or book of Chevalry to your Lordship may take this for
satisfaction, that I have well observed your true devotion to Religion, which
is the best ornament and addition to your Honor; and great is the happiness
when Religion and Military profession are met in so Heroique a Center. The
variety arising from this copious subject of Traditions, will invite your
Lordship to read DU MOULIN with delight; but their modern incrochment (I mean
the Romish) upon the Church and their presumptuous comparison with the sacred
Scripture, will force your Lordship to reject them with scorn and greatest
loathing. Cast your eye upon this little volume, and vouchla e it your
favorable opinion, such countenance will giv it life; receive it into your
Lordships pat o^age, for to that end I have presented it, and in that security
I humbly leave it; recommending your Lordship to Gods holy safeguard.

Your Lordships most humble and faithful Servant. G. C.

To the Reader.
COurteous Reader, When you set apart some hours for serious studies, employ a
few to the reading of this short Enchiridium; a most exact survey of Romish
Traditions. You will find them here arraigned, by divine testimonies of
Scripture, by solid interpretations of the Fathers, by effectual persuasions
of reason, by the ridiculous impossibilities of their own sufficiency, and by
the selfe-contradictions and confessions of all Projectors and Founders of
them. The Frontispice does show my Author to be French, and I have copied out
his sense into our mother Tongue, as near to life, as my running pen would
give me leave, If any man obj^ct, Wha^ need of (...) amidit so many
unparallei'd Original, composed by the (...) of our Church at home? I answer
wi^h a qu^st Is it not pity ^o learned a book (amo^st us refo^m^d Christian)
should be guilty of that An^^christian Traditi^n cast upon the Scripture, Not
to be published in a known t^ngue? (...) let me not wade over deep, into the
commendation (...) left a consure of Tractet fabrilia, or some (...) etc.
recoile upon (...) (...) man ought to guide himself by the measure of ^is own
ability. It is true that I was never wor^hy to make this holy Knowledge my
Profession, vet my z^ale to it is such, hat if I may nor act he part of an
Encomiasles in the merit of DU MOULIN and hi Work, I must take leave to gaze on
him with silent admirat on, and (passing over particularities) with this brief
Character, only to point at him: For general and profound schese ship, he
is, Extra invidtae aleam doctus. What can be said more? Let it suffice that I
have named him; Qui cognoist son nom assez entend son renom, His mere name is
the individual cognizance of his same. Pardon me, if I yet stretch a nore
higher in praise of him; it is his due, it cannot be omitted without a
national ingratitude. And what should it be, but his ingenuous perseverance to
this very day, in vindicating the sacred honor of his late Majesty (the
learned King JAMES of most happy and immortal memory) from the unjust
redargution of Cardinal Perron in a book which he has written against the
said late King; as by those often quotations in this Treatise expressly made,
may plainly appear? In the last place (my friendly Reader) if you afford me
a favorable construction of this my undertaking, and connive at such errors
as you meet with, you have done to my wishes; and in requital I pass my word,
that whatsoever is lame and defective, or verbally mistaken at the Press in
this translated form, you shall find supplied in the real goodness of the
Authors matter. Read and profit.

G. C.

Errata.
Page 136. line 14. themselves never appear, read themselves appear not. p.
183. l. 1. as, r us. p. 194. l. 11. word, r. world. p. 195. l. 13. contain, r.
continne. p. 196. l. 3. in eist, r. insist. p. 221. l. 13. stromatae, r.
stromata. l. 20. book of history, r. of his history. p. 239. l. 3. asleep, r a
sleep. p. 245. l. ^^. as for that, r. for example, that. p. 294. l 2.
contractions ^. contradictions. p. 298. l. 4. a^guments, r. arguments. p. 312
l.19. has determed, r. has been determined. l. 22. ceterminations, r.
determinations. p. 314 l. 4. pass, r. passage. p. 319. l. 11. non plus, to, r.
non plus, is to l. 22 touch, r couch p. 320. l. 12. for used, r. for, be used.
p. 336. l. 9. Dotanists, r. Donatists. p. 348. l. 4. barge, r. bar.

A Table of the Chapters in this Treatise of TRADITION.
Chap. 1. COncerning the nature of this Controversy. p. 1. Chap. 2. Of the
word Tradition. p. 22. Chap. 3. The belief of our Churches. The Calumny of
Regourd. p. 24. Chap. 4, The opinion of the Romish Church. That our Adversaries
with one consent accuse the Scripture of insufficiency, etc. page 31. Chap. 5.
That our adversaries say there are Doctrines and Articles of Christian Faith,
yea in the very essential things, which the Apostles have neither taught by
mouth nor writing. page 45. Chap. 6. A proof of the same, because our
Adversaries do affirm that the Pope and the Church of Rome may change that
which God commands in the Scriptures, and infringe the Apostles
Commandments. p. 60. Chap. 7. Passages extracted one of the writings of our
Adversaries, which prove that in the Church of Rome, Traditions are without
comparison more esteemed then the holy Scripture, and the Scripture charged
with Injuries. Regourds boldness to defame the same. page 76. Cha. 8. A proof
of the same by the practice of the Primitive Church. p. 110. Chap. 9. Three
reasons wherefore Tradition is preferred before the Scripture, etc. page 121.
Chap. 10. That in this Question, by the word Church, our Adversaries understand
the Pope alone. page 129. Chap. 11. Of what sort, how weak, and how uncertain
the Foundations are whereon the Traditions of the Romish Church are built, etc.
page 139. Chap. 12. That our Adversaries alleging the Scripture, do
contradict themselves, and allege Scripture for Tradition in general without
touching the particulars, wherein they find the Scripture contrary. page 165.
Chap. 13. That our Adversaries to distinguish the good Traditions from bad, do
give us a plea wherein they wholly convict themselves. p. 175. Chap. 14. A
proof of the same, by the Traditions which our Adversars ^s do ^uppose to be
the mist ancient and best grounded in Antiquity. p. 195. Chap. 15. The secon^
mark set by our Adversaries, to distinguish the good Traditions from the bad,
viz. Succession. p. 205. Chap. 16. That the Pharisees and ancient Heretics had
recourse to Tradition; that Clemens Alexandrius suffered himself to be too
much carried away in the same. p. 217. Chap. 17 An examination of the passages
of Scripture, whereon they found Traditions. p. 223. Chap 18. An answer to
that which is obje^^ed unto us, that the Church has bin sometime without the
Scripture. page 231. Chap. 19. That the Church of the old Testament, after the
Law given by Moses until Jesus Christ, has had no unwritten Traditions. p.
236. Cha. 20. An answer to our adversaries a^^^^ming, that we receive many
Traditions contained in Scripture. p. 254 Chap. 21. A proof of the sufficiency
and perfection of the Scriptures, by the testimony of God himself, speaking in
the Scriptures. P. 267. Chap. 22. Whether to ground a Doctrine, it be lawful
to use words equivalent to those that are found in the Scripture, or to use
consequences and Arguments. page 298. Chap. 23. Testimonies of the Fathers,
touching the perfection of the Scripture. page 322. Cha. 24. How the Texts and
passages of the Fathers, which our Adversaries allege for the unwritten
Traditions, ought to be understood. p. 346. Chap. 25. A proof of that which
went before. page 349. Cha. 26. Three ancient Customs which we are blamed to
have forsaken. p. 393 Chap. 27. That the Traditions of the Romish Church of
this time have nothing in common with the unwritten Traditions mentioned by the
Fathers. page 398. Chap. 28. Of the multitude of Traditions in the Church of
Rome. p. 403.
A LEARNED TREATISE OF TRADITIONS. OF THE SACRED Scriptures perfection against
the Traditions of the Romish Church.
CHAP. 1. Concerning the nature of this Controversy.
Our Adversaries were accustomed a great while to dispute by way of Scripture;
but at length perceiving themselves weak in the cause, and being much
disquieted that the Scripture does lock them up into so narrow a room, they
spurn against it, laboring to make it appear doubtful, and without
authority. By this means our Controversies change their nature; for instead
of disputing by ground of Scripture, we are now led back to dispute of the
Scripture it self, and to defend the Authority and Perfection of it. This is
now the field wherein our Adversaries do sport, and display the metal of
their conceits. They accuse the Scripture of imperfection and insufficiency,
of obscurity and vncapablenesse to determine any difference, calling it a
dumb and imperfect rule, a nose of wax, a rock of scandal, a scabbard, that
receives as well a leaden, as a steel blade. And though Church of Rome be
party in the cause, yet will it be Judge supreme, and infallible. If the
Church be Judge, she of Rome will be Judge, and will have it appertain to
her to prescribe her task unto her self, and to be sovereign Judge of her
own proper duty. Our Adversaries make the Church of Rome the Judge infallible
of her own proper infallibility, and that she shall be sovereign Judge of
the interpretation of the same Laws, whereby God does judge her sins. They
stick not to say, that the Church of Rome is no way subject to the Scripture,
that is to say, to God speaking by his Prophets and Apostles. So on the other
side they maintain, that the Scripture is subject to the Church of Rome, and
ought to be regulated by the Faith of that Church. They avow that to be the
singular and only Church which gives authority to the Scripture, and will
have the Scripture inferior to the Church in Dignity, in Stability, in
Certainty, in Antiquity, and in Amplitude: Yea, so far they proceed, that
the Pope may add to the Creed, dispense contrary to the Apostles, alter that
which God has ordained in the holy Scriptures, and dispose of his
Commandments. They hold, that the sacred Scripture be therefore entertained
and received amongst men, because the Pope does approve and ordain it so to
be: as if the Pope were more to be credited then God, speaking in his holy
Scriptures; or that he were no whit subject to the Law of God conta^ned in the
Scripture.

In all this controversy between the Scripture and the Church, concerning the
pre-eminence, by this word Church, our adversaries always understand the
Romish, although there be many other more ancient and more pure; namely, the
Greek, the Syrian, the Affrican, etc. and by the Romish church they understand
the Pope alone, in whom resideth the sovereign authori^ie, and who judges all
things without possibility to err; yea, then especially when he judges alone
motu proprio, of his own mere motion, and speaking in the Chair Apostolic;
and when it is his pleasure to join unto him some Prelates for his assistance
in Decreeing, he reinvesteth them with infallible knowledge and understanding,
yea in the points which he himself understands not.

Whosoever will here open his eyes, and not forbid himself the use of reason,
shall easily perceive, that Satan by this proceeding indeavoureth slily to
bring in Atheism, and to undermine the foundations of Christian Religion For
by this means the Christian Faith is not founded upon the Word of God
contained in the holy Scriptures, but upon humane and uncertain evidence, yea
the most uncertain that can be conceived; they justifying the authority of
the Church of Rome to be only established upon the testimony of the Romish
Church, making her Judge, witness, and party in the same cause, and
endeavoring to make men believe, that the Church of Rome has more authority
then the Scriptures, for she her self does say it.

If it be so, that the authority of the Scripture be grounded upon the
authority of the Church of Rome, why do they allege unto us passages of
Scripture to support the authority of the Church of Rome?

And when instead of directing the Faith of a Christian by the Word of God,
speaking in the Scriptures, they send him to the Church, the simple people are
perplexed and hindered from choosing the best Church amongst many contrary. How
shall they choose? Church from the false? shall they know it in examining her
doctrine by the Scripture? that may not be; for the Scripture is a Book that
the people are not permitted to read: and our adversaries affirm, that the
Church is not subject or bound to the Scripture, and that the Church may change
the same which God commanded in the Scripture.

Shall they discern the true Church by antiquity and succession? nor that; for
the Syrian and Greek Churches (contrary to the Romish) are more ancient then
that of Rome, deriving their succession from the Apostles; and punctually to
judge in this succession and antiquity, infinite Histories both Greek and
Latin ought to be read, wherein the people understand little or nothing: And
amongst the Clergy it self, scarce one of an hundred is found, that has but
ordinary or competent knowledge therein. He that but enters into the view
thereof, shall discover the seat of the Roman Pontifies defiled with heresies
and enormous crimes, yea mangled and rent with Schisms that are decided by
stroke of sword; and according to the power of Emperors and Kings does the
scale weigh down.

Shall they have respect to the generality and multitude? no, Jesus Christ
calls his Church a little flock, Luke 12. 32. and signifies unto us, that
the multitude and broad way lead to perdition, Math 7. 13, 14.

Shall they give heed to miracles? no, the Apostle has foretold us, that the
son of perdition, who is Antichrist, shall come with signs and miracles, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. And Jesus Christ admonishes us, that false prophets shall arise,
and shall make signs and wonders to seduce, Math. 24. 24. Now seeing that so
many false miracles are wrought, and the most predominant Courts of Justice
have made many Decrees against the workers of them, how and by what marks
shall the poor people distinguish the true miracles from the false, seeing
there is no knowledge of the true doctrien declaring Gods will that we should
discern the miracles? Deuteronomy. 13. v. 1, 2, and 3. Briefly, it is certain, that
the Scriptures authority being no more the foundation and direction of the
believers faith, all Religion vanishes, and turns into smoke, and there
remains nothing but to believe at adventure, to follow the generality, and
like blind men to lay hands on him that marches next before us.

It is answered, that in this perplexity the people are to follow their
Doctors and Pastors, for they are the men that undertake with God for the
people. What? must every man believe the Pastors of his own country? must
they follow the Church wherein they are borne? shall man owe his Religion to
his birth, or the custom of his country, or the success of affairs? If it
be answered, that by the Pastors and Doctors, those of the Church of Rome are
to be understood, therein lies the point of difficulty. For the question is,
if those Doctors be sound and good, teachign the true way of health,
conformably to the Word of God, which they conceal from the people, in denying
them to read the holy Scriptures; then are the people bound to believe, that
these are good Doctors, before they know the good doctrine; and that this
church is the true church, before they know or apprehend the truth. They are
also bound to believe what the church of Rome believes, not knowing what that
Church ought to believe. But if it be their tenent, that every particular
person be assisted with the Spirit of God, to be able to discern the true
Church; why hold they not that he be assisted with the same spirit to
discern the true doctrine, and to examine it by the holy scriptures, seeing
that the true Church cannot be distinguished but by the true doctrine? for the
true faith is first to be known before the true faithful can be
distinguished; and the true rule is to be well understood, before those that
follow it can be known. Christ must first be known, before there is
possibility of knowing undoubtedly, what Church is truly his flock.

Add likewise heereunto, that the faith of the Romish Doctors depends
entirely upon the Popes faith; nevertheless they (for the greatest part) do
believe that the Pope may err; and the Popes themselves do confess the same,
as we have elsewhere prooved. Yea, their errors are condemned by those
Councels, which the Church of Rome did allow. And it is hard to believe that he
cannot err, who boasts of his authority and power, to change that which God
has ordained, and to dispense with his commandments.

Add moreover, that the greatest ^^atterers of the Popes, that have written
their histories and lives, do lament the corruption of that seat, and
complain of the traffic it exercises, and of the infamous ^^ving of many
Popes, and their intolerable pride: for what does the Pope? he is advanced so
far as to call himself God, and the divine Majesty, to cause himself to be
adored, to reach forth to Emperors a pantable to be kissed, to dispose the
crowns and lives of Kings, and to release souls out of Purgatory: insomuch as
from a poor Biship of a city, who in the Primitive time appeared not but in
the martyrdomes, is by degrees become a great Monarch of the earth, that
surpasses in riches and treasure the greatest Kings of the world.

These things considered may we fix in our minds a just cause to suppose, that
the Pope is the same man that the Scripture has foretold to come into the
world, to 2 Thessalonians 2. 7 and 8. Apoes 13. 11 2 Thessalonians. 2. ^. 4. and 9. Apocal.
17. 3. 4. 9. 18. Apocal. 17. 2. Apocal. 13. 15.
lift himself up into the shrone of Roman Emperors, style himself God, vaunt
of signs and miracles; he that should be^ clothed in scarlet, should possess
his seat in a town of seven mountains, (which is Romes description), should
seduce Kings, wage war against the Church, and vanquish it, and all this under
the name of Christian, assuming to himself the title and authority of Jesus
Christ. For so says the Spirit of God in the 13 of the Apocalipse: He shall
have the horns of a Lamb, but shall speak like a dragon. These things having
been foretold above fifteen hundred years past, no man since that time has
so swelled himself to so high a pitch, as to have these recived things
appropriated unto him, but the Pope of Rome. Is it by chance or adventure, that
such pre^ogatiues have met in one man? Surely these considerations are
sufficient to cause a suspicion in ^s, that this is the man who should have
more authority then the Scripture, that would have himself believed, when he
says that the Scripture is subject unto him, and that he has power to change
it, that is to say, to contradict it. For no man can extol himself above the
Scripture, unless it be merely to impugn it.

Now though man fearing God, and touched with the zeal of his house, cannot
see the Scriptures, (that are divinely inspired) to be so injuriously
despighted, without extreme horror and grief; and though it be a very
prodigy or wonder of men, that call themselves Christians, but so power out
their hearts in invectiues against the Scripture, (whereof neither Porphyry,
nor Lucian, nor the most capital enemies of the Christian name were ever
advised): yet to us is it a subject of joy, and no little consolation in the
midst of reproaches cast upon us, to be employed to speak in Gods behalf, and
to defend the honor of his word, against men perversely ingenious to defame it.
For it is better to suffer for him, then to triumph without him. There is not a
more honorable blemish, nor more honest disgrace, then to be defamed, and
oppressed for his name.

True it is, that the stain and disreputation exceed our strength, and it is
no easy matter to speak worthily of the condign honor belonging to holy
Scripture, and with imperfect minds to defend her perfection, it were in some
sort to light the day with a candle, and to demonstrate the Sanne with the
finger, as to endeavor to arrive at the bright evidence of the Scripture: for
at all times all that we can perform is less clear then her perfection. I
hold it therefore expedient to publish to the light the scandalls and
accusations which our adversaries do raise against the Scripture, and to show
how God has stricken them with the spirit of amazement: as also to compare the
wickedness and vanity of the Romish Traditions, with the perfection and
sanctity of the holy Scripture. And we hope that in this so holy and just
quarrel God will assist us, and that he will vouchsafe us the grace to
maintain the honor of his Word, by such means as are most agreeable to his
Word: and that he who has confounded the tongues of the builders of Babel,
will confound the thoughts and spirits of those that labor daily to rebuild it.

In my three former Treatises, entitled, The Judge of Controversies, I have
defended the authority of the Scripture, and shown, that our adversaries in
this cause have not only the Scripture contradicting them, but also
themselves, common sense, antiquity, and experience; and that they are not
only at variance among themselves, but every one particularly thwarteth
himself. It remains now to speak of the perfection of the Scripture, and to
show that our Adversaries wrongfully find fault therein, and most injuriously
accuse it of insufficiency.

These two Questions, the one touching the authority of the Scripture, the
other as concerning her perfection, are linked together inseparably. These two
properties of Scripture reciprocally embrace one the other, and afford to
themselves mutual succor. For the Scripture it self by her authority
maintains her sufficiency, and her sufficiency gives her authority. And
whosoever withstandeth the authority of the Scripture, fights also against
her perfection: for if the Scripture be sovereign Judge, it is deficient in
nothing to judge well And it is certain that she cannot be Judge of points
whereof she speaks not. If she be wanting in any thing, some superior
authority must supply her default. And if our Adversaries have reason to say
that the Church of Rome is the rule of Scripture, for a certain it is of that
Church wherein we ought to learn, whether there be any imperfection in the
Scripture: but the decision of the question touching the Scriptures authority,
levelleth the way for us to the question concerning her perfection: which shall
be (if God permit) this last Treatise, wherein we defend the absolute
perfection of the Scripture, against the Appendixes and Additions of the Romish
Church, which men call Traditions; yea against men that with a depraved
subtlety search and hunt after defects in Scripture: like unto Holland
spectacles, that discover spots and stains in the shining sun.

When we compare the Romish Traditions with the doctrine of holy Scripture,
they will be found not only infinitely beneath the sanctity and excellency
of the Scriptures, and as coals mingled amongst Diamonds: but also contrary to
them, and mere insurrections against Gods commandments, under color of
addition. It will be found, that these Traditions, which they derive and make
to descend from the Apostles, are forged de novo, and resemble the Gibeonites
who being very near, spoke as if they were come from far. It will appear,
that these Traditions which men exalt in general, when they come to a
particular scanning, they are but a frivolous bundle of human Inventions,
contrived for gain, and of malicious deceits, to subdue the people under the
Ecclesiastiques, and to retain them in blind ignorance.

CHAP. II. Of the word Tradition.
IT will be necessary to expound the word before we speak of the matter. This
word Tradition signifies a doctrine given by succession from hand to hand.
From whence we conclude, that the holy Scripture, the Law of God, and the
Gospel are Traditions. The Apostle St. Paul, in his first chapter (...)
to the Galat. v. 14. affirms himself to be exceedingly zealous of the
Traditions of his Fathers; calling so the Law of Moses, whereof he had been
very zealous, or at least comprehending it in these Traditions. The same
Apostle in the second to the Thessal. chap 2. v. 15. exhorts them to preserve
the Traditions which they had learned either from his mouth or by his Epistle,
calling the doctrine which he had written unto them a Traditon. And in the 15
chap. to the Corinth. the I. (...) Siergo aut Evangelio praecipitur, aut in
Apostolorum epistolis aut actibus continetur, etc. observetur divina haec and
sancta traditio.
I have given you by tradition, (for so is the Greek word) that Jesus Christ
is dead for our sins, according to the Scriptures. He then calls Tradition
that which is in the Scripture. Just in the same manner speaks he in the
same Epistle at the 23. verse. of the 11. chapter.

Thus speak the Fathers. Cyprian in his 74. Epist. to Pomp. If it be
commanded in the Gospel, or contained (...) etc.
in the Epistles of the Apostles, or in the Acts, let this divine and holy
Tradition be observed. And Basil in the third Book against Eunomius: The Lord
himself in the tradition of saving Baptism, gave this order, saying, As you
go along, baptize in the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.

But Custom has prevayled, that by this word Tradition, some Document, Rule
Recital, or Ceremony in matter of Gods Service, not contained in the holy
Scriptures be observed. And so shall the word be taken in all this Treatise.

CHAP. III. The belief of our Churches. The calumny of Regourd a Jesuit.
THe fifth article of our confession expresses, that the holy Scripture is the
rule of all verity, containing all that is necessary for the service of God
and our own salvation, whereunto it is not lawful to add, diminish, or
change.

Hereby we intend not absolutely to reject all Tradition: for if there be a
Tradition that adds nothing to the Scripture, but serves only to maintain
her authority and perfection, we embrace that most willingly. Such a
Tradition is that the Books of the old and new Testament are sacred and
Canonirall. This Tradition is so far from adding to the Scripture, that on the
contrary it says, that nothing ought to be added thereunto. Neither is it
without the compass of the Scripture, seeing that it springs and results
from the perfection of the Scripture it self; and the credit or testimony that
a Church (be it true or false) conferreth upon these Books, is but a probable
and humane testimony, until God (giving efficacy to this Scripture to touch
and stir up devotion) imprinteth in it a more effectual persuasion. For it
is not the Church that gives faith, but the spirit of God that works in our
hearts by his powerful word.

As a river that passes through a town, is sufficient to refresh and water it
throughout, yet notwithstanding is it behoouefull that some Pipe or channel
should conduct it from the source into the place: so the holy Scripture is
sufficient to instruct us to salvation, nevertheless it must come to us as it
were by the course of successiue Tradition. Such a Tradition adds no more to
the Scripture, then the channel adds to the water of the River.

Also when we reject unwritten Traditions, we intend not to reject all the
words that are not found in the Scripture, in regard that we may there find
the matter in substance and equivalent terms, and that these words do add
nothing to the doctrine of salvation contained in the Scriptures. Such are the
terms of Gods providence, and of the Immortality of the soul. Likewise the
words of Trinity, Consubstantiall, and the Procession of the holy Ghost, words
profitably employed by our forefathers, to make that perspicuous which is
contained in the Scriptures, and to shut up heretics into a more narrow strait.

Also we willingly admit of unwritten Traditions which concern not the
doctrine, but only the Ecclesiastical policy, and outward order, in regard
that such Laws and Customs are not given for absolutely necessary, and
equalled with the doctrine of salvation: as also, because they serve not the
Pastors use for traffic, avarice, or ambition; and that in this order and
outward policy there is nothing dishonest, and contrary to good morality, or
that may expose the Christian Religion to ridiculousnesse; and lastly, because
that with these Ceremonies and observations the multitude is not excessive,
neither do they divert the piety by postures of the countenance, or the
spiritual service by corporal exercise. For as the Romans having conquered a
Province, did amuse the people with Sports and pompous Triumphs, feasting them
with their spoils, whilst they were then busy in plotting and aggravating the
peoples servitude: so does the enemy of our salvation amuse the people by the
splendor of Ceremonies, whilst he then inthralleth consciences, and tacitly
insinuates idolatry; to which, the very inclination of the people does much
contribute. For a man naturally loves rather to recreate his sense, then to
instruct his understanding; to behold public spectacles, then hear wholesome
doctrines; to admire pictures, then edify by good precepts; and finds less
difficulty to shape stones to the image of man, then to unshape or reform man
to the image of God.

Our confession then rejects only the Traditions, that add something to the
doctrine of faith and manners contained in the Scripture, and which are given
forth to supply that which is thought to be wanting in the doctrine of the holy
Scriptures.

The Iesuire Regourd in his book Page 786. and 787.
entitled, Catholic Demonstrations, in the sixth Demonstration, proposes
salsely our Belief. He alleges the words of the fifth Article of our
confession of the faith, where he makes us say, that the Word of God contained
in the Books received by us, is guided with all verity, and contains all
that is necessary for the service of God, and for our own salvation, and that
by it all things ought to be examined and squared; Antiquity, Customs, the
Multitude, humane Wisdom, Judgments, Sentences, Edicts, Decrees, Counsels,
Visions, Miracles. But he changes the words of our Confession by a most
notorious falsification: for we say only that these things must not be opposed
against the Scripture. Mark our very words: It is not lawful for men nor
Angals to add thereunto, nor diminish, nor change. Whence it follows, that
neither Antiquity, nor Customs, nor the Multitude, etc. ought to be opposed
against the holy Scripture. We condemn not Antiquity, nor Councels, as
Regourd imposes upon us; but we say, that he that would oppose these things
against the Scripture, ought not to be believed. We affirm this, because our
Adversaries say, that the Romish Church may change that which God has
commanded in the Scripture, dispense Gods word contrary to the Apostle, and
esta^lish new Articles of Faith: whereof we have set down multitudes of
proofs, in the forepart of our first Book, and will produce more here
following.

CHAP. IV. The opinion of the Romish Church. That our Adversaries with one
consent accuse the Scripture of insufficiency, and of not containing all the
doctrines necessary to salvation.
WHen our Adversaries dispute against Pagans, and compare the holy Scripture
with humane wisdom, they exalr the sanctity, perfection, authority,
perspicuity, and divine efficacy of the holy Scripture; yea, you would imagine
they accorded with us, and borrowed our terms. But when the question is of
comparing the Scripture with the church of Rome, then alter they their
language, debasing the dignity of the Scripture, to the end to magnify the
authority of the Pope. They uphold, that the Scripture is not Judge, and that
this title appertains unto the Pope, and to the Prelates which he authoriseth;
then (I say) they make all authority of the Scripture to depend upon the power
and testimony of the Romish Church. They accuse the Scripture of incertitude,
of being depraved, of obscurity, of insufsiciencie, and imperfection.

But if one represent unto them their own proper words, wherein they commend
the perfection of the Scripture, and acknowledge that it contains all that is
necessary to salvation, they have an evasion ready at hand: for they say that
the Scripture may be called ^erfect, because she refers to the church,
which supplyeth all her ^efects. Wherein they apparently ^putradict themselves.
For if the Scriptures send back to the church to learn of her wherein they are
de fectiue, by the same message and ^^nding back they confesle their ^wne
imperfection. The Merchant that sends away his Chapman to another shop, to
find that which he has not in his own, by this dismission he confesses
that his own shop is ill furnished. And if it be sufficient for the Scripture
to be called perfect, when as she sends is to the Church, it is most cer^aine,
that instead of all the Scripture, one sole line might suffice, spcaking thus;
Go but to the Church of Rome, and she will teach you all things infallibly.

Now to understand what is the imperfection where of our adversaries accuse the
Scripture, let v^^ observe what they discourse upon the same.

The Council of Trent in the fourth Session pronounces that the Church shall
rece^ue and honor the unwritten Traditions with equal affection of piety and
reverence as the holy Scripture. The hallowed Synod (say these Fathers) Omnes
libros tam veterus quam novi Testamenta nec non Traditiones ipsas tum ad fiaem
tum ad mores pertinentes, tanguam vel ore tenus a Christo, vel a Christo, vel a
spiritu sancto dictatas pari pietatis affectu, ac reve re^tia suscipit ac
veneratur.
receaues and honors with like affection of godliness and reverence all
Books as well of the Old as the New Testament, and the Traditions appertaining
to faith and manners, as dictated only by the mouth of Christ, or by his holy
spirit. Yea by this decree the commandments of the Church of Rome are equal
to the Law of God, and the doctrine of the Gospel contained in the New
Testament. By this rule the Invocation of Saints commanded by Tradition, ought
to be done with like piety and reverence, as the Invocation of God commanded
in the holy Scripture.

By the authority of this Council Catechismus ad pa ochos ex Decrete Con^tly
arid. Py 4. Pont. Max. iussis editus. Omnis aoctrinae ratio quae fidelibus
tr^aeda sit, quod in Scripturam traditionesque distributum est.
a Catechism was framed, which in the very entry and be ginning places this
Maxim that all doctrine which ought to be given to the faithful, is contained
in the Word of God, which is divided into Scripture and Traditions; whence grew
up the distinction of the word written and unwritten.

Gregory de Valentia the Jesuit in the fifth Book of his Analysis, and
Scripturans non esse sufficientem fides regula^, quta non continet omnia.
Title of the third Chap. The Scripture is not a sufficient rule of faith, for
it contains not all things.

Cardinal Bellarmine a Jesuit, in his Book of the Unwritten word Scripturas
sine Traditioni^us nec fuisse fimpliciter necessarias, nec s^fficientes.
Chap. 4. The Scriptures without Traditions are not simply necessary nor
sufficient. And there again he calls the Scripture regulam non totalem, sed
partialem, a rule not entire, but a piece or parcel of a rule.

The Jesuit Bail in the 9 question of his Catechism: I will make you point
it with your finger, that the Scripture is not sufficient.

Peter Charren in the fourth Chap. of his third Verity, says, that to require
all to be proved by Scripture, is an unjust demand. And not much after: The
Scripture is nothing but a little par cell of truth revealed. Part. 3. disp. 8
(...) Stultum est omnia ab Apostolus scripta putare vol omnia ab^^is tradita
(...) Etin iniurtam vergerat agentis and r^velantis Spiritus: Et insuave esset
natura nostre, quae omnia simul non capit.


Salm ron the Jesuit in his 13. Tome of the first Book of his Commentaries
upon the Epistles of Saint Paul: It is a sottishness to think that the
Apostle have written all things, or have given all by Tradition, that would
turn to an injury against the holy Ghost operating and revealing: and it would
be a thing repugnant to our nature, that comprehenaeth not all things at a
clap.

Of which un written Traditions that have been started since the Apostles time,
he fercheth some examples: to wit, the Ecclesiastical Quint. opus.
Hierarchy, that is to ay, the Papal Monarchy, with the subordinate degrees;
the service of Images, and. Postremo.
the suffrages of the dead, the Mass and manner of sacrificing, and the. Porro.
Tradition that Jesus Christ has made a sacrifice in bread and wine: and that
he then made the Chrisme, etc. He renders the reason why these things should
not be written: to the end that the Commandment. Quint. opus. Haec literis
co^signari minime debuerisnt, ^^ soruaretu praecepiu^ Christi; Nolite dare
sanctum canibus.
of Jesus Christ be kept, who charge in this manner: Give not to dogs that
which is holy. Upon this Jesuits reckoning, the doctrine of the birth and
death of our Savior was given to dogs, when it was digested in writing. And
God gave his Law to dogs, when he wrote it in two Tables. But as for the Papal
Hierarchy, Image-service, Romish Indulgences, Invocation of Saints, etc. God
would not have such holy things to be cast to dogs, nor has he permitted them
to be written.

And there again: Waxing insolent Tertio. Protervire voientes scriptu^^
refelli non possunt, idea una tradi^^one lugulandi sunt.
and froward, they cannot be vanquished by the Scriptures, therefore must their
throats be cut with one Tradition alone.

Coster a Jesuit in the Preface of P^aefat Enchi^^d. Nostri toporis haretici
ad solas S^ipturas tanquam ad laxum adharescunt. Idem cap de sacra script. In
membranis tam n^vi guae veteris Test a^. multa desiderantur. In ea tamen o^ nta
non contineri valde impude^ter affirmare non verentur. A Christ videtur cautum
ne omni^ fider dogmata scriptu co^mendarmtur dum ait, Nolite dare sanctum
canibus.
his Manuell: The Heretics of our time do stick to the Scriptures as to a
rock. That displeases the Doctor, for (says he) In the Parchments as well of
the Old as New testament many things are wanting. And further: they fear not
to affirm with great impudence, that all things are contained in the
Scripture. And a little after: It seems that Jesus Christ forbad all the
doctrines of Faith to be couched in writing, when he said: Give not to ^ggs
that which is holy. As if the Scripture were made for the dogs. And who may
these dogs be but the Christian people? Now seeing that Jesus Christ has
given the Scripture to these dogs, that is to say, to the people, wherefore
does the Pope take from them that which Jesus Christ has given unto them, in
debarring them of the reading?

Reason would require, that our Adversaries specify unto us, what are the
Doctrines that are wanting in the Scripture, and that they make us a catalogue
of their Traditions. But they have not dared to do it hitherto, fearing to
affright the people with the multitude of doctrines, which they have patched to
the word of God.

We learn by the History of the Hist. del Concilio Trident. lib. 2. Ann. 1546.
Council of Trent, that besides the public Sessions of the Council, they
caused Congregations to be made of Prelates and Doctors to make draughts of the
Decree which should be proposed to the Council: and when these were
afterward to be read in full Council, the Fathers gave their suffrage by the
word Placet, without scruple or difficulty therein, receiving the said Decree
as a Law already ratified by the Popes Legates. Before the fourth Session was
held, where in was established the Decree touching Traditions, some selected
Doctors were assembled to frame this Dectee, which was for a long space
debated. Some interposing that it was necessary a Decree should be made,
wherein it should be declared that all the Catholic doctrine is founded upon
Tradition, in regard that the Scripture it self is not to be believed, but by
the leave and means of Tradition that ministers authority unto it.

Vincent Lunel, a Cordelier was of opinion to make a Decree of the authority
of the Church, before Traditions should be mentioned, because these are
grounded upon the authority of the Church, and the Church is that which
affor^eth all authority to the Scriptures. To which opinion the Legates would
not condescend, fearing that hereby the memory of the Councels of Constance
and Basil should be revived, which have adjudged, and definitiuely determined,
that the sovereign authority of the Church abides in the Council, and not
in the Pope, and that the Pope is subject to the Council, and that to enter
into dispute hereon, were to signify that it is not yet known who should be
Judge.

But Anthony Mariner the Carmelite, a sage and learned man, was of opinion,
that nothing at all should be spoken of Traditions, alleging, that without all
doubt God under the old Testament had commanded Moses to write his Book of
the Law, charging the Kings to read it carefully, and to put a copy of it into
the Arc of the Covenant; but says, that under the new Testament the Scripture
is not necessary, in respect that Jesus Christ has written his doctrine in
men's hearts, without need either of Tables, Arc, or Book. He further says,
that if there were no Scripture at all, yet the Church should loose nothing of
her perfection: It is true, that God has not forbidden his Apostles to write,
but so also is it certain that they have not written by his commandment, and
it is an abuse to say, that God has commanded them to write one part of the
doctrine, and forbidden them to write the other. Again he presses, that if
any man he of a contrary opinion, he should have too maine difficulties to
unfold, the one to declare the things forbidden to be written; the other to
tell us who has made those men that came after the Apostles so adventurous and
bold, to commit to writing that which God had forbidden his Apostles to write.
Lastly he says, that if any man avowed it to be chance and without express
commandment from God, that some things have been written, and others not, he
should accuse the providence of God, in taking no care of so important a
matter, and should call into doubt the assistance of the holy Spirit, that has
instructed the Apostles to write. For these reasons was he of opinion to make
no comparison of Traditions with the Scripture, since by this mean also they
might pass over the Scripture.

But Cardinal Poole an English man, and third Legate, did utterly renounce this
opinion. Yet for al^ that there was a decree framed wherein (without mentioning
the authority of the Church, or that Traditions are above the Scripture) it is
averred, that simply the Scripture and Traditions ought to be received with
equal piety and reverence. Which is a perpetual rule that the Council has
observed, to devise empty Decrees, not expressing the moity of the church of
Romes opinion, and that in ambiguous words, to the end, that upon all occasions
they may make Interpretations fit for their own turns.

CHAP. V. That our Adversaries say there are doctrines and articles of
Christian Faith, yea in the very essential things, which the Apostles have
neither taught by mouth nor writing.
Our Adversaries are not contented to accuse the Scripture alone of
imperfection, but they find also a deficiency in the Aposties preacaing, and
say, that they have not taught all by word of mouth. So as by their account the
holy Scripture and Apostolic Traditions coupled together make no an entire
body of the Christian doctrine. They also freely con^^sse, that the Popes have
added from age to age diverse Traditions, according as they have thought them
necessary; and that not only ^^ things of less importance, but also in matters
essential to the Christian faith.

Bellarmine in his 4. Book of the Est aut e^. Prior partitio Traditionum est
in divi^as Aposto^^^as, Ecclesiasti^as.
Unwritten word of God, chap. 2. calls some Traditions Divine, which Jesus
Christ has taught by mouth, and have not been set down in writing. Others he
calls Apostolic, which the Apostles have taught by word of mouth, and never
wrote them. And the last he calls Ecclesiastical, which he Ecclesiastica
Traditiones proprie dicuntur consuetudines quaed^ antiqua ve^ a Praesulibus vel
a (...) paularim tacito consensa populorum v^m legis obtinuerunt. Ide^ hab^t
Sa^meron, Tom. 13. Disp. 8.
says, are introduced from ancient customs by the Prelates, or by the people,
and creepingly by the silent and vnquestioning agreement of the people, have
gained as it were strength of law. In which distinction he clearly
acknowledges, that the Traditions which he styles Apostolic, are not
Divine; and that Ecclesiastical are neither Divine nor Apostolical. Whence it
is manifest with what subtlety our adversaries commonly attribute the title of
Apostolical to all Traditions indifferently, as if they were all derived from
the Apostles; and how falsely they comprehend Traditions under the title of The
unwritten word of God, when as by their own confessions a great part of these
Traditions is not the Word of God. For Traditions that are not divine, are
necessarily humane. And this is evidently seen in the Prayer Books for
certain hours, and the duties wherewith they charge the people, unto whom they
first commit Gods ten Commandments, and then the commandments of the Church:
which is an argument of their confession, that the commandments of the Church
are not Gods commandments.

In this interim the Council of Sess. 4
Trent, at the before recited place, makes no difference between Traditions;
avouching, that the^ are all received with like affection of piety and
reverence as the hol^ Scripture, and equalleth those Ecclesiastical Traditions
(brought in b^ the Popes at several times) to th^^ ten commandments of the
divine Law, and to the Doctrine of the Gospel written in the New Testament.

The same Cardinal disputing against Barkley touching the Popes power to
depose Kings, and cause them to be killed, as also concerning his authority
over all the Temporaltie of the world, not finding either in Scripture, or in
ancien^ History of the Church, any passage or example to countenance and
underprop so abominable a Bellarm. in Barkl. cap. 3 Non recte de Ecclesia
sentit, qui nihil admit tit nisi quod express in veteri Ecclesia sumpen^ a^t
factu^ ess^ legit, quasi Ecclesia, osterioris temporis aut desierit esse
Ecclesia, aut facuitate non habeat explica^^ et acclarandi, costiruenat etiam
and (...) qua au (...) and (...) Christianon per^^on^.
doctrine, defends himself in this manner: He judges not rightly of the
Church, who admits nothing but what he expressly reads to have ^en
practiced or done in the ancient church: as if the Church of these ^tter times
had c^ased to be a Church, ^ had not power to unfold and d^clare, ^a to
establish and ordain the things ^^at appertain to faith and manners ^f
Christians. This power then of ^he Pope over the life and crown ^f Kings is
not a divine Tradition, ^ or Apostolic, but Eccl^siasticall, ^rought in by the
church of Rome ^n latter times, that is to say, by ^he Pope.

And when our adversaries attribute to the Pope the power of adding to the
Creed, and of making articles of Faith, it is apparent that they hold the Pope
able to bring in. Traditions essential to Christian faith. which the Apostles
have neither written nor taught by word of mouth.

This is that which Thomas Aquinas Them. 2. ^^. q^. 1. are. 10. Ad solam ar.
theritate (...) ^^^(...) is pertinot noua editie symboli, sicut and alia omnia
qua pertinent ad toram Eccl^siam.
teaches in the second part of his Sums, saying, It belongs s^lely to the
authority of the sovereign Pope, to make a new edition of Creed, as also all
things that concern the universal Church. Upon which passage, Andradius that
assisted at the Counsel of Trent, spoke thus in the second Book of the
defense (...) Pontifices ^^lte defini(...) qua anto (...) symbol^ fidei (...)
consu(...).
of the Tridentine faith: The Roman Pontifies in defining many things which
had been formerly hidden, have accustomed to augment the Creed.

This question has been moved to the Council of Florence, between the
Greeks and Latins; the Latins maintaining against the Greeks, that the Pope
and church of Rome may add to the Creed. Finally in the last Session is
concluded in favor of the Latins, Ipsi necessitate ^^gente, iure suo
particula^ illam ex filioque symbolo app^(...) licuisso.
that the Church of Rome has right of power to add to the Creed; and in the
margent is noted, Rom: Pontificis potestas, the power of the ^ope, for by the
church you must ^understand the Pope.

To this does the Jesuit Vasques ^gree, who disputing of the Apo^les
commandment, that bids ^he people of Corinth, 1. Cor. 11. verse. 28 to eat
of this bread and Vazques Tom. 2. Disp. 216. Nu^. 60. Licet co^cederemus hoc
fuisse Apostoloru^ praceptu^, rithilom^n us Ecclesia and summus Po^tifex
potuerunt illud i^ustis de causis abrogare. Neque enim mayor fuit porestas
Apostolorum quam Ecclesia and Pontificu in ferendu praceptis.
drink of this cup, speaking thus: Though we should grant, that it has been
the Apostles commandment, yet nevertheless the Church and the sove reign
Pope were able to abolish this commandment upon just reasons: for the power of
the Apostles to give commandments, has not been greater then that of the
Church and the Pope. Seeing therefore that the Pope has as much power over the
Church as the Apostles, and that the Apostles have had the power to form a
Creed, and to establish in the Church Articles of Faith, which had not been
written before, nor taught by word of mouth in the Church: it follows, that
the Pope has the same power, and that he can forma a Creed, or add to that
which the Apostles have formed, and can ordain matters which the Apostles have
neither written nor taught by mouth.

Whereupon Leo the tenth in his Bull Exurge, which is annexed to the end of the
last Lateran Council, thundereth and pronounces an anathema again ^ Luther,
for having spoken amongst other things, Certum est in manis Ecclesis aut Papa
proorsus no^ esse (...) arti^ulos fides.
that it is no way in the power of the Church or of the Pope to establish
articles of faith.

Salmeron the Jesuit is express in his 13 Tome, and the third part Disp. 6. ^
est ergo. Doctrina ^dei admitit additione^ ^ essentialius.
of the sixth Disputation, saying, The doctrine of faith suffers addition in
the things that are essential. These words are worth observation: for if you
believe this Jesuit, the Pope and Church of Rome ^^ay add to the Traditions
that ^re called Apo^tolicall, and to the ^^ written word, not only matters
^cciden^all, but also essential, not ^aught by the Apostles. Which ^ikewise
does i^feere, that the A^ostles have not taught all that is ^ecessary to
Christian Religion, and that then there wanted some^hing that was essential in
the doctrine of the Apostles. Atque hoc etc. Nec sub Apostolu omnia occur.
runt, vt possent ab en omnia decidi. Et in alio statu erat Ecclesia sub
Apostolu quam sit modo vel fuen^^ post illa tempra. Deinde natura nostra non
omnia simul doceri potest, etc. In iniurtam igitur spiritus sanct^ qui vngit
unction ^a membra Christi, and qui vsque modo operatur, reiicitur quicquid non
est dudum ab Apostolis, etc. Possunt ergo esse n^uae traditiones ad fidem and
m^res specta^tes, licet ab Apostolu no^ sint condit^ aut explicat^.


The same Jesuit in his 8. Disputation, gives a reason why the Apostles have
not written nor preached all things: The affairs (says he) in the Apostles
time di^ not so hit and fall out, as that all things could be decided; and the
Church at that time was of a condition differing from her now pr^sent estate,
and from her estate since that very time. Moreover, our nature cannot apprehend
all things at once, but by progress and succession of time: neither is it
capable of all truths at a time, etc. It were then to abuse the holy Ghost
(that an^oynteth Christ's members with ointment, and that operateth until thi^
instant) to reject all that has not bee^ spoken by the Apostles. Whereupon he
concludes, therefore may ther^ be new Traditions concerning faith and
manners, though they were never made or explicated by the Apostles.

Now I leave to judge, with wha^ conscience it may be maintained that the
Traditions are ancient and Apostolical, seeing that our adversaries do
confess, that there are many of them modern and new, whereof the Apostles
never spoke word.

And to the end that no man may conceive these new Traditions to be spungie
and of no weight, unnecessary, or unessentiall to christian Religion, he
speaks directly, that the new Traditions are touching faith and manners, and
that the ^^ctrine of the Christian faith re^^veth yet an addition even in ^ings
that are essential: yea and ^ore expressly in the same 8. Dis^tation:. Tertio.
varia. Hins (...)gi potest non om^^a tradita esse ab Apostolu, sed ^^ qu^ tunc
^e^por^ necessaria ^^ qu^ ad salutem credent^^ (...)
Hence (says he) may be col^cted, that the Apostles have not given ^l by
Tradition, but only the things ^at then were necessary, and that were ^oper
for the believers salvation. Ac^ording to this Jesuits Tenet, the Apostles
have not taught all that ^s necessary in these our days; and ^here are now
articles of faith necessary to salvation, which in the Apostles time were not
necessary.

Of the number of these new Traditions neither written nor preached by the
Apostles, and that are now decreed for necessary and essential to Religion,
are Romish Indulgences, and Treasure of the Church, wherein the Pope gathers
up the superaboundance of satisfactions made by Saints an^ Monks, and
distributes them ^^ others by his Pardons, to satisfi^ the justice of God. This
is an essen^iall doctrine of the Romish Religion, and the arch or Buttres^^
that shoreth ^p Papisme. For i^ there any thing of more importance in Religion,
then the remission of sins, and the means to satisfy the justice of God?
yet in this while our adversaries do confess that this is a new Doctrine, and
that there is found no trace or footstep of it in all Antiquity, as we shall
hereafter discover.

When we produce the Council of Laodicea, and multitudes of Fathers, Meliton,
Origin, Eusebius, Athanasius, Epiphanius, Hierome, Gregory Nazianzen, Hilary,
Ruffin, etc. that unanimously exclude the Books of Macabees, out of the list of
Canonical books; our adversaries ^nswer that then the apprehensions ^^d
opinions were much differing, ^r that the Church had not yet ^ecided any thing
upon this point. ^ere then by their own confession ^^ a Tradition which the
Apostles ^ever taught, nor decided either by ^outh or writing, to wit, that
these Books of Maccabees are canonical, which they do now falsely ^nsert
amongst the Apostolical Traditions.

In this class I rank Invocation of Saints, adoration of Relics and Images,
the painted Trinity, the power of the Pope to dispense with oaths and vows;
to dispose of kingdoms, and depose Kings; to canonize Saints; to release
distressed souls out of Purgatory, the Communion under one kind, the Limbus
for little Infants, private Masses, particular men's prayers, and public
service in an unknown tongue; the assumption ^ the Virgin Mary bodily into
he^ven, together with her coronatio^ in the dignity of Queen of heaven and Lady
of the world; and many other the like things, wherein ^ this present they make
Gods Service to consist; of these is the body of Papistry composed, and herein
are the people more carefully instructed and exercised, then in the Doctrine of
salvation contained in the holy Scripture. All which are new Traditions and
unheard of in the ancient church; yea and that by the confession of our
adversaries, as we shall prove in fit place.

It would be very proper and convenient, to know when the Christian doctrine
shall be perfect, and whether the Popes shall ever be able to add new articles
of faith thereunto.

And if it be so that the Apostles ^e neither taught by mouth or ^iting, all
the Doctrines essen^ly belonging to Christian ^th, it would be necessary to
^derstand whether the Apostles ^ew the Doctrines which they ^ue not taught: for
if they knew ^em, why did they not publique^ teach them? why have they
^ssembled Doctrines essentially ^elonging to Religion? But if ^hey knew them
not, it must be ^cknowledged, that the Popes sur^asse the Apostles in
knowledge, and that Saint Paul deceiues himself, when he delivers that he
had taught the Ephesians all ^he counsel of God, Acts 2. verse. 27.

CHAP. VI. A proof of the same, because our a^ versar^es do affirm that the
Pop^ and the church of Rome may chang^ that which God commands in the
Scriptures, and infringe or null^^ the Apostles commandments.
WHosoever teaches things contrary to the Apostles consequently teaches
things that are differing and rep^gnant. The Traditions whereby the ordinance
of Jesus Christ and the Apostles is changed and abrogated, cannot be
Apostolical Traditions, unl^sse we would have the Apostles to be contrary to
themselves. Seeing then the Pope and church of Rome attribute to themselves the
power of altering the Apostles ordinances by their Traditions, it follows
that they may make traditions ^^ich the Apostles never taught, ^^er by mouth or
writing. This that which is practiced in the ^^rch of Rome, and that our
ad^saries do openly maintain.

We have already heard the Ie^e Vasques speaking, that the Vasques Tom. 3.
disp. 216. Number. 60.
^^rch and sovereign Pontifie may ^^ish and break the Apostles com^dement,
because the Apostles power ^iue precepts has not been greater ^^ the Popes.

The Council of Trent, in the P^^ter^^ ^^(...) potestat^m p^rpe^^ in Ecclesia
f^iss^, vt ^^ Sacra^^t^r^^ disp. (...) s^ v^ (...) substantia, ^^ s^ ^^ueret
vel m^tares qua suscipientium vti ^ita^i magis exp^^r^ iudic^^et.
^ Session, chap. 1. and 2. declares* ^t this power has the Church a^ ^^es
had in ministering of the Sacra^^ts, (saving their substance) to ^r^^e or alter
that which she judge^ ^^st expedient for the vtility of th^se ^t receive them.
This Council ^deed specifieth that exception, ^eir substance remaining safe;
but ^e Pope assumeth power to him^^fe to judge, and define in the authority of
a Judge, what things ^^ Sacraments are essential, or whether they be so or
no. By the means he boundeth his pow^^ with what limits he pleases, an^
changes matters essential in^ matters accidental. As for example, it is
essential to the Sacrame^ of the holy Supper to be a signif^catiue sign of
our participatio^ of the body and blood of Ies^ Christ: This signification is
dim^nished to the people, by the priv^tion Perron against the king of great
Bretany, in his Treatise of the Communion under both kinds. p. ^108.
of the Cup, as Cardinal Perron ingenuously acknowledgeth^ It is essential to
the Sacrament (...) be taken for the remission of sins ^ as it was first
instituted by the Lord: Now this essence is changed in the Masses that are said
^^ the corn, for horses and disease^ sheep, for the success of a voyag^ etc.
It is likewise essential to the holy Supper, to be a communion ^^e Apostle
tells us, 1. Corinthians. ^ The bread which we break, is it ^he Communion with
the body of ^^st? for as much as we that are ^y in number are one bread and
one (...). This communion is aboli^d in private Masses, where no ^^ does
communicate, and where (...) man does assist. And these ^rds of the
Institution, Take, eat, (...) become ridiculous, since no (...) is there
either to take or eat. ^^e real and propitiatory sacri^e of Christ's body, is
it not of (...) essence of the Mass? yet is ^^re an addition to the Lords
In^tution, wherein is neither men^n made of sacrifice, or of sacri^^ing his
body, or of making any ^lation to God. The Pope then (...) the Sacraments
changes essen^all things as well as accidental. and by the way observe but
the ^ride of this Council, and detestable impiety, to be of opinion that the
Church of Rome knows better then Jesus Christ, wh^ is expedient for the
peoples sa^ vation.

Does not the Council Constance, in the thirteenth Session Lieut in Primitiva
Ecclesia hususmodi Sacramentu^ reciperetus a fidelibus sub vo^aque specis, etc.
confess, that in the primitiv^ Church, (and consequently in th^^ of the
Apostles) this Sacrame^ is to be received by the faith full under both kinds?
yet after wards forbad the Cup to be ^^ven to the people. This Tradi^ tion
which a little while sino^ has changed the Apostles observation, cannot be an
Apostolical Tradition.

The Gloss upon the Canor^ Lector, in the four and thirtieth Distinction of
the Romish Decree, says, that Papa dispensat contra Apostolum, the Pope
dispenses again^ the Apostle. Pope Innocent the third says in Innocent. 3.
Decret. Deconcess. prabend. tit. 8. cap. Proposuit. Secundu^ planitudinem
potestat is de iure supra ius possumus dispensate.
manner, We may according to fullness of our power dispose of the (...) and
dispense above the Law. And ^reover the Gloss of the Doc^rs adds: For the
Pope dispen^ against the Apostle and against the Testament, as also in the
vows and ^hs. And the Gloss of the Ca^^ Sunt quidam in the 1. question the
25. cause: Papa dispensat in angelio interpretando ipsum, the ^pe dispenses in
the Gospel in ^ving it interpretation. Cap. Quanta personam. Non enim homo,
sed Deus separat, ques Romanus Pontifox (qui no^ purs hominis, sed very Dei
vice^ gerit in terris) Ecclesiaru^ necessitate pensata dissolvit. In quae verba
Glossa sic habet: Etiam aliquid est secundu^ quod homo. tit. de haret. cum
Christus. Et est verus Deus and verus homo; gerens very Dei vicem. Vnde dicitur
habere coeleste arbitriu^. Etiam natural rerum immutat, substantialia vnius re^
applicando aly: Et de nullo potest aliquid faecere. Et sententia^ qua nulla est
potest facere aliquam. Quia in his qua vult, ei est pro rations volun^as. Nee
est qui ei dicat: cur ita facu? ipse enim potest supra ius dispensare. Ide^ de
iniustitta potest facere iustitiam.


In the first book of Gregory, the ^nth decretall, at the 7. title, Chap. ^e
3. we have an Epistle of Inno^nt the 3. where he speaks ^us: Those which
the Bishop of Rome ^th separate, it is not a man that sepa^teth them but God.
For the Pope holeth place on earth, not simply of a man ^ut of true God. Which
the Gloss ^xplaineth by the example of Jesus Christ, who is very God at very
man; informing us likewi^ that the Pope though he be ver^ God, yet leaves
not to be some thing the same that man is. In pro^secution where of the same
Gloss^ declares how far forth the Pope power does ex^end, which is, The he
has celestial government, and ther^ fore may change the nature of things
applying the substance of the o^e to the other, of nothing can create something
and a Decree that is void, he ca^ make it in force; for in matters the he
will have come to pass, his will i^ his reason; and no m^n questione^ him
wherefore do you that? for he ca^ dispense above the Law; and of in justice
can make justice; and proves all this by multitudes of Canons and Decrees.

Cardinal Bellarmine speaks as much in the 31. Chap. against In bono sensu
dedit Christus Petro potestatem faciendi de peccato non peccatum, and de non
peccato peccatum.
Barkley: In good sense and judgment ^rist has given to Peter (and
conse^ently to the Pope) the power of ma^g that to be sin which is no sin,
It ^d that which is no sin to be sin. It no wonder then if by the same ^wer
he can make justice to be in^tice, and sin to be no sin, that ^ can
nullify the Apostles ordi^nces, and make them v^iust, as so cancel the old
Traditions, and Bell. lib. 4. de Pontet. cap. 5 Si Papa erraret in pracipiendo
vttia, vel prohibenao virtutes, teneretur Ecclesia credere vitia esse bona and
virtutes malas, nisi vellet contra conscientia^ peccaro
^stablish new. The same Cardinal ^roceedeth so far as to say: if ^he Pope
erred in commanding vices and forbidding virtues, yet the Church should be
obliged to believe that the ^ices are good and the virtues evil, ^nlesse it
would sin against the ^onscience.

Andradius in his second book of the defense of the Tridentiue Minime vero
maiores nostri religione and pietate excellentes, Apostoloru^ haec and
quamplurima alta decreta refigere in ani^mum induxissent, nisi intelle^cissent,
etc. Liquet eos minima errasse qui dicunt Romans Pontif posse nonnunquam in
legibus dispensare a Paulo, and primis 4. Concilijs. Cum certu^ sit no^ omnia
quae Apostols institueru^t iure divino esse instituta.
faith acknowledges that His ancestors, men excelling in piety have broken and
annulled many Decrees of the Apostles. And moreover pronounces this sentence:
It is evident that those have not erred who say that the Romish Pontifies can
sometimes dispense with obeying the Law of the Apostle S. Paul, and the four
first Counsels.

Whereupon Cardinal Tolet in his first book of Sacerdotall institution, Chap.
68. gives this reason: For all that the Apostles have instituted, is not
ordained jure diuino, that is to say, it ought not to be held for the word of
God. Now amongst the Apostles ordinances, to discern such as are jure diuino
from those as are not, the Church of Rome has no other rule but the Popes will
and pleasure, who can make a commandment of the Apostle to be or not to be
held for the word of God. This venerable Cardinal gives us the Apostles
commandment for an example, 1. Timot. 3. Let the Bishop be husband of one
wife. For the Pope can admit and allow of bigamies to the Priesthood.

Cardinal Perron in his book against the King of great Bretaine Lib. 2.
Observat. 3. cap. 3. page 674.
makes a Chapter expressly to that purpose, entitled: Of the authority of the
Church to alter matters contained in the Scripture: And in the same book in
the Chapter that handles the Communion under both kinds, he says, that when
in Page 1109. and 1115.
the form of the Sacraments some great inconveniences are met withal, the
Church may therein dispense and alter. And speaking of the Lords commandment,
Drink ye all of it, he maintains that this precept was not immutable nor
indispensable, alleging that the Church has judged that there may be
dispensation for it.

Charles Bovius in his observations upon the 24. Chap. of the 7. book of the
Apostles constitutions, says that The Church of Ecclesia Rom na quae
Apostolita vtens potestate, su gula pro con^^tione tem^o^um in melius mutat.
Quartae fertae (...) quod diu mansit in Ecclesia, nunc (quod est dole^^u^ at
que lugendu^) cum alijs optimis matoru^ institutu, in desuetudinem abijt.
Gregor. de Vate^. Tom 4 disp. 6. qa. 8. puncto 5. sect. 10. Et certe quaeda^
posterioribus temporibus rectiut ^onstitu^a esse in ec^lesia qua^ initio se
haberent. Id confirmat authori^ate Amb^osij, and Thomae Waldensis Tomo 2. de
Sacrament. cap. 94.
Rome chalenging to her self Apostolical authority, can change and alter
every thing to better, according to the condition of the times, yet there
complains that a custom of the ancient Church to fast on wednesdayes, and
many other very good Laws were abolished.

Gregory of Valence, in the fourth Tome of his Commentaries, and the sixth
Disputation, makes no difficulty to affirm that Many things in these latter
times are better ordained in the Church then they were in the beginning, that
is to say, from the Apostles time.

The sacred Scripture in the 18. and 20. of Leuiticus, lays down certain
degrees of consanguinity and alliance which hinder marriage, whereof the most
removed is the marriage of the Uncle with the Niece, or the Aunt with the
Nephew; which are marriages forbidden and declared incestuous by the word of
God, which permits marriages in other degrees De la permission d'espouser les
2. soeurs, voyez Almain au li. de la puissance Eccl. and larque.
more removed. But the Pope usurps power to himself in giving liberty to
marriages forbidden in the Scripture, yea extending so far as to a toleration of
marying two sisters, as also he permits the Uncle to mary the Niece. On the
otherside he forbids marriages in more remote degrees, and which God
permits in his holy word; as marriages between the issues of cosen germans,
and between cosen germans removed. Whereupon the Council of Trent in the 24.
Session at the 3. Canon denounces an Anathema against al those that shall say,
that the church of Rome cannot forbid marriage in degrees allowed by the word of
God, and cannot dispense in degrees forbidden. Thus runs the Si quis dixerit
cos tantu^ consanguini t^t^ ^t affinitatis gradus qui ^^u^^ico exprimu^tur,
posse impedire matrimonium contrahendum, and dirimere contractum, nec posse
Ecclesi^ in nonnullu illoru^ dispensare aut censtituere vt plures impediant and
dirimant, Anathema sit.
Canon: If any man says that there are no more degrees of consanguinity and
alliance, then what are expressed in Leuiticus, that can hinder from
contracting of marriage, or separate that which is contracted, and that the
Church cannot dispense in some of these degrees, nor ordain that many other
degrees hinder or separate the marriage, let him be an Anathema. This Council
curses those which say, that the Church of Rome cannot alter Gods ordinance,
nor dispense with that which God has forbidden in his holy Word. It is true
that in the same Session this Council gives an exception in these In secundo
gradu ^unqua^ dispensetur nisi inter magnos Prin^ipes, et ob publi^a^ ^ausam.
words: Let no dispensation be given in the second degree, unless between
great Princes and for public cause. For the laws of the Church of Rome open
or shut according to the quality and riches of the persons. Now it were good to
know whether to marry a wives sister, or his ^eece, or cosen; a dispensation
were ever asked of Saint Peter, and whether he gave dispensation to the rich
and sent the poor away.

According to this power that the Pope arrogateth to himself to dispense
against Gods commandment contained in the Scriptures, ^hee dispenses with
persons concerning their oaths and vows; he dispenses with subjects and
officers of a King, for keeping the fidelity sworn to their Sovereign
Prince. He separateth marriages lawfully contracted, under the shadow of
Religion, against the Lords commandment, speaking of the dissolution of
Marriages, Math. 19. 6. What God has joined together, let no man put assunder.
For the same that Tolet speaks of the Apostles, may be spoken of Jesus
Christ, that all that he has institut^d is not Lib 1. inst^t. S^c^rd. c. 68.
Iure divino. He exempteth children from obedience to their parents, contrary
to the Law of God, when they are cast into Monast^ries against the wills of
their fathers and mothers. He suffers whoredom, yea in Rome it self, and
there establishes Brothell-houses against the Law of God. He has forbidden
the public Service in ^ known tongue, appointed Masses without Communicants,
and ordained Image-service against the express commandments of Jesus Christ,
and the Apostle Saint Paul: and against the practice of the primitive Church,
yea against the very Law of God, as we will show in fit place.

These things and many more the like do explain, that the question between
us and our adversaries, is not alone, whether the Apostles have taught
Traditions by mouth, which they would not have to be set down in writing, and
whether besides the Scripture, there ought also Apostolical Traditions to be
received. For the principal point of difference is touching the Traditions
which our Adversaries confess not to have been written nor taught by the
mouth of the Apostles, and which have been long since introduced. And touching
the Popes power to add to the Creed, and to establish new articles of faith.
Yea especially and above all, touching an arrogance without example, wherein
the Pope and Church of Rome attribute to themselves the power of annulling Gods
commandments, and of the Apostles contained in holy Scriptures, and to alter
the institution of our Lord, and to judge, (as Cardinal Perron speaks) that
such and such commandments of our Lord are dispensable. These kind of
Traditions ought to be called after the Italian word Tradimenti, treasons or
conspiracies against God.

CHAP. VII. Passages extracted out of the Writings of our adversaries, which
prove that in the Church of Rome, Traditions are without comparison more
esteemed and respected then the holy Scripture, and the Scripture reviled and
charged with injuries. Jesuit Regourds boldness to blemish and defame the
Scripture.
THe Council of Trent in the fourth Session, seems contented to equal
Tradition with the Scripture, ordaining that the one and the other be received
and honored with like affection of piety and reverence. But this Council
does now, (as customarily it does) propose its doctrine in doubtful terms,
involving it self in darkness and obsuritie. For whosoever is never so little
versed in the writings of our adversaries, or has exactly considered the
practice and customs of the Romish Church, shall easily discover that the holy
Scripture is of no comparison with the value and account of Tradition, which is
exalted with praises and magnificall titles, as also most carefully observed,
whilst the Scripture is rejected and made odious to the people as a dangerous
book.

I. We have seen in the former Chapter, how our adversaries affirm openly,
that the Pope and Church of Rome can alter the Lords Institution, and nullify
his Ordinance: the which being granted, it necessarily follows, that the
tradition of the Church which corrects the holy Scripture, and alters what
is therein ordained, be of greater authority then the Scripture.

II. When our adversaries unanimously affirm that the Scripture is not Judge,
but that the authority of judging belongs to the Church; hereby they
withdraw us from the Scriptures judgment to rely upon the Churches Tradition:
for by the Tradition of the Church they only understand the Laws of the
Church of Rome, by the which they would have us judged.

III. When they say that the Stapleton lik. 2. de authoritate Scripturae. cap.
11. Dix^ et d^c^, non ta^ ipsius fidei regulam in se esse scriptura^, quam
ipsam scriptura^u^ regu^a^ esse (...) Ecclesi^.
Scripture is not the rule of our faith, but that it is the faith of the Church
that rules the Scripture, they manifestly prefer Tradition of the church
before Scripture: for the faith of the Church, and Tradition of the Church are
all one.

IIII. These goodly Maxims wherewith they dull our ears; Charron. a^ 2. chap
de l^ troisieme verite. Nous voulous l'eglise avoir pour nostre regard plus
d'authorite que l'escriture.
That the Church ought to have more authority over us then the Scripture; That
it is the Church which gives authority to the Scriptures; and that the
authority of the Scripture over us is founded upon the authority of the
Church: what are their meaning other then that the Scripture owes that
authority she has, to the Tradition of the Church? For the Tradition of the
Church is nothing else but the voice and judgment of the Church, whereby she
pronounces as being a sovereign and infallible Judge, that the Scripture
ought to be received?

V. If the Scripture must be Staplet. lib. 1 de authorit. Scriptura. c. 9
Ipsis Proph^tis e medio ^ublatu, ^^ru^ prophet^as a Deo esse crede^du^ non est
nisi id Ecclesia confi^met. Synodus Romana sub Gregor. 7. Quod nullus liber
Canonicus habeatur sine authoritate Papa.
believed, because the Tradition of the Church so ordained it, what follows,
but that Tradition of the Church of Rome is more credible then the Scripture?

VI. The Jesuit Coster in his Enchiridion, chap. 1. calls the doctrine
imprinted in the heart of the Church an other species or kind of Scripture, and
compares it also with holy Scriptures. The excellence Huius Scripturae
praestantia ^ul^is partibus su^erat scripturas quas nobis in membra^^ Apostoli
reliquerunt. Primu^ quod illa exarata sit digito dei, hac calamis Apostoloru^.
(says he) of this kind of Scripture surpasses much the holy Scripures which
the Apostles have left us in parchment, especially because this is witten with
the finger of God, the other was written with Apostles pens. By his leave, I
would willingly ask him whether the Apostles pens were not guided by the
spirit of God.

VII. Carranza in the second Controversy: The Church is a rule Nos di^imus
quod prior regula et notior et multo latior est Ecclesia quam Scriptura
canonica, ^t hac ab illa debet regulari, and non e contra.
that is elder and more known, yea much more ample then the Canonical
Scripture, and this ought to be governed by that, but not on the contrary. ^n
saying that the Church is a rule, ^t is evident, that by the Church ^ee
understands the Tradition and laws of the Church: for the persons are not
the rule.

VIII. Bellarmine in his fourth Quada^ sunt Traditiones maiores quod ad
obligatione^, qua^ quadam Scripturae.
book of the Word of God, chap. 6. There are Traditions that are greater then
some Scriptures, in point of obligation.

IX. Salmeron in his first Prolegomenon: Nunc de Nam etsi Eccclesiae ac
Scripturae authoritas a Deo sit, illa tamen Ecclesia antiquior est, atque adeo
dignior, siquide^ Scripture propter Ecclesia^ contexta est.
Though the authority as well of the Church as of the Scripture be of God,
yet the authority of the Church is more ancient, yea and more worthy; for the
Scripture is made for the Church. By the same reason one might say, that
subjects have more authority then Laws and Kings: for the people are more
ancient then Laws and Kings, and Laws and Kings are made because of the
people.

Now, the authority of the Church of Rome cannot be promoted above the
Scripture, but that by the same reason the authority of Tradition in the
Church of Rome is to be advanced above the Scripture: for Tradition is the law
of the Church of Rome.

X. Cordubensis: To decide contr^versies C^dub. Art. ^. cap. 80. Catholicae
Ecclesi^ Traditi^ est certiss^^a regula.
of the Faith, Tradition of the Catholic Church is the most certain Rule.

XI. We have formerly heard Coster and Salmeron the Jesuits speaking, that
God would not have Traditions that are taught out of the Apostles mouth to be
written for fear lest holy things should be given to dogs. Herein do they
not clearly signify that the Scriptures are for the dogs, but that God would
not have Traditions to be in such danger, as being more sanctified things, and
worthy of greater respect.

XII. To what end do these men say, that Jesus Christ has commanded the
Apostles to preach, and not to write, but that unwritten Tradition might be
preferred before the Scripture, and have much more authority?

XIII. Did it ever happen that any of our adversaries have reported the same of
Traditions which they have said of Scripture? Have they ever called the
Traditions a dumb rule, a part or parcel of a rule, an ambidexter sword, a
stone of scandal, a nose of wax? have they ever accused Traditions of
obscurity, of ambiguity, or of imperfection, as they have the Scripture?

XIV. But the Jesuit Salmeron shall suffice for all: for in the third part of
his 13 Tome, and 8 Disputation, he treats of this matter punctually and at
large, and thus compares Scripture with Tradition: Tradition (says he) is
above all Estigin^^. (...) est (...) ad salute (...) Ebidem. P^^ ^^ ergo
Scriptura ^^mendat traditione (...) scriptura^: et ob id magis est necessaria,
quia ad (...) come adanda^ est Scriptura-Necessaria ost (...) ad (...) du bra
qua express in scri(...) ^on conti^ent or nec (...).. Postre^^. Ibidem. ^ui
no^ creditura dir^om in ecclesia receta (...) scriptura malo (...) similes est,
^^l^^^ aebitum reddere si non oste^datur syngra^ha, cum satu sit idoneos
produce^^ restes.. Secunda. Se^unda co^ditio (...) qu^^ sit Ser. (...) (...).
Trtia conditio quae traditione commendat, est claritas and perspa (...). Nam
primu^ Scripturas (...) von cognoscit.. D^^de. Scriptura p^test ab haeroticu
traili ad quoth sibi quisque collibuerit. Tertio quia. Scriptura dubioru^ quae
pullulab^^ (...) ess^ non ^oterat, etc. ^^ quia (...) a^f(...) est, tum quia
muta est etc. H^nc in (...) Testamento ad Ecclesia^ mettitur qui aliquo (...)
torquetur, o^ co^stat Act. 15. on autem ad ^^ riptaras qu^ s^ instar nasi ceret
ducuntur quo quis vult. etc. Ideo protervire vole^tes, Scripturis no^ possunt
refelli, vna ergo traditione ^ugulana^ sunt. Quod aute^. Q^^ ^ h^c su fi^mior
inde ^^ns^are potest, quia notior est Ecclesia et Apostoloru^ sanctitas, quam
scripturae, cu^ haec per illam cognoscatur. Ibidem. Scripturae verae probantur,
quia sunt co^formes traditioni iam factae.
things necessary to sa^vation, yea high^^ then Scripture it self. And a
little after: The Scripture rather recommendeth Tradition, then Tradition the
Scripture* and therefore Tradition is more necessary, for Scripture is made to
recommend Tradition to us. And there again: Tradition is nec^ssary, because of
many doubts that are not contained, nor expressly defined in the Scriptures. And
again, He that believes not the Tradition received in the Church, but
s^archeth the Scripture, resembl^th an ill debtor, who refuses to pay unless
he see a quittance, or the bond, when as to produce fit witnesses would be
enough. Which is as much to say, as the people may* pretermit and balke the
Scripture, but must cling close to the Testimony and Tradition of the church of
Rome.

He further alleges, Tradition is more ancient then Scripture; whence he
infers, that it is more excellent then Scripture; and says a gain, that
the same which recommendeth the Traditions about Scripture, is their
clearenesse and evidence: for the people have no knowledge* of the Scripture:
and the Scripture may be wrested by the Heretics to whatsoever they will.
He adds likewise, that the Scripture has not been able to judge of doubts,
because it is difficult and dumb; and that he that is troubled with any doubt
in the new Testament is sent to the Church, Acts 15. but not to the
Scriptures, which like a waxen nose are molded and twisted at pleasure.
Whereupon (says he) those that will be perverse cannot be vanquished by the
Scriptures, their throats then must be cut by Tradition alone. And further,
That Tradition is more firm then scripture, it appears in this, that the
Church and the sanctity of the Apostles is more known then Scripture, because
this is known by that. Wherein he speaks against common sense: for it is by
the Scripture that we learn the sanctity of the Apostles: and we know not
that God will have but one Church in the world, if he did not teach it us in
the Scriptures.

Again, he dares to say, that the Scriptures are true, because they are
conformable to the Tradition already* made. Will we know if the unwritten Word
of God in two Tables ought to be received? will we know if the doctrine
contained in the Psalms of David, in the Prophets, and in the Evangelists be
true? let us enquire what the Popes opinion is, and what Tradition of the
Romish Church is, and we shall soon be satisfied: for, (say our adversaries)
the Scripture must be examined by the Tradition of the Church of Rome, which is
the rule of Scripture, and is not ruled by the Scripture. Truly these things
cannot be read without horror and detestation.

Of the self same stuff is that Apostoli non scripserunt omnes, quasi ex
co^muni consensu partito labor, sed tantu^ aliqui pro causa particulari, et ad
conservandam traditionem.
which he adds: The Apostles have not written by one common consent, but some
have written for particular respects, and to preserve Tradition. When you hear
these kind of people speak, you would say that the Scripture is nothing but a
letter of credence, to give authority to the Church of Rome, and her
Traditions.

Wherefore he concludes, that Ibidem. Ideo nen receaendu^ est ab Ecclosia,
viva traditione erudita, vel ob scriptura^ allegatas.
no man ought to depart from the Church, instructed by living Traditions,
notwithstanding the allegations of Scripture.

He compares also the amplitude and large extent of Tradition, with the
narrow limits of the scripture. Qu^n^o. Traditio multo est vniversalio* quam
Script^ra, quia ad plura tempora, ad plura obiecta et ad lura individua s^
exte^ait.
Tradition (says he) is much more vn^versall then Scripture, and reaches to
further time, to more matter, and more persons then the scripture. To be
short, if these men were to be believed, Tradition comprehends all the
doctrine of faith and manners, but many things are wanting in the Scripture.

Having in this manner dishonored the Scripture, and placed it far below
Tradition, he makes them fight, and plotteth to have the allegations of
Scripture to be repulsed by Tradition. To those (says. Alias. P^tenti
scriptura^ opponenda est Traditio.
he) who demand the Scripture, Tradition is to be offered in opposition: as if
he should tell us: You ask me passages of Scripture, but content your self
that I allege unto you Tradition, and the op^nion of the Church of Rome. For
this is the more necessary rule, more ancient, more firm, more easy, more
universal, and by which the truth of the Scripture ought to be examined. Thus
is the Word of God handled; and it is so come to pass, that the same Jesuit
in his Quarto cum. Cum Scriptura obscura sit valde, nec i^dex esse qu^at etc.
Proprium ergo et diabolicu^ sensum h^bent, i^^^rco peius est illu, vacare
Scripturis qua^ fabul^.
tenth Disputation having said, that the Scripture cannot be Judge, adds,
that the Heretics (for so he qualifies us) have a diabolical sense, and do
worse to addict themselves to the Scripture, then to apply themselves to fables.

But nothing does more plainly show, with what a loud voice our adversaries cry
up the tradition of the Church of Rome above the Scripture, then when they say,
that the church is not subject nor bound to the Scripture, but the Scripture is
subject to the church, that is to say, God is subject to men. For our
adversaries acknowledge, that the scripture is the word of God. These Lindan.
Panop^^n indic^ tituloru^ lib. 5 cap. 5.
are the words of Lindanus in hi^ Panoplia: The Church has not been Ecclesia^
non esse ex voluntate Christi scripturu allegatam.
obliged to the Scriptures by Christ's will and commandment.

Coster the Jesuit in his 3. chapter of his Manual: Christ was not willing
Christus nec Ecclesia^ sua^ a chartace^ scriptis pendere, nec me^bra^is
mysteria sua committere voluit.
that his Church should depend upon Scriptures in paper, nor was he pleased to
committ his mysteries to parchment.

Salmeron in his second Prolegomenon: In the Church of God (understanding.
Septimo Scriptura. Addimus in Ecclesia Dei esse Spiritum sanctu^ Scriptura
authore^. Non mirum ergo si Ecclesia Dei, quae Spiritu^ habet, subijciatur.
always the Romish) is the holy spirit, which is Author of the Scripture: it
is no marvel then if the Scripture be subject to the Church that has the
spirit. What? is not the Pope subject to the Scripture? is he not subject to
the Law of God, which God has given us written in two tables? Is he not
obliged to obey the Doctrine of the Gospel written in the New Testament? Now
if the head of the Church of Rome be subject to the Scripture, how much more
the Church of Rome, that is subject to the Pope? But is it not a transcendent
blasphemy to defend, that the Scripture is subject to the Church of Rome? For
is not the holy Scripture the Word of God? It must otherwise follow, that the
word of God is subject to men, and that Gods commandments are subordinate to
the Pope, to whom the Church of Rome is subject. Now tell me after such
abomination, whether these men do believe that there is one God, and one
Religion.

Thomas Stapleton an English Doctor, in his second Book of the Authority of
the Scripture, chap. D^ non t^^sius si^e^ regu^am in se esse scripturam, qua^
ipsaru^ scripturaru^ regulam esse fide^ Ecclesiae.
11. I have said, and do say, that the Scripture in it self is not the rule
of faith, but the faith of the Church is the rule of Scripture. Now the faith
of the Church is nothing but Tradition of the Church. His scope then is, that
the Scripture shall be regulated and examined by the Tradition of the Romish
Church, and that it shall be subject to that rule; whence is to be concluded,
that God speaking to us in the holy Scriptures is directed by men, and subject
to their judgment. The Prophets whose writings are extant with us, were
extraordinarily stirred up to reprehend the church of that time, and to
chastise the Priests, the Sacrificers, and the Scribes that erred in manners
and doctrine. Now in reason tell me, were the prophesies of these Prophets
subject to the authority of that Church? Was the faith of these Sacrificers a
rule, by which those divine Prophesies were to be examined, and which we have
kept to this present time? Go to then, if the prophecies were not subject to
Priests and Sacrificers, that lived about the Prophets time, how are they now
subject to the Pope? by what occasion are they become subject to the
superintendency of the Church of Romes Tradition?

Briefly, we are now arrived at an age wherein blasphemy is come to the
highest degree, men openly professing, to pull God with violence from his
Throne, and most insolently to climb above him. Surely the Mahometans do
speak of the Scripture with more respect and reverence.

What is the scope or purpose of Jesuit Regourds late book, entitled
Catholic demonstrations, but to prove, that to rest upon the Scripture, is
the way to all impiety and atheism? If herein he meant only our French Bibles,
or the diversity of latin translations, or the sundry interpretations which
he discovers in some of our Doctors, (though all this which he says are
but calumnies, and a Fardell of unprofitable trifles, which we have refuted in
a former treatise) yet this were to forge untruths with Method, and scarce to
touch upon the question: but he means the originals, Hebrew and Greek,
wherein he finds no certainty* He discovers in them manifest
contradictions, Page 440.
and error in the calculation of times. He says that S. Paul Page 562.
used fraud (but an honest fraud) toward the Corinthians. He tells us Page
128. and 131.
that many books of the Scripture are lost, that the Scriptures were burnt in
time of persecution, and the Copies perished: that many devout Doctors Page
131.
do affirm, that under the captivity of Babylon, all the old Testament was
depraved, rent in pieces, and burnt, until Esdras did newly re-compose the
same Scriptures: that the Jews (our Saviors enemies) have made vowells Pap.
183.
in the old Testament, and so changed the sense of the scripture, and made it
doubtful. The same (says he) is true of the new Testament, the which having
been written without accents, and without marks and distinctions of words, no
man can assure himself of the true sense, seeing that the sense depends upon
the accents, etc. And a little further: We have not therefore any true knowledge
of the sense of the Scripture, and consequently we are pointed and referred
over to the mercy of the contestations of Grammarians, to the litigious craft
of critical spirits, to the capritious fancies of Dictionary-makers, to the
Gallimafries and Chimeraes of scholiasts. Now for all these difficulties, there
is but one single remedy, to weet, we must repair to the Church, that is to
say, the Pope, and whom it shall be his pleasure to authorize. Whereupon it
were good to know, when there i^ a question concerning the exposition of an
Hebrew or Greek passage, whether a Pope, who understands neither Hebrew nor
Greek shall therein be a good Interpreter: whether sitting in the Apostoli^ke
chair, he shall give infallible interpretations of a Text whereof he knows
not a letter: whether having called the Doctors to instruct him thereupon, he
instantly reinuesteth them with an infallible spirit, and enableth them with
power not to err in matters, wherein he himself understands nothing.
Whence then proceeds so great a diversity and contrariety amongst these
Doctou^s in the Scriptures interpretation? why amongst their writings do they
refute the interpretations of one the other? Is it not the Pope and the Church
of Rome that by the Council of Trent has authorized the vulgar ^atine
translation, and ordained that it should only be received for ^uthenticall,
although it be the worst interpretation of all; and stuffed with a thousand
errors and absurdities? have not the Popes themselves since the Council of
Trent caused multitudes of faults to be amended therein? do not the most
learned of the Romish Church, Pagnin, Arias Montanus, Isidorus Clarius,
Andradius, Sixtus Senensis complain of the corruption of this translation?
wherein the Jesuits themselves are not silent, especially Salmeron in his
Salm. Pro^. 9. Quinqua. l. Can. 5. In nouo Testamento sequenda est editio
vulgata ac te^enda corrigenda tamen, and emaculanda prius in his in quibus aut
temporum iniuria, aut labrariorum incur^a vel imperi^^a depra^^ta est.
ninth Prolegomenon: of these things we have written at large in our first
Treatise of the Judge of controversies.

The perverseness of this Jesuitical spark is most of all discovered herein,
that having once displayed (as he supposes) the defaults of the Scripture,
he rejoices that such defaults are therein found, and gives God thanks for
it; to the end that men finding no stedinesse or certainty in the Scripture,
may subject themselves to the tyranny of the Church, that is to say, of the
Pope, and there to find instruction, these are his words: The providence
Demonstr 2. 5. p. 128.
of God to constrain us yet more powerfully to undergo the yoke of the Church
with humility and simplicity, permits that there be not only some
alteration in certain parcels of the Scripture, and in some copy, but the
more the books of the Scripture are dispersed, the more they shall alter and
perish by tract of time, whether they be in original tongues or translations.
Without doubt, he that rejoices at the deprauations which he imagines to be
in Scripture, and at the loss of some books, and prayseth thererein the
providence of God, would much more solace himself and rejoice if all the
Scripture were abolished. For to what purpose serves it, if Tradition of the
Church of Rome be a perfect rule, more certain, and of more authority then
the holy Scripture; and if the Pope judge soueraignly and infallibly of all the
points of faith? for he has forbidden the people to read the Scripture, as a
book not only unnecessary, but also dangerous, and that which has made a
great breach in the Popedom.

The same Jesuit pleases himself with this conceit of his, inculcating it
with often repetition; As in the third Demonstration, when he has said, that a
man cannot assure himself of the sense of the Greek Testament, because it
first was written without accents and distinctions (whereon depends the sense),
he adds: It is a work of the providence of God, to stoop our minds and
inclinations to the soveraigntie of the Church, that is to say, of the Pope,
who by consequence, has more authority then the Apostle S. Paul speaking to
the Corinthians, not that we have dominion over your faith, 2. Cor. 1. 24. But
may not we affirm it with more probability, to be a work of Gods providence,
that he has suffered so many schisms and heresies, so much simony,
uncleanness of life, and cruelty to have infected the seat of Rome, whereby
to refer us to the Scripture, to make us forsake those wicked guides, and to
subject us to his holy word? and that God by his providence, has permitted
that the Popes themselves have confessed their own errors? And lastly, that
the Popes sycophants have recorded unto us their crimes and heresies, as I have
proved in my first Book.

In short, to be thoroughly informed with what spirit this Jesuit is lead, it
is but to read the same that he has written in his third Demonstration, page
190. They cause them (says he) to renounce the Church (pretending that it
consists of men that are faulty and liars) under a fair semblance of
Scripture, and under a plausible promise to govern all by the word of God. But
the truth is, they depute a bleare-eyed Leah unto them in lieu of a fair
Rachel, and submit faith to the sovereign command of the will of Ministers,
who put into their hand a Scripture that is humane, erroneous, mutable, subject
to correction, etc. This miserable Jesuit will one day render an account to God
of so damnable a speech, wherein he compares the holy Scripture to
bleare-eyed Leah, and the Church of Rome to beautiful Rachel. It is very false
that we renounce the Church; but yet we maintain that it ought to be subject
to the Scripture; and we renounce the doctrine of those who say, that the
Scripture is subject to the Church of Rome: for God cannot be subject to men.

As for the sovereign power of the Ministers function, that might well be
retorted upon us for a reproach, if we boasted amongst us that they cannot
err, that they have power to change Gods commandments contained in the holy
Scriptures, to add to the Creed, and to make new articles of faith; or if we
should style our selves Judges infallible and sovereign of the points of
faith. We leave these usurpations, and proud titles to the Pope, by the which
he exalts himself above God. Only we exhort the people to believe the
Word of God contained in holy Scriptures: wherein if we find any obscure
passages, we take not upon us to be Judges of the sense, and to determine it
with authority. It is enough, that as much as therein is perspicuous and
plain, (not needing the help of an Interpreter) is sufficient for our
salvation. And to contest much about Translations, we busy not our selves;
for the Translation approved by the Church of Rome fufficeth us, discovering
clearly therein the very condemnation of Papistry. All Translations agree in
the matters necessary to salvation, and the original texts both Hebrew and
Greek, are at this day familiar and agreeing to our Translation.

Of these things have I treated at large in my first Book of The Judge of
Controversies, and have discussed all the slender objections wherein our
Adversaries do side with Pagans and Infidels, and endeavor to extenuate the
firmness and authority of the Scripture, which Saint Paul calls The divine
Oracles, Romans 3. 2. and The Scripture divinely inspired, 1. Tim. 3. 16. which I
say, Jesus Christ himself has uttered, holding up his own vocation by the
testimony of the Prophets; and by it has repelled the temptation of the
Devil, Math. 4. Yea S. Paul says, that the Scripture can make a man wise to
salvation, and is most proper for man's accomplishment in every good work;
without it we have not means to know that God will have but one Church in the
world. And when our adversaries have wretchedly reviled it, yet are they
afterward constrained to return unto it, and to beg of it, (though with an
ill stomach) some clauses of Text to found their Church upon the Scriptures
authority: without it Christianity had been long since abolished. The divine
efficacy of it is manifest in this, that the Pope has suppressed it, so as the
people may not see it: yet when God is pleased to lay it open to the peoples
view, and that it be translated into vulgar tongues, Papistry does immediately
vanish in many Provinces. Yea if Emperors and Kings had not hastened to
succor, using both fire and sword, and the rigor of Inquisitions, without
doubt Papistry had been utterly extinguished. Wherefore it is no marvel if
the Pope by his scouts labor to blemish the Scripture, rendering it doubtful
and without authority; which ungodly instruments at this day borrow the weapons
of Pagans, who to restore Paganism and ruin Christianity, have had no surer
course then to difsame the holy Scripture. Lo whither Satan strives to lead
us: He strives to shake the only foundation of Christian religion, to the end
that the people distasting the Scripture, may for their faith and salvation
rely upon the conductors of the Romish church, wherein have lived multitudes
of Popes notorious heretics, and so judged by the Councels which the Church
of Rome has approved, and by the Popes favorites themselves: Wherein also you
may perceive to the number of three and twenty Schisms, and many contrary
Popes at the same time, mutualy entitling themselves Antichrists. Yea wherein
have lived many infamous Popes, Necromancers, Adulterers, Murderers, advanced
to the Popedom by whores, by Simony, and by violence. Such as take upon them
the title of God, causing themselves to be adored, and Kings to kiss their
feet, and the Scripture to be prostrate before them when they enter into the
Councels; such as vante they cannot err, that they can make another Creed, can
change Gods ordinances, can transport souls out of Purgatory into Paradise,
and rank whom they please in the Catalogue of Saints by canonizing them: under
color whereof they exercise an abominable commerce and traffic by
Dispensations, Absolutions, Indulgences, Annates, Licenses, and Benefices. So
as from a poor Bishop of a City, who was no way eminent but in martyrdomes,
the Pope is become a puissant temporal Monarch surpassing in riches the
greatest Monarchs of the earth. To effect so great an alteration, it was
needful that Religion should be changed: for the purity and plainness of
christianity regulated by the Scriptures, could not serve to build up so great
an Empire.

These things have I amply handled in my first Book, wherein I maintain the
Authority of the Scripture. Which work went then forth almost the very day
that lesuite Regourds Book against the Authority and Perfection of the
Scripture was published. These two Books if any man will compare together,
shall find that I answer all that he pleads against the authority of the
Scripture; and that Regourds Book satisfies nothing of all that I propose in
mine. Before that he published his book, a Challenge was brought to the Pastors
of this Church of Sedan, to enter into conference and dispute with some
Doctors, amongst who^ was Jesuit Regourd, wherein they threatened us. We
accepted the Conference: the place and day were assigned, with all
accommodations, that after so many Defiances every man's honor should oblige
him not to recant. Nevertheless he durst not appear, and for two several
times failed at the day appointed. But his humor serving him at last to
dispute, and being thirsty of reputation, he went some where else to
discharge his choler, and in Conference seiseth upon Monsieur Mestrezat, where
he received all sort of disgrace, so far forth as his friends were feign to
make use of superior power to draw him from the combat, and to hinder the
Conference from Printing, for it could not be seen but to his dishonor: and
that in a place where all things were favorable unto him, and where the
language of Truth is very new and strange. And so retired this witty Doctor,
as well contented as satisfied, being not so wisely advised but to make
trophies and signs of victory, considering there were so many witnesses.

CHAP. VIII. A Proof of the same by the practice of the Primitive Church.
We have proved by many passages of our Adversaries, that in the Church of
Rome, Traditions are much more esteemed, and of greater authority then the
Scripture, which they so much under-value, and charge with a thousand
reproaches; and that by injustice and most fraudulently the Council of Trent
seems to make them equal. Now are we to prove the same by the practice and
maxims of the Church of Rome.

I. In the first place, when our adversaries ground the authority of the
Scripture upon tradition of the Church, and would have the Scripture received
and believed, because the Church does so ordain it; It is evident that they
prefer Tradition before Scripture: for they make Scripture to depend upon
Tradition, and esteem Tradition of the Church more worthy of belife then
Scripture, and believe not the Scripture, but because the Church of Rome has
so commanded it.

II. Let us look upon experience, and we shall inform our selves, that in
the Church of Rome the people is a thousand fold more carefully instructed in
Tradition, then in the doctrine of salvation contained in holy Scriptures. The
most ignorant know the meaning of Lent, and the four Seasons: they are
instructed in the difference of meats; they are skilled in Festival days and
Eues; they go in Pilgrimage, visit the Relics, gain Pardons; purchase
Masses, Obits, and Suffrages for the dead; speak of Purgatory, mumble over
their Chaplet or Beads, and their Rosary, or our Ladies Psalter; and discourse
of the Popes succession in Saint Peter's Chair, but they are ignorant in the
holy Scripture, accounting it modesty and humility not to enquire much after
it. Ask them upon the doctrine of our Redemption in Jesus Christ, upon
Justification by faith, upon our free Adoption, upon the correspondencie
between the Law and the Gospel, upon the difference between the old and new
Testament, upon the causes wherefore it was necessary that our Redeemer should
be God and man in the unity of person, upon the ends of their Resurrection
and Ascension, upon the Doctrine of faith and good works (which are the points
wherein consists the essence of Christian Religion) and you shall find them
as mute as fishes, and altogether uninstructed.

III. Baptism is a divine Institution; but Confirmation (such as is practiced
in the Church of Rome) and confection of the Crisome, are humane Inventions.
Yet are they much more honored then Baptism: for in the Church of Rome a
woman, yea a Pagan and Jew may baptize, and give that which they have not: and
Confirmation is not administered, nor Crisome consecrated but by the Bishop,
with great solemnity.

IV. God has commanded St. Peter, and the other Apo^^les to preach the
Gospel, but gave them no command to give Indulgences, nor to canonize Saints,
nor to release souls out of Purgatory, nor to consecrate their Agnus Dei, and
their blessed Beads. The first point is a commandment of God, the other things
are humane Traditions, which the Pope does perform with preparation and
solemnity: but he preaches not the Gospel, esteeming the labor of
preaching as a thing unworthy of his greatness. Insomuch as the Popes are
industrious observers of their own Traditions, and adore their own proper
Inventions, but dispense with the Lords commandments.

V. Hence comes it to pass, that the sins committed against Gods Law, are
held to be light, in comparison of those committed against the Traditions,
Decrees, and Canons of the Pontifies. The inferior Priests give absolution of
thest, of lying, and of whoredom, which are sins against the Law of God; but
there are cases reserved, wherein no man in France can give absolution but at
the point of death; and they are specified in the Bull De Coena Domini, which
the Pope thundereth every year on Maunday Thursday before the Paschall. The
sins that are most enormous, and whereof no man but the Pope makes
absolution, are not murder, parricide, incest, sodomy, and perjury: but to
appeal from the Pope to a future Council, to withdraw Tithes from the Clergy,
to take up Arms with heretics, to impeach those that go to Rome to obtain
the great Pardons, to play the Pyrate upon the coasts of the Papal territory
from the hill Argentara to Terracina; of these heinous sins none but the Pope
can give absolution; for these are transgressions against the Laws and
Traditions, broached by the Popes for their profit, and to infringe them is
rated a matter more grievous and capital, then sins against the Law of God
contained in holy Scriptures.

VI. The Canon Violatores, in the 25. Cause, and 1. Question, pronounces, In
Spiritum sanctum blasphemant qui sacros Canones violant.
that those blaspheme against the holy Ghost who violate the sacred Canons.
Whence it follows that this sin is unpardonable. The sins then against the
Law of God are remi^table, and the Priests forgive them; but to violate the
Canons of the Church of Rome, is a sin unabsolvable. This is that which is
spoken by Pope Nicholas Can. Si Romanoru^. Diss. 19. Vt si quis in illa
co^miserit, noverit sibi veniam denegari.
the first: If any one sin against the Decretalls of the Apostolic Seat,
let him know that it shall not be forgiven him, at the Canon Si Romanorum, in
the 19. Distinction. And there again he declares, that the Old and Capitulum
S Innocc^ty Papae, cuius authoritate deecatur, a nobis vtrumque testamentum
esse recipiendu^, qua^vis in ipsis paternis Canonibus nullu^ eorum ex toto
contineatur insertum, etc.
New Testament ought to be received, although they be not inserted in the
Canons, for the holy Pope Innocent has expressed his opinion touching the
same. If the Old and New Testament must be received, because Pope Innocent has
so appointed it, we must conclude that the Decree of Pope Innocent, is of more
authority then the Old and New Testament. For that which gives authority, is
greater then that which receives it. Yet the Old and New Testament had their
plenary authority before Pope Innocent was in the world.

VII. Pope Gregory the first, before Nicholas had beat the path to this pride,
in his Epistle to Antonine Subdeacon, complains of one Honorat, who (says
he) has not only Lib. 2. Epist. 16. Non solum mandata Dei neglsgens, ^ed and
scripta nostra contemnens.
neglected the commandments of God, but also misprised our writings: as if his
writings were of more authority then the commandments of God.

VIII. The single life of Priests is a Them. 2. seeundae. quast. 88. art. 11.
mere humane institution, as Thomas acknowledges; as also Bellarmine in his
book concerning the Clergy, Chap. 18. And in very deed the Scripture speaks
nothing thereupon. But whoredom is forbidden by the Law of God; nevertheless
if a Priest does play the Fornicatour or Adulterer, it is but a laughing
matter: But if a Priest do marry to obey the Apostle, speaking: If they cannot
contain let them marry, 1. Cor. 7. 9. And let a Bishop be a husband but of
one wife, 1. Tim. 2. 2. this marriage is called a sacrilege, and pointed at as
a prodigious thing. In lust and whoring he transgresses the Law of God, and
the vow that he has made to obey his word. In marrying he transgresses the
Tradition of the Church of Rome, and the vow invented by humane Tradition,
which is accounted the g^eater offense. For it has pleased the Pope to allow
of obscene whoredom, and to forbid marriage, which are two Traditions that have
carried him away against the rules of holy Scripture.

IX Mark yet something worse. Innoc. 3. Extra de Big^nou, cap Q carea. Post
lasts per se Apostolica edoceri si presbyteri plures Con^ binas hab^ bigame
ce^antur. A^ quoth duicin r^spondendu^, quod cum irregularitate^ non incurrerint,
cum eu tanqua^ simplici fornicatione notatu, poleru dispensure. Navar. Tom. 2
cap. Ad inferendam. 23. quast. 3. De defe^sione pro^^mi cap. 37. sect. 15.
Respondendu^ est crimon Sodomiae non comprehendi [in criminibus quae
irregularitatem inducunt] etc. Quia parum rejert illud crimen esse gravissimu^
et spurcissimu^, cu^ matus sit crime^ haeresis mentalis, and edium Dei, quoru^
tamen nullu^ irregularitatem in^ucit.
Pope Innocent the third declare h, that a Priest having many Concubines, is
not therefore lapsed into irregularity, that is to say, does not for this
become incapable to exercise the Priesthood. Yea for Sodomy a Priest is not
degraded, as is taught by Nauarras the Popes Penancer. But a Priest that
marieth, is forthwith degraded, is made a public execration, and chased with
more maledictions then the Azazel or Scapegoat, although he have the Apostle
on his side, to protect him against the Tradition.

It is certain that in the Church of Rome, to eat flesh on Goodfriday, is
accounted an hundred degrees more horrible then to haunt brothell houses: and
to break the arm of an Image, is more then to break the heads of ten living
men. For Tradition is more religiously observed then the Law of God.

CAP. IX. Three reasons wherefore Tradition is preferred before the Scripture
in the Church of Rome.
THe reasons that have moved the Pope to exalt Tradition above the Scripture
are three. Peter is a Tradition, which is the only prop of his dominion. And
therefore it nearly concerns him to exalt Tradition, upon which his Empire is
founded.

Jews (who are not obedient to him) do carefully preserve; nor the Greek
Testament, which the Greek Churches have saved for us. It concerns him
therefore that the Traditions (whereof he is both Maker and Master) be had in
great estimation.

they attribute to themselue the Gabriel Biel in Can. Miss. Lect 15 Ne^ volut.
Dominus aliqu^m habere potestate^ ligandi vel solvenis super corpus Christi
mysticu^, nisi haberet potestate^ super corpus Christi ver^^.
power of making God with words, to create their Creator, and to have Jesus
Christ within their jurisdiction, locked up in a Pix. By the sacrifice of
Mass, they make themselves sacrificing Priests, sacrificing Jesus Christ to
his Father. By the institution of festival days, the Pope usurps power in
commanding al shops to be shut up, and causes all Sessions of justice and
Council to be interrupted at his pleasure. By the difference of meats, he
governs the Markets, Kitchens, and Tables of Kings. By the canonization of
Saints, he makes his meanest grooms to be worshipped by the people, and
lifts up to heaven those that have most faithfully served him; and commands
the people to invoke such Saints as he pleases. By the Sacrament of Penance,
he imposes corporal and pecuniary penalties and mulcts, yea upon Kings and
Princes to the very whipping of them, usurpeth sway over bodies and goods, and
changes corporal punishments into pecuniary. By the Absolution of sins, the
Priests make themselves Judges between God and the sinner, and will have God
obliged to pardon a sinner, because the Priest has pardoned him; yea in a
cause where God is the party offended, the Priest makes himself judge.
Whereas God in the holy Scripture gives to Pastors power to dispense with the
punishment of sins as far as Ecclesiastical censure, these gallants make
bold as far as the Conscience, and to the very judicial Seat of God. By
Service in Latin, the Pope retains the people in ignorance, and planeth
among all Nations a mark of his Empire, giving them the Roman language to
subdue them to the Romish Religion. The Dispensations which the Pope gives to
Princes, to marry in degrees forbidden by the word of God, do oblige the
children that spring from them to maintain the Papal authority; for if that
were shaken, it would be doubted whether they be legitimate or no. The power
of dis-enthroning Kings, disposing of Empires, causing their feet to be kissed
by Monarks, canonizing Saints, and of releasing souls out of Purgatory, are
Traditions which magnify the papal dignity, above all power spiritual or
temporal that ever was on earth. Wherefore let us not marvel that the Pope
labors to countenance these Traditions, and to crush the Scripture, which
does but molest him, disaccommodate him in his traffic, and staggereth his
whole Empire.

Hereupon the Reader that has heard the comparison, which our adversaries make
of Tradition of the Romish Church, with the holy Scriptures (saying, that
Tradition of the Church is more ancient, more ample, more clear, more
certain, and of more authority over us then the holy Scripture) will call to
remembrance the example of the Egyptians, who passing by long ranks of
columns and pillars and by magnificall Temples, did lead the Worshipers to a
place more solitary and retired, where stood the God of the Temple; there did
they show them an Ape, or an Ox, or a Cat, in honor of whom the Temple was
erected, even thus do our adversaries in this question. After such high titles
and magnifications of Traditions (to the extolling of them above the word of
God, contained in holy Scriptures) when we come to unmask their ugliness,
and offer them to sight, they present us with absurd inventions, and such as
expose Christian religion to laughter. They tell us of Images of the Trinity in
wood or stone. Of souls that broile in a fire for sins pardoned. Of
Indulgences for one hundred years. Of priuileged Altars, upon which whosoever
causes a Mass to be said, makes choice of a soul to be released out of
Purgatory. Of Adoration of Images, bones, and rags. Of solitary Masses without
communicants, which chant after the intention of him that pays them. Of
public prayers and particular in an unknown tongue. Of masses for horses. Of
Jesus Christ carried away by mice. Of blessed beads, and Agnus Dei. Of
pilgrimages. Of the difference of meats. Of borrowed satisfactions. Of fasting
and being whipped one for another. Behold their Traditions, see what is preferred
before the Scripture, observe the Laws and documents which they balance with
the Law that God himself has pronounced, and with the doctrine of our
redemption, which the eternal Son of God has brought from Heaven, and yet
is found light in comparison of these venerable Traditions; for why? because
they cast into the scale a massy stone, to weet, the names of Pope and Church
of Rome, which in the hearts of men grown brutish, weigh down against God and
the Scriptures.

CHAP. X. That in this question, by the word Church, our Adversaries understand
not the Church whereof is spoken in the Creed, but the Pope alone.
FOrasmuch as our Adversaries do maintain, that the Church whereof mention is
made in the Creed, is the whole body of the faithful people, and that to this
people it belongs not to be judge of doubts and controversies, it is evident
that by this Church (which is said to be sovereign judge and infallible)
another Church is understood, besides that whereof mention is made in the
Creed; but as by the Church they understand only the Church of Rome, so by the
Church of Rome, is understood the Pope, who attributes this sovereign and
infallible authority to himself. Thus do Salm. To. 13. part 3. disp. 10.
sect. quarto ^um. Cum Scriptura obscuta sit and perdiffic^lis nec ^adex esse
queat: quia pro^i^en^ia Dei tolleretur, cum per eam s^la lite^ (...) sedar^ non
possi^t; superest ergo vt certu^ aliqu^ iudi^em nobis d^signat^m re^que^^^t. At
h^c al^us non est habitus qua^ qui s^mper fuit, hoc est, Romans Episcopus: alias
e^im perijss^t providentia Dei per tot secula. Caietan. in 2. ^a. ^. 1. art.
10. Verissimu^ est authoritatem Ecclesi^ vniversalis et Co^^^lij princ^paliter
et totaliterr^ sid^r^ in Papa, in ^^termina^d* ea qua sunt d^ (...)
the Doctors accord, and in this manner do apprehend it.

Salmeron the Jesuit: seeing that* the Scripture is very obscure and
difficult, and cannot be judge (for so the providence of God should be
annihilated, because by it alone the controversies moved cannot be appeased
and determined) it remains therefore, that some certain Judge designed was
left unto us. And he is thought to be no other then the same that ever was,
to weet, the Bishop of Rome; for otherwise the Providence of God in so many
ages had perished.

Cardinal Cajetan: It is most true that the authority of the universal Church
and of Council, resideth principally and totally in the Pope, to determine the
points of Faith. And there again he says, that the Church adoreth the Pope.

Paschal the Pope avoucheth, that the Church of Rome is not subject to
Councels, and that in whatsoever they ordain, the Pope is always excepted.
Speaking Ex^r. de Electione. cap. Significasti. Tit. 6. Aiunt hoc in Concilijs
statutum non inven^ri. Resp. Quasi Romana Ecclesi^ Concili^ vlla leg^ prae
fixerint. Cum omnia Concilia per Roman^ Ecclesiae authoritatem facta sint, and
robu^ acceperint, et in eorum statutis Romans Pontificis patenter excipiatur
auctoritas.
thus: They say that this is not found to be decreed in the Counsels. To the
which he makes this answer: as if any Counsels had prescribed any Law to
the Church of Rome, when as all the Counsels have been made, and have taken
their force by the authority of the Church of Rome; and in their statutes the
authority of the Pope is clearly excepted. Who does not perceive that in these
words, by the Church of Rome the Pope alone is understood? for our Adversaries
deny not, but that the people, and Clergy of the Church of Rome, are subject
to the Counsels.

The Jesuit Gregory of Valence in Pontifexi^^ Roma^^ e^t in qu^ auth^ritas
illa r^^det: qu^ in Ecclesia extat ad iudg^andu^ de omnibus omnino controversis
fidei.
the title of the seventh book of his Analysis: The Pope of Rome is he in whom
resideth all authority of the Church, to judge entirely of all doubts of the
Faith.

Andradius in his first book of the defense of the Tridentine faith: Fide
Papae nostra continetur, and ex eius vnjus authoritate salus omnium pendet.
Our faith consists in the faith of the Pope, and upon his authority alone
depends all men's salvation. Judge whether man's salvation be not well
derived. Whereupon he Non minor est Papae ad controversias dirimendas, qua^
Ecclesiae totius authoritas.
speaks there again that the authority of the Pope to decide all
controversies, is not less then the authority of the whole Church. And we
have formerly heard the Jesuit Vasques affirming, that the authority of the
Pope is not less then that of the Apostles, and that he can abrogate and
cancel the Apostles commandments. In the second Session of the last Lateran
Council, these words are express: Behold Ecce adest Divi Petri successor I^^
lius no^ minor authoritate.
Julius the Successor of Saint Peter, no less in authority then him. It is
true that when the Pope will, he joins some Prelates with him, to assist him
in his decreeing. But whereas he calls and chooses whom he will, these
Prelates have not authority but by him, and the Pope an enact all without them.
This is that which Cardinal Bellarmine has, in his third book of Iste iudex
non potest esse scripturae etc. Igitur Princeps Ecc esiasticus, vel solus vel
cum consilto et co^sensu coepiscop orum.
the word of God, Chap. 9. That judge cannot be the Scripture; therefore is it
the Ecclesiastical Prince, either alone, or with the advice and approbation of
the brother Bishops.

For so our Adversaries do jointly hold, that when the Pope judges in the
Apostolic chair, and as Pope, his sole opinion and decree is as firm and
certain, as if a Council had voted upon it.

And to remove all doubt, our adversaries blush not openly to affirm, that by
this word Church, Grego. de Valent. Tom 3. in Thom. disput. 1. q. 1. pusto. 5.
sect. ^.
the Pope is to be understood. Gregory of Valence the Jesuit after having
said, that the full authority of Hane authoritatem pleue in Romano Pontifice,
etc res^dere qui scilicet de sides et morum controverstis ad vniversale^
Ecclesia^ pertinetibus, vel per se vel cu^ generali Concilio sufficienter
co^stituat. Iam igitur quu^ dicimus propositionem Ecclesiae esse conditionem
necessariam ad assansu ^^ fidei, nomine Ecclesia intelligimus eius caput, id
est, Romanu^ Pontifice^ per se^vel vna cu^ Concilio.
judging controversies of the faith and manners, which concern the universal
Church, does plenarily reside in the Pope of Rome Christ's Vicar, he adds:
Now therefore when we say, that the Proposition of the Church is a condition
necessary, to oblige the Faith to one agreement, by this word Church we
understand her head, which is to say, the Pope of Rome, either alone, or with
the Council. For he is not of opinion that the Council be necessarily
required.

Bellarmine expounds it thus, in his second book of the Councels, Chap. 19.
The Pope (says he) ought to speak it to the Church, that is to say, to
himself. And Pope Innocent the third, in his Chapter Novit extra de iudicijs,
attributes to himself the taking notice of a difference between Philip the
second surnamed Augustus King of France, and Iobn King of England, for it is
written, tell it to the Church. Now S. Peter was one of those to whom Jesus
Christ spoke, Tell it to the Church: was this Apostle able to divine that Jesus
Christ understood, Tell it to thy self? and that Jesus Christ would have the
party complainant to be judge? see then the Church (which is a word that
signifies an assembly) reduced to one man. And the sense of this Article of
the Creed, I believe the Church shall be, I believe the Pope, who sometimes
calls himself god, sometimes Jesus Christ, and sometimes the Church; so he
shall be Bridegroom and Spouse; and one man shall call himself an assembly.

And tell me to what purpose are Councels assembled, so long and so painful,
seeing nothing is to be done, but to consult the Papal Oracle, with in one
instant can decide al controversies without possibility of erring, seeing (I
say) that in one man we have the universal Church, that the Council can do
nothing without the Pope, and that the Pope can do all, and judge of all
without the Council? Whereupon Bellarmine affirms Bellar. lib. 4. de Roman.
Pontifice, ca. 2. Sect. videntur. Ipsa^ insallibilttatem non esse in coetu
consiliariorum, vel in concilio E. piscoporum, sed in solo Pentisice.
with all the Doctors, that the Infallibility of a Council is not in the
assembly of the Counselors, nor in the Council of Bishops, but in the Pope
alone; and yet in the mean time the Popes themselves never appear not in the
Councels.

This Advertisment was very necessary, to the end that the Reader might know,
that as by the authority of the Church, is understood the authority of the
Pope; so by Traditions of the Church, nothing is understood but the Ordinances
made or approoved by the Pope: for they subsist not but by his authority and
though they have passed through a Council, yet the Pope can change and abolish
them, and institute new in their stead, without waiting for a Council. For
should he have less authority over Traditions then over the holy Scripture,
wherein he can alter the Ordinances, and Institutions of our Lord? He can
dispense against the Apostle, should not he be able to dispense against a
Council, or against the custom which has authorized a Tradition? It is the
same that Andradius expressly teaches, in the second Book of his Defense of
the Tridentine Faith: Liquet minime eos ^rrasse qui dicunt Romanos Pontifices
posse nonnunquam in legibus dispensare a Paulo et a primis quaetuor Concilys
Greg. 1. lib. 1. Epist. 24.
Those (says he) err not who affirm that sometimes the Popes in their laws
can dispense contrary to that of S. Paul, and the four first Councels, which
are the universal Councels most ancient, of greatest authority, and which Pope
Gregory the first equalleth to the four Evangelists. Pope Gelasius speaks the
same: for in his Tome of the Bond of an Anathema, disputing against one of the
four first Counsels, to wit, against that of Chalcedon, where there were six
hundred and thirty Bishops, he urges thus, The Apostolical Seat alone
dissanulleth that which a Synodall Assembly Quod refutauit seeds Apostolica
habere non potuit firmitatem, and sola rescind^ quoth prater ordine^ congregatio
Synodica pis^ taverit vsurpandum.
though to have usurped against order. The subject of his choler against this
so famous and honorable assembly was, for that in this Council is framed a
Canon, ordaining that the Bishop of Constantinople should be equal to the
Bishop of Rome in all things and that he should have the same preheminences.

CHAP. XI. Of what sort, how weak, and how uncertain the foundations are
whereon Traditions of the Romish Church are built: and of the three maxims that
serve for their defense and prop.
THe Traditions of the Church of Rome are of so great a number, that a mere
Catalogue of them would furnish out a large volume. The whole rabble of them
has these three maxims for their foundation.

1. That the Pope is Successor to St. Peter, in the charge of Head of the
universal Church.

2. Secondly, that the Pope cannot err in the faith.

3. That the Apostles have not set down in writing all that they did teach by
word of mouth.

He that will comprehend the nature of these maxims, shall know that they
evert the Christian faith, and consume all Religion into smoke: for if the
Maxims whereon all Papistry is founded, and all the body of Romish Traditions,
be imaginary maxims and purely humane, (not to give a worse phrase) it is
impossible that the Religion which is built thereupon can have the least tittle
of assurance.

1. The first maxim that lays down the Pope to be Saint Peter's Successor,
in the charge of Head of the universal Church, is destitute of all testimony
of Gods Word; and our. Adversaries to uphold it, produce nothing but humane
testimonies. Whence it follows, that it is not an Article of the Christian
Faith, and that it cannot be believed for a certainty of faith, for the
Christian faith is grounded upon the Word of God: Faith comes by ^earing, and
hearing by the Word of God, Romans 10. 17.

But the Church of Rome gives his maxim not only for an Ar^cle of Faith, but
also for a foun^ation of all the other Articles of ^aith, and of the whole
Religion. For in the Church of Rome, the Popes authority is planted to be a
Foundation of the Church, and of all the doctrine of salvation, to the very
subjecting of the Scripture (that is to say, the word of God) to his
authority: and to cause that the authority of the Scripture depend upon the
opinion of the Church of Rome; and all this by virtue of that pretended
Succession to St. Peter. Briefly, our Adversaries make all Christian Religion
to hang upon this point: as Bellarmine acknowledges, at the entrance of the
Preface in his Books of the Pope, speaking thus: To say in a word, when mention
is made of the Etenim de qua re agitur cum de primatu Pontificis agitur?
breutssime dicam, de summa rei christianae. ^^ ent^ quaeritur, aebeatne
Ecelesia diutius consistere, an vero dissolui and concidere. Observe andic est
tertia, licet force no sit de ^ure diuno, Romanis^ Pontifice^ ut Romanum
Pentificem Petro succecere, tamen ^^ ad fidem Catholicam pertinere. No^ enim
est idem alsquid esse de fide, et esse de ture divine. Nec enim de our divine
fuit ^^ Paulus h^beret penula^; est tamen ^^^ ipsum de fide, (...) penulam.
Etsi autem Romanum Pontificem suc^edere Petro no^ habeatur express in
scripturis, etc.
Popes supremacy, the sum of all Christianity is at stake: for the question
is, whether the Church ought to subsist any longer, or whether it must be
dissolved and fall. Thereunto do all the Controversies refer, and all the
Traditions aim at the profit and greatness of the Pope; yet the same
Cardinal at the 12. chap. of the second Book of the Pope, acknowledges, that
the Scripture makes no mention of the Popes succession in the place of Saint
Peter, and that this poyut is not jure divino. Nevertheless he affiemeth that
this succession, though it be not jure divino, leaves not to appertain to
the Catholic faith; In the same manner as the Catholic faith believes, that
Saint Paul had a Friars weed, though that were not jure divine, and that God
had not commanded any thing to that purpose.

Hence it is manifest, that all the divine doctrine is founded upon a plain
humane Tradition, to weet, a Tradition unwritten, That God has ordained the
Pope of Rome for Successor in the Primacy of Saint Peter. Thus you see
Tradition grounded upon tradition, that is, upon it self: and this infinite
Mass of traditions is founded upon a Traditions that is no more jure diuino,
then Saint Paul's weed, whereof never was any divine Testimony extant.

I will not at this time enter into proofs of the falsity of this matter,
which we have handled in diverse places, especially in my book that went
before, and showed the untruths by abundance of reason and authority drawn
from antiquity. I say but this, that the ancient Bishops of Rome were called
Successors of Saint Peter, in the Bishopric only of the City of Rome; but
not in the Apostleship, nor in the government of the universal Church. Just as
the Bishops of Jerusalem were called Successors of Saint James, and those of
Antioch of Saint Peter, and those of Ephesus of Saint Paul and of Saint John:
not in the Apostl ship, but in the Bishopric of the towns, wherein these
Apostles had planted the Church. Our adversaries produce not any example or
passage of the ancient Church, whereby it may appear, that ever the Bishops of
Rome attributed any authority to themselves, over the Churches that are out of
the Roman Empire.

I say also, that when the Bishop of Rome was heretofo^e Successor to Saint
Peter, in place of head of the Church, so it was that the heresies which
infected this seat (as our adversaries themselves do confess, and the Popes
complain of it) and the Schisms which have rent it, (there having been two
Popes at once, sometimes three at the same instant, prosecuting one the other
to extremity, and calling one the other Antichrist) did long since break the
chain of this succession. In which Schisms ordinarily the most vicious and
most cunning carried it; and he excluded his adversary, who had the favor of
those Emperors and Kings on whom the fortune of war did smile. This
continued strain of succession, not being possibly known, but by the
multitude of Histories and Authors, both Greek and Latin (who very often
jarre among themselves, so far as not to agree upon the next Successors to
Saint Peter) it is impossible that the people should know any thing in this
succession, o^ should have any assurance hereof, but by the Testimony of those,
who brag of it and live by it.

Moreover, our adversaries do confess, that the Pope and church of Rome may
err in the question de facto. Now these questions, to weet, whethe^ Saint
Peter has left the Bishop of Rome Successor of his Apostleship, or of his
Supremacy; and whether this succession has not been interrupted by Schisms
and heresies, are questions de facto, and consequently of the nature of those,
wherein our adversaries hold, that the Church of Rome may err. And the proofs
which our adversaries bring forth are drawn, from books which theirselues
convince of falsity, and from such fragments as for the most part are
supposititious.

I forbear to censure any further the certainty of Romish traditions, seeing
they are all founded upon one Maxim, which is, a Tradition humane, not vpheld
by any Ordinance of God; a Tradition which is not an Article of the Christian
faith, yet at this time is put down for the ground of Faith; a Tradition which
is of the nature of those wherein our adversaries confess, that the Church may
err; a Tradition whereof the people can have no certainty nor knowledge, but
by books, both Greek and Latin of infinite length, wherein they understand
nothing, and by the Testimony of those especially who propose it, that is to
say, the Popes, who receiving not the Scripture for Judge, call themselves
supreme Judges and infallible in all controversies, more especially in that
wherein is pleaded their succession, and their own proper authority and
infallibility.

Now it is an easy matter, to guess, at what the proceedings of the Enemy of
our salvation do level. Their butt and scope is to distill (as it were) all
Religion into a vapor, and to make it depend upon presuppositions, not only
vain and uncertain, but also false and imaginary: as he that should bear up
an obeliske upon a small feskue. When some demand, Wherefore is it behouefull to
receive Traditions? the answer is, because the Pope has ordained it. Again,
if it be demanded, whence comes this authority of the Pope? it is answered,
Because Saint Peter dying has left the Bishop of Rome Successor of his
Supremacy, over the Church of the whole world. Moreover when it is asked, Can
you produce any Ordinance of God for this succession; for this point being
estated by you, for the foundation of the Church, and of all the Christian
faith, it is not credible that God has ordained nothing of it? there they
stand caught by the nose, not uttering one syllable of the word of God, and do
confess, that this succession is not lure diuino, nor by the Ordinance of God.
Only the Popes will be therein believed, and call themselves supreme and
absolute, in a case wherein they are so much interessed, and wherein it is
disputed of their succession and authority. Thus you may see all the Ius
diuinum founded upon a point which is not Iure diuino; and all the divine
doctrine founded upon humane Tradition, yea upon humane Testimony, the most
uncertain of all, for the certainty of the Popes succession is founded upon
the Testimony and authority of the Pope himself, who is party in this cause,
and who by this Tradition rules and vpholdeth his Empire.

Nay, they do worse, they make not only these Traditions, but the very
authority of the holy Scripture, to depend upon this Tradition. Let it be
demanded, wherefore ought we to believe that God has created man after his
own Image, that he has given his Law to Moses in two Tables, and that the
Son of God has taken flesh in the womb of the blessed Virgin, and is dead
for us? It is answered, that this is to be believed, because it is written in
the holy Scripture that God has inspired his Prophets and Apostles. Again let
it be asked, wherefore ought the holy Scriptures to be believed, and why are
we obliged to put our faith therein? The answer Basiliensis Concily^
appe^dice Ecclesia Romana sic lequitur: Qued autem verum feret Christi Eva^ge
leum, qu^m^de scire possetu, nisi illud vobis patefeeissem? Audistu no^nullos
ex Apostolu scripsisse Evangelia. Sed quo^iam quatuer duntaxat approbavi, ^ Ra
vt Evangelia venerantur, alia respuuntur.
is, Because the Church of Rome has so ordained it, which has this authority
by virtue of her succession in Supremacy of Saint Peter. But upon this
question, have you any commandment from God? they answer, the holy Scripture
indeed speaks nothing of it, but the church of Rome is supreme Judge and has
more authority over us then the Scripture. Nevertheless in this point it is
disputed of the authority of the Church of Rome, wherein it is no reasonable
thing that she should be Judge, much less to assign her self Judge above
the Scripture.

Do but observe what becomes of all Christian Religion in the account of
these Merchants. Their will is that God should be believed, because men
ordained it, and that the divine truth should have no other foundation, then
the evidence and authority of lying men, yea such as will be Judges in their
own cause, and who having invented a thousand Traditions (all tendi^g to their
profit) hold them all up by one Tradition alone, which has no other foundation
then their own authority. There is no such pernicious stratageme to pervert
the Christian Religion, as to confound the things that are certain by
uncertain proofs, to plead humane Tradition for their highest and concluding
principle, and to order that the Christian faith should have a Maxim that is
no Articie of faith, and is vpheld by no other authority then of those that
publish it, and such as by this Maxim enrich themselves, and build them up an
Empire on the earth: yea all the Churches in the world (except the Romish) do
reject this Maxim, and laugh at this succession, as a story contradicted by
all antiquity, and especially by all the Bishops of Rome; who whilst the Roman
Empire was in flourishing estate, never intermedled in any affair beyond the
limits of that Empire; as I have proved at large in my first Treatise.

the Pope cannot err in the Faith, and that likewise, by virtue of the same
succession. For they will have the Pope Successor not only of the power of
Saint Peter, but also of his infallibility.

Now if the Pope should be Successor of the Supremacy of Saint Peter, it
follows not thereupon that the Pope cannot err; for he that is Successor
of the charge of another, is not therefore Successor of his virtue. The Doctors
that have succeeded in the chair of Moses, have often corrupted the Law of
Moses, and have caused the people to depart out of the way, and to stumble at
the Law, Malach. 2. 8. And the Scribes and Pharisees that were in the Chair of
Moses, taught that Jesus Christ was a Seducer. And we have formerly seen
diverse Popes condemned for heresy and impiety by the Councels, and many Popes
complaining of their Predecessors heresies. And seeing that our adversaries
confess that there have been multitudes of profane Popes and of infamous
life, it is hard to believe that he which is not Successor of the good life,
and of the virtues of Saint Peter, can be Successor infallible of his purity
in the Faith. For if the wicked doctrine of the Leaders of the Church bring in
errors, their ungodly life brings in profaneness and Atheism; and as the
Canon Si Papa has it in the 40. distinction, it casts headlong innumerable
troops of people into hell, it exposes the Christian Religion unto Scandal,
and brings errors into the very Faith. It being the custom of lewd Pastors
to change the doctrine, for the better accommodation of their vices, and to
make it serve their avarice and ambition. Let Saint Peter preaching the Gospel
be compared with the Pope that preaches not at all; Saint Peter going on bare
foot, with the Pope carried upon Princes shoulders; Saint Peter not suffering
Cornelius to worship him, Act. 10. with the Pope expecting himself to be
adored, and that Kings should kiss his feet; Saint Lib. Sacram. ceremon. sect.
5. c. 1. and 3.
Peter reprehending Simon Magus for holding the gift of God purchasable with
money, Act. 8. 20. With the Pope drayning so much money to himself by
Absolutions, Dispensations, Indulgences, Annates, Archiepiscopall roabes, etc.
Saint Peter recommending chastity to women, 1. Pet. 3. With the Pope suffering
whoredom, and establishing brothell houses publicly at Rome; Saint Peter that
was married, Mark. 1. 30. With the Pope forbidding the Clergy to live in state
of matrimony; S. Peter who in his second Epistle, Chap. 1. Exhoreth the
faithful to be attentive to the word of the Prophets, With the Pope not
allowing the reading of Scripture; Saint Peter writing to all the faithful,
and commanding them to obey their Kings, 1 Pet. 2. 3. and 14. With the Pope
exempting the Clergy from subjection to their Kings; Saint Peter making no
mention in his Epistles of invocation of Saints, of adoration of Images, of
Relics, of Purgatory, of Indulgences, of the Treasure of the Church, of
Limbus, of the Service in an unknown tongue, of his Supremacy, nor usurping
any title to himself, that was not common to the other Apostles, with the
Pope, who teaches all these things, and in his Bulls attributes to himself
such titles as Saint Peter never admitted of in his Epistles; then may it
easily be conjectured what little modicum of assurance there is, that the Pope
cannot degenerate from the purity of Saint Peter, nor be alienated from his
doctrine.

And note, that although Saint Peter was exempted from error, by the
continual assistance of the Spirit of God, which Jesus Christ had promised to
the Apostles, nevertheless neither he, nor any Apostle used this arrogant
language, vaunting of their impossibility to err. As the Pope is the only
Christian Prelate which makes himself to be called God, so is he the only
creature which qualifieth himself with Infallibility, to the end to make him
resemble God. Imitating herein the false Doctors who taught the Jews to say:
The Law shall not perish from the Iere. 18. 18.
Priest, nor the Counsel from the Wise, nor the Word from the Prophet.

It is not requisite to prove this Maxim any further, That the Bishop of Rome
cannot err in the Faith, to be false and contradicted (in the experience of
so many ages) by so many holy Doctors, who have so often condemned the Bishops
of Rome; by so many Councels, damning the Romish Church, and the Bishop of Rome
for error and heresy; by the testimony of numbers of our adversaries, who
reject this Maxim; and by the confession of the Popes themselves. This has
been amply prooved in my first Treatise.

Upon which so false a Maxim, are grounded all Traditions of the church of
Rome, as a multitude of flies sitting upon a floating planke; or a number of
Chymera's hanging at a spiders thread, which breaks at a blast. It is their
plaster for all evil. They make new Articles of faith most gainful to his
Holiness. Idolatry, Merchandise, tyranny, corruption of the benefit and nature
of Jesus Christ is established. And in conclusion they pay us with this maxim,
that the Church cannot err; and by the Church they understand the Romish; and
by the Romish Church the Pope of Rome. Thus the Romish Church forbids all
sorts of errors by an error, in saying, I cannot err, supplying with
presumption that which is wanting in reason. She is exempted from giving
reason of her doctrine, for she her self judges that she has reason. Such
an error is the worst of all; for by this means a man becomes Judge of the
Word of God, and makes Religion to depend upon his will. And he that says, I
cannot err, will never reform his error, nor subject himself to any rule;
for he believes himself to be the Rule. How shall he be raised up, who
believes he cannot fall?

Jesus Christ and the Apostles have spoken many things which they did not
commit to writing. Upon this presupposition they build another, the most
inconsiderate and unreasonable that can be. For they would have it believed,
that those things which the Apostles did not set down in writing, are the
Traditions of the Romish Church at this time; and therefore conclude, that when
Jesus Christ spoke severally and apart to his Disciples, he conferred with them
about the service of Images, and adoration of Relics, about Indulgences and
superaboundant satisfactions of the Saints, which the Pope ought to lock up in
his Treasury; about Invocation of Saints, about the crowning of his Mother in
the dignity of Queen of heaven, and of the Angels; about private Masses, the
Communion under one kind, blessed Beads, and Agnus Dei, etc. This is a daring
conjecture, whereon if the faith of the faithful be founded, all Religion
shall consist of supposition: and the Pope shall have good recreation to invent
Traditions which shall turn to his profit; for such conjectures are taken for
Oracles, and laid down for a foundation of the Christian faith.

But they are ashamed of this, and *contradict themselves: for knowing that
these Traditions are new Inventions, they speak freely that neither Christ nor
the Apostles have taught all, either by mouth or by writing, and that the Popes
from time to time have added many doctrines essential and necessary, reserving
to themselves the power of altering that which God has commanded in the
Scripture, of adding to the Creed, of dispensing against the Apostle, and of
establishing new Articles of faith, a^ we have showed by multitudes of proofs,
and by the practice of the church of Rome. So as now we are not to consider
what doctrines have been taught from the mouth of the Apostles, but it is
endeavored to make us receive all the Traditions which the Popes have added,
not only to the Scriptures, but also to the preaching of the Apostles, for
inviolable laws and infallible rules.

Our adversaries then come back to this, that the Church of Rome cannot err in
her Traditions, for she cannot err in this Tradition, that she cannot err.
They would have us believe the Tradition of the Romish Church, because the
Tradition of that Church has so ordained it. So as this third Maxim leads
us back to the second, which holds, that the Pope cannot err: and this
Maxim that the Pope cannot err, leads us to the first, that is to say, to
the Succession of Saint Peter, (whereof God ordained nothing) from whence they
have made this infallibility to spring forth.

It is lamentable to hear, how they speak of the antiquity of their
Traditions, yea, when they be fresh and modern. They heard their fathers say,
that they heard from others, and they again from others, that the Apostles
have taught these things by mouth only, and did disperse them amongst some
few. Thus they make a brittle cord which binds not the consciences, and their
belief striving to rove back through fifteen or sixteen ages, wherein they
see not one jot, is lost in the way; in stead of beginning at the fountain, to
wit, at Jesus Christ and his Apostles, and to learn in their writings that
which they have taught: for, a Commandment of the Lord, or of the Apostles,
had in one word freed them from all doubt and difficulty.

CHAP. XII. That our Adversaries alleging the Scripture do contradict
themselves, and allege Scripture for Traditions in general without touching
the particulars, wherein they find the Scripture contrary.
IT is the property of lying to say and unsay, involving it self in
contradictions. Our adversaries build the authority of the Scripture upon the
Tradition of the Church: and then contradicting themselves, they labor to
ground Tradition upon the testimony of Scripture.

Their custom is to allege Scripture, not to defend every one of their
Traditions in particular; but they endeavor to prove in general, that the
Scripture speaks of Traditions, and approves them, Presupposing without
proof, th^^ the traditions whereof the Scripture makes mention, are those
which in our times are received by the Church of Rome, and where of the body of
Papistry is compounded.

And herein they do wisely. For what should they find in the scripture, that
may be of use to uphold so many new inventions? unless^ perhaps they would
ground the abridgement of the cup upon the words of our Savior, Drink ye ^
Math. 26. 27.
of it. And upon the words of Saint Paul writing to the people of Co^rinth, Let
a man examine himself 1 Cor. 11. 28. and chap. 10. 17.
and so let him eat of that Bread, an drink of that Cup. As likewise, ^ are
all partakers of one and the same Bread; and one and the same Cup, according to
the vulgar translation.

Or they would ground the single life of Priests and Bishops upon the Apostles
Commandment, wherein he charge a Bishop to be 1 Timothy 3. ver. 2. and 4.
husband of one wife, having his children in subjection with all gravity: as
also, If they cannot contain, let them 1 Cor. 7. 9.
marry: for it is better to marry then to burn.

Or Invocation of Saints, upon the words of Solomon, that God only 2 Chro. 6.
30
knows the hearts of men. And upon those of Saint Paul, How shall they Romans
10. 14
call upon him in whom they have not believed? And upon those words of Jesus
Christ, When ye pray, say, Our Father which art in heaven, etc. Luke 11. 2.

Or private Masses and without Communicants, upon this reason that Saint Paul
calls the holy Supper A Communion. And upon 1 Cor. 10. 16
this that Jesus Christ giving bread to his disciples, has said, Take, eat:
for in their solitary Masses, no man assisteth, to whom the Priest may say,
Take.

Or the power of the Pope to depose Kings, and to make them kiss his feet,
upon these sentences of the Apostles, Fear God, Honor 1 Pet. 2. 17.
the King: and upon this, Let every Romans 13. 1.
man be subject to superior powers: and upon the example of Jesus Christ, who
paid tribute, and washed his Apostles feet.

Or Service and Prayers in a strange language, upon that which the Apostle
speaks: Except you 1 Cor. 14. 9. and 19.
utter by the tongue words easy to be understood, how shall it be known what
is spoken? for ye shall speak into the air. And, I had rather speak in the
Church five words with my understanding, then ten thousand in an unknown
tongue.

Or difference of meats, upon that which the Apostle says: If any of them
that believe not, invite 1 Cor. 10. 27
you to a feast, and ye be disposed to go, whatsoever is set before you, eat,
asking no question for conscience sake. And upon that which the same Apostle
calls the instructions of those that said, ( touch not, taste not, handle
not,) humane Commandments and doctrines, although they were made for devotion,
and to subdue the flesh, as he has it in the 2 chap. to the Colos. 21. 22. 23.

Or merit of works of condignity as they are called, or of equivalence and
congruity, upon the words of our Savior, When you Luke 17. ^^.
shall have done all that is commanded you, say, we are unprofitable servants.

Or works of supererogation not commanded, upon the sum of the Law, which
inioyneth to love God with all the heart, and with all the strength. For in
these words is commanded all the good that man can do, and upon that where
Saint Paul in the 4. to the Phil. 8. charge us to addict our selves to all
things commendable and virtuous, whereupon it follows that if the works of
supererrogation are virtuous and praise worthy, they are commanded; and upon
this that the perfection of the Angels does consist in obeying the
Commandment of God, Psalm. 103. 20. and not to do more then he has commanded.

Or borrowed satisfactions, upon that which the Apostle testifies, that every
man shall carry his own burden, Galat. 6. 5. and that every man shall receive
his own proper reward, according to his own labor. 1 Cor. 3. 8.

Or offerings of Priests, in making sacrifices for the living and the dead,
upon that which Jesus Christ has said, Do this in remembrance of me: which is
the place for proof thereof, that the Counsel of Trent in the 22. session will
have to be received of every man, under pain of an Anathema.

Or festival play days, upon the commandment of God speaking: Exodus 20. 9.
six days shall thou labor.

Or the power of the Pope to set at liberty under ground, and to give
Indulgences to the dead, upon that which Jesus Christ says, Math. 18. 18.
Whatsoever ye shall bind and loose on earth, etc.

Or cases reserved to the Pope, upon the words of our Savior uttered to all
the Apostles, Whose sins soever ye shall pardon they shall John 20. 23
be pardoned.

Or images of the Almighty upon that which God discoursing to the People of
Isreal, gives the reason why in speaking to them from heaven he suffered none
to see any image or resemblance: For Deuteronomy. 4. 23.
fear (says he) Lest ye might forget the Covenant which he made with you,
and make you a graven image, or the likeness of any thing male or female.

Or establishing of brothell-houses at Rome by the authority of his holiness,
upon the commandment, Thou shall not commit adultery. Deuteronomy. 4. 13.


Or the doctrine of the Council of Trent, affirming in the fifth Session that
covetousness is no sin, upon the law of God, speaking, Thou shall not covet:
and upon the Deuteronomy. 5. 21.
testimony of the Apostle, saying, that he has learnt out of the law, that
covetousness is sin. Romans 7. 7.


Or forbidding the People to read the Scripture, upon that which is written in
the Apocal. Blessed is Apoe. 1. 3.
he that reads, and they that hear the words of this prophecy; and upon the
example of the people of Berea who Acts 17. 11.
searched the Scriptures daily; and upon the commandment made to Kings, to
read carefully the book of Deuteronomy. 17. 18.
the law of God.

Or swearing by relics, upon the commandment of God: Thou Deuteronomy. 10. 20.
shall fear the Eternal, and swear by his name.

Or Purgatory, upon that which the Lord said unto the Thief upon the Cross:
Thou shall be with me Luke 23. 43.
this day in Paradise; and upon the Luke 17. 22.
example of Lazarus, whose soul was carried by the Angels into Abraham's
bosom imediately after his death; and upon the Apostle Saint John, speaking,
That the blood 1 John 1. 7.
of Jesus Christ purges us from all sin.

Or the sacrifice of the body of Jesus Christ in the Mass, upon that which the
Apostle to the Hebrews (speaking of the sacrifice of the death of Jesus Christ
made up on the Cross) declares, that We Hebr. 10. 10 and 14.
are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all.
Hebr. 9. 25. and 26.
and that Jesus Christ offers not himself ofien: for as it is ordained for
all men to dye once, so Christ has been offered once to take away our sins,
making the sacrifice of Jesus Christ no more reiterable then the death of men.

Without all doubt if contrariety to the Scripture can give authority to the
Romish Traditions, these traditions which I have specified, ought to be of
great authority.

Yea to sum up all, our adversaries are too licencious and rash in their
conjectures, and I cannot conceave that they believe it themselves, when they
would have us to believe, that Jesus Christ speaking in private with his
Disciples, did confer about the service of Images, and great Pardons to be
made by the Pope, of Chaplets, and Blessed-beads, of lessening the torment of
Souls in Purgatory by Masses and Indulgences, etc. To what may this tend but
to expose Jesus Christ to laughter? or to delight themselves in faining matters
without proof? and to allure those that will be deluded, to believe things
that are incredible? for such kind of presuppositions work their effect,
according as he is awed that propounds them.

CHAP. XIII. That our adversaries to distinguish the good Traditions from the
bad, do give us a Plea wherein they wholly convict themselves.
TO discern the good Traditions from the bad, our adversaries lay down
certain Pleas which we hold fit to have strictly examined. They say that the
Traditions ought to be both received and believed to be divine, which have
always been approoved by the universal Church, as Vincentius Lyrinensis
confirms it, allowing that to be received for truth which has ever been
believed wholly and by all; and Saint Augustine in his Epistle. 118. If the Si
quid horu^ rota per orbe^ frequentat Ecclesia, hoc quin it a faciendu^ sit
disputare insolentissima insaniae est. Quod v^iversa tenet Ecclesia, nec
Co^cilijs institutu^, sed semper retentu^, non nisi au horttate Apestolica
traditu^ certisime creditur.
Church throughout the world observe any thing, it is a distracted impudence to
dispute whether it ought to be so or no; and in his 4. Book against the
Donatists Chapter 4. That which the universal Church holds, and has not
been instituted by Counsels, but ever maintained, is to be believed in all
just reason, not to have been ordained by other power then the Apostolic
Authority.

Now though these passages of Saint Augustine be unseasonably alleged,
because they speak of customs not necessary to salvation, and indifferent in
their nature, or of opinions without the knowledge whereof a man may be saved,
as we shall hereafter discover: yet I say that by this Plea, the Traditions of
the Church of Rome do fall to the ground, and are not current or receiueable:
for it is easy to prove, that they have not been received from the beginning
by the Catholic Church.

How is it that Purgatory (which 1. Purgatory
is by interpretation, a subterraneall fire, where the souls of the faithful
are purged by orment) could be believed in the ancient church: seeing that a
great part of the Fathers did believe, that the souls could not be tormented
without the bodies: And that the Mass prays for souls that sleep in a
peaceable rest: it being a clear case that when this piece was patched to the
Canon of the Mass, the Church of Rome did not believe that the souls of the
faithful were tortured in a fire. Pope Gregory the 1. In his Dialogues,
s^ateth Purgatory in the smoke of baths, and in the wind; for this underground
fire was not yet devised: and yet this time was so far advanced as to the year
590. of our Lord.

Invocation of Sts. was unknown 2. Invocatio^ of Saints.
under the three first ages of the Christian Church, and more then half of the
fourth. Cardinal Befla. in his third book of worshipping Saints, Chap. 9.
says, that When the. Pratercacum scribetentur scriptura sancta, (...) coeperat
usus vovends sanctia.
holy Scriptures were written, the custom was not yet to make vows to Saints.
Which is as much to say in plain terms, that about the Apostle time, Saints
were not called on, nor did the Apostles (who survived the Virgin Mary)
address their vows unto her. And Cardinal Perron (to whom this commendation
Du Perron co^rre le Roy de la Grand Bretagne, Page 1009. Et quat aux auteris
plus proches du siecle Apostouque, encore qu'il ne s'y trouue pas de vestages
de vesta coustume, etc. Page 994. Quelques particuliers (...) que les ames des
fideles (...) point la visin is Di^^ avaunt is augament final, etc. L'Eglise
n'avcit point incore prononce la decisian la dessus.
is due, to be the best versed in the study of the Father's) confesfeth freely,
that in the Authors nearest approaching to the Apostles time, there appears no
trace of this custom of invoking Saints. Yea, he acknowledges that then when
S. Augustine wrote, (which was some 420. years after the birth of our Savior)
the doctrine of those which hold that the Saints know not the occurrences of
things acted here below, was not condemned, and that the Church had not yet
made a decision thereupon: and indeed all that our Adversaries allege out of
the Fathers of the three first ages, and more then half the fourth upon this
question, are passages ser ving to prove that the Saints pray for us, which is
a point that willingly we condescend unto; but not to prove it behovefull for
us to invoke the Saints, nor to allow them a religious service.

The approbation of the books 3. Maccabees
of Maccabees (amongst other books Divine and Canonical) is inserted by our
Adversaries, in their unwritten Traditions. Yet this is not a Tradition
received from the beginning by all the Catholic Le Concile de Laodice^ Can.
58. Mel^^^^ a^^gue pur Eusebe ^^ 5. lib^^^ foni histoira chap. 24. Origene
sur^^s primier Ps(...) par E^seb lib. 6 cap. 24 Tertull. ^^ 4 liver de ses
Carmes. Eujebe Chron. Olymp. 116. (...) Cateeltesi quarta. Athanas. Epost. 39.
and Synops. Na-Zianz. Ca^^^n. Epiph. de mensuris et ponderibus. Hilar. prologo
Psalmorum.
Church: the Council of Laodicea rejects them: and Meliton Bishop of
Sardius, near the time of the Apostles: and Origin: and Tertullian: and
Eusebius: and Athanasius: and Cyril of Jerusalem: and Hilarie: and Gregory of
Nazianzene: and Amphilochius Bishop of Iconia: and Epiphanius Bishop of
Salamine: and Philustreus Bishop of Bresse: and Saint Jerome in Prolog^
Galeato, and in his Preface upon the Books of Solomon: and Ruffin upon the
Lords Prayer: all of these were persons remarkable in the third and fourth
age^. Yea, and Pope Gregory the 1. who wrote near upon the end of the fifth
age in the 19. of his Morals, Chap. the 17 as we have proved elsewhere in
amplemanner: wherefore, this is no Tradition received wholly and at all times
by the Church universal.

By this very Plea the Romish 4. Indulgences.
Indulgences ought to be rejected, the which Indulgences I understand to be a
Tradtion, wherewith the Pope heapeth up the superfluity of the satisfactions of
Jesus Christ and the Saints, to the treasure of the Church, and convertech them
to payment for others by his Indulgences: which he hoardeth in certain
Churches of Rome, and causes that the people from all parts repair thither to
purchase pardons. I say that these Indulgences are new and that neither the
Apostles nor their disciples did convert the superaboundance of the sufferings
of Abrabam, or of Saint John the Baptist, or of the Virgin Mary to payment for
others, and kept no treasury to hold the superabounding satisfactions of the
Saints, and gave no pardons of one or two hundred thousand years, as the Pope
does: and that these Indulgences have been altogether unknown in the first
ages of the Christian Church, by the plain confession of our Adversaries.
Cardinal Cajetan in the 2. Chap. of his Treatise of Indulgences, has these
words; De ertu Indulgentiaru^ si certitu^^ habert posset, veritati indaganda
opem ferret. Verum quia nulla sacra Scriptura, nulla priscoru^ Docto^u^
Graecoru^ aut L^^inoru^ au(...) asscripra hane ad nostra^ deduxit notitiam, sed
he solum a treemtis enn^ scriprurae co^mendatu^, and de ve tustus Pa^^tbus,
etc. Gabrtel Biel Lect. 57. Decendum quod ante tempora B. Gregorij modicus vel
^ullus fuit vsus Indulgentiarum. Nu^^^ autem crebrescit (...) vsu^, quiae sine
dubi^ Ecclesia habens spirita^ sponsi sut Christi, et idcirco non errans, etc.
Navan us Coment. de Iobel ^t Indutg. page 545 Quate autent apud ant^q^os tam
rara, and apud recentiores ta^ frequens sit Indulgentiarum mentio, docuit ille
vit sanctissimus etc. I^hannis Roffensis c^(...) ea de re verboru^ summa est;
Quod non certo constat a (...). primu^ tradi coeperint, etc. Quod multa a^
Evangelijs ^t alijs scripturu nu^c sunt ^xcusa ^ucu^^ntius and intellectu
perspicacius qua^ fuerunt olim. Quod nemo ^^ dubitat orthodoxus an Purgat^rium
sit, de quo tame^ apud priscos illos nulla vel qua^ rarissima fiebat mentio.
Quod non fuit tam necessaria sieve Purgat^rij sieve Indulg^ti^rum fides explicita
in ^rimitiua ec^lesia atque ^unc est, etc. Anton. Sum. ^^ S. Theolog. art. 1.
tit. 10. 3. de Indul. l. 202. Ve^tijs ann. ^82. 5. bridgeent of Cup.
If we could have any certainty concerning the original of Indulgences, it
would help as much in the disquisition of the truth: but we have not by
writing any authority, either of the holy Scripture, or of ancient Doctors,
Greek or Latin, that affords us the least knowledge thereof. Gabriel Biel
Lect. 57. upon the Canon of the Mass: We must confess that before the time of
Gregory (that is to say in the six first ages) the use of Indulgences was very
little or none at all: but now the practice of them is grown frequent, for
without doubt the Churoh has the Spirit of Christ her Spouse, and therefore
erreth not. Navarrus the Popes Penitentiary: What is the cause that among the
ancients, so little mention is made of Indulgences, and among it the modern
they are in such use? John of Rochester most holy and reverend for his dignity
of Bishop and Cardinal, has taught us the reason, saying: that The explicit
faith, whether it be of Purgatory, or of Indulgences, was not so necessary in
the Primitive Church as now. And a little after: Whil*st there was no heed
taken to Purgatory. no man enquired after Romish Indulgences, because thereupon
depends the proper^y and worth of them.

Antonine Archbishop of Florence (whom the Pope canonized for a Saint) speaks
to the same purpose: Touching Indulgences we have nothing expressly recited in
holy Scripture, although the saying of the Apostle be alleged upon this
subject, 1 Cor. If I have pardoned any thing, I have done it for your sake, in
the person of Christ. Nor are found at all in the writings of the ancient
Doctors, but of the modern. It is therefore no small abuse to place
Indulgences amongst Apostolic Traditions.

Of the same rank is that Tradition which excludes the people from the
communion of the Cup: it is a modern Tradition, and forged de novo: concerning
the which we have the confession of the Council of Constance, held in the
year 1416. which is the first Council that ever made the abridgement of the
Cup to pass with legal authority. Mark the words: Though in the Primitive
Church this Sacrament was received by the faithful under both kinds, yet this
custom was introduced with good reason, that it should be taken in both kinds
by those that consecrate, but by the Laics under the species of bread only.
And the Council of Basil in the 30. Session: The Laics are not bound by the
Commandment of our Lord, to receive the Sacrament under both kinds. These
Councels do acknowledge, that Gods Commandment, and the custom of the
ancient Church, is to give both kinds to the people, but they will not suffer
the Church to be obliged to this Commandment: and when our Adversaries
endeavor to defend themselves in this point by antiquity, they vouch examples
of some sick persons receiving but in one kind, or of some that could not
taste or endure wine, or of some superstitious people, who would carry the
consecrated Bread from the Church home to their houses, and there lock it up
in coffers: but they bring no prohibition of giving the Cup to the Laics, nor
any example of any ancient Church, which has celebrated the holy Sacrament in
the assembly of the faithful, without offering the Cup to the Communicants;
nor any example of denial to administer the Cup to the people: yet this is the
point of difference, and which is now in controversy. It was upon this
abridgement of the Cup, that Cardinal* Perron and Jesuit Vasquez former^y told
us, that the Church was a^le to change the institution of our Lord, and the
commandment of ^he Apostle.

As for painting God and representing 6. Images of God.
the Trinity in stone or in wood, this tradition has not been ^eceived by all,
nor at all times, and ^onsequently is neither Divine nor Apostolic, I could
produce mul^tudes of passages of Ancients that condemn this abuse, but for ^he
present, the testimony of Pope Gregory the second, and Cardinal Baronius shall
suffice. This Cardi^all in the year 726. of his an^ales, cites an Epistle of
the same Gregory, wherein are found these words: Why do not we place before
^ur eyes, and set forth in painting the ^ather of our Lord Jesus Christ? it is
because we know not what he is, and the nature of God c^nnot be painted or
brought in sight. Upon which words Baeronius noted this saying in the Postea
vsis venit, ut pingatur in Ecclesia Deus Pater et Spi^tus san^^us.
margent: Afterward it came by custom in the Church, that God the father and
the holy Ghost were painted, this is therefore new, and has not been received
by all and at all times in the Catholic Church.

The service of Images was so 7. Service of Images.
generally unknown in the primitive Church of the three first ages, that the
very trades of painting and graving were execrable amongst the Christians.
Tertull^^ reprocheth Hermogenes his trade of painting as a thing infamous.
Clemens Alexandrinas in his doctrinall, and I^stin Martyr against Tryphon
speak of these trades as of unlawful Arts.

The power of Popes to depos^ 8. Depositio^ of Kings.
Kings, and give and take Kingdoms, is yet of a fresh date, and there is not
sound any rule for ^^ nor example, nor the least sign of footing in all
antiquity. Perron in his Oration pronounced before the States of Paris the 15
of Ian. 1615. could not yield one example for the five first ages, and those
which he alleges before the year 1076. are all either false or useless.
Gregory the seventh in the year 1076. pronouncing sentence of deposition
against the Emperor Henry the 4. enterprised a thing without example, which
also turned to his confusion. Cardinal Bellarmine disputing this same question
against Barkley, perceiving himself destitute of all testimony of antiquity,
has recourse to the authority of the Church of the latter Bellarm. in Barkl.
cap. 3. Non recte d^ Ecclesia Christ's sentit, qu^ nihil admittit, nisi quod
express in veters Ecele^^ sia scriptum aut factu^ esse legiteur Quasi Ecclesia
poster toris temporu aut desi erit esse Ecclesia, aut facultatem non habeat
explicands et declarandi constitutndi etia^ et ^bc^di qua ad fidem and mores
Christianes pertinent.
ages, saying: He judges not rightly of the Church of Christ, who receives
nothing but that which he reads, to have been expressly written or done in
the ancient Church, as if the Church of this latter time had ceased to be a
Church, or had not the faculty of unfolding and declaring, yea of establishing,
and commanding things appertaining to the Faith and manners of Christians. In
brief, this usurpation is not a Tradtion received by all, and in all time, nor
could be at that time practiced, when the Christian Emperors deposed Popes,
and made them prisoners, and punished them with death, and took of them a
sum of money for their reintegration in the Bishopric, as may be seen in
the 123. Nov. of Iustiniam, chap. 3.

And how can the Cannon o^ 9. Canon of the Mass.
the Mass be an Apostolic Tradition, when the persons therein named were
after the Apostle^ time, more then two hundred years? namely Cosmus and
Di^mian, who suffered martyrdom in the year of our Lord, 285. like wise we
could produce many autuors Voyez les livers des mysteres at ^^ Mass de
Innocent 3. Et Platine en la vte de Sixte 1. Et le Pantisical de Damase.
amongst our adversaries, who affirm that this Pope and that Pope have added
such and such a parceil to the Mass, and yet the whole Canon of the Mass is
contrary both to Porgatory, to the merit of Works, and to Transubstantiation,
for in the Canons of the Mass the Priest prays for the souls Cano^ Missa.
Non astimator mariti, sod veniae largitor.
that sleep in peaceable rest and tran quility, and not for those that are
formented in a fire, and craveth at Per que^ hac ^^nia Domine s^^^per bena
creas, sanctificas, benedicu. Supra qua (domne) prepitto ac seneno vultu
respicere digneris et accepta habeas sicut accepta habere dignatus as (...) ^^
inso Abol.
Gods hands that he will not weigh our merits, but that he will grant us
pardon, and holding the consecrated host, says, These are the good things
which God always creates sanctifies, and blesses, offering them through
Jesus Christ, and humbly beseeches that God would as freely accept of these
gifts and presents, as of the Calfe or Lamb offered by Abel, of all this there
is nothing but may sort well and agree with Jesus Christ, and true it is that
the Mass being punctually considered, appeacheth and condemns the Romish
Church of this time, and (as now it is,) must be far differing from that of
heretofore; for Gregory the first, in the 63. Epistle of his 7. book
affirms, that the Apostles did consecrate the Eucharist with only the Lords
prayer.

As for Monastical profession, it 10. Monastical profession.
can neither be a Divine nor A. postolicall Tradition, nor believed always by
all, for Paul the Hermit was the first of that calling, and made no disciples
at all, but died in the year of our Lord 343. Particularly in the Church of
Rome, this profession was neither seen nor practiced, until about the year
of our Lord 370. for this is the time whereof Saint Hierome speaks, in his
Epitaph of Marcella, No Women (says he) of great parentage knew yet at Rome
what this Monacall profession did mean, nor durst take this name, which was so
vile and ignominious amongst the people, because of the novelty of the thing,
as then it was esteemed, moreover the Monks of that time were of a far
different condition from these of this our time.

In sum, (not to run over all the traditions of the Romish Church,) I
maintain that in the four first ages (I could descend a little lower) no
ancient Church can be shown unto us, which has approoved, 1. The Masses
without Communicants. 2. The images of the Trinity. 3. Or that has made
mention of the treasure of Romish Indulgences. 4. Or that has forbidden the
people to read the sacred Scripture. 5. Or that has deprived the people of the
Communion of the Cup. 6. Or that has rendered any Religious service to Images.
7. Or that has instructed the People to pray to God in a tongue not understood
by him that prays. 8. Or that has called the virgin Mary Queen of heaven,
and Lady of the word. 9. Or that has believed the Limbus for little infants.
10. Or that has taught, that the Pope can give and take kingdoms. 11. Or that
the Pope can canonize Saints, and free souls out of Purgatory, I could rehearse
many more if need were.

Pope Martin in his Canon S^ quis Presbiter the 30. Did. ordains for an
Apostolical Tradition, the prohibition of kneeling at Prayer, between the
Paschall and Pentecost; yet does it well appear in the 20, of the Acts ver.
36. and in the 21. ver. the 5. that Saint Paul and the faithful with him,
humbled themselves upon their knees at that time, whereupon Baronius in his
Annals, reprehendeth this Pope for having celebrated the Pentecost nequaquam
Christiano more, not after a Christian fashion. Ann. 58. Sect. 102. but if this
custom be an Apostolic Tradition, why does not the Church of Rome contain
the practice thereof?

CAP. XIIII. A proof of the same, by the Traditions which our adversaries do
suppose to be the most ancient and best grounded in antiquity.
TO the end it may not be said, that for our advantage, we pick out their
most modern Traditions, and least countenanced with antiquity. I will incist
upon three, wherein our adversaries take themselves to stand upon surest
ground, and labor to overwhelme us with texts and places out of the Fathers;
the first is prayer for the Dead, secondly Lent, thirdly single life of the
Clergy.

For the first, I say that prayers 1. Prayer for the dead.
for the Dead, which the Romish Church does exercise, and are made for the
comfort of Souls in Purgatory, are so modern as not to have any mention or
trace of them in all antiquity. For we have already expressed, and will
further demonstrate in its proper place, that the ancient Christians prayed for
the dead, sleeping in a peaceable repose, and kept in hidden receptacles,
expecting the Resurrection; praying likewise that the dead should rise again
to salvation, or that they should be raised at a better hour then others, or
that the fire at the last day of judgment should burn them more superficially
and sparingly, but for a prayer to ease and mitigate a burning soul in the
fire of Purgatory, there is not any found in all antiquity: yea, in all the
prayers of the Church of Rome, which are found in the Mass for the dead, there
is not so much as any whispering of Purgatory; and yet the Canon of the Mass
prays for the souls that sleep in peaceable quietness: and at this day the
Greek and Oriental Churches pray for the dead, and deny Purgatory. The second
book of the Maccabees at the 12. c. wishes us to pray for the dead, having
respect to the resurrection, saying likewise that to pray otherwise then thus,
were trifling and dotage; briefly, I say that the prayers which the ancient
Christians did make for the dead, are utterly abolished in the Church of Rome;
and that he who should pray at this time for the dead, after the manner of the
ancient Church, shall be branded for an Heretic, and not escape the
Inquisition, for such kind of prayers would not be gainefull to the Romish
Clergy; and the power of the Pope (not Gelasius Co^monitorio ad Faustum Super
terra^ (inquit) nam in hac legatione defunctum nunguam dixit absolv^.
long since invented) to give Indulgences to the dead, (and condemned by Pope
Gelasius,) should vanish by such prayers, and the traffic therein should be
dissolved.

Secondly, Lent, (that is to say, 2. Lent.
the custom of not eating flesh, nor eggs for six and forty days before
Easte^) is not a tradition received into the Church from the beginning; indeed
the word Quadrag^ssima is found often times in the Fathers of the fourth and
fifth ages: but in the pure and unsuspected writings of the Fathers of the three
first ages, I never met with it, and we must note that this word (to take it
originally) did signify a fast of forty hours before Easter, which
observation the ancient Christians grounded upon that which Jesus Christ spoke
in the 9. of Saint Matthew, They shall fast when the Spouse shall be taken
from them. Now the spouse, to weet, Jesus Christ was taken from his Disciples
for forty hours: for there are just so many hours from the time that he was
nailed to the Cross unto his resurrection. Nevertheless the customs did
forthwith vary, some fasting two days, some three, some five, but though the
custom did alter, yet the ancient name did still remain, and according as the
observation hereof did increase, so in conclusion, this Fast of forty hours is
become by little and little a Fast of forty days, whereof every one among the
people did fast his day, according as he saw good, except the Sabbath days:
for to fast on Gods day was judged a crime, the Spouse being rendered to the
Church on that day by his resurrection. There was none but the Pay prouue tout
ce la par multitude de passages au 7 liver contre le Cardinal du Perron en la
5-contraverse cap. 6. 7. et 8.
Church of Rome that fasted on Saturdayes, whereof also it was condemned by the
sixth general Council at the 55. Canon: yea at Milan which is near Rome,
they fasted not on Saturdayes, as Saint Augustine testifies in his 118.
Epistle.

Thirdly, single life of Priests and 3. Single life of Priests.
Bishops cannot be an Apostolical Tradition, because it was not practiced at
the time of the Apostles, nor many ages after them. But having spoken of this
elsewhere at large, I will content my self for the present, with the testimony
of the two most famous Cardinals of this age, Barronius, and Perron. Baronius
in the 58. year of his Annals Bar. Ann. 58. 14.
acknowledges, that married men were received to the function of Bishop at the
Apostles time, whereof he alleges diverse causes, and namely amongst the
rest, the scarcity of unmarried men, especially in Crete. And Perron affirms,
Du Perron co^tre le Roy de la grand' Bretagne page 312. A cause. respondrens
nous, de la rarete des persons marices lors de la naissance de l'Eglise, etc.
Mais depuis comme l'Emperour Constantin, etc.
that this permission lasted until the time of Constantine, that is to say,
during the three first ages. But if he would have confessed the whole truth, he
had acknowledged that Greek Churches, never was any time when Priests were not
married, yea they so continue to this very day. And the 13. Canon of the sixth
general Council, called at the Imperial Palace of Constantinople, does
formally condemn the Church of Rome upon this subject. Estius Doctor and
Professor at Doway, in his Commentary upon this passage of the Apostle 1 Timothy
3. Let the Bishop Fatendum est Avestolum permittere vt in Episcopum eligatur
qui habeat; verum id pro te^pore, propter paucitatem eorla qui et coelibes
essent, and ad Episcopatum idonei.
be husband of one wife, speaks thus: We must confess that the Apostle
suffers us to choose a Bishop that is married to one wife: but he teaches
this according to the time, because of the fewness of unmaried men, and of
such as were fit for the function of a Bishop. Therefore this Tradition
claims not the Apostles to be the Authors of it, and consequently is not
Apostolical; nor has it been received at all times, and in all places.

I have insisted hereupon, not that we should have need of the authority of
the ancients, to fight against Romish Traditions, (for refutation whereof, the
word of God is sufficient, and is only that which ought to judge us:) but to
show that our Adversaries, supposing to establish their Traditions, do
plainly destroy them, and do give such notes, whereby they draw their own
indictment and conviction.

Nevertheless it is not without craft, that they will have Traditions to be
examined by this touchstone: to wit, whether they have been universally
received at all times. For they know, that of those who would examine their
Traditions by this way, scarce one amongst a thousand can attain to the head
of them, and that the people can inform themselves nothing at all therein: for
this examination cannot be made, but by the reading of all the Greek and
Latin Fathers, and of all the Ecclesiastical histories since the continuation
of sixteen hundred years. All the books to this purpose would fill a
spacious room, and are no more then sealed letters to the people; yea amongst
the Clergy, not one of a hundred will be found that has but ordinary
knowledge therein. By this means our Adversaries contrive the matter, that
when their Traditions come to be examined, a way must be undertaken that is
endless, wherein the people walk blindefold, and are constrained to repair
to the testimony of such men as preach these Traditions, and live by them:
truly if by these directions men expect to arrive at the knowledge of
salvation, I know not who can be saved.

The which most clearly appears in this, that the holy Scripture being the
short and sure means to examiue Traditions, they sequester it far from the
peoples eyes, and divert them from reading thereof, appointing them to books,
wherein they are neither comprehensive, nor capable. It appears likewise in
the examination of Traditions by the history of every age, wherein ordinarily
they commence with the last age, and so walk retrograde in the calculation of
their times, to the end they may arrive as late as possibly they can at the
Apostles time and their writings.

CHAP. XV. The second mark set by our Adversaries, to distinguish the good
Traditions from the bad, to wit, Succession.
To discern the good Traditions from the bad, our Adversaries agree, that
those ought to be held for divine and Apostolical, which are received by the
Churches that derive their succession from the Apostles.

This mark has no more certainty then the former, and makes as much against
our Adversaries. The doubtfulnesse of it is manifest in this, that the Churches
of Antioch, of Alexandria, of Ephesus, of Thessalonica, of Candia, etc. (which
are contrary to the Romish Church, and more ancient) do boast themselves to
be of equal succession, and one part of them challenges a succession from
Saint Peter: yea before the Churches of Alexandria and Antioch did suffer any
interruption, by the persecutions of the Mahumetans, they were often in discord
with the Church of Rome, and were not in any wise subject unto it: and more
particularly, the Church of Thessalonica founded upon Saint Paul, and the
Church of Candia where Saint Paul established Titus, (from whom descended the
Bishops of Candia) keep a succession from the Apostles, which never was
interrupted, and has continued since the time of Christ, who speaking from
heaven, sent the Apostle Saint Paul; yet notwithstanding these Churches are
separated from a communion with the Church of Rome, and the Pope holds them
for Schismatickes and Heretics.

As for the Bishop of Rome, so many schisms dividing, and so many heresies
tainting his Seat, (as our Adversaries themselves confess, and we have
elsewhere proved) have long since broken the rank of this imaginary succession.

Also the uncertainty of this succession betrayeth it self, in that it is a
mere tradition, so as if the service of Images, or the Communion under one
kind, be founded upon succession; behold then Traditions founded upon a
Tradition, and this Tradition founded upon humane histories, which may mistake,
yea often do jarre and disagree: wherefore this is an uncertainty founded upon
another uncertainty, as atoms and motes carried upon the air.

But how shall a Mechanicke, or a woman know this succession? How shall they be
assured that the second Bishop of Rome has believed in the points of Religion
as the first, the third as the second, the fourth as the third, and so for
sixteen hundred years, though there never might have happened any alteration?
Who does not perceive that these men, by a palpable falsehood invent projects,
whereof they know that the knowledge is impossible, and wherein the search is a
labor in vain, to the end that the ignorant finding themselves muffled up in
darkness, may catch hold and graspe the hand, which these men stretch forth to
them, to be conductours of their blindness?

Yet let us briefly observe, what this succession of the Church of Rome may
signify or be: they bring us clauses of ancient Authors, reporting the
Bishop of Rome to be Saint Peter's Successor; and show a Nomenclature of the
Bishops from Saint Peter to this day: but we find that the ancients make such
another Catalogue of the Bishops of Jerusalem, and of Antioch, whose succession
is of greater antiquity then that of the Bishops of Rome. The Bishops of
Alexandria likewise draw out their succession from Saint Peter. But our
Adversaries will not have this succession to be esteemed, for (say they) those
Churches are heretical, and yet the same Churches also call the Church of Rome
heretical and schismatic. Herein then lies the point of difficulty, the
ancients reckon up the Successors of Saint Peter, and other Apostles in
Iernsalem, in Antioch, at Rome, and at Alexandria: but they mean not they
should be Successors of the Apostles in the Apostleship, they mean only in
the government of such and such a particular Church, planted by one of the
Apostles. So, putting the case that Saint Peter founded the Church of Rome, and
was there Bishop, (which nevertheless is doubtful and mistrusted) I will also
agree that the Bishops of Rome of the first ages have been Successors to
Saint Peter, but in the Bishopric of the Church of the city of Rome only. In
the same manner as Simon was Successame manner to Saint James the Apostle in
the Bishopric of Jerusalem, and Timothy Successor to Saint Paul in the
Bishopric of Ephesus, but not in his Apostleship.

Our Adversaries profit nothing by their allegations, if they prove not first
by testimonies both divine and irrefragable, that God has ordained Saint Peter
to have a Successor in his Apostleship, and that the Bishop of Rome was
Successor to Saint Peter, in the dignity of the head of the universal Church.
For ought not this succession to have come from God? Did God establish a
supreme and successive head over the Church of all the world, without making
any mention of it in his word? And did Saint Peter himself forget to speak of
this succession, from whence we have two long Epistles? See then whereupon we
stand, and how our Adversaries are taken. All their Religion is founded upon
this Tradition, to wit, that the Pope has been ordained from God, to be the
Successor of Saint Peter, in the charge of head of the universal Church;
hereunto they bend their force, this is the scope of all the controversies. And
yet concerning this Tradition, they cannot produce one poor divine truth, nor
one single word out of the word of God: yea, when it comes to humane
testimonies, it is apparent that they are contrary to this Monarchical
succession of the Pope of Rome.

In one thing our Adversaries find themselves much encumbered: We demand of
them, when they speak of a succession, whether they understand it of persons
without succession of doctrine, or of a succession of persons in the same
doctrine: If they understand a succession of persons, sitting in the same
chair, without succession of doctrine, this succession is impious, serving for
a title of succession to make war against God. He that corrupts the
Doctrine of his Predecessors, succeeds them (...).
as sickness succeeds health, and darkness light; so Gregory of Nazianzene
speaks in his Oration upon Athanasius: To have the same Doctrine (says he)
is to have the same Seat; but to have a contrary Doctrine, is to have a
contrary Seat: one has the name, the other has the truth of the succession,
etc. Unless a man will call it succession, when the malady succeeds health,
and darkness the light.

But if our Adversaries speaking of succession, understand it of persons, not
only in the same Chair, but also in the same Doctrine, this succession is
excellent, and a singular ornament in a Church: no man can err in adhering to
such a succession, for it carries conformity of Doctrine with the Apostles:
and before this succession can be known, it is behovefull to be instructed in
the writings of the Apostles, and in their Doctrine.

Such a succession is that whereof Iren. lib. 4. cap. 43. E^ qu^ in Ecclesia
sunt Presbyteru obedire oportet, his qui successione^ habent ab Apostolus qui
cum Episcopatus successione charis^a veritatis certu^ secundu^ placitu^ Patris
acceperunt
Irenaeus speaks, saying, That we ought to obey Priests, who are in the
Church, who have the succession of the Apostles, and with the succession of the
Bishopric have received the certain talent of the truth. Not acknowledging
succession in the Bishopric, without succession in the truth of the Doctrine.
And Tertullian speaking of the Heretics: Their Doctrine Tertull. de praescr.
c. 21 I^sa eoru^ doctrina cum Apostolica comparata ex diversitate and
contrari^tate doctrina pronuntiabit neque Apostoli ^lic^ius auctoru esse neque
Apostolic^.
being compared with that of the Apostles, by the diversity and contrariety
therein, will plainly demonstrate, that it has not any Apostle for Author,
nor any one that is Apostolical. Snatching this specious title of Apostolic
succession from those, who taught otherwise then the Apostles had done.

It is no small abuse (when we would know whether a Religion be true or no)
to give us a list of Bishops in painting and pictures, without knowing whether
the latter do teach as the first; pinning religion unto the Chaires, to the
end to suppress the true rules and institutions: as also to divert the people
from reading of the holy Scripture, for fear lest they should apprehend the
conformity in Doctrine with the Apostles, which is the true succession.

We must note by the way, that in the time of Irenaeus and Tertullian, who
wrote about six score years after the Apostles, it was easy to show the
succession; Then (I mean) when the Churches wherein the Apostles had taught,
did hold one and the same faith: I say, when the succession was of no great
length, and the memory of the Apostles and their disciples preaching was fresh
and familiar. But now that the Churches which were planted by the Apostles are
divided into contrary Sects, and separated from communion, and that the
confusions abounding in space of some fifteen hundred years, have thrown
down so many Chaires, and reared up others, and that particularly the
Bishopric of Rome is turned into a temporal Monarchy, and the Pope of a
Bishop is become a temporal Prince, this successive derivation of Chaires in
the East and West is impossible, considering that the entayle of this
succession has been thousands of times cut off, so that it is a mere
imposture, to enter into this lea of Histories and confusions, to the end to
examine the Traditions, in stead of addressing our selves to the word of God.

CHAP. XVI. That the Pharisees and ancient Heretics had recourse to
Tradition, and the unwritten word, and that Clemens Alexandrinus suffered
himself to be too much carried away in the same.
THe custom of Heretics (both ancient and modern) is, when they are at
default in Scripture, to have recourse to Traditions, Josephus in his 3. book
of Antiquities chapter the 18. affirms, that The Pharisees had very many
observations by the successive Tradition of their Fathers, which are not
written in the law of Moses. Whereupon Jesus Christ at the 15. of Saint Matt.
the 3. and 9. accuses them to have transgressed the Law of God by their
Tradition; which Pharisaical Traditions were doctrines, that for the most part
commanded things not expressly forbidden in the Law of God: as to cleanse their
Pots and Vessel, to wash their bodies at return from Market, to lengthen out
their Phylacteries, to fast twice in a week, to pour forth longer prayers
then ordinary, to make conscience of healing the sick, or journeying more then
two miles upon the Sabath. This I observe, to the end it may not be said, that
Jesus Christ condemns them only for teaching things expressly forbidden in the
law of God.

Tertullian in his book of prescriptions, chap. the 25. tells us, that the
Heretics of his time affirmed, Non omnia volunt illv amnibus revelasle,
quaeda^ enim palam and universis, quada^ seereto at paucio demandasse.
That the Apostles had not revealed all things to all, but that they had
commanded some things openly, and some in secret and to few.

But the same Tertullian after he had written this book, applies himself to
defend the heresies of Montanus, by the unwritten word, speaking in the second
Chapter of his book of Monogamy, that Christ De vtroque aute Daminus promus is
avit. Adouo habeo multa qua loquar ad ves, etc.
pronounced his opinion thereupon, when he said, I have many things to tell
you, but you cannot at this time bear them away.

Irenaeus lived at the same time, who in his first Book and fourth Chap.
says, that The Carpocratian Iesum in mysterio discipulu suis seersim lequmtum
and illes expostulasse vt dignis and assentsentibus searsum hac tradere^t.
Heretics affirmed, that Jesus had spoken in private to his Disciples, and had
required of them, that they should teach these things a part to the worthy, and
to such as give their approbation thereof, and in his 2. chapter of the 3. book.
Cum ex scriptur is arguuntur in accusationem convartuntur scripturarum, quasi
no^ recte habeant, neq, sint ex authoritate, et quia varia sunt dicta, and quia
non possit ex hu inventri veritas ab his qui nesetant traditionem. Non enim per
literat tradita^ illa^, sed per vivam vocem.
When they are confuted by the Scriptures they revile, and turn again to
accuse the Scriptures themselves; as if they were not as they should be, and
had not sufficient authority, and because matters therein are diversely spoken,
and that in them the truth cannot be found by those who are ignorant of
Tradition; which they say was not give^ by writing but, viva voce, by word of
mouth.

Some twenty years after the death of Saint John, one of his disciples named
Papias Bishop of Hierapolis, addicted himself to the unwritten (...)
Traditions, the which were Parables, and strange doctrines, and other fabulous
devices, as Eusebius witnesses, at the last Chapter of the 3. Book of his
Ecclesiastical History.

Clemens Alexandrinus a most worthy Author to be read, (but one who has his
infirmities) venteth many vain things and false doctrines, drawn from
Tradition, as for example, that the Greeks were justified by Philosophy; that
Jesus Christ descended into hell to Preach to the Jews; that the Apostles also
descended thither, to Preach to the Gentiles; and many other the like fancies,
all his books of his Stromatae are full of them, especially the sixth.

The followers of Artemon the (...) Onones insipientisiumi haretici audacias
sigm ^toru^ suorum juas maxim exhorret sensus humanus, has occasion
Eva^gelica colorare nituntur, vbi Dominus ait, adhuc multa habeo vobis dicere
sed non potestis portare mado, quasi hae ip a sint qua tune discipuli portare
non poterant.
heretic teaching matters not contained in the Scripture, professed that They
did exercise them from their predecessors, yea from the Apostles, as Eusehius
has it in the 5. book of history chap. the 25.

Saint Augustine writing upon Saint John at his 97. Treatise, has these words:
The most senseless Heretics, who would be called Christians, strive to color
their bold inventions (which are abhorred by humane sense) with the pretext of
this evangelicall sentence, where our Lord speaks, I have yet many things to
tell you, but you cannot bear them at this time, as if these were the same
things which the Apostles could not then carry, we shall not therefore affront
or wrong Cardinal Bellarmine, if we rank him amongst those, which Augustine
calls most senseless Heretics, seeing that he speaks as these heretics,
employing the same quotation to prove Romish Traditions, speaking thus in the
5. Chapter of his Esse aliquas veras traditiores probatur testimonys
Scripturaru^. Primum est Johan. 16. Multa habeo ve^is i^er^, sed non potest^^
portare moda
book of the unwritten word: It is prooved by testimony of Scripture, that
there are some true Traditions, the first testimony is at the 16. of Saint
John: I have many things to tell you, etc. Thus have the ancient Heretics no
want at all of Disciples.

CHAP. XVII. An examination of the passages of Scripture, whereon they found
Traeditions.
Our adversaries ground the authority of the Scripture upon unwritten
Tradition, whence it follows (if they had but reason for it) that unwritten
Tradition is not grounded upon the Scripture: they contest therefore against
themselves, when they endeavor to ground Tradition upon the Scripture, but let
us hear their proofs.

In imitation of the ancient Heretics, they allege these words of our Lord
Jesus to his Apostles, at the 16. of Saint John, verse 12. I have yet more
things to tell you, etc. This is the passage that served the ^
ancient He^erikes turn, to prove their Traditions, as Tertul. witne^. f^th
in his book of Prescriptions; ^
Chap. 22. such imaginations (if men would believe them) are; The succession of
the Pope in the ^
Apostleship of Saint Peter; invocation of Saints, service to images, the power
of the Pope to draw souls out of Purgatory, etc. And they pronounce this
without any proof, save only because theirselves do say it, and the Pope will
have it fo to be, unto whom these Traditions are very gainefull; But we had
rather believe in Jesus Christ, who expounds himself in the same place: for
at the verse following he declares to his Disciples, that the spirit of truth
should approach, and teach them the come, that is to say, the future ^^ vents
of things foretold in the Epistles written by the Apostles; as for example,
that there should arise 1. Tim, 4
false Doctors, teaching to abstain from marriage and victual; and that the son
of perdition should name 2. Th^ss. 2.
himself God, and should practice with signs and miracles to seduce; and that
the great Whore clothed Apoc. 17.
in scarlet, sitting in a Town of seven mountains, should intoxicate Kings
and glut her self with the blood of the faithful, etc. As also the estate and
condition of the Christian Church, and of the spiri^uall kingdom of Jesus
Christ, which the Apostles did not as then fully comprehend.

Above all, they press the 15. verse of the second chapter of the second to
the Thessalonians: Therefore (brethren) stand fast, and hold the traditions
which ye have b^ene taught, whether by word, or our Epistle.

The word Tradition which the (...).
Apostle makes use of, does purport and signify all instruction. In Au I. chapter
de ceste controverse.
this sense the Scripture it self is a Tradition, as we have already proved.

As touching this passage our adversaries do infer, that besides the Epistle
which S. Paul wrote to the Thessalonians, he had uttered unto them many things
by word of mouth: unto which I shall willingly condescend; for we would not
maintain that the first Epistle to the Thessalonians, contained all the
doctrine of salvation; our dispute is not whether a little Epistle of Saint
Paul, but whether the old and new Testament contain all that is necessary to
salvation; therefore this passage is not to purpose.

Moreover, when the same Apostle did say, Hold the traditions which you have
learned by our word or by the holy Scriptures, it must not be thereupon
concluded, that the mysteries which he had told them, were others then those
that are written: for the same thing may be taught by diverse means.

And when the precepts delivered by the Apostles mouth, had some disparitie
with those that are written, we could say, that such things flowing from the
Apostles mouth (over and above that which is found in the Scriptures) were not
points of Faith, but Ordinances touching Ecclesiastical policy.

Yea when we shall have yielded to our adversaries all that they wish and long
for, yet is all fruitless and nothing done by them, unless they prove that
these Traditions, which they say were given to the Thessalonians by mouth, are
the points whereof consists our controversy: to wit, the Popes Supremacy
over the Church of the whole world, Romish Indulgences, single life of Priests,
the Communion under one kind, borrowed Satisfactions, a restraint of reading
the Scripture, Masses without Communicants, Prayers wherein the Petitioner
understands nothing, the power of the Pope to release souls out of
Purgatory, and to depose Kings, etc. which are Traditions of a new impression,
and which the Church of the Thessalonians (yet subsisting, and has so
continued since the Apostle Saint Paul) did never believe, nor as yet allows
of their validity, but defieth them with all loathing and detestation.

Saint Ambrose in his Commentary upon this place, by the Tradition whereof the
Apostle speaks understands the doctrine of the Gospel, which our Adversaries
would not deny to be contal^nd Ve prasciantia Dei maneat in salute illorum,
ideirco in traditione Evangelij standu^ ac perseverandum monet.
in the New Testament: To the ^d. (says he) that the foreknowledge ^f God
should remain in their salua^ion; he admonishes them to stand ^ast, and
persevere in the tradition of ^he Gospel.

I am of opinion I shall prevent ^ur Adversaries, from interrupting ^ee more in
the passages which ^hey allege. Saint Paul says, ^Ve speak wisdom among
those that ^re perfect, 1. Cor. 2. 6. And again ^aue before thine eyes, and
hold fast the ^atterne or form of sound words, which thou have heard of me, 2.
Tim. 1. 13. In a third place, now I praise ^ou that you remember me in all
things, and keep my Ordinances, as I delivered them unto you, 1. Cor. 11. ^.
Ergo (for so they conclude) the things which are preached are dif^ering from
those that are written. And what are the things? Invocation of Saints, service
to Image^ etc. In all this what a defect then is of common sense? The jawbone
of Sampsons Ass, or Tobi^ dog might be as well employed.

Concerning the words in the 16. of the Acts at the 4. That Paul and Silas,
passing through the Cities, instructed them to keep the Ordinances decreed by
the Apostles, and by the Elders of Jerusalem: In these Ordinances are
understood, the restraints of eating blood, and strangled creatures whereof
mention is made in Acts the 15. for in this voyage Paul and Silas were bearers
of this Ordinance: and Paul wa^ expressly sent to perform the same. Now, this
Ordinance i^ written, as also the alteration wa^ made since the Apostles time;
an^ it is but a Ceremony ordained for a time, and not a doctrine necessary to
salvation: and when, some Ordinances should be here understood, how shall it be
proved unto ^s, that these Ordinances are others then those that are written?
how shall it be proved unto us, that these ordinances were invocation of
Saints, adoration of Re^iques, the Popes Supremacy, and^. This will never be
proved.

CHAP. XVIII. An answer to that which is objected unto us, that the Church
has been sometime without the Scripture.
TO undervalue the authority of the Scripture, and to make it annecessary, it
is objected unto us, that the Church from the creation until Moses, for the
space of 2454 years, has been without the Scripture. And that (as Irenaeus
is witness) from the time of the Apostles and their Disciples, ^^^ nations
whercunto the wrirings of the Apostles were not yet at that time come, have not
omitted conserve the purity of the Gospel.

To which we answer, that when God speaks from heaven, or sends Angels to
instruct men concerning his will, the Scripture might easily be neglected: if
at this day God spoke from heaven, and published his Oracles from above, as he
spoke heretofore to the Fathers and Patriarchs before Mases, we should not
seek for any other instruction. But this is no more; and God having fully
imparted his will unto us, by the writings of his Prophets and Apostles, we are
obliged to follow the means, wherewith his goodness has furnished us. and it
is necessary to be bound and compelled thereunto.

I say, the same of the Church in the Apostles time, whilst it was clearly
illuminated by the preaching and miracles of so renowned instruments of the
holy Spirit, who were instructed by God in all verity; those people which were
taught by their mouth, made no great esteem of their writings: but God having
inspired them to leave in writing the effect of his will, wherein he had well
tutered them, and they having not left behind them one person of like
authority and knowledge, nor that has the Spirit of God in equal measure;
nothing remains more for us, but to be instructed by their writings, wherein
the Apostles speak unto us, and their word is yet alive and full of efficacy
since their death and departure.

It is a profane presumption, or affected negligence, to speak of these
writings (divinely inspired) as of unnecessary scripts and scroles: for they
which talk that language, do it for this end, to withdraw the people from the
holy reading thereof, as from a frivolous business, and for the end to
distribute the rules therein contained unattentively and in huggermugger. Shall
we call them unnecessary means. which God has chosen to inform us concerning
his will? The which if they were not absolutely necessary of their own nature,
yet they are made altogether necessary by the will of God, and by the counsel
of his providence: for he has left but this infallible means to instruct us.
And men that speak in the Chaires may err, they are likewise subject to
avarice and ambition, the two ports through which errors do enter by troops
and throngs, the Pastors ever accommodating religion to their profit.

And truly whosoever shall know what was the estate of the Romish, church, some
six score years passed, and how it consisted only in fabulous Legends, in
adoration of Relics, in miracles made by images, in virtues and perfections
of the Frocke or Cowle of S. Francis and Saint Dominick; and that Jesus Christ
scarce appeared amongst the Sts, and that the holy Scripture was utterly
estranged and unknown; will easily acknowledge, that the maine bar which has
hindered Papistrie, that it should not pass into Paganism, (whereinto it was
running post) has been, that these holy Books were drawn forth of dark
ignorance, and translated into the vulgar Tongues. He will (I say) acknowledge
that the people of the Romish Church owe unto us that little knowledge which
remains with them, and that we have diminished their servitude.

CHAP. XIX. That the Church of the old Testament, after the Law given by Moses
until Jesus Christ, has had no unwritten Traditions.
To the maintenance and increase of their Traditions, our Adversaries do join
some examples of them, which they say have been received in the Church of the
old Testament, without form of Scripture, since the Law written by Moses.

Cardinal Perron puts forward Du Perron co^tre le Roy de la Grand'
Bretagne, Page 776.
some histories, and certain commandments made to particularmen: as the
commandment to carry the Arc of the Covenant in procession; the transferring
of the Ark of God, from Shilo to another place; the charge made to Solomon, to
build a Temple; and yet nevertheless the first of them is found in the 3.
chap. of Ioshuae, verse the 3. and 6. the second at the 78. Psalm verse the
60. the third in the 2. of Sam. chap. the 7. verse the 13. and 1. of Kings 5.
5. So little was this Cardinal versed in Gods book. A and though these
passages were not found in the Scripture, yet could it not be prejudicial to
us; for they are Histories and commandments, made to particular men, not
rules and doctrines of Religion.

Also he octiecteth unto us (and others after him) the immortality of the
soul, which they say appears not in the five books of Moses; these men
without doubt scaree turn over the Sacred Pages of the Scripture. At the 23.
chap. of Numbers, Balaam speaks. Let me die the death of the righteous, and
let my last end be like unto theirs. He that calls death a dissolution,
acknowledges that the soul suruiueth the body; and he that accompteth the
death of the Righteous to be blisse-full, does not believe that their souls
perish, as they do of Beasts. At the 59. chapter of Genesis verse the 18. Jacob
dying, speaks, O eternal, I have understood thy salnation. And at the 35. of
Genesis 18. it is said of Rachel dying, and as her soul was in departing. Which
perpetuity cannot be said of souls in Beasts, for they perish with the body.
At the 31. of Deuteronomy. 16. God speaking to Moses, Behold, thou shall keep with
thy Fathers. Which does fully make good, that the souls have their repose
after death. Never did man in his right wits call the estate of some horse
after death, a sleep. At the 47 of Genef. Jacob calls his life in this
world; and that of his fathers a pilgrimage, and acknowledges himself a
stranger in the world. The Apostle to the Hebrews, chap. 11 14. declares, that
they which say such things, declare plainly that they seek a country, that is
to say, a cel estiall one, as it appears by the 16 verse. Icsus Christ at the
22 of S. Matthew to the same purpose (and to prove the Resurrection) alleges
the words of God himself, at the 30 of Exodus; I am the God of Abraham, the
God of Isaac, the God of lacob: for (says he) God is not the God of the dead,
but of the living. But what moves these men to persuade, that the immortality
of the soul is not found at all in the books of of the Law of God, except it
be because they themselves doubt of it? or because they endeavor to make the
Sacred books contemptible, as failing in a point, without the which, the same
that is called Religion, is a mere fallacy and imposture, and all the service
of God, is a supersluous toil and care.

To the same purpose they add, John I^^bert chap. 26. p. 324.
that the resurrection of bodies, the final Judgment, Paradise and Hell, are
not contained evidently in all the old Testament, whereby it appears, that
the whole study of these men, is to read only the writings of their doctors,
in coppying forth their reasons, without the pains of coming to the fource,
which is, to finger over the leaves of the Scriptures, for when should we have
done collecting together the passages of the old Testament, which speaks of
these things? the very Psalms alone might suffice; and consider with me some
passages among the rest. Psalm. 16. 12. Thou shall show me the path of life, in
thy presence is the futnesse of toy, and at thy right hand there is pleasure
for evermore. And at the 17. Psalm. 16. I will behold thy presence in
righteousness, and when I awake up after thy likeness, I shall be satisfied
with it. Gods face is not to be seen with satiety but after the last alarm
of the resurrection And in the 49. Psalm. 16. God shall redeem my soul from
the Tyranny of Hell, (meaning of death) When he shall take me unto him. And at
the 73. Psalm. 23. Thou shall guide me with thy counsel and after that receive
me with glory. At the 31. Psalm. 6. Into thy hands I commend my spirit, for thou
have redeemed me, O Lord thou God of truth. At the 50 Psalm. 3. 4. 5. Our God
shall ^^me, having a consuming fire before him, and a mighty tempest shall be
stirred up round about him; he shall call the heaven from above, and the
earth, that he may judge his people, saying, Gather my Saints together unto
me, etc. At the 102. Psalm. 26. The heavens shall perish, but thou shall enaure.
The Prophet Daniel at the 12. 2 Many of them that sleep in the dust of the
earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, some to shame and everlasting
contempt. At the 26. of Esaias 19. Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead
body shall they arise; awake and fing ye that dwell in the dust. At the 65.
chap. verse 17. Behold, I create new heavens, and new earth; and the former
shall not be remembered, nor come into mind. Job a^ the 19. the 25. 26. 27.
Speaks amply of the coming of his redeemer upon the earth, and of his
resurrection, after his body shall b^ devoured with worms, and of the
assurance he has to see God one day with his eyes. The Prophet Esaias, at the
66. pronounces this of reprobates: Their worm never dies, and their fire
shall never be extinguished, Baalam desiring to dye the death of the just, At
the 23 of Number. 10. Accompreth the death of the wicked to be wretched and
woeful. These passages as I conceive are express and punctual concerning
Paradise, the resurrection, the torment of the damned, and the eternal
judgment.

They offer yet more; that in the Book of the old Testament, no mention is
made of the Creation, nor of degrees of Angels, nor of the Creation and essence
or being of devils; which nevertheless are points clearly found to be
therein, as in Job the 2. the 1. And at the 38. 7. The Angels are called the
sons of God, whereupon it follows, that God is their Father, and that he
has formed them, and when the Scripture says. Let the Angels do worship to
him, Psalm the 97. 7. And let them execute his commandment. and obey his word
Psa. the 103. 20. It presupposes that God created them, for if God had not
created them: injustice would have been laid to his charge, for usurping an
Imperial Dominion over the workmanship of another power: Yea this alone,
where in the Scripture affirms, that there are Angels, is sufficient to
prove, that God created them, for it is impossible that they should create
themselves.

As for the degrees of Angels, it is a mere vanity for any man to distill and
consume the brain therein. It concerns neither faith nor morallitie.

And for the essence of devils, the old Testament sufficiently does determine
it in saying, that there are devils. (He that confesses there is a Sun,
presupposes that the Sun has a being) and there is no necessiity that we
should be skilled in the knowledge of their nature. As for their fall, seeing
God has made nothing but what is very good, the 1. of Genes. 31. It follows
that these evil spirits in the beginning were good, and consequently that they
are lapsed from their integrity, how, and by what occasions, or by what degrees
they are fallen, are matters which God has not revealed, for they are not
reputed necessary to salvation. Du Perron an livre cotre le Roy de la grand'
Bretagne page 776. 2. Tim. 3. 8.


They also report many Histories, which they say are not found written in the
old testament. As for that The Magicians which withstood Moses were called
Iannes and Iam. Hebr. 12. 21
bres: That Moses being at the foot of the mountain, spoke, I exceedingly
fear and tremble. The placing Hebr 9. 4.
of the Censer in the Arc of the Covenant, and the combat of Michael the
Archangell with Satan, for Jude 9.
the body of Moses. Which are not rules either of good belief or good life:
but only histories of things happened, wherein consi^teth not the substance of
our salvation.

As much may be said of some Ceremonies practiced in Israel once or oftener, but
not ordinary, or indifferent customs in their nature, as washing of the feet
before they went to eat of the Paschal-Lambe: which was a custom that the
Jews ordinarily observed before the repast. And the mixture of water with
blood, for the purification of the People, (as the Apostle) intimates to the
Hebrews, at the 10. chap.) which was not a law in the ancient Church, but a
Ceremony practiced once by Moses.

They also object unto us some depraved and lewd customs: as the pardon of a
capital malefactor at the feast of Easter, though he be a murderer, a
custom contrary to the law of God, Nu. 35 31. and some other scrupulous and
vain observations, as was that custom of not journeying above two miles on
the Sabbath; grounded Josh. 3. 4.
upon an act of Joshua passing over Iordane, when he kept the people at
distance from the Arc of the Covenant, being remooved from thence about two
thousand cubits by measure. We are well contented that our adversaries uphold
their Traditions, with such poor and unworthy examples.

Some of them thinking to be more sub^ile, object unto us that in the books
of the old Testament, three things are wanting which are necessary to salvation.

Vide Thomam par. 3. q 70. and in ea^ Vasquez and de Valentia.
our adversaries themselves do not believe, that original sin was taken
away by virtue of circumcision: but by the faith of the Parents applied to the
children by form of impetration, and by the merit of him that circumciseth.
For they hold that circumcision did not justify, nor confer grace, but only
that it was a sign of grace, and not necessary to salvation.

The Jesuit Vasques speaking of Children, that under the law of Moses dyed
without being circumcised, Vasquez in Thom. partem 3. Disp. 163. cap. 2. Nequ^
inco^modu^ ^liquod ^rat pueru^ fine Sacramento dec^aer^, cu^ i^^ud ad ^alutem
non ^sset necessar^um.
says, If a Child died without any Sacrament, there was no hurt therein, for it
was not conducible and necessary to salvation. It is certain that remission of
original si^ne is necessary to salvation. Wherefore I say that origi^all sin
was remitted and forgiven, as well to the Male as to the Female people of
Israel, by virtue of the alliance which God had contracted with Abraham,
saying, I shall be thy God, and to thy posterity after thee. Ge. 17. 7. for
women were also fo the posterity of Abraham.

The Circumcision of the Males was sufficient to signify that all the people
were taken into confederation with God, to discern Gods people from the other
nations. And for this, there needed no such particular sign or token in the
Women. The Jews writing of their Traditions, speak nothing of such a sign or
Sacrament, nor have our adversaries produced any.

Moses, nor from the Prophets; therefore they learnt it by the unwritten
Tradition.

In speaking thus they falsific the words of the Apostle Saint Peter, who at
the 10. of the Acts 43. says, that To Jesus Christ all the Prophets give
witness, that through his name whosoever believes in him, shall receive
remission of sins. And they contradict Saint Paul, who at the 26 of the Acts
22. Says of himself, that he speaks no other things then those, which the
Prophets and Moses did foretell should come to pass. They also abuse
themselves to think, that it was then necessary to every one of the faithful,
to have a clear insight and understanding of the sacrifices of the Law, and of
the Paschall Lamb: for the faithful are not bound to believe of Jesus Christ,
more then that which God by his Word has revealed unto them. If any one about
the time of Moses, offering sacrifice according to the Law, were not instructed
in the doctrine of the death of our Redeemer, but only believed, that God
through the means which he knows to be most agreeable and convenient, will
forgive us our trespasies, it were rashness to go about to exclude such a man
from salvation, and it is certain, that then the faithful were not without
instruction, as touching this point, for they were prompted by the Scriptures,
to expect this seed of the Woman, which should crush the head of the Serpent,
and the seed of Abraham, wherein all Nations should be blessed.

Perron is advised of a third Tradition, not written in the old Testament,
which nevertheless (if we could believe it) was necessary to salvation. He
supposes that it was necessary for the Jews to believe, that the fire of
their sacrifices after the captivity) was descended from Heaven, and that the
same continual fire which was upon the Altar, was conserved by miracle, during
the tranfmigration. Whereupon I say that 2. Macc. I.
this miraculous conservation of the fire being but a Judicial fable, the
Jews were not bound Hac de rev^de Rabbi Shelomo in ea. 1 Aggai. Talmud
Tractatu Tukasin 1. fol. 21. Rabbi Moshe Ren Me^mon tractat. de (...)
to believe it. The charge of the Sacrificers, was to put the fire upon the
Altar, as it is said, Leuit. 1. 7. The sons of Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, did
sin, not because they placed strange fire upon the Altar, but in putting into
their Censers, the fire which they took from elsewhere, and not from off the
Altar. Leuit. 10. 1. Look upon the 8. of the Apoc 5. Moreover, put the case
this fable were admitted for true, yet is it not a rule of Religion, nor a
doctrine of Faith, but only a mere History, whereof whosoever had bin
ignorant, had not incurred eternal damnation.

And admit that under the old Testament, the Church had unwritten Traditions,
it should not therefore follow, that it was lawful for the Church of Rome to
forge new ones, and to equal them in authority to the writings of the Prophets
and Apostles.

CHAP. XX. An answer to our Adversaries affirming, that we receive many
Traditions contained in the Scripture.
Our Adversaries upbraid us, in that we who reject traditions, are
nevertheless constrained to admit of many. Ye believe (say they) that these
books are canonical: ye allow of baptizing such as are Heretics, and the
baptism of little infants: ye believe the procession of the holy Spirit from
the Father and the Son, and the translation of the Sabbath to the Dominicall
day, and the perpetual virginity of Mary the mother of Christ: ye believe
that women ought to sing in the Church: ye grant the words of
Consubstantiation, of Trinity, of Person, and of Sacrament, which are not found
in the holy Scripture.

I have already said, that we reject not all unwritten Traditions; but only
those which add something to the doctrine of salvation, contained in holy
Scriptures. For answer to their objection, that we receive this unwritten
Tradition, to wit, These books are canonical; to say so much of the books,
is not to add to the canonical books. And speaking in that manner, we are so
far from adding to Scripture, that on the contrary, it is a declaration that
nothing is to be added thereunto, and that it is the perfect rule of our faith.
Yet to have a complete certainety of the sacredness of these books, there
must be a stronger testimony then this Tradition. An illiterate man not
instructed in the knowledge of God, receives the testimony of the Church of
his own country, which tells him that these books are canonical, as a
probable testimony, and which he should not willingly contradict: but then he
begins to have of it a divine testimony, and of sovereign efficacy, when
the Spirit of God by the Doctrine contained in this Scripture, has enlightened
his spirit, and inflamed his heart with a secret virtue, whereof it is in vain
to dispute with those that feel it not: the which cannot serve for a Law to
another but serves to every one of the faithful in particular, to assure his
conscience. It is also to be considered, that the testimony of showing such
and such books to be canonical, might proceed as well from an heretical as
from an orthodox Church. The Apostles received the holy Scripture from the
Pharisees and Sacrificers, who were enemies to Jesus Christ. Whence it
appears, that the testimony which the Church affords to the Scriptures, is
not of supreme authority and indubitable, but invalid. It is by faith that we
believe, that the contents of the Scripture are the word of God; which faith is
not given by the Church, for it is an effect of the Spirit of God.

Touching the other points, I speak of them in general, that if they be
Doctrines and Rules of the Christian faith, not contained in the Scripture, we
are not bound to believe them. But when every one of these points shall be
examined asunder, some will be found contained in the Scripture, others are
not Doctrines, nor Laws or Rules of the Christian faith, nor things requisite
or necessary to salvation.

I am astonished to behold how our Adversaries dare to insert the Baptism of
little infants, amongst the unwritten traditions, seeing that their selves
disputing against the Anabaptists, prove it by many passages of Scripture.
Bellarmine in his eighth Chapter of the first Book of Baptism, brings these
proofs of Scripture, that Baptism succeeded Circumcision, which was applied
to little infants. That Jesus Christ at the ninth of Saint Matthew, says,
Suffer the little ones t^ come to me etc. That in the sixteenth of the Acts,
Lydia is baptized by Saint Paul with all her house. And that in the same
Chapter, the same Apostle baptizeth all the family of the Jailer. That Saint
Paul baptized the family of Stephanus, 1 Cor. 1. 16. If these proofs are bad,
Why do they make use of them? If they be good in their mouths, Why should
they not be good in ours?

As for holding Baptism of Heretics to be good, we account not this article
as necessary to salvation. Agrippine a man of holy life and Doctrine, and Saint
Cyprian, Saint Firmilian, Saint Denis, Alexandrine, and Saint Basil have
dissented in this point, from the Church of Rome; yet nevertheless they are
held for Saints by our Adversaries. Yea more, many Councels approved by the
Church of Rome ordain, that some Heretics should be rebaptized, by name the
Paulianists, the Samosetanians, the Montanists, the Eunomians, the Sabellians,
the Eucratites, etc. as is to be seen at the nineteenth Can^ of the first
Council of Nice. At the eighth Canon of the Council of Laodicea. At the
seventh Canon of the first Council of Constantinople. And in the Epistle of
Saint Basil to Amphilochius at the 47. Canon.

Yet this question shall be found decided in the Scripture by all probability.
For Circumcision did still continue among the Israelites, of the ten idolatrous
races, who were no more circumcised, when they were converted to the true
Religion. The custom of circumcising the Samaritans again that were ranged
into Iudaisme, (whereof Epiphanius speaks in his boo^ of measures and weights)
practize^ upon Symm^chus a Traducer of the Scriptures, was invented afterward.
The same reason is for Baptism.

Concerning the procession of of the holy Spirit from the Father and the Son,
it is to be seen in the Council of Florence, that the Latins defending
themselves against the Greeks upon this question, do allege Scripture: but
this controversei was devised, and is sustained with animosity, to strengthen
the Schism, and it is an easy matter to accord them therein. For those who
say that the holy Spirit proceeds from the Father by the Son, do say also
that it proceeds from the Father and the Son. In a matter that passes our
capacities, it is better to say little then too much, and rather to be ignorant
then to contest.

The change of the Sabbath, and observation of the Lords day, are plainly
enough collected out of the Scripture. The Apostle to the Colos. 2. 16. saying,
Let no man judge you in meat or in drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of
the new Moon, or of the Sabbath days, forbids to condemn any man that
does not observe a distinction of meats, and keeps not the new Moons, not
Sabbaths. And by the placing of new Moons and the Sabbaths in the same rank,
he shows clearly, that as Christians were not obliged to keep the new
Moons, so were they no more strictly bound to keep the Sabbaths. At the first
Chapter of the Apoc. 10. is mention made of our Lords day. Upon which passage
the Jesuit Ribera Ribera in cap. 1. Apocal. Videmus hie etiam tempore
Apostolorum S^bbaths solemaitatens mu^a^am esse in Dominicam diem.
speaks thus, We see here that in the time of the Apostles, the solemnity of
the Sabbath was changed to the Lords day. This is the first day of the week
whereon the Christians made their solemn assemblies, to celebrate the holy
Supper, and to contribute their alms: as is to be seen at the 20. of the Acts
7. and in 1 Cor. 16. 2. as Thomas and Lombard have declared in their
Commentaries upon this Epistle: and Estius Comment in 1. ad Corin. cap. 16.
Ecclesia iam ab illo tempore caepit vacare diem Dominicam, quod in ea
resurrexisset Dominus a morte. Sic enim appellatur a lohanne Apostole Adocal.
1. vt proinde diet Dominica nomen and institutione^ ad Apostoles referendam
esse non sit dubium.
after them one Estius, speaking thus; The Church from that time began to call
it the Lords day, because on that day the Lord was raised from the dead. For it
is so called by Saint John at the first of the Apocalypse Where fore it is not
to be doubted but that the name and institution of the Lords day ought to be
fathered upon the Apostles. Nevertheless, let us grant that no mention is made
of this in the Scripture, what avails it against us, who affirm that all the
Doctrines of the Christian faith are contained in the Scripture? For the
observation of our Lords day is not a Doctrine, but a Law of Ecclesiastical
government.

The perpetual Virginity of the blessed Virgin, is believed in our Churches
by way of decency: though it be not a Doctrine of faith, nor a point
necessary to salvation. Basil in his Homily of the (...)
Nativity of Christ, says, That if it were otherwise, yet would it be nothing
prejudicial to our salvation. Howsoever, Helvidius had not his perfect senses
about him, to move so impertinent a question, and call into doubt a matter,
which were better supposed to be true, then argued on either side.

As for singing of Psalms in our Churches, as well by men as by women, it is
no Article of the Christian faith, but an Ecclesiastical policy and custom,
which neither adds to, nor substracteth from the Doctrine of faith. And this
custom is not practiced in all our Churches; for there are Churches which do
assemble secretly, to avoid persecurion, as heretofore did Christians under the
Pagan Emperors. These poor Churches have not the liberty of singing, yet are
they not the less amiable in the sight of God. The Apostle to the Colos 3. 16.
commands us to exhort one the other by Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs.
He wrote this to the Colossians without distinction of Sex. The same Apostle
in 1 Cor. 14. 14. and at 1 Timothy 2. 12. forbids women to teach in the Church,
but not to sing. For seeing they partake of the prayers and preaching, why not
of the praises and actions of thanksgiving? If it be a seemly thing and
religious in them, to chant forth the glorious commendations of God in their
house at home, why not also in the house of God?

The terms of Consubstantion and Trinity, are words, but no Rules nor
Doctrines: and these words as they add nothing to the Scripture, so they
import nothing that is not contained in the Scripture in othertermes. The term
of Person is found in Heb. 1. ^ for this word hypostasis in Greek signifies
person.

They have but little modesty who blush not to demand a passage of Scripture,
where the word Sacrament may be found. The Apostles writing in Greek, regarded
not to provide themselves of a Latin word. Surely these men speak as properly
as if they enquired whether this very word horse is found in Virgil. In the
Latin vulgar translation the word Sacramentum is rehearsed some dozen of
times, and signifies a mystery or secret. Whence it comes, that the mystery
of the great Whore, the signification of the seven stars, and the Sense or
exposition of the dreams are called Sacraments. Apoc. 3. 1. and 17. 7. Dan. 2.
18.

Touching the Holy Supper, which we call Sacrament, herein we follow the
custom, and by the word we understand no other thing, but that which Jesus
Christ calls a memorial or commemoration, saying. Do this in remembrance of
me.

CHAP. XXI. A proof of the sufficiency and perfection of the Scriptures, by
the Testimony of God himself, speaking in the Scriptures.
We have offered to your understandings, both the novelty, and falsehood of
Romish Traditions, and have proved that they are neither Divine, nor
Apostolical. It is therefore to be concluded, that we ought entirely to adhere
to the word of God, contained in the Holy Scriptures: for in two ways, when
the one is blocked up, there remains but the other that is passable. Our
adversaries themselves aid us in this point. The Popes having made so many
decrees, and decretals, and extravagants; yet they dare not call these decrees
the word of God. Yea, they produce no other book then the Scripture, that
bears this title of the word of God, or of the Testament or Covenant of God.
This single proose may suffice, unless we would embrace the word of men for a
rule of faith.

Our adversaries again tell us that the Holy Scripture cannot testify of it
self, and when it is ^aile 'Iesuite (...) 1. traitt^ de son Catechism.
Bellarm. lib. 4 de Verbo Dei, cap. 4. Quart^.
called Holy and Divine, It is ^ more to be credited then Titus Livius or
Mahumets Alcoran. But let them know that this is Gods true Prerogative, to be
Judge and witness in her cause, who being the party offended, will not forget
at the last day to be Judge of those that have offended him. Hearken to that of
Jesus Christ, speaking at the 8. of S. John 14. Though I bear record of my
self, yet my record is true, and worthy to be believed. For God is not
therefore to be the less believed, because there are so many incredulous and
unbelieving; and the perversity of man shall never despoile God of his right.
It is a non sequitur, and an unjust inference that because of the malice and
depravednes of man, the dominion of God should suffer dimunition. Therefore we
will not fear to allege the Scripture, for proof of the perfection of the
Scripture; We know that the authenticke Testimony which God gives to his
word, can be no way taxed, or justly suspected.

The Apostle Saint Paul, in the 2. to Tim 3. 15. speaks thus to his disciple
Timothy. From thine in* fancy thou have known the holy Scriptures, which are
able to make thee wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus.
Now what need we seek any further then to be so instructed, as that we may
be able to attain unto salvation by our belief in Jesus Christ?

To shif^ off this passage of Saint Paul to Timothy, our adversaries tell us,
that Saint Paul speaks not in that place, but only of the books of the old
Testament; and yet at that time the greatest part of the new was written. But I
am contented to gr^^t what they say, for it makes against them: being assured
that if the sole books of the old Testament can make a man wise to salvation,
much more, and with stronger r^ason shall the old and the new coupled together,
make us wise to salvation. The Holy Scripture never says, that unwritten
Traditions can make us wise to salvation. The Apostle had never said that the
Scripture can make us wise to salvation, if it instructed us but by halfes, and
if it were needful for us to seek the other part of our instruction, in
another word that is unwritten.

Where they say that Timothy could not learn out of the old Testament, the
immortality of the soul, nor Paradise, nor the resurrection, etc. It has bin
formerly confuted. Of the resurrection of Jesus Christ, and of his death, the
Prophets speak^* most clearly, and all the sacrifices lead thereunto. And when
these things were less plainly and expressly set down, yet God required not
of our forefathers (before the coming of Christ) a greater knowledge, then
that which was revealed unto them.

There are those who play the Sophisters upon this word, (...), used by the
Apostle, and do render it to instruct, and not to make wise. Wherein their
own Bible ^^s^ l^ 18. an Gr^c. Phan^^^ni l^x^con, (...).
teaches the contrary, for at the 19. Psalm. 7. There is in the Greek, (...),
which is the vulgar translation Sapientiam praestans parv^lis, that is to say,
giving wisdom to the simple. And at the 119. Psalm. 98. (...), Where Pagnin
renders it, tu me s^pienti^rem reddidisti inimicis meis. Thou have made me
wiser then min^ enemies. But upon the point it comes all to one: for it
suffices us to be instructed to salvation, Saint Paul speaks not of any
curtal'd or half instr^ction. He is instructed to salvation, who has
sufficient instruction to be saved: and whosoever is not wise to salvation, is
not instructed to salvation; so are they one and the same thing. But if the
Scripture could make Timothy wise to salvation, why should it not be as well
sufficient to make others wise to salvation? For if any man profit therein
lessen then Timothy, the reason is not, because it is more perfect for one then
for another; but because one brings to it more light of spirit, more
affection, and more attention then another: and because God conferreth his
knowledge more abundantly upon those that fear him, and humbly crave the gist
of understanding.

2. The Apostle Saint Paul at 1 Cor. 4. 6. limiting the power of the Pastors of
the Church, says, (...).
Let no man think above that which is written, there it is, above that which
is written, and not above that which I have written. And whosoever imputes to
Beza, that he translated it, above that which I Iehan. Iaubert. pa. 306.
have written, is a detracting Calumniator.

3. The same Apostle at Act. 26. 22. protests, He never taught any thing,
save only such things as the Prophets and Moses had foretold should come to
pass. He then confined his preaching to the Scriptures. And he shall be a good
Minister of Christ, who (after the example of Saint Paul) shall be able to
say, that he never taught any thing, except those things which Moses and the
Prophets and Apostles (disciples of the Prophets) have taught. If it be
moreover objected, that Saint Paul being restrained to the writings of the
Prophets, it shall follow, that the writings of the Apostles (who have written
since the Prophets) are unprofitable. I will answer that the Apostles have
written the same things that the Prophets have written, for as much as
concerns the substance of salvation, but they have added thereunto much more
cleerenesse and light.

4. Yet the same Apostle at Act. 20. 27. speaks to the Ephesians, I have not
shunded to declare unto you all the counsel of God. Whereupon it follows,
that the essential things of faith, which Salmeron formerly told us were added
since the Apostles time, and not taught of them either by mouth or by writing,
are not of the counsel of God. Of which additions in matters of religion of
the greatest importance, we have already vouched many examples, especially out
of the confession of our Adversaries themselves.

It would be impertinent to reply, that by the same reason it should be said,
that the Gospel of Saint John, and the Apocalypse are not of the counsel of
God, because they were no^ then written, when Saint Paul said, he had declared
all the counsel of God. For these two books contain not any doctrine which
is not found in the other books of the new Testament, and which the Apostles
have not taught by mouth and by writing.

5. At Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and 12. 3. God speaks thus, Ye shall not add to the word
which I command you, neither shall you diminish ought from it. He does not
say, you shall not change or alter any part, or you shall not teach any thing
to the contrary: but you shall add nothing, and diminish nothing. As to
diminish and defalse something from the Law of god, is not to foist in a
contrary c^mandement: so also to add does not signify to impugn. Put the
case it were not forbidden to add, and that it should be spoken thus: You
shall change nothing of my word, yet the Pope would still be culpable of having
infringed this restraint, by attributing to himself the power of changing the
Laws and Ordinances of God, and of dispensing against the Apostle. In the
books of the hourly prayers of our Lady (according to the custom of Rome)
the ten Commandments of God are placed in the entrance. The third is couched
in these terms, Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath and festival days.
Can any thing be more plainly added to the Commandment of God? Therefore if
it were prohibited to add to the Law of Moses (without which was then no
Doctrine of salvation) there is no color or appearance that at this time the
Law of Moses, the Prophets, the Evangelists, and Apostles are not sufficient,
and that it is lawful to add unwritten Traditions thereunto. And let it not
seem strange, that the books of Moses alone were then sufficient unto
salvation: for whosoever will examine the books of Joshua, of the Judges, and
of the Prophets, who did set forth their writings afterward, shall find that
they add nothing to the Doctrine of salvation, which is contained in the
books of Moses: only they add some confirmatory examples of the promises and
menaces of God, some histories of the chastisements, judgments and
deliverances of the Church, some Prophecies and future events, some particular
expositions of that which the law of Moses spoke in general, and some
commandments made to some particular one, which were not general Laws nor
perpetual in the Church. As for the Oracles which God gave amongst the
Cherubins, they were not Doctrines nor Canons of Religion, but answers upon
future successes, or upon the estate of the present affairs, of peace or
war. It is true that Jesus Christ and the Apostles have since given a more
ample instruction: but I say that whilst the Church had no other divine books,
but those of Moses, they were sufficient to salvation: for the Church ought to
be contented with that measure of knowledge which God has revealed. But in
succeeding ages, if God reveals something more then he had done before, and
p^esenteth himself more obviously to humane understandings; this falls out
necessary for those, unto whom Gods pleasure is to have himself manifested.

That Noses has not distributed unwritten Traditions to the people, see his
own testimony at Deuteronomy. 31. 24. in these words, And it came to pass, when
Moses had made an end of writing the words of the Law in a book, until they
were finished, that he commanded the Levites, which bare the Arc of the
Covenant of the Lord, saying, Take this book of the Law, and put it in the
side of the Arc etc.

6. After the death of M^ses, God gave to Joshua no other precept or document
^hen this very book, as he himself speaks to Joshua in the first Chapter:
Be strong and courageous, that thou may observe to do according to all the
Law, which Moses my servant commanded thee; turn not from it to the right hand
or to the left, that thou may prosper whithersoever thou go. This book
of the Law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou shall meditate therein
day and night. Surely God in this Law of Moses, commands to obey the
Sovereign sacrificing Priest, as also the Levites, and the Judges, not when
they should add to the Law of God, but when they should teach this Law: as it
is said at the 17. of Deuteronomy. 9. and 11. Where also the Kings are commanded to
have the book of the Law of God always before their eyes, and to read therein
all the days of their life, verse the 18. and the 19.

7. None of our adversaries durst yet deny, that the doctrine of the Gospel is
sufficient to salvation, or gaine-fay that the Gospel is found whole and
entire in the new Testament. Otherwise the title were false, and we should be
forced to change the inscription, and set it down part of the Gospel, until
the Pope does publish the second part; or else be compelled to seek the other
part of the Gospel in the unwritten word, which is not to be found. For our
adversaries would never suffer it to be compiled and reduced into one body,
nor do they divulge any book which is called the word of God, except the Holy
Scripture.

Some answer, that the books Iehan Iaubert. p. 308.
of the Gospel, which are in the new Testament, do contain all the Gospel
but implicitly, that is to say, after an involued and imbroyled manner, the
force of conscience has extorted those words from them, for if the service of
Images, adoration of Relics, Pardons of one hundred thousand years, single
life of Priests, succession of the Pope in the Apostleship of Saint Peter,
restraint of reading the Scripture, etc. are contained in the books of the new
Testament, they must be lurking after an inveloped and obscure manner, for no
man could ever descry them to be therein. Those that extract oils and salts,
out of the stones, would idly employ their knowledge therein. For to speak in
general, without any specification, that the Scripture approoueth Traditions,
is but a mockery, under this veil or shadow, there is neither tyranny, nor
idolatry, nor bartering traffic, but may abound, and be practiced in the
Church, presupposing without proof, that these are the Traditions which the
Scripture means, for the Pope so judges of them, who cannot err in the
Faith, though all these Traditions tend only to his profit.

8. I affirm the same of the title of the whole Bible, being called the
Testament or Covenant of God, which Title must be changed, if the Scripture be
but a part of Gods Testament. It were deluding of the World, to call contract
of marriage a parchment that contains but the moyetie of the clavses of the
contract: or to call Testament, that which is but a part of the disposal of
the last will.

9. Toward the conclusion of the Apocalips, the Lord Jesus speaks as
follows: I testify unto every man that hears the words of the prophecy of
this book; If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him
the plagues that are written in this book. Upon which passage the Council of
Friuly speaks thus: Concilium Porojuliense Nam in Apocalypsi Johannes
Apostolus sub vnius libri appellatione de tota vtriusque Testamenti se is
contestatus est, dicens, Si quis apposuerit ad hac, apponet Deus omnes plagas
scriptas in libro hoc.
In the Apocalips, John the Apostle under the name of one book, has protested
concerning the whole series or prosecv^ion of both Testaments, saying; If any
man add to these things, God shall add to him the plagues that are written in
this book.

10. The Apostle Saint John at the 20. Chapter of his Gospel. 31. says. These
things are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, and that
believing, ye might have life through his Name. Upon which passage, Cyrill of
Alexandria Cyrill. lib. 12. in Ioha^. cap. ultimo. Non igitur omnia qua fecit
Dominus co^scripta sunt, sed qua scribentes ta^ ad mores qua^ ad dogmata
putaverunt sufficere, vt recta fide and operibus as virtute rutil a^tes, ad
regnum coelorum perv^niamus.
speaks in this manner. All things which our Lord has done are not written,
but those things only, which they that did write them, have believed to be
suff^cient, to the end, that shining in true faith, works, and virtue, we may
attain to the Kingdom of heaven.

11. Our Lord Jesus at the 15. of Mat. 3. spoke to the Pharisees, Why do ye
transgress the commandment of God by your Tradition? Observe here that he
says not ye contradict, but ye transgress the commandment of God by your
Tradition. For indeed the Pharisaicall Tradition^ were for the most part simple
aditions to the Law of God, having appearance of devotion, and things no
otherwise forbidden, but a^ God forbids to add to hi^ word: as to fast
twice in a week to lengthen out their fringes an^ Phylacteries of their
garments, t^ wash themselves at return from market, scrupulously to clean the
pots, and to account their pac^ upon the Sabbath.

12. The Apostle to the Colo^ chap. 2. 8. Beware lest any man spo^ you through
Philosophy and vain ^^ceit, after the Tradition of men. A^ that our
adversaries may not com^ here to distinguish humane Tr^ditions, from those
which ^^ Church of Rome will have to ^^ embraced for divine and Apostolical,
the Apostle specifieth, and chiefly condemns certain traditions, found to
be amongst those that are taught by the Church of Rome: to wit, service of
Angels, observation of Feasts, and the ordinance of those, who using a
distinction of meats did say, eat not, touch not, taste not. And this not
because they thought the meats to be hurtful or polluted in their nature, but
(as the Apostle says) teaching these doctrines through voluntary devotion, and
humbleness of spirit, in that they no way spare the body, nor have they
respect to the fullness of the flesh.

13. The same Apostle to the Ephesians 2. chap. 20. groundeth our faith upon
the Prophets and the Apostles. Being built (says he) upon the foundation of
the Prophets and Apostles. If our faith be grounded upon the unwritten word, it
is behouefull there be another foundation then the Prophets and Apostes. For if
our adversaries say that S. Paul understands the Church to be grounded upon
the word of the Apostles as well written as unwriten, they oblige themselves to
say the same of the doctrine of the Prophets, and also to forge unto us
Prophetical Traditions unwritten, which were never mentioned or spoken of about
Saint Paul's time, mor^ouer we have formerly heard our adversaries maintaining,
that there are more things essential in Religion, then the Apostles have
taught by mouth or writing.

14. At the 16. chapter of Saint Luke 26. the wicked rich man being in hell,
requesteth Abraham, that one amongst the dead should be sent to his brethren,
to give them advertisement, and warn them of their duties, least that they
should tumble into the like torment; to whom Abraham makes answer, They have
Moses and the Prophets, let them hearken to them. Which is clearly to say,
that they ought to content themselves with the Doctrine of Moses and the
Prophets, which was read in the Synagogues every Sabbath without expecting
other revelation. For Jesus Christ speaks of ^he unhappie rich man, as of a
man that had lived under the old Testament, during the time that the Church had
(...).
no other Doctrine, but that of the books of Moses and the Prophets.

Chrysostom does so understand it in his Commentary upon Galat. 1. Abraham
being required to send Lazarus, answers, they have Moses and the Prophets, if
they hearken not to them, neither will they believe the dead raised up to life.
Now Jesus Christ brings in Abraham speaking thus, to declare that he would
have more faith ascribed to the Scriptures, then if the dead were called back
to life.

15. At Gal. 1. 8. Though we or an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel
unto you, then that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. The
vulgar translation of our Adversaries interprets this passage as we do:
Licet nos aut Angelus de coelo evangelizet vobis, praeterquam quod
evangelizavimus vobis, anathema sit. Consider now that this translation which
the Council of Trent declares to be only authentical, rendereth it
praeterquam not contra, that is to say, other then, but not contrary. For
though this word praeter sometime signifies contra, yet praeterquam cannot be
so taken; and praeterquam quod can import nothing else, but other then that. So
though the Preposition (...) used by the Apostle, (...). Theoph. in Ep. ad Gal.
N^que enim si contraria solu^ praedicaverint intulit, sed si Evangelisaverint
praeter id quod ipsi evaengeli savimus, hoe est, fi plusculum quippiam ipsi
adiecerint. Tertull. de praescr. ca. 8 Hoc ^rius credimus, non esse quod vltra
credere debeamus. Et cap. 14. Nihil vltra. scire omma scire est. Et cap. 29.
Etsi Angelus de coelo aliter evangelisaverit vltra qua^ nos, anathema sit.
signifies sometimes contra, yet our Adversaries translation admits not
this exposition. Chrysostom in his Commentary upon Gal. 1. understands it
the same way, saying, The Apostle says not, if they declare things contrary,
or if they pervert all, but if they preach never so little other then we have
preached, or if they have altered any thing, be it never so little. And
Theophilact after him: The Apostle has not said, if they preach only things
contrary but if they preach other then that which we have preached, that is to
say, if they add never so little more thereunto.

Tertullian in his book of Prescriptions at the eight Chapter, speaking of the
Scripture: In the first place we believe, that we ought not to believe other
then this. And at Chap. 14. To know no other then this, is to know all. And at
Chap. 29. If an Angel from heaven preach other then, etc. And truly the reason
is plain, for if our Adversaries confess, that Saint Paul has preached all
that is necessary to salvation, as well by mouth as by writing, it follows
that he not only forbids here to teach contrary to that which he has
taught, but also that he forbids to add thereunto.

It is objected, that Paul himself has added to that which he did preach,
when he wrote more Epistles after that to the Galathians; and that Saint John
after him wrote the Apocalypse, and are not therefore accused. The vanity of
this objection answers it self; for nothing can appear wherein Saint Paul
in his last Epistles, or Saint John in the Apocalypse, have added to the
Doctrine of salvation, which Saint Paul had preached by mouth, and digested
into writing; and which was already contained in the books of the Apostles and
Evangelists, written before this Epistle.

In sum, what avails it to dispute, whether the Apostle condemns those
that preach other then, or contrary to that which St. Paul had preached, seeing
that whatsoever is other then the Doctrine of the Gospel concerning our
salvation, is also contrary, in as much as God forbids to add thereunto? It
is an unn^cessary work to rehearse the passages of the Fathers, who affirm
that the Apostle condemns those, who taught contrary to that which he
himself has taught: no man denies it; for whosoever preaches contrary to
that which Saint Paul taught, preaches also other then the Doctrine of the
Apostle: and adds contrary things thereunto; contractions being also
additions to the Scripture.

Our Adversaries being repulsed from this refuge or starting hole, find out
another, and say that Saint Paul condemns those who taught other then, or
contrary to that which he had taught concerning the Doctrine of the Gospel:
but Saint Paul himself has not set down all in writing which he has
taught: this is that which they say without proof or reason. For who told them
that Saint Paul was tender, and forbear to book down all the Doctrine of the
Gospel in writing? Did he it in spleen, or was it of forgetfulness, or
fearing lest the people might become too expert in the Doctrine of the Gospel?
Surely they that speak thus, are bound to open unto us some particular points,
that make a part of the doctrine of the Gospel, which Saint Paul would not set
down in writing. Is it invocation of Saints, or papal Indulgences, adoration
of relics, succession of the Pope in the Apostleship of Saint Peter,
religious s^rvice of Images, single life of Priests, prayer in a tongue which
the supplicant understa^deth not, or Masses to free souls out of Purgatory? no
Christian will believe it of these, unless it be such a one as has a mind to
be deceived: And this inconsiderate presupposition must be countenanced by
some other proof, besides the testimony of our adversaries.

Saint Augustine gave no credit to August lib. 3 contralue^as Petiliani cap. 6.
Si quis sieve do Christo, sive de eius Ecclesia, siv^ de quacunque alia re qua
pertinet ad fide^ vitamque nostr^m, non d^^am si nos, sed quod Paulus adiecit,
si Ange us ^e coelo vobis annuntiaverit pra^erguam quod in scripturu legalibus
et Evangelicis accepistu, anathema sit. (...).
it: for he expounds this passage unto us by way of paraphrase. If any man
whether it concerns Christ or his Church, or any other thing appertaining to
faith, or government of life (I speak not, if any of us; but that which Paul
has suggested, if an Angel from heaven) declare unto you, other then you have
received in the Scriptures, concerning the Law and the Gospel* let him be an
Anathema. And Chrysostom in his exposition upon the 1. chap. to the
Galathians, Saint Paul prefe^reth the Scriptures before Angels descending from
heaven, and that most justly. And a little after. Wherefore he denounces, that
if any man preach unto you other then I have preached unto you, etc.

To conclude, how should those points before recited have been preached by
Saint Paul, considering that in his Epistles there is found a flat condemnation
of their doctrines?

If beside the holy Scripture there be some other word of God, it were fit our
adversaries should lay them in view fairly above board, for the better
avoidance of ail strife and controversy arising from them. But they cannot.
Only they would have the Church of Rome to be believed, and especially the
Pope; who is circumspect enough not to pronounce his own condemnation, nor to
abolish the Traditions that are so beneficial unto him. Yea our adversaries
themselves refute this, when they say that the Apostles have not taught by
mouth, nor composed in writing all that is essential to Christian Religion.

CHAP. XXII. Whether to ground a Doctrine, it be lawful to use words
equivalent to those that are found in the Scripture, or to use consequences and
Anguments.
SOme smattering and unquie^ Jesuits perceiving themselves weak in the
combat, by the pressure of the evidence of truth, have thought upon a
cavilling and impertinent course, whereby to entangle the disputation at the
very entrance, and to prevent ever coming to the true scanning or examination
of the doctrine.

Their cunning slight is always to question and interrogate, instead of
keeping themselves to a regular and methodicall argumentation; and as soon as
we open our mouths, they call to us Show me that which you say, word by word
in the Scripture. Now if there want but a syllable, or if it happen that we use
these words, that is say, or by consequent, they fall into laughter and say
that a Coach drawn by Horses is a consequent, and so break off, alleging
they have reduced us to consequences. If we quote some passage of Saint Matthew
or of Esaias, they ask whether the book be Canonical: if we answer, yea;
they require a passage of the Scripture that says, Saint Matthew is
Canonical. If we expound one passage by another, they say, show me a passage
that allows this passage to be expounded by that. If we make an argument
(though it be demonstrative) they deride and jeere it, saying, that syllogismes
are but humane discourse, and an invention of Aristotle, unfit to regulate our
faith.

But those of our adversaries who are better stored with knowledge, as Thomas,
Bellarmin, Baronius, Perron, Salmeron and Vasques rejects this wrangling
Philosophy and froward reasoning, which carpeth at syllables, and is made for
nothing else but to bring forth nothing, and to brave and swagger in the speed
of running away.

Now, what an unjust case it is, that those who attribute to the Church of Rome
the power not only of adding to the Scripture, but also to alter that which God
has ordained in the Scripture, and who hold that their Church has no
obligation to the Scripture, should use such rigor against us, to bind us
precisely to the words and syllables of the Scripture: though we change
nothing in the subst^nce?

It were an easy matter for us to proceed against them after the same wise:
replying to the first word they offer us, Show me what you say in as many
words in the word of God written or unwritten, for they take both for the rule
of their instruction. And if they make use of these words therefore and then,
to tell them, these are your reasons and consequences; and in stead of giving
satisfactory answer, to injoyne them that they prove unto us, that we are
bound to prove to them what they demand: and so to break off with laughter
and insultation, this were the way (as the proverb has it,) to counterfeit the
fools with madmen.

If in handling points of the Faith, it be not permitted to make use of other
words besides those that are found in the Scripture, it shall not be suffered
to preach, nor to write commentaries, nor to confer the passages of the
Scripture together: for this collation cannot be made without employing some
other words, which form the comparison, and show the resemblance. It shall not
likewise be suffered to recite the Creed, nor to say there are but four
Evangelists in the new Testament: for the Scripture speaks not this in so
many words.

Moreover by this pedanticall cavilation, neither Charles nor Anthony, nor any
particular man, shall be obliged to believe in Jesus Christ, nor to obey him:
For the Scripture neither speaks of Charles nor Anthony. But the duty of
particular men is drawn by necessary consequence, from the general rules that
are in the Scripture.

So our adversaries believe that Pope Vrbane is lawful successor in the
supremacy of Saint Peter, which nevertheless they derive by consequence of
this general Maxim, that the Bishops of Rome are lawful successors in the
Primacy of S. Peter. If from an imaginary Tradition they draw consequences, why
should not we draw them from the holy Scripture?

When I say that Purgatory, and the primacy of the Bishop of Rome are
Traditions, whereof the Scripture makes no mention, how should I show this in
so many sillables, seeing I hold that it is not found therein at all? for if
there were found a passage that says, there is no such thing as Purgatory, the
Scripture should make mention of Purgatory. These men require the same, as when
I should say, that nothing is spoken of Jesus Christ in Virgils Aeneades, some
trifling Sophister urges me to show in the Aeneades, a passage affirming that
Jesus Christ is not therein mentioned.

This peevish wrangling, no less injurious then troublesome, takes from the
Christians, all means of proving to a lew, by the Prophets, that Jesus is the
Christ, for the name of Jesus Christ is not found in the Prophets; yet certain
it is, that the thing it self is therein explained in equivalent terms.

To be short, in such juggling Theology, it is impossible to prove by Scripture,
that an Ape or Cat is not to be adored: for this is not found totidem verbis in
the Scripture; but it is drawn from necessary consequence of passages, wherein
God alone will be worshipped.

If I say that the soul is immortal, and that God governs the World by his
providence; will these venerable Doctors take me by the throat, to show them
this sillabically in so many words? Indeed it is not found in the same words,
but in some other equivalent speaking of the life eternal, in this manner: God
makes all things according to the counsel of his will. Ephesians. 1. 5. And a
sparrow falls not the ground without the will of God Matt. 10. 29. And God
himself pronounces: My counsel shall stand, and I will accomplish all my
pleasure. Esaias 46. 10.

If the Scripture says that God descends, or runs, or is inflamed with
choler, or sleeps; shall it not be lawfvll to use* plain and intelligible
words in expounding these figures?

Likewise I find not in the Scripture the word Trinity, but I have found the
word three; Saint John telling us that there are three in heaven, the Father,
the Word, and the Holy Spirit. 1. John 5. 7.

I find not in the Scripture, tolidem verbis, that the soul of the thief was
not in Limbo. But I find that Jesus Christ assured him, Thou shall this day be
with me in Paradise.

I find not in the Scripture in the same terms, that the Saints know not our
hearts, but I find there, how God alone knows the hearts of men. 2. Chron. 6.
30.

There is no mention made of single life of Prelates, in the same words, but
there it is said. Let a a Bishop be husband but of one wife. 1. Tim. 3. 2.

Furthermore Jesus Christ disputing with the devil, Matthew. 4. 11. told him; It
is written, thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.
Which is a passage of the 6. of Deuteronomy. 13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God,
and shall serve him, and swear by his Name. To which passage, the Lord joyneth
another of the 1. of Sam. chap. 7. 3. Subject your hearts to the eternal God,
and serve him alone. Jesus Christ made no scruple or difficulty to speak the
same thing in sundry phrases.

At the 18. Acts 28. It is related that Apollos a lew, demonstrated by the
Scriptures of the old Testament, that Jesus was the Christ, though it be not
therein expressed in so many words.

And S. Peter at the 10. Acts 43. speaks thus. To Jesus Christ give all the
Prophets witness, that through his name, whosoever believes in him, shall
receive remission of sins. Yet this is not found among the Prophets in
express words, but in equivalent terms, and by necessary consequence. Shall
we then be rebuked, if we allege the Scripture after the same wont and form
as Jesus Christ and the Apostles have done?

The Apostle S. Paul in the 2. to Tim. 1. 13. commanding us to hold fast the
form of sound words, does not bind us to sillables, for soundness and purity
of doctrine, may copiously and in full sense dwell under the signification of
several sorts of words, as health of body, may be clothed under another habit.
It is so taught by Hierome upon Ne putemus in verbis scripturarum esse
Evangelium, led in sensu: non in superficie, sed in medulla: non in sermonum
folijs, sed in radice rationis.
the 1. chap. to the Galat. Let us not think that the Gospel consists in the
bare words of the Scripture, but in the true meaning and signification: not in
the superficies, but in the very marrow, not in the leaves decked with words,
but in the root of solid reason.

The Fathers and ancient Counsels were ignorant in such kind of importunate
and unmannely divinity, when they defined by the Scripture in the first Nicene
council, (...).
that the Son is consubstantiall with the Father. And when the first Council
of Ephesus decreed against Nestorius, that the Virgin Mary might and ought to
be called the (...). Deipara.
Mother of God.

The Arians pressed Athanasius to (...) Quomodo ^^cu in Scripturis (...) Ego de
(...) Pater vnum sumus. (...). Non potest aliquid certu esse certitudine fidei,
nisi aut immediate contineatur in verb dei, aut ex verbo dei per avidentem
co^sequentiam deducatur, etc. Neque de hoe principio vel Catholici vel haretici
dubitant. Salmer. proleg 9. prima quinquagena Can. 7. Non tantuns diuinam
authoritatem habent, and si^^ ea tenenda Sunt qua in Scripturis express
con^^entur, sed etlam ea omnia qua exilla necessaria and euidenti consequentia
deducuntus, qua doctrina a magno ille Theologo Gregory ad nos deriuat a est.
Et Paulo post: Dupliciter aliquid esse in Scriptura dicitur, aut quia est
express in ea contentum, et in sensu literals: deinde omne quod virtute in ea
co^tentum est, and necessaria consequentia extractum. Atque his duobus modis
agere licet in haeretieos. Vazq. in 1. Partem. Thomae Tomo 2. Disp. 110. cap.
1.. Quarto. Nihil refere have vacam non esse in Scriptura, fi vox ^^ signifieat
quod Scriptura decet.
show them this word consubstantiall in the Scripture: to whom Athanasius
answers in his book of the decrees of the Nicene council: Though the very
words be not so couched in the Scripture, yet they have the sense and
understanding of the Scripture.

Gregory of Nazianzen at the end of his Sermon touching Cyprian. calls the
verbalists (...), hunters after syllables and words. And in his 37. Oration,
which is the fifth concerning Theology, he faith that the love of the letter is
to them a shadow or cloak for impiety.

Ambrose in his book concerning the Faith, written against the Arians, chap.
5. How do you say that consubstantiall is not in the divine Scriptures? as if
consubstantiall were any thing else but, I am issue of the Father, and the
Father and I are one.

We learn out of Photius, his Bibliotheca, that Theodoret composed an expres
treaty upon this subject, the inscription whereof is, Against these who affirm
that we ought to rely on the words, without having regard to the matter
signified.

Touching this point, we have the most learned of our adversaries on our side.
Bellarmine in his 3. book of justification, chap. 8 Nothing can be sure in
certainty of Faith, unless it be contained immediately in the word of God, or
drawn from the word of God by some evident consequence.

Salmeron in his 9. Prolegomenon: Not only the matter which is immediately
contained in the Scriptures, has divine authority, and ought to be allowed
with faith; but also all things that are drawn from thence by necessary and
evident consequence, which doctrine has bin derived unto us from Greg. that
great Divine. And a little after, a thing is said to be in the Scripture two
manner of ways; partly because it is therein contained expressly, and in the
litter all sense: partly because it is contained vertually therein, and is
drawn from thence by necessary consequence, now it i^s lawful to dispute with
Heretics both these ways. He brings Purgatory, merrits, and satiffactions
for examples: words that himself confesses not to be in the Scripture, but
may be drawn from thence by consequence.

Jesuit Vasquez: It imports not whether the word be in Scripture or no, so
as that which it signifies be in the Scripture. Iansenius Bishop of Gant,
affirms the same at the 107. Chapter of his Harmony.

Our confession is frivolously objected unto us, which says in the 5. Article,
that the Scripture is the Rule of all verity, containing all that is necessary
for the service of God and our salvation, to the which it is not lawful to
add, diminish, or alter. For if these Novice Doctors affoorded themselves the
leisure to read the following lines, they should there find, that we avow the
three Creeds, to wit, the Apostles, the Nicene, and the Athanasian. Which
notwithstanding are not found in the Scripture, in such and so many words. And
in the Article following, we approve of that which has bin determined by the
ancient councels, touching three persons in one individual essence, yet the
determinations of Councels are not found to be in the Scripture in the same
terms.

Our confession confineth u^ ^^ more to the Scripture, then the Council of
Trent binds our adversaries to the word written and unwritten. Yet they would
not be interrupted thereupon, nor that we should enjoyne them to show every
word spoken by them, to be in so many syllables in the written word, or in that
which is not written.

Whereas they suffer us not to bring one passage of Scripture, for exposition
of another, unless we suddenly bring a third, that says this passage
expounds that. By such proceeding they take away and extingnish all means of
expounding Scripture by Scripture: wherein also they contradict the Elders and
Doctors of the Church of Rome, who grant that Scripture shall be interpreted
by Scripture, as we have mentioned in my former book of the Judge of
Controversies, Chap. 4. For the exposition of these words, This is my body, we
allege the passage of the Apost. saying, This Bread which we break, Is it not
the Communion in the body of Christ? Likewise, When youshall eat of this Bread,
or drink of this Cup, you shall declare the death of the Lord. Hereupon these
youngsters require a passage which says, that these two last passages are the
exposition of the first. We answer that it is not needful, for it is
sufficient that these three passages speak of the same thing. For to
understand the Doctrine of the Euchari^^, it is behoovefull to collect together
all that the Scripture makes thereof mention; seeing that passages so
comparatively united, do manifest and interpret one the other.

These new Disputants in rejecting all syllogismes, and all arguments, are
obstinate and unexcusable. For by what reason can they banish the use of reason
from Divinity? It were fitter for them to address themselves to the Thomists
and Scotists, who are full of School brambles, and do subject Saint Paul to
the positions of Aristotle, and clothe Divinity with a Philosophical habit.
Yet these very menwho forbid us to dispute, do make arguments (after their
manner) to the which it is impossible to give answer, by the sole words of the
Scripture. For we are constrained to say, I deny the major, or the minor, which
are words not so much as touched in the Scripture.

What man, but a senseless, is ignorant, that when two Propositions are
soddered together as they should be, the conclusion or inference must
necessarily follow? And this is not an invention of Aristotle, but a work of
God, and a natural impression; for peasants make good arguments, though il
accommodated.

If of two propositions in an argument, one be drawn from the Scripture, the
other be known by the sense, and allowed by the Adversary, the conclusion
shall follow of necessity. As for example; speak according to Scripture, that
every man is a liar. To this proposition, Iadde another well known by the
sense, and confessed by the Adversary, Philip is a man, whereupon the
conclusion that follows, therefore Philip is a lier, cannot be denied, but
by some witless Idiot, and such a one as will not stick to contradict
himself, in denying that which necessarily follows, upon the proposition
which he has confessed.

And to the end it may not be thought, that this Conclusion has no certainty,
but by virtue of the two propositions, I say that without a formal syllogism,
this conclusion Philip is a liar is contained in that proposition every man is
a liar: just as one crown is contained in ten, though there be no man to say
it.

Thomas ought to have instructed Quaest. 1. art. 8. Theologiam esse
argume^tatiuam, and ex articulas fidei proced^ re ad aliqu^ aliud o^^endendum:
S^ cut Apostolus 1. Cor 1^ a resurrect, one Christi argumenta^ ad (...)
rosurrectionem prob^^dam.
them hereupon, who in the first part of his Sum Quest. 1. shows, that
Theology is disputative, and that by the Articles of faith it proceeds to
show some other thing: as when the Apostle in I Cor. 15. disputes of the
resurrection of Jesus Christ, to prove the resurrection to be common. Upon
which place Vasquez in the 12. Disputation Chap. 2. maintains, that in
Theology if one proposition be taken out of a passage of Scripture, and the
other known by natural light, a conclusion may be drawn from thence, which
may serve for a definitive position in the faith.

It is true (say these men) that humane reason may be deceived; and they say
true. The same may be said of the sight and of the hearing But would they dig
out their own eyes, under color that their eyes do sometimes deceive them?
Under the pretext that reason is sometimes abused, shall they withhold us from
the use of reason? Are there no good consequences, and necessary? Because some
are evil, shall they reject those that are good? If they will have it so, when
the Doctors read to us some passage of Scripture, May not we tell them,
Perhaps it is not there as you read it, you must not believe your eyes, for
the sight of a man may often be deluded and mistaken?

Therefore the manner of making arguments, where reason is not deceived, and
whence the conclusion cannot be denied, is that which I have said, by joining
to a proposition drawn from the Scripture, a second that is known by the
sense, or by a natural light, and is allowed by the Adversary.

The way to put these Disputants of our age to a non plus, to stave them off
from interrogations, and keep them to a syllogisticall method: for then they
shall make an argument, wherein the second propositon shall be thus in
substance: You are obliged by your own confession to say nothing but what is
in the Scripture totidem verbis, the which ought to be denied them.

It would be easy for us to touch our Belief, in terms extracted word by
word out of the Scripture, fastening one passage to another without knot or
connection. The language indeed would ill cohere, having neither the word for,
nor then, nor wherefore, nor all that serves to dispose its discourse into
parts, and to show the prosecution of the reason Bu^ in doing this, we should
close up the mouths of these harebrained spirits, who take it in indignity,
and are offended if a word for used which is not in the Scripture.

In one thing they speak reasonably. But If (say they) Ye be permitted to make
use of consequences, why shall it not be lawful for us to do the same? This
cannot be contradicted, but on condition that they obtrude not unto us non
seq^it^rs for consequences, drawing all things out of all things, like so many
Chemists. You may see some paterns of the^ consequences: Christ has said, I
have to tell you many things, but you cannot for the present bear them away:
Therefore Christ has taught that Saints ought to be invoked, images to be
served, and the Trinity to be painted. Christ has said, do this: therefore the
Priest sacrifices the body of Jesus Christ in the Mass. Christ has said,
tell* it to the Church: therefore the Church of Rome cannot err. Christ has
said, All that you shall loos^ (...), shall be loosed in heaven: therefore the
Pope can let loose under ground, and release souls out of Pugatory. God has
made man after his own image: therefore images ought to be adored. Likewise,
Sin against the holy Ghoast is neither pardoned in this world, nor in the world
to come: therefore there is a fire of Purgatory, to purge the souls.
Consequences that would provoke laughter, were it not that thereby the word of
God is trodden under foot, and the service of our Lord utterly depraved.

CHAP. XXIII. Testimonies of the Fathers, touching the perfection of the
Scripture.
AS the authority of the word of God contained in the holy Scriptures, is not
supported by the authority of men, so also its perfection has no want of their
restimony. Jesus Christ spoke at the 5. of John ^4. I seek not testimony from
men. To believe that the word of God is perfect, because men affirm it, is to
kindle a lamp to light the noone day; for God is not to be therefore trusted,
because men say the word it must be so. The word of God is as forcible alone,
as in company: yea being alone it better guardeth its own authority. How
gross then and absurd our adversaries should show themselves, in attempting to
prove the insufficiency of the Scripture, out of the Fathers, seeing that to
defend her sufficiency by warrant of the Fathers, is to derogate from her
authority.

But before we listen to the ancient Doctors in this question, give us leave to
protest, that we allege them not to defend the Scripture, but by way of their
justification: for they are made the advocates of error, contrary to their own
intention. They are alleged to prove the insufficiency of the Scripture, whose
actual perfection and absolute sufficiency they exalt above all, upon all
occurrences and tracts concerning the doctrine of salvation.

Clemens Alexandrinus in the sixth book of his Stromata, We say nothing (...).
without the Scriptures.

Tertullian in his book against Hermogenes wrote before he became Scriptum
esse doceat Hermogenis officina. Si non est scriptum, timeat vae illud,
adijcientibus au^ detrahentibus destinaetum.
a Montanist Heretic, in his 22. chap. The shop of Hermogenes declares to us
that it is written, but in case it be not written, let that woe, denounced
against those which add or diminish, be a terror unto them. But when he
afterward slid away into heresy, he betook himself to maintain his
doctrine by unwritten Traditions. For in his book of Monogamy, which he
compiled being an Heretic, at the 2. chap. he transmitteth us to Tradition,
alleging these words of our Lord: I have many things to tell you, but you
cannot carry them away at this time. which is the passage that our adversaries
ordinarily produce for Hippol. tome 3. Biblioth. Patru^, page 20 and 21. Edit.
Col. Vnus Deu^ est, quem non altunde agn^scimus quam ex S. (...) Qutadmodum. n.
si que vellet sapientiam huius saculi exercere, non aliter hoc co^sequt
poterit, nisi dogmata Philosophorura legate: sie quicunque volumus pietate^ in
Deum exercere, non aliunde discemus quam in Scripturis divinis. Athan. (...)
Ambros. Quae in scripturis sanctis non reperimus, ca que^admodum ^ surpare
possemus? Hillar. Te admiror, fide^ tantum secu^dum ea qua scripta sunt
desiderante^. Basil. (...). Idem, (...) (...) Cyrill Hier. Catech. 4 c. de
Spir. S. (...) Cvrillus Alexandr. Gla. Phyr. Did. 2. (...).
their Traditions.

Saint Hippolytus, There is but one God, whom we know not by other means, but
by the sacred Scriptures. Even as he that would exercise the wisdom of this
age, cannot seek and obtain it, but by reading the opinions and precepts of
Philosophers: so all of us that would practice true Piety toward God, can
learn and comprehend it no way else, but by the holy Scriptures.

Saint Athanasius in the beginning of his oration against the Gentiles, The
holy and devinely inspired Scriptures, are sufficient to cause the truth to be
understood. And in his book of our Saviors Incarnation, Are you so
inordinatly desperate as to relate things that are not written, and to keep
your understanding at such distance from true piety?

Ambrose in his first book de officijs cha. 23. How can we allege things,
not found to be in holy Scriptures?

Saint Hilary in his second book against Constantius, I do admire thee, O
Emperor Constantius, showing thy desire, that men should believe, according as
it is written.

Basile is excellent hereupon toward the end of his Ethics, which are among
his Ascheticks: If (says he) all that is not of Faith be sin, as the
Apostle speaks, and faith comes by hearing, and hearing from the word of
God, all that is without or beside the holy Scripture devinely inspired (not
being of faith) is sin. And again in his Treatise concerning Faith: It is a
manifest revolt from the faith, and a capital crime of pride and presumption
to reject any thing that is written, or to bring in any thing unwritten. See
also the same Father amongst his more compendious rules in the 95. definition.

Saint Cyrill of Jerusalem is no less express. This good man in his fourth
Catechism instructs people in this manner: Touching the divine and sacred
mysteries of the faith, the least matter is not to be taught without the holy
Scriptures, nor suffered to be brought in after any sort whatsoever, either
through probability, or through words fitly disposed. Yea, put no confidence in
me that speak unto you these things, unless I give you proof, of that which
I preach unto you, out of the holy Scriptures, for the integrity of our faith
consists not in designs or conferences artificially invented, but in proof
drawn from the divine Scrptures.

And Cyril of Alexandria in the 2. book upon Genesis, How can we admit of that
which the holy Scripture has not said, or range it amongst absolute verities?
And in his seventh book against Julian, The holy Scripture is sufficient to
make those wise, most approved, and of able understanding, who are therewith
educated and instructed.

Theodoret in his first Dialogue Theod. Dialog. 1. (...) Et Dial. 2. (...)
Corysost. (...) Et in Psa. 95 (...) Bellar. d^ verbo d^i lib. 4. cap. 11.
entitled De Immutab. Bring not humane reasons to me, for I believe not in any
thing, but the holy Scriptures. And in his second Dialogue, I am not so rash as
to affirm any thing, wherein the sacred Scripture is silent.

Chrysostom upon the second Epistle to the Thessalonians the second Chapter,
All things that are in the divine Scriptures are clear and sincere, every
thing that is necessary, is therein plain. And upon Psalm. 95. When any thing
is spoken without the Scripture, the very cogitations of the hearers are lame.

The same Father in his third Homily upon the second to the Corinthians,
calls the Scripture an exact balance, the rule and square of all things. He
says not as Bellarmine (falsifying this passage) does make him, that the
Scripture is the most exact rule of all; but that it is the balance, square,
and rule of all things.

Saint Hierome upon the first Chapter of the Prophet Aggay, Hieron. Sed and
alia qua absque authoritate and testimony scripturarum quasi traditione
Apostolica sponte reperiunt, percutit gladius Det. Ecclesia Christi etc. non
est ogressa de finibus suts, id est de Scripturis sanctis.
The things which they invent and forge of themselves, as by an Apostolical
Tradition, without the authority and testimony of the holy Scriptures, are
stricken and dashed by the very sword of God. And upon the Prophet Micah l. c.
1. The Church of Christ is not strayed out of its limits, that is to say, from
the holy Scriptures. So as to bring any thing from without the Scripture in the
Doctrine of salvation, is to wander out of the bounds that God has prefixed to
the Church.

The same Father against Helvidius. As we deny not that which is Hiero in
Heluid. Vt hac quae scripta hunt non nega^us, ita ea ^ua non sunt script a
(...). (...) Deum esse de ^^gane credimus quia legimus: Maria ^^^ ^^sse post
portum non eredimus quia non legimus. August. Evangalista tastatur multa
Dominum Christu^ it dixisse et secisse qua non scripta sunt: electa sunt autem
qua scriberantur, qua salut^ cradentium sufficere videbantur.
written, so we reject that which is not written* We believe that God is
borne of a Virgin, because we read it: but we believe not that she was
joined in marriage after her childe-birth, because we read it not.

We have the life of Saint Anthony (which some attribute to Athanasius)
speaking, (...), that the Scriptures are sufficient for our instruction.

Saint Augustine in his 49. Treatise upon Saint John, The Evangelist testifies
that Jesus Christ both did and said many things that are not written* but we
have chosen the things esteemed necessary to salvation, which have been written.

I^ his second book De merito Vbi de re obscurissima disputatur, non
adiuuantibus diuinarum scripturarum certis clarisque do(...), cohibere se deber
humana prasumpti^.
peccatorum and remiss. Chap. 36. When a matter of greatest obscurity and
darkness is disputed, without the assistance of the divine Scriptures evident
and most certain direction, humane presumption ought to suppress it self.
The knowledge that some impute to Saints concerning our cogitations, the Limbus
for the Fathers, and that for little infants, are matters very obscure, yet
concerning these points have we no passage in the word of God.

In the 142. Epist. chap 9. By the Per sol as scripturas potes plenam Dei
intelligere (...)tem.
single Scripture alone, you may fully know the will of God. And if it be
supposed, that this Epistle was not written by Saint Augustine, but by
Pelagius, yet it is manifest, that Augustine never reprehended him for speaking
in this manner.

Also in his book of nature and Solu (...)eis debeo s^^^ vlla recusatione
consensu.
grace, Chap. 61. A Pelagian reciting to him some allegations of the Fathers,
he answers. I owe my approbation and consent only to the Canonical
Scriptures, without refusal or excuse.

The same Doctor in his book of the Unity of the Church, disputes against the
Donatists, who affirmed that the true Church was on their side. Augustine to
know which is the true Church, will have the question determined by the
Scriptures alone; not by the Histories and humane Testimonies, whereof the
Donatists make their use and best advantage. These Quid ergo faciuri sumus? in
verbis nostru ea^ qua situri, an in verbis capitis sui, Domini nostra Jesus
Christi? Puto quod in illius potius verbis ea^ quarer^ debemus qui veritas est.
are his words in the 2 chap. What shall we do then? shall we seek the
Church in our words, or in the words of her head, our Lord Jesus Christ? I
conceive that we ought rather to seek it in the words of him, who is the truth
it self. Diametrally opposing our adversaries, who will have the Scripture
notified and received by the Testimony of the Church: He on the other side will
have us take notice, and embrace the true Church, by the Testimony of the
Scripture. And in the 3. chapter Sed vt dicere coeperam, non and^amus hac dico,
hac dicis, sed audiamus, Hac dicit Dominui. Sunc certi libri dominici quoru^
authoritati vrtique consentimus, vtrique credimus, vtrique seruimus. Ibi
quaramus Ecclesia^, ibi discutiamus causa nostra
persuing this discourse: But as I began to say, let us not hear it spoken, I
say this, thou say that, but bet us hear, this says the Lord. There are
assuredly books of the Lord, to whose authority we both subscribe, therein we
both believe, to them are we both subject, that is the place where we are to
seek the Church, there we debate our cause. This pious Doctor spoke not as too
many do in these days that the Scripture is not judge, that it is a dumb
Rule, that it is ambiguous, that it contains not all things necessary to
salvation, that the faith of the Church regulates the Scripture, and not on the
contrary; he would have the question of the Church decided by the Scripture
alone. Whereupon he (...) ergo illa de medio, qua aduersus not (...) ex diui^^
(...), sed alionde recita^^^s.
adds. Let us despise and cast from ^^ those allegations, which we make one
against another, and are not taken from the divine Canonical books, but from
elsewhere. For (urging further) I desire that the Church be prooved, not by
humane documents or instructions, but by divine Oracles. He calls humane
instructions, all that is alleged without the Scripture. Can our adversaries
by this course ever prove, that the Church of Rome is only the true Church,
rather then the Grecian, or the Syrian? and that the Pope is Saint Peter's
successor, in the charge of head of the universal Church? At the last, after
many passages of Scripture called to mind, and uttered in defense of it,
turning his design toward the Donatists, he summoneth them to prove their
Cap. 6. Legete nobis hoc de Lege, de Trophetis, de Psalmis, de ipso Ena^gelis,
de Apostolicis literis, (...), and credumus.
positions by Scripture. Read us that in the Law, the Prophets, the Psalms,
the Gospel it self, or writings of the Apostles, and we shall believe.
Observe directly how we proceed with our adversaries; for we call upon them.
Read us invocation of Saints, Images of the Trinity, adoration of Relics, or
succession of the Pope in the Apostleship of Saint Peter, in the writings of
the Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, and we will believe them. But they are so
netled at this, that (following the example of the Donatists) they censure this
demand to be unjust, remanding us to Tradition, which they call the unwritten
word, taught by the mouth of the Church, that is to say, the Pope and a few
Prelates, who dominere by means of these Traditions, which are all accommodated
to their profit, and subdued to their power.

This holy personage cannot be satisfied with long enough insisting upon this
subject, and if this book were not to be found in all Saint Augustines
works, or tha^ it were without a title, our adversaries would say, that
Calvin, or Beza had contrived it to their humor. Cap. 12. Legate mihi hoc in
scripturis sanctis, and non sit anathema. Cap. 15. Legant hoc nobis de
scripturis sanctis, and nos eredenous.
For he adds. Let Donat read me that in the holy Scriptures, and he shall be
no Anathemae. Likewise, let them read us that in the holy Scriptures, and we
will believe it. And a little after, rejecting the proofs of the Dotanists,
who alleged miracles for themselves, and the Counsels of Cap. 16. Remotis
igitur talibus Ecclesiam suam demonstrent si possunt, non in sermonibus and
ru^oribus Afrorum, no^ in concilijs Episcoporu^ suorum, non literis quoru^
libet disputatorum, non in signis and prodigijs fallacibus, quia etia^ contra
ista verbo Domint praeparati and cauti redditi sumus, sed in prascripto Legis,
in Prophet^. rum praedict it in Psalmoru^ Cantibus, in ipsius pastoris vocibus,
in Euangelistarum praedictionibus and loboribus: hoc est, in (...) Caenoni^ is
sanctorum librerum authoritatibus.
their Bishops, and the belief of the people, says, Such like matters being
laid aside, let them demonstrate and prove their Church if they be able, not in
discourses and rumors of Africans, not by the Counsels of their Bishops, nor
by the writings of such and such disputants, nor by cheating signs and
miracles: for against those devices we are armed and prepared with the word of
God: but by the ordinances of the Law, by the predictions of the Prophets, by
the Canticles of the Psalms, by the words of the Shepherd himself, by the
preachings, and pains taking of the Evangelists, that is to say, by all the
Canonical authorities of the holy Books.

But as concerning another difficulty proposed, to wit, that there was
obscurity in the Scripture, and that there was difference and disagreement
touching the sense of the passages which were alleged, he does not in manner
of our adversaries, who strive to make the Church infallible interpreter: for
in so doing, one of the parties should be judge; and the Church should not be
subject to any judgment; but he averreth that leaving the obscure passages,
every one may make use of those that are plain, presupposing that what is said
obscurely in one passage, is clearly manifested in others. Assuring withal,
that there is no other way to avoid doubtfulnesse and Cap. 4. Hoc etiam
praedico atque propono, vt quaeque aperta and manifesta deliga mus, quae si in
S. Scripturis non inuentre^tur, nullo modo essent vnde aperire^tur clauso, and
illustraere^tur obscura. Lib. 2. de doct. Chri. cap. 9. In his quae aperte
posita sunt in Scriptura inveniuntur illa omnia quae continent fide^ moresque
vivendi.
difficulty. I propose this (says he) to the end we may choose the passages,
that are most clear and manifest; the which being not found in the holy
Scriptures, there should be no further means to open things that are shut up,
and explain the obscure.

For (as he speaks in another place) In matters that are plainly set down
in the holy Scriptures, are found all things that concern the faith and good
manners. As Basil has it in his Breviores Regulae, at the 267. Answer. The
matter that seems to be obscurely mentioned in some passages of the
Scripture divinely inspired, are interpreted by that which is more clearly set
down in other places

He in his third book against Maximine, Chap. 14. disputes thus Sed nunc
^nec ego Nicanum nec tu debes Ariminensa tanqua^ p^aiudicaturus proferre
Concilium: Nec ego huius authoritatate, nec tu illius detineris. Scripturaru^
authoritatibus non quoru^cimquo propijs, sed vtrique communibus testibus, res
cu^ re, causa cum causa, ratio cu^ ratione concertet.
against an Heretic; Now I ought not allege the Nicene Council, nor thou
the Ariminensian by way of prejudging. I am not bound to the authority of that,
nor thou to the authority of this. Let one thing be opposed to another, one
cause to another, and one reason to another reason, and this by authorities of
the Scriptures, which are not particular to such and such, but are common
witnesses to one and the other party.

Origin in his Homily upon Jeremy, It is necessary that we bring the Necesse
nobis est sanctas Scripturas in testimonium vocare. Se^sus quippe nostri and
enarrationes sine his testibus non habent fide^. Bell. lib. de verbo Dei no^
scripto, cap. 11. sect. 2.
holy Scriptures to witness, for without them our opinions and reports are not
worthy to be believed. Bellarmine answers, that Origin speaks only of
obscure questions, concerning which, he thinks it behoovefull, that they be
taught by the Scripture. But besides that, the whole proceeding of Origin in
this passage, makes the contrary to appear: the Cardinal deceives himself,
if he think that the things easy to be understood (as that God has created
the world, and that Jesus Christ is dead for us) have not as much need of the
authority of the Scripture, as those that are obscure: but on the contrary, it
is not necessary to penetrate into the knowledge of many obscure things; and
God has not deemed it requisite to satisfy curiosity therein. Moreover,
Bellarmine speaking in that manner, condemns a great number of Traditions in
the Romish Church, which are most obscure; as the Tradition of Limbus for the
Fathers, and that for little infants. The Tradition that the Saints know our
thoughts, and behold all things in Gods face. The Tradition of accidents
without subject in the Eucharist. The Tradition that the Virgin Mary is
crowned Queen of heaven; which are things wherein man's understanding is
benumbed, all being full of uncertain presumptions. And it were most needful
to have the Scripture testifying for them, if it be so that in obscure things
we ought to be taught by the holy Scripture. Theod. lib. 1. Histor. ca. 7.
(...).


I will add the opinion of the Emperor Constantine the great for a close, who
was the man in this world after the Apostles, that did most good to the
Christian Church. Of him Theodoret reports, that at the overture of the great
Nicene Council, exhorting the 318. Bishops assembled to determine
controversies, he speaks in this manner: The Evangelicall and Apostolic
books, and the Oracles of the ancient Prophets instruct us plainly in our
Belief, concerning divine matters. Wherefore all unfriendly contention being
thrown to the ground, let us draw the solving of doubts from the words
divinely inspired. This holy discourse displeases Bell lib. de verb. Dei n^
scripto cap. 11.. tertio. E^at Consta^tinus magnus Imperator, sed non magnus
Ecclesi^ Doctor. And rad. lib. 2. Defens. Fidei Trid. initio. Non advertu^t
imprudentes ho^ines tantu^ Arianis qui S^leuci^ convenerunt, is it a^ Constan^ini
^ration^^ arris^ss^.
Bellarmine, for he says, That Constantine was a great Emperor, but no great
Doctor of the Church, and that he understood not the secrets of religion. And
Andradius affirms, that these words of Constantine pleased none but the
heretical Arians. But who was he among the Ancients that ever blamed this
Emperor for speaking so? Yea, do not all the Historians magnify his prudence
and sage management of affairs in this Council? And verily this Council has
followed his counsel, and refuted not the Arians by other strength of
Argument, then by the holy Scripture.

It is evident by this passage, that Constantine until then had allowed no
other instruction but by the holy Scriptures, and that no man taught after the
fashion of the Romish Church at this time, wherein men begin with Tradition, in
saying that the authority of the Scripture is founded upon the Tardition of the
Church.

If then in matters necessary to salvation, these Doctors for three or four
ages after the Apostles did reject all Traditions not contained in the holy*
Scriptures, much more and with stronger reason it stands, that after so many
ages transacted, there should be less probability of cause to make new
additions. For when shall there be any cessation of adding? Bellarmine in his
3. chapter against Barkley, perceiving that the Popes power to depose Kings, is
destitute of all Testimony of antiquity, Non rect^ d^ Ecclesia sentit qui nihil
admittit nisi quod expr^ss^ in vet^r^ Ecclesia scriptu^ aut factum ^sse legit.
Qu^s^ Ecclesia poster^^ris temporis au^ desi^rit ess^ Eclesia, aut facultat^
non habuerit explicandi and declarandi, constituendi ^tiam et iub^nd^ qu^ ad
fide^ et mores Christianos pertinent.
says, that he judges not soundly of the Church of Christ, who admits
nothing but what he reads expressly to have been done or said in the
ancient Church. As if the Church of the latter time, had either discontinued
and left off to be a Church, or had not the faculty of explicating, or
declaring, constituting, and ordaining matters which concern the faith, and
manners of Christians. Whence it follows, that the Church of Rome is not yet
complete and finished in her perfection, seeing that precepts touching the
faith, and rule of morality may be added thereunto; as indeed there are yet
many that are hot in the forge, and freshly hammered upon the anvile of
avarice, and ambition. But this Cardinal ought to consider, that seeing this
Tradition touching the Popes power to depose Kings, makes the Pope King of
Kings; It is not just or reasonable, that the Pope should be judge thereof, nor
that he should be permitted without rendering account to any other person, to
introduce such Traditions without the word of God, whereby to enveagle the
temporal weal^h, and to make himself the mo^arch on earth.

By this very doctrine the Jesuit equalleth in authority the Romish Church of
this time, to the Church of the Apostles time. Yet it is the Church of the
Apostles time, which regulateth the succeeding ages And those first Heralds of
grace in Jesus Christ, are yet seated upon the twelve thrones ludging the
twelve Tribes of Israel.

From this source proceeded the Bull Exurge, which is at the end of the last
Lateran Council, placing this amongst the heresies* of Luther, when he said
that, It is not in the power of the Pope, and Church of Rome, to establish
Articles of faith. Hence also proceeded the remonstrance, Syn Flor. Sess. vlt.
Romana Eccl^si^ n^cessitat^ vrgente iur^ suo part^cul^ illam ex filioque
Symb^l^ app^nere li^u* ^ss^.
which the council of Florence published; that the Church of Rome had just
power to add to the Creed.

CHAP. XXIIII. How the Texts and Passages of the Fathers, which our adversaries
allege for the unwritten Traditions, ought to be understood.
SEeing that in matter of Christian faith, and the points necessary to
salvation, the Fathers do unanimiously cleave to the sole word of God,
contained in the Holy Scriptures, it were a strange thing if after this, they
should seek to ground themselves upon Traditions, and to surmise in matter of
salvation, another word unwritten. Certainly the Doctors who should destroy
that which they have built up, ought not to be believed, by no means should
they be credited, who credit not themselves.

Now for the better purging of Three sorts of good Traditions.
them from this blame, it would be necessary to remember that which we have
formerly spoken, to wit, that we reject not all sorts of Traditions; Satan
having alienated any one of these customs, and turned it to Idolatry, or
converted it to any other end unpractised before, we do not believe that in
deserting such a custom, Christian Religion is a whit impaired; but it were
wisely done to barge up that gate against the devil. Traditions we will not
quarrel him thereupon, provided that he allow such Traditions to be bottomed
with the Scripture, and there to be found in substance.

I say then, as often as the Fathers mention and give way to Traditions, their
meaning is of those three sorts before recited: that is to say, either of the
Scripture it self; or of customs and reglements of Ecclesiastical policy,
and of matters not necessary to salvation; or of occurrences contained in the
Scripture, yet not there found in the same words, as the ancients propose
them, but in substance and ^y consequence, to prove the which we have
employed the Chapter following.

CHAP. XXV. A proof of that which went before.
SOme do object Irenaeus unto us (who wrote abou the end of the second age)
that in his 3. book 4. chap. disputing against Heretics that gave no admission
to the Scriptures, labors to convince them by Traditions, that is to say,
(as he expounds himself) by the succession of the doctrine left from hand to
hand, in the Churches erected by the Apostles. What? Quid ause^ si neque
Apostoli Scripturas quidem reliquissent nobis nonne oporteret ordinem sequi
traditionis quam tradiderant ^^s quibus co^mittehant Ecclesias?
(says he) If the Apostles had not left us the Scriptures, would it not have
been needful to follow the order of Tradition, which they delivered to those,
unto whose trust they committed the Churches? And to good purpose he said it:
for if we had not the holy Scriptures, we should have been constrained to
have recourse unto weaker means, and of less certainty. And it behooveth that
when he speaks in that manner, it be to such as are refractary and averse
from the Scriptures, but not to us who cordially embrace them, and set up our
last rest upon them. Moreover from the time of Irenaeas, the succession was but
short, and the memory of things taught by the mouth of the Apostles fresh, of
the which the remembrance would be razed and put out, if we had not the
writings of the Apostles. For the continuation of time, and the subversion,
corruption, and schism of so many Churches, which then unamimously concurred,
and are now at variance, boasting of their succession, makes this search and
examination impossible to the Christian people, and full of uncertainty.

But at length what are these doctrines which Iren^us would have to be taught
and learned by Tradition, if we had not the Scripture? Is it invocation of
Saints, service of Images, adoration of Relickes, the Communion under one kind,
or the Romish Indulgences? no such matter; it is the doctrine touching the
Creation, and touching the nature and office of Jesus Christ contained most
clearly in the Scripture: which appears not only for that herein he
skirmisheth and contendeth against the Heretics, erring in these points; but
also in that he says, that we ought to seek these things by Tradition, if
we have not the Scriptures; acknowledging that these things are taught by the
Scriptures. Assuredly Irenaeus by Tradition, intends not to speak of any
addition to the Scripture, but he speaks of the succession from hand to
hand, whereby the doctrine of the Gospel was trained on to his time: and in
this very place speaking of certain barbarous people, that had received the
Gospel by Tradition without Scripture, he interprets the articles of this
Tradition, which are the articles of the Apostles Creed.

Also it is not amiss to have the Reader advertised, that Irenaeus in these
same books, which he has written against the Heretics, treats concerning
Traditions not contained in the holy Scriptures, which the Church of Rome
approoveth not. He teaches that Souls separated from the bodies have Iren.
lib. 2. cap. 62. Plonipimi Dominus (...), animas charactere^ corporis, in que
etiam adaptentur, custodire cundem. Et cap. 63. Per hac manifestissime
declaratu^ est et perseverare animas, et no^ de corpore in corpus transire, et
habere hominis figuram. Iren. lib. 5. cap. 5. and lib. 5. cap. 31. Iren. lib.
4. cap. 30. Iren. lib. 5. cap. 33. and 34 and 35.
feet and hands, and a corporal figure. He holds that the Souls issuing out
of the bodies m^uut not up to C^lestiall glory, but into a terrestrial
Paradise. And that Before the publication of the Law, no Law was given to the
Fathers, because they were just: and the Law was not ordained for the just, who
had no need to be admonished by written letters. But when justice was lost in
Egypt, then God gave his Law unto the people.

The same Father teaches, that the kingdom of Jesus Christ ought to endure no
longer then one thousand years, which is an error of the Chiliasts: and that
they shall then feast themselves with delicate Wines, and exqusite Viands. So
little certainety there is in men, as soon as they start aside from the sacred
Scripture. With what conscience can our adversaries Iren. lib. 2. cap. 57.
Ecclesia non invocationibus Angelicts faciens aliquid, sed ^^u^de, pure and
manifest ^rationes dirigens ad Deminum, etc.
allege Irenaeus in the behalf of Traditions, seeing his are so distasteful
to them? He also condemns Invocation of Angels, and the hautinesse of Victor
Bishop of Rome, as Eusebius records it in the 5. book of his history, chap.
25.

They serve also their turns upon the testimony of Clemens Alex to back their
Traditions. Eusebius in the 6. book of his Ecclesiastical history, chap. 11.
remembers on^ passage of him, where he reportet^ (...)
that his brothers importuned him to teach them the Traditions which he had
heard by the ancien Priests. But he makes no mention whether these Traditions
were matters not contained in the Scriptures. Now the Reader may her^ note,
upon what groundworke Papisme is bu^lt: our adversaries to shoulder it up, do
scrape together the most excrementall scumme of the Fathers, like to the
carraine-Crowes that forsake trees beautified with delicious fruit, to cast
themselves down upon noy some carcasses. Observe this Clement full fraught
with his idle and extravagant Traditions, fitting to his purpose, this passage
of the 1. to the Strem. lib. 5.
Corinthians: We declare Wisdom among the perfect, as our adversaries Clem.
Alex. Serom. lib. 1. page 137. (...). PLurima eiusimodi habe^t lib. 1. Strom.
page 121. and seq. eait. Comeli mana. et li. 6 Idem lib. 2. Stro^. pa. 173.
(...). Strom. lib. 3. page 193. Strom. lib. 4. page 217. Strom. lib. 5. page
252. Strom. lib. 6. page 270.
do in like manner. Listen then to his Traditions. He holds that the
Greeks, that is to say, the Pagans were justified and saved by Philosophy. That
there are four persons in God. That the Angels are fallen from their purity by
their coha^itation with Women. That the death of Jesus Christ did not come to
pass by the will of God. That afflictions do not seize upon us through Gods
will and command, but that he no way hinders it, and by his simple
permission. That God is a body. That the Apostle Saint Paul exhorted the
Christians to read the books of the Grecians, of the Sybills, and of
Hystaspes. That Christ had foretold to the Jews which should be converted,
that their sins should be pardoned them within two years. That Christ has
preached to the Jews which were in hell, and that the Apostles also descended
into hell to preach to the Gentiles, to work their conversion. And in the same
sixth book of his Stromata, speaking of a sage or wise man in this present
life, says, he is not subject to any passion or alteration, and that he is
without Strom. lib 6. page 276. (...)
joy, or fear, or confidence; to be short, he makes him a God in the shape
of man, and calls such a man a Gnosticke: and will have him to be skilled in
Music and in the Mathematics, in Logic and Astronomy. He affirms that
God Strem. lib. 6. page 284
has given the Sun and Moon to the Pagans to worship them, to the end they
might not be without a Religion And speaks of gods in the plural, as if
there were many of them. Are these the Traditions which our adversaries obtrude
upon us to prove the insufficiency of the Scripture? or if these displease
them, why do they rely upon the authority of one that rely coyneth
Traditions, whereof the memory should be buried for everlasting?

At the same time Tertullian wrote his book de Militis Corona. In the 2. chap.
of the same book, he fileth up a long list of unwritten Traditions, which
are, that in Baptism the Christians of his time renounced the Devil, and his
pomp, and his Angels: that they were plunged three times into the water: that
they tasted the miscelane or hotchpot of milk and honey: that they made
conscience of washing themselves seven days after: that they participated of
the Sacrament of the Eucharist in the assemblies made before day, and would not
receive it from any hand but of those that did preside: that they made
offerings (so they called the gifts which the people did present) for the
defunct, upon the day of the Nativity, one day every year. By the day of
Nativity he understands that day, whereon the memory of Martyrs was yearly
celebrated, as also whereon Off^ings were made, and Alms given in memory of
them.

Further more he adds the Tradi^ion wherein they account it a foul sin to
fast upon the Lords day, and to pray that day kneeling; and the custom (when
they trample and walk abroad) in putting on their shoes, to mark themselves
in the forehead with the sign of the Cross. Haru^ et cateraru^ eiusmodi
disciplinaru^ si legem expostules Scripturaru^, nullam invenies. Traditio tibi
prate^ditur austrix, consuetud^ confirmatrix, et fides observatrix.
summing all up with this saying; If thou expostulate the legal condition of
these disciplines and others the like, thou shall not find it. Tradition is
pretended to thee which increases them, custom which confirms them, and
faith which observes them.

Our Adversaries do shroud themselves in the protection of this last passage,
to establish their Traditions. Yet can there not be a more proper passage
alleged to confirm the same which I have said concerning the Traditions which
the Fathers have handled, that they are not Doctrines of faith, nor matters
necessary to salvation, but only Ceremonies, and Customs, and Laws of
Ecclesiastical policy, which the Church of Rome has forsaken for the most
part, and regards them no more. For all the Traditions of Tertullian are but
Customs and Ceremonies; whereupon he calls them Disciplines, and there is
nothing therein which concerns the Doctrine of faith, or is necessary to
salvation. And concerning the question which he discusseth in this book,
whether a Christian soldier at a day of muster, when all the soldiers were
crowned with a Laurel, did better in choosing rather to suffer martyrdom, then
to put the crown upon his head, contenting himself to hold it in his hand; I
say it is not a point of faith, but an opinion wherein Tertullian had but a few
to second him. For the other Christians accused this soldier of temerity, and
to have drawn persecution upon his companions in a thing indifferent, saying,
That there was nothing in the Scripture that obliged him to it. But Tertullian
defends the action of this soldier by Tradition.

When we allege some passages of Tertullian express against invocation of
Saints, and against Transubstantiation; our Adversaries on the other side,
allege the words of Hierome against Helvidius, I have nothing more to say of
Tertullian, but that he was not a man of the Church: that is to say, he was an
Heretic. Whilst he was Orthodoxall, he condemned Traditions, as it has
formerly appeared unto us. But being turned Montanist, he falls into much
admiration of Traditions, vouching the words of our Savior, I have yet many
things to deliver to you, but you cannot for the present bear them away. Which
is the ordinary language of ou^ Adversaries. Now, it does no^ import us,
whether he has written the book of the soldiers crown, being an Heretic,
or being yet Orthodoxall; seeing the Traditions which he bundleth together,
touch not the Christian faith. Nevertheless, it is certain that he was then
an Heretic For in this book he maliced and repined at the Catholics,
because they taught, that it was lawful for any man to save his own life,
without exposing it to martyrdom; and because they rejected the prophecies of
Montanus, who styled himself the holy Ghost. Hereunto those words of
Tertullian at the second chapter, seem to Plan^ superest vt etiam Martyria
recusare moditentur qui prophetias eiusde^ Spirttus sancti respuerunt, etc.
Nov^ and pastores eoru in pace leones, in praelio cervos.
have relation, It remains that they who have rejected the prophecies of the
holy Ghost, do intend to decline and refuse martyrdomes. Also, I know their
Pastors who are Lions in peace, and Hearts in battle. The same has likewise
been observed by Pamelius. So then, these Gamesters have little reason, but
less honesty to borrow the weapons of an Heretic.

There are found some other passages of Tertullian, wherein by Tradition, he
understands the Doctrine of the Gospel contained in the holy Scriptures. But
we willingly embrace this Tradition.

To this passage of Tertullian, we may compare another of Basil much alike, in
Chap. 27. of his book De Spiritu Sancto, where he makes a long recapitulation
of unwritten Traditions. Hearken to his words: Some of the precepts and lessons
which the Church observes, and are preached unto us, we have by written
instruction; some others we do receive by way of mystery, having been
conveyed unto us by the Tradition of the Apostles. Both of them have like
force in matter of piety, and no man that has insight (be it never so l^ttle)
in the Ecclesiastical Laws will contradict it. For if we will reject the
un^ritten Customs, as having but little virtue, we shall endammage the Gospel
at unawares, especially in matters that are commodious and proper: or rather we
shall reduce preaching to a simple and bare name. As for example, (that I may
make mention of the first and most common): What writing has taught us to
mark those with the sign of the Cross, who have put their trust in the name
of Jesus Christ? What Scripture has taught us to turn toward the East in
prayer? Which is he of the Saints that has left unto us by writing the words
of the invocatio^, when the Bread of the Eucharist, and Cup of benedi^tion are
showed? For we content not our selves with that whereof the Apostle or the
Gospel makes m^ntion, but we add other things before and after, (as having
great virtue in the mystery,) which we were taught by unwritten instruction.
But by what Scripture do we bless the water of Baptism, and the oil used
in the V^ction, especially that wherewith we baptize? Is not this a Tacit and
mystical Tradition? He adds the triple plunging in Baptism, and the
renouncing of the devil and his angels. Also the custom of standing at prayer
the first day of the week, and from the Paschall unto Pentecost, to show that
we are raised up again with Christ, and do seek the things that are above;
and because seven times seven days signifies the eternity And (to make short)
he inserts the belief in God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, amongst the
Traditions; saying, That these unwritten things are of sembl^ble authority with
the written, and ma^ch them i^ virtue, and that the Fath^rs have covered them
with silence, as the more high and more venerable, of p^rpose to keep men in
more awful observance by the obscurity: and that it is of these, as of a most
sacred place, wherein only the chief sacrificing Priest did enter.

This passage indeed does ill accord with those excellent ones of Basil, in the
which he has formerly acquainted us, that all which is not of faith is sin,
and that faith is by hearing of the word of God, that whatsoever is without the
verge of the Scripture divinely inspired, is not of faith, and consequently is
sin; and that to show a forwardness in adding to the holy Scripture, is a
flat revolt from the faith. By reason of this contrariety, Beilarmine supposes
that these questions, which make a part of his Aschetickes, were not Basils
own. For (says he) the Author of these questions see^es unwilling Bellar de
Amiss* great. lib. 1. cap. 13. Respondeo.
to admit of unwritten Traditions But Cardinal Baronius affirms, that To
call this into suspicion or Baron. annal. t^m. 3. anno 361. 52. H^c in dubi^^
rev^casse summa stultiti^ sit.
doubt, is a notorious sottishness. And maintains these books to be
Basils; as it is manifested by the style. Saint Hierome in his Catalogue, and
Ph^tius in his Bibliotheca, put the Aschetickes amongst the Works of Basil.
Yea more, Gennadius composed Homilies out of pieces of Basils Works compacted
together, amongst the which many were taken out of Ascheticks. Wherefoer the
conjecture of Erasmus is not improbable, who made a preface upon Basils book,
de Sanct. Spiritu. Wherein he professes, that having translated this book to
the half way, he perceived the phrase to alter, and to be no more of the same
authors; for he could discern a palpable other vain. Moreover though
Bellarmine had something wherewith to defame and disgrace this piece of
Ascheticks, yet could he cast no aspersion upon his Treatise of the true
Faith, where Basil affirms that it is a manifest revolt from the Faith, and a
brand of pride and presumption, to reject any thing that is written, or to
introduce any thing which is not written: Jesus Christ having said; My sheep
hear my voice; Nor any upon that place, (...).
where Basil speaks to Eustachius the Physician, in his 80. Epist. If (faith
he) custom be of force for proof of doctrine, it shall be lawful for us
in this to immitate them. Let us then stick to the arbitration and award of
the Scripture inspired by God, and hold the free suffrage and voice of the
truth to be on their sides, whose doctrines shall be found concurring with the
divine words.

Nevertheless, let us consider what benefit our adversaries can derive from
this passage, about the which they make so much bruit and clamor. In the first
place, Basil makes a recital of Traditions, which he affirms to be of
equal authority with the Scripture; yet amongst them there are many not
approoved by the Church of Rome, as prayer toward the East, and making
conscience to kneel on the Lords day, and from the Paschal to Pentecost. Most
especially it displeases our adversaries, that Basil in the Eucharist, puts
the consecration in the prayer or in the invocation (that is to say, in
speaking to God) and not in the bread. If they believe Basil, why do they
reject his Tradititions? or if they believe him not, why will they oblige us to
believe him?

In the second place, all these unwritten Traditions (except the last) numbered
by the Author of that book, are but ceremonies and laws of Ecclesiastical
policy, not necessary to salvation, but subject to mutability, and such as
consequently make nothing to the purpose. For our dispute is not of Traditions
that concern not the Faith and Christian doctrine, but of those that concern
the doctrine of salvation, not contained in holy Scripture. Yet I cannot
dissemble, that the author of this book (be he Basil, or whatere he be)
isgreatly mistaken in his not only equaling, but also preferring (both in
height of dignity, and profoundnesse of mystery) certain petty ceremonies,
before the Sacred doctrine of our redemption, contained in the Gospel. Can any
man without unsufferable injury (not to use a more rigide exclamation) equal,
ye prefer the Customs of standing at prayer on certain days, rather then
kneeling? Of praying toward the East, rather then toward the West? And of
giving a benediction to the water or oil, before the doctrine of the
incarnation of the Son of God, the benefit of this death, the justification
by Faith, the election eternal, and the internal seal of the Spirit of God?
Can any man without impiety change any part or particle of these doctrines? But
as for those ceremonies, they have suffered alteration, and the Romish Church
it self has disparaged and debased them. You see how preposterous and gross
our adversaries are, who instead of covering the faults of those grave Fathers,
do arm themselves with their dross and refuse, as birds that live on nothing
else but caterpillars.

And touching the last unwritten Tradition, which is, that men ought to believe
in God the Father, and in Jesus Christ his Son, and in the holy Ghost; Is it
possible that Basil, where do shine so many virtues and perfections, never saw
this in the Scripture? For Jesus Christ says, at the 14. of Saint John, You
believe in God, believe also in me. And in the 5. chap. 23. To the end that all
men should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father. And as touching
the holy Ghost, how often times is he called God? therefore when the Scripture
bids to believe in God, it commands to believe in the holy Spirit. Now to
excuse Basil, we must say, that he calls Traditions the doctrines that are
not found in the Scripture in express words, but are there in ubstance, and in
equivalent words. And we do willingly entertain such kind of Traditions.
Only he is mistaken to have entermingled this high and divine Tradition,
amongst Customs and Ceremonies indifferent in their nature, as things equally
necessary, and which ought to be regarded with like duty and reverence.

These words of Saint Hierome, in an Epistle to Marcella, are alleged Nos vnam
quadragesima^ ex Apostolica traditione tempore nobis ^ongrue ieiunamus.
unto us: We fast one term of 40. days, at the time that we think meet,
according to the Apostolical Tradition. This is but a ceremony, and not a
doctrine of the Christian Faith: and we have elsewhere showed, that in the ages
Au li^^e de la Nouveate du Papisme liver 7 en la 5. Conrrovers^ chap. 6. and 7.
nearest approaching to the Apostles, the Christian Church fasted but forty
hours: And that this fast was arbirtary, and diversely practiced.

The same Hierome against the Luciferians, makes the Heretic speak thus.
Know thou not that it is the custom of the Churches to impose hands upon
those who are baptized, and so to invoke the holy Ghost? Do thou ask me
where this is written? I answer, in the Acts of the Apostles. And if there
could not be found authority of Scripture for it, the custom generally
observed in this point should serve instead of a commandment: for many other
things in like manner which are kept in use by Tradition in the Churches, have
usurped the authority of the written Law: as in baptism to plunge the head
three times; and being come forth of the washing place, ^o taste the
conjunction of milk and honey, for a signification of infancy; not to pray
kneeling, nor to fast upon our Lords day, and through out the whole
Quinquagesima or fifty days: with many other unwritten things, which men's
indifferent observation does chall^nge to it self. Such is the language of the
Heretic, to whom the Orthodox answers; I d^ny not the custom of the
Churches to be so, etc. This passage is considerable. For I doubt not but the
reading of such passages makes our adversaries sick at the very heart, seeing
that the unwritten Traditions whereof the Fathers do make mention, as of
Traditions descended from the Apostles, are Traditions which the Church of Rome
has rejected: and when the ancient Fathers do make recital of those unwritten
Traditions, they put not invocation of Saints amongst them; nor Images of the
Trinity; nor service to the Images of Saints; nor the Communion under one kind;
nor Romish Indulgences; nor the forbidding to read the Scripture without
special permission; nor the Limbus for the Fathers, or that for little
infants; nor prayer in an unknown tongue; nor the assumption of the Virgin
Mary bodily into heaven, or her Coronation in the Majesty of Queen of Heaven;
nor Masses without communicants; nor the power of the Pope to give and take
Kingdoms, and to release souls out of Purgatory, etc.

The Reader may note by the way, what little reason there is to insert the
custom of standing in prayer (from Easter to Whitsuntide) amongst the
Apostolical Traditions, seeing that in the 20. chap. of the Acts 36. and at
the 21. chap. 5. the Apostle Saint Paul prays kneeling, between the Paschall
and Pentecost, as appears by the 6. and 16. verses of the 20. chap.

As for Hierome, his opinion touching these ceremonies and external
observations, is far differing from that of Basil, if it be true that Basil
is the author of that book de Sancto Spiritu. For mark what he says in his
28. Epistle to Ego te breviter illud admonendu^ puto, traditiones
Ecclesiastieas (prasertim qua fidei non officiant) ita observa^das vt a
maioribus tradita sunt, nec altorum consue udine^, alioru^ co^trario more
subverti.
Lucinius. I think is expedient briefly to advertise thee, that
Ecclesi^sticall Traditions (especially those which offend not the Faith) ought
to be observed, according as men have received them from their ancestors. And
that the custom of some should not be subverted by the custom of others
contrarily practiced. He will have every man to follow the custom of his own
Church (in matters not contrary to the Faith) without taking in ill part, that
other Churches have a contrary custom, which is as much to say, that he
accompteth these things indifferent in their own nature. And it is the
counsel that Saint Ambrose gave to Saint August. Epist. 118. ad Ianuarium. Cum
Romam venio, ieiu no sabbate, cum hic sum, non ieiune. Si^ ^tiam tu ad quam
forte Ecclesia^ v^neru, eiusmorem serva, fi euigua^ non vis esse s^andalo, nec
qui^quem tibi.
Augustine, saying. When I am at Rome, I fast on Saturday: but when I am here
(meaning at Milan) I do not fast. So at what Church s^euer thou shall arrive,
follow the custom of it, if thou desire not to give occasion of dislike to
any man, and that no man should scandalize or be offensive to thee.

Pope Gregory the first about the year of our Lord 595. sending Augustine the
Monk into England, (not to plant Christianity there, for that was brought in
long before, but to establish the Popes authority, to which the Christians of
that Island were not then subject) was asked some questions by the said
Augustine; amongst the rest, Interrogationes Augustini sub fine operu^
Gregorij. Cur cum v^a sit sides, sunt Ecelesiaru^ censuctudines ta^ diversa?
and altera consu^tude mtssar^^ est in Romans Eeclefia, arque altera in Gallica
tenetur? Resp. N^vit, etc. Sed mihi placet vt sieve in Romana, five in
Gallicaneru^, seu in qualibet E^clesia aliquid i^^^^nisti quod plus e^^nip^tets
D^^ placere po^^it solicit eligas.
mark but the third: There being but one faith, why are the customs of the
Churches so differing and repugnant? Why is there one custom of Masses
observed in the Church of Rome, and another in that of France? This Pope that
undertook not to regulate and shape other Churches to the form of his own
answers him, Your brotherhood knows well what is the custom of the Church
of Rome, wherein you may remember you had your education. But I hold it
requisite and good, if you find any thing either in the Church of Rome, or in
that of France, or in any other, which is more pleasing to God Almighty, that
you make choice of it with all diligence and respect. To celebrate the Mass at
this present in France otherwise then according to the Romish order, were a
flat rebellion: and all that the Pope enjoyneth to the Churches (which he
subjecteth to himself, by the assistance of Kings and Princes) is granted for
inviolable, and for an Apostolical Tradition.

More especially, our adversaries do flourish insultingly with the words of
Chrysostom, in his 4. Homily upon the 2. to the Thessal. Hence (...)
(says he) it appears, that the Apostles have not taught all by Epistles,
but that they have also taught many things without writing, and as well these
things as those are worthy to be believed. I have already said that although
the intention of Chrysostom should be to affirm, that the Apostle have
taught many Doctrines and Articles of the Christian Faith, not contained in
holy Scripture, yet would it not follow that these were the same points which
they of the Romish Church advance and put forward: as invocation of Saints,
succession of the Pope in the Primacy of St Peter, Images, Indulgences, etc.
But Chrysostom suffers us no^ to doubt of his intention. He understands
only the things that are not necessary to salvation: for as touching the
Doctrines that are necessary to salvation, he affirms in the precedent Homily
(being the third,) that they are all contained clearly in the Scripture.
Observe his words: All that is in the (...)
divine Scriptures, is clear and legal: all things that are nec^ssary, are
therein plainly couched. Nothing can be uttered more expressly.

The same Father in his third Homily upon the Epistle to the Philippians,
speaks of the commemoration of the dead in the Eucharist in these words: It
is not without reason that he has ordained by the Apostles, that in
thereverend mysteries a commemoration be made of the dead, acknowledging that
thereby much gain and good accrueth to them. But we must take notice, that the
prayer which the ancient Church did make for the dead, is rejected by the
Romish Church of this time. For the Church of Rome prays only for the souls
of Purgatory, to the end their torment may be assuaged, or consummated. But the
ancient Church, prayed for the Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs; and humbly
besought that those for whom it petitioned, should be raised to salvation, or
should rise earlier and at a better hour then the rest, or should be more
superficially singed with the fire of the last judgment. Particularly,
Chrysostom was of opinion that the Souls could not be tormented without the
bodies, as he speaks in his 39. Homily upon the 1. to the Corintbians. And
in the same passage, where his 3. Homily upon the Ep^stle to the Philippians is
objected to us, he supposes that the dead which are comforted by lamentations
and prayers, are not the faithful, but the infidells. So as this passage
makes altogether against the Church of Rome.

Though Saint Augustine be punctual and excellent in this subject, (as we have
seen) yet they would make him an advocate to plead for unwritten Traditions in
matter concerning the faith. This holy Father has believed, and we with him,
that the necessary Doctrines which concern faith and manners, are sufficiently
contained in the holy Scriptures: And for some certain Customs, Ceremonies,
and outward observations, because they are generally received, he believes
they are derived from ancient unwritten Tradition. It becomes none to
gainesay this, but frantickes, or such as are given to a contradicting humor,
and are enemies to the peace. Good reason for it. To give you some instance;
Aug. ad. Ianuar. Epist. 118. Illa qua non scripta, sed tradita custodimus, quae
quidem toto terrarum orb servantur, dantur intelligi vel ab ipsis Apostolu,
vel pleparijs Concilijs, quoru^ est in Ecclesia saluberrima authoritas
commendata atque statuta retine. 1. Sicut quod Domini passio, et resurrectio,
and ascensio in coelu, et adve^tus de coelo Spiritus Sancti anniversaria
solemnitate celebra^ur.
It is not commanded in the Scripture to celebrate annually the day of our
Saviors Nativity, nor of the Paschall, nor of the Lords Resurrection, nor of
Pentecost, which is the day whereo^ the holy Ghost descended upon the Apostles.
For Saint Augustine in his 118. Epistle, brings these examples, where he
says, To stir up dissentions hereupon, for matters in their own nature not
necessary to salvation, but authorized by the general custom of so many ages,
should be (according to my judgment) and according to the truth, a despightfull
perverseness, yea, a symptom of distraction, confounding all concord and
quietness. In like manner does the Scripture give no charge, touching the
precise hour of administering the holy Supper. Jesus Christ occasionally
performed it after Supper, to place and substitute the holy Eucharist
immediately to the Paschal Lamb. But it appears by the History of the Acts,
that the Apostles were not obliged to this hour; and since that time, the
general custom was to celebrate it in the morning. I say, for a man hereupon
to separate himself from the Communion of the Church, and to make a schism,
or trouble the peace of the Church in a matter that concerns not the Doctrine
of faith, nor is necessary to salvation; What is it but stubborn arrogance? It
is most necessary not to molest the Church, for matters not necessary in their
own nature. If the mischief be not great for as much as concerns the
Doctrine, yet is it of no small importance for what concerns the manners, and
the many inconveniences that ensue thereon. This is the same that Saint
Augustine teaches in his 118 Epistle to Ianuarius, where he argues the case,
whether they be well advised who appoint, that on Thursday before the Paschal,
the holy Supper be twice solemnized, that is to say, in the morning and after
evening repast. His answer is, If Quid horum sit facienu^, si divina Scriptura
praescribit authoritas, non sit dubitandu^ quin ita facere debeamus vt legimus,
etc. Sioniliter etiam si quid horum tota^ per orbe^ frequentat Ecclesia. Na^
hoc quin ita faciendum sit disputare, insolentissima insania est.
the authority of the holy Scripture, prescribe what is to be done, we are not
to doubt but that we ought to do as we read, etc. As also if there be any
thing that the universal Church does practice thorowout the world. For to
dispute whether this should be done or no, is a mere lunacie. But in other
matters (as that concerning the hour of the holy Supper) which do vary
according to the places, he allows that every man should follow the custom
of his country.

He speaks of the same otherwhere. As in the second book of Qua^
consu^tudine^ credo ex Apostolica traditione viniente^, sicut multa no^
inveniuntur in literis eorum, neque in Concilijs posterioru. Et tame^ quia per
vniversame custodiuntu. Ecclesiam, non nisi ab ipsis tradita and commendata
creduntur. Quod vniversa tenet Ecclesia, nec Concilijc institutu, sed semper
retentu^ est, no nist auctoritate Apostolica institutu^ rectissime creditur.
Apostolis qui de^ nihil exinde praecep^ king ^t, sed contudo alia, (...)
oppnetur Cypria^ab eorum ^ditione ordium ^mpsisse cre^nda est. Si-^t sunt
mul-^t quae vni^ersa tenet Ecclesia, at ob^oc abd Apotolis praecep^a been
creduntur, quanqua^ scripta non reportantur.
Baptism against the Donatists the seventh Chapter. Which Custom (not to
rebaptize Heretics) I believe to be derived from Apostolical Tradition, as
many things are not found written in their books, nor the Councels of
posterity after them. Nevertheless, because they are kept by the Catholic
Church, it is believed that they were delivered by none but them. And in his
fourth book chap. 24. That which the universal Church does keep, and has
not been instituted by Councels, but has always be^ne preserved, is justly
believed to have been given for no other Tradition but Apostolical. And in
his fifth book chap. 23. The Apostles have commanded nothing to that purpose,
(speaking of the re-baptizing of Heretics) but we must believe that the other
Custom which was opposed against Cyprian, took beginning from their
Tradition. As there are many things which the universal Church observes, and
therefore are believed to be insti^uted by the Apostles, although they appear
not in writing.

In this Tract he speaks concerning the Custom of not re-baptizing those,
who have been baptized by Heretics, which is no point necessary to
salvation. For how many men are saved, that never heard discourse of this
question? If a man once baptized, be rebaptized the second time, although his
second Baptism be superfluous, yet nevertheless the fault not being in him
that is rebaptized, he shall not be therefore debarred from salvation. Or, if
the Baptism of Heretics be unlawful, yet he that is converted from heresy
to the true faith having received no other Baptism, shall not be deprived of
salvation, because it happens not by his default. It is not the privation,
but the neglect and contempt of Baptism, that impeacheth man's salvation. Saint
Cyprian and his Predecessor Agrippine, and with them all the Bishops of
Afric, have in this point been of a contrary opinion to the Romish Church:
and by express Councels have condemned the Doctrine held in that Church. Would
our adversaries therefore exclude Saint Cyprian and his companions from
salvation? Or do they believe that he failed in something necessary to
salvation? Indeed Saint Augustine in the same chapter of his second book
against the Donatists affirms, Nondu^ not diligenter illa ptismi astio
peractata.
that This question of Baptism was not yet well dicussed and explained in
Saint Cyprians time. But it is not credible that the Christian Church at that
time, should be unresolved upon any point necessary to salvation.

This is above all to be confidered, ug lib. 1. ^ Baptismo ^ntra Doatistas. I
am ^ videar hu^anis argu^entis id a^re, etc. ex ^vangelio ^rofero certa
^ocumenta. ^ide et lib. 2 a. 14. Et li. ^ca. 7. Et li. ^. ca. 4. et 23.
^cripturaris ^anctis testimonijs no so^^^ coll^gi^^, sed plane (...).
that Saint Augustine himself (who tells us that the Apostles wrote nothing
as touching this matter, and that this Custom comes by Tradition) does not
stick to handle this question by the Scriptures, and brings many passages
from thence, which he affirms to be certain, and the proofs to be clear.
Whence it appears, that by the things unwritten, he understands matters
which are not in express terms in the Scripture, but are deduced from thence
by good consequence.

These things serve for the clearing of a passage in the same Father, at chap.
33. of his first book against Cresconius, where speaking of the re^baptization
of Heretics, he has it thus: Although there be no certain example vouched
for this out of the Scriptures, yet herein we preserve the authority of the
sacred word, when we do that which pleases the Church universal. For he
speaks of a point not necessary to salvation, and of a Custom, but not of a
Doctrine of faith. The which Custom nevertheless, he groundeth upon the
Scripture.

The same answers may serve, to resolve all other passages produced out of the
ancients. For by these Traditions, whether they understand the holy Scriptures
themselves, and the Doctrine of the Gospel; or whether they understand
Doctrines not contained in the Scriptures in express terms, but drawn from
thence by consequence; or that they understand Customs, Ceremonies, and Laws
of Ecclesiastical policy allowed by the universal Church; we willingly
embrace all these Traditions. For though we place this last sort of Traditions
far below the two first, yet no Ceremony can be brought unto us, nor Law of
Ecclesiastical policy, which has been generally received by the universal
Church of the first ages, but we also do approve of them.

CHAP. XXVI. Three ancient Customs which we are blamed to have forsaken.
THere are three Customs, and ancient observations, which are cast upon us for
a reproach, that we have left them; that is to say, the sign of the Cross in
the forehead; prayer for the dead; and Lent. Our answer is, that these are
Customs which have not always been, and which the Apostles have not observed;
and lastly, which were diversely practiced in diverse Churches, and in diverse
ages: so as if we were to choose what age, and what Church we ought to adhere
unto, we should find our selves much puzzled. The best is, the Church of Rome
has changed these Customs, and under a shadow of keeping the words, has
wholly perverted the thing it self: having turned the sign of the Cross,
August. de verb. Domini Sermon. 8. Ne de cruce Christi erubescat, in fro^te illam
figat, vbi seeds puderis.
( which was but a mark of the Christian profession) into superstition and
idolatry, into conjuration, preservatives, and spells, to repulse the Devils
temptations, not only of men, Efficit super ea crucis signaculum, vt per
crucis virtute^ omnes comitatus diabolieae malignitatis effugi^^ne contra
^^^cerdotem vel sacrificiu^ aliquo modo prevaleat. N adiouste que l'encens sert
aussi a chasser les diables.
but of Jesus Christ: For, In the Mass they make signs of the Cross by a
prescribed number, not only upon the Bread not confecrated, but also upon the
consecrated Host, for fear lest the assaults of the Devil should prevail
against it: as Pope Innocent the third does teach, in his 2. book of the
mysteries of the Mass, chap. 58.

It is the same concerning prayer for the dead, whereof the first mention is
found to be some two hundred years after the birth of our Savior: which was
made for the Saints, Apostles, Prophets, Martyrs, and for the faithful, to the
and they might be raised at a better hour then the rest, or be the more
lightly scalded with the fire ^^ the last judgment, and after ^ome refreshment
in the sleep of ^eace, they might rise joyfully to ^verlasting Salvation. But
the Pope ^ath changed these into prayers for ^ormented souls in Purgatory,
^king this occasion to eclipse the ^erfection of the benefit of Jesus Christ,
Whose blood purges us from all sin. 1. John 7. and so to ^ake a trade and
traffic, whereby ^o heap up riches innumerable.

The same abuse is crept into ^ent, which the Pope makes use ^f, to advance
his Empire, usuring thereby the power to mode^ate the Bellies, Kitchens,
Markets, and Tables; to give dispensations; and to change fasting into a
diffe^ence of meats, and an exercise of ^umility in matter of Merit and of
satisfaction, as well for him that fasteth, as for another. And whereas
heretofore this abstinence was free, and every man did fast before the Paschal
as many days as he thought good, and that these reglements were made by
ordinances of the Bishops in every Church; the Pope has thereto imposed a
precise necessity, unless a dispensation be obtained from him, or his
Ministers. And lastly, he has drawn to himself a power that he had not
formerly, but only in the Bishopric of Rome, which was a particular Church.

This is our belief; that the things necessary to salvation ought not to be
abolished, by reason of the abuses which are, and may be thrust into them, but
we must take away the abuse, and return to the fountain, which is the word of
God. But as for things not necessary, nor perpetual, nor observed from the
beginning, and without which the Christian faith may ^ubsist in its integrity;
when corruption is infused amongst them; and the use is transformed into abuse
and idolatry, or tyranny, or superstition; it is prudently done to shave off
the occasions of abuse, and firmly to shut this gate against the Devil.

CHAP. XXVII. That the Traditions of the Romis^ Church of this time, have
nothing in common with the unwritten Traditions mentioned by the Fathers.
IT appears how weak, and how little to the purpose all is which our
adversaries do produce in the behalf of the antiquity of their Traditions.
For the unwritten Traditions which they have recited, are not Doctrines o^ the
Christian faith that add anything to the Doctrine of salvation contained in
the Scriptures, as ^ have prooved: but customs, and ceremonies, and
observations o^ Ecclesiastical policy. Now, the Traditions of our adversaries
ar^ of another nature. They put fore most the Popes succession in the
Apostleship and supremacy of S^ Peter over the universal Church: upon which
Tradition they make all religion to depend. Yea they maintain that the Church
is founded not only upon Saint Peter, but also upon the Popes that are his
pretended successors.

They stuff our ears with Invocation of Saints, with religious service to
Images, and with adoration of Relics, which are Traditions that shake and
totter the service and religious adoration due to God alone, and do establish
articles of the Christian faith, to weet, that the Saints do know our hearts,
and that we must employ them for mediators, and that they can hear our
prayers effectually.

So likewise does the Church of Rome tell us, of superaboundant satisfactions
of the Saints, which the Pope gathers into the Treasure of the Church, and
distributeth them amongst others by his Indulgences. This Tradition ushereth in
three new articles of faith. The first is, that man by his punishments and
afflictions, can satisfy God more then his sins do merit. The second is,
that God receives the satisfactions of another, for payment of our sins. The
third is, that God has established the Pope, to be distributor of the
satisfactions of another, and commands him to gather them together into the
treasure of the Church. What is all this but a new Gospel? Certainly if these
Traditions be true, the holy Scripture is a book very imperfect in the
principal materials of Christian faith. For what is there more important then
the remission of sins?

Also the Tradition of Monasticke vows lays down this Doctrine, (which is a
new article of faith,) to weet, that man can perform works of
supererrogation, that is to say, more good works, and more perfect then those
which God has commanded in his Word.

I say as much of the Communion under one kind, wherein is impleaded the
abridgment of the moity of the Sacrament instituted by the Son of God. Not to
speak of so many other Traditions, which are not only additions to the
Scripture, but merely diametrall contradictions to it.

This also is worthy of consideration, that when the Fathers do rehearse some
examples of unwritten Traditions, they do not mention those of the Romish
Church at this time, but others that the Church of Rome has disestemed, and
observes not: as prayer toward the East; The prohibition of fasting on the
Lords day; The custom to pray standing on the same day, and from the Paschall
to Pentecost; The custom of tasting the milk and honey after Baptism, and not
to be washed seven days after; The prayer for the deceased Saints, to the end
they may be raised at a happyer hour, and in their sleep of rest they may find
refreshment, with such like matters which the Church of Rome has pretermitted,
(because they served not the Popes turn) but has invented others, that are
more gainefull, and better accommodated to the profit and exaltation of the
Pope, and all the Roman Clergy.

CHAP. XXVIII. of the multitude of Traditions in the Church of Rome.
THe saying of Cornelius Tacitus Ann lib. 3. In corruptissima republtca plurima
leges.
is very true, that the worst and most corrupted Republiques are those, which
have most laws. For in the same proportion that vices wax strong, the laws
also are multiplied: especially when the Laws themselves become vices, and
mischieses are applied for remedies.

If this be true in humane affairs, much more in Divine, and in the Doctrine
of salvation. It is certain that in civil affairs posterity instructed by
experience, has often redressed the occurrences, changing them into better,
and has cured old evils with new laws. But as for the Doctrine of salvation
delivered by God himself, this will admit of no alteration without infinite
impiety. It is not for Subjects to add to the laws of their Sovereign, nor
for Men to presume to be wiser then God.

It will be found that all the Traditions which men have added to the
Scripture, are so many infringements of the Law of God, which under the color
of adding thereunto, do overturne that which God has established; and are so
many artificial means, through a glorious pomp, to dazell the eyes of the
People, and to amuse them, whilst they are seduced; and lastly to enrich and
exalt the Clergy. For the Prelates of the Church of Rome carnestly bent to
their profit, have taken sufficient notice, that the Gospel in its simplicity
could not serve to build up their Empire.

And although this numberless rhapsody of Traditions should not be woven by a
fraudeulent workmanship yet the confounding multitude of new ordinances
smothereth the old, and causes that things necessary cannot be discerned from
superfluous, and that Jesus Christ is scarce known among the Saints: and the
absurdity of many new inventions by their addition, do call the ancient
Doctrines into suspicion, and weaken their certainety. Especially when they
make the true knowledge of Divine doctrine, to depend upon the authority of
humane Tradition, and God to be believed, because men have so ordained it, as
it is now practiced in the Church of Rome.

Add to this the inclination of man to worship his own proper inventions, and
to till and improve that most industriously, which he himself has planted.
For as the earth nourishes nettles which her self has produced, much better
then good plants that are strange and brought from far: so the spirit of man
is restless in taking care, that the laws be observed which he of himself
has invented, much more then those which Jesus Christ has brought from
heaven; especially when these new Doctrines are gainefull to the projectors,
and a prop to their dominion. Hence it comes to pass, that in the Church of
Rome, the doctrine of the Gospel (which consists of rules few and easy) is a
clasped book to the people, and the commandments of God are of little moment;
but the Traditions (though toilesome, and almost innumerable) are most
religiously observed, and with mavelous obedience.

Amongst all the Religions that ever were in the world, the Romish in multitude
of Laws and Traditions bears the Bell away, the number of them being so
great, as scarce an age will suffice to learn them. And it had been very
requisite, that when the Council of Trent did establish Commissaries to attend
the censure of prohibited books, it should have established other Officers
immediately, to collect together the unwritten Traditions, and to put them in
order: for seeing that by the authority of this Council, the Romish Traditions
were declared, to be of equal authority with the Scripture, it was convenient
that these Traditions being digested into a body, should have been annexed to
the Scripture, to the end to have the body of Christian Religion entirely
together. But they gave their minds to be neglectfull in this point, for fear
of affrighting the people with many myriads of Traditions, of prodigious
length: as also lest the people should compare the vanity of these Traditions,
with the sanctity and excellence of the holy Scriptures, which our Adversaries
hinder to be read, with all their might and diligence. Moreover, our
Adversaries do say, that the Pope and the Church of Rome can add to the
Creed, and establish new Articles of faith. Whereupon it follows, that if
Christian Religion may suffer yet more additions to be matters essential, the
Fathers did vainly labor to make a perfect body of the Christian Religion,
seeing that it is as yet imperfect.

I (being moved with these considerations, which do altogether hinder them)
did design with my self, to make a collection of all the Traditions of the
Church of Rome, and to lend help to their negligence. But being entered
therinto, I perceived the labor to be endless, and was overwhelmed with the
multitude. It has happened to me, as to those that settle themselves in an
evening to count the first stars that appear, and whilst they are counting
the first, others appear, and then more, so as all their reckoning is
interrupted. This labor increasing underhand, dulleth the edge of a man's
desire, and so much the rather, seeing there is no man but is soon weary of
gathering useless dross together.

If I were disposed to make a perfect Catalogue of the Romish Traditions, it
would be necessary for me to decipher, and paint forth the infinite diversity
of Masses; the Services and Suffrages of the dead; the Rubriques and Proviso's
to supply the defects of the Mass, arising either from some defect in the
person of him that celebrateth, or from the place, or from the time, or from
something in the matter, or in the intention.

It would be needful for me to insert all the laws touching the
administration of the Seven Sacraments, and the disciplines of the Romish
Pontificallity, that direct the collation of the seven Orders. The Consecration
of the Bishops, the Archiepiscopall garment, the benediction of Abbots,
Abbesses, and Nuns; the Dedication of the Churches, the Consecration of the
Altars, whether fixed or portative; together with the vessel and movables of
the Church and Churchyards: the reconciliation of the Churches and Churchyards,
in case of pollution, by effusion of blood, or by other dishonest act, or by
the interrement of an Heretic: the benediction of the Images, Crosses,
Corporalls, Relics, Bells, and Standards: the Consecration of the Chrysme, and
the Fonts; the Admonitions, Excommunications, and Reconcilements of Penitents
on Maundy Thursday: the form of Degradings and Exorcismes, the single and
double shaving, the infinite variety of Monks and their Orders, and of the
diverse privileges and spiritual graces, which the Pope has granted unto them.

It would like wise be needful for me, to represent the laws of the book
of holy Ceremonies, wherein the form of the Popes Obsequies and Funerals, and
of the Election and Coronation of a new one is prescribed. The submissions
which the Kings owe in the Procession that is made at his Coronation, and at
the Feast. The Coronation of the Emperor by the hand of the Pope, with his
shameful homages and submissions to his Holiness. The benediction of the
Knight of the Church. The benediction of the Rose on our Lords day Laetare, and
of the sword on Christmas night. The Consecration of the Agnus Dei. The
Creation of Cardinals. The power of Apostolic Legates. The Order of the
Consistory, and of the Conclave, and of the Council when the Pope is resident
there in person, or by his Nuntio's. The Papal Mass, and how the Pope
receives the Communion. The Popes Habits, his Episcopal Miter, his Royal
Crown, and a thousand the like things, whereof the very names do terrisie us,
and the Laws and Disciplines, for quantity, do surpass the Bible in
thickness.

It would have been needful, to add a thousand villainous and ignominious
precepts, touching busy and unchaste interrogations which the Confessors make,
and the determinations touching the cases of conscience. But modesty has has
not permitted it, and I was loath to stain my book with such infamous rules,
which teach vices under the shadow of examining and reprehending them.

Therefore to put some bounds to this trouble, I have contented my self to
bring traditions which concern the Doctrine, that is to say, which in some
sort thrust at the Law of God, and the Doctrine of the Gospel, and that
concern the Sacraments, and the Orders, and the Ecclesiastical charges, with
some superstitions where the abuse is most gross and apparent.

I have drawn all these Traditions from the public practice, from the
Councels approved by the Popes, from the text of the Mass it self, and from
the Decrees, Decretals, and Extravagants of the Popes. And from some of the
more famous Authors, as Lombard and Thomas, two Princes of the School,
Bellarmine, Vasquez, Gregory of Valence, Tolet, Emanuel Sa, that are Jesuits,
Navarre the Popes Penitentiary: the three later I quote most often, because
they maintain their sayings by a multigude of other Doctors: so as under the
name of one Author, I allege many.

All such as have hearts disposed to learn, shall here see with admiration,
mixed with grief, (as in a small contracted table) the whole massy body of
Papisme, varied with a hundred thousand colors, and shall be able thereby to
profit. For the simple recital is enough for refutation, and to lead forth
into view the mystery of iniquity.

FINIS.

