A TRVE IOVRNAL OF THE SALLY FLE^^ WITH THE PROCEEDIN^^ OF THE VOYAGE.

Published by JOHN DVNT^^ London Mariner, Master of the Admir^^^ called the
LEOPARD.

Whereunto is annexed a List o^ (...) Captives names and the places where (...)
dwell, and a Description of the three Towns in a CARD.

LONDON, Printed by John Dawson for Thomas Nicholes, a(...) be sold at the
sign of the Bible in Pope's Head al^^^ 1637.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE LORD VAIN, One of his MAJESTY'S priv^^ Council of
his High Court of Admiraltie.
RIght Honorable, in S^^tember last was twel^^ month, I redeemed m^^ self
prisoner from Sal^^ being sent out Mast^^ and Pilote in a Sally ma^^ of war,
with twenty^^ one Moors and five Flemish rennagadoes, un^^ the coast of
England to take Christians, brough^^ them into the Isle of Wight under the
command of Husk Castle, where I was detained^^ a Pirate, and sent to Winchester
with the re^^ till we were tried by the Law, then coming to London very bare,
I found much favor at your Honors hands; For which I must ever rest engaged,
and have no way to testify my thankfulness more, than by presenting this my
poor endeavor to your Honor: which if you please to accept and consider of,
may be a means to relieve more as you have done me; for my only son is now
slave in Areire, and but ten years of age, and like to be lost for ever,
without Gods great mercy and the Kings clemency, which I hope may be in some
measure obtained by your Honors means, and then your poor suppliant shall be
ever bound to pray for you and yours all his days,

and ever rest at your command, JOHN DVNTON, Mariner.

A FLEET OF SHIPS Set out by his MAJESTY against the Turkish Pirates and
Pirates of Sally in January 1636.
JOHN DVNTON went aboor^ his Majesty's Ship the Leopard at Chatham the 26 of
January, to see her v^ctualls and provision taken in for the Voyage; and the
tenth day of February following, his Majesty's Ships had all the^ victuals
and provision shipped aboard, and were ready to set sail, but the wind was not
good, for it wa^ against us, and at North-east, and at East North-eas^ until
the 13th day of the said February in the morning at 8 of the Clock we broke
ground to set sayl^ with the said Ship the Leopard. And we did warp^ the same
Ship to his Majesty's Dock at Chatham, an^ there did ride till the 14th day of
the said February i^ the morning, and then at daylight we did make wa^ to
warpe the said Ship down over the Chain, the weather then being calm, and no
wind stirring^ And as soon as we were down over the Chayn^ with the Ship,
we had a little wind Northerly, s^ we sailed down to Gillingham, and there
came t^ an Anchor in six fathom water, for the wind was against us at Nore
and Nore North-east, and we did ride all night until the 16th day of the same
February in the morning at ten of the Clock, at which time we set sail with
the wind at South Sea-west, and did get up as far as the west end of the Nore,
and there came to an Anchor and rode all night till the 17th day in the morning
at daylight, and then we set sail and at noone we came to an Anchor in
Tilbery hope, and there did ride to get Seamen to man our Ships, and gather
our Fleet together, and stayed for nothing but a wind. And the 24th day in the
morning, we set sail from Tilbery hope with the wind at West and little wind;
and the 26th day of February at two of the Clock in the afternoon we came to
an Anchor in the Downs, in eight fathom water, with the wind at West Nore
West, March 4th
and there we did ride until the 4th day of March in the morning at six of
the Clock we set sail out of the Downs with the wind at South-east, 6th
a fine gale of wind: and sailing along the Coast of England until the sixth
day of March at noone we departed from the Southermost land of England called
the Lizard in Cornwall, and set our course for the Coast of Spain with the
wind at East North-east. And I will not be too tedious to set down every point
what course we did steer, and every day how the wind was, because I will make
it as short as I can, and sailing along the Coast of Spain with a fair
wind, and sometimes a contrary wind, we did not see a sail nor a ship all the
way, but one small Carvill, and short of the Northern Cape, we had much wind
at South-west, and West north-west, and the 12th of March in the night betwixt
twelve an^ one of the Clock our Reere Admiral the Hercule^^ bore her Main
Mast by the board; and we were^^ feign to leave her, and we staying by her all
night un^ till the next day, our General asked the Captain^^ what he would
do, and he told him that he would^^ go for Lisborne to set a new Mast, so we
took ou^^ leave of him, and steered away our course; and tha^^ Carvill we saw
we could not speak with her, for sh^^ was too Windward of us.

It was the 19th day of March that we did see tha^^ Carvill, and so sailing
along the Coasts until the^^ 21 of March in the morning at daylight we did
se^^ the South Cape of Spain, and were fair by the land^^ by six a clock in
the morning; and so steering away^^ our course South-east for Sally in Barbary,
and the 2^^ of March in the morning, we saw the land at noone^^ we made the
Town of Momora; and at night wee^^ came to an Anchor in 27 fathom water, two
leagues^^ off the shore before Momora, and there did ride al^^ night until the
24th day of March in the morning we^^ set sail at ten of the clock with little
wind at Nor^^ North-west, and at 4 of the clock in the afternoon* we did come
to an anchor in Sally Rode in 33 fathom^ water, right before the new town of
Sally. And our^ Captain and General having the command of all^ the Ships,
sent some unto the Southward, and some^ unto the Noreward; and we riding in
the middle^ right against the Castle, and before the Harbours^ mouth, that
Ships should neither go in nor out, so we^ dispersed all our Ships over all
the Rode of Sally, that neither ship nor boat could pass in nor our, for our
ships and boats did lie under the Castle every night close under the Harbors
mouth the watch. The 26th of March our General sent his Letter ashore to the
Governor of New Sally to demand our Kings Majesty's subjects, 26th.
and Christians, and satisfaction for ships and goods, and for all those
Christians that they sold away both to Argier and other Countries before we
came there; which did trouble them very much, and move their patience. And in a
bravado they refused to send our General an answer; whereupon we perceived,
and looking well about us, we went roundly to work with them another way
which they expected not, as you shall know hereafter. It was Gods great mercy
that we did come into the Rode so soon as we did, for they had made ready all
their ships to go for the Coast of England, as it was credibly reported of
some Christians that were slaves ashore that did steal away out of the Town,
and came swimming aboard the Leopard, they were most Frenchmen, and some
Spaniards, and they told our General, that the Governor of New Sally sent for
all the Captain Runnagadoes, and commanded all the Captains in New Sally that
they should go for the Coast of England, so near the shore with their
ships, and hoyst out all their boats, and go ashore and fetch the men women
and children out of their beds, had not GOD of his great mercy prevented them,
but we coming so suddenly into the Rode upon them before they knew of any
ships that our gracious King had at Sea, or any such intent to send a Fleet
of Ships upon the Coast of Barbary, and they were grown to such a height of
pride, that some English Merchants and men ashore told the G^ vernor of new
Sally, that they were the King of En^lands Ships, he said, what care I for the
K. of Englan^^ Ships, or all the Christian Kings in the world, a^^ not I King
of Sally: but we made him sing anoth^^ song in a short time after, for we went
to workewi^^ him another way that he dreamed not of. The 2^^ of March at three
of the clock in the afternoon the^^ did come in a Sally man of war from
Argier wi^^ passengers, and going close aboard the North sho^^ as near as she
could steer for running ashore, w^^ and the Antilop did shoot above 100 pieces
of On^^ nance at that ship, we shot through and through h^^ and over her, and
into the town. It was such a gr^^ Sea that we could not sink her, but we
met w^^ her in the Harbor, and sunk her within amongst^^ rest, as will
appear in a short time afterward, a^^ we did come to an anchor hard by the
Castle, (...) the Castle did shoot at us, and we did shoot at^^ Castle, into
the Castle, and over it, and thro^^ it, and into the town, and through the
town, (...) over it, and amongst the Moors, and did kill a g^^ many of them.

The 29th of March, the Governor of the town did send our Kings Letters of
peace aboor^^ our General, and did desire a peace with our K^^ for they are
out with the new town, and many ^^ters passed betwixt the Saint and our
General, an^^ in a short time after our General did make a pe^^ with the
Saint, for the old town was so terrified (...) the rogues in the new town,
for we saw them in fi^^ all day ashore one with the other, and a great (...)
men and horses were killed and hurt on both sides, the old town set up a white
Flagge of truce upon their walls for our boats to come ashore to see what they
would have, so our General caused five or six of our boats and shallops to be
manned with good small shot, and our boat with our Kings Colors therein went
a shore, and they told our men they lacked a Surgeon. Our Cockson having order
from his General to take in two of the best of them and bring them aboard the
Leopard for pledges, and sent our Surgions-Mate ashore, and in a short time, he
cured all their hurt men, that were curable, at which the Governor and all the
Moors in the old town did much rejoice, and were very diligent unto us; and
all those rogues in New Sally were very crop^icke, and much discontented at our
being ashore, and so conversant with them, and called them and us
English-dogges, and did say amongst themselves that they were all turned
Christians, and rayled upon them and us, shooting with their great gunnes at
them and us continually; and they of the new town had built a bridge over the
River upon boats with Deal boords to march over to the old town with horse
and man with many thousands, and were fully resolved to take the old town into
their own possession, had not we prevented them, but in a short time after,
we made them pull up their bridge, break their Camp, and go their ways
home and fortify their own walls and Castles, for they found their hands
full of us.

April the 5th our peace was concluded with the Saint our friend, April 5.
this Saints name was Siddy Hamet Allilash, he is a petty King of the old
town, an^ some other towns in Barbary, as Barbary is in much trouble and
much wars one with another, but ^ will be now better: For the King of Morocus
dot^ now go abroad to wars himself, he was abroa^ this Summer with 40000
men horse and foot, an^ was coming to Sally, but the Saint our friend
prevented him, for he did burn up all the Corn upon the ground round about
the Country, that the King could have no provision for his men and ho^ses, and
by that means he could come no neer^ Sally, than within thirty leagues, and
so he was fai^ to retire home again with fire and sword grammi^ all the
Country wheresoever he went, and put the^ all to death.

The 9th of April we did see a sail off at Sea, w^ did give her Chase until
night, and lost her, w^ did go into the Rode again, for she was so ^
wind-ward of us, that we could not fetch her.

The 11th day in the morning we saw two shipp^ we did give them Chase all
day, they were so fa^ off at Sea, and night was coming on, and then w^ lost
them.

The 18th day of April, the Hercules our Reere A^mirall did come into Sally
Rode from Lisbone, a^ had set her Mast again.

The 20th day of April, the two towns of S^ were in fight very hard one
against another, and (...) kill a great many men on both sides, we did sta^^
and look upon them in our ships as they wer^^^ fight, we riding at an
Anchor, and could not re^^ them with our Ordnance, they were ashore.

The next day being the twenty-one of April the Moors in the old town did
hang out a white Flagge for our boats to come ashore, 21th.
and our General did send two of our boats ashore to the old town with the
Kings Colors in our boats, and as soon as our boats did come to the shore
side, there were many Moors would have come aboard: Our men did take in three
of the best of them, and they told our General that he should have all the old
^owne at his command, as Castles, Forts, and Gunnes, and men, and all to lay
siege and battery against the new town at his service, or any thing else in
the town, for the King of Englands sake, so in a short time after, our
General did send our Master-Gunner and one of my chief Mates ashore, to see
how the town was fortified, and how many Gunnes they had mounted, and how many
great Gunnes they can bring to beat upon the new town, for to lay battery,
and likewise how many great Gunnes they can bring to beat upon their Ships
to ^inke them, or how they may come to burn them, and also to go round about
the town, and take very good notice of all things therein, and likewise of all
their Ships, and for a place to make a trench for great Gunnes, and they
being many times ashore did find out a place for a trench, and so in a few
days after our General had well understood himslefe, what a good work it
would be to sink and burn their Ships, did give order unto our
Master-Gunner, and my chief Mate Simpson, with some other good Seamen out of
every ship, to take some barrels of power and shot ashore into the old town,
and to shoot at their Ships, and to sink as many of them as the^ can; and
they did sink three of their best shippesth^^ first day, and the next day they
did come aboard f^^ powder and shot, and they told our General th^^ they had
found out a place to make a Trench, th^^ will sink all their ships in the
Harbor, and o^^ General did sent to every ship for every Gunn^^ and men to
take their ^urnes ashore to manage th^^ Ordnance and ba^^ery, all day lon^, and
while t^^ Trench was making our men did sink many of the^ Ships, and shot
through many of their house^ and killed a (...) many men in their town and
C^^stle; and continued killing of them everyday, a^^ when the Trench was made
and their Gunnes hal^^ down into the Trench, our General sent for all t^^
best Gunne^s of every Ship, and appointed eve^^ Gunner and his Company his
day, and to take po^der and shot with them, and so to go to work w^^ their
Ships to sink and burn them all, and as the^^ were shooting at their ships
and barks, the Moo^^ in the new town did shoot at our men in the Tren^^ and
did shoot off one of our men's legs, but he is w^^ again God be praised for it,
for we did so torm^^ them in sinking and burning of their ships that th^^
were stark mad, and at their wits ends, for we (...) every day (...) some of
their ships, and kill some^^ them in the new town with the great Gunnes, w^^
shooting out of the Trench at them, and shoot^ through their houses and from
the walls and forts^ the old town, and in every place where our men co^^r
could bring great Gunnes for to beat upon the^^ or their ships, boats, or
houses, or Churches, or (...) or anything of theirs, and at last we did sink
and spoil and burn all their ships but three that did lie up in the Harbor
behind a point of rocks, that our men could not bring any Gunnes to beat upon
them, and what with the Saint besieging them by land, and we by Sea, they were
in a mutiny in all the town, and together by the ears amongst themselves,
and being so, and victuals began to be short with them, they were so
tormented, that that side which was strongest, in the night did set upon their
Governor, and took him prisoner, and put him in chains, and sent him
prisoner to the King of Morocus, that is fifty leagues from Sally to the
Southward; and when that Governor to that great King of theirs was gone, they
made one Governor one day, and another another day, from the time we did come
into the Rode, to the time the old Governor came to the Town again.

The 27th day at one of the clock in the morning, 27th.
seven of our boats were in close aboard the shore at watch, and did see two
great Carvells coming out of the Harbor; and our boats did set upon them, and
did wedge one of their Rudders fast, and did lay her by the Lee and were board
and board, and did heave in fire pots unto her, and did burnethree men of them
to death, and did kill fifteen men of them outright, and did hurt eighteen
more of them with our small shot, and they did kill us one man in the head with
their small shot and hurt us eight more in our boats with small shot, and all
our boats had men hurt in all that fight thirty Seamen, some i^ the legs,
and some in the arms with small shot: and two of the Hercules men were shot
with arrows in the back, and are dead, and all our men be all well again God
be thanked, had they not been so near the shore, and a gale of wind off the
land, that we could not help them, nor rescue them with ou^ Gunnes, and the
rogues from the shore did beat of^ our boats with their small shot; and so our
boate^ were forced to leave them, and go aboard their ship^ again.

The 28. of April we saw two ships off at sea^ the Mary and the Hercules did
go off to them, an^ fetch them up, and spoke with them. They were tw^
Spaniards bringing Soldiers from Momora.

The 29 of April the Saint our friend be^ieged the new Town of Sally, and set
all their corn on fire o^ the ground without the town, and did keep them in^^
that they cannot not stir.

The first day of May in the morning, we did see^ sail go into the harbor
from all our ships: (...) she did go so near the shore that we durst
not'follow her. The Antilop followed her to the harbor mouth, and made many a
shot at her, and did kil^ them a great many men, as the Moors in the ol^ town
told our men.

The 5. of May the Mary and the Hercules did com^ into the Road from Fedally,
and told our General^ that they did put a Sally man of War ashore at F^dally,
and set her on fire; and the Saint had taken al^ her men: she was one of the
best ships that they had^ she had in her 23. or 24. great Gunnes, and coming
from Argiere with a great many men in her^ would have gone a roguing, had not
we destroye^ them.

The 11. day in the morning we saw a ship off at Sea, 11th.
and we gave her chase all the day, and in the eight we lost ^^ght of her: for
it was so dark, and no wind.

The 12. day in the morning, we did see two ships, 12th.
and we did give them chase all day until night, and then lost them, it was
so dark, and little wind.

The 15. 15th.
day, in the morning we saw two ships to the norward of us, as far as we
could see them, we did give them chase all day, and at night we lost them.

The 18. 18th
day at two a clock in the morning, eight of our boats were in fight with four
of their great boats until day light: we did kill them a great many men in
their boats, as they were coming from Fedally: and had it not been a gale of
wind, our boats had taken them all before they had gotten into the harbor.
We had but two men hurt in all our boats.

The 24. 24th.
day, our boats did take a great boat of theirs.

The 25. 25th.
day we did give a man of war chase to the Southward of Sally all day: in the
night we lost her, for it was dark, and little wind.

The last of May in the morning, we did see a ship off at sea: Last.
we gave her chase all day till night. She sailed too fast for us. All those
ships that we have chased, were men of War, Rogues and Pirates of Sally.
Some of them did come out of the Straights, and some small men of war of them
out of Sally.

June. 1.
The first day of June, in the morning we did see two ships off at Sea, June
1.
we did give them chase all day, till at night, little wind and dark, and
then we lost them.

5.
The fifth day at ten a clock at night, 5.
the Governor was sent away prisoner in a boat to the King of Morcous, thinking
that the King would have cut off his head, and we having notice of his going,
did watch narrowly for him with all our boats: it was such a night, and so
dark, and such a Fogg, that our boats could, not meet with him, for we would
have taken him prisoner.

7
The seventh day in the night, 7.
a small man of War did come out of the Harbor, our boats being at watch did
meet with her, and did put her ashoare, and she was spilt all too pieces, and
all her men drowned and taken by the Saint our friend.

The tenth day of June the Expedition did come into Sally Road. 10.


The eleventh 'day Providence came into the Road; 11.
and one of their men of war came creeping along the North shore, a mile
from the Norward of the Old Town; our boats and one of the Pinnaces did set
upon her, and put her a shore, and she was split all too pieces, and most of
her men killed and taken by the Saint our friend.

The twenty third of June, 23.
our General did go aboard of the Expedition in the morning, to see how they
would row, and they did row after three leag^ s a watch, and did row under the
Castle and the Castle did shoot at her, and thee did shoot at the Castle, and
into the Castle, and over the Castle, and into the town, and over the town;
and the Castle at her, and she at them, and so they did lie shooting one at
another, until four a clock in the afternoon; and then she did come off
into the Road again, and did come unto an Anchor hard by the Leopard, and
came off very well, and had never a man hurt we give God thanks: they broake
one of their best Gunnes of brass in the Castle, with shooting at her.

The twenty seventh day of June in the morning we saw two ships at an Anchor
under the Castle; 27.
Our General sent for all the ships boats to towe in the Providence, for it
was clame, she did row and eight boats did towe, and they towed her within
Musket shot of the shore, and the Providence did shoot at those two ships,
100 pieces of Ordnance through and through, and the great shot did kill them,
some men right out, and went a shore amongst a thousand Moors, and the Castle
did shoot above eighty pieces of Ordnance at her. And the men in the town
came down to the water side with 1000 small shot at her; And at noone they
left off, and she came off very well, and had never a man hurt; but her ropes,
and her sails, and her side; were paid with small shot; we could not know how
many Moors she did kill them.

The thirteenth day in the morning we saw a ship, 13.
Captain White chased her a shore to the Northward. The same day at noone, the
new town sent a boat aboard with letters to our General, about the
Christians, and would saine have made a peace with our General, but he would
not make a peace with the^, except they would give us al our Christians, and
satisfaction for all that ever had been taken by them, those words made them
in a dumpe, and when they did see our two Pinnaces come into the Road out of
England, and did see them row with Oars after one of their ships they were
stark mad, and sought all the ways they could for a peace with us, or with
the Saint, and there did run away one hundred men in a day out of the new
town to the old town, to the Saint: and most of the best men in the town for
want of victuals, which were very short with them, who durst not go out for
fear of our men, they were almost all sterved for want.

30.
June the thirtieth we saw a ship at Sea, June 30.
and gave her chase all day, and at night we lost her, it was dark and little
wind, that we could not fetch her.

July 3.
July the third, July 3.
we did put a Sally man of war a shore, with fifty five Mores and Turks in
her, all killed and drowned, and taken with the Saint our friend, and their
ship split all too pieces.

11.
The eleventh day in the morning, 11.
we saw three ships at Sea, we gave them chase all day, and at night we lost
them.

12.
The twelsth day the Providence chased a Sally man of war ashore, 12.
with eighty five Mores and Turks in her, to the Southwards, all taken and
killed by the Saint our friend, and their ship split all too pieces, to the
Southward of Sally, Ships and Carvels six, and boats two put ashoare
without the Harbor of Sally bar, unto the Southward two ships and one
boat, unto the Northwards four ships and one boat, they were all men of
war, and Pirates of Sally, and all the ships that we gave chase too, were
all Turks men of war and Pirates of Sally, but four that came to trade with
the town. But our General would not suffer them to trade.

26.
July 26. 26.
our Master Gunner, and my mate Simpson, and a grear ma^y men more, had made
ready some great Gunnes to go up to the Saint, by the Generals appointment
about the head of the river, for they in the new town had taken away their
bridge, that they had made upon boats and deal boards, to go over the river
into the old town, to fight with them, and did fight with them many times; and
had taken the old town, if we had stayed away but ten days longer, but when
they saw our ships, and knew wherefore we came, we made them soon take a way
their bridge again, for fear we should take their bridge away from them, and
carry our great Gunnes over, and beat down the town about their ears, and
made them in a woeful case, that they were sometimes in the mind to give up
the town to the Saint, and sometimes in mind to give it to the Spaniards, and
^t last they were in the mind to run away, and did run away a great many
out of the town daily, if they could have told how to have got out of the
Harbor, for they could not hold the town above six or ten days longer,
the Christians did all escape so to our General, but we did look out with our
boats close in the shore, and before the Harbors mouth, that they could not
stir; and if chance they had got out of the Harbor from our boats, our
ships in the Road; were all ready to set sail, and to cut our Cables in the
Harse, and all our sails in smiting being ready to set sail after them, at an
instant.

The 27. 27.
day of July there came letters to our General from the King of Morocus, and
Master Robert Black a Merchant and Interpreter for the Kings Ambassador to our
General; and in that ship was the old Governor, that was sent away in
chains unto the King of Morocus, and had made his peace with the King, so the
King sent him to be Governor in Sally again, with a Proviso that he could
make his peace with our General about our Christians, for the town of new
Sally was very near the matter to be none of the King of Morocu's, nor he to
be entertained for Governor again, had not our gracious King with his ships
given him possession of it, he had never been King of Sally in this world, for
we had notice of their coming a week before they came, and our General sent
his warrant and the Providence, and one ship more, and a small Friget out at
Sea, to look for their coming.

The same day our Pinnace the Providence met with him, and commanded him a
board our ship the Leopard, and he was kept prisoner till the next day, and our
General threatened to hang him, at which he trembled very much, and was sore
afrai^ of it, and our General sent for all the Captains aboard, and Called a
Council of War, and it was agreed upon, th^r the Kings, Alcade, and Master
Robert Blake should go ashore first into the new town, and see how they would
intertaine the Kings Alcade, and how they would intertaine the old Governor
again. And the 28. day, they sent a boat aboard unto our General with eleven
Christians that were the Governors slaves or most of them, and Merchants some
of them to my knowledge, and told him if be would send the Governor ashore,
he should have all the Christians aboard; and it was agreed upon that they
should bring all our Christians aboard in their boats, and the old Governor
was sent a shore, and they did receive him very thankfully again, for had not
he and the Kings Alcade come as they did, the town had been the Saints and
ours, but God would not have it so, and they did make as much haste to bring
our Christians aboard as they could, because they would have us gone out of the
Road.

August. 8.
The eight day of August, August. 8.
we had all our Christans aboard our ships, and all their names, and in what
towns they formerly dwelt, as you shall see in a List following God willing.

The same day toward night our General sent four of our ships away to rove
and to range the Coast of Spain, and to look for Turks men of war, Pirates
or others, the Antilop, the Hercules, the Providence, the Expedition, two
ships, two Pinna^es.

12.
And the twelfth day the Mary Rose, 12.
and the Roe Bucke, did come into Sally Road out of England, with a new
supply, not knowing what we had done; but the Moors of new Sally, seeing two
ships with the Kings Colors, they were mad to see more ships come into
the Road of Sally, and we must stay still to take in the Kings Alcade, and
Master Robert Black, and four of the best men in Sally, to go to the King of
Morocus for pledges, and to see the peace confirmed between the King of
England, and the King of Morocus.

August. 21.
August the 21. Aug. 21.
we set sail out of Sally Road.

23.
And the twenty third day we came to an Anchor in Saffee Road, 23.
twenty fathom water.

September. 19.
And the nineteenth of September, Sept. 19
at six aclocke at night, the Ambassador came aboard with all his men to go
for England in the Leopard.

21.
The twenty one day of September, 21.
at 4. aclocke in the afternoon, we set sail out of Saffee Road, with the
wind at South Southwest, little wind and calm all night.

23.
The twenty third day at eight of the clock in the morning, 23.
Cape canteene did bear East South-east, 7 leagues from us.

October. 4.
The fourth of October, October.
in the morning at eight of the clock, we sounded and had 110. fathom of
water, the ground was great red sand, with some small black sand, and some
white shells, and other small white pieces, and some round stones.

5.
The fifth day at noone, 5.
a North-east and by North way, 31. leagues in degrees, 49, and 41 minutes, the
wind at South, and South-west. The same day at 2. of the clock in the
afternoon, which did bear from us at noone North, eight leagues off, and the
Lizard North-East and by Nore Northerly, 20 leagues at noone, we sounded 55.
fathom water off Scylla, and did see land upon the deck at two of the clock,
the wind at South South-west.

6.
The sixth day in the morning at nine of the clock, 6
we did lie by the Lee of the Bery, a mile off the shore to land all our
Christians, that day at night they were all landed at Tarbay, that we brought
from Sally which were Cap^ives.

7.
The seventh day at seven of the clock at night, 7.
we came to an Anchor in the Downs, nine fathom water.

8.
The eighth day being Sunday, 8.
in the forenoone, we did set the King of Morocus Ambassador ashore in the
Downs, and at two of the clock in the afternoon, we set sail, the wind at
South South-east, and at five aclocke in the afternoon we came to Anchor in
eight fathom water in Marget Road, with very much wind, at South South-east
we did ride all night.

9.
The ninth day, 9.
at eight in the morning, we set sail out of Marget Road, the wind at South
South-west, and at one of the clock in the afternoon, we came to an Auchor
at Quinborow in nine fathom water, and there stayed for a fair wind to go up
to Chatham, and there to deliver his Majesty's Ship over the Chain in safety.

Captain William Rainsbrough, Captain of the Leopard, and General of the
South Squadron of the Sally Fleet.

Captain George Carteret Captain of the Antilop, and Vice Admiral.

Captain Brian Harrison, Captain of the Hercules, Rere-Admirall.

Captain George Hatch, Captain of the Mary.

Captain Edward Symons, Captain of the Providence.

Captain Thomas White, Captain of the Expedition.

Captain Trunchfield, Captain of the Mary Rose:

And Master Broad of Rederiffe, Master and Commander of the Row-bucke.

The Leopard in burden 600. tons 36. great gunnes, 180. Seamen.

The Antilope in burden 600 tons, 36. great gunnes, 180 Seamen.

The Hercules in burden 400. tons, 28. great gunnes, 140. Seamen.

The Mary in burden 400 tons, 28. great gunnes 140. Seamen.

The Providence Pinnace, in burden near upon 300. tons, with 14 great
gunnes, 100. Seamen.

The Expedition, in burden near upon 300 tons, with 14. great gunnes, 100.
Seamen.

The Mary Rose in burden near upon 400. tons, with 28 great gunnes, 100
Seamen.

The Row Bucke in burden 80 tons, 10. great gunnes 50 Seamen.

All these good Ships with the Captives are in safety arrived in England, we
give God thanks.

And God bless King Charles, and all those that love him.

Hampton Court, the 20. of October. 1637.
This Iournall and Map may be Printed. Ex mandato Sae. Rae. Matis.

R. Weekherlin.




