AN EPISTLE OF the Lady Jane a right virtuous woman, To a learned man of late
fallen from the truth of Gods most holy word, for fear of the world.

Read it, to thy consolacion.

Whereunto is added the communication that she had with master Feckenham upon
her faith, and belefe of the Sacraments.

Also another Epistle which she wrote to her sister, with the words she spoke
upon the Scaffold before she suffered. Anno. M. D. Liiii.

SO oftas I call to mind the dreadful, and fearful sayings of god: that he
which lays hold upon the plough, and looks back again, is not meet for
the kingdom of heaven. And on the other side, to remember the comfortable
words of our savior Christ, to all those that forsaking them selves, do follow
him, I can not but meruel at thee, and lament thy case. That thou, which some
time wast the lively member of Christ: but now the defourmed impe of the devil,
some time the beutiful temple of God: but now the stinking and filthy kenell
of Satan, some time the unspotted spouse of Christ, but now the unshamefast
paramour of Antichrist, sometime my faithful brother: but now a stranger and
Apostata yea some time a stout christen soldier: but now a cowardly runawaye.
So often as I consider the threatninges and promises of god to al those that
faith fully love him: I can not but speak to the, yea, rather cry out upon the,
thou sede of Satan, and not of Judah whom the devil has deceived, the world
has begiled, and desire of life has subverted and made the of a Christian,
aninfidel. wherefore have thou taken upon the, the testament of the lord in thy
mouth? wherefore have thou hitherto yielded thy body to the fire, and blodi
hands of cruel tirauntes? where fore haste thou instructed other to be strong
in Christ, when thou thy self do now so horribly abuse the testament and
law of the lord: when thou thy self preachedst (not to steal) yet most
abhominably stealest (not from men) but from God, and as a most heinous
sacreleger, robbest, Christ thy Lord, of his right, of his members, thy body
and thy soul* when thou thy self do rather chose to live miserably (with
shame) to the world then to dye, and gloriouslye with honor to taigne with
Christ, In whom? even in death, theris life. And when I say thou thy self art
most weke, thou ought, to show thy self most strong. For the strength of
a forte, is not known before the assault, but thou yeldest thy hold, before
any battry be made.

Oh wretched and vnhappi man what art thou but dust and ashes? And will thou
resist thy maker that formed the, and fashioned the, will thou now forsake him
that called the from costome gathering, among the Romish antichtistians to be
an imbassadour and messenger of his eternal word, he that first framed the:
and since thy creation, and birth preserved the: no rished the: and kept the:
yea, and in spired the with the spirit of knoledge: (I cannot say of grace)
shall he not possess the? Dare thou deliver up thy self to another, being
not thine own, but his? How can, thou having knowledge, or how dare thou
neglect the law of the lord: and follow the vain tradicions of men? And where
as thou have been a public professor of his name, become now a defacer of his
glory. I will thou refuse the true GOD: and worship the inuencio of man,
The golden Calfe, the whore of Babylon, the Romish religion, the abominable
idol, the most wicked mass: wylt thou torment again, rent and tear the most
precious bodi, of our Savior Christ, with thy bodily and fleshly teeth?
without the breaking whereof upon the cross, our sinful sins could else
nowaies be redeemed. will thou take upon the to offer up any sacrifice unto God
for our sins? Consydering that Christ offered up him self (as Paul says) upon
the cross a lively sacrifice once for all.

Can neither the punisment of the Israelites (which for their ido latrye so often
they received) move the, neither the terrible threateninges of the ancient
prophets, stirrethee, nor the cursses of gods own mouth, fear the to honor
any other god then him? VVylte thou so regard him, that spared not his dear
and only son for the, so deminishing, yea, utterly extinguishing his glory,
that thou will attribute the praise and honor to idols, which have mouths.
and speak not, eyes, and se not, eats and yet hear not: which shall perish
with them that made them? what says the prophet Barucke, where he recites the
epistel of Ieremi, written to the captive Jews? Did he not forewarne them,
that in Babylon they should se gods of gold, silver, wood, and stone, borne
upon men's shulders, to cast a fear before the heathen, but be not ye afraid of
them (says Jeremy) nor do as other do. But when you se other worship them,
say you in your hearts: it is thou (O Lord) that ought only to be
worshipped: for as for the timber of those gods, the Carpenter framed them and
polyshed them, yea, gylded be they, and laid over with silver, and vain
things: and can not speak. He shows moreover, the abuse of their deckings,
how the priests took of their ornaments, and appareled their women withal.
How one holds a Septer, another a sword in his hand, and yet can they
judge in no matter, nor defend them selves, much Iesse any other, from either
batte^ or murder, nor yet from gnawing of woormes, nor any other evil thing.
These, and such like words, speaks Jeremy unto them, where by he proves them
butvain things, and no gods. And at last he co^ cludeth thus: Confounded be
they that worship the^. They were warned by Ieremye, and thou as Jeremy, have
warned other, and art warned thy self, by many scriptures, in many places.

God says: he is a gelious god, which will have al honor, glory, and worship
given to him only. And Christ says in the fourth of Luke to Satan, which
tempted him: even to the same Satan, the same Belsabub, the same dyueil,
which has prevailed against thee. It is written (says he) thou shall
honor the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. These and such like
do prohibit thee and al Christians to worship any other God then which was
before all worlds: and laid the foundations both of heaven and earth. And
will thou honor a detestable idol, invented by Romish Popes, and the
abominable college of crafty Cardinals? Christ offered him self up once for all, and will thou offer him up again daily at thy pleasure? But thou will
say* thou do it for a good intent. Oh sincke of sin, Oh child of
perdicion: Do thou dream therein a good intent, where thy conscience bears
the witness, the promis of gods wrath toward the? How did Saul: who for that he
dysobeied the word of god for a good intent, was thrown from his worldli and
tem poral kingdom? Shall thou then, that do so deface gods honor, and rob
him of his right: inherit the eternal and heavenly kingdom? will thou for a
good intent pluk Christ out of heaven, and make his death void, and deface
the tryumphe of his cross, offering him up daily? VVylte thou either for
fear of death, or hope of life, deny and refusethi God, who enriched thy
pouerti, healed thine infirmity, and yielded to this victori, if thou could
have kept it? Does thou not consider that the thryde of life, hangs upon him
that made the: who can (as his will is) either twine it hard, to last the
longer, or untwine it again to break it the sooner? Do thou not remember
the saying of David a notable king, which teaches thee a miserable wretch, in
his, ciiii. Psalm, where he says: when thou take away thy spirit (O Lord)
from men, they dye, and ar turned again to their dust, but when thou let
thy breath go fourth, they shall be made, and thou shall renew the face of the
earth?

Remember the saying of Christ in his Gospel, who soever seeks to save his
life, shall loose it, but whosoever will lose it for mi sake, shall find it. And
in another place: whosoever loves father or mother above me: is not mete for
me. For he that will be my dysciple, must for sake Father and Mother, and him
self, and take up his cross and follow me. What cross? the cross of infamy,
and shame, of misery and poverty, of affliction and persecution for his names
sake.

Let the often faliing of those heavenly showers pearce thy stonye heart. Let the
two edged sword of gods holy word, shere a so^der the sewed together sino was
of world ly respects, even to the very mari of thy carnal heart, that thou
may once again forsake thy self, and embrace Christ. And like as good
subjects will not refuse to hasard al in the defense of his earthly and
temporal governor: So fly not like a white hewred milk soppe from thy
standing, wherein thy chief captain Christ has set the in a rai of this
life, Viriliter age co^fortetur cortuum, and sustine Dominum. Fight manfullye,
come life, come death, the quarrel is gods, and undoubtedly the victory is
ours. But thou will say: I will not break unity. what, not the unity of Satan
and his members? Not the unity of darkness, the agreement of Antichrist and his
adhearentes? Nay, thou deceiuest thy self with fond imaginations of such an
unity as is among the enemies of Christ. were not the false prophets in an
unity? were not Joseph's brethren, and Jacobs sons in an unity? were not the
heathen, as the Amelechites, the Feresites and Iebusites in an unity? I keep no
order but rather look to mi matter. were not the Scribes and Phariyses in an
unity? Does not king David testefie: Conuenerunt in vnu^, aduersus Dominum?
Yea, thieves and murderers conspyratours, have their unity.

But mark my friend (ye friend) if thou be not Gods enemy. There is no unity,
but where Christ knitteth the knotte among such as be his. Yea, be you well
assured, that where his truth is resident, the^ it is verefyed that he says:
Non veni mittere pacem in terram, sed gladium. That is, Christ came to set one
against another: the son against the father, the daughter against the mother.
Deceive not thy self therefore with the glysteryng and glorious name of unity.
For Antichrist has his unity, yet not in deed, but in name. The agreement of
every man, is not an unity, but a conspiracy.

Thou have heard some threateninges, some curses, and some admonishions out of
the Scripture, to those that love themselves above Christ. Thou have heard
also, the sharp and biting words, to those that deny him for love of life.
Says he not, that he that denies me before men, I will deny him, before my
father in heaven? And to the same effect writes Saint Paul. Hebru. vi. It
is impossyble (says he) that they which be once lightened and have tested of
the heavenly gift, and be partakers of the holy ghost, and have tasted of the
good word of God, if they fall and slide away, it is impossible that they should
be renewed again by repentance, crucifiynge again to them selves the son
of God, and making him a mocking stock. And again (says he) if we shall
willingly sin, after we have receined the knowledge of the truth, there is
no oblation left for sin, but the terrible expectation of judgment, and fire
which shall devour the adversaries. Thus S. Paul writes, and this thou
read. And do thou not quake and tremble? well, if these terrible and
thundering threat ninges cannot stur thee, to cleave unto Christ and forsake the
world: yet let the sweet consolacio^s and promises of the scriptures, let the
example of Christ and his Apostles, holy Martirs and Confessors, encourage the
to take faster hold by Christ. Harken what he says: blessed are you when men
revile you and persecute you for my sake, Rejoice, and be glad, for great is
your reward in heaven. For so persecuted they the prophets before you. Hear
what Esaias says: Fear not the curse of men, be not afraid of their
blasphem^es and reuylynges, for worms and mothes shall eat them up like clothe
and wol, but my rightousnes shall endure for ever, and my saving health, from
generation to generation. What art thou then (says he) that featest a mortal
man, the child of a man that fades away as does the flower, and forgettest
the Lord that made the, that spread out the heavens, and laid the foundations
of the earth. I am the Lord thy God that makes the sea to tage, and to be
still, who is the lord of hosts. I shall put my word in thy mouth, and defend
the, with the turning of a hand. And our savior Christ says to his disciples:
They shall accuse you, and bring you befote the princes and rulers, for mi
names sake. And some of you they shall persecute and kill, but fear you not
(says he) neither care you not what you shall say, for it is mi spirit that
speaks in you, the hand of the highest fhal defend you, for the heates of
your head are nombred, and none of them shall pearish. I have laid up treasure
for you (says he) where no thief can steal, nor moth corrupt, and happy are
you, if you endure to the end. Fear not them (says Christ) that have power
over the bodi only, but fear him that has power both over the bodi and soul.
The world loves her own, and if ye were of the world, the world would love you,
but you ar mine, therefore the world does hate you. Let these and such like
consolations, out of the Sctyptures, strengthen you to Godward. Let not the
ensamples of holy men and women, go out of your mind, as Daniel, and the teast
of the prophets, of the three Children, of Eleazarus that constant father, of
the vii. of the Machabes Children, of Peter, Paul, Steven, and other Apostles
and holy Martirs in the beginning of the church. As of good Simeo^ Archbishop
of Seloma, and zetrophone, with infynite other under Sapores the king of the
Persians and Indians, who co^tempned al torments devised by the tiraunts, for
their Saviors sake. Return, return, again into Christ's watre, and as
becomes a faithful watriour, put on that armor that S. Paul teaches to be
most necessatye for a Christian man. And above all things take to you the
shyelde of faith.

And be ye provoked by Christ's own example to withstand the devil, to
forsake the world, and to be come a true and faithful member of his mistical
body, who spared not his own body for our sins. Through we down thy self with
the fear of his thretned vengeance for this so great and heinous offense of
Apostasy, and comfort yout self on the other part with the mercy, blood and
promises of him that is ready to turn to you, when soever thou turn to him.
Disdain not to com again with the lost son saying you have so wandered with
him. Be not ashamed to turn again with him from the swil of strangers, to
the delicates of the most bening and loving father, Acknoledginge, that you
have sinned against heaven and earth. Against heaven by stainynge his glorious
name, and caused his most cinsere and pure word to be evil spoken of, through
you. Against earth, by offending your so many weak brethren, to whom you have
been a stomblinge block through your sudden slidinge.

Be not ashamed to come again with Marye, and to weep bitterly with Peter, not
only with sheding of tears out of your bodily eyes: but also pouring out the
streams of your heart, to wash away out of the sight of God, the filth and
mire of your offensive fall. Be not ashamed to say with the Publicane: Lord be
merciful to me a sinner. Remember the hortible history of Iulien of old, and
the lamentable case of Fraunces Spira of late, whose case (me thyncketh) should
be yet so grene in your remembrance, that being a thing of our time, you
should fear the like inconvenience, seeing that you are fallen into the like
offense. Last of al, let the lively remembrance of the last day be always
before your eyes, remembering the terror that such shall be in at that time, with
the tunnagates and fugetiues from Christ, which setting more by the world,
then by heaven, more by their life, the^ b^ him that gave the^ their life, did
shrink, yea did clean sal away from him that never forsook them. And contrary
wise the inestimable joys prepared for the^ that feared no parel, nor dreading
death, have manfully fought, and victoriouslye triu^phed oueral power of
darkness, over hell, death, and damnation, through their most redoubted captain
Christ, who now stretches out his arms to receive you, ready to fall upon your
neck and kiss you, and last of al to feast you with the deinties and
delicates of his own precious blood, which undoubtedly, if it might stand with
his determinate purpose, he would not let to shed again, rather then you should
be lost. To who^ with the father and the holy ghost, be honor, praise and
glory everlasting ly. Amen.

Be constant, be constant, fear not for pain:
Christ has redeemed the, and heaven is thy gain.

A CERTAIN COMMVNYcation, between the Lady Jane, and Master Feckenham, iiii.
days before her death, even word for word, her own hand being put thereto.
Feckenham fitst speaks.
WHat thing is required in a Christian?


Jane. To believe in God the Father, in God the son, in god the holy ghost,
three persons and one God.


Fecken. Is there nothing else required in a Christian, but to believe in God?


Jane. Yes, we must believe in him, we must love him, with all our heart, with all
our soul, and al our mind, and our neighbor as our self.


Fecken. Why the^ faith justifies not, nor saves not.


Jane. Yes verily, says (as S. Paul says) only justifies.


Fec. whi. s. Paul says: if I have al faith without love, it is nothing.


Jane. True it is, for how can I love him, in whom I trust not? Or how can I
trust in him, who^ I love not? faith and love agrees both together, and yet
love is comprehended in faith.


Fecken. How shall we love our neighbor?


Jane. To love our neighbor, is to feed the hungri, clothe the naked, and
give drink to the thirsty, and to do to him, as we would do to our selves.


Feck. why then it is necessary to salvation to do good works, and it it not
sufficient to believe.


Jane. I deny that, and I affirm that faith only saves. But it is mete for
Christians in token that they follow their master Christ, to do good works, yet
may we not say that they profit to salvation. For although we have al don all that we ca^, yet we be unprofitable servants, and the faith only in
Christ's blood, saves.


Fecken. How many sacrameutes be there?


Jane. Two, the one the sacrament of Baptism, and the other the sacrament of
our Lords suppet.


Fecken. No, there be. vii.


Jane. By what scripture find you that?


Fecken. well, we will talk there of hereafter. But what is signified by your
two sacraments? Ian. By the sacrament of baptism, I am washed with water, and
regenerated by the spirit, and that washing is a toke^ to me, that I am the
child of God. The sacrament of the lords supper is offered unto me as a sure
seal and testimoni, that I am by the blood of Christ which (...) shed for
me on the cross, mad^ partaket, of the everlasting kingdom.


Feck. why* what do you receive in that bread? Do you not receive the very body
and blood of Christ?


Jane. No surely, I do not believe so, I thinck that at that supper sireceiue
neither flesh, nor blood, but only bread and wine. The which bread when it is
broken, and the wine when it is drunk, puts me in mind, how that for my
sins the body of Christ was broken, and his blood shed on the cross, and with
that bread and wine, I receive the benefits that came by breaking of his bodi,
and by the sheddyng of his blood on the cross for mi sins.


Feck. why does not Christ speak these words* take, eat, this is my bod^?
Require we any plainer words? Does not he say that it is his body?


Jane. I grant he says so, and so he says: I am the vine, I am (...), but
yet he is never the mote, the vine nor do^e. Does not S. Paull say, that he
calls those things that are not as though they were? God forbid that I should
say that I eat the very natural bodi and blood of Christ, for then either I
should pluk away my rede^tio^, either else there were.ii. bodies, or.ii. christ's or
else. ii. bodies, the one body was tormented on the cross, and then if they did
eat another body, the^ either he had. ii. bodies, either else if his bodi were
eaten, it was not broken upon the cross, or else if it were broken upon the
cross, it was not eaten of his disciples.


Feck. whi is it not as possible, that Christ by his power could make his
body both to be eaten and broken, as to be bore^ of a woman, without the sede
of man, and as to walk on the sea, having a body, and other such like miracles
as he wrought by his power only?


Jane. Yesvereli if god would have done at his supper a miracle, he might have
don so, but I say he minded no work nor miracle, but only to break his bodi,
and shed his blud on the cross for our sins. But I pray you answer me to this
one question, where was Christ when he said: Take, eat, this is my body? was
not he at the table when he said so? He was at that time alive, and suffered
not, til the next day. well, what took he, but bread? and what brake he, but
bread? and what gave he, but bread? Look what he took, he brake, and look
what he brake, he gave, and look what he gave, that did they eat, and yet all this while he him self was at supper before his disciples or else they were
deceived.


Feck. You ground your faith, upon such authors as say and un say, both with a
breathe, and not upon the church, to who^ you ought to give credyt.


Jane. No, I ground my faith upon gods word, and not upon the church. For if
the church be a good church, the faith of the church must be tried by gods
word, and not gods word by the church, neither yet mi faith. Shall I believe the
church, because of antiquity? Or shall I give credit to that church, that
takes away from me, that half part of the Lords supper, and will let no lai
man receive it in both kinds: but themselves? which thing if they deny to us,
they deny us part of our salvation, and I say that is an evil church, and not
the spouse of Christ, but the spouse of the devil, that altreth the Lords
supper, and both takes from it, and adds to it. To that church I say, God
will add plages, and from that church will he take their part out of the book
of life. Do you not learn that of S. Paul, when he ministered it to the
Corinthians in both kinds? Shall I believe that church? God forbid.


Fecken. That was done of a good intent of the church to avoid an heresi that
spro^g on it.


Jane. whi, shall the church alter gods will and ordinances, for a good intent?
How did king Saul the lord define. with these and such like persuasions. He
would have had me to have leaned to the church, but it would not be. There were
many mo things, whereof we reasoned, but these were the chief.


Be me Jane Dudley.

These words were spoken openly. After this Master Feckenham took his leave
saying: that he was sorry for her. For (said he) I am sure we two shall never
mete* Trothe it is (quoth she) that we shall never mete, unless god turn your
heart* For I am sure (unless you repent and turn to God) you ar in an evil case,
and I pray to god, in the bowels of his mercy, to send you his holy spirit.
For he has given you his great gift of vtteraunce, if it please him to open
the eyes of your heart to his truth And so she departed.

AN EXORTATION written by the Lady Jane the night before she suffered, in the
end of the New Testament in Greek, which she sent to her sister, Lady
Katetine.
I Have here sent you good sister Katetine, a book: which although it be not
outwardly trimmed with gold, yet inwardli it is more worth the^ precious
stones. It is the book (dear Sister) of the Law of the Lord. It is his
testament and last will, which he bequethed unto us wretches, which shall
lead you to the path of eternal joy. And if you with a good mind read it,
and with an ernest desire follow it, it shall bring you to an immortal and
everlasting life. It will teach you to live and learn you to dye. It shall
win you more, then you should have gained by the possession of your woeful
fathers lands For as if God had prospered him you should have inherited his
lands: so if you appli diligently this book, seking to direct your life after
it, you shall be an inheritour of such riches, as neither the covetous shall
withdtaw from you, nether the theife shall steal, neither yet the mothes
corrupt. Desire with David (good sister) to understand the law of the lotd
your god. Live still to dye, that you by death may purchase eternal life. And
trust not that the te^dernes of your age, shall le^gthen your life: For as soon
(if God call) goth the young as the old. And labor always to learn to die.
Deny the world, defy the devil, and dispisethe flesh and delight your self
only in the Lord. Be penitent for your sins and yet despair not: Be strong
in says, and yet presume not: and desire with S. Paull, to be dissolved, and
to be with Christ, with whom, even in death there is life.

Be like the good servant, and even at midnight be wakig: Least when death
comes and steal upon you like a these in the night, you be with the devils
servant found sleping: and least for lack of oil ye be found like the five
folishe women, and like him that had not on the wedding garment, and the^ you
be cast out from the Marriage. Rejoice in Christ, as I trust ye do. And saying
ye have the name of a Christian, as nere as ye can, follow the steps of your
master Christ, and take up your cross, lay your sins on his back, and
always embrace him. And as touching my death, rejoice as I do (good sister)
that I shall be delivered of this corruption, and put on uncorruption. For I am
assured, that I shall for losing of a mortal life, win an immortal life. The
which I pray God grant you, send you of his grace to live in his fear, and
to die in the true Christian says. From the which in gods name I exhort you
that ye never swar ue, neither for hope of life, ner fear of death For if ye
will deny his truth, to le^g then your life: God will deny you, and yet shorten
your days, And if ye will cleave to him, he will prolong your days, to your
comfort and his glory. To the which glory, God bring me now, and you
hereafter, when it shall please god to call you. Far well good sister and put
your only trustin God, who only must help you. Amen.

Your loving sister, Jane Dudley.

The Lady Ianes words upon the Scaffold.
GOod Christen people, I am under a law and by a law I am coudempned to dye,
not for any thing I have offended the queen's Maiesti, for I will wash my hands
giltles thereof, but only for that I co^se^ted to the thing which I was enforced
unto. Not withstanding I have offended almyghtie god, for that I have felowed
over much the lust of mi flesh, and the pleasure of this wretched world, and I
have not lived according to the knowledge that God has given me, whetfote God
harh plaged me now with this kind of death, and that worthelye according to
my deserts. How be it I thancke him hartelie that he has given me time to
repent my syns here in this world, wherefore good Christian people, I shall
desire you all to pray with me, and for me while I am now alive, that god of
his goodness will forgive me my sins. And I pray you al to bear me witness,
that I here dye a true Christian woman, and that I trust to be saved by the
blood of Jesus Christ, and by none other means, and now I pray you al, pray
for me and with me, and so said the psalm of Miserere mei, that don, she said
Lord save my soul, which now I commend into thy hands, and so prepared
herself meekelie to the block.

Finis.

