Finis (...) ^ax.

DEO PROPITIO.

Cedant arma togae

EMBLEMA ANIMAE OR Morrall Discourse reflecting upon Humanity.

Written By John du Plesis now Cardinal of Richleu.

Translated by I. M.

Also Variety of Observations delightful to the mind.

LONDON Printed by Nic: and Joh: Oaks. 1635.

^^^reat L^lium.

Deus Proxima.

Will Marshall. Sculpsit.
engraved title page

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader:
THere are three sorts of Men. Natural, Moral, Divine; and all are partakers
of Blessings, though not alike: The Natural has that of Beasts, he lives, he
feeds, and dies before he can be said to be. The Moral that of Men, which is
endued with Reason, which guides him to the knowledge of Arts, of Wisdom, of
the perfection of Nature, the Solace of the Body, and Tranquillity of Mind.
And he lives the life of a Worthy man, and leaves behind him a lasting Memory.
The Divine, he flies a higher pitch then all, his Soul is mounted on the
Wings of Contemplation, and having already all Moral instructions, he soars
with the Eagle to attain those Heavenly Mysteries, which GOD himself has
Revealed, and never leaves till he has seated himself by a prepared flight,
and happy death in the high Tribunal of that Holy of Holies.

Courteous Reader, the Author of this little Book (who writ it, though long
since, in French) had liberal Education which diverted him from pitching upon
the first. And the Controversies of the Times would not permit his Free soul
to instruct the last. So that Retiring himself into a mean betwixt them both,
he writ this little Book, and Entitled it Emblema Animae, which though
Moral, yet he that Understands, may find both GOD and Nature in it, and in
mine opinion, he makes the best Concord, that joins these together, where we
may find Man in Nature, that in Him, and GOD in them both.

The Wri^er or Composer of this little Volumne, being a man of great Eminency
and Learning, whose Fame divulgeth it self daily to the World. I hope, is
enough to commend it without my weak applause. For my part, as I was the
Translatour, I assume nothing to my self; but only desire for my labor, that
it may be entertained friendly, and cersured charitably: this is all that I
shall require at thy hand, gentle Reader, and in lieu whereof, thou shall ever
have my Wishes, that what he has Writ may work happy effects in thee; and
this is the part of a Friend.

J. MAXVVEL.

THE CONTENTS of this present Book.
Discourse 1. How we must prepare our selves against the assaults and onset of
our passions. page 1 Disc. 2. Of the choice of our Callings, Charges, and
Affairs. p. 11 Disc. 3. Of Providence and foresight. p. 18 Disc. 4. Of each
man's Vocation and Calling. pa. 28 Disc. 5. Of a Man's Ruling and Ordering his
Life. pa. 41 Disc. 6. Of the diversity of Actions. page 47 Disc. 7. Of the
choice of friends. page. 58 Disc. 8. Of dissembling and disguising of humors.
page 63 Disc. 9. Of Vanity. p. 70 Disc. 10. Of Prosperity. pa. 76 Disc. 11. Of
comparing of our Fortune with that of others. page 86 Disc. 12. Of adversity.
p. 103 Disc. 13. Of sadness and sorrow. page 125 Disc. 14. Of the Afflictions
of good men. p. 129 Disc. 15. Of other men's faults and imperfections. p. 133
Disc. 16. Of injuries, indignities and wrongs. p. 184 Disc. 17. Of Death our
last Discourse, and our last debt. p. 181. The Authors conclusion, and
advertisement.
A Table of the chiefest matters contained in the ensuing discourse, etc.
THe four parts of the World. page 197 The four Monarchies. p. 199 The six
Ages of the World. p. 203 The seven Wisemen of Greece. page 212 The ten
Sybils. pa. 213 The twelve Apostles with their Martyrdoms. p. 223 The ten
persecutions of Christians under the Roman Emperors. page 230 The eight times
that Rome has been taken. page 232 The seven Electors of the Emperors of
Germany. pa. 239 The three Crowns of the Emperor. page 241 The twelve Peers
or Pairs of France. page 241 The eight Parliaments of France. pa. 245 The
seven Saxon Kingdoms that England was once divided into. Five Orders of
Chiualry which continue at this day amongst Princes. pa. 254 The thirteen
Cantons of Swisserland. pa. 265
EMBLEMA ANIMAE: OR MORAL DISCOURSES REFLECTING UPON HUMANITY.
DISCOVRSE. 1. Of Preparation against the assaults and onsets of Passions.
MAN'S Happiness on earth, (next to the knowledge of Christ and his Maker)
depends upon his own Actions, which duly considered, and that the Soul is,
as it were, the fountain and welspring thereof, our chiefest care (if we desire
to lead an happy life) ought to be spent in quieting and making calm that
better part within us, endeavoring by all means, that it be not troubled, nor
diseased by vulgar and popular opinions, they being things much contrary to the
excellency of the nature and essence thereof.

A Passion is a violent motion of the soul in the sensitive part thereof,
which is either made to follow that which the soul thinks to be good for it,
or to fly that which it takes to be evil: And there are sundry sorts of them,
which are therefore called Passions; to put a difference betwixt them and the
fancies of the soul, which are naturally inbred in it. Now ther^ are two
seasons, the one of prosperity, the other of adversity wherein the soul is
wont to be vexed and tossed with those of the inferior part, as with so many
violent and impetuous winds. And therefore we must herein imitate Mariners,
who before they loose off from the Port, do furnish themselves with all things
necessary and needful for resisting of Tempests and storms: and provide our
selves aforehand of such sound and substantial discourse, as may anchor and
stay the mind against the push of our passions, when as they, like so many
surging waves, do nil we, will we, overflow into our Boat; and as Xenophon
did exhort his fellow Citizens to sacrifice unto God in time of prosperity, to
the end they might find him the more ready and favorable, when as they should
invoke him in their adversity: So must we do, and even at our first leisure,
contract acquaintance with rectified reason, to the end, that when we shall
stand in need of her aid and assistance, she may come running to us, as
knowing us by our voice, and having already an affectionate and earnest desire
for our defense.

For Reason is the office of Virtue, and not of fleeting inconstant Opinion, or
tumultuous passion; but is man's bonus Genius, his good spirit, in such sort,
that he cannot without shame stumble; and the discourse of rectified Reason is
both the master and daunter of all peevish and perverse affections: for, when
as we have once taken good notice of them by an earnest examination and trial,
made and had touching the same; and that we have ripely and advisedly weighed
both what power they have over us, and what Empire we hold over them: They are
not thereafter so fierce and furious in our behalf, but are more easily, and
with much less labor appeased and pacified. They therein not a little
resembling our little dogs, which will bark uncessantly at such as they are
wont to see and know; but by and by are quieted as soon as they hear the
voices of them.

The Empiry or seat of the mind, when it is fixed in its proper Sphere, is
Wisdom, Science and Art being the two supporting pillars, and these three are
the mistress parts of a reasonable soul, whose governor and guide being the
mind, the Wise have compared the commandment of it above this sensual and
terrestrial part of the soul, out of which our passions do spring, unto the
office of a Rider, who teaching and training his Horse, and sitting within the
sadle, manageth and turns him at his will. But if he should bring a young
Horse to the Turney or Tilt, which had never before borne the Bit, or galloped
the round, he must needs reap great discredit thereby; as not having before
broken him with convenient Discipline, fit for a management of so great
importance. In like manner, before we put our backs under the burden of any
business, or expose our selves unto the public view of the world, we must
endeavor to break and bring under this wild and unbacked part of the soul,
and make it, as it were, to bite upon the Bit, by bringing it to learn the
laws and measures whereby it must be managed, and mastered in all occasions,
and at all occurrences: and in the mean time, we must not forget to enhearten
and encourage it, by acquainting it with the pleasure and contentment,
wherewith is accompanied the issue and end of all worthy and virtuous actions.

Meditation is a secret lifting up of the soul from vanity, and a fixation of
the mind upon things really good and honest; and it is much helped by
Eloquence, which being a purity and elegancy of Speech, stirs up discourse in
the apprehensive parts of man: and when it is connext with Meditation, they
both give an edge unto the soul, and make it steele-hard unpierceable, even
unto the sharpest point of the strongest passions; and usually we prove
admirable at every such exercise, when we have before hand accustomed our
selves unto, what difficulty soever they may seem to carry with them. On the
other side, there is nothing (be it never so easy) which will not seem hard
and difficult, and withal much trouble us, if we are found but novices, and
new apprentices therein. How often think ye, must Canius have meditated upon
death, and revolved in his mind what thing it should be, who being condemned by
the Tyrant, and sent to the place of execution, was so far from being any
whit dismayed thereat in his mind, that merrily, and as it were jestingly, he
bid the Centurion, who came for him, remember that he was stronger by the
advantage of one Chesseman, then he against whom he played at that hour? And
who taking his leave of his nearest and dearest Acquaintance, for his last
farewell, uttered no other words but these: Now my dear friends, I shall
presently find that which I have so long longed after, and so much desired to
know; if the soul be immortal, and whether men in dying, do feel the
separation of the Soul and Body which they endure? We must needs think that
this man, though a Heathen, had a long time exercised himself in commanding
and overruling his passions; and that he had aforehand armed and fenced
himself with fair resolutions, seeing that with such constancy and gravity he
went to undergo a death both cruel and unjust. If the only desire to
understand what should become of the soul after death, could make the torment
and torture not only tolerable, but also acceptable unto him: What resolution
then ought the certain and assured knowledge of the Souls immortality,
together with the hope of eternal felicity, work in such as do seriously
meditate upon the same in their minds? May not these goods, think ye, make
unto such minds not only supportable, but even comfortable and delectable,
both Death it self, and all other disastrous afflictions which they endure,
seeing they are as waves which do push us forward unto the sweet and sure port
of everlasting rest and repose?

DIS. 2. Of the choice of Callings and Affairs.
EPAMINONDAS Prince of Thebes, so hated idleness, that finding one of his
Captains asleep in the day time, he slew him; for which act being reprooved by
his Nobles, he answered, I left him as I found him; comparing idle men to dead
men. And truly man is not borne to live idly; but rather, as one of the
fairest members of this fair frame, he must-conferre, and contribute his
whole travail and pain to the conduction and conservation of that civil
society and condition wherein he is placed. And because in the choice which
men make of a calling, their rest and quietness does principally depend, and
that nothing does so much avail to the leading of a contented life, as when
they find themselves fit for the same: They ought before all other things, to
take a trial and survey of their own strength, and seriously bethink
themselves of that charge which they are about to embrace: seeing usually we
presume too much upon our own power, and attempt more then our ability is fit
to atchieve; this error is incident almost to all our actions. And hence it
is, that some will dispend more then their means may well bear: And others in
laboring and toyling, go beyond their abilities; some are not masters of
their own anger; others dallying, disporting, and playing the pleasant, will
not spare any person, no not the Prince, although thereby they should incur
the danger of hazarding their Heads. Some are unapt to manage public
affairs, being either of a fullen and solitary humor, or of a slack and slow
disposition. Others it does not beseem to be at Court; for that they be either
obstinate in opinion, or uncourteous in behavior. And that which makes us to
fall into these faults, is that we do not thoroughly see and look into our
selves. Whence it comes to pass, that neglecting to take a true trial of
our own ability, we often undertake employments of such gravity and weight,
as that afterward we must either abandon them with ignorance and shame; or
else if we go on with them, we must needs suffer much trouble and anxiety of
spirit.

Now that a man may the more warily weigh his occasions, or affairs, before he
put under his back; let him remember, that always the bearer must have more
pith then the burden for if it be huge and too heavy, who sees not that the
undertaker must be constrained either to leave, or else to lie down under it;
and consider, that there are diverse kinds of affairs, some whereof are hard
and uneasy; not so much for that they be weighty and important of themselves,
as for that they be matched and mingled with a multitude of toylesome and
troublesome businesses which follow them? Therefore actions of this kind, are
to be shunned, because they do very much disquiet the mind. And we should
rather make choice of such affairs, as we may well and easily execute, or at
least with a reasonable industry bring to an end. For always it is a good
thing to desist from the profecuting of our begun businesses, when as we shall
find, that they take not such a course and way, as in the beginning was
proposed and expected by the undertaker. I say not this to affray, or dismay,
nor so to discourage any man, as to make him decline and eschew the undertaking
of necessary and needful employments, because of the manifold encombrances and
cares wherewith they may be accompanied: so that not daring to intermeddle
with any matter of moment, he should abide without some business and charge,
which were to lead a life both unprofitable and unpleasant: Nature prompting
every man to listen to somewhat, and chiefly unto such things as be expedient
and profitable for the Commonwealth. But I mean to insinuate, that seeing the
life of man is naturally subject unto perplexities and pains, it behooveth him
so wisely, and warily to demean himself, that if it be his fortune to be
called to the undertaking of virtuous and laudable actions, he neither be so
feeble-hearted, as to shun or relinquish them for their difficulty; nor yet
so foole-hardy, as to undertake such affairs as go beyond the reach of his
power. And if the narrow room of Poverty, or ample palace of Honor has
either advanced any beyond employment, or taken them from it, there is no
Vocation so lawful and just as Religion: Therefore let none despair of
business; for here he shall find both labor, and rest; labor in searching
out the Knowledge of God, and himself: Of God, repleate with Wisdom and
Mercy; and that in his Son, humbled, weakened, debased; Of himself, dust,
ashes, earth; and grass: And rest, in the saving Love of the one, and well
performed Duty of the other. And this Exercise is most fit for a Christian; and
above all, for them, on whom God has bestowed no other Talent.

DISC. 3. Of providence and fore sight.
A Wise man in time of peace makes his preparation for war: a good Mariner
before he go forth of the haven, makes provision of what is necessary to
resist the violence of a tempest; it is too late to provide against an evil,
when it is already come, and O how much are we deceived, and how little
judgment have we, when we think that that which happens to others, can not
likewise fall upon us. Therefore take order that ye be not surprised by any
humane accident that ye have not beforehand prudently foreseen, which thing
ye shall easily perform, if in all the affairs ye shall take in hand, ye
diligently fore-think your self of such it conveniences and cross encounters
as may fall out, according to the nature, quality, and ordinary issue of your
affairs; and such provisoes do marvailously mitigate, sweeten, and abate the
sharpness, and harshnesse of all sinister accidents and chances: which cannot
then bring any sensible, or notable alteration, by reason of their not coming
unlooked for, but contrarily do endamage such persons as suffer themselves to
be surprised, not considering how that nature sending them into this world,
has allotted them rough, and uneasy feats. Such men do not mind how that
about their own door; many times they have with their eyes seen loving wives
weeping and bewailing their deceased husbands, and husbands with dewy eyes
burying their beloved wives, and dear children. They do not ponder how that
such persons as did yesterday walk, and talk with them, to day dead, lie
buried in their graves. So ap^are we to be deceived, and so little foresight
have we in our own fortune, that what we see daily with our eyes happen unto
others, we never or seldom consider that the like may befall our selves.

If we would take notice of things as we ought, we should rather find
occasion to marvel how that disasters and dangers which do follow us at the
heels, have delaied so long to overtake us, and having overtaken us, how it
could be possible that they should have handled us so harmelesly, and gently
as they have don. But we grossly deceive our selves, when as for fear that men
take us to be timorous and fearful, we think ill to forecast and foresee
dangers, and will not a whit mistrust our own judgment. It behooveth the
Pilot who is minded to set sail, to know that he is in possibility of a
storm; so we must know that the chance which has happened to one, may
likewise befall unto us, and that which hangs over the heads of all, may fall
upon any one, without exemption or exception whatsoever. That which some make
light by long suffering, a wife man makes light and easy by long Cogitation.
He considers exactly the nature of all things that may offend him, and
presents unto himself whatsoever may happen unto him most grievous and
insuportable, as sickness, poverty, injuries and examineth in them all that
which is according to nature, or contrary to it; he marketh well another
misfortune as a thing which may no less befall unto himself, then it has
already done unto his fellow, and has this advantage, that before any such
mischance take hold of him, he is already armed against the f^ry and force of
the evil. He knows that it is too late for a man to make head against a
danger, when it is already come, and bootlesse to say, I did not think, that
such a misfortune should have befalne me. And that there is not any wealth in
this world which has not following after it poverty, or any health that is not
apt to be diminished by a lingering disease, or any honor which is not in
possibility to be turned into dishonor and disgrace? or any high rising which
is not apt to downfall? or any estate from the peddler even to the Prince,
exempt from alteration, so that which has befalne to one may likewise befall
another? he that stands, let him take heed lest he fall: it is a thing far
more easy to be cast headlong, then to rise up to eminency, and in a man's
trouble this is the most assured comfort, that in his pristine providence he
has armed him self agains: those present evils which now have light upon
him. It were a matter both tedious, and contrary to our design, to discourse
of such as fortune (if so we may speak) from high degree brought low; and of
mighty men in a moment made miserable. In such a variety and vicissitude of
matters, if ye do not fore-thinke how that all humane accidents may touch you,
as well as others, ye give adversities great power over you, which by the
prudence of him that foreseeth them, are not a little abated, and made more
mild. Against public evils, a man ought to consider from whom and by whom
they are sent, and to mark their cause. It is God his providence, from whence
comes and depends an absolute necessity, which governs and rules all,
and whereunto all things are subject: and if we desire in any thing to be like
him, our minds out of question, would be in greater rest: Let every man
therefore employ his actions about such things as be of a more certain and
constant condition: So shall he sit down with content, and enjoy the
sweetness and commodity of tranquillity and ease.

But seeing that in this world, all things are subject to tottering and turning
and that there is nothing under the Cope of Heaven stable and firm: the Remedy
most fit unto our infirmity; is to foresee this instability, and not to
passionate, and turmoyle ourselves about those things, the possession whereof
is no less toylesome and troublesome, then was the acquisition and purchase
thereof. And therefore we must love them as things which may leave us, and
withal, have so much foresight, that they never leave us first. When on a time
it was told Anaxagoras that his Son was dead: I knew very well, quoth he,
that he was a man, and that he was borne to dye once. In like manner, must we
be prepared for all adventures. My Friend has not assisted me: well, I knew
that he was a man, and one that might change. My Wife was very virtuous, and
yet was she but a Woman. Afflictions of Body, and of Mind, sickness,
casualties, losses, imprisonments are befalne me: They are welcome; these are
as great blessings, as Dignity, Health, and Pleasure; seeing they proceed from
one, and the same, the giver of all things. And he that thus before hand
bethinketh himself of humane accidents, shall never betaken at unawares,
neither shall he ^ave need to say, as customa^ly the unadvised are wont,
(...) did not think of such a thing: unto whom the chances of For^une do
occasion much affliction and anguish, because they ^inde themselves disarmed of
^his wise foresight. Ulysses over^assed many dangers and difficul^ies, and yet
none of them all ^^d afflict him so fore, as one thing which did take him at
unawares; even the death of a dog which he loved dearly. And ^^ence the common
Proverb proves true: That a person sur^rised, is half beaten.

DISC 4. Of each man's Vocation and Calling.
Virtue and Industry are the chiefest props of an honest calling, and it behove
tha^ wise man to carry himself equally between them both, taking Virtue for
the guide, and Fortune for the Companion, and follower: for it comes
oftentimes to pass, that such as do not think diligently of that which they
do, are seen to fall into such a kind of life as is painful to bear, and
uneasy to be abandoned. Which is certainly a great straight, and a case that
does require much prudence, and patience, with piety to implore the aid and
assistance of God; for patience with humility in Gods behalf, is the remedy
which does most lighten and ease the evil. Consider poor prisoners, at first
what pains they endure to bear the burden that is laid upon their legs, but
after that they are once accustomed thereunto, necessity teaches them, and use
makes all such hard usage easy unto them. There is no manner of life,
howsoever hard and strict it be, which has not some kind of solace and
refreshment to sweeten it. And truly there is not any one thing, wherein
Nature has so much favored us, as in this; that she makes us to find the
remedy, and mitigation of our misfortunes in the sufferance of them.

The case then standing as it does, that man is borne obnox ous and subject
unto all manner of miseries; we must consequently suppose that we are all of us
the prisoners of Fortune, who holds us, tied and fettered hand and foot; and
that there is no difference, saving that the fetters and chains of some, are
of Gold, and of other some of Iron. We are all of is in one and in the same
prison, and those that hold others captive are in the like condition and case
themselves in regard of others. If the desire of honor turmoileth thee, the
desire of riches does trouble another. If the baseness, and obscurity of birth
does afflict thee, to others Nobility and greatness does bring a thousand
discontented thoughts: Art thou subject to the commandment and will of
another, that other is subject at least to his own, having his brains and his
breast beaten with ten thousand heartburnings, and diseasements which thou
do not epsy: in sum, if ye mark all things well, our whole life is
nothing but a slavery, wherein every one ought to take good heed how to
demean himself in his calling, and how he may content himself therein,
winking at that which is evil in it, and applying himself unto that which is
good. For there is no calling, howsoever Painful and toylesome it be,
wherein the patient soul does not find some contentment and gain, though
that cunning and skill be more exquisite in time of adversity, then of
prosperity. For when as calamities and crosses do present themselves, then
must we gather all the forces of our wits together, and set our whole vigor
and strength against such imminent or present evils, reposing our whole
confidence in God. Jonas had leisure even in the Whales belly to make his
supplication and prayer unto God, and was presently heard. In this manner all
accidents, how grievous and uneasy soever they be, may be sweetened and
lightened.

To this purpose also it is good that each one set certain bounds and limits
to the hopes of this life, and that he think with himself, that howsoever
humane thing be different and various in the outward semblance and show: yet
nevertheless inwardly they resemble one another in their inconstancy and
vanity.

A Calling is the Tie of every man from Sloth; it gives him health, it draws
the mind from thinking on such things as precipitate the Soul: By it
Commonwealths have their true decorum, and are therefore permanent; because
upheld by continual employment: It is ever best, when Honesty steeres the
course, and mean ones bear not envy against such as are in higher places then
they; for oftentimes that which we account hight, is as a steep hill, from
whence a man with very little ado is hurled down headlong. And truly such as
have lived content, have not been always those that have made the better
choice: but rather those who prudently and discreetly could carry themselves in
that estate and calling which they once made choice of, taking patiently the
evil that fell out therein, and endeavoring to redress such accidents as did
cross their desires. This advice likewise is required to keep discretion,
which seasoneth, and gives a taste and relish to all things. And for this
cause Plato did compare the life of man to the play at Dice, whereat whosoever
does play, ought always to strive to have a fair throw, and yet content
himself with any cast that comes. For seeing that good or evil luck is not
in our power, at least wise we must labor to take cheerfully our chance, and
withal to thank God, for that the worst that could, is not fallen out.
Whereas men of weak wit, having Fortune at will, are so transported with joy,
that scarcely they know what they do, they are so insolent, that no man can
keep them company; they can abide no body, and no body can abide them. Whereas
in the time of adversity they are so amazed and so melancholy, that they are
almost overwhelmed with sorrow and heaviness of mind, ye shall see them like
unto the sick of a languishing, and anguishing disease, which can neither
abide heat nor cold.

Whatsoever thy fortune be, bear it with patience, if thou art Low, strive not
to Emulate those above thee, for in so doing the bow which thou seek to
bend, will fly back upon thee; and if thou art high, contemn not those meaner
under thee: for that is to take up a stone to fling at thy self; but so weigh
both thy mind, and it, as that a golden mean may be the Center of all thy
hopes.

The Philosopher Theodorus was wont to say, that he gave his Scholars
instructions and lessons, with the right hand, but that they received them with
the left, and so does it fare often times not with a few, who with the left
hand take hold of the luck which fortune (I mean Gods providence) reaches
them with the right. It were much better in my judgment wisely to imitate the
wise diligence of the Bees, the which of Thyme, which is but a dry and harsh
herb, do make the sweet and pleasant honey. So should we out of this harsh
and combersome life extract and draw whatsoever therein is good and chase away
what is evil therein; or case and cover it closely, and who knows not but
that such as are exercised in the actions of Virtue, can draw by a certain
secret and supernatural kind of Alchimy, good out of evil? Diogenes was
banished, but he made good use of his banishment, in that he did in the mean
time betake himself unto the study of Wisdom. And this shall not be so
difficult and hard to do, as it seems to be, if by frequent exercise ye
do endeavor to acquire the habitude and settled custom of living content. Can
ye not abide in the Houses of Princes and Great men? content you then with
your own. Do ye find your self incapable of government in the Common
wealth? play then the good Citizens part, and be content to obey. Thus doing ye
shall make unto your selves facile, and casie, that which most men deem to be
strict and hard in the course of your life.

Moreover it shall much avail you in your discontentments, to represent unto
your self the great and fame us personages of the time past: how and with what
wisdom, and courage they have remedied and borne the crosses and calamities
which befall them in this life. Does it displease you that you are destitute of
children? Consider how many Kings, Princes, and Potentates, have dyed without
issue. If poverty does vex you, weigh in your own mind, how many excellent
men have been likewise poor; who nevertheless have lived patiently whithout
complaining. On a day it was told the philosopher Stilphon, that his daughter
had done amiss: the fault (quoth he) is not in me but in her fortune and
mine. To live is a gift, to dye is a debt: and then is that ransom only paid,
which all thy life time was due to Nature for thy being, and this is much eased
by the patience of a discreet man. If the churlish and froward conditions of
your own grieve you, set before your eyes so many wise, honorable and
illustrious men, as have quietly comported with the importunities of theirs,
Socrates had the most froward wife in the world, and he said that by enduring
of her at home, he did learn to be patient abroad. Look upon holy David, a
man after Gods own heart, who yet was troubled and angered by his own Children.

The world is full of such examples, and if we did not love our selves so much
as we do, it is certain that in the greatest crosses and encomberments of
this life, we should find comfort enough. For there is not any prison, how
dark or straight soever it be, which will not give place unto a Song, to
refresh somewhat the poor prisoners perplexed mind. Finally, I say, that if
ye serve God, and fear him, Charity shall be able of it self, to procure
peace and tranquillity unto your spirit: which the whole world cannot perform,
although every one should offer themselves to help you. Let Truth guide thee,
whose purity will cleanse thy heart: Ask not what it is, but embrace it: It is
^he Rule of Reason, and Birth of Uprightness; by it thy life will be full of
sweetness and pleasantness; thy profession, ^hy end shall be better then thy
beginning, and that also full of ^ope.

DIS. 5. How a man must order and rale his life.
NO man would accept of life, if he knew what it were: for all men do so much
complain of it, yea, even the wisest; that if that length of days which those
in the first Age before the Flood, enjoyed, were given them, it would but
increase an^ augment their sorrow; and thi^ happens through the unconstancy of
the world. Therefore (...) is expedient in my conceit, tha^ a man hold, and
keep a certain^ stayed and settled manner of living, and that he vary not with
every wind. Ye shall see many much subject to this vice o^ changing their
manner of living from day to day; so tha^ they cannot ground or fett^
themselves upon any thin^ whatsoever. Wherein they d^ resemble such as have
never been accustomed to be at Sea^ who as soon as they begin t^ sail,
run out of one vessel into another, leaving the bigger, to put themselves
into (...) lesser, and by and by leaving the lesser, to return to the bigger
again. And thus they continue in changing, until they evidently know that
nothing can fit them; because that whither soever they go, their queasie
stomachs do keep them company, and consequently, their vomiting disease.

Also, there are others that bring their passions with them unto their
affairs, and seek incessantly after a new manner of living, and never
accomplish what they have once begun. All things go against their stomach,
all things displease them: whether to be employed, or to be idle; to serve, or
to command; to be married, or to be single; to have children, or to have none
at all: finally, nothing does fit their fancy, nothing does satisfy their
desire, save only that thing they have not: and such folk must needs live as
miserable as prisoners fettered in perpetual pain.

There is likewise another manner of men not much unlike unto the former, that
cannot keep themselves quiet, nor be at any stay, in any time, or in any
place. They cease not to go and come, always intermedling with affairs,
without being thereunto called, and busying and bestirring themselves about
that which no wise concerns them. These men when they go out of doors, if
ye but ask them whither they go, they will answer you thus; I know not, I
go to do as the rest do. They run along the streets, they haunt the
public places, and then they return home full of vexation and weariness,
without any design: for there is nothing that does so much irke and weary men's
minds, as to labor in vain. They are like unto little Ants, which do climb
upwards upon trees, and after they have mounted to the top, are forced to
creep down again the same way they went up, without bringing down with them
any good at all. Many do live in this manner, whose life is nothing else but a
busied leisure full of tumults and toils, ye shall see them posting on with
such vehemence and speed, as if they would carry away with them all that they
find before them in their way. The Streets, the Churches, and Markets, are
ordinarily full of them.

These be they which forge, and frame news: they will be the weighers of
men's worthes, and the givers of garlands. They will talk lavishly of other
men's lives, and discourse of other men's offices, keeping a babbling coil. It is
a principal point of Wisdom truly to know how to esteem of life; he that
esteems and loves his life for the love of it self, he lives not but to
live: But a wise man lives no longer, then that his life may be worth more then
his death; a great part of life is lost to those that do ill; a greater to
those that do nothing; and all to those that do that they should not do;
some begin to live when they should dye; some ended before they begin; and
amongst other evils, Folly has this, that it always begins to live. But
the actions of a well advised man tend always to ^^me certain end; neither
does ^e burden himself with more ^usinesses then he can conveni^ntly the man
that undertaketh ^^uch, must needs, in my mind, ^ive Fortune much power over
^im.

DISC. 6. Of the diversity of Actions.
EVery one in my Opinion ought to take pains in ina^ling himself to comport
with the time and matters according as they accidentally happen: and not to tie
themselves so much to one manner of living, but that in case of necessity they
may forsake it. For if we consider man according to the life we shall find
him full of vanity, weakness, inconstancy, misery and presumption; a
fruitful argument to divert him from singularity. For even a^ a man that is
whole and sound, should not subject himself to the keeping o^ one certain
rule in his diet, bu^ ought rather to accustom himself to eat sometimes
more, and sometimes less, at one time of one meat, and at another time of
another meat; to drink now of wine, and then of water, to abide sometimes in
the sun, and sometimes in the shade, sometimes to labor, and sometimes to
rest^ so must he frame and fashion himself to all manner of accidents, for in
so doing, any new chance whatsoever, that can befall (for there are infinite in
the course of our life) shall neither trouble him, nor disquiet him: ye though
he be driven to betake himself to some other manner of living, yet shall he
do it without much trouble (provide always that temerity and rashness be
away) by reason that he shall be so well inured thereunto before hand, that
it will be easy for him to give place unto the time that offers it self.
And truly the impotency and weakness is all one, not to be able to change in
time of need, and not to be able to continue constant in a good course, for he
that loves riches, shall not be satisfied with it; and he that cannot
comport with necessity has not the valor of a Christian.

Moreover, we must mingle and temper our matters in such sort that they may be
fitted proportionably one to another. As for example. At one time to be
solitary, at another time to be in company, the one for our friends sake, the
other for our selves: for we must not always remain in our grave mood, for
that will make us abhorrec^: neither must we show our selves continually
jocund and glad, for that will render us despised. But we must carry our
selves discreetly, observing comeliness and conveniercy of time and place, as
the life of man does require. For it is a needful thing for a man at one time
or other to recreate himself by giving intermission to his more serious
affairs.

Labor in some is a weakness of the Spirits, in others a waste; in some it
makes the head dizzy, in others the back, and ^ll suffer; though not a like.
Recrea^ion is the Physician that ^ures all those, and makes them ^gree in a
sweet harmony; and therefore he that will not mix ^hese two together, is
guilty of his own distemper, and ^n enemy to the Law of reason.

We read of Socrates, a most grave Ph^osopher, that he made no scruple to play
and refresh himself with little boys: and of Cato, a very austere man, that
sometimes he did feast his friends, thereby to refresh himself with the
pleasure of their company, and to recreate his mind, wearied with the weighty
affairs of the Commonwealth. Also of Scipio Africanus, that he would delight
himself with dancing.

And this we have said to show that the mind of man requires some release.
Neither has he his due liberty, who has not the means sometimes to
beatleasure. The fruitefullest grounds if they are not laid to waste, become
barren in a short time. Continual labor makes the mind of man to become
slack and weak: even as lasinesse and and luxury does make it heavy, feeble,
and faint. Our recreation ought to be as our sleep, which restores our
strength, and gives us breath to return more gayly, and joyfully to our
work. For if we should sleep continually, it would be a death and not a
sleep.

The law of reason establishes a convenience in the ordering of all things; and
knits it self to Nature: which ordaines four seasons, wherein trees ap^eare,
Leaves budde, bear fruit, and ripen, and after retire their ^ap into the body
of the earth, to teach even men, that rest is altogether as necessary as
Labor, and those which of old did establish laws, have ordained there should
be also certain feastival days in the year, to the end men might in a
manner be constrained to surcease from the emploiments of their ordinary
callings, and take some pastime after their toil: and of old we find that
many excellent men were wont to allot some parcel of time to their recreation.
Asinius Pollio a great Orator was never so much busied in affairs, but he
reserved for his pleasure and pastime the two last hours of the day; during
the which space, he would not so much as read the Letters which he received
from his friends, fearing lest they should minister unto him some new care and
cogitation. Others were wont to labor until noone, and the remnant of the day
they did spend about meaner matters. And the Canon it self allows civil
Recreations, and that on the Sabbath, to those whose weekly labor has
afforded no releasement. The lights which they distribute to servants at Court,
do likewise limit and bound the times appointed both for labor and rest.
Conscience also which is placed in the mind of man, to decide the difference
betwixt the Body and the Soul, even in holy exercises ordaines a repose,
following that first Institution of rendering God his glory, and man his right.

And there was a Decree of the Senate of Rome, which did bear a prohibition,
that no new thing should be propounded, or mentioned in the last two hours of
the day. Furthermore, when a man is weary of his work, he does find himself
marvailously refreshed and restored, when as he goes out into an open and
spacious place; and it seems that the free air does repair and renew the
strength and vigor of his dispersed and spent spirits. For conclusion, ye
ought to love diversity and change according to the time, and take heed lest
ye nourish, and cherish your minds too delicately and daintily.

For that having of its own nature great strength, provided that it be
wakened and rouzed up, it were not reasonable ye should suffer it through
voluptuous and delicious living to wax feeble and faint. And no sooner do ye
come to that point to be impatient and delicate, but as soon all things begin
to cross your good liking. Diverse things are offensive to diverse men, which to
others are not so: and that is a Cure to this man, which to another is
hurtful. To eat, it goes against your stomach; to be hungry, it hurts
you; to sleep, it slays you; to be awake, it vexes you: and as a sick or
queazie person, ye go on in a restless maze, always searching and seeking
after some new thing: such delicacy and tenderness has bin the cause that
diverse have had much ado to comport with the very things which are necessary
in this life, as to lie, to sleep, to wake, to rise, to dine, to suppe, to
talk, to walk, to cloth and uncloath themselves: so that some have thought
it a death to be always wearied in beginning anew again, and reiterating so
often the same things. Such people come to so great extremities, that they can
hardly manage, or maintain the manly courage of their mind; neither can they
frame themselves in all, to know and taste of many things, and always in every
of them to carry a good stomach. For in this case there is the like reason and
condition of the body and of the mind. Hence it is that ye shall epsy some
men so tenderly disposed, that a small noise of their neighbor will annoy
them, and the sound of a little Bell will trouble their brain. For as unto a
crazie and ill complexioned body, so unto a drooping and languishing mind it
does semblably befall, that what thing soever touches it, does prick it and
sting it full sore.

DISC. 7. Of the choice of Friends.
IT is not with Virtue as with worldly Princes; her pride consists not in her
plumes, nor the glory of her state, in the greatness of her Train: But she
is as well contented to lodge in a poor Cottage, as in a Kingly Palace: Her
greatest Glory is in Friendship, where two hearts are mutually connext, and
dare lay down their lives one for another: There she exults, and esteems
nothing more heavenly; to this purpose she has dispersed her rays, that
Amity might be in common to all.

Therefore seeing that the life of man necessarily has need of Friendship and
Fellowship; for it is a matter both harsh and hard for a man to have always
his mind bended about business; and would be yet more wearisome, if he had
not one with whom he might take some release; and that we prove commonly too
negligent and careless in making our choice: We ought in my judgment to choose
such people for our friends as be of a mild and meek conversation, and who
because of their calm and quiet disposition deserve to be beloved, for there
is not any thing that so much does content, and deligh: the mind of man, as
faithful and trusty friendship. It being a great contentment to find a person
so disposed, unto whom ye may safely impart your most secret affairs: whose
counsel may advise you, whose cheerefulnes may qualify all your cares, and
whose presence may appease all your pains, and expel your pensiveness of
mind: And therefore ye must endeavor to choose such friends as are free from
covetousness, and all notorious vice. For vice like the fire takes hold of
that which is nearest unto it. So that we must do as men are wont in the time
of plague and ^estilence: which is to separate and sever the sick from the
whole: it being a contagion and ^n occasion of sickness to let them live
together. Neverthe^esse I do not like that we should be in our choice too
scrupulous, but seeing we cannot find folks together perfect, we must hold
those for good which be less evil.

Amity is a sacred flame kindled in our breasts by nature, and has expressed
its first heat, between husband and wife, brother and sister, friend and
friend, it is the soul and life of the world, more necessary then Fire and
Water. Friendship is the companion of Justice, the bond of Nature, the
Defense and Safe-^^ard of a Town or City the comfort of old age, and the quiet
harbor of man's lif^^ By it all things consist, and discord decaies, and
therefore in the election of friends, ye ought chiefly to avoid such as be
extremely sullen or sad, who weep and wail at all things, and despair of all
things, although otherwife they be such as d^e love you, and would prove
faithful enough unto you. For it is a thing that must needs trouble us much
to have such a man for our friend as is always sad, sighing and sobbing at
every occasion. For seeing that friendship, and fellowship is ordained to drive
away discontent, sorrow, and grief, it were neither reasonable no^ convenient
to choose such a one for your comforter and friend, as in stead of delighting
you, and of lightning your grief, should by his fullennesse and sadness
increase your sorrow, and every day occasion unto you some new vain
apprehension and fear.

DISC. 8. Of dissembling or disguising of humors.
DIssimulation comes from Distrust, which is the Sciene or seed plot thereof:
for if that were not, and that there were trust and fidelity in all,
dissimulation which opneth the fro^t, and covers the thought, could have no
place. Now it is a great pain, and a testlesse molestatio^ of mind, for men to
labor to appear different in show from that which they are in substance. And
a mavelous trouble and torment it is, for them to take always heed unto
themselves, for fear lest they should be discovered. Look how often men look
on them, so often do they think that they are espied: so that in the end it
falls our, that whether they will or no, they do bewray the humor and
inclination which bears rule in their breast. The excessive care they have to
hide their natural humor, puts them to an unexplicable pain: and again,
to be discovered, it puts them to almost an intolerable shame. So that in
this covered and masked kind of carriage there is not that pleasure and ease,
which is to be felt in the other plain and simple kind of conversation that
Nature does lead each man unto. And though there be some little danger
accompanying this plainness, that a man may be the less esteemed of by
reason of this his inclination when it is discried: notwithstanding in my mind,
it were better for him to be a little less accounted of, and to live openly;
then with such pain to disguise and carry himself dissemblingly. And yet in
both the two there is to be kept a reasonable mediocrity and mean: for there
is a great difference between a frank and free fashion of behavior, and a
negligent or careless kind of carriage.

To understand this point somewhat better, we have to consider, how that Nature
has endued man with two diverse qualities and properties, the one general and
common to us all, in making us reasonable and capable of discourse, wherein we
surpass the brute beasts a (...) other particular to each one of us, as to be
inclined to gravity, to policy, to melancholy, of (...) some such humor. In
this every one should follow his natural inclination, provided that it be not
absurd, unseemely, or vicious. As if a man her subject to too much laughter, in
behooves him to endeavor to amend this imperfection. But in such qualities, as
are not blameable, it is good not to use counterfeiting, cloaking, or
dissembling. For it is a thing very uneasy for that man always to Act the
grave, who is not naturally inclined to gravity, as to change his countenance,
to enlarge or raise swellingly his voice, to fashion and frame his eyes and
looks to austerity, majesty, and greatness: The which gestures if a man
chance to forget through negligence and oversight, by and by he is discovered.

In my conceit it were much better for such a man to follow his inbred
cheerful inclination, and gay humor in conversing with others.

Notwithstanding, if it be a man's fortune to be preferred to a place of
dignity and honor, such as does require a grave, or severe countenance and
carriage, then in this case it behooves him to constrain and command a little
his joviall inclination. But this must be don with much discretion and
moderation, and by degrees, and in such sort that this change offend no man.
And this kind of dissembling, or disguising of humors cannot be blamed;
seeing the quality of his charge does require it, for the seemly bearing
whereof, he must be content to take the pains, to put aside; or rather to
smother a little of his fac^le and easy disposition.

But there are some lightheaded and ridiculous, which notwithstanding men take
for grave, stayed, and magnatimous: Others there are, and some great ones, on
whom God has bestowed both Riches and Honor, and yet these do give
themselves over to a depraved and loose voluptuous will, when as their open
Carriage preclaimes them wise, modest and discreet: And there are others
again, who without cause labor to counterfeit and cover, or rather smother
their good inclination; for being borne of a mild and meek disposition, they
endeavor to dawb themselves over with the untempered mortar of inhumanitie;
roughness, and austerity. Also others there are, who being very cowards, will
yet make show as if they were the most valorous in the World, and by no means
can they be brought to know themselves.

But yet this their colored and constrained courage they cannot carry far
off without discovery: The common saying always proving true, That no violent
or constrained thing has long continuance.

DISC. 9. Of Vanity.
VAnity is the most essential and proper quality of humane Nature: there is
nothing so much in man, be it malice, infelicity, inconstancy, irresolution,
(and of all these there is abundance) as base feebleness, sottishness, and
ridiculous vanity: And therefore Pi^darus has expressed it more to the life then
any other, by the two vainest things in the world; calling it the Dream of a
shadow. So that is a very hard thing, yea, I dare say impossible, that a vain
and ambitious man can ever attain to taste sweet and most desirable
tranquillity of mind, which the ^ise have so diligently sought ^or, by Sea and
by Land, on note, and on horse, sparing no ^aines: For he that has his ^inde
and heart even with the ^hawing worm of Ambition, cannot attain to that which
he desires, to wit, that place, credit, and account which he does ^rave. And
as of himself be promises always more then he can perform; So likewise in
his habits, attire, and all his other things, he does usually go beyond his
measure: And is found to be in the self same pain, wherein are lodged all
those which strive against the stream, or which creep and graspe upwards
against a steep Rock, and because in setting forwards they make too much
haste, therefore they lie the further behind. Moderati^ carries a soft pace,
and submit her self to the rule of Temperance, she vayles under a slo^ sail,
and by little and little creepes along; yet in that neglected pace goes further
the^ the galloping scope of prodigality: the true means to attain unto ease
is, for a man to make smaller semblance and show then indeed his power and
ability does bear, and to set asid^ all pompous superfluity and vanity, as
well in his attire, as in his train: and to hold always for his measure and
rule that which is necessary, not that which hat^ no other ground but a vain
opinion, or a frivoulous concei^^ yea in our very eating and apparelling, we
must take heed there appear nothing so singular, or odd, that men may in an
extraordinary manner take notice thereof. It is likewise very expedient and
profitable, that we refrain our hopes, and that we extend not our designs
further then we may well attain unto. As for riches, endeavor to come by
them rather of your self, then of fortune: And every way it is a principal
point for a man to be moderate as well in his actions, as in his intentions.
For when any tempest, or storm of fortune shall fall out, it shall have the
lesser power to prevail upon him, and to give him the overthrow, if it find
him with his sails gathered in, rather then hoysed up to the full wind.
Finally, a man ought so to dispose and demean himself, that although fortune
should frown on him, by reason of lack of means; yet let him beware lost he
be at once both crossed in his Condition, and quelled in his courage by the
incommodity of want.

If your Mind gives you to love Books, endeavor to make them serve you for
another use and end, then for ornament to your Chamber walls, as some do which
purchase and buy many, only for Ostentation; therein resembling Asses, and
Mules, which carry good Victuals on their backs, and yet eat not thereof at
all. The immoderate multitude of Servants, brings unto the Master a multitude
of charges and cares, with an excessive great pain: And they on the other
side, are marred and made worse, by reason of too much ease. For conclusion, in
what thing soever it be, if ye intend to live according to the opinion of
others, ye shall never be content; but if ye do live according to Reason, and
that which Nature does require, ye shall never have Want. O how securely and
quietly does the Humble and Moderate man live, and how little pains does he
take, to provide and furnish himself! And truly, even unto the very brute
Beasts which we do feed we have in horror such as be untameable and wild, and
will not suffer themselves to be fed and led after our fantasy and Will. What
reason have we then to approve of wild and immoderate men, which come so near
these unmanageable and unsatiable Beasts? In brief, and for a good
advertisement, call to mind how that the Thunder and Lightnings do fall
ordinarily upon the tallest Trees, the highest Hills, and the stateliest Towers.

DISC. 10. Of Prosperity.
PRosperity is the life of Peace in a tumultuous War, where all seek to be
conquerours over poor men, whose weak stability can hardly support it self
without them; his happiness being not much unlike a fair house, whose
foundation is rotten and decayed. And therefore when fortune smileth on us, and
(as they say) every thing falls out according to our wish, it is then, yea
even then, if ever at any time, that we ought heedfully to look unto our
selves, to hold our affections in raines, and watchfully to order our actions
by reason. For adversity may procure our very enemies and foes to pity our
affliction; but prosperity may move our very Friends to envy our fortunate
condition.

If we would rehearse in this place all those which have miserably miscarried
by sudden and violent Death, because that they could not in their prosperity
moderate and master themselves. The Story would be too tedious; it being our
intention to use brevity, we will therefore leave that Discourse: For scarcely
shall we find any man, who has not some Knowledge thereof: And therefore
when as we enjoy the smiling favor of time, we ought diligently to avoid all
presmuption, and pride, which ordinarily does accompany prosperity: and must
endeavor to diminish, and abase, as much as we can; this haughty humor, and
strouting be haviour which always does follow the heels of a more favorable
fortune.

True it is, there are some which sustain such a rank and dignity, that they
cannot conveniently debase themselves, except they either fall from their
place, or at least, not carry themselves in the same as they ought. King Xerxes
and Cyrus got such abundance of wealth by war that being there with puffed
up with pride to take enterprises in hand, through persuasion of of wealth; the
one after he thought to rob and spoil all Greece was slain by Artabanus,
the other thinking to subdue all Scythia, was vanquished by Tomiris, the Queen
thereof: see here both these proud Princes, how by having too much wealth, nay
rather for not using it well, they lost both it and their lives too: and truly
men most employ their prudence and wisdom in tempering their gravity, so that
others may be brought to impute it to their charge and calling, and not to the
natural disposition of their mind; and therefore it is good that they excuse
themselves toward their friends, and such folks as be of a meaner rank, whom
they have known familiarly before, that they have not the leisure to
entertain them, and to make much of them, by bearing them company, as
otherwise they would very willingly do: Yet so, that they use in the mean
time, all the facility and affability their condition and calling can suffer
them to use; not bewraying or showing any stormy, or angry mood, by their
visage or words, if a man chance to come to them at an unfit hour, or speak
to them somewhat more importunatly, or undiscreetly then reason would require.
For it is a like vice for a man not to know how to carry himself in his
prosperity, as not to be able to comport with adversity: we ought therefore to
observe an equality in our whole life, and to show always (if it be possible)
in all the changes and chances thereof one and the same countenance, full of
courtesy, mildness and gentle in behavior. Prosperity is very dangerous
whatsoever there is that is vain and light in the Soul of Man, is raised and
carried with the first favorable wind; there is nothing that makes a man so
much to lose and forget himself; as great prosperity; and therefore it is
necessary that a man look to himself, and take heed as if he went in a
slippery place, and especially of insolence, pride and presumption. Alexander
the great did far outrun his father Philip King of Macedon, by his high and
excellent feats of war: but his father did far surmount him in humanity and
gentleness of mind. The father was always virtuous and welbeloved, but the
son was oftentimes vicious and hated: In such sort that their counsel is
questionless wholesome and sound, which tell us that the higher and loftier
men are, the humbler and lowlier ought they to be.

Antonius Primus overthrew himself and his whole house, by nothing else then
his overmuch glorying in his valiant deeds, and found this Maxim too late to
be true, that a proud and insolent carriage toward men of spirit can hardly
compass any thing, unless in some sort or other he that uses it be able to
over awe them. Scipio Africanus was wont to say, that even as men are
accustomed to put wild and untamed horses in to the hands of Equitiers and
Riders, that being daunted and tamed, they may serve them at their need; So
likewise is it needful to tame proud and insolent persons, that have grown
wild through the abundance of fortunes favor, and to bring them again
within the round and compass of reason, by setting before their eye the
wretchedness and weakness of humane matters, and the mutability and
instablity of fortune. And for this end we ought in our greatest prosperity to
use the advice and counsel of our friends, yea, then we should give them more
authority and power over us then at any other time, to the end they may be more
bold toward us in telling us the truth. We must also stop our ears to
flatterers, which may very easy beguile us: For at all times men do deem and
esteem themselves to be such, as ought to be praised and extolled, but most of
all in time of prosperity: In which it is a thing very rare and difficult to
find a man who does not incline to attribute unto to himself the cause of his
own good hap. Neither is there any other Season in which men sooner forget God,
then when they enjoy health and wealth, dignity and felicity according to their
wish. So that mishap whenever it does happen them, does serve them for a
medicine, because it brings them home again unto the knowledge of themselves.

This opinion of self-conceit, for a man to think too much of himself, and
to give credit lightly unto the fawning lies of flatterers, makes men to
stumble, and to fall into many gross faults, yea, gives occasion of mocking
and bitter reviling, and out of all question, it is a great oversight, and a
folly, for a man to rely more upon another judgment concerning himself, then
upon his own. This Philip (of whom we spoke before) seeing himself very
mighty and victorious, and considering with himself, as a wise and moderate
man ought to do, how that humane things do not always abide in the same stay,
appointed that one of his Pages should each Morning salute him with these
words, Philip, remember that thou art a mortal man. But how much more may the
wise and well-disposed Christian say every day to himself, Remember that thou
art earth, and to earth thou must return.

DISC 11. Of the comparing of our fortune with that of others.
IT is an ancient question, whether Industry and Fortune has most credit: For
it is out of all doubt, that both have; and it is clearly false; that one
only does all, and the other nothing; and commonly they that settle themselves
unto the one, contemn the other; but the difficulty is to join them together,
and to attend them both.

Therefore it is much availeable for the attaining of this tranquillity of
mind, that a man setting aside all passions, consider with himself what
means and commodities he does enjoy, and in the next place, that he set
before his eyes such men as have not so much: not doing as many are wont, who
have their eyes only upon such as surpass them, admiring and reputing them
only happy and blessed. The prisoners hold them happy that are set at large;
and again, those esteem such blessed as are altogether free. The free think
the rich only fortunate, and the rich again those that command. They that
command, account Kings of all other most blessed, and Kings those of their
degree that excel them in ability and power. Hence it is, that men finding
themselves unable to equal such as surpass them, they do remain
discontented, and no wise satisfied with their fortune, wherein they both
bewray their ingratitude toward God, and beget a torment to themselves. A wise
man will not be male content, though many surmount him in means, but rather
representing to himself the great numbers of afflicted and miserable men the
world does afford, he will rejoice and be glad of his condition and case. If
ye see then a man well mounted and furnished with fair horses, richly arrayed,
do but cast down a little your eyes, and consider how many there are that go
a foot, which leading a poor life, esteem that of yours to be happy, for it is
not reasonable that the good fortune of one, or of a few, should have greater
force to make you discontent, then should the bad fortune of many have to move
you to be content. How many poor folks see ye daily that live of their
labors; and are laden with children, and pinched with poverty, and which is
worst of all, have no hope at all to escape out of their misery? How many is
there to whom your life, which ye so much deplore, would bring much consolation
and ease? Fortune may make a man poor, sick, afflicted, but not vicious,
dissolute, dejected: many times a man complains unjustly, for though he be
sometimes surprised with some ill accident, yet he is more often with a good,
and so the one must recompense the other: and if a man consider well thereof, he
shall find more reason to content himself with his good fortunes, then to
complain of his bad. We are come to a time so miserable, that one man's life
depends more of another then of it self; and the good of our Neighbor does
occasion us greater grief then is the gladness we reap of our own. But if
it were possible for men to see unfolded the fortune of such as they esteem
happy, they would feel and find in it oftentimes more anxiety and pain, then
they do in their own. Who is he that does not account the condition of Kings of
all other to be most happy? And yet harken what a great King says of himself
in Homer; Great Jupiter has imprisoned me with great perplexities and cares.
O how happy then are those that live in their little corners out of these
dangers and fears! And if it be so that ten thousand folks would be content
with the estate wherein God has established you, what reason have you to
complain, for that ye have not the estate and fortune of one whom ye envy?
Ye have no cause at all to kill your self with sorrow and care, for to
attain unto another man's rank, seeing there is nothing that so much roubleth
and tormenteth a man, as this affection and immoderate desire of mounting from
one degree of dignity to another. For such folks ordinarily do follow without
consideration any hope whatsoever that offers it self; the which if it fail
to succeed according to their wish, they presently begin to accuse Fortune,
and to accurse their hard hap; whereas they ought rather to blame themselves
for their rashness and lightness, and their want of foresight. Neither do
they consider what a folly it is for them, to impure unto another the blame of
their own weak understanding, and the fault they have fallen into, by
following that which was either uncertain, or impossible for them to attain
unto. They are like unto those, in my conceit, which fret and fume for that
they cannot fly, or shoot an arrow with a bow as big as a plow-beame.

The cause of this evil, is the excessive affection men bear unto themselves:
Whence it happens, that in all things they will needs strive and labor to be
the first. It is nothing in their eye to abound in Wealth, except they have
much more then other rich men have.

Solon the Philosopher says, that Wealth is the Mother of Excess, Excess the
Mother of Lust, Lust the Mother of Violence, and Violence the Mother of
Tyranny. Behold how this vice reigns, or rather rangeth in all estates.
Dionysius the first was not content to be King of Sicily, neither esteemed he
his dignity accomplished enough, because Philoxenus did surpass him in Poesy,
and Plato in Philosophy. Whereupon he was so furious, that he condemned
Philoxenus to the quarries, there to wring Verses out of the hard rocks, and
banished Plato out of his country. But it were good that he and all other
complainers did practice the saying of a wise man, that if all the evils that
men suffer, should be co^par'd with the blessings they enjoy, the division being
equally made they may see by the overplus of that good they enjoy, the
injustice of their complaint. And out of this immoderate love it does also
proceed, that men will speak of all things, thereby to show that they know
all things: whereby thy make themselves often to be mocked at, as it once
happened to Megabyses the Persian, a man otherwise of great reputation, and
valor who having upon a time entered into the lodging where the famous painter
Apelles did plye and practice his art, began to discourse touching the same,
and would needs give him to understand, that he understood the nature and
secrets thereof. To whom Apelles, as being a man wise, and well conditioned,
thus answered: Truly, Megabyses, before I heard you speak, I held ^ou for a
discreet man, for ^our silence did grace your ^rave apparel, but since ye
have meddled to talk of my ^rade, trust me, there is not the ^mallest boy here
that grindeth the colors, but will mock you for your labor.

Hannibal that great Captain of Carthage, after that the Romans had chased
him out of Italy and Affricke, fled to the King of Bithynia, where he was
invited to go into the Schools, to hear a great Philosopher discoursing of
the stratagemes, tricks, and subtilties of war, his auditors wondering at his
eloquence and science of the military Art, asked of Hanibal. what he thought
of him; who laughingly answered them: That he had known many old fools, but
that he had never seen, nor heard any man uttering so many fond and foolish
words as that man did, whom they all so much admired. And not without cause did
he answer them in this wise: considering how that this man did take upon him to
discourse largely and lavishly of a matter which very hardly can be taught or
learned in the shade of a School, and that in the presence and audience of the
greatest Captain, and most experimented warrior that was then in the whole
world. Which may teach every man to contain himself within the compass of
his calling, without meddling or troubling himself with that of another man's.
The which thing the Poets also have taught us, when as they feign that their
gods do content themselves each one with his own calling and charge. Mars
medleth with war, Minerva with arts, Mercury with eloquence, Cupid with love,
Neptune with the sea, Pluto with Hell, Jupiter with the heavens, and so of the
rest, each one keeping himself within the bounds and lists of his
jurisdiction. And if that any of them had encroched upon the office and
function of another, he had been scoffed and chastised for his presumption.

How ill a fools cap becomes the head of a wise man; and yet through that
disguise he is discerned to be discreet, when all the choicest garments in the
world cannot cover the nakedness of a fool. And hence we may gather, that all
things do not be fit, nor become all men, and that each one ought to consider
what calling he finds himself most apt and sufficient for, and that he
contenting him therewith, and containing himself therein. They that follow the
profession of letters and learning, have need of leisure and ease. He that
will follow the Court, and labors to have the countenance and acquaintance
of great men, and to find access unto Princes, must needs undergo much
pains. So that these conditions, and the like, are not sitting for all: and it
stands each one upon to know whereunto he is most apt. The Horse is fit for
riding, and running: the Ox for opening and laboring the ground. The man that
is sorry that he cannot bear a Lion in his bosom, as he may a little dog,
is he not more then mad?

If Fortune be a blessing to thee, why should thou contemn it in another?
or if not, why despairest thou that thy neighbor is richer: dos not the same
sun shine upon all? and is there not a God above the power of Fate? who
knows what is better for man, then himself: if so, thou art most happy in
being the least: in that thou art not daily in fear to be made so. But there
are some, who without leaving any part of their ease, and of their vice, would
be as wise as the Philosophers that have both day and nigh spent their time in
study. The good wrestlers of old contenting themselves with their prize,
suffered the other Champions to win likewise theirs at running. Contrariwise
such as despising and disdaining their own good, do sighingly seek after
another man's do they not live in displeasure and pain?

They say, that in times past, there was a notable kind of men in Baeotia,
which did complain of their gods because that their fig trees did not bear
grapes, and that their vines did not bring forth figs. We must imagine that
God has fashioned and framed diversely men for diverse affairs, and that each
one ought to content himself with that ability or place which God has
imparted unto him, without passing beyond his own, to pursue, and follow after
that which is another. For these kind of people make no account at all of that
which they have, but only of that which they would have: they go always
looking a far off, and little think of the place wherein they are.

There was of old, in a certain Temple, an image pourtraied, which did
represent the manner of men, that always wait on the time to come, and neglect
the good opportunity of the time present. The picture was of a Rope-maker who
did still work, but suffered an Ass that stood behind him to eat it up. And
thus do the ingrate people in Gods behalf, who make no reckoning of the goods
they enjoy, but suffer them to be buried in oblivion, and are always covetous
of things to come. In the harmony of the world, the differences, or distances
are to be observed: so likewise in humane things, all are not of one sort. And
as in music there are tunes and sounds, some grave, some sharp, and some
mean, of the mingling whereof the skillful Musician makes a sweet melody: so
does the prudent man make an harmony of the good and evil that occurreth in
this life, not taking the good or the evil alone, but consorting and tempering
the one with the other, as things which in this world can never be fully
severed. That fair proverb uttered by Eurypides, but used of all, proving
true: That sorrow and man's life are sisters of one womb.

DISC. 12. Of Adversity.
WIth what a Labyrinth is purblind man encompast, no sooner borne with hope of
a prosperous life, but that is cross't with variety or adversity, which is of
its own nature grievous and heavy unto our hearts, in sickness, the loss of
children, of friends, with such like other disma^l accidents. But yet in part
we follow popular opinion in the apprehension thereof, and this we do
principally in our own wants necessities and in matter of affronts,
circumventions and scoffs, when as we imagine that the honor is deferred us
which we deserve.

Against these crosses it were good for us to apply unto our selves the saying
of the Poet Menander, That which has befallen you, is not indeed grievous, but
only seems so, and that it is so, it may appear in that ye have your mind
and body as much at commandment, as ye had before the cross did befall you.
And against the crosses of the first kind ye ought to consider how that ye
endure nothing contrary to the Law and course of humane things, in regard that
all these accidents are annexed unto man's being, and that from his birth they
are allotted to him for ordinary; and the truth is nature has not framed us so
feeble, to bear out adversity, as we make our selves. Let us always think
that it is but our inferior part which is subject unto fortune, and that we
have the principal in our own power: and that that which lies in us, as
concerning virtue, cannot be overcome by any other thing, without our consent:
For we know that we have not need of any great forces for the doing hereof,
we having none to fight against, but our own selves, and the better part of
the victory consisting in mastering our own will: whereunto add this, that
God will always favor the man who through the aid of rectified reason
disposes himself to be the stronger. Fortune (if so it be lawful for a
Christian to speak) may well make thee poor, abase thee and afflict thee but
she is not able to make thee vicious, lasie, or il-conditioned; neither can
she bereave thee of the courage and vigor of mind, wherein does lie greater
strength to govern thy soul, then there is in the Art of Navigation to direct
a ship. For the Mariner, let him be never so skillful and wife in his Art,
cannot withal his skill assuage the surging tempest of the Sea, nor yet take
away fearful apprehensions from another man's fantasy. Whereas Virtue and
Wisdom in a well ordered mind does assure and settle the body, for it
preserves it from diseases through temperance, and pulls it back from
wicked and vicious dispositions by continence: and whereas any thing, wherein
there is danger, shall present it self unto our mind (as if it were in a
quicksand) it is good that we leave it, and pass further^ or else if the
evil be unavoydable, let him comfort himself, and think that the haven is not
very far off: and that his soul goes out of the body, as out of a crazy or
broken bark, holding death for a sweet and assured harbor, chiefly
considering, that in regard of the nature of the soul, her out-going from this
life, is her in-going to a better. Which consideration ought to add much unto
the courage of Christians, yea, and make them not to fear that which brings
affrightment unto others. And truly, if we had skill and courage enough to
look Fortune in the face, and to meet her in the way with a stou^ stomach,
prepared to sustain all her assaults, nothing in the world could dismay us, or
make us suffer. And this thing would certainly come to pass, if we could once
be accustomed never to promise to our selves aney great or assured hopes, or
yet any certain and settled estate, during this miserable life, and if we
would take heed diligently, considering whether those things we do account
as evil, be so evil as we deem them to be, or if happily they be not so
evil, but rather less then we imagine. Finally this thing would happen if we
would behold a far off, and wisely foresee frowning fortune, for in so doing
we might assure our selves, that at her coming she should not affright us,
but the nearer she came to us, the bolder we might be to look her in the
face, and to esteem her not to be so lusty and strong as her picture does
import, and if no man be able to boast during this life, so far as to say, I
am exempted from this bitter potion, at least may he say thus, though I must
swallow it down, yet shall I not be aghast, weep and wail I will not,
neither despair, as many men do. I will not bring my self into so deplorable a
plight as diverse do, amidst their disasters. Though poverty pinch me more then
many others, for all that will I not beguile my neighbor, nor yet take that to
my self which belongs to another: I will not lie, much less will I
forswear my self. Briefly there shall nothing unto me seem so intolerable,
as that for to shun it, I would choose to become vicious. If by honest means I
cannot avoid indigence and need; at least necessity shall make this necessity
of mine easy to be borne. Besides, the common law of humane things, does not
allow us to esteem that thing heavy and unbea^eable, which so many daily do
carry, and bear on their backs: for choose what manner of afflictions ye
will, ye shall find more men burdened therewith, then exempted therefrom.

Adversity is a Penelopes web, which undoes all that the day of Prosperity had
woven: In the day of Adversity, consider, says the Wise man; and the Ancients
give a clearer revelation of the Knowledge of God unto it, then to Prosperity;
because it is a nearer way to Heaven. Therefore we must likewise comfort our
selves with this consideration, that where there is no sin, ^here can be no
true evil at all: and that the virtuous man is more came and quiet in his
deepest adversity; then is the vicious man in his highest prosperity: And such
were the crosses of the righteous men of old, which by the help of the divine
grace, were so accompanied with fortitude, patience, and humility, that how
sharp and rough soever they were, yet they brought them not so much vexation
and anguish as their conscience did them consolation and ease, and even as
those that are sick of a Fever, feel sooner, and in more painful manner,
the heat and coldness of their fit, then do the whole and sound the sharpest
cold of Winter, or the scorching heat of Summer: So likewise does it sure with
those that are trouble with the fever of their vicious affections, the which do
burn and blister extremely and continually their conscience: for they are much
more vexed with the corrupt and vicious qualities they do beget and bear in
their bosoms, then are virtuous men with all their adversities. For the
virtuous quell pride by humility, covetousness with temperance, and all things
with patience: and these having the inward and better part sound and without
wound, cannot be hurt by outward accidents, whereunto they oppose a lively and
lusty courage together with the force of an honest and inviolable mind, which
is more strong then any thing else whatsoever. Think not that riches,
howsoever abundant they be, can afford so great contentment to the owner
thereof, as virtue does unto the virtuous man, which is sufficient to make him
content: For virtue in whomsoever it be, is always the reward and recompense
of her self. We read how that Aglaus a poor shepherd in Arcadia, was by the
Oracle of Apollo preferred for his contentation before King Craesus of Lydia,
who esteemed himself the happiest man in the World for his riches: and even as
the most precious plants and sweet smelling trees, though they be cut in pieces
and dried, keep always their sweet and pleasant sent, when as the unsavory
and barren do not please the sense, even then when they are whole and full of
blossoms and flowers: even so the virtuous man in the very midst of his
adversity reapeth more pleasure and contentment of his virtue and honesty, then
the vicious can do of his wealth and superfluity, being beaten and scourged
with a cursed conscience. In one word, in what time, place, or condition soever
ye find the virtuous man, ye shall find him always content. O what a
blessedness then, if considered aright, is Adversity? which though common to
all, yet works diverse effects, according to the Subject whereupon it
lights. To fools and reprobate persons, if serves to drive into despair,
afflict, and enrage them: to sinners and offenders crosses are so many lively
instructions and compulsions, to put them in mind of their duty, and to bring
them to the Knowledge of God: To virtuous people they are the lists wherein to
exercise their Virtue, and to win to themselves greater commendations, and a
nea^er alliance with God; and to all a guide, that leads ^ut of this life
into a better.

It is reported that Diogenes ^he Philosopher, seeing on a ^ime a certain man
dressing and ^ecking himself for a Festival ^ay, said unto him thus: Why
^oest then take such pains to ^rimme thy self to day, conside^ing that every
day is a festival ^ay to the virtuous man? And ^uely every day of the life of
^he virtuous man is a Solemn ^ay, and fit for a moderate re^oycing and mirth.
For if we ^ooke well unto the matter, the world is no other thing else but
(...) fair and holy Temple, into which a man is brought so soon ^s he is
borne: and within this Temple there is to be seen two bright Lamps or Torches
set up, the Sun and the Moon, with many other Starry lights. There may we see
and behold diverse kinds of Creatures, by means whereof, Man attaineth to the
Knowledge of other Essences, that cannot be seen. What a sweet sight is it to
see so many fair floods, and clear running Rivers, which send out always
fresh Water, to behold so many fruitful and flourishing Trees, Plants, Herbs,
and Roots: the beautiful variety of Beasts, and of stones, together with
graffie hills, and high Mountains on the one hand, and low Valleys and pleasant
playnes on the other? if man were so wise as he should be, this same sight and
show might serve him for a passe-time, and a delight. For what thing is there
in this Life more worthy to be seen, then the passe-times and pleasures which
God does afford and offer us in his Creatures, if we could use the same as we
ought? Why do we take greater delight in any artificial sport of Beasts, then
we do to behold them acting their several parts of Natures play, each kind of
them their own part, upon this fair and wide stage of the world? Or is there
any Music sweeter then the chirping and singing of Birds? In brief, it is a
great delectation to see and observe the diversity of creatures which God has
framed and formed each one to his kind: we consume and spend away our life
about so many purposes and practices, so many toiles and broils, that hardly
we do enjoy any part thereof, and yet for all that we leave not to enjoy the
other good creatures of God. If a man could once attair to this point of
perfection, as to ^id his mind ou^ of these manifold entanglements, and to give
it some space and place to entertain, cherish, and nourish it self with the
knowledge of the creatures, and of the Almighty Creator, nothing should, or
could cast it into any excessive sorrow, except it were sin: for the Soul
being once unite I with him that made it, by contemplation and meditation, by
knowledge and love, it would gather it self together calmely and quietly, and
man lead and live continually a gladsome life, considering that at one time or
other some evil has befaln him, yet oftener has he tasted of good. So that
requiting, as it were, the one with the other, he may well say that he has
greater occasion to rejoice of his good success, then to complain of the
evil adventure of another time; as we are accustomed to turn our eyes away
from such things as offend us, and to cast them upon green, and gay colors
that please us: so should we divert the eyes of our understanding together
with our thoughts, from sad and sorrowful objects, and apply them to such as
are more pleasing and agreeable thereunto, neither must we be like unto the
malicious man, who beholds another man's faults with the eyes of an Eagle, but
his own with the eyes of an Owl. But our perverseness is such, that very often
we do resemble the boxin-glasses, which draw and drink up the corrupt blood,
and leave the pure and clean blood behind. There was in former times a
certain rich wretch, who had in his house great store of wine; but yet was so
nigardish and near, that he sold the best, and kept the worst for his own
use; a certain servant of his, observing this pinching and preposterous
nigardlines of his Master, fled away from him: and being asked afterward why
he left his Lord, answered thus: Because I could not endure to stay with a man,
who having that which was good, made choice of that which was evil. The
Philosopher Aristippus, made yet a far better reply, who having lost on of
his three Farms, said thus unto his friends, That it was babishnes to be
sorry for one Farm lost, and not to be merry for the other two that did rest
in his hands, seeing that all of them had lain open to the same adventure. We
are like unto little Children, from whom, if ye pull but one of their Rattles
or Knackes, they will presently, without more ado, fling away all the rest in
despite. For if, of many good things that we enjoy, it chance that one of them,
either be taken from us, or that it be lost, by and by we begin to bewail
it, forgetting all that rests behind in our hands.

But some man bewailingly will ask me, saying: alas! what have we? To whom
askingly I would answer: But what rather have we not? One has great
reputation and credit, another has Wealth, and another health, one has a Wife
according to his wish and will, another has sweet Children, and another
faithful and trusty friends.

Comforters in Adversity, are diverse, and most of them such as Job had: if
they see a man forsaken, by those who perhaps were his dearest friends in a
better fortune; they think him forsaken of God also, and few there are that
attribute his fall to a trial of his patience or love: censure not thy brother,
for as his afflictions are greater, so are his comforts, and the one would not
be given but that it makes the other greater.

Antipater of Thrase did reckon it among his other good fortunes, that he had
sailed prosperously between Sicile and Athens, but we each one of us would
have all, though we have not in the mean time the understanding to thank God,
for the smallest thing. Neither make we any account or reckoning of the
greatest goods because they seem to us to be too common, as to live, to be in
health, to see, to hear, to speak, to enjoy peace, to eat and drink, to have
food for our belly, and clothes for our back, to see and enjoy the fruits of
the labourable ground, together with the commodities of the saileable Sea, that
we can talk, or hold our tongue, sit, or stand, sleep or wake as we will. If
men would but consider in their minds, what displeasure and grief redoundeth
unto such as do lack any of these abilities, they would no doubt, live much
more content then they do. What think ye would the sick give for the benefit
of health? the blind for the use of his eyes? and such as are despised for a
small measure of renown? we wretches are so blockish and blind, that we can
never prize the goods that we have, until that we be deprived of them; and
have them no more. For we care not if what we do be right or wrong, so it
make for the raising of our fortune, and thus has vice by the contempt of
adversity bin entertained.

That which rests, I wish you always to be advised that ye fall never so
far in love with the things of this life, that the fear ye have to loose
them vex you with unrest, or yet having lost them, immoderate sorrow for them
hurl you headlong into despair.

DISC. 13. Of sadness and sorrow.
Sadness, or heaviness of heart, is a languishing feebleness of the spirit,
and a kind of discouragement engendered by the opinion that we have of the
greatness of those evils that afflict us. It is a dangerous enemy to our
rest, which presently weakneth and quelleth our Souls: it corrupts the whole
man, brings his virtues asleep; and it is the Daughter of Adversity, which
does beget in us vexation and grief, according to the greatness or smalnesse
thereof: whence likewise there happens some fault: For now adays we may see
men ordinarily mourning and moaning excessively for many things, not so much
for that they have cause, as because it is the custom. One lamenteth the
mishaps of his neighbor, or friend, and carries a pale and heavy countenance,
to show that he is very pensive, although he be nothing sorry at all. This kind
of customable compassion is altogether unprofitable, in regard that even in
your own adversity, ye ought not to be sad, but only so far forth as
reason does require, and not as custom does command. There are six kind of
men that are never without sorrow: He that cannot forget his trouble; an
envious man that dwells by Neighbors newly enriched; he that dwells in a
place and cannot thrive, where another did thrive before: A rich man decayed,
and fallen into poverty: He that would obtain that he cannot get: And he
that dwells with a wise man, and can get nothing of him. And besides these,
how many is there who weep when others look on them, and do think it should
be a very ill favored thing, not to shed tears when as others do mourn? How
many frivolous sorrows has it made many to slide into, to lean too much upon
the tottering and unstayed proppe of opinion? How much better were it in such
cases, to devise some new fashion, and to feel humane accidents after that
mood which best becomes wise and moderate men? What good do their immoderate
sighs and sobs, either to the living, or to the dead? Does there any other
thing flow therefrom, save that they waste themselves wretchedly and
retchlesly away? For tho it be true, that oftentimes such disasters and
accidents fall out, that it is impossible for men to pass them over without
being touched with sorrow for the same: nevertheless we must always be ware
to be more sorry then reason does allow; and seeing that time ought to heal us
in the end, it were a babishnesse not to prevent it wisely, and to do that
betimes, which at one time or other we must do perforce.

How many men shortly after the death of their children, or wives, have
recomforted themselves, esteeming the time lost which they had spent in
sadness and in sorrow? For although though it be true, that such persons are
worthy to be renewed in our remembrance, yet we ought to bring thereunto that
moderation and remedy, which at last will needs offer and apply it self,
though ye would never so feign resist it.

DISC. 14. Of the affliction of good men.
Grief is the next friend unto solitariness, enemy to company, and heir of
desperation; and it is not a small occasion of sorrow unto vigorous minds, and
such as are touched with humanity, to see virtuous men vilipended or wronged:
and truly it seems to be nothing less then a heavy heart-breake, and almost
an unsupportable pain to behold wise and peaceable men afflicted, troubled,
and vexed, yea to be ill-used, and trampled; as it were, under feet by the
vain world, and to say the truth, it seems that this does touch us very
near: for when as we weigh with our selves that the portion and lot of
virtuous men is no other but affliction, and labor of mind, we do thereupon
presently imagine, that thereby our best hopes are hemmed in.

If then such a case disquiet you think with your self, that if they be
honest and patient men, then are they in that case so much the more happy,
because that in this life which is so short, they purchase to themselves a life
eternal in the heavens, for ye must know that the first good which such as go
to rest in Gods house do obtain, is to be quit and discharged from the
tentations and torments of this troublesome life.

Afflictions on earth are as so many good companions unto the godly; which
though of themselves unworthy, yet make their cause the better, who aim at a
higher end then the blinded eyes of the ignorant without dazzling can behold;
and so becomes the master of their own hopes, before others perceive them in
trouble. The heavens are their only prospect where they behold the creator of
Nature in his height of wonder, and themselves are the Mine into which they
dive, to find reason Tryumphant by which they govern their insurrective
passions. Moreover, set before your eyes the roll and scroll of holy men of
old, the blessed Martyrs of Christ, of whom some have been beheaded, others
have been hanged; some have been burnt, and others have been broyled; some
have been cut in pieces, and others have had their skin pulled off. Besides
that during their life they have been afflicted with hunger, nakedness, and
need: of whom certainly the world was not worthy, and therefore it had them
in horror as those in whom it had no interest at al. But God loved them
dearly, and by his divine providence, which cannot be deceived, appointed
them to pass through such Tribulations, as through a needles eye, into the
place of perpetual repose. Yea the pains and perplexities that virtuous men
do endure, do even prick them forwards to have a more earnest desire to
loath, and to leave this wretched world. So that in the end they dislodge out
of a bad and sad prison, they escape and slip out of the dark caves and
obscure corners, and having no deep apprehension of death, they find the
fair beaten way that leads them to a better life.

DIS. 15. Of other men's faults and imperfections.
NOw joy begins to budde, and the blossoms of felicity appear, yet after that
ye have thus disposed of yourselfe, and have appeased your own passions; yet
shall ye have the vices of others, and the faults which are done in public,
making an onset against you to trouble your mind. Considering the great
disorder that is amongst men; which is so great, that scarsely there cannot any
thing be found in the room where it ought to be; and that there is hardly any
one that does the duty whereunto by birth and calling he was ordained. The man
who should prove a wise Judge, is a simple Citizen: and he that ought to be but
a mere citizen is made a Judge, and that man does command who ought to obey.

It is a strange thing to consider, how that almost every thing is corrupt and
sold, and how that, as it were; all things are turned upside down. To see how
that the poor man is punished for every petty trespass, and the puisant and
wealthy person is spared: to see, I say, how the whole plotting and plodding of
men now a days, is altogether for money; when as riches are but the gifts of
Nature; but goodness of God himself; and can thou think that he that
created man good, has not bestowed a greater portion on him, then those whom
fortune has made rich: what if thou be poor, content thy self, thou shall
find greater consolation in that, and goodness, then the bad, and rich shall
with all their store.

Again, it cannot but bring grief unto a good man's mind, to consider how
small occasion and example of living virtuously such persons do minister unto
us, as hold the chief offices, and the first ranks in the Common wealth. The
virtuous man is holden every where as a monster; abhorred, despised, and
disdained. And what shall a man say, when as he weighs with himself the
variable and mutable disposition of the multitude, one while loving, and
another while loathing, at one time praising, at another time dispraising, one
and the same thing, one and the same party? How many be the miserable changes
that fall out amongst men? And what a hard case is it, when men make none
account of that they should diligently hear: and on the other side harken to
that whereunto they should rather stop the ear. The despite and dislike that
many have conceived, by reason of such courses, has made them bid the world
fare well, and moved them to withdraw themselves into deserts and solitary
aboads, as not being able to behold with their eyes, that which did breed, and
bring so much displeasure to their minds, whose intentions were wholly bent
upon that which was really good, laudable, and honest. And therefore such have
chosen to live rather amongst the wild beasts, amidst the vaste wilderness,
and rocky mountains, then amongst so many wild men, swarming with vile and
wicked manners.

Nevertheless, in these, and such other occurrents as cannot be amended, man
must command and master his mind, and carry himself in such sort, that these
unamendable evils make him not to abhor the company and society of men: but
rather he must take occasion thereof, to be the more watchful and wary, lest
he become one of those that forget to carry themselves discreetly amongst men;
he must also beware lest he minister occasion to another, to blame in himself
that which he does blame in his neighbor. A man must hold more on Democritus
then on Heraclitus, for he did weep always at the faults he saw men fall
into; but Democritus did laugh at them: To the one, all that men do, did seem
to be but misery, to the other fondness and folly. And it seems to be the
better of the twain, when as things amiss cannot be amended, that we sweeten
them a little, if it were but in covering them with the cloak of a fair show,
it being a likelihood more consonant to man's nature, to laugh at the manifold
miseries of our life, then mourningly to bewail them with tears.

But yet ye shall do better, if that for the vices of other men, and such as
are done in public, ye do keep a mediocrity and mean, neither always
lamenting, not yet always laughing at them: for it is both a miserable kind
of disposition, for a man to afflict himself excessively, by reason of another
man's miscarriage, and a pitiless kind of passe-time to be laughing always
thereat.

But there be some, to whom this advice will seem to be of no weight: for not
only they cannot comport with the imperfections of their friends, but also
those of their enemies do afflict them. Their honors, precedencies, wrongs,
and incompetencies vex them: the importunities of their friends, the way
wardnesse and peevishness of their Servants, and Acquaintance trouble and
torment them daily. But how much better were it to have patience in such
accidents, chiefly seeing they win so little by willing and wishing the
amendment thereof: Ye must rather imagine and think with your self, tha^ these
men, which thus take pleasure to annoy you, are as dogs which be borne to
bark. And impute all this evil to their perverse nature, wherein they are
enough punished by the means of a perpetual peoplexity, which pricketh and
peirceth their mind.

But if your weakness be such, as to stumble at all that ye see ill done, by
such as are about you, ye are then, in that case meere^y forlorn. For if the
vices of strangers, or of those that be your own, come once to win ground on
you, to close with you, and to overcome you, ye shall be abashed, and amazed to
see how that all such importunities and troubles, like water, shall run into
you, as the rain does from the gutter into the base cour^, or from a steep
hill into a low valley. And out of all question it is to be undiscreetly
tenderhearted for a man to be always sorry, when those with whom we do hant,
do not entertain us so carefully, or respectively as we desire. He that
avoideth conversation, does nothing else in effect, but contradict the power of
his Creation; therefore he ought so to principle himself, as that his
carriage may be pleasing and acceptable unto all men, to the intent that Love,
Peace, and Charity may be preserved.

The immoderate affection we bear unto our selves, does deceive us, and the
delicacy of our own condition makes that we cannot bear with the defects and
neglects of our servants, we not considering how that very often they know not
how to do any better. We require at their hands perfect things, when as yet we
our selves do fall into so many faults, and are subject unto so many
imperfections.

And most often we play the passionate and fretting man's part in our servants
behalf, either being moved by the distastes that our own ill conditions do
occasion unto us, or by the quality and kind of the business we have in hand:
and thus foolishly we cast the fault upon them which are innocent, and do the
best they can. The angry was never a good man, and he that perversely follows
his own passions, without balancing his actions, shuts himself out of this
Kingdom of reason and Humane society: be not rash, but weigh another faults
in thine own scalls, so when thou come to be weighed in them thy self;
thou shall find thy sins so much the lighter, by how much thou have borne
with the errors of others.

There is also another thing which does bring unto us much disquiet, and that
is to affect too much one and the same thing, and thereupon to fall into debate
with our friends. For there was never yet any perfect friendship amongst them
which are led and miscarried with an obstinate emulation and contention who
shall overcome. If ye belabor, and accustom your self, through exercise, to
frame your self to times and persons, ye may easily govern and rule men at
your will, and withal purge them from such evil humors as ye find them
subject unto. And whenever it shall fall out, that it shall seem unto you a
thing impossible to comport with them; think that it is your fault, and that
this flows from your own inability: considering how that so many others
could, and yet can very well comport with the same. You must not strive or
contend to go beyond others in apprehension, Sin, Judgment, or Conceit, but
Moderate your understanding, and somewhat abase the value and estimation of
your worth; so shall you sail with much more safety, and by a surer compass,
then those that shall do otherwise. For even as the sick are wont to say,
that they find all meats bitter, and contrary to their taste, thinking that
the fault is either in the meats, or in the man name into ^^ared them: but as
soon (...) ^ther men eat them, wit^ ^^^ren requ^^^ any whit against their
stomac^ ^^^tledness ^o know that the imperfection ^ieth in themselves. In like
manner, as often as ye call to mind, how that many others have suffered, and
yet do suffer, with a gaye and courageous heart, the most troublesome, and
toylesome accidents of the world, ye must confess that the fault must be
imputed to your own feebleness, and to nothing else.

Regal Government is that of a King, domestic of a Master, as the first is
sometimes merciful, sometimes severe to his subjects, so should the latter be
to his Family. Economy is that which every man may practice, and find
sufficient employment: there is power given to wh^^ Tyrannize, and pow^^ out,
that it ^^erne well: theref^^^ you a^^ thin^ ^^^vised, and re^^^ comp^^ that
only the go^^ ^^inke tha^ wise receive the blessed reward of doing happily.

If the manners and conditions of your wife vex you, ye must bend them, and
bow them gently and softly, if it be possible, and that by using all kind of
mild and amiable means. But if your misfortune be such that ye cannot
prevail with her, by way of pleasing and peaceable persuasions, then it
behooveth that wisdom and discretion teach you to endure patiently her cross
conditions, and to master and dissemble the evil which ye cannot amend:
otherwise ye shall turn your house into a prison, your quiet rest into
restless coil, and your good name into an intolerable shame.

In your children require not that sagenesse and settlednesse, which ye find
in old folks: seeing that they were not borne old: This age carries in it
many things, the which if ye should endeavor on a sudden to draw to a
perfection, ye should undertake a task of no small trouble, and if in young
trees, ye are content that they bear leaves and buds, why do ye require ripe
fruit in your children before the time? Who craveth the thing* that cannot be
had, labors for that he shall not obtain. The mean is to touch and in
instruct them diligently, to bring them up virtuously, and not to chide them
continually, or check them immoderately: if peradventure they fail to do a
thing as they ought.

DISC. 16. Of Injuries and Indignations.
THree things a rise of an Injury done to us; first hatred in our affection,
secondly the sign of this anger is, when it appears in the countenance;
thirdly when we intend action by law for wrongs; we are bound to pardon the
first, although our enemy sue it not of us; we are bound to pardon the second,
when our enemy sues it of us; but we are not bonud always to pardon the
third; for there are some men, which could patiently comport with all other
kind of affliction, only they cannot away with an indignity and wrong. The
which thing, nevertheless, befalls them more for being persuaded that the
injury offered them is unsupportable, then for that it is so of its own
nature. In which case one thing may avail you much; if ye can resolve with
your self to keep you aloof from the common opinion, and if ye can consider
without passion, each one of the things that are wont thus to toil, and
turmoile men's minds. For in so doing, ye shall see, if ye have reason to
think upon the wrong offered you so immoderately as ye do.

There is one kind of displeasure, which we call an injury, or wrong, that is,
when any one overthwarteth us in our affairs against all equity and right. And
there is another kind which we call an indignity, or affront, when as in our
body, or name, we are used by word or deed otherwise then is fitting.

For both these kinds, ye ought to know, that the virtuous man is not subject
to receive any wrong: not that I do mean that there is none to offer and to
infer wrong, for there is nothing so sacred, but there will be found
sacrilegious hands to touch it. But that though there be not wanting
multitudes of men, whose tongues and hands have no other, employment, but to
defile, and diminish, so much as in them lies, the honor of God, and of men:
yet, for all that, the virtuous man's mind is not a whit the less assured: and
though that such mischievous, and malicious men, level right at him to hit,
and to hurt him with their harmefull shaft, yet do they come short of their
aim; for either they hit him not, or if they do, they hurt him not all: for an
inviolable thing is not simply that which cannot be hit, but rather that which
being hit, receives thereby no hurt or at least, cares not at all for it. And
thus does it fare with the virtuous man, who of himself offers no man any
occasion of offering him any wrong. But his carriage is so level and even, his
love so meek and humble, that even the vicious admire him. And if it fall out,
that a man, out of a proud and haughty stomach, or rather out of a malicious
disposition set upon him, and assail him, he is then in that case like a
brazen wall, which the darts of the wicked cannot pierce through.

Moreover; we know that the virtue and vigor of him, who in fighting has
vanquished his adversary, is always greater then his who never did try the
combat at all. And even the very same must we think and say of the virtuous
wight, and well disposed person: who, like to good metal, the more he is
fired, the more he is fined; the more he is opposed, the more is he approved.
Wrongs may well try him, touch him, or prick him, but they cannot imprint in
him any false stamp. And if (peradventure) some flout, or affront be flung
upon him, yet does he in the mean time remain firm and unremoved; he makes
no reckoning, nor yet takes any notice thereof, as assuring himself that it
does not reach so far as unto him. Add also hereunto, that there is almost
no man, but he will hold the wrong-offerer for wicked, and the wrong-sufferer
for honest, as not deserving any such outrageous usage. The force and strength
of his Virtue appears so much the more in this kind of adversity, and his
mildnes and meekness of mind, shines so much the more clearly, by how much
the more bitter and grievous the wrong offered was. But unto such as are of a
more cowardly and base courage, an indignity is more uneasy to be borne
withal.

But would you see how men do measure wrongs by opinion? Such vanity there is
in the things of this World, that some will make less ado for a bloody blow,
then for a light box on the ear. Yea, some will make a greater stir for a
vanishing hard word, then they would do for a deadly blow with a sharp
weapon. We are fallen into such blindness and babishnesse, that opinion
annoyeth us more then the Soar it self, being like unto little children,
which are amazed at a mummers mask. If it chance that a man be hindered, or
wronged in his goods, it is a wonder to consider what a coil he does keep
about them. But the discreet and welstayed person; who judges of things
according to reason, not measuring them by opinion, as he holds all things,
even as if it were by borrowing, so he feels the loss of them, as if they
were things in no part his. And even as he should not cease to be content,
though he had never had them at all, so he takes the loss of any part of
them, as the necessary out-casting or forgoing of one portion to save another,
in the midst of a tempestuous storm. Yea the forgoing of his whole goods will
not make him to forget his own worth and vigor of mind: he knowing well that
not only his goods, but also his life, honor, and whole happiness does only
depend upon him who is the giver of every good thing. Such a one perhaps has
couzened you of so many crowns, has deceived you of so many Ducates. Well, it
is a damage he has done you, yet is it a loss but of a part only of your
goods, and not of the whole. And the man that has the heart to give or forgo
the whole, can he be much sorry to let go, or loose apart.

But if it be the manner of your loss which does most vex you: then ye have
to think, that as your virtue would have you comport with Fortune and her
frowns; so ought ye likewise to bear with insolent and audacious men, which
are no thing else but the hookish hands of the same hard fortune. And trust me,
our impatiency does us much more harm, then those of whose violence and
injustice we do so bitterly complain.

What? (will some say) such a one did disdain to put off his hat to me; such
another in speaking to me did not use that respect in my behalf as he ought,
and I thought he should have don such a one did not give me place, but sat him
down before me, and such another would not give me the wall. What terms, I
pray you, be all these, but mere plaints flowing from the soft and feeble
courage of an effeminate mind?

Diverse things displease us, which otherwise would not do so, if we had the
will to conster them aright, and to take them in the better part; whereas
through our own indiscretion, and distrust of our selves, we make that an
indignity which of its own nature is none; in so doing we judge our selves
well worthy thereof, and what other thing is this but lack of courage, though we
feel the wrong never so sensible, not to be able to tread it, and to trample
it under our feet?

And if we will but weigh and observe how, and in what manner the nightly
visions and imaginations of dangers, which do present themselves in our dreams
do suddenly vanish, and sometimes do make us laugh when we remember them, we
should do well to endeavor to do the like in our injuries, to think when as
any wrong is done us, that we do but awake out of a dreaming sleep: a
virtuous and well-disposed man (assure your self) will be loath to wrong you
in your body, goods or good name; and as for any ill-disposed wretch, what
shall it avail you to complain, seeing that he is no more his own man, then
if he were mad? If the good affect you, and applaud your laudable
endeavors, why should you fear the malice of the wicked, seeing that the
first are rewarded with a crown, but these with folly; ye will willingly
endure any thing at the hands of a man that is out of his wits, neither will he
make any complaint for ought he has said or don to you, but will rather pity
his case: even so must ye bear with the mis-behaviour of a foolish undiscreet
person, who is no better then a man distracted: ye will endure well enough
what a Jester or sporter will say unto you, be it never so unpleasant, and
would think it but a base part for you to inform against, or to complain
upon such a person, as if he chance to utter any pleasing word amidst his
carping discourse, ye take it and taste it as a savory disport. Consider
therefore how unfitting and unseemely a thing it were that the same word uttered
by one, should cause you to laugh, and by another to lowre: the case so
standing, that the man that is in choler, has no more judgment then a simple
Jester has; if he have so much.

The Hebrews say, if a man have offended his neighbor, he must go and seek
reconciliation of him; but if he will not be reconciled, he shall take three
men with him, who shall intercede for him, and seek reconciliation: but if he
yet will not pardon him, this is a great iniquity to be so cruel, and then he
leaves his neighbor inexcusable. But what shall we say of those that are
offended with little boys, and silly women? persons that do offend rather of
weakness, then of a wilful or wicked design? for conclusion ye shall never
attain to tranquillity of mind, if ye take in ill part every cross chance
that does offer it self.

Some will say, this offense may be well borne with', but that others must not
be borne with at all. But these men do shut up virtue into a too strait
room, and confine her abilities within too narrow bounds, as i^ they should
say, virtue may we^ vanquish this wrong, but no^ that other: truly if Fortune
b^ not wholly beaten down and defeated, she will remain mistress. But what
then will ye say, occasion of affront is given me? how then shall I, or can I
bear it patiently, and go with an open face? If the injury has his birth from
your mis-behaviour, ye must think then, that it is not so much a wrong as a
correction: and this ye ought to receive discreetly, and withal make use of
it as a chastisement of your own misdemeanour. If it chance that a man flout
you for some imperfection of your person, because the features of your body are
not to their mind, take not this to heart as a revengable wrong: for it is but
a mere folly, for a man to care much for that which falls not out through
his own fault. Fidus Cornelius did weep for very anger in the Senate, because
Corduba S^^thio said to him scoffingly that he did resemble much a pilde
Camel: Behold, if one counter feit our gesture, we are by and by offended. But
what miserable blindness is it for a man to vex himself, because another
does imitate his mood or manner of going. The remedy rather were this, if
Nature, has laid upon you any defect or blemish which does deforme your body,
speak of it first your self, as knowing it better then any other: for by this
means ye shall take away from others all occasion of scorning or flouting you
for it. Thus Vatinius was wont to mock himself, in regard of his neck, and
feet which were somewhat deformed: so that his enemies and il-willers could not
take any advantage thereof to break upon him any bitter jest. Moreover it is
not a small policy to deprive the party that does you wrong, of all the pleasure
he entendeth to reap, by holding your peace, as not thinking him worthy of so
much as one word of your mouth, of by leaving him there where ye found him,
disdaining to brable or quarrel with him, to take any notice of the man, or of
his manners: if ye will be advised by me, make never answer to an insolent
malapert person, for in holding your tongue ye leave with him lying in his
mouth, yea in his mind, his vice, folly and rashneffe, whereas in answering
him, ye shall conform your self to his naughty nature. There is nothing that
equalizeth so much men among themselves, as the participation of one and the
same vice: neither can there any such chastisement befall unto an ill-humored
man as to make no reckoning, but to let vanish with the wind his vain and
unsavory words, for both by your silence are his speeches condemned of
impertinency, and he deprived of the pleasure he promised to himself by
provoking him to anger.

Jeasts are the superfluity of their discretion who make it a pastime, to
revile, and a sport to condemn others; they spare non, and had rather suffer
then suppress their thoughts: they are like a woman with child, who longs to
be delivered, although the birth may prove abortive; and therefore it likewise
behooves a man to be very circumspect and wary in his jesting at others. For
we find by experience, that men do commonly fly the company of such as make
profession of scoffing and deriding. We find likewise, that no man can
entertain a certain Amity and unfaileable Friendship with such a one as is
averse from pardoning such as have offended him. For a generous and Heroicke
spirit will yield to fortune as he sees occasion: He will not strive to swim
against the stream, nor sail against the Wind. The greatness of his mind
gives place to the weakness of his means: when he cannot what he would, he
wills but what he can, and ^hinkes these plots and counsels ^o be best, which
though they ^ee inglorious, and want that ^ustre which prosperity might ^end
them, are yet convenient ^o be followed in regard of Circumstance.

The Emperor Caius Caesar, a man of an injurious inclination, and in his Army
a certain Tribune, Che^ea by name, a man of a shrill, small, and womanish
voice in speaking, and therefore one of whom they had no great opinion. This
effeminate voiced man having on a time asked the Emperor what should be the
watchword, he of purpose to scorn him, gave him such a word as was dishonest.
By reason of which indignity the Tribune was so deeply offended, that
thereafter associating himself among the murderers which did wickedly seize
upon the Emperor, he was the man that did beat out the one half of his
brains. So that he who seemed unto Caesar to come somewhat short of a man,
proved most the man (though indeed he had more malice then manhood) in cutting
him impiously off, from being any more a Monarch among men. To use such bitter
taunts bewrays want of discretion, and not to be able to digest them, does
argue lack of courage. Socrates hearing himself flouted to his face, did no
other thing but laugh thereat, without making any show of a displeased mind. It
is reported of him and of Lelius the Roman, that they two did so happily
entertain this Tranquillity of mind, that they were never seen to change
their countenance. How ill did Michals jeasting become her, when David with
such zeal danced before the Arc? cannot religion be spared? One would have
thought his greatness might have freed him from reviling: but whom will
impiety not offend, when it spares not the great not the holy; yet even he
sets her words at naught, and was for all that no way hindered in performing
holy duties.

Furthermore ye ought diligently to avoid all noise, brabbles and strife: for
this brawling and quarrelling humor alters not a little the whole man, and
makes him ill-conditioned. Be not lavish of your language, but rather sparing
of speech. Let your words be such as carry with them their due authority and
weight. And withal accustom your self to pass diverse things under the great
Seal of silence: It being the part of a wise man, to make a virtue of
necessity, and with a settled countenance to swallow down upon an urgent
extremity, the bitter potion of indignity; if when the winds do storm, he
cannot harbor where he would, he will anchor where he may. Suffer not your
self to be beguiled by the unreasonable opinion of the miscrdred multitude,
which do hold such folks only to be free as may do what they list, be it
never so evil; and such only to be courageous and generous spirits as can put
up no wrong.

It is true liberty for a man to live not according as his lawless lust does
lead him, but as reason does rule him: and to do not what ever sensually he
would, but what reasonable he should. And it is true courage and magnanimity,
for a man to put up wrongs, to dis-esteeme, and not to be moved by them, but to
command his affections, and to overcome his passions. That which he shall never
be able to do, who has not his spirit composed, and his mind ordered to
despise these vanities and delicacies, which do shake the feebler sort:
finally, endeavor to have the upper hand in fetting light by all humane
crosses, and popular conceits: for it is no sign of good, when a man is
always crying and complaining that they touch him; and so it fares with the
mind. Let that therefore be mollified with comfortable and peaceable
playsters, such as are joy, exultation, and delight; and these will bring unto
you greater content, then Humanity can imagine.

DISC. 17. Of Poverty.
THere is a twofold Poverty, the one extreme, which is the want of things
necessary and requisite unto Nature: The other is the want of things that are
more then sufficient, required for pleasure, pomp, and delicacy. This is a
kind of Mediocrity, and that which we fear to lose, is our riches, and
movables, when such poverty is rather to be desired, then feared: And therefore
the Wise man asked of God neither Poverty nor Riches, but things necessary. He
that can make that reckoning of life and death that he ought, poverty can never
afflict or bereave him of his rest: For it were a thing very unfitting, that he
who can despise death, should suffer his courage to be cast down, or to be
quite quelled by poverty and need which nevertheless is that the common people
do most apprehend, and most complain on, when as they cannot attain unto a
sufficiency of goods whereupon to maintain themselves in a gay and gallant
manner. They not being able to content themselves with such things as may serve
for their necessity; but esteeming Wealth man's sovereign good; and Poverty and
Want his chiefest evil. And yet were it not better for a man not to have at
all, then to lose it when he has it? And how is it possible in this life that
some should not lose, seeing that one cannot be rich, except many other be
poor, and many cannot inherit, except others do die? And yet there is in
poverty this consolation, that as it is not subject to the receiving and
incurring of great damages, so is it not accompanied with so many monstrous
turmoiles as plenty and abundance is.

Wisdom if she be poor is never respected: fools have the fortune, and
that not without good reason; for they have the most need of it. Desert if she
be mean, may to the Cart, there is no room for her in Court, where judgment
looks a squint, and casts her eyes but upon outward adjuncts, unless she be
perfumed and ruffle in her silks; let her avoid the gates of greatness. And
to think that rich men have more courage to comport with losses then other men
have, is an error. For the pain of a soar is as sensible and dolorous in a
big body, as in a small; yea we see ordinarily, that the greatest men are
the most tender and delicate.

The Philosopher Bion was wont to say, that the pain is alike which is felt by
plucking, or pulling the hairs from an head that has many, and from that
which has few.

All the difference that can be, is this; that the balde head has less hair
to loose, and consequently cannot feel so much smart as the other does that is
full of hairs.

If thou will live according to nature, thou shall never be poor; if
according to opinion, never rich: Nature desires little, opinion much, and
beyond measure. Moderate and quiet poverty by the law of nature is great
riches, and godliness is great gain with sufficiency, and hence it is that we
see, for the most part, the poorer sort of people to be more jocund and
joyful then commonly the richer sort are, because they have not so great care
as they have, neither do they fear so deeply the storm of adversity, as they
do. For they are eaten up with this double worm, the care of conserving and
increasing the goods they have got, and the fear of losing that which they
enjoy. But poverty is a castle and fort, assured and fenced against fortune,
yea the whole world. She fears nothing, and is able withal to defend her
self against all her enemies. Thouman whosoever thou art that go drooping
and dying for riches, for worldly pelf, and wealth, tell me I pray thee, if
since thou have got them, they have brought unto thee any more knowledge unto
thy mind, or more Tranquillity and peace unto thy spirit, or more rest and
happiness unto thine heart, then thou had before thy came into thine hands?
The wise men among the heathen have taught us, how much poverty is to be prised
and praised, when as they did portrait and paint their Gods naked, attributing
unto them all things according as they conceited to be most befitting their
natures: and as for my self, I shall never repute that man poor, who is
placed without the reach and power of fortune. There is one thing sufficient to
express unto us the nature of poverty, to wit, that no virtuous man speaks
thereof, but he praises it; and avoucheth that the wisest have bin those who
have suffered the same with most contentment, and truly it is a great
weakness and tenderness in us, not to be able to endure that which so many
others have passed through, and it can be no other thing but a vain
apprehension and frivolous fear to endure and suffer, which makes us so
feeble hearted; for if we were indeed of a generous and magnanimous
disposition, we would love and like that for our selves which we approve in
others: and therefore howsoever this peevishness and softness of ours is not
altogether to be comported with; we ought at least to limite our affections,
and dress our selves in such sort that fortune may find the less advantage
to offend us: for a small body that can cover and gather it self together under
a buckler, marches on toward the enemy with more surely then a bigger body
does, that lies at large and open unto blows. If it were not mine intention
to husband the time, and to spare paper, I could enlarge my discourse by
reciting of almost ^nnumerable examples as well of Heathens as of Christians,
which have placed a great part of their perfection in poverty. But ye ought to
consider one thing for all, that Jesus Christ was poor, who was Lord of the
whole world: his Disciples were poor, which did possess all things, and the
Saints were poor which might have been rich. If ye should never dye, I would
advise you to set your affection upon riches: but I see to that those to whom
they most befall, do find sooner the end of their living then of their
longing. Why then should a man torment himself for a thing that he must
necessarily leave? and why is he not rather content quietly with that which is
needful, chiefly considering that the fairest kind of wealth is for a man to
be neither too poor, nor yet too far off from poverty?

DISC. 18. Of Death.
CAesar said well, that the best death was that which was least premeditated;
and to say truth, the preparation before death has bin to many a greater
torment, then the execution it self. The Mexicans salute their Infants coming
forth of their Mothers womb, thus; Infant, thou art come into the world to
suffer; endure, suffer, and hold thy peace. Why then should a man be sorry to
dye, when nothing but life is miserable. And it seems, that all incommodities
and misfortunes may be borne with, either by the means of a long custom, or
by the help of a strong discourse, only Death and the apprehension thereof,
is the thing that puts us in greatest fear.

Now the only remedy and true easing of this evil, is that ye make this
reckoning of the world, and all that is therein, that ye have nothing which is
your own, neither life, nor living, no not so much as your own self; but
that ye live always borrowing and holding your very life, not in property,
but on condition to restore it unto him again, who has lent it you,
whenever he shall require it at your hands: yet for all this ye must not
neglect it as a thing not yours, but must keep it faithfully and carefully, in
regard that God has trusted you with the custody thereof, and when it is time,
to render it to him that gave it, not grudgingly, but gladly, and with a
cheerful countenance: in the mean time thanking GOD, the giver of all good
things, for the time ye have had the use and aid thereof, and saying unto him
in this, or the like manner; Lord, I render unto thee again this Soul and
Life, with as good an heart as it pleased thee to give me the same, yea, even
with a better and readier will then I did receive it: for when thou gave it
me, thou gave it to a little weak Creature, which knew not the good thou
then did bestow, but now thou do receive it again at the hands of a
Creature more accomplished, who knows what it is he commends into thine
hands, and therefore rendereth it unto thee withal franknesse and readiness of
will: and truly we may easily imagine that it is not a hard thing for a
substance to return to the place whence it first came, the body returning to
the earth, and the soul (if it go the right way) must go to him that gave
it. To be short, that man doubtless never learned well to live, who knows
not how to die: we must therefore in this case be so affected toward our
selves, as we are wont to be in the behalf of fencers which must fight in a
barred field: for we commonly hate him that bears himself faint-heartedly,
and favor the other, who out of a brave courage had rather chose to dye then
to be overcome. Besides the fear of death is sometimes the cause, or occasion
of it, to him that flies fastest from it.

And seeing ye know well, that life was given you upon condition to render it
again; ^e ought not to be so unjust, as ^o desire to enjoy that thing for
ever, which was given unto you for a day, by making your self Lord, and owner
of the thing whereof ye are only a depositary or keeper.

Moreover men will say, that it is a matter of great import, to wit, the fear,
and apprehension of death, and that it is the extreme of all terrible things.
But ye ought to understand that Death is not to be found fault with for this,
seeing that it proceeds not from the nature of Death, but from our own
imbecility: who are commonly overtaken and entangled with delights, with a
desire of this transitory life, and with an immoderate love of this miserable
flesh? And if ye take good heed, it is not so much Death i^ self that is
dreadful, as the opinion which we hold concerning the same. For every man
fears it according to his judgment, apprehension, and conscience. And if it
be so, that ye have no fear thereof, but only for this occasion, then lay
the blame upon your self, and no^ upon it. For it fares with men of an evil
conscience, when they must dye, as it does with riotous spend-thrifts when they
must pay their debts. They will not come to an account for the distrust which
they have of their ability, to satisfy for what they have done.

And to say that ye fear death ^y reason that it is the last point ^^d period
of man, has but lit^^e reason in it. For the Soul (...) always, it lives
ever, and ^^nnot dye.

The Greeks call man's decease ^^e end, giving us thereby to ^nderstand, that
it is the period and end of wearisome life. O^^ers a death, of which there ^re
four kinds; the first is the ^aturall death, or separation be^weene the Body
and the Soul; ^he second is a spiritual death, ^r a separation between the
grace of God and us; the third ^s a ghostly death, or a separation between our
sins and us; and the fourth is an everlasting death, or a separation between
Heaven and us for ever.

But the Holy Scripture calls death a sleep, to assure us of an assured
Resurrection, and to the end we weep not as Infidels do, which are without
hope. Let us consider with ou^ selves how many holy men and women have prized
it, and desired it as the only easemen^ of all their anguish.

The writings of Solomon, Job and the histories of Gods Saints are full of the
praises of this Christian desire of death. What a vanity is it to love so much
this miserable life, this Jaile, this prison, this vale of ^eares, seeing that
the longer we live, the longer we live in sin, the more days we spend, the
more we err, and so go on, each hour purchasing unto our selves a new pain
and punishment?

The day of Death is the Master-day, and Judge of all other days; the trial
and Touchstone of all the actions of our ^^fe: Then do we make our grea^^st
assay, and gather the whole ^^uite of all our studies. He that ^^dgeth of the
Life of a man, ^ust look how he carries ^imselfe at his Death: for the and
Crowns the Works, and a good Death honors a ^ans whole life, as an evil
de^^meth it. Therefore fear it ^ot (On Christian) for that day which thou
fear as thy last, is ^^e Birthday of Eternity.

Diverse days have been ^appy and unlucky to diverse, ^en; as Friday to that
great Captain Gonsalvo in the Wars of Naples; the twenty fourth day of
February, to Charles the fifth; Wednesday to Pope Six^us the fifth: Sunday to
Henry the seventh of England: And Saturday in the three times taking of
Jerusalem by Pompey, Herod, and Titus. But no day (...) either happy or averse
to a ch^^stian, but his day of death: Ho^^ careful ought ye then to be (...)
prepare himself against the day, wherein he shall be rewa^ded according to his
worke^ which if good, with a Crow^ of blessedness, but if bad, wi^^
unquenchable fire.

It was a custom among the Indians, when any of the m^dyed, his wives with
their mo^^ glorious Habits and greate^ pomp as if it were on the^^ nuptial
day, threw themselv^^ into the fire, she accounting h^^ self happiest that was
the first and those that refused, were for ever after rejected and mad^ slaves.
Let not Heathens ou^ strippe thee O Christian, let the death be more
honorable CHRIST is the Spouse of the Church, follow him therefore, ^^t not
thy life only but thy ^eath be godly: otherwise thou ^^t no better then a
slave to sin and Satan, despised not of men ^nely, but of the Devils
themselves.

This consideration of our death (...) a great help, not only to ^rovoke us
to live a good life, ^ut besides that to dye well: In things that be hard and
dificult, foresight and preparation before ^and is a very great help to ^ring
them well to pass. Now so great a leap, as is the leap of death (which
reaches from this life to the everlasting life to come) cannot well be leaped,
unless we make a great course, and fetch a long race to run the same. No
great thing can be well and perfectly done at the first time; seeing therefore
it is so great a matter to dye; and so necessary to dye well, it shall be very
expedient for us to dye oftentimes in our life, that we may dye well at the
very time of our death. We must not be unwilling to dye, and to yeel^ our
bodies as a debt due to Nature: no, for the Body at the best is but the Coffin
of the Soul, as the Grave is the coffin of the Body. The souliders that be
appointed to fight, do first practice themselves in such postures and
exercises, as whereby the may learn in time of peace, what they must do in
time of war; the Horse also that must run at the Tilt, traverseth all the
ground before, and tries all the steps thereof; that at such times as he
comes to make his course, he be not found new and strange in doing his feat.
Wherefore seeing we all must run this course (insomuch as there is no man
alive but must dye) considering also that the way is so obscure and stony (as
all men know) and the danger so great, that whosoever falls shall be tumbled
down headlong into the bottomless pit of hell fire; it is very requisite that
we tread diligently before hand all this way, and consider particularly, all
the steps and places thereof one by one, because that in every one of them
there is much to be considered; and let us not think it enough to consider
only what passes outwardly in our conversation, but let us endeavor much
more to understand what passes inwardly within the heart, so shall both our
life and and death be acceptable.

And to shut the door unto all fearful apprehensions of death, we must
learn to do two things which the world can never teach us; the one is to live
well, for a virtuous and Christian life makes even agreeable the very memory
of death: the other is that we believe that the thing which it has pleased
God to afford us for a remedy, and easement of our manifold labors, and
toils, is not so harsh, nor so horrible, as we do imagine.

And for a final conclusion, let us remember how that the Saints have held
life a pain, and death an ease. And that every part of Heaven shall together
shine upon us; who wholly shall behold all the glory thereof in his due place,
which now through the straight and narrow passage of the sight, we do but see
and discern a far off: And let us close all up with this, that though our
mortal bodies are dissolved here on earth, yet God will raise up both Soul
and Body at the latter Day, to Crown them with Everlasting Happiness.

The Authors Conclusion.
BEHOLD here the Flowers that I have gathered here an^ there out of the
garden of the flourishing Wits and Wri^tings of the Wise. Them I lay open in
common between you an^ me, even as busy Bees do their Honey which they have
reaped i^ fair and well furnished Gardens* and flowery Fields, to the end we^
together may draw from thence the sugared sweetness of this pleasant Emblem,
or Happiness of the Mind. I am of opinion, that of the ancient Poets had
thoroughly known this, they would not have composed any other Nectar, or brewed
any other Ambrosiacke for the dye^ of their Gods: but should have thought them
well feasted in serving them with ^his dish alone, for all messes and ^neales.
Seeing therefore we have the opportunity offered us ^f finding out, and using
so di^ine a thing, let us make use of ^t in the most thrifty manner we ^ossible
may: Acknowledging in ^he mean time that this Happi^esse we talk of, is a
Gift from Heaven, which the bountiful influence of the Worlds maker must
distill into our Minds; He being the true and living Wellspring whence
flows all our Felicity and Bliss. Whose Name therefore (according as we are
bound) we bless and magnify for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
THE MINDS DELIGHT.

OR, VARIETY OF MEMORABLE MATTERS WORTHY of Observation.

Lege, and Collige.

Collected by J. M.

LONDON: Printed by Ni. and Io. Oaks. 1635.

THE MINDS DELIGHT: OR, Variety of Memorable Matters worthy of observation.
The four parts of the World.
EVROPA so called from Europa, Daughter of Agenor King of Libya; and of the
Phoenicians brought hither (as Poets feign) by Jupiter, in the shape of a
Bull: but as Historians write, by a Cretan Captain named Taurus, is separated
from Asia, as is hereafter shown; and from Afric by the Mediterranean sea.
It is in length 2800. and in breadth 1200. miles.

Asia so called from the Daughter of Oceanus and Thetis, Wife to Iapetus, and
Mother to Prometheus; or as some say, of Asia the Son of Manae, King of
Lydia; is separated from Europe by the River Tanais, now called Duina, by the
Sea called in time past Palus Mcotides, now Mare de Zabache: and by Pontus
Euxinus, now Mare Maiorica; and by part of the Mediterranean Sea: and from
Africa by the River of Nile, the Red Sea, and the Egyptian Istmus It
stretches in length 5200. miles, and in breadth 4560. miles.

Africa, which some say is so called of one Affer, of the line of Abraham, is
separated from Europe by the Mediterranean sea, and from Asia by the Rod sea,
and the Fiver of Nile. Africa is in length 4155. and in breadth 1920. miles.

America, o^ West India, so called of Americus Vespusius, but first found out
by Christopher Columbus of Genua, the year of our Lord 1492. it is like an
Island, round about environed with the great Ocean* but the length and breadth no
man knows. Africa is greater then Europa, Asia then Africa, and America
bigger then all.

The four Monarchies.
THe first Monarchy was of the Assyrians, founded by Ninus about the year of
the World 2220. augmented by the Queen Semiramis, and after it had endured the
term of 1300. years, it was translated by Arbactus unto the Medes: and there
having endured 350. years, it was lost by Astyages, and conquered by Cyrus.

The second Monarchy was of the Persians, founded by Cyrus, the year of the
World 3425. which after it had endured 191. years, was lost by Darius, and
subdued by Alexander the great.

The third Monarchy was of the Grecians, founded by Alexander the great, in the
year of the World 3634. and before Christ 320 years; after whose death it was
divided among the Prefects, which in his lifetime he had appointed in diverse
Countries: By which division Seleucus was King of Syria, Ptolomeus of Egypt,
Antigonus of Asia, Cassander of Macedonia and Greece: all which Countries were
after subdued by the Romans.

The fourth Monarchy or Empire was of the Romans, founded by Julius Caesar, in
the year of the World 3914, after the building of Rome 706 years, and before
Christ 47 years. This Monarchy flourished about the space of 470 years, till
that after the death of Theodosius the great, it was divided by his two Sons
into two Empires: Arcadius was Emperor of Constantinople, which Empire endured
(though afterward much diministred by the invasions of barbarous nations)
until the year of our Lord 1453, and then was quite lost by Constantine, and
conquered by Mahomet second King of Turks. Honorius was Emperor of Rome,
which Empire shortly after, in the year of our Lord 475, and about the ninth
month of the reign of Augustus, was utterly ruinated by Othacar King of
Goths. And long after, the year of our Lord 801 it was restored by Charles the
great, and by him united to the Crownne of France; and by his successors
translated into Germany, where it yet remains as a shadow only, or
representation of the greatness and majesty of the ancient Roman Empire.

The six Ages of the World.
IN the dividing of these Ages there is great contrariety of Opinions among
Writers; for that some follow the computation of the 72 Interpreters, and some
follow the Hebrews, and the common Text of the Bible. The first Age from the
creation of the world till the universal Flood, endured according to the
Hebrews, 1656 years, which agrees with the saying of S. Hierome, Bid,
Philo, and the common text of the Bible. The 72. Interpreters, and Eusebius
hold that it endured 2242 years, and Saint Austine is of opinion, that it
endured 2272. Of this Age few, or no things are recited worthy of memory:
Except the birth of the first man Adam, and the creation of all things.

The second age from Noah's flood till the birth of Abraham, endured according
to the 72 Interpretours, Eusebius, and the greatest part of writers 942: and
according to the Hebrews but 292 years: Saint Austin counts 172 years. In
this age was builded Babel, The tower of confusion: the Empire of the Assyrians
began, and the great City of Ninive was builded, which contained in circuit
three days journey.

The third age from Abraham to David, endured by the agreement of all Authors
942 years. During this age was the peregrination of Abraham: the beginning of
the Amazones, Sodom and Gommorrah were destroyed: Joseph was sold to the
Egyptians: Moses passed the red Sea: Job the just lived: Jason conquered the
golden Fleet: the destruction of Troy: the Latins began to reign in Italy.

The fourth age from the beginning of the reign of David, till the leading of
the Jews captive into Babylon, endured 485 years: during this age the Empire
of Assyrians was translated to the Medes, the Olympiades of the Grecians
began: Carthage was builded by Dido, and Rome by Romulus: Byzance was also
builded: the destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, and thereupon the
calamity of the Jews.

The fifth age from the transmigration of Babylon to the coming of Christ,
endured by the agreement of al, 589 years. During this age Cyrus began the
Monarchy of the Persians: the 70 year of this age the Jews returned to their
Country: Consuls began to rule in Rome: Xerxes invaded Greece with an army
of 1000000 men: Plato, Aristotle, and Demostenes flourished with many other
worthy Philosophers: Alexander won the Monarchy of the world: the destruction
of Carthage by the Romans: Caesar usurped the Empire of Rome.

The Sixth age began at the birth of our Savior Christ, which yet endures,
and shall endure to the end of the world.

The seven wonders of the World.
THe first, were the walls of Babylon, built by Semiramis, of stone joined
together with a strange kind of slimy and gluish mortar, which grows in the
mines of those Countries, and especially in the Lake where stood in time past
Sodom, and Gomorrah, now called Asfaltida. These walls according to the town
were built in quadrangle, and contained in circuit (as says Pliny in the
twenty sixth Chapter of his sixth book) 60 miles; so that every square was
fifteen mile long; they were 200 foot high, and fifty foot thick: and to
build these walls were hired by Semiramis, out of diverse Countries for a long
space, 300000 men.

The second was the Pillar of the sun, offered by the Gentills unto Jupiter.
This Pillar stood in the i will of Rhodes, and was made of iron, in the form of
a man of incredible greatness; in so much that a man mighst scarce fadome the
great singer thereof. After it had stood 56 years, it fell down by reason of
an earthquake, and so lay till the Island was won by the Souldan of Egypt; who
carried so much mettle away as loaded 900 Camels.

The third, were the Pyramides of Egypt: among the which there is one specially
noted, about the City of Memphis, now called grand Caire; this Pyramid covered
about 40 acres of land, at the foot or foundation thereof, it was all built of
marble ^one, and in the building thereof were employed continually, for the
space 20 years, ^600000 men: and for the sustenance of these workmen, was
disburst in radish and such other ^oots 1800 tallents, which according to our
reckoning is the sum 1880000 crowns: this might seem uncredible, were it
not that it is affirmed by so many authors of authority.

The fourth was the Mausol, of Mausolus King of Caria, and husband to Artemisia
so called: this woman for the great love she bare to her spouse, burned his
dead body, and drank the powder thereof, thinking no Sepulcher so worthy, as
her own body; and the rest of the powder she buried in this famous Tomb, the
stone whereof wa^ of an excellent kind of marble it was 411 feet in circuit
and 25 cubits high, and wa^ environed about with 36 Pillar of stone,
wonderfully wel^ carved.

The fifth, was the Temple o^ Diana, builded by the Amazones: it was 455 foot
long, and 220 foot broad, and in it stood 127 marble pillars, each of them
being 70 foot high: the work thereof was so wonderful curious, that it was
220 years a making.

The sixth, was the Image of Jupiter Olympius, in Achaia; all of Porphyre, an
infinite number of little pieces joined together: this image beside the
excellency of the work, is especially noted for the greatness thereof, and
was the more famous by reason of the game, called Olympiades, there kept.

The seventh, was the Tower Pharos, nigh unto Alexandria in Egypt; builded by
Ptolomeus Philadelphus, King of Egypt, to direct the passengers which came to
take haven therabouts, by burning of pitch, or other like things in the top:
this Tower was of a mavelous height, and singular workmanship; the building
whereof cost according to our money 480000 crowns. Some Authors put for the
seventh wonder, the Gardens and Orchards upon the walls of Babylon. Others put
the Obelisque of Semiramis; which differs in nothing from a Pyramid, saving
that it is all one stone: the Obelisque, Semiramis caused to be wrought, and
taken out of the mountains of Armenia: it was a hundredth and fifty foot high,
and every square was four and twenty foot broad at the bottom; so that it
contained in circuit 96 foot.

The seven wise men of Greece.
BIas borne in the haven town of Priene, in the Country of Ionia.

Solon borne in the Island of Salamine. Chilo borne in Lacedemonia. Cleobulus
borne at Lindus in the I Will of Rhodes. Pittacus borne at Mitylene in the I Will of
Lesbos. Thales borne at Mileto in Greece. Periander King of Corinth.

The ten Sibylles.
THe first was of Persia, called Samberta, or Persica: which among other
Prophecies said, the womb of the Virgin shall be ^he salvation of Gentiles.

The second was of Libya called Lybica: One of her Prophecies was, The day
shall come that men shall see the King of all living things, and a Virgin Lady
of the world shall hold him in ^er lap.

The third was Themis, surnamed Delphica, because she was borne and prophesied
at Delphos. A prophet shall be born of a Virgin.

The forth was Cumaea, born at Cimeria a City of Campania in Italy: who
prophesied, that God should be borne of a Virgin, and converse among sinners.

The fifth was the famous Erithrea, borne at Babylon: who especially prophesied
a great part of our Christian Religion, in certain verses recited by Eusebius;
the first letters of every which verses being put together, make these words,
Jesus* Christ, Son of God, Savior* These verses are translated into Latin
by Saint Austine Lib. 18, and 23. de civitate die: the substance whereof
follows* The earth shall sweat sign o^ judgment: from heaven shall come a
King which shall reign for ever, that is to say, in humane flesh, to the end
that by his presence he judge the world, so the unfaithful as well as the
faithful shall see God with their eyes aloft among his Saints; and in the end
of the world, the souls of men with their bodies shall appear; whom he shall
judge when the roundnesse of the earth untilled, shall be full of clods of
earth and grass, men shall cast away their idols, and all their precious
jewels, the world shall be consumed with fire, he shall pierce the inferior
parts, and break the gates of hell: then to the flesh of Saints shall be
given free and clear light, and the evil shall be burned with eternal fire,
all secrets shall be opened, and every one shall know the secret of his
neighbor, and God shall discover the consciences and hearts of all men: then
shall there be lamentation and gnashing ofteeth, The Sun and Stars shall
lose* their light, the Firmament shall be dissolved, and the Moon shall be
darkened, the Mountains shall be thrown down, and the Valleys shall be made
equal with them, there shall be nothing in the world higher or lower then
another, Mountains and Valleys shall be made plain, al things shall cease,
the earth shall be d^yed unto powder and dust; the fountains and rivers shall
be burned likewise, then shall a Trumpet sound from Heaven in woeful and
horrible manner, and the opening of the earth shall discover confused and dark
hell, with the torments and pains of the miserable condemnec, and here before
the Judge shall come every King: a river of fire and brimstone shall fall from
Heaven. Diverse other things were prophesied by this Sibyll: and because they
were obscure, and therefore not to be comprehended by the Gentiles before they
came to pass, she said of her self these words: They shall think me a
false and blind Prophetess; but when they shall see these things come to
pass, they will remember me, and call me no more a false Prophetess, but a
Prophetess of the Almighty God.

The sixth was called Samia, borne in the I Will of Samos, which said; He being
rich, shall be borne of a poor Maid; the creatures of the earth shall adore
him, and praise him forever.

The seventh was called Cumana, because she prophesied at Cumas, a Town of
Campania in Italy: she prophesied that he should come from Heaven, and reign
here in poverty: he should rule in silence, and be borne of a Virgin. She is
affirmed to have written Nine Books of the Sybills: They were all presented by
an old woman to Tarquinius Superbus, but he not willing to pay so great a
sum of money as was demanded, den^ed them: whereupon the old woman burnt three
of them, requiring as much money for the other six as for all: which being
denied, she also burned the other three, asking as much for the three
remaining, as for the rest; which Superbus amazed, gave, and the old trotte
vanished. These Books contained man^fest Prophesies of the Kingdom of Christ,
his Name, his Birth, and Death. They were burned by the Arch Traitor Stilico;
so that those Prophesies which are now extant, are only such as are extracted
out of others writings.

The eight was called Helesp^ntica, borne at Marmisea, in the Territory of
Troy. A woman shall descend of the Jews, called Mary, and of her shall be
borne the Son of God, named Jesus, and that without carnal copulation: for
she shall be a Virgin before and after his Birth; he shall be both God and Man,
he shall fulfill the Laws of the Jews, and shall add his own Law thereunto:
and his Kingdom shall remain for ever.

The ninth was of Phrygia, and prophesied in the Town of Ancire: one of her
sayings were; The Highest shall come from Heaven, and shall confirm the
counsel in Heaven, and a Virgin shall be showed in the valleys of the
deserts.

The tenth was Albunea, surnamed Tiburtina, because she was borne at Tyber, 15
miles from Rome. The invisible Word shall be borne of a Virgin: he shall
converse among sinners, and shall of them be despised. Lactantius Firmianus
rehearses diverse of their prophecies, without making any particular mention of
them: they are to be referred specially notwithstanding (as it should seem)
unto Sibylla Samberta, who wrote 24 Books in verse, chiefly entreating of the
coming, miracles, and life of Christ, whereunto the sayings of all the other
Sibyls are conformable.

S. Austine likewise in the 2^ Chapter of his 18 book De civitate Dei,
recites those prophecies a^ follows. Then he shall be taken by the wicked
hands of the Infidels, and they shall give him buffets on his face with their
sacrilegious hands, and they shall spit upon him with their foul and cursed
mouths. He shall turn unto them his shoulders, suffering them to be whipped;
yea, he shall hold his peace without speaking ^re a word, to the end that ^o^e
shall know from whence his words proceed. He shall also be crowned with
Thorns, they shall give him gall to eat, and vinegar to drink: behold the
feast that they shall make him: in so much that thou ignorant and blind people
shall not know thy GOD conversing among men, but thou shall crown him with
Thorns, mingling for him gall and vinegar. Then the veil of the Temple shall
rend, and at midday it shall be dark night for the space of three hours. So
the just shall dye the death, and his death or sleep shall continue three
days: and when he shall have been in the bowels of the earth, he shall rise
again, and return to life.

Lactantius more over, Lib. 4. Chap. 15.10 hearteth these Prophecies of them.
He shall raise the dead, the impotent and lame shall go, and r^nne nimbly, the
deaf shall hear, the blind shall see, the dumble shall speak freely. And a
little before that, says, with five loaves and two fishes he shall nourish in
the Deserts 5000 men, and the fragments thereof shall be sufficient to satisfy
many more. Many other things were foretold by these Sybils, as well of the
ruins of great States, as of Christ.

The twelve Apostles with their Martyrdomes.
James the Son of Zebe dee called mayor, for that he was chosen to be an
Apostle, was sent to convert Spain, from whence by reason of the obstinacy of
the people, (for he converted in all but nine persons) he returned shortly
again to preach in Judea. Where by the envy of a Jewish Bishop call^^
Abi^^har, he was accused, and beheaded by the consent of Hered Agrippa. His
body was conveyed by his Disciples first to Jerusalem, and from thence to
Spain, where it yet remains in Compostella a famous pilgrimage.

James, the son of Alpheus, called minor, for that he was last chosen; he
was the first Bishop of Jerusalem, and that by the space of thirty years: and
then as he was preaching in the Temple, he was thrown headlong down by the
Pharisees, and by them stoned to death. He was buried by the Temple.

Simon, by Christ called Peter, through the indignation of Nero, because he had
overcome Simon Magus, I was crucified with his head down ward, according as he
desired.

Saul, after his conversion called Paul, after he had endured and escaped many
dangers and ^orments, as beating with rods, and put in the stocks by
Philippus; stoned in Lystra, delivered to wild beasts in Ephesus, bound and
beaten in Jerusalem, and many others: lastly came to Rome, where by the
commandment of Nero, he was beheaded, (because he was a Roman borne) the same
day that Peter was crucified. Paul in stead of John, because he ended not his
life with Martyrdom.

Philip, after he had preached through the whole Country of Scythia, and
converted a great part thereof in the space of twenty years, was at the last
in the City of Hierapolis (when he had there extirped the Heresy of the
Hebeonites) fastened to the Cross, and so died.

Bartholmew went to preach in India, and afterward came to Albania a City of
Armenia the greater, where he converted the King of that City, and destroyed
the Idols, wherefore by the commandment of Astiagus, brother to the King Po
emius, whom he had converted, he was flead alive. His body was afterward
brought to Italy, and is, as some say, at Rome.

Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, went first to preach in Achaia, and afterward
preached in Scythia: but lastly he was taken at Patras, a City of Achaia, by
Ege is, Proconsull of that Province: who, because he had converted his Wife
Maximilla, cast him in prison, where he was sore beaten, and lastly stretched
out, and bound on a slope cross; to augment his torment, and so died.

Thomas preached the Gospel ^o the Parthians, Medes, Persi^^s, Hyrcanians,
Bragmans, and converted a great part of India. He was by the Infidels thrown
into a burning Furnace, and come ^^^ur hurt. Finally, because he prayed God to
destroy the (...) of the Sun, which the (...) fi^^^ would have compelled him
^o worship, he was by them thrust through with spears and swords.

Marbent; after he had preached much in I^dea, he went into Ethiopia, and there
converted the greatest part of that Country. Finally, having newly ended his
prayers, and lifting up his hands to Heaven by the Altar, certain spies came
behind him, and ran him through with their swords: which wa^ done by the
commandment of a King of those Countries.

Judas, called also Thaddeus, after the ascension of our Lord was sent by
Thomas to heal Abagar King of Edissa: afterward he preached in Pontus, and
Mesopotamia, and converted many cruel and barbarous people. Lastly, he came to
Persia, where for confounding of their Idols, he was suddenly run upon, and
murdered by the P^gan Bishops of that Country. He is buried at Netre a City
of Armenia.

Simon, called Chananeus, brother to Thaddeus, and James the less; after he
had preached in Egypt, returned to Jerusalem, whereof by the consent of the
Apostles he was made Bishop after the Martyrdom of his brother James. As
touching his death and Martyrdom some say that he suffered with his brother
Judas Thaddeus in Persia, others, that he was through the envy of Heretics,
accused to be a Christian before the Consul Atticus, and therefore crucified
^s his Master was.

Mathyas, after the ascension of Christ, chosen by the Apostles to supply Judas
room, was borne at Bethlehem, and desended of the Tribe of Judah, he preached
altogether in Judea; where lastly he was accused by his enemies of perjury, or
rather blasphemy, and therefore he was condemned to be stoned to death by
two men, during which torment; one smote him with a hatcher, and so he suffered
martyrdom.

The ten persecutions under the Roman Emperors.
THe first began in the 13 year of the reign of Nero, in such sort, that
the Christians were feign to hide themselves in caves of the earth.

The second began in the 12 year of the reign of Domitian, who caused S.
John the Evangelist to be put in a vessel of burning oil, whereof he
received no hurt.

The third began in the tenth year of the reign of Traian, which ceased
afterward by the pity and means of Pli^^y Second, prefect of the Empire.

The fourth began under Marcus Antonius, and Aurelius Commodus Empire.

The fifth began at the commandment of the Emperor Severus.

The sixth began at the indignation of Maximinus, who especially persecuted
the Clergy.

The seventh began under the Emperor Decius, and continued cruelly.

The eight began under the Emperor Valerius, who though at the first he were
a Christian, yet afterward being corrupted by certain heretics, he became
a most cruel persecutor of Christ his Church.

The ninth began under the Emperor Aurelianus.

The tenth began by the commandment of the Emperors Dioclesianus and
Maximianus Herculeus: this persecution was far more cruel and general then
any of the rest insomuch that Dioclesinnus in the orient, and Maximianus in the
occident destroyed all Churches, and tormented the Christians with all strange
torments.

The eight times that Rome has been taken.
ROme was first taken by the Gauls, under the conduct of their captain
Brennas, the year of the foundation of the City about 365, the year of the
world 4835, and the year before Christ 364. This Brennus is by the Britain,
and English Cronicles reported to be a Britain, and brother to Belinus King of
Britain; but neither the Chronicles of Rome nor of Gaul do speak of any such
matter.

Rome was secondly taken by Alaricke King of Goths, after ^ee had held his
siege to it the space of two years, which befell the year of the foundation
of the City 1164, the year of our Lord 412, and the 25 year of the Empire of
Honorius. It is written in the Cronicles of Constintinople* and in other
places, that as Alarick (being a Christian,) marched with his host toward
Rome, a certain Monck, of holy life and great authority came unto him, who
having audience, admonished and counseled him to break of that evil purpose,
and to remember that he was a Christian, and that for Gods sake he would
moderate his wrath, and that he should not take pleasure in the shedding of
Christian blood, since that Rome ha^ not in any respect of fended him Unto whom
Alaricke answered him, Thou must understand, man of God, that proceeds not of
mine own will that I go against Rome: bu^ contrarily I assure thee, tha^ every
day there comes unto me a man, which constrainet^ and importuneth me
thereunto, saying unto me, Haste^ thee, go against Rome, destroy it utterly,
and make it dessolate At which words the religiou^ man being astonished, durst
no^ reply: and so the King follower his enterprise.

Rome was thirdly taken by Gensericke king of Vandales, the year of the
foundation of the City 1208, the year of Christ 456. who sacked and burned in
it many places, which befell in the Empire of Marcian.

Rome was fourthly taken by by Totila King of Goths, who because he could not
obtain peace of the Emperor Iusti^ian, (who trusted too much in the power of
his Lieutenant Bellisarius) commanded the Citizens to avoid the City, and
afterward burned, sacked, and destroyed almost all the City, Walls, and the
Capitol, and made it altogether desolate, in so much that never since it could
be repaired according to the first form, although awhile after Bellisarius
peopled and repaired a great part thereof, and calling again the old
inhabitants, fortified and strengthened much the walls. This desolation, and of
all other most lamentable, happened the year after the foundation of the City
1300: after Christ 548, and the 21 year of the Empire of Justinian.

Rome was fifthly taken by the same Totila, King of Goths; after that
Bellisarius had repeopled and repared it: but whereas before he had almost
destroyed it, he now called again the Citizens, which were fled at his
coming, and travailed all he could to restore and repair that which he had
destroyed: and behaved himself toward his subjects, and especially toward
the Romans, not like a stranger but a father. This happened but three years
after he had destroyed it.

Rome was sixthly taken by the Moors and Sarracens, followers of Mohomet his
Law, which in great multitude came into Italy, and in the year of our Lord
833, sitting in Rome, Gregory the fourth, and governing the Empire Lewis the
first; besieged, took, and sacked Rome, profaning the Temple of Saint Peter:
which don they returned to their ships, charged with prey and prisoners.

Rome was seventhly taken by Henry the fourth of that name, Emperor of
Germany, sitting in Rome Gregory the seventh: this time Rome was most cruelly
destroyed, by reason that both the armies of the Pope and the Emperor
scirmished, and fought long within the City, and the Capitole, which had been
before (destroyed) was now again (repaired which befell the year of our Lord
1082: Authors write, that Rome never was so much endamaged at any time, as at
this, by reason of the lamentable destruction that was done by the Normans on
the Popes side, and Germans for the Emperor.

Rome was last taken by Charles, the last Duke of Bourbon: who being slain as
he scaled the walls at the first assault, and by that chance the Soldiers
being in liberty and without a Head, pitifully destroyed the City, and
committed all kind of enormities, and barbarous cruelties, saving that they
burned not the Churches, although they spoiled and robbed them to the
uttermost: for a great part of the Army were Germans, and most of the Germans
Lutherans. This adversity happened to Rome the year of our Savior 1527,
sitting at Rome Clement the seventh; and governing the Empire Charles the fist.

The seven Electors of the Emperor of Germany.
THree Ecclesiastical: that is to say, the Archbishop of Ments, called the
Arch-chancellour of Germany: the Archbishop of Colen, called the
Arch-chancellour of Italy: and the Archbishop of Triers, called the
Arch-chancellour of France. Four Temporal: the Marquis of Brandebourg, great
Chamberlain of the Empire: the Duke of Saxony bears the Sword before the
Emperor, the Count Palatin of Rhene, Carver, Arch-sewer in carrying the Plate:
the King of Bohemia Taster to the Emperor, or Cupbearer. These Electors were
first ordained by the Emperor Otho, third of that name, and confirmed by
Gregory the fifth, in the year of our Lord 1000, to take away the dissension
which before times had been for the choosing of Emperors: and ordained
moreover, that being chosen by these seven Electors, he should be called
Caesar, but being afterward crowned by the Bishop of Rome, he should be called
Augustus.

The three Crowns of the Emperor.
THe first Crown is of Silver, for the Realm of Germany, and is kept at Aix
the Chapel. The second Crown is of Iron, for the Realm of Lombardy, and is
kept at Modene, a little Town not far from Milan. And the third of Gold, for
the Empire of Rome, where it is kept.

The twelve Peers, or Pairs of France.
IN the Realm of France, to be a Peer, is the greatest dignity under the King,
for that in many things they have almost equal authority with Kings; for Peer
in the French tongue signifies equal. But because it might be too prolixe a
matter to speak of their prerogatives, it shall suffice to number them, and
each of their offices at the sacring or coronation of a new King. These ancient
Peers are twelve in number; whereof six are of the Clergy, and six are Lay
men: the six of the Clergy with their offices at the coronation, are the
Archbishop and Duke of Reins, which has his accustomed charge to oynt and
consecrate the King: the Bishop and Duke of Lacon, whose office is to bring the
holy Ampoule, or divine water, wherewith the king is anointed: the Bishop and
Duke of Langres, whose office is to bring the scepter and the hand of justice;
the Bishop and Earl of Beauvais, brings the Kings cloak; the Bishop and
Earl of Chaalons, brings the Kings Ring; the Bishop and Earl of Noyon,
brings the Kings girdle. The six temporal Peers with their offices at the
coronation, are the Duke of Burgundy, Deane or chief of the rest, whose
office is to bring the kings crown: the Duke of Guyen brings the first square
banner: the Duke of Normandy brings the second square banner: the Earl of
Toulouse brings the Kings spurrs: the Earl of Champaine brings the Kingly
banner, or the standart of war: and the Earl of Flaunders brings the Kings
sword. And although the five first temporal Peerdomes be united to the crown,
and the sixth be subject to another Prince, yet at the Kings coronation, there
are other noble men appointed to supply their room and offices. These be the
twelve ancient Peers, although since their creation others have been made,
which though they have like authority to judge in the Court of Parliament, yet
they want offices at the King coronation, and bear not that majesty that the
other Peers do, for that they are not of so great antiquity.

The eight Parliaments of France.
THE chief and generallest justice of the Realm of France, is continually
kept in eight Cities, wherein are Palaces made expressly for that purpose:
and this general kind of justice is divided into eight parts, according to
the eight Cities, and every of them are called Parliaments, which differ very
little from our Terms: but whereas these are but four times in a year,
those are continually kept, each of them having in stead of our Lord Chancellor
a chief President.

The first and chiefest of these Parliaments is that of Paris, called the Court
of the Peers of France: and to the equity and judgment of this Parliament,
many foreign Kings and Princes have submitted themselves in matters of
greatest importance, as to the most venerable and chiefest Senate of justice in
the world. Such were the Emperor Frederick the second, called Barberossa, King
of both Scycils, when he submitted himself to the judgment of this Court of
Parliament, as touching all the controversies of his Empire and Kingdoms,
which he had against Pope Innocent the fourth: Philip Prince of Tarente, and
the Duke of Burgundy, who submitted them selves to this Parliament, for the
controversy betwixt them upon the expenses of the recovery of the Empire of
Constantinople. The Duke of Lorraine subject to the Empire, and the Lord Guy of
Chastillon, who submitted themselves to the judgment of this Court, as
concerning the limitation of their lands and possessions: the Daulphin of
Vienna, and the Earl of Sauoy submitted themselves to the judgment of this
Parliament, concerning the suit betwixt them, for the homage of the Marquisat
of Saluces. Moreover, without the consent of this Parliament, it has not been
seen that the Kings of France have done or passed any matter of importance
touching the state of the Realm, so much is it respected both within the
Realm and abroad. This Court of Parliament was first ordained by Phillip the
fair, King of France.

The second Parliament is at Bordeaux, for the countries of Gwyen, Gascione,
Zaintonge, Perigort, part of Poictou, and others: and was first ordained by
Charles the seventh.

The third Parliament is at Roven, for the dukedom of Normandy, first made
Exchequer by Philip the fair, and afterward continual Parliament by Jews
the twelfth.

The fourth Parliament is at Tholouze first ordained for certain times in the
year by Philip the fair, and afterward made continually by Charles the
seventh, for the Country of Languedoc.

The fifth Parliament is at Grenoble, for the country of Daulphine, instituted
by Jews the 11

The sixth Parliament is at Diion for the dukedom of Burgundy, it was likewise
ordained by the said Jews the 11.

The seventh Parliament is at Aix, for the Earldom of Provence, appointed by
Jews the 12.

The eight Parliament is at Renes in Britain, ordained by Henry the second. Of
all these Parliaments Paris Parliament is the chief; and certain cases are
reserved to be judged only at the Parliament of Paris.

The seven Saxon Kingdoms that England was once divided into.
THe f^rst, was the Kingdom of Kent: which had his beginni^g of the Saxon
Hengist, in one year of our Lord 476: and the fifth year of Vortiger King of
Britain, his last reign, (for he had been deposed) the Kingdom continued
342 years, till that Egbert, King of Westsaxons vanquished Baldred last King
thereof, and joined it to his own Kingdom.

The second Kingdom was of Sussex, or Southsaxons, which began by the Saxon
Ella, in the year of our Lord 482: and the second year of Aurelius Ambrosius
King of Britain. This Kingdom continued not above 112 years.

The third Kingdom was of East Angles, or East Englishmen, and contained
Northfolke and Suffolk: it was first begun by the Saxon Vffa, about the
year of our Lord 492: and the 11 year of Aurelius Ambrosius King of Britain.
This Kingdom continued 376 years; the last King whereof was Saint Edmond,
martyred by the Danes.

The fourth was the Kingdom of Westsaxons, containing the West-country of
England, and had his beginning by the Saxon Cerdicus, the year of our Lord
522: and the fifth year of Arthur the great King of Britain, and endured from
the first year of Cerdicus to the last of Alured, the term of 378 years. The
Kings of this Country subdued at length all the other six Kingdoms, which
Egbert began, and Alured finished, making all the South part of this Island one
Monarchy.

The fifth was the Kingdom of Northumberland, containing the Countries betwixt
the river of Humber and Scotland, had his beginning of the Saxon Ida, King of
Brenicia; the year of our Lord 547: and the second or las^ year of the reign
of Aurelius ^anon, King of Britain. This Kingdom of Northumberland was at the
first divided into two Kingdoms, the one was called the Brenicia, which bended
toward the North, and the other Deyra (about) the Country of Durham: and this
kingdom continued some-while under one King, sometime under two, the term of
409 years: first under the Saxons, and then under the Danes.

The sixth Kingdom was of the East Saxons, or Essex, which began by the Saxon
Sebert, the year of our Lord about 614, and continued from the beginning of
the reign of Sebert, till the eighth year of Edward the elder, 293 years.

The seventh Kingdom was of Mercia, containing Huntingtonshire, Hertfordshire,
Glocestershire, and others: and was the greatest of all the other, taking his
beginning of the Saxon Penda, in the year of our Lord 626, after the coming
of Hengist 126 years: during the ^eigne of Cadwan King of Bri^aine, and
continued from Penda, till that Edward the Elder chased out the Danes, about
280 years. These 7 Kingdoms of the Saxons, beside that of Wales and Scotland,
were all contained at once in this Island of Britain, and continued a long
space.

Six Orders of Chivalry, which continue at this day among Princes.
THe first and ancientest of these Orders of Chivalry, or Knighthood, is the
Order of the Garter, instituted the year of our Lord 1348 in Bordeaux, chief
City of the Dukedom of Guyne in France, by Edward the third, King of England,
and then possessour of that Dukedom: which Order he consecrated, and dedicated
to Saint George: Though the motive of the institution thereof, proceeded of the
loss of a Garter, which he supposed to have bin the Countess of Salisburies:
but I refer the Reader to the Chronicle. And it happened in this manner; as
one day he was entertaining her with pleasant talk, a Garter chanced to
unloose and fall down, the King endeavoring to take it up, wittingly caused
such a jest as moved the Noblemen to laughter: the Countess thereat blushing,
and blaming that more then seemly familiarity of the King, for that he had
caused such a jest among the assistance, said sharply to him, and the rest,
Honi soit qui maly pense: which Englished, is, Evil to him that evil
thinks. And the King in recompense of his rashness, said forthwith, that
before it were long, those Noble men which had made a jest and laughing at the
Garter fallen down, should esteem themselves much honored to wear it for a
mark of Honor and Chivalry, and thereupon ordained the said Order, and
dedicated it to Saint George, and made thereof 26 Knights, and ordained that
they should wear their cloakes of Violet-colour Velvet; their hoods of red
Velvet, lined with white Damask; their Bases of red Velvet, and under the left
knee a blew Garter, buckled with Gold, garnished with precious stones, and
about it wrought the words of the Countess of Salisbury; HONISOIT QVI MALY
PENSE, and a collar of Gold, full of red and white Roses, with an Image of S.
George hanging thereon: and about these Roses are written those words which are
in the Garter. There are of this Order 26 Knights, of which the Kings of
England are Sovereigns: and it is so much desired for the excellency, that 8
Emperors, 22 foreign Kings, 20 foreign Dukes, and diverse Noblemen of
other Countries have been fellows of it. About their neck they wear a blew
Ribbond, at the end of which hangs the Image of Saint George, upon whose day
the installation of the new Knights are commonly celebrated, being the three
and twentieth of April.

And al though it was first ordained at Bourdeaux, yet the said King Edward the
third, would that the siedge and place of the solemnizing thereof should be at
the Church of Windsor, here in England; where at the same time he founded
Canons, or a Canonry, for the better prosperity of the knights of the order.

The second order in antiquity, is the order of the Annuntiation, instituted
Anno Dom. 1356 by Amede the sixth of that name, Duke of Savoy, and surnamed the
green knight. The Knights of this order wear a great collar of gold, made
winding with three laces which are called of love, wherein are enterlaced these
words, FERT, FERT, FERT, every letter importing his Latin word, thus F.
fortitudo, E, eius, R, Rhodum, T. tenuit that is his force has conquered
Rhodes: and at this Collar hangs an image of our Lady, and of an Angel
saluting her, and for that occasion is called the Order of the Annuntiation.
The collar is of 15 links, to show the 15 mysteries of the Virgin, each link
being inter-woven one with the other, in form of a true Lovers knot. The
number is fourteen Knights, the Solemnity is held annually on our Lady Day, in
the Castle of Saint Peter in Tutin. This Earl ordained this Order in memory of
Amide the great, Duke of Savoy, which succored the Knights of Saint John, when
they conquered the I Will of Rhodes upon the Turks, in the year of our Lord 1310.

The third in antiquity is the Order of the golden Fleece, founded upon the
fable of the golden Fleece, that Jason with the other Argonautes went to seek
in the I Will of Colchos, which is to say, that he went to the Mine of Gold; or
in Analogy to Gedeous Fleece, as some will, and ordained by Philip the second,
surnamed the good Duke of Burgundy, in the year 1430: the complete number of
which Order were at first 25 Knights, and raised afterward by the said Philip
to 31. Charles the fifth raised them to 51: and now there be as many as the
King of Spain will invest with it. They wear a Collar of Gold, interlaced
with an Iron, seeming to strike fire out of a Flint, the word ex ferro flammam;
and at the end hangs the Fleece, or Toison d'or: Their Cloaks and Hoods are of
Scarlet, guarded with Embroidery like flames of fire. Philip appointed for the
celebrating of that Order St. Andrews day, being the 30 of November. But the
Emperor Charles the fifth, (heir of the house of Burgundy, and chief of that
Order) changed their apparel, and ordained that their Cloakes should be of
Crimson Velvet, and their Hoods of Violet color Velvet, and that underneath
they should wear a Cassocke of cloth of Silver.

The fourth in antiquity is the Order of St. Michael the Arch-Angell,
instituted by Lewis the 11 of France, the first day of August, in the year
1469: and ordained that of that Order there should be 36 Knights, which
afterward were augmented to 300, Gentlemen of name and of Arms without
reproach, of whom he himself was chief and Sovereign, and after him his
successors Kings of France. And the brothers or companions of this Order were
bound, at the receiving thereof, to forsake and leave all other Orders, if any
they had, either of a Prince or any company, only excepting Emperors, Kings,
and Dukes, which beside this Order, might wear that Order whereof they were
chief, with the agreement and consent of the King and Brotherhood of the said
Order: and in like manner the said, King of France might wear beside his own,
the Order of other Emperors, Kings, and Dukes. And for the connoissance of
this Order, and the Knights thereof, he gave to every of them a Collar of Gold,
wrought with Cockle shells, enterlacing one another with a double pointing
Ribbon of Silk, with golden Tagges, the word, Immensi Arenor Oceani, which
King Francis the first, because his name was Francis, changed into a white
Friars of Franciscans Girdle, made of a twisted cord; and hangs on that
Collar a tablet of St. Michael upon a Rock, conquering the Devil. Of the
institution of this Order, is made a book, containing 98 Articles, wherein are
set down the things whereunto the Knights of this Order are subject.

The fifth Order is that of the Holy Ghost, instituted by Henry the 3. King of
France, on New-yeares day, in the year 1579 it was called by the name of the
Holy Ghost, because this Henry was on a Whitsonday chosen King of Poland. Of
this also is written a Book, containing the Articles whereunto the Knights
thereof are bound. Among the which I have principally noted one, that is to
defend and sustain the Clergy: for the King does give to every of them the
rent of certain Abbeyes, religious houses, or other spiritual lands, whereof
they shall allow a certain stipend, to the entertaining of a certain number of
religious persons, in every religious house under him; and for that benefit are
sworn at their entering into the said Order, always to defend the
Spirituality, and maintain the Clergy in their privileges: but how they keep
their Oath, it is well seen in every place of their spiritual possessions:
and thereof my self have oftentimes had ocular experience, for travailing in
that Country, and passing oftentimes by goodly religious houses, I have
sometimes for recreation (having well tried the courteous demeanor, that
commonly religious men use toward strangers that come to view their houses)
entered into sundry of them: where I have diverse times bin sufficiently informed
by the religious, how the King had given the rents and possessions of their
houses to the Knights of his Order, with the conditions already rehearsed,
which Knights allow them such bare exhibition, that by reason it is not
sufficient to entertain the fourth part of the number by them appointed,
almost all of them are constrained either to forsake their houses, and beg,
or else there to starve: through which occasion, many goodly religious houses
are of late fallen in decay for want of reparation, trimming up, and
inhabiting, and will domore and more without a redress. And this have I
learned in diverse religious houses, beside the common murmuring of the Clergy:
and so we may see, how these Knights, called of the Holy Ghost, for to defend
and mainetaine the spirituality, do under pretense thereof, rob, and
prodigally waste the spiritual possessions: so that it may seem only to be a
policy (under the correction of better judgment) put in the Kings head, to
diminish spiritual livings (which in that Country are wonderful great) and
satisfy his prodigal mind, in rewarding by that means his flatterers;
because through his exceeding lavishnesse, he is scarce able otherwise to
reward them. The Bishop of Rome considering what dismembring of Church Lands,
and decay of Gods service, comes through this Order, in the Realm of France;
will not grant the confirmation thereof, although the King has been instant
for the same: but notwithstanding the Popes misliking thereof, the Order is
maintained, though to the great weakening of the religion in that Country: Yea,
at the last celebration thereof, which was on New-yeares day eeven, 1581, I saw
three Bishops were admitted into that Order. The Collar is of Flowers de lys,
and flames of Gold, with a Cross, and a Dove on it pendent, representing the
Holy Ghost, wrought in Orange tauny Velvet, garnished about with silver beams,
which the Knights of that Order wear upon their Cloakes, before their heart.
Their robe is a black Velvet Mantle, poudered with Lillies and flames of Gold
and Silver. None are admitted to this Order, who cannot prove their Nobility
by three descents at least.

The sixth Order is of the Bath, brought first into England 1399, by Henry the
fourth: They are created at the Coronation of Kings and Queens, and the
installation of the Princes of Wales: Their duty is to defend true Religion,
Widows, Maids, Orphans, and to maintain the Kings rights.

The 13 Cantons of Swisserland.
THE inhabitants of Helvetia or Swisserland, after they had emancipated
themselves from the yoke of the Empire, and expelled the Nobility of the
Imperial faction, began to make leagues and confederacies one Town with
another, to fortify themselves by that means against foreign invasions if
any happened. And in process of time, within little more then an hundred
years, are increased to the number of 13, which they call Cantons, by which
the whole Country of Swisse is governed and defended. And here (according to
their antiquity) I place them the first that confederated together, and gave
example to the rest, were Vri, Swits, Vndervard, Villages: and these 3 by
little and little, have drawn to their faction all the rest that follow,
Lucerne, Zurich, Cities; Glaris, Zug, Villages: Berne, Fribourg, Soulleurre,
Basle, Schaffouse, Cities: Appensel, Village. Whereof 7 profess the Romish
Religion, viz. Vri, Swits, Vndervard, Zug, Lucerne, Fribourg, and Soulleurre,
the rest are Zuinglians: which diversity of Religion has caused dissension,
and mortal wars of late years among them, although they be all sworn
together to defend their liberties against Strangers.

Non munus, sed animus. FINIS.

