THE Sclopotarie of Josephus Quercetanus, Physician. Or His book containing
the cure of wounds received by shot of Gunne or such like Engines of war.
WHEREUNTO IS ADDED HIS SPAGEricke antidotary of medicines against the aforesaid
wounds.

PVBLISHED INTO ENGLISH BY John Hester, practitioner in the said spagiricall
Art.

LONDON, Printed by Roger Ward, for John Sheldrake. 1590.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE LORD Robert Deuorax, Earl of Essex and Ewe, Vicount
of Hereford and Bowrchier, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Burchaier and Louaine,
master of the Queens Majesty's horse, and knight of the most honorable order
of the Garter I H. wishes all heavenly happiness, and increase of honorable
virtue.
THe state and condition of true nobilititie, subject still to fatal
destinies, or rather to the divine direction of the most highest is such (right
honorable) that whether you regard the virtue, from which it originallie
sprung: or respect the honor by which it continually holds, you shall never
find it vnfauoured of the better, nor vnspighted of the baser sort: By which
two spurs of praise, and dispraise, as it were pricked foreward, it runs
in a speedy and voluntary course, the right, and perfect race to earthly
felicity, the rich, and present possession, whereof is a plain, and easy
passage, to that heavenly paradise, to which your father to the great grief of
all good men, though to his great, and unspeakable joy, is lately gone: who
leaving behind him, the same steps for you to tread in, that he traced, the
same paths for you to wander in that he walked in before you, least at his
death, so lively a pattern for you to imitate, as neither our present age can
afford you any more virtues, nor any age past: many more valiant? Since then of
these two points, the very sound and solid substance of true nobility) you
have in your own house, so rare a president of fresh memory, proceed right
honorable (as you have well begun) so by this line to level all your actions,
as in becoming such a son, of such a father, you may prove more wise, then
by inioying his lands, and possessions seem fortunate. The way that he walked
in, lay as far wide of vice, as virtue her self, in flesh and blood cold pace
it out, by which he grew so dear to her sacred Majesty, so acceptable to his
peers, and so regarded of the multitude, that it were hard to guess whether he
were more favored, more beloved, or more honored. This way though in some
appearance it lie open to the vvide world, and so by that means, common to you
with many, yet by a special prerogative, it is peculier but to a fevv, among
whom, your honor so hold it by inheritance, that not to challenge your right
therein, were but to disclaim your dissent, and to assume the possession, is
but to accept of your own title: which in the opinion of such as know you
well, you may lavvfully auerre: whereunto I will forbear longer to exhort
you, as well for that your forvvardnesse already, stirred up by a natural
inclination, preuentes all foreign persuasions: as for that I know you to be
furnished with men ofsuch vvorth, whom in all honorable affability it
pleases you to converse with, as that herein, an abler man's council then
mine own, may seem either superfluous, or frivolous. Your late expedition
into Portingall (howsoever the event sorted out) yielded to the indifferent
censure of every man, a most pregnant proof of a martial mind: at what
time the skilful and expert captain, took as good occasion to wonder at your
singular valor: as the sick, maimed, and poor simple soldier to commend your
liberal bou^ty: both which are so deeply impressed in their hearts that saw, and
felt them, as nothing but death shall enforce a forgetfulness. And now right
honorable acknowledging my slender report herein, to be too base, and bear a
record, for matter of so great consequence, and carrying no mind (for sundry
dutiful respects) to register any part of the voyage: I leave to speak more
thereof: In all lowly humility, most humbly beseeching you, to avouch the
patrionage of this my simple, and plain translation, wherein I have endeavored
to deliver into English, that which sometime Josephus Quercetanus the author,
left both in lattin, and in fresh, to the great benefit of his country men:
and all other that take notice thereof, the subject being a most learned, and
profitable discourse, of the cure of wounds, gotten by gunshot, a matter in
this tumultious and troublesome time in knowledge acceptable: and for
necessity commendable, in which patronage, you shall not only join partner
with a mighty Prince, Frances late brother to the french king, but also, by
countenancing the book, continue the good opinion, that soldiers generally
have conceived of you, whereof I presume you make no small account. And so
vvishing to your honor, all manner of happiness, even to the fullness of your
own content, I humbly take my leave.

Your honors most duetifull, John Hester.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
IT is credibly recorded that one and the self same City of Ments in Germany,
about one and the self same time found out and delivered to posterity two
inventions of rare and wonderful importance, the Print and the Gunne: the
former not so grateful for the exceeding good, which thereby to every man does
or may ensue: as the latter, for the excessive hurt threatened to all men is
ungracious, and yet both at this day in such request, as it were hard to say
whether Mars his knights more value the one, then Mineruas scholars account of
the other, so that as both have for beginning their authors and founders, so
for continuance they both want not their fautors and maintainers: neither is or
can the privilege of the one be any way prejudice to the other, but either
stands or falls in estimation, as sundry men to either are severally
conceited. Leaving therefore the print to the learned, who when and where they
list, can deliver you in good and sweet terms the use, necessity, and
commendation thereof: I have chosen with mine Author to speak a little of the
other, or rather of the cure of such deadly wounds, as by the furious breath of
so dangerous a devise are procured to us, and that not in smooth and curious
phrase, or picked eloquence, the roughness of the matter utterly rejecting,
any such soft handling, but in blunt and rude words, such as best suit and
sort with the subject it self. And here it is no part of my meaning with any
curiosity to enquire whether the unhappy invention of this churlish engine be
fetched from the Friar, or from the devil, or from a joint council of them
both, held by consent in Vulcans fyery shop, I leave that charge and the
search thereof to my masters the Germans, or to any man else, yt seeks out
of so boisterous an invention. To challenge any civil commendation, it shall
suffice me, in an English toonge to tell you a Frenchmans tale, a tale, or
rather a discourse as auailable to redress the injuries inferd by shot (where
the stripe is not mortal) as the gun almost was to enforce the harms: wherein
although diverse authors have diversely written, every one according to the model
of his learning and experience, as of the french Laurentius Iubertus and
Botellus: of the Italians Alfonsus Ferrius and Johannes Vigo, of the English
Thomas Gale and William Clovves, and sundry of other countries, as every man
has found leisure and aff^^^ion to travel in a matter so needful: some
laying open the nature of the wounds, as well in concusion as dilaceration,
some delivering the malignant and venomous quality, proceeding from the
mixture of the powder: others leaving both these, bestow their whole endeavor
in the discovery of such medicines, as to themselves or to such of whom they
borrowed their light, might any way seem fittest. Among all which our
Quercetanus, as it werem a middle course between both lightly goes over the
causes, and settles himself wholly upon the cure: in which as his method is
exquisite, so are his medicines singular: the same for the most part agreeing
in substance with those of Antiquity, but differing much in preparation, for
the which many condemn him, as straying from the old beaten and known way,
but these men forget that arts which whilome were in their nonage, have grown
in process to a more ripe and perfect middle age, and if they be not in time
provided for, may easily decline (as most things else do) and fall into a
dotage, of such force and weight is and ever yet has been the due
consideration of time and circumstance, let us show our selves thankful to
such, as pitying the imperfections of others, seeks to furnish us with better
supplies. And as Quercetanus with his own countrymen, and all that understand
the Latin tongue, has herein deserved wonderful commendation: so let me
(gentle reader) that have laid him as open to thee, as he is to any other, find
thy friendly acceptacion, and so much the rather because whatsoever I have
offended in the rudeness of my translation, in the diligent preparing of the
medicines, I here promise to amend. Many things not without great charge and
painful labor, I have already performed, to these and diverse other hard
cures not impertinent, and if there be any thing else to make, that to this
Spagiricall art does any way belong, the learned, or practitioned shall find
me ready upon reasonable consideration to perform all, and whatsoever my poor
tallent can afford.

John Hester.

A Sonet upon the treatise of gunshot, of the Lord of Morence and Liserable, a
Physician and excellent Philosopher.
That Monk or Friar accursed may be, that bent his wat so wickedly,
By salt peter and other stuff, through shot of Gun most cruelly.
To murder men at unawares, by sudden stroke of bullet shot,
So as no force can now prevail, and strength of men is quite forgot.
For where these engines come in place, men's bodies there are rent and torn,
And many the^ loose leg or arm, and bodies maimd are left forlorn.
But monsieur du Chesne we well may bless, whose godly care and happy skill,
Has found a mean to ease this grief, and how the rage of shot to still.
Yea he the mean has well set down, to heal all Gunshot with good speed,
Which was a worthy deed of his, and comfort yields to such as need.
Peter Enoc.

A Sonet to the Lord of Morence and Liserable.
Now the hell and devils all might him take,
Monk or Friar what might he be:
That powder and Gunshot did first make,
to torment men of every degree.
Was not the force of svvord and fire,
and other engines used of old:
Enough to fill vvarres bloody desire,
but that new Esculape unfold.
This thundering torture new and strangc,
to spoil by chance and not by might.
Wovvorth that vvight that causde this change,
and altered so our kind of fight.
But monsieur du Chesne he may be said,
the help and succor of our age:
Who has by medicines right assaid,
and easde of Gunshot all the rage.
Buttet.

To Monsiour du Chesne, Baron and Lord of Morence and Lyserable.
Ungrateful should I be, and void of nurtures lore*
If that I should neglect to make report:
Of virtues rare in you that bear such sway,
As them to know may breed each man's comfort.
A Nurse the Muses have you found, and ye
Proud ignorance have stricken such a blovv,
By your vvritings as learned grave and wise,
And that your name for ever men shall know.
Not only have ye hereby done much good,
In shevving vvhatmen chiefly ought to shun:
But medicines right ye have set down, and how
To cure all such as wounded are by Gunne.
F. Merchant,
groom of the kings chamber.
AD. LECTOREM, QVOD QVERNEA CORONA A CLARISS. IVRISC. FR. Hotom. optimo Iure
authori sit posita.
Fortes fulmineis perituros glandibus istis,
Praesenti auxilio vis releuare viros?
Tot tibi quas Chiron, tot quas Epidaurius herbas
Monstrant, ne tanto quaere labor proeul,
Nec Pergamem insignes Coiue medelas:
Arboris vnius sat tibi fructus erit.
Fertilis hoc fructu est, pretiosas, glandibus illis,
Quercus quae glandes obijcit ipso suas:
Quae tot frugiferas interfert nobilis arbor,
Et domino and patriae munera tanta suae.
Quo nunc, Naturae and patriae cui iura coronam,
Decernunt quernam, Zoile iure negas?
C L. Tex, M.
A TREATISE MADE BY THAT FAmous Physician Josephus Quercetanus, and entitled
his Sclopetarie: wherein is contained the perfect curation of such wounds,
which comes by shot of gun or by any other engine of war.
CHAP. 1. Sundry disputations of the essence of wounds by shot, and of the
venom and blasting joined therewith.
IT may be, it will seem superfluous to some, that I have thought it
convenient to set out this Treatise of curing wounds by gunshot, of the which
diverse, and especially that excellent physician Laurentius Iubertus has ver^e
lately so diligently and fully written, that there is not let pass any thing,
that pertains to the essence or nature of such wounds. The which being found
out and known, presently the chiefest and truest way of curing is showed, and
that same did that learned man Iubertus most excellently and orderly set out
in his book: but yt causes, why I was not withdrawn by the authority of this
man, from my pretended purpose, chiefly was the burden of inconveniences of
these wounds which we intend to treat of, and next a natural desire (from my
birth) placed in me of the immortal God, to bring (as much as in me ^teth)
some help to mankind, and especially to mine own countrymen, for whose
sakes I have also published this little book in the French tongue, wherein I
doubt not but that I shall bring to light some excellent remedies neither
known to those which wrote before me, neither yet to the common people: the
use of which I have learned both of excellent Physicians and chyrurgions,
partly when I traveled in sundry dominions of Europe, and partly by the
familiar company which I had with most skillful Physicians abroad in the
camps. And first I will set down my opinion concerning the essence and nature
of such wounds: the which question (by the consent of all that have written
thereof) is the mincipallest. Batallus, Iubertus and Paraeus have delivered to
us that the hurts by gunshot are accompained with two inconveniences, that is,
they consist of solution of continuitie, and brusing, with rending oftentimes
of the muscles, vessels, and flesh, to the which many accidents d^o come, the
which being diverse, must needs have diverse intentions of curation. These are
the two sorts of inconveniences, of the which by disputation they have agreed
on, wounds by gunshot to consist, and therefore they have set down two kinds
of remedies, one wherewith the parts so torn and wanne are helped, that is
the flesh, sinews, lygamentes, tendons, joints and bones, and that by means
of the bruise, the which may come to pass without any manifest wound at all,
and of the Erccians is called Ecchymoosis, yet not without danger, but
oftentimes subject to great accidents, and many times has great effusion of
blood between the muscles, which when it is shed out of the veins, presently
putrifieth; also great aches, which are accompanied with great fiuxe of
humors, diverse swellings, inflammations, and at the last Gangrena and
mortification of the part affected.

The other sort which comes with a manifest wound is more daily seen, and the
deeper and greater it is, so much it is thought the more dangerous, because the
shot (whether of lead or brass) the more vehementer it goes in, so much the
more it bruseth the parts in which it enters, by the which cause the blood is
congealed which falls in the hollownes of the wound, and fills the orofice
of the veins and hollownes of the other parts, and then being destitute of
his nature all heat (the which being quenched and mortified by the resolution
of the spirits, and by reason of the pain and tearing of so many parts, it
goes again to the spring head, that is to the heart, by reason of the fear
which is taken with the deadly hurt) it becomes of a wannish and leady color,
like to that which the common sort calls Asure, the which is easily rotted,
and easily does rot the parts adjoining, and especially the Spermatical: the
which according to the opinion of our auncesters, is easily turned to quitture:
and that the easier and speedier this flesh being bruised and dead, may be
separated from the quick and lively flesh, the Chyrurgions do commonly use
remedia suppu^a^tia and mollientia* the use of which, alth^ugh it be (...)
used in common bruses, yet in these hurts it may not be followed without grave
and weighty considerations, and especially without consideration had of the
body, time, and part, for in so much as these wounds do easily admit great
store of putrefaction, so that many times worms are engendered with
intolerable putrefaction, it is not to be doubted, but that by the use of
such medicines, which by nature move putrefaction, the grief is increased and
augmented, through evil vapors, wherewith the principal parts, that is to
say, the heart, the brain and liver are molested, whereof come crampes and
phrensies with continual fevers, and so commonly death follows: But this
happens for the most part in bodies filled with evil juice, whose flesh,
when it is agreeued through putrefaction of the blood, it is no marvel if the
wound be very dangerous and very hard, or not at all to be cured. In this
case the disposition of the air and heavens, is to be considered, and also
the quality and state of the member hurted. Who also doubts but that through
the entrance of the South wind into the hollownesse of these wounds, whereby
natural heat is weakened, there is great occasion to increase the
putrefaction and generation of worms, which is seen by daily experience: that
I may ouerpasse the authority of Hipocrates lib. Apho. 3. and in his book de
Epid. which also he signifies in another place, where he teaches that drith
is more healthier then moisture, and so all corruption to come of overmuch
moisture, as it were of his proper matter. And to this purpose also it shall
greatly avail us to have a perfect knowledge of the temperamentes of parts,
for wounds in the head, bottom of the stomach and other moist parts, and
therefore more apt to putrefaction, although they be bruised, do require of us
the use of suppurantia, but yet not without great judgment and heed taking,
for because in this case great hurt does often come through the unskillfulness
and rashness of the Physician: neither at any time shall the Physician be
excused, although he see the wound very much stinking (which is always an
evil sign) or berayed with stinking matter and worms, (which may come to
pass in one day by reasons before alleged) yet I say he may not use medicines
called commonly Digestiues, although he reason, that it is a bruised wound, and
therefore must come to suppuration, because these incommodities drawing on, we
must presently have recourse to such medicines as resist putrefaction, that the
most dangerous accidents may be prevented, which are threatened by that which
is said before, that is to say Gangrena, Sphacelus and mortification of the
whole members. Such medicines are the salts both mettaline and mean mineral
drawn out especially of copper, iron, mercury, vitriol, sulphur, arsnick, and
orpiment, as we shall declare in such place where we shall entreat of
curation, for these saltes having the office of an exterior Baulme, do by
their heat and subtlenesse, cut and make thin, thick humors, which do
choke natural heat, and do by their saltness and sharpness, withstand
putrefaction: they do defend the wound from Gangrena and mortification, and
do prepare the way (being mixed with meet medicines, as hereafter shall be
declared) to an easy and short curing, and that without pain.

Far better medicines surely, then simple precipitate commonly prepared, or
Egiptiacum, that specially which has arsnicke and sublymate in it, or such
like, whose common and daily use I can scarslie allow, by reason of the great
pain which they bring to the patient, of whom we ought to have a great and
special regard: the which incommodities may easily be avoided, by a true and
apt spagiricall preparation, which will be a great solace and comfort to the
sound patient. Hitherto concerning the first remedies, which are appointed to
the first intention, that is, to the restoring of members bruised and torn, in
which ^ase it ^ehoueth to be a wise and wary physician, in altering the
medicines, and apply them as occasion do serve to sundry affections and
sudden mutations, that so it be foreseen in all the whole sickness, as
Galen also has taught.

The second kind of medicines, which serve to a more general intention,
pertain to consolidate together parts disioyned, the which is chiefly
performed by the diligence of the radical and natural Baulme, which is
present in every part, as the principal doer, and chiefest workemaster, being
maintained with fit and convenient nourishment, which balm has great power
and strength in uniting and knitting together of parts disioyned: and this
Baulme, as the cause principal and efficient, must be defended by the
Physician, who must foresee, that the strength and efficacy thereof, by no
means be hindered: and must keep from it al outward causes which are noisome
and hurtful thereunto, and also all such as have power to hinder the
consolidation thereof: which he may do both by orderly kind of diet, and by
applications of meet medicines. These reasons (as I may conclude in few words)
do signify to us two sorts of griefs which wounds by gunshot are accompanied
with, that is to say, solution of continuitie, with brusing and rending of the
soft, mean, and sound parts of man's body: and indeed, it oftentimes so
falls out. And these two intentions curatiue (as I may say) were sufficient
for us, were it not that I can easily prove, as well by reason as experience,
and also by the favor of most brauemen which have written before me, that
these wounds are commonly accompanied with venom and blasting, the which two
being adjoined, do^ require of us other intentions curatiue. Notwithstanding we
have not spoken this to the intent to defend those, which have thought this
venom to come of the powder, partly through his essence, and partly by the
transmutation thereof: of which opinion was John de Vigo, otherwise an
excellent and learned Surgeon, and now lately renewed by one Alphonsus
Ferrius an Italian Phisitio^, whose disputation is learnedly confuted by
Botallus, Physician to the king, and also in Chirurgerie most excellent. For
the composition of the powder especially declares, that the nature thereof can
be by no means venomous, in that it consists of brimstone, saltpeter and
coal, all which simples are without venom, and also so wholesome, that they
have great virtue in expelling of strong diseases: and amongst these, brimstone
(upon which Alphonsus especially groundeth his disputation) is most excellent
for diseases of the Lungs, so be it, it be right and orderly prepared, as we
have taught in our book, of the Spagirical preparation of medicines: and that
same may be learned out of the writings of Galen, Theophrast, Pliny,
Dioscorides, and also by the daily use and experience of our France, and other
nations. For the Physicians dispairing the curing of any notable disease, do
send their patients to the whot Bathes, which are in Bearnia, Germany, Subaudia
and Italy, the which waters running through the mettaline veins of the earth,
they do retain some of the spirit of Sulphur, some of Alome, some of Nyter,
some of Vitrioll and such like: yet notwithstanding they are not wont to be
deadly, but wholesome, and especially those, which taste of Sulphur and Nyter, the
which are very profitable against the palsy, Sciatica, stone, long griefs of
the stomach, and such other Tartarous diseases, whose cause is resolved and
purged by urine by the diureticall and percing power, which proceeds of the
spirits of these metals: which daily experience does teach by the incredible
curation of most desperate diseases. And thus much of brimstone, which by no
means is to be thought ve em^^s, no more then is sa^t Peter: which
notwithstanding. I do not think that it is all one with the Niter of
D^oscorides and other ancients, as Bot^llus supposes, for that must be had out
of Macedonie and Egypt, where in old time great flore was to be found. In
Macedonie by reason of y^ nature of the ground and Nitrous lake named Clitis,
and in Egypt through the water of Nylus: which flowing ^uer his ban^es, did
rest in uneven places, and in space of time it is imbibed with the saltness
of the ground, and by little and little, through the heat of the sun, was so
hardened, that being not prevented, it would consume to the hardness of
stones: And such was the Nyter of Alexandria, which was the basest of all, and
farthest dissenting from the marks of the best, because the chiefest is wont
to be porous or hollow, for so it is described by Pliny and Dioscorides: and
so, that we may return to our saltpeter, which is unlike to Niter, except
paraduenture it has a certain agreance of qualities therewith, as all saltes
have a certain agreeance among themselves, notwithstanding we may truly and
advisedly ^ff^rme, that gunpowder has no poison or venom in it, by reason of
the saltpeter, because the saltpeter is made, either of a^ertame fatness
falling from the old walls or cellers, caves and den^es, (whereof it seems to
take this name sal-petrae) or else it is made of the fat and rotten flores,
stables, and old Churchyards: and that it is no more venomous, then is the
salt, which we daily and commonly use, is easily proved, in that many men do
use to eat it in-steede of ou^ common salt: and so (because we ^^dge there is
no man that will withstand the authorit^e of most excellent Physicians) we may
conclude, that gun-pouder, through his composition is not venomous, for coa^e
either of Willow, or other dry wood, (which is the third ingredience thereof)
is without al ve^^me, as is proved daily by the gyrrles which are pale faced,
and are sick with the disease called Pica, much less then are the lyquors
ve^amous, with which it is imbived, which is wine and Aquavitae. Thus much of
the nature of powder, which if we weigh his composition, is not venomous
because none of his simples or ingrediences are venomous: neither can it be
venomous by any means by changing it into a fiery quality. For reason it
self teaches that fire both Actu and Potentia does resist venom. And this is
the venis error in which Alphonsus Fer. is fallen, when he sought for venom
in th^s powder, in which is none at all, as by the particilar examination of
the parts and sunples we have declared: and of this matter, may also the
German soldiers be a good ^nsample, for they so soon as cuer they perceive
themselves wounded by shot* by and by, they put no small portion of the powder
in a cup of w^ne, and as a wholesome medicine drink it up. Now some man will
say, I pray you from whence then do you think this venom in the wou^d does
proceed, it seems then, that the cause is in the bullet, when it strikes and
wounds the person, and that also being commonly of lead, cannot be venomous,
in so much as lead does greatly agree with our nature, and is very wholesome
thereunto: for it greatly aua^leth to the consolidation and drying of sores,
whether it be appl^ed in his meta^itue form and shape, as when places of lead
are applied to depresse the swelling lips of sores, or else the ashes thereof
mortified and dissolved are mixed with emplaisters, as it is, being brought to
Ceruse and minium, (in which case the authority of all the ancient Physicians
is of great force) and in the use thereof, there appears no one sign of
venom. And I let pass to declare, how that some do carry the bullets long
time after they are stricken in their bodies, without any hurt at all: And
therefore that we may answer to this necessary question, I plainly confess
that lead being plainly and simply in his own nature considered, cannot bring
any venom to the wound, except it be outwardly poisoned, which thing is not
hard to be done, every man knows: neither I think does any man doubt, but
that lead (although in his substance it is more heavy and earth^e then other
metals) is rare and spongious, as all the Philosophers do confess, in that
it consists of an impure and cumbustible sulphur, and of great store of
gross, unclean, and drossie Mercury (which is the cause that it will be so
soon melted: and of his raritie and softnes) and therefore it is most easily
imbibed with any ^^quour: the which if it may be done to Iron, whose substance
is far more thicker, faster, and harder, for it has less store of Mercure:
let no man doubt but that lead by reasons before aleaged) will far more
easier receive that venomous quality, whereof you may find the witnesses of
many authors, for who is ^gnorant but that the a^ncients have often made
mention of poisoned weapons, the which the Greeks named (...), as in the ninth
of Virgils Eneados.

Vngere tela manu, ferrumque arma^e veneno. And in the x. book.

Vulnera dirigere, and calamos armare veneno. And in the xii. book.

Non seeus ac vento per nubem impulsa sagitta,
Armatam saeui Parthus, quem fell veneni
Parthus sieve Lidon telum immedicabile torsit.
Likewise Silius lib. 1.

Spicula quae patrio gaudens acuisse veneno. Also Ovid lib. Trist. 3.

Nam volucri ferro tinctile virus inest. So Homer Odiss. 1.

Pharmacum homicida quaerens, vt ei esset vnde sagittas oblineret. Likewise
Theophrastus lib. Plant. 9. cap. 15. writes, that among the Ethiopians there
grows a venomous root, with which they are wont to anoint their arrows:
the same does Pliny write of the Scithians lib. 12. cap. 53, and Paulus
Aegineta in his sixth book and fourscore and 8. chapter, writes the same to
be used with the Dacis and Dalmatians: and also Dioscorides affirms the same
generally (in his sixth book and 20. chapter) to be used of the Barbarians.
Neither shall it any thing prevail, if they allege, that lead being purged
from his grosenesse in melting, after will not receive into it self any
contrary quality: for nature teaches, and experience proves that all
metals are purged by the fire, and are cleansed therewith from their drossie
earth, or unclean susphure, and so thereby their substance becomes far
more purer, and by this same means are metals prepared, as copper, tin, and
iron it self, which through heat of the fire being melted, the filth and
feces are purged and settle to the bottom, and that which remains clean and
pure is called steel as Arist. testifies. 4. Met. cap. 6. And although it be
proper to these imperfect metals in melting to cleanse them selves of their
dross and gross substance (as it is said before) nevertheless they may
imbibe into themselves a contrary: for who doubts but that steel (which is
inferior to none in hardness) is oftentimes tempered with annost a contrary
quality or substance: who would judge vinegar, soote, salt, the water of
earthwormes and mouseare, mixed with the juice of radishrootes, to be of an
Iron substance, for Iron being often quenched in that juice becomes so hard,
that scarsely any man, having not made proof thereof, would credit it: and on
the contrary part, it is made soft by often quenching thereof in the juice of
Hemlocke, soap, and holthocke, the which also comes to pass in tin and
lead, which being often melted and quenched in the juice of ye sea Onion, the
one loses his crackling, the other is purged of his blackness and
tenderness, which could not come to pass, except they did retain some part
of the spirit and virtue wherewith they are tempered. It is manifest therefore,
that the metals, although they be purged by the fire, may receive easily ye
substance and nature of other things: and mere folly it were to think but
that a far more easier mixture may be made of mettaline spirits, being as it
were of one kind, for we see Copper to be dyed and wax yeallowe with the
spirit of Calemine and Tutiae, and again to be white with the spirits of
Arsnick, Auripigment and such other, whereby it may justly be concluded, if
that metals and especially lead (whereof shot is commonly made) does receive a
spiritual substance naturally of things which are of the own kind, of the
which is made diverse mercuriall stinking and deadly waters, by adding to it
the juice of Libards bane* of the sea Onion, of the Ewe tree, of the herb
Crowfoote, and also of the poison of venomous beasts, the which by the
contrariety of their natures to ours, do destroy the substance of our bodies:
and by such venomous mixtures, I say, the shot is so poisoned, that by the
only passing through, it leaves behind it plain and manifest tokens of his
poison, and that not without great danger, if not with speedy remedy it be
redressed. For we see also by daily experience, such venomous compositions,
that if only the head of an Arrow be tempered therewith, and wounding a
person, with drawing of blood, and the Arrow stick not, but presently passes
away, yet is the poison so subtle and venomous that by little and little
creeping from the smaller veins to the greater, and so to the principal
parts, the wounded man presently dies. the which I have declared, partly
because it was my chance often to see the like, (and not only I but also other
worthy Physicians, whose names for brevity I let pass) partly that I might
bring to light these wonderful and prodigious effects, which are wont to
happen in this case: and that they might not be thought impossible, because
they are known of a few, as more at large I mean to declare in that book de
Antidotis, which I have in hand, and do mean (God willing) shortly to
publish, wherein I will reveal both true and meet remedies against such
poisons: and therefore let no man doubt but that the wound may be poisoned,
through the venime of the shot, whether it be of lead or of any other metal,
although some will say the contrary, because it was never their chance to be
conversant with worthy and skillful men, neither have observed the sundry and
myraculous effects of nature (unknown witho^t doubt) to antiquity. But that
we may return again to our purpose, we conclude that the shot may be
poisoned, not by pouring of it in a hole made of purpose, as some would have
it, but by often dipping and quenching them in mercuriall waters and deadly
juices, through ye which their substance may be altered and spoiled, and so
they do venime and infect the wound with their evil disposition, although
they stay not in the wound, but presently pass through: of such force is the
subtlety of them, as by experience often made in beasts, has been often
proved, the which we mean to confirm with probable reasons in that book de
Antidotis, of which we spoke off a little before. But yet we grant that the
shot passing so swiftly through the body, cannot so suddenly infect with his
poison: yet often it comes to pass that the bullet lies long in the wound
unknown to the Chyrurgion: and so I think there is no man that doubts, but
that in such space it has time enough to infect with his venime the hurted
part, for the more subtiller and spiritual the poison is (as we have declared
before) so much swifter and quicker are the effects thereof, by spreading
abroad his malign vapors, through the veins, arteries and sinews, whereby
it does infect the spirits natural, vital, and animal: choking them with a
certain disagreeance and contrariety, joining themselves with them, whereby
the life of man is extinguished, the which does consist of a lively and meet
action of the said three spirits. And these poisons, the more subtiler and
finer they be, so much the more dangerous they are, the which is plainly to be
seen by the biting of Vipers and other ven^mous wastes. But if any man will
frowardly contend (as I see some will) that the strength of the fire will take
away all the poison of the bullet, I will answer them with the same argument
which they themselves are wont to use: for say they, these wounds are not any
thing burnt at all, in that the shot (by reason of his hardness) is never so
hot, but that it may be handled with bare hands: and likewise I say, that then
the fire cannot have such power that it is able to abolish the poison which is
spread through the substance of the bullet, specially when the venime is so
mixed with all parts of the shot, that it has infected with his venime all the
substance thereof. Neither am I moved in that Aristotle lib. de Coelo cap. 7.
writes, that by the impulsion of the air, the darts or arrows wax so hot
that the lead thereof melts, the which by the thing it self and daily
experience is known to be false, and especially in gun bullets, which are sent
out by fire, and are carried away far more swifter then any arrowe: but if
this might be granted to Aristotle, yet the witness of ancient writers (of
whom mention before is made) does plainly prove that the poison thereby, cannot
by any means be extinguished: much less the^ can it be overcome with a far
lesser heat. Nay, I say, that not only, that the venime cannot be taken away
with so small heat, but also I affirm, that if the bullet it self should be
molten, yet very hardly thereby the poison would be purified, for so greatly
and deeply is it spread and mingled with the whole substance thereof, that for the
most part there is not one part left unaltered. Likewise the spirit of
Arsnicke, Calaminae or Tuthiae, being mingled with gray or yellowish Copper,
does not at the first melting vanish away, yet we count not those like to them
which we spoke off before, such as be deadly, being only outwardly and far
from the principal parts applied, through their hid and secret quality, as
the effects thereof does most plainly declace, By this we trust, it is
manifestly proved that shot may be poisoned, which very quickly will work
his effects, especially if it stay in the wound: as oftentimes we have seen,
that poison being heated with a small fire and scarsly made warm, would very
hardly be quenched or taken away. By which reasons it may be concluded yt shot
may be venomous, but not through the powder (which we have proved to be quite
void of venom) but by dipping and seasoning the shot in poison, which
oftentimes we have seen, wherefore it behooves a wise and expert phisit^an,
not to be self minded, for as this thing happens not daily, yet many times
it comes to pass, and yet not oftentimes, when a sudden battle is fought
when either through ignorance, or want of poison it is not practiced, but it is
rather wrought in defense of Cities, being besieged, or of set purpose, when
any is minded villanous^ie to murder another, to which most wicked devise (in
these our unhappy days) Princes and noble men are more in danger, then common
soldiers, in this place we will ouerpasse the signs and tokens, whereby it
may be known whether the shot be v^nomous or no, having a more fitter place
therefore, in the chapter of the true and orderly curation thereof. This place
requires that we reason of the variety which is found in such wounds, that
is, of the burning, which sometimes is, and sometimes is not, and to say my
mind therein, I cannot allow their opinion (moved thereunto by the authority
of diverse learned men) which write that the cause of the burning and blasting
comes through the shot, which they th^nke, by reason of his swift moving and
motion of the air, (through which it swiftly passes) waxes so hot, that it
has the strength of a cauterise which they labor to prove, by the effect
following, that is, by the escharre, great inflammation and blackness, and
other such accidents, which are wont to accompany burning. Of this I will
not with many words contend, insomuch that the nature of the shot being
wisely waied (which is commonly of lead, and therefore can hardly abide such
force of heat without melting) their error with small ado^ is convinced, and
so much the easier, being already confuted by many learned reasons of
Laurentius Loubertus, a most excellent physician, and famous in our country,
whose wise and learned judgment (I doubt not) will also verify with me, that
this blasting of the wound, is not through the heat of the shot, which comes
far of, out of an Iron piece, But it may be when one is wounded by shot
standing hard by, asdayly we see do happen, that they stand so nigh the piece,
that with the wound, their garments and very beard are also scorched, which
happens only through the burning of the powder, which fiery and burning with
the shot flies out of the mouth of the gunne: which if any man says it
cannot flee far, I will answer him by the contrary that it may very well
fly so far, that if any man touch his body he may plainly feel it,
before it be quite extinguished: And again if any more captious will demand,
whether that the harness and apparel be not sufficient to defend the flesh
from burning by the powder, I doubt not but the harness has much more force
in defending thereof, then has a doublet made of a beasts skin or such
other kind of apparel, the which with the very shirt oftentimes we have
seen by shot burned, neither then is it to be doubted, but that the air
being on fire, following and driving the pellet into the wounded person, but
thereby the flesh may also be burned: But what will they say then, when the
gunne is discharged even close at the part^es body, and the wound happens in
an unclothed and naked place, does every soldier wear gauntlets and
helmets: yea oftentimes it happens the gunne to be discharged at the very
face, neck, hands and open mouth, as they which are daily conversant in the
wars can bear me witness far better then those which dispute of the
matter in their closets (and according to the proverb) without hazard of
gunshot. Surely I deny not, but when one is wounded so nigh the Ordinance, but
that the wound may be burned and blasted, in which case, they are greatly
deceived, which think that such wounds are always without blasting, and do
judge the heat to come only of the pellet, and thereby do make rules so
general, that they may have many exceptions, which easily may be gathered by
that which we before have spoken, entreating of the venom and blasting
happening to these wounds, Thus much have I thought it good to declare unto
you concerning the nature and essence of wounds by shot, and of the sundry
accidents which may happen thereunto: the which for the most part, are wont
to be, solution of continuitie with brusing and rending of the parts, which
requires two intentions curatiue, that is consolidation, and restoring of the
bruised and torn parts, but if it be accompanied with burning (as it may be)
then must we repair to the third intention, that is to the extinguishing of
the fire, and drawing out of the heat, yea and last of all to the fourth, that
is to some wholesome remedy named of the Greeks Alexipharmacon, as often as
we shall think that there is some venom in the wound, having special regard
to the most dangerous discommodities, and to find out so many curatiue, and
conseruatiue, and preservative intentions, as sundry wounds joined with
sundry accidents shall require.

CHAP. II. Of the differences, tokens and sundry signs of wounds by Gunshot.
THose which more heedily consider those parts which by shot are wounded, and
do wisely weye their office, necessary substance, situation, sense and
figure, and likewise the essence or manner of the hurt, and the proper
differences thereof, may presently see and judge, as well by reason as
experience, what and how many intentions are necessary to the curation
thereof, and so may provide indications much able to sundry accidents and
present griefs, and thereby to prevent things which are as yet to come, as
Galen teaches, lib. Met. 4. and 7. To which purpose it greatly avails a
perfect knowledge of proper differences, and a consideration of the greatness
or smalenesse, deepenesse or hollownesse of the wound: the which differences
are taken (as of the cause efficient) of the manifold figures, substances,
shapes, and kind of metal of the shot, for some of them are long, some
plain, some great, some little, some very slender, which causes that the
wound is of sundry sorts* some strike away the member, other pearce through,
tearing and rending the sinewy parts, and bursting the bones, or sometime by
only brusing and not pearcing the flesh, according to the sundry and unlike
kind of shot, or to the nighnesse or far distance thereof, or according to
the state of the body being hurted, that is either naked or covered, yea
sometimes so safe it is defended with so sure a corslet (and as we may say) so
te^pered that it cannot be pearred, neither the body by any means be
wounded: And if it be wounded it is very little and without danger, in that
the violence of the shot is weakened by the hardness and strongnesse of the
armor, and especially being the shot of no great ordinance, but of some small
piece, and all these differences (without doubt) may be referred to one kind,
that is, to the solution of continuitie, which sometime is seen and sometimes
is hidden, that is manifest, which is perceived by handling and sight, and when
a plain wound appears with wanness of the flesh (as it were an Escare)
joined with great dolor, and specially when the sinews are hurt which does
plainly show unto us, beside the signs of a wound (which does not a little
avail to this purpose) that the same is made by gunshot. A hidden or secret
wound is, without any manifest breaking of the skin, which the Grecians call
(...) and is known by shedding of the blood between the flesh and the skin,
and do stayne the hurted part with a violet and wannie color. These are the
common signs of such wounds, wherein a consideration is had of only brusing
and solution of continuitie, but insomuch as we have taught in the former
chapter, that such wounds may sometimes be accompanied with venom and
blastin^, contrary to the opinion of some, it behooves the Surgeon to
employ all his study and labor in this case, to judge and discern every
affection by the tokens and signs proper thereunto, because such affections
(as we said before) be often joined to such wounds, and let him seek out a
proper remedy for each of them, and diligently consider, which of them is most
dangerous, for that (as Galen teaches) is not only first, but also chiefest
to be cured: that insomuch, as sometimes we are compelled by reason thereof
not only to let pass the other accidents, but also to make new, that thereby
we may remedy that which is most dangerous. And this is the very cause, why
the knowledge of these wounds poisoned by shot are so necessary (as in the
Chapter before we have taught) least that the sudden death which many times
comes thereby, be imputed to the corruption of the air and other first
qualities: when commonly the fault lies in the wilfulness and unskillfulness
of the Physician, persuading themselves that these wounds by no means may be
venomous, and thereby they refuse the true kind of healing: And some no doubt,
will attribute it to the abundance of blood, and to the evil juice of the
bodies called by ye Greeks Cachochimia, the which two verily I do acknowledge,
and with Galen confess, have great force in hindering of al wounds, and the
chiefest causes of evil accidences, notwestanding if the signs, which
signifies venom, has in the^ any thing common, with these yt happen to
gunshot, where only co^tusion is joined yet may they easily be discerned,
whether they be great or little or weighty and fearful accidents and
extraordinary, which oftentimes Signs of poison gathered together.
come to pass. Therefore if the flesh be more wanner then it is wont to be in
common wounds by shot, and as it were dead, with an evil color of all the
whole member, with intolorable and extraordinary aches, and also with
inflammation and pricking and shooting pains, especially about the wound, with
vnlustinesse and heaviness of all the whole body, and many times burning
fevers, with sounding and alienation of the mind: all these do testify that
there is some venomous quality joined with the wound, and especially when
there can no manifest cause be found out by ye Physician, whereof all these
evil accidents should proceed, which sometimes I have seen to happen in
simple wounds, yea without the tearing of any sinews. But more certainer
signs of this matter may be if any tokens appear outwardly, which may be
learned at the mouth of the patient, and by relation of his familiar friends
and companions: considering also the manner, the place, and the person being
wounded. But the surest sign of all is learned by the bullet, if it may be
found, for if you cut him in two parts, you shall see him dark and mixed with
a purple and violet color, unlike to the color of other shot being cut, which
is wont to have a yealow color. Then may thou surely affirm that the shot
was poisoned, whereby the very substance thereof was altered, as plaincly is
seen by his inward color, which is greatly altered, wanne and dark (as we
said before.) Proof thereof also may be made in the fire, which was said (not
rashly) to have great force in purging of all poison. Because such things which
are strong poison in deed, do consist of a spiritual and ayriall substance,
and therefore by force of fire do easily vanish into the air, yet not with a
small heat such as is felt in going out of ye shot, as Ambrosius Pareus
thought, which rather in process of time would fix it and make it not
volatle, and so consequently unhurtful. But by a most strong heat of fire,
such as they use in subliming, for in that force of fire, ye mercury is
elevated and vanished away: so likewise is the Arsnicke and orpigment, and such
other spirits, and for that cause they cannot be purged, except they be pressed
in the cold neck of the subliming vessels: and so the suspected bullet being
melted and kept in great heat a sufficient time, then a dark and stinking
smoke arises, covering the metal (of which smoke or fume you must heware)
which after the melting is found not only unpurged, but also appears black,
wanne, and dark, which comes through the venomous fume, spreding it self
about the metal, and this is an infallible sign that the shot was poisoned,
whereby the wound may be venomed (as I said before) and that according to the
time, as it remains in the wound. These be the signs whereby a poisoned
wound is known, which are the more dangerous to be judged, the more they do
weaken the strength of the patient: Likewise, blistering, Signs of Adustion
gathered together.
bladdering, pricking pain, dryness, contraction, and hardness of the
skin, does manifestly show that the wound is also burnt with powder, the
which may be learned more surely by relation of the wounded person, which can
commonly declare whether he ware wounded, nigh or far off, which also may be
gathered by the burning of the vesture: and it behooves the Physician to take
heed diligently of all these things, because they are of great weight and may
bring great hurt to the wound, and hinder greatly the curation thereof: and
through abundance of fiures and other grievous accidents, which commonly
ensue, unless timely with wholesome medicines they be prevented, as Galen
commands in 4. Met. cap. 5. where he teaches the manner of curing of an ulcer
(joined or coupled with another grief) not as the curation of a simple ulcer:
but first that affection must be removed, and then the ulcer to be cured.

Of the judgment.
Furthermore a sounder judgment in this case may be given by a heedie
consideration of the saying of Galen written in his method where he teaches
that diseases may be dangerous, for three causes: first by reason of the
worthiness of the part affected, secondarily through the vehemency and
strength of the grief, lastly by the malignitie and evil quality of the
disease: Therefore if the spiritual parts, or if the brain, and especially
the substance thereof be wounded it is deadly: Likewise the lunges, the
midriffe, the stomach, the spleen, and kidnie being wounded, does commonly
bring death, for they also by reason of their offices are reckoned among the
principal parts: of no less ieopardie are the wounds of the guts, especially
in the smaller, where there is no flesh: also in the bladder, which cannot be
aglutinated, because they are unbloody parts: and likewise wounds wherein the
head or stomach is pierced through, are counted very dangerous, and the more
greater and deeper ye wounds be with tearing of the sinews and brusing of the
bones, so much the more dangerous they are: and especially those which happen
in the head with fracture of Cranion, and also such as be nigh the joints,
through great and vehement accidents ensuing hereon, but wounds joined with
venom, although in show they be but small, yet are they most dangerous,
because by the contrary substance and excessive quality thereof, not only
the natural disposition, but also the very substance of the body, is altered
and changed, and especially when the wound is with breaking of the skin,
which by thickness thereof does defend the flesh (which otherwise it would,
so that the poison be not subtle) that the contagiousnesse thereof does not
infect the blood, spirits and humors, and consequently the principal parts,
whereby death commonly insueth. Moreover all these wounds are to be counted
the more dangerous, in case they be accompanied with evil accidents and great
passions, and also the passion filled with evil humors: and so much the more
if at that time any common sickness does reign in the camp caused by the
air, whose quality although it be simple: and not subject to putrefaction,
yet oftentimes it brings great alteration to the qualities, being infected
with noisome and stinking fumes, which oftentimes comes to pass in great
hosts, and chiefly in that part which is molested with composts, and dead
carcases of beasts and men: from whence arise the noisome and stinking fumes,
whereby the soldiers are afflicted: also unstableness of the weather coming
with tempests, does greatly hurt these wounds, and oftentimes put the party
in great hazard, and chiefly when a dry winter goes before with northen
blastes, and a wet spring insueth with southerly winds, through which many
gross humors are engendered, which with that unstableness of weather, are
stirred and corrupted: and the euilenesse of the air joining therewith,
brings forth pestilent and burning fevers, with inflamacions, Gangrena and
mortification, yea and at the last, death it self, as Hipoc. witnesses in the
third Aphorism in lib. Epid. Neither may we ouerpasse the loose and unorderly
kind of diet used Hip. lib. Epid. Aphor. 3.
not only among the common soldiers, but also with the Captains, rulers,
legates and protectors. Which oftentimes are enforced to take such food as
comes to hand, either hot or cold, raw or sodde, good or bad, yea sometimes,
pulse, fruits and berries: and to drink stinking waters, new, sower and dead
wines. Contrary to the usage and nature of diverse, through which they are
infected. And through such unorderly kind of dyer, hurtful and common diseases
are wo^nt to arise in the camps, very dangerous to the wounded, and that
thereby the blood is annoyed, and the humors infected: and so the euilenesse
of the wound is increased, and sundry accidents do ensue. And on the
contrary part, such wounds are to be judged less dangerous and more cur
able, which are accompanied with few passions, and are far from the
spiritual and prin^ipall parts, and are without venom, tearing of the
sinews, and fracture of the bones. And whenever the Physician does judge the
wound to be mortal, yet I would not have the patient strait to be forsaken as
a dead man, but to apply the best medioines, for many times nature helped by
Art does work miracles, whereby the Emperickes (to the great infamy of
Physic) does oftentimes purchase great fame and glory. For being bold on the
strength of nature, they take in hand desperate cures forsaken, as dead men by
the Physicians, and get thereby to themselves great credit, and to the
Physicians no less shame, as by hearesay a two years past happened to a noble
Provincial named Vnissius being in the kings army against Rupella^, was by
shot pierced through and forsaken of the Physicians, who judged the substance
of his liver to be perished, and yet was cured by some of his noble friends,
with medicines of no great price, The which rare event may be a notable
e^sa^ple of the strange effecies of nature, which oftentimes deceives the
judgment of most learned Physicians: whom I would wish never to be destitute
of singular remedies against desperate and haynoos griefs, as Cornelius Celsus
teaches that in extreme and desperate cases, it is better to apply some
remedy, then utterly to give it over.

CHAP. III. The order of curing the aforesaid wounds.
THe curation of such wounds, does consist of two general intentions, and one
particular, the two general are an orderly kind of diet, and an expulsion of
humors, the other by an apt application of inedicines. And that we may keep an
orderly and methodicall kind of teaching, first of all we will entreat of
the order of diet, which is convenient for such wounded persons, the obseruat^
on whereof is known to bring great commodity to the sick and wounded.

And such a kind of diet is to be prescribed to the hurted, as is The order of
diet.
wont to be ordained in other diseases, that is, a mesurable observation of
the six things not natural, but a more particular consideration is taken, by
the season of the year, by the nature, strength, and disposition of the
party: and by his accustomable use in eating and drinking, as Hipoc. does
plentifully declare in lib. de vict. ratione in morbis acutis. For one kind of
diet is meet for chronicall and daily griefs, and another for sharp and
vehement sickenesses: and that also variable according to the beginning, state,
and decreasing of the disease. And let no man doubt but that also the
disposition of the Region, and nature of the season of the year, may alter the
diet, in that some regions are hot and some cold, and some seasons who^ some
moist and rainy, and among all, the nature and temperament of the wounded is
diligently to be observed, in so much, as the bodies being full of evil
juices, the larger their diet is, the more hurtful it is to them. The strength
also of the party is to be wayed, and according to that we must not only
prescribe a diet, but also thereunto apply the ministration of all our
medicines. As concerning custom, there is none but has great respect thereof,
in that sudden alterations are so much the more dangerous, as they shall
digress from the daily custom and use of ye sick, as Hipoc. teaches in lib.
de vict. ration. in morbis acutis: and reason it self shows, for if any man
should prescribe a general strait order of diet to all alike, which by shot
are wounded, (without any consideration of the thing aforesaid, as commonly
they do) neglecting qu^^e their daily diet, when some there be, which make
three or four meals a day, yea almost every hour: othe^s there be, which in
their sickness may not (without great hinderance) forbear wine, to whom if
we should command a strait diet, it would straight fall out as Hippoc. in
the foresaid place concludes: where writing of those which make three or four
meals a day, if they lost but one, they are weakened: and contrariwise such as
are wont to keep a slender diet, if they eat and drink more then ordinary,
or out of season, are incontinent agreeued: and therefore according to the
mind of that worthy man, we must endeavor our selves, to prescribe such a diet
to our patient, as he was most accustomed to in his health: and let it be
holden, that nature is chiefly comforced with such things as he is daily and
by familiar custom used unto, and are far more wholesome, better, and
healthier (although it seems contra^ie to our intentions) then such as for
the patients health are devised strange and unwonted, because by their sudden
mutation, they contrary nature: and indeed this is the cause why the learned
Physicians of Germany do judge, that the used and daily diet is to be
retained, and do permit their wounded persons to drink wine, which otherwise
would think themselves undone, in that the use of waters is so dangerous to
them. The which I have seen used, not only in France, but also (and that with
better success) in Germany, where the wine for the most part is more waterish
and thinner, then in France. The which I have not spoken: as though I would
have no other kind of diet prescribed to the wounded, then such as they were
accustomed to in their health: neither am I so vns^ilfull, thoroughly to al^ow
it, but that thereby I might admonish the Ch^rurgions, that they prescribe not
so strait a diet as they are wont commonly to do, and that they should keep
a measure both in y^ quality and quantity of meat and drink, as the state
of the disease shall require: for in the state of the sickness (for avoiding
of inflammations and aches) a slender diet is to be kept, as is taught by Hipoc
lib. de vict. rat. in morb. acut. Aphori. 10. Moreover, the diet is to be
prescribed as the time of the year requires, for the stomachs of some are
whot, others cold, and so be apt to digest, and are to be considered according
to the te^perame^t of the patient, for (as Galen teaches) some things are
allowed to Phlegmatike, which must be retained from the sanguine and Cholerike:
and as we said before, consideration must be had of the age, strength, and
disposition: and in the very beginning of the sickness so strait a diet is not
to be kept, but by lit^e and little it must be deminished until the end of the
state of ye disease, but so as ye strength of the patient may suffer it, which
thing must be warely observed, And so these things rightly considered, we must
come to the administration of the things not natural, and so satisfy our
intent.

After this it behooves to choose a dry and temperate air: for Of the air.
such is required of all wounds, because by exiccation they are conglutinated:
but and if any man object, that it lies not in our power, to bring a dry air
to the sick, when as there is not any thing to be found, more moister (as
Aristotle teaches in the second chapter of his Meteors) in so much it
exceeds the water in moisture, which in sight seems moister, in that it
moistneth things dipped therem, which the air cannot do by reason of the
subtilnesse thereof. This may easily be answered, that such air may be chosen,
and by art corrected, and so made meeter to our purpose and intent: for it is
not unknown, but that some places and houses are whotter, dryer, moister, and
colder then others be, for those which be nigher the North are cold, and such
as are Sowtherly are whot, even as the sun is nearer or farther from them.
Also the situation of the country is to be considered, for some are hilly, some
marrish, others adjoining nigh to lakes, standing pooles and rivers: by the
variety whereof, the quality of the air is changed and altered. Who is
ignorant but that the nature of the men of Asia is far differing from those
of Europe, the which Hipoc. lib. De aere Locis etaquis) does attribute to the
change and variety of times, which causes the nature of countries to be more
rougher and harder. and that is the cause that country and sea-coastes men be
of an unlike nature and disposition to those which are bredde in cities and
valleys far from the seacoasts. What shall we say now of the situation of the
city of Ferraria, or Florence, of the which in the first, all wounds in the
head are deadly, in the other all the hurts of the legs are incurable, for
which cause Hippocrates, treating of this matter, says that the nature of the
south wind is altered, by reason of the countries, by which it is carried,
which are some hotter, some colder then some: for he writes that first it
comes from cold and Isie countries (whereof winds are engendered, as Aristot. in
the second of his Meteors shows, and that they are of the same nature at the
first, as the Northwinds are, which are frostie and cold: as those which
inhabit, these countries do feel:) And after being carried by the South, and
beams of the sun waxes so hot, that through the heat thereof, it loses
his coldness, and burns the herbs, and makes the inhabiters thereof to be
dry, and so passing over the seas, and imbibbing the moisture thereof, it
loses the great dryness it had received, and becomes moiste, as is seen and
perceived in all Italy, and also in that part of France, which is named
Occitania. And this is the reason why we judge the South-winde to be hurtful
to wounds: because that this moisture is joined with heat, which is the
mother of putrefaction, as we have before proved. The like may be said of
the North-winde, which in sundry regions is very wholesome: and withstandeth
putrefaction: and again in some very unwholesome: insomuch that the pestilence
or any other disease reigning) is thereby increased. the cause whereof (as we
said before) is to be attributed to the variety of countries: and situation of
Cities, being in low and marrish places, wherebyth e proper nature of the
winds may be altered: and so the bodies of men are corrupted and filled with
all humors. These things waied, and the season of the year considered,
(which are diverse, and unlike by reasons before alleged) and sundry
mutations, which daily happen and alter the quality of the air, as
Hippocrates has taught, libro de ^ere, locis and aquis) we must choose fit and
profitable air, where the wounded person may remain. But insomuch that, that
is hard and impossible to be done, because the wounded, by bitterness of the
grief can neither ride nor go, but commonly are compelled (...) to stay in
the place, where they are wounded, or at the least ^^ the ^itie next adjoining
thereunto, yet specially that place where the camp has long stayed, is above
all to be shunned, because the air thereby is infected: and also moist and
marrish places are to be avoided, for thence do noisome and thick vapors
ascend. And contrariwise such air is to be chosen, that is far distant from
moist and wet grounds, for such is pute clear and wholesome. And let the
windows next the north be open rather then those next the South: but and if
that shall seem cold, it may be amended by heat of fire made in the chamber,
and also sometime corrected with odiferous things, as Masticke, Roses, Jumper
Berries, and such like. And in the summer you shall use lauing of the house with
Oxicrato, and strew the chamber with rushes and green herbs and leaves of the
wythie, or vine tree, and after this order may the air be applied and
corrected to the health of the patient, as the part hurted shall require. For
wounds and hurtes of the head or co^missures thereof cannot suffer so cold an
air (by reason of the nipping thereof) as wounds in other places may. And as
concerning his diet, it is no doubt, but it must be ordered according to the
manner Of meat and drink.
of the hurt (as Hippocrates has taught, and as the nature of the patient is
able to abide, avoiding sudden changes, for such (as we said before) are very
dangerous, let his meat be such as breeds good juice, and the quantity
thereof the less, especially until the state of the disease be past: in which
time a more slenderer diet must be kept then afterward: and let the bread be
well leauened, and thoroughly baked. And let him use the flesh of small birds,
as thrushes or such like, eating therewith the juice of an Oringe or Lemon or
Greenesauce made of Sorrel, to get him a stomach: Also bread-broath, which is
made of bread, and a chicken first boiled with buglose, sorrel, lettice and
such kind of herbs: and this broth he may use in ye morning to mollify his
belly: and raisons of the sun, and prunes in this case be very wholesome: so are
likewise Damascenes, Grapes condit, Barley picked and sodden, Almond milk and
Oten milk: all these are very wholesome, and chiefly in the beginning, for
then the wounded commonly refuse all meats saving broathes, and such as are
liquide. But after the state of the wound he may use Partriges, Chickens,
young Capons, and Mutten minced with his own juice, and the juice of an
Oringe: and all other meats are wholesome, which are sweet, delicate, of good
juice and light of digestion. The poorer sort may eat broth made of Mutten
and Veale, and of a Chicken if they be able, boiled with raisins and prunes, or
such like, as their ability will extend: and let them forbear gross meats of
evil juice and hard of digestion, and all water fowls, and beasts: and
especially pigge flesh, and salt meats, and others that be sharp: and all
kind of spices, and let them drink Prisan, and Hipoc. water, and such as are
sanguine or choleric may use only water filtred and boiled: let others
(especially such as before were not used to drink wine delaide with water)
have thin Claret delayed with water, and that in the beginning, if so be y^
there be no fever or inflammation: and as concerning labor or rest, let this
Italian proverb followed, La gamba al'letto, and la man al pecto, with the advice of Hipoc. lib. de ulcer. which says, that rest is very meet for all
wounded persons, and labor hurtful: and therefore the Physicians do very
foolishly in in commanding exercise of body to them that have need of such
rest and quietness, that oftentimes they cannot move themselves for pain: but
in steed of exercise they may use frication, on the whole parts and contrary
side: and then they shall do the office of medicine having virtue of keeping
back, and shall turn aside the fluxes of humors coming to the affected
member, and also dry up superfluous moistures engendered by rest, as Hipocrates
has taught lib. de Diaeta. And as for sleep, let it be granted when nature
seems to require it, for sleep (in all diseases) is very necessary to
concoction, and does revive ye strength lost and deca^ed, by bleeding, pain,
and other passions, yet heed must be taken, that if the wound be inwardly, and
venomous: the sleep be not to large, least thereby plenty of humors flow to
the affected part: for the blood with sleeping, is always drawn into the
body. Moreover all vexations of the mind are very hurtful, and especially
anger, which troubles the stomach, and causes the humors to be more thinner
and subtiller, whereby more abundance of fluxis comes to the affected part,
and many other evil passions and accidents. I have willingly passed over
repletion, and emptiness, in that I mean to entreat of them, by themselves,
and so without repetition to declare my mind.

CHAP. IIII. Of the second intention, that is of purging and euacuation of
humors by bloodletting and purgation.
NOt rashly and without great cause, did Galen in his Method call to
remembrance, and highly commend this noble saying Met. 4. cap. 6.
of Hipp. Medicum opportere non modo naturae imitatorem esse, verum etiam eoru
mque cum sua sponte eueniunt, conferunt. For it is y^ office of the Physician
to supply the wants of nature, and to prevent such hurtful accidents, as may
happen thereunto, and that by indications taken of the waightinesse of the
grief, the which I find to be two, that is bloudletting and purgation, both of
the which are very necessary to the curing of wounds by shot: which for three
causes may justly be reckoned among most dangerous: and therefore it is very
necessary to draw blood in the curation of these wounds, and that in the
very beginning, that so thereby the flux of humors in the wounded part, be
stayed, and impostumation kept back: neither must we stay for the digestion of
the wound, and defer it till the beginning and state thereof be past, as
Auicen thought, whose opinion is not only against all reason, but also
contrary to the authority of Hipocrates, who teaches, that if any thing is
to be moved, it must be done in the very beginning, Moreover this bloudletting
must be done in ye contrary or opposite part and then especially, when it is
not doubted that the shot was venomous: which if it should be, then is
reuulsion forbidden, for the venom is to be drawn out by scarification of the
wound it self, or a little below and parts about it, taking heed that it
creep not far (as his nature is) to the noble and principal parts, as more
at large we will declare when we entreat of the curation thereof. The fittest
time for letting of blood is the morning, except we be forced otherwise either
by overmuch flux of blood or any other accident, and before we do it, it
shall not be amiss to minister a glister to lose the belly: and also in
letting of blood we must not only weigh the greatness of the wound, but also
the fullness of the whole body, and according thereunto limit the quantity of
blood, either more or less: neither must we forget to consider the age of the
patient, the time of the year, the nature of the place, and diverse other
things, which must be committed to ye judgment of the skillful Physician,
which may wisely weigh yt which is written by Galen lib. De missione sanguinis.
Purgations are no less necessary in the curing of these wounds then is
bloudletting, for two causes, the one the Of purgation to be vsed^^ these
wounds.
greatness of the grief, the other the abundance of ill juice: which may be
gathered by these words of Galen, written lib. 4. Meth medendi. Purgatio non in
sola cacochymia conuenienter suscipitur, sed (sicut missio sanguinis) vel
propter ipsius abundantiam, vel propter morbi magnitudinem: ita purgatio, and
propter abundantiam alteruis cuiusdam succi, and propter vim morbi adhibetur.
Neither are they blameless, which contemn this way of curing, as though it
were little o^ nothing pertaining to cure wounds by shot, when as both reason
and experience show the contrary to those, which (following Hipocrates and
Galen as captains) have set down a methodicall and orderly curation of such
wounds: for purgation (says Hipocrates) is profitable for diverse ulcers,
Preterea Hippoc. in his book of ulcers.
vulner ibus capitis, item ventris, tum inferioris, tum superioris. atque etiam
articulorum, And he adds also, quae exeduntur, and quae serpunt, quae
diuturna sunt: etiam quaecunque obligand^ sunt, per aluum purganda esse. The
which remedy must by and by, and at the very beginning be used, yea
immediately after the letting of blood, partly that we may avoid the humors
following to the afflicted part, by the contrary way which the Grecians call
(...): as if the wound be in the over part, we must purge by the lower part,
and if in the lower part, we must purge by vomit) and partly, that thereby
we draw away the humors imimpacted and sticking to the wounded part and sides
thereof, by deriuation, as both Hipocrates and Galen has taught, But if any
will allege, by the authority of ancient Physicians, that purgation is not
necessary to healthful bodies, and such as abound not Vide Oribas, lib. 7.
cap. 22.
with excrementes, as commonly the bodies of soldiers be, (otherwise they were
not able to sustain such great labor, and that they very grievously abide
purgations, and therewith are brought into swoundinges, and whirlinges of the
brains (the which discommodities are to be kept o^f from nature) for when the
purgation finds not his proper hu^or to work upon, it sets upon the
blood and flesh, and so expels that which is necessary and good: yet for
all this, except such be purged, they commonly fall in great hazard, and worse
passions, as fevers, m^^mamations, great aches, rau^nges, and such like, which
commonly follow these wounds: and therefore the euacuation of good humors is
necessary, that we may prevent that which is to come: and by this means we
shall not only bring the wounded part in good temperature, but also the whole
body in better state. Now then, insomuch as purgations are necessary in these
great and dangerous wounds, it behooves it to be done with great diligence and
heed taking: first we must consider the state, custom, and age of the
patient, also the nature of the time and quality of the country: and so in
other cases we must search out the humor most abounding, and the place
affected, whereby we may learn, what humor is to be purged, and how and what
way most easily it will be expelled, and then above all let us choose such
purgations, as most easily and safely may be ministered, for I can scarce allow
the use of y^ violent ones which were in use in Galens and Hipocrates time,
because in operation they are very hot, and thereby do easily breed fevers,
and disturb the blood, and so bring the wound to inflammation and
impostumation, of which sorts are Coloquintida and Elleborus, especially
unprepared, But we may safely use Cassia, Manna, Rubarbe, Seen, Polipodie, and
Agaricke, but chiefly their extracts, the which more safer, and with as much
profit may be used in these green wounds, as the other may in daily and
vehement ulcers: and because the bellies of some by taking a medicine are not
loosed by reason of the variety of natures (for some are hardily purged, with
others a small purgation works, and there be, which by only smelling
thereunto, are greatly purged) we must therefore take heed that we give not a
strong purgation to our patient, except first we have had proof of his nature,
But and if the ordure be hard and baked in the guts, and so the purgation be
hindered, it were necessary first to loose it, with some gentle medicine given
by the mouth, as a bole mad of an. of Cassia^extract with Sugar and Aniseede,
or else made soluble Clyster. Emolliens.
by ministering some gentle glister: of which sort is this following.

Take of mallows, violets, herb Mercury, betes, of each a handful: of the
greater cold seeds and of Anise an. i. of Barley, flowers of Chamomill, of
Borage, and Nenuphare or water Lily Ana. p. i. Let a decoction be made, and to
one pint thereof, add of Cassia extract with the leaves of Seen, and dia
Prun, simp. or trifera persica ana. vi. honey and oil of Violets Ana. ii.
misce pro enemate. The day following, let him take some medicine, as shall be
most meetest, as his body does abound either with flcame or choll^r and any
other humor: for more easier does it work, and better is the purgation when
the right humor is purged.

Take the root of Irios, Eupatory, Pimpinel and Acorus, ana. A convenient
^otion for the Phlegmatike.
iii. the root of Mechoacan, Oak Fern new, the pith of Cartamy seeds, ana.
ss. Aniseede, Raisins and Licorise, ana ii. Veronica, Betony, and Scabios ana.
m. i* of the Cord^all flowers, of each p. i. the leaves of Seen. ii. let them be
boiled and strained, and infuse thereunto of the troches, of Agaricke ii. and
after the expression, put thereto i. of sirupe of Roses solutiue, and for those
that be strong, add to it i. ss. or ii. of Diaphenicon: and for the choleric
use this following.

Take succorie, endive, sorrel, lettice, purslane, fluelin, ana m. i. A potion
for the Cholerike
raisines ii. Iuiubarum, sweet prunes, ana paria iiii. the seeds of melons,
dodder, citrons, purslane, and anise, ana i. ss. of the cordial flowers, of
each one little handful, yeallow sanders. ss. let a decoction Let the Physician
consider of this medicine
be made, and to a dose thereof, add iii. of chosen rubarbe, and and ii. of
Citren Myrabolans, with i. of synamom, and to that being expressed, add of the
sirupe of Cicorie, with rubarbe and sirupe of roses solutiue, of each one ounce,
and thereof make a potion: and for the stronger sort add to ii. of the Elec of
the juice of roses of M^sues, or else ii. of the Elect. de citro sol. ii. But if
the complexion of the patient be melancholy, and that humor abounds, this
potion following is profitable.

Take Radicum eupatorii Mesues, sieve gratiolae, and turmentil, of each ss.
Polipodie, Asarabacca, Tamarindes, ana iii. aniseed and A potion for
melancholy.
raiso^s, ana ii. fluellin, scabious, burrage, buglos, fumitere, ceterach,
politrici ana m. ss. sinamon ss. Epithimy, flowers of violets, and of broom,
ana, p. i. and let them all be boiled, and in the expression thereof, macerate
half an ounce of Seen: that being strained, dissolve therein of the sirupe of
Peaches, and of fumiterre compound ana vi. and make thereof a potion, and if
the strength of the patient be sufficient, you may add there to ii. of
Confectio hamech, or the like quantity of dia polipodi.

In so much as oftentimes, not one but all humors abound mixed, and spread
throughout all the body, and that happens oftentunes, in that case, minister
this potion following, especially if there be any suspicion of venime.

Take the roots of Turmentill, of Angelica, of Gentlan, of each A potion fit to
cuacuate all malignant humors.
iii. of Acorus, of Pimpinell, of each ii. of Polipody of the Oak, of the pith
of Cartamis^edes, of each ss. of Endive, of Succorie, of Agrimony, Cetrach,
Hops* Fumiterre, of each half a handful, of Licorise and Raisons, of each i. ss.
Of Damasin Primes, par^a iiii. of the seeds of Endive, of Sorell, of Citri and
of Purslaine, of each one dram: of Aniseed one dram and a half: of ye Cordial
flowers, and of the flowers of broom and Tameriske one little handful, of
Seen leaves iii. b^ile them for a dose, and infuse in the decoction thereof
being strained, of Ruba^be ii.. and iiii. of Agaricke, with one scruple of
Spicknard and another of Ginger, and in the expression thereof dissolve one
ounce of the syrope of Roses solutiue, and make thereof a potion, and let it be
ministered, yea twice, and it be need.

Many other sorts of Purgations may be made, which are to be referred to the
judgment of the learned Physician, as also the reiteration of them (yea in the
state of the sickness) if strength do serve and occasion require: but if the
patient abhors this kind of medicines, then let him use the extractions of
simple purgers, as of rubarb, agarike, or seen: of the which by orderly
composition, al humors may be purged, as we have taught lib. de med* vegetab.
spag. prepar. where also you shall find the right and orderly preparation and
dose of them.

CHAP. V. Of the third general intention curatiue, which is done by
Chyrurgerie: and first of the manner of the first dressing.
WE said in the beginning, that in wounds by shot, two Indications curatiue
were to be considered, that is suppuration, and generation of new flesh, (which
are sufficient, if we only regard the contusion and brusing thereof, and not
the venomous quality and burning, which may be joined therew^th) the which two
intentions, that we may orderly do, and so obtain our pretendid purpose, there
are eleven indications to be considered of us, which they call Subalterne, of
the which one of them commands the shot to be taken out, or small pieces of
the coat of maile, or points of weapons sticking fast, and also pieces of
their apparel, scales of bones, sharp and pricking, clots, or any such other
thing which may happen in the wound, which must be taken out, (if it may be)
without pain: and if any thing be deep in, it must be wrought with your
fingers or pincers, or toothed tenacles, made after the fashion of a Crows
bill, as you may see them pictured in sundery sorts, in the book of Ambrosius
Pareus, a most skillful Chyrurgion. And the shot must be taken out the same way
it went in: placing the wounded person (as Hippocrates commands) in the same
sort as he was in when he received the wound, or at the least so placed and
laid in his bed, that so nigh as may be, he resemble the same. And the shot
is commonly taken out by that way, as vy force it was driven in: because it
has made and prepared it self a way to come forth thereby: the which passage
(if need require) must be enlarged with a lancet or incision knife, that the
bullet may follow the easier, and the less inflammation arise, if so be it be
found by a searcer sticking in the flesh, and has not pierced any great vain,
or sinewy place. In which case we must use a new incision, with more profit,
if the flesh in the contrary part be very thin, and by feeling the shot is
perceived, and no manifest let, but incision may be made in the contrary side.
And of this the Chyrurgion ought always to have a special care (as says
Celsus, writing of drawing out things infixed in wounds) least that a sinew,
great Seventh book of remedies, Chap. 5.
vain, or artery be hurted thereby: which if it be like to ensue, or the shot
be so hid that it cannot be found, it is better to let it stay till such
time as nature it self shall expel it. For what shall it prevail, when the
wound is great of it self, to make a new, and in vain to molest the patient
with double pains: in so much as in diverse the shot has been so secret, that
many years after ye wound has been healed, it has fallen out of his own
accord, with a small impostume.

Moreover this thing may be done by applying of drawing medicines, whose use is
daily, especially if it be suspected the shot to be venomous, for in such case
it must be had out with speed: wherefore (least the venime stricke upward, and
draw to the principal parts) we must presently use the strongest drawers, as
in other cases those not so forceable, of the which we shall have occasion to
speak, when we entreat of venomous wounds. This first intention being done,
that is, all things (as much as in us lies) taken out of the wound, next we
will speak of such medicines as first are to be applied to the same: in which
case we find the judgment of the Physicians and Chyrurgions much to vary,
some would have a burning whot iron, or causticke, or any other eating
medicine to be applied to every wound indifferently: others the oil Olive, or
oil of Elders to be powered on exceeding whot: some commend Treacle, others
Turpentine, and some would have the oil of whelps, to be applied very
warm: but the common sort use to take their matches, stupes, or tow, and dippe
it in vinegar, the white of an egg, and some astringent medicine, and
therewith fill the whole wound: and bind and roole therein the parts about it:
and that dressing they will not to be removed for the space of a whole day,
as they say, for fear of bleeding. But how evil this common use is, the
skillful may judge: for these emplasticall medicines are of a thick and earthy
substance, and astringent power, which suddenly are dried up, and do pre^se
the sore member too much, and cause great pa^ne, whereby comes great fluxes of
humors, and inflammations, and other grievous accidents, because they do shut
up the pores and passages of the skin, and do thicke^ and ingrosse the
humors: even as Lard, Rosine, Pitch, Wax, Butter, and the substance of all
things meltable, does congeale with cold, and in feeling is harder: even so
are the humors thickened, and become hard to be discussed by the sinister
application of these cold medicines: for the pores of the skin being shut
up, the spirits by and by are choked, by the staying of exhalation of evil
humors, whereof many times comes Gangrena and mortification of the whole
member. But if mere necessity, and want of other medicines, does enforce the
Chyrurgion to use these common remedies to stop the great flux of blood (which
in these wounds is seldom seen) yet (if they may) let them be picked out or
changed, or else often made moist with Oxirhodino warmed: neither is it to be
forgotten that many now adays, do use to the cure of such wounds (not only at
the first dressing, but until they be fully healed) only running water
warmed, and some put thereunto vinegar and oil, and dippe therein their
matches and towe, which so well falls out, that diverse think that it is done
by magical incantations: the which thing by daily experience is proved:
neither is it against reason: for Celsus writes that simple cold water is
profitable for wounds: Lib. 8. cap. 30.
and in another place he says, it is good how ever it be applied: yea warmed,
for it eases pain, expels inflammations, and puts back fluxes, the
which accidents (by the consent of all men) in the very beginning are to be
resisted. Furthermore by the advice of Hippoc. all contused wounds are to be
cured by present supuration the which is done (as experience and all ancient
writers have taught) by fomentation of warm water. If so be then, water does
repel and drive back the viole^tnes of such grievous and great accidents which
commonly come to wounds, why should then any man mauell, if the nature (wherein
is contained the efficient cause and natural balm which does eonglutmate both
broken bones, and wounded flesh) does so incarnate wounds, and socicatrise
them, (so be it that art give attendance to nature, and does minister and
serve thereunto, in taking heed that the wound be not h^ndered by outward
causes, and that the curatiue virtue of the Balm be not let, but may do his
office) and in clensing the wound thoroughly from fi^th and all other things
which may hinder the consolidation thereof. And also I must greatly commend
their endeavor, which will, oil and vinegar to be added thereunto, for with
that remedy was that Vinsius cured, of whom we spoke before, being wounded
grievously at the siege of Rochell: and not only he, but diverse others: for
these things being mixed, do resist all kind of accidents, as pain,
inflammation, fluxes, and also putrefaction: which last especially is to be
prevented (because these kinds of wounds are very much subject thereunto)
least Gangrena and Sphacelus follow after. And it is manifest yt vinegar
withstandeth corruption, in that it preserves things co^^it therein, from
venoming and moulding: likewise oil being powered upon wine or any other
liquor, preserves them from sowring, or dying, in that it keeps away the
air, and excludes all fumes, which may cause putrefaction. And so much the
more I allow the use thereof, in that whether it be inwardly ministered or
outwardly applied, it suppresseth the power of venom, which may sometimes be
joined with these wounds, as we have taught, and that is the cause that I
allow the judgment of those which cause hot oil presently to be applied,
for it is very wholesome, partly because, by relaxation it dissolueth the
inward venom of evil humors, and partly in that it defends the hollownesse
of the wound from the violence of the air: which thing above the rest is to be
heeded. That the wound be not long open, but so soon as may be, it be covered,
and that the air is altogether subject to putrefaction, it is manifest to
those, which set any kind of pippins, and stop the same very close with
lut um sapientiae, as they term it, that no air break in, and bury it in a
p^t and so these fruits being kept from the air cannot rot or putrify, but
are taken out again as fresh and sound as they were when they were put in,
the which things I have spoken by the way to prove, that many were cured by
medicines and not by enchantmentes. as the common people judge, although that
some use them not with reason, it is agreeable to reason: yet I would not have
any man think that I have written this to defend the qua^re^^ of the
E^pericks which stick not to cry cunning on the very body and life of man,
and as the proverb says, by breaking of a pot, to prove the potters craft,
but I judge rather such to be rooted out, for through their ignorance and
rashness it comes to pass, yt Physic (which otherwise is highly to be
praised) is condemned and despised. But that we digress not far from our
purpose, to my judgment it seems profitable, to pour into such w^unds made
by shot, by and by, the compound oil of the Misselto of the Apple tree, or the
oil of the flowers of Mulleyn or of Hypericon, or of eggs, the making of which
you shall find in our Antidotare of gunshot, and such the Chyrurgion ought to
have in a readiness: For they greatly prevail, to mollify and assuage pain,
and are very profitable to cure such kinds of wounds, But when these are not
at hand, you may use the oil of Elders (which is highly commended of Ioubertus
an expert Physician) or y^ oil of Lynseed, or of Eggs, or of worms, or Lyles,
or Cham^mill, or of Turpentine, and in case any man be destitue of all those,
let him take warm butter or Turpentine, and annoint the clothes or lynt with
the ointment following.

Vnguentum Magistrale.
Take of Goats suet, of Colophonie of each. iii. of the marrow of the legs of
Oxen and oesepi humidi of each. ii. ss. of fresh butter. ii. of the juice of
Selondme and centuary, of each. i. of the oil of Ware and of Misselto, of each
as much as suffiseth to make an ointment, take of this ointment. iii. of
Mercury Precipitat sweetened, and prepared after our manner, and of Crocus
Veneris right prepared, of each. iii. and mix them together, and annoint
therewith the Plegettes and Tents, if the use of them be necessary. The
powders ought to be prepared in a readiness, the which the richer sort may
carry about them in a box, and if the foresaid ointment be not at hand, you
may very well mix them with fresh butter, and make thereof a broad plaster,
that may cover the sides also of the wound, and the lint is to be wet with
simple Oxirhodino, made with vinegar, and the oil of Roses and of Miselto, and
the parts far of, must be defended with this ointment following.

Take Bole Armoniack, sanguis Draconis, red corrall and ss. croci martis ii.
baccharum myrthi i. ss. oil of Roses Omphacine. iiii. vinegar of Roses. ii.
wax. i. ss. so make thereof a lynament.

In the mean while this one thing is chiefly to be observed in rolling of
such wounds, that the roll be not so lose, that the medicines sagg from the
wound, neither it be so hard, that it be grievous, and so draw fluxes of
humors, and sometime impostumation and at the last Gangrena and Canker, as
Celsus (sometime) has seen happen, we therefore must give our endeavors, that
in avoiding the discommodities of the one, we may reap the commodities of the
other, and in the mean space let the linen cloth be often made moist with
Oxyrhodino, and the dressing renewed after xii. hours, except through the
cutting of some great vain or artery we fear bleeding a fresh, The which if
it chance to happen above measure, it must presently be seen to and stayed,
which may well be brought to pass by the applying and taking of these
medicines following, but yet I would not have it stayed, until such time as a
reasonable quantity of blood is issued.

An ointment to stay blood.
Take Crocus Martis finely reuerberated, Crocus Veneris, of each. ii. let them
be tempered with the oil of Visci pomorum, and make thereof an ointment, it is
to be wondered at, to see ye strength of this medicine in stopping blood, and
does moreover reduce the wound to a better state, digest the superfluous
humors, strengthens the member and greatly withstandeth putrefaction.

Another.
Take Crocus Martis. i. the lyme o^ Eggeshels, and Colchotar of each ss. the
ashes of Frogs burnt. ii. mix them with the oil of visci pomorum.

Another easily to be made* and of no less virtue.

Eake Colchotar prepared with vinegar. ii. the ashes of snayles. ss. fresh
butter. iiii. make thereof an ointment, or mix them with the white of an egg.

Moreover in great flux of blood it were good to use this, or the like drink
following:

For the wealthier.
Take Crocus Martis, and the essence of corrall of each. i. and make thereof a
potion with the water of spermatis ranarum, or of Roses.

For common soldiers approved.
Take Crocus Martis prepared after our manner,. i. the lyme of Egshels. i. the
sirope of dry Roses, and of mirtils of each. i. and with the water of the
flowers of red popie make thereof a potion, and minister it three hours before
meat, the which may be barley broth boiled with Rosewater and popie seed, if
it ^e toward bed.

Above all there cannot be found a worthier remedy, both to stop blood, and
case all pains, and suppress fluxes of humors, then Laudanum Opiaticum* if
you minister a pill thereof as big as a Pepper come, the use whereof:
(especially in these kind of wounds) cannot to highly be commended, that I have
more plenteously entreated of in my answer to y^ treatise of Aubertus vindonis
do ortu and causis Metal. After these things being first done, then apply
medicines, which quickly may suppurate, and being come to maturation, let it be
mundified, with exiccation, that natural flesh may grow, that is, it be
neither over hard, or soft, or proud, and the scales of the bones, if there be
any, may come out from the sound bone. Moreover we hasten the suppuration of
these wounds, least the venom closed within* and filthy saines, do some
greater hurt for being thoroughly ripened, fevers, pains and almost al other
passions will decay. For this intention, the common sort are wont to use, at
the second dressing, digestiues as they term them, made of the yeolke of an
egg, oil of Roses and Turpentine, which (as I may say the truth) I cannot
allow in that they soon putrify and cause the wound to smell, which thing is
always ill, Others use hydreleon warmed with butter, and other things which
have nature to suppurate, and some boil the flower of wheat with a little
safron: some again there be which greatly commend Tetrapharmacon made of
pitche, rosin, wax, and suit: and Cor. Celsus esteems this above all others,
Also Macedonioum is made with the forenamed simples and frankencense, and much
commended of some, Other greatly allow Basilicon, for it is a great
suppuratiue, and also ready at the Pothicaries, and some commend Dialthea,
which they call Resumtiuum. Others Emplas. dia Chilo, simplex, and de
mucilaginibus, which they temper with oil of lylies. And with all these and
other like medicines, they out of hand, do suppur at the bruised flesh,
following the precepts of H^ppoc. For he writes, that it is expedient that
the bruised flesh, be supurated, and by such means is the wound less subject
to impostumation and anguish, and this is the judgment of Hippoerates, and all
other ancient Physicians, and I my self cannot, but highly commend the use of
the supuratiues, for they do defend the nature and strength of natural heat,
and do temperate the rage of rotten humors, and very quickly do bring the
corrupted blood to matter, and thereby do bring the wound in a far better
estate, But yet this one thing must be taken heed to, that the unorderly use
of them cause not the wound to rot, which is remedied by putting to every
ounce of the suppuratiue, one dram of precipitate prepared after our order, yea
and more to, if the wound shall smell, and so shall the medicine pearce
farther, and work his effe^t without danger, and by this only means, you
shall have white matter, and the affected member shall be saf^ from Ga^grena and
putrefaction, whereunto (in the^e kind of wounds) they are much subject, and
this have I oftentimes proved, by sure experience. Neither have I thought it
amiss (in the behalf of the unpracticed chyrurgions) to set down some
ensamples for this intention, I would therefore that the tents, Plegetes, and
whatsoever is put in the hollownesse of the wound, be dipped in this ointment
following, which is easy to be made.

Take unguents Basilici maioris discrip. Mesnae ii. fresh butter i. Precipitate
prepared after our manner ii. ss mingle them and anoint therewith the tents
and plegets.

Another.
Take new Wax, Rosme, ship Pitch, of each iiii. Goats sue^, and marrow of
calves legs, of each ii. aesypi humidae i. oil of Olive or of Linseed, or of
Visci pomorum one pound, melt them and strain them, and make thereof an
ointment.

An addition.
Take of that ointment ii. of our Precipitate ii. mix them, and so shall thou
have a most excellent remedy, which being used in emplasters without
Precipitate, is to be anointed and put into the wound. Or else thus.

Take venice turpentine and white honey, of each half a pound, the yelkes of
twelve eggs, and mix them very well, and boil them to the thickness of a
pultise. This ointment (which the Paracelsians call Galcinatum magnum) you may
safely use in sreede of a digestive: for being so prepared, it resists
putrefaction, and is very good to bring such wounds to suppuration.

But in so much as it is the office of natural heat to maturate, and not of
medicines, we must therefore by all means possible, increase such heat as is
likest thereunto, which is to be increased and nourished by wraping the member
in bombase, lana succida, and linen clothes, or else with some Cataplasme, by
all which means (as Celsus writes) dangerous wounds are cured: and such
things must be dipped in Hydraelion made of oil of Ros^s and Rose Water,
whereunto you may put a little vinegar, but not too much in that it hinders
suppuration, or else use this fomentation following, which I my self do often
use.

A fomentation to mollify and ease pain.
Take of the leaves of Visci pomoru^ small shred, with the berries m. iii. the
roots and leaves of Holihock, Mallows, Violet leaves ana, m ii. of Fenigreke
and Linseed ana. ii. the flowers of Camomell and melli^ote ana. p ii. sees
them in milk.

This medicine never failed me, for it drives away inflammation, greatly eases
pain, and strenthning the substance of the member, it very quickly moves good
matter: and of the foresaid substance pounded, and driven through a seeue, is
made a cataplasme by putting thereunto the meal of Lineseed and Fenugreke ana
ii. Oesep^ humidae, and marrow of cal^^es ^eete ana i. ss. the yelkes of four
eggs, of saffro^ six grains, oil of Viscipomorum and rosarum as much as
suffices: let it be applied to the wound and parts nigh unto it, but round
about it somewhat farther off: let this ointment following be used to withstand
the flux of humors.

An excellent defensive.
Take the powder of red Roses and of Myrtils, of each i. bole Armeny
terrasigillata, of each vi. the juice of Plantine and Dwa^ of each i. vinegar of
Roses ii. oil of Roses, Omphacine, and of Myrtils ana ii. ss. Wax ii. make
thereof a defensatiue.

And such medicines so long you must use (as we said before) dressing it twice
a day, until the wound come to good matter, and then must you use clensing
medicines, wherewith you may always mix our Precipitate in greater dose, which
bravely cleanses wounds from matter, and also resists corruption.

An excellent mundificatiue easy to be made for common soldiers.
Take vng. Aurei ii. Turpentine and honey of Roses, of each ss bean meal ii.
Borax i. our Precipitate iii. mix them.

Another proved for the rich.
Take of the juice of Persicarie, and Cumphory ana ii. stilled oiles of
Turpentine, of Francomsence, of Mirrh, of Sarcacoll, of each iii. the root of
round Astrology i. ss. white wax i. oil of hypericon q. ss.

An addition.
To one ounce of that, put a dram of our Precipitate, and anoint therewith
the tents or pledgets: Also the only unguent de paeto is very good, whose
descripsion you shall find in our Antidotarie.

Also the use of the cataplasme above taught, is then also allowed so be it you
add to it the meal of Orobus, of Barley, Bean^s, and L^ntils: and this Cerot
following is very good.

Take massae emp. Diachalciteos vi. olei visci pomorum q. ss. and make thereof
a cero^c, and apply it to the wound.

But insomuch as for the most part, such wounds are so deep, that neither
ointmen^^ nor tents can reach them, it were very good to use this iniection
following, which serves for common soldiers.

For the common soldiers.
Take Peruincle, Petum, Persicarie, Betonie, of each one handful, flowers of
saint John's wort, and Verbasci ana. p i. the roots of both Astrologies, of each.
ss. Francomsence, Mirrhe, Sarcacoll and Ireos, of each ii. boil them in white
wine, and wash the wound therewith at every dressing, but beware you leave not
ought thereof in the wound, for it suffices if the wound be washed therewith.

For the richer sort.
Take Fluelline, Peruincle, winter-greene, Betony, Agrimony, and y^ greater
Cumphery, of each m. i. the roots of round Astrology and Ireos, of each i. boil
them in the fleme of Vitriole.

An addition.
Take of this decoction strained half a pint, and dissolve therein the
chymicall Oiles of Myrrh and masticke ana iii. Oil of Turpentine one dram,
mix them and use them as aforesaid.

The wound being thoroughly cleansed, it must be incarnated, which is soon done
by making less and less the tents daily, for by that means only is the
wound filled with flesh without any medicine, by the strength of nature^, and
then after is easily cicatrised, so be it we augment the quantity of our
Precipitate in the ointments, or else use the medicine following.

A cicatrising powder.
Take lyme of eggshels well ralcyned ss. Boraxe, and burnt Alome, of each i.
crocus Martis i. make thereof a powder, which is excellent to cicatrise.

Moreover, if the wound cannot be brought to suppuration by the foresaid
medicines, but begins to grow to Gangrena and mortification of the member,
which may be seen by the wanne, yelow, leady, and black color of the same:
then you must apply such medicines as have virtue to withstand such corruption
and mortification, whose discriptions you shall find in the Chap. of Gangrena,
and also we must withstand all evil accidents if any come: as pain,
impostumation, and such like, as hereafter shall be declared. Now it rests
to entreat of such wounds by shot, as are accompanied with venom and burning.

CHAP. VI. Of wounds by Gunshot, accompanied with venom and burning.
Having set down the curation of those wounds, in which the solution of
co^tinuity with brusing, and tearing of the parts, was only to be waide. It
remains now to entreat of venom and burning, which two, we have proved to
happen oftentimes to such wounds. For venom therefore which must have recourse
to a third intention, that is to some wholesome medicine (named of the greeks
Alexipharmacon) whereby, out of hand it may be drawn out of the wound, and
the strength thereof delayed, least by little and little creeping in, it
comes to tbe principal parts, and so alters their substance and hinders
their operation: and this is to be done with medicines, partly apylied
outwardly to ye wound and heart, and partly inwardly by the mouth ministered.
For if the flesh about the wound be more wanner then it is wont to be in common
wounds, and as it were dead, with palenesse of the whole member, with pricking
of the sides, and extraordinary inflammations and pain, with debilitie of the
whole body, alienation of the mind, and burning fevers. And these accidents
come without any manifest cause, it plainly declares the wound to be venomed:
and then (all other intentions said aside*) presently we must provide to
withstand that, for even as the skilful shipmaister seeing a terrible tempest
arising, with blustering winds, does presently even against both stream and
wind (considering his safeguard) with sail and oar, seek to find some safe
port and place to stay in: Even so the Physician harnised with reason, use,
and experience, ought out of hand to apply some healthull medicine to this
present incommoditie, to boat down presently (if it may be) the malice
thereof, and that before it takes root and hold in the wound, and does
possess the principal parts and heart, to which place it makes great
speed, and in this case present incision often fails, and that which is done
too late never helps. Therefore if we judge by the foresaid signs and such
like that the wound is poisoned, we must straight have recourse to some present
remedy, but first a sound judgment taken, with perfect prognostication (as
Celsus wills) given to the friends of the patient, whether he be either past
help, or in great danger, or like to recover, least that art being overcome
with the evil, it be attributed to our ignorance and deceit, to the great
discredit of the art, after this, a convenient order of diet prescribed,
which resists venom, we must straight have respect whether the grief does
require either bloudletting or purgation, which are to be done speedily: with
good aduisement, whether the euacuation must be done first and foremost, or
else with sweat, vomit, laske, and phlebotomy, that the evil humors may be
purged* before they be spread in the veins, and taken hold in the arteries, or
else the pores (by sweat) being opened, these evil and noisome vapors,
wherewith the heart is oppressed, may come forth and vanish, which is to be
done, especially if the poison first be spread through the body, and the patient
filled with ill humors, and then also Paulus counsels, that euacuation be
made by phlebotomye as is to be seen in his 5. book, chap. 2. After this
minister such things as defend and comfort the heart, as Treacle and
Methridate, in wine, or decoction of the roots of Angelica, Turmentill,
Gentian, Bistort, Citron seeds, Sorrel, hear be baulme, fluelline and
pympinell, with the sirope of lemons, or any other infusion: and that, as the
nature of the party requires, and shall seem good to the expert Physician,
and in that case it behoueh him to be wise and wary, and not miss. Moreover I
have thought it good to set down a receite easy to be made, for their sakes,
which are to come, which being ministered, expels all venom, as by daily
proof it has been tried: and take it for a singular secret, although it be
familiar.

A most excellent medicine against poison, and by often ttiall proved.
Take the rotes asclepiadis i. the rotes of Ualerian and Turmentill of each ss.
polipodie rotes ii. garden Augelica iiii. wild Angelica and holihock roots ana
ii. nettels i. rotes of Thimelea i* ss. roots of scabious and lesser valerian
ana ss. let all the roots be gathered between the 15. of August, and the 8. of
September, and small shred, and put in a pot with a sufficient store of vinegar
and then fast luted, and so let them infuse for 12. hours. after sees them
for the space of an hour and a half, and pouring out the vinegar, let them be
dried and made in a powder, and put thereto twelve berries of herb Paris, and
six and thirty leaves of the same and make of them a powder, whose do is i.
in white wine.

Another, always ready to be made.
Take Methridate and treacle of each ss, pearls prepared, and red coral and
i. bole armenye ss. sirope of lemons i. buglosse and Scabions water as much as
suffiseth, and make thereof a potion, and let it be renewed once or twice if
need require.

Another for rich men.
Take aurum vitae and essence of pearls ana gr. vi. essence of corrall gra.
viii. terrae sigillatae electae i. and let a potion be made with ii. of our
thertacle water, and ministered out of hand, for this wonderfully defends the
heart from all poison and venoine. It is very good also to use tomentations to
the region of the heart made of pearls, saunders, corrall, camphere, and other
cordials.

But Galen in his xiii. book Meth. Med. judges two intentions curatiue to be
required in those venomous wounds, the one to draw forth the poison, the other
to alter the pain coming thereof, The first intention is performed, with
things heating and drawing, as boxing, frications, cauterizatio^s made with
hot iron or medicines: The other is done by such medicines, which did, or can
alter the quality by a contrary quality, as to use refrigeratiues, if great
heat do^nolest the patie it, and calefartiues, if cold be felt in the wound, or
in all the body, And in the mean spaee the ancient Physicians councelled to
put in the wound, salt, onyons, rue, mustardseede, wallnuts, dittany,
brimstone, nuttes, and such like medicines having great force to draw, They
used allbindinges and sacrifications with lancet whereby the more quantity of
corrupted blood might issue, of which things Paul. Aetius, Actuarius, and
Cornelius Celsus, excellent Physicians and worthy of eternal commendations,
have worthily written. Notwithstanding because they had neither ye knowledge of
wounds made by gunshot, neither of any excellent medicine, neither yet perhaps
of the poison, wherewith the shot may be poisoned, I have thought it meet to
bring to light most profitable medicines, and they not common, to cure such
wounds as are veno^ned, ye use of which the thankful posterity cannot
sufficiently commend, Therefore at the very first dressing, (if by the
aforesaid signs, it is manifest the wound to be poisoned) draw out if you may
all things infixed and scarifie the lips of the wound, and set boxing
glasses thereto, and annoint the tents to be put in the wound with this
unguent following.

An unguent profitable for poisoned wounds.
Take Vng. Macedonici ii. oil of Mirrh and Turpentine, ana ii. our precipitate
i. ss. butter of Arsnicke fixed and dul^ified as the manner is ss. oil of
Antimonie ii. a little wax, and make thereof an ointment.

There cannot a more better medicine be found to draw out and cleanse any
poison in wounds, wherefore the Chyrurgions ought always to have it made in a
readiness, whose force when they have proved in these wounds, and all malign
ulcers, as Carcinomata Gangrena, and other desperate sores, so much the more
will they commend it, for it works without any pain.

Another most excellent.
Take olei mercur, corporalis i. ss. olei sulphuris therebi. iii. arsenici
dulcificati ii, and with a little fresh butter, make thereof an unguent, and
apply it to the wound, as it is said, with tents and plegettes, for it cures
all venomous wounds, and Gangrena, Caner, eating and naughty vl^ers, and
about the compass of the wound let this plaster be applied.

An attractiue medicine.
Take Ammoniaci, bdellii, dissolved in vinegar of Roses, ana. ii. Galbani ss.
mumiae thuris, Mastick ana iii. Camphere ii. white and red coral, Magnes
prepared, asphalti, amber, ana ss. rad. aristolochiae, serpentariae. et
arundinis. ana. ii. ss wax, ship-pitch. an. iii. alabast. iii. oil of
Turpentine, and of eggs, ana q. s. to make a cerote, This medicine being
rightly prepared, draws out not only the venom, but also whatsoever is
infixed in the wound, either pellet, iron, bones, spells, or rags of clothes.

Another excellent attractiue.
Take gummi corticis med. tiliae drawn as hereafter shall be taught ii.
magnetis praep. i. succini flaui praep. ss. opoponaxe purged with the juice of
Serpentariaz iii. Turpentine and wax, as much as suffiseth to make an
emplaster.

Aliud specificum.
The tongue of a fox cut off in a convenient time, and prepared and dried as it
ought, draws out the shot, yea from the inward parts, without pain if first
it be moystened in red wine, wherein serpentarie and aristolochia has been
boiled, and so applied to the wound, also this defensive following laid round
about the member, is of great force.

Defensiuum Magistrale.
Take of the flowers of Mullen, hipericon, and roses ana p. ii. the leaves of
rue and henvane ana m. i. Camphire, ss. boil them in vinegar, and make thereof
a Cataplasme, that asswageth pain and keeps the part from impostumation.
These medicines ough^ to be changed twice a day, and must be used, until all
grievous passions shall seem to be gone: and then the wound must be used as if
it were bursed: and that may be done with prolonging of tune, that the venomous
matter may ruime out and not creep inward, And when such time is come that we
judge the venom to be drawn out quite, you may incarnate and cicatrize the
wound as we have said before, but if the wound be so infected with poison, that
it seems to bring great danger of death, and is deadly indeed, and nothing
amendeth by applying of medicines, it shall not be amiss (the danger before
declared) to cut of the member, if it be such as may be cut off: let this
suffice concerning venomous wounds.

Now going about to entreat of burning, which oftentimes happens Of burnings.
to wounds by shot, I cannot sufficiently discommend the judgment of those
which will that cold things and such as have great poer to keep back, are
in this case straight to be applied, for such keep in and drive back, and not
draw out the fire, and does drive it more into the parts, and increase the
grief: and especially vinegar, which they commonly use, for with his
astringent virtue, it stops the pores, and keeps back the fiuxe of blood,
Tetr. 4. Seem. 2. Cap. 26.
as Aetius writes. For rather brine or salt water does presently draw on the
burning and fire of such wounds, and do aswage the great pain, and keep
back blisters, if the burned part be presently covered with a fine cloth wette
in salt water. But Oribasius and Paulus have thought good that burnings were to
be cured with clensing medicines, and therefore they have commended terram
Chiam, Cimoliam, and Creticam, and all other light earth being Or^b. sinosp.
lib. 7. cap. 6. Paul. lib. 4. cap. 11.
tempered with vinegar, being not sharp. The late writers commend an unguent
made of lime seven times washed and tempered with oil of Roses, and applied to
the grief. Other have recourse to Walwort boiled in wine and made as a
Cataplasine, and to all such medicines which by heat may draw out the burning
from the slesh: and by this reason the fire it self, if the part burned be
holden thereunto, becomes aremedie to cure his own hurts, for in opening the
pores, it draws out hte fire and cease pain: but wehaue oftentimes to our
great profit, used these medicines following.

Anvnguent for common soldiers, to quench the burning, and keep back
blisters.
Take oil of elders and of nuts ana. ii. oil of eggs. ss. hearts tallow, and
marrow of a bull ana i. two Onions roasted, and a little Wax, make of these an
unguent and lay it to the part affected.

Another for the same of great virtue.
Take of oil of lard, and oil of butter ana ss. the juice of the berries and
leaves of Iuie ii. the juice of the middle rind of Elders i. oil of elders,
iiii. salt peter, zii. boil them altogether till the water be consumed, and
with a little wax make thereof alinament, which is of great force to take away
burnings. Also this water following is most excellent for the same purpose.

A water against burning.
Take of the fieame of vitriol and allome ana lb. ss. the flowers of tapsus
barbatus, leaves of black Iuie ana m. i. s^afles, frogs, and crafishes ana
numerox. distill them in a leaden limbeck, with somewhat a strong fice, and wash
the burned place with this water, five or six times a day. Likewise the water
of sperma ranarum, mixed with the fieame of vitrioll is very good, but there
cannot be found a more excellent remedy to quench the burning heat of powder
the^ this lynament following, for it puts away all inflammations, and
al^wageth p^ine, and the rich may use it.

An excellent lynament.
Take salis saturni saccharini i. oil of yolks of eggs ii. butt^r prepared
iiii. mix them and make alynament, wherewith anoint the bin ned place, thrice
or four times a day: and lay this defensive following to the parts about it,
to withstand the flux of homors and inflammation.

Nutritum Magistrale.
Take of the juice of henbane, housleeke, and water lilies, of each ii. water of
the sperm of frogs and flowers of Mullein ana i. Wharge, or his salt, which
is better ii. o^se of visci pomorum and Ros^omphac. ana ii. ss. vinegar of
Roses i. te^per them long in a leaden mortar with a pestill of the same, and
make it in form of Nutriti, and use it for a defensive. These are the local
medicines which are necessary for such burned wounds: but in so much as these
inconveniences are wont to happen to bodies being sick and filled with evil
juice, and weak of strength, which are subject to all mishaps, as to great
pain and inflammation, whereof fevers may grow, and so death follow. (For so
old patched and rotten ships do soonest give up in a tempest.) In which case
we must have a care that a good order of diet be kept, and also if need
require, purgation and blood-setting: all which things are to be committed to
the judgment of the skillful and wise Physician, who may prudently presage
what will be the end of the grief, not to neglect that which is great,
neither to make that great which is little, least it should seem that he has
done more then need: and this thing (according to Celsus mind) must always
be looked to, least that grief which is of it self being small, be made great
by the neglig^nce of the Physician.

CHAP. 1. A particular curation of these wounds and also of the accidents
happening thereunto.
Of vvounds with fracture of the bones.
THe curation of such wounds is commonly judged more difficult, if so be it
be joined with fracture of the bones, and that not without great cause,
especially if the greater bone, as of the legs and arms, be so broken that
the marrowe goes out, which cannot be without great perishing of the sinews,
veins, and Arteries, the which bring life, feeling and moving to every part,
and that being kept back, the member must needs perish, and commonly death
ensues. Whereunto the Physician or Chyrurgion ought so much the more to look
by, how much the more the number and greatness of accidents shall increase, that
he may let nothing pass which does pertain to the perfect ^uratio thereof. And
it is better to attempt that with excellent medicines, the^ by utter
desparation by a heavy and sorrowful means ^o cut off the member, and
especially in the beginning, when as yet Sphacelus, is not grown: and that I
have not spoken this without a cause, the works and miracles of nature may
teach us, the which she oftentimes brings to pass (being furthered with meet
medicines) and deceives the judgment, yea of the learned, the which with
these eyes I have oftentimes seen to have happened in the tents, at this last
wars and among all the rest, a certain noble man named Brosseus, whose arm
was so torn by a great shot, that it missed but little of breaking of y^ head,
which is fastened on the bones, named Omoplat, which was the only cause why
the Chyrurgions did not cut it off: but they meant shortly to do it for fear
of Sphacelus: but it fell out that the pacient recovered, whom they judged past
help, in that the wound was accompanied with such evil and sundry accidents,
yea and his arm saved, that he is able to do any thing with it. I have
thought it good to set out this ensample to the younger Chyrurgions, that
thereby they may endeavor themselves by all means rather to preserve the
hurted member, then to begin their curation by taking it off, which ought not
to be done, before it is plainly perceived the member to be come to
mortification, and then let it be done by due warning and prediction: some will
object, that in the beginning the strength of the pa^ient to be of more force,
and also to s^^^er better the taking off, the which by the greatness of the
grief dacayeth: and therefore it is to be done by and by, which is as it were
to set that present before his eyes, which is not yet, and is also uncertain
whether it will be or no. Moreover it is better first to die that kind of
curation which is of credit and profit, then to attempt a taking heed of
other hanious griefs not yet come: neither may we think that nature is so
weak, but she is able to perform that which seems impossible, being helped
in time, and d^oth oftentimes deceive our expectation and judgment: as in the
ensample before we have declared. But in case the member must needs be taken
away, it is better to be done by a general consent of the learned, then by the
rash judgment of the unskillful, which oftentimes will boldly enterprise the
same.

The cause why (entreating of these wounds, which happen Of woun^s in in the
head with fracture of the skull.
without breaking and brusing of the bones) I take my beginning of these which
happen to the head, as the most waightiest and dangerous: by reason of the
worthiness of the brain enclosed therein. And also because there can no bands
and rowlers (which they say to be very necessary in all fractures) be applied
thereunto, which bands were invented to repel, to aswage impostumation, to
avoid quitture, and to take away all hurtful things sticking in the wound
without which means, Gal^n thinks Meth. vi. cap. vi. no bone broken may be
united: whereby it comes to pass, that Cranion being fractured, it is
necessary to open the scull, which commonly we call trapaning, that thereby we
may cleanse and make a passage for the matter, which otherwise might corrupt the
pani^les, and so the brain it self. And that we may entreat orderly hereof,
and our meaning the better understood, let us imagine to be set before us, some
one wounded in the head by shot: and the first thing to be considered shall be
this, whether the wound be manifest or secret, showing it self only by
brusing, which may come to pass, if so be the helmet be so strong, that the
shot is not able to pearce him, but only bends it, and so bruseth Cranion
and breaks it without opening of the skin. This happening, the wound must
be launced crossewise, and to the incision, let some assringent medicine be
applied with lint or towe, made of sang drac. mastic. and bole Armeny mixed
with the white of an egg, and so in the day following, the wound will be
greater, and so may ye judge better of the fracture, which does happen after
sundry sorces, for some whiles one part, and otherwhiles both parts of the
table are perished, sometimes the fissure is to be seen, and then with the
Grecians it is named (...) otherwhiles it is very narrow and not to be seen.
Aegin. lib. 6. cap. 90. quo loco expressionem depressionem.
which the Latins call Pilosa, the Gretians (...) the which again do pearse
both parts of the table, or one which is not so dangerous: Therefore, the
fracture being manifest, the wound being sufficientie delated either by shot or
incisiion, so soon as may let it be taken in hand: first of all let all things
be taken out which are contused and torn, and whatsoever oppresses the
panicles, but if there be any great fragment, which oftentimes chances, you
may not too h^stily pursue it, as Galen wr^teth in his sixth Meth. med. ca. 6.
It shall be sufficient if the bone be so much opened that the matter may avoid
thereby. These are to be considered when the incision or fracture is manifest:
but as concerning such wounds, as have only a simple fissure, such require a
skillful and expert Chyrurgion to discern them: for oftentimes it is not to be
perceived by sight nor handling.

The ancient in this case, (that is when the fracture is pilosa or Capillaris)
did use a certain black medicine, which leaving behind it a black scarre in
the bone, did show the fracture to be there. To this purpose may be used
ink wherewith we write, tempered with masticke, or else coals with mell
Rosate, or else (which is better) tartar calcinid till it be black, which also
of his own accord easily resolves: but the later writers do judge of the
fracture, by applying of astringent medicines, for in what place, and where it
is soonest dried (which comes of hot vapors percing through the fracture,)
there it is showed to be, which being found out, we must presently search by
proper signs and tokens, whether the fissure does pass both the tables, or
else but one: for if it be but in the uppermost table only, it suffices to
scarifie the bone where the fracture is with a razore (which the greeks call
(...)) or any other fit instrument, as far as the fracture extends, that
the bone be made equal, and after proceed to the residue of the curation,
applying medicines meet for wounds contused, of which we have already
entreated in the first book. Moreover you must take great heed in all wounds
of the head that they take no moisture, as Hipoc. witnesses de vuln cap. But
contrariwise, let such things as dry and comfort the head be applied either
dry or in powder, or mixed with mell rosate. Such as comfort the head are
these: the roots of both Aristolochies, franke^sence, myrrh, ireos, panax,
farina, orobi, and other such like: also mercury precipitate is very good,
mixed with mel rosat, and ruineth the superfluity of bones: but if the rising
perce through, then must it be trapined before the third day, or by some other
means an issue made, (as Hippocrates says) which must be so ample, that
inflammation be staide, and a passage for the matter made, so that thoroughly it
may be taken away and cleansed, which must be done circumspectly, and with fit
and meet instruments, which are lively set out by Ambrosius Pareus in the
Chapter of wounds of the head. And this handie work being ended, we must
diligently mark when the broken bone does wax lose, for then it is to be
taken out, so be it sticks not fast to the panicle, which if it does, it must
not be meddled with, least thereby you hurt the panicle or hinder it by letting
in of the air: but you must stay till such time as the bone fall away of his
own accord, but if the bone be quite separated from the skin, which
oftentimes happens in such wounds, through the great force of the shot: and
there is also inflammations, and other davngerous accidents which commonly
accompany these wounds. Then it must presently be opened, yea before it do
rot, if so the Chyrurgion be come in time, which ought to be both diligent and
skillful, and has a perfect knowledge of all such places as may be trapaned,
in that ye seams of Crainon, are not to be meddled with, but if the wound chance
to happen there, then it must be trapaned on both sides, not touching the
seames, and it must be done in that part which shall seem most convenient, to
avoid the corruption. Moreover you must beware that you trapan not the brows
or lower parts of the brain, least thereby (the way being made open) the
brain by reason of his heaviness issue out, neither yet about the temples,
because of the muscle, and vital instruments which are there: which thing
Galen has observed li. 6. ca. 6. meth. with these words: Cogitaui preterea
accidere posse, vt si a latere magnum fierit in ossibus foramen, promineret
fortassis hac part cerebrum. Est porro and in lateribus non vno in loco-etiam
neruorum, horumque non leuis momenti quidem exortus. His admonitus abstinui ab
eximendo osse, quod in latere capitis esset. But in y^ uppermost part of the
brain, he says there comes not out any nerve: whereby we may learn that in
that place, we may trapan with less danger. The wound being enlarged, the
Chyrurgions do commonly apply santalum as they terine it, which is a piece of
red sil^e cut according to the bigness of the orofice, which some apply warm,
dipped only in oil of Roses: but other mixed therewith mel rosarum and some
use only honey of roses, doubting least that through the moistness of the
oil, the panicle would corrupt. Others thrust in tents and linte to fill
thereby the hollownes of the whole wound: and some use their degestiues as they
term them, of which we have spoken off before, some again prefer Maced. and
Basilicon, and some there be which use a cerote made of the emplaster of
betony dissolved with oil of Roses in form of an unguent. But according to
the mind of Hippoc. so soon as the panicle of the head is uncovered by taking
away Cranion: it ought straight to be cleansed and dried, least through the
prolonging of time it swel and corrupt. Now after fear of impostumation above
is past, they apply such things as mundifie and incarnate, that thereby the
wound at last may come to cicatrization, which is brought to pass (as we said
before) by such medicines as dry and comfort the head. Moreover it shall not be
amiss, to set down some descriptions of such medicines which are profitable
in wounds of ye head with fracture of Cranion, and first we will set down
such as must at the first dressing be applied to the panicles detected where
Cranion is taken away.

Take Mel rosat ii. oil of yolks of eggs i. mix them, and dippe therein a
piece of silk, or lint, and lay it warm to the place, but take this following
if you desire to have an easy and speedy medicine.

Take mel rosat ii. olei rosat i. turpentine washed ss. mix them and dippe the
tents or silk therein. But at the third or fourth dressing you must not use
oil of roses or of eggs, but mel rosat, mixed with a just quantity of oil of
Hipericon, and when the seventh or eight day is past, use these medicines
following.

Take Mellis rosat. ii. turpentine i. aqua vitae, gut. x. mix them together and
warm them, and dippe therein your santalum or fine lint, and apply it hot to
the place, let a chafingdish of what coals be by, least the cold air hinder it
by percing in.

Another for the same purpose, to be used of the rich.
Take mel rosat ii. oil of myrrh, made according to our description ss. oil
of turpe^tine distilled with aqua vitae by Balueo. i. mix and use them as
aforesaid, so there be no impostumation, for this medicine is excellent to
preserve the panicle from putrefaction and also profitable in all fractures of
Cranion.

You may also use in the beginning vnguentum Magistrale, descrived by us
before, which you may apply about the bone, and fill also the hollownes of the
wound with lint dipped therein, and so cover it al with a plaster of the
same, also Calcinatum mag. Paracelsu is very good for the same purpose, and in
the mean while, to cleanse the wound use this following.

For common soldiers.
Take myrrh, sacacol, Ireos, ana ii. mumia i. ss. both astrologies ana i.
farina orobi ii. ss. mel rosat. and turpentine washed in the water of betony,
ana q. ss.

To make an ointment for wealthy men.
Take vngent de peto of our description iii. oil of myrrh iii. oil of amber
distilled by discention, and corrected as shall be taught ii. the powder of the
roots of astristolochie i. mix them, and use it as aforesaid. But after that
the panycle shall seem to be covered, then you may use medicines which dry
more. And so you may add to one ounce of the foresaid ointment one. of our
precipitate dulcorated, for thereby not only the scales of the bones fall more
easier away, but also hiposarcosis or proud flesh is kept back, and this
medicine may be used until it be perfitly whole and cicatrised, foreseen
always that it be covered with Empl. de betoni, or gratia dei, or diadictaum
not described of Galen, or this following.

An excellent emplaister for the head.
Take the juice of Peeuincle, Sclandine and Comfory, ana. i. Mummye, Myrrh,
Srarcocolle, Ireos, ana i. the roots of round astristolochie ss. powder of
yellow amber ii. ss. Turpe^tine and honey ana. iii. Croci marti iii, wax, q. s.
to make a plaster. And to assuage inflammation, it is very good a day or two,
in the beginning, to annoint the parts about the wound with the oil of roses,
and to apply rowles and bowlsters, as fit and easy as may be, and as much as
is possible to shun the cold air: for there is nothing more hurtful to
such wounds. Let a slender diet be prescribed, wherein he must abstain from
wine, and all such kind of meats, as send fumes and vapors to the head: you
must not forget also to Lib. de vuln. cap.
purge, as well by phlebotomy, as also if need require by seege, And always
have in memory the sentence of Hippocrates, which says, that no wound of the
head, is to be lightly regarded, yea if the skin be but only rased because
of the great accidents and passions which commonly happen thereunto, and
therefore you must prognosticate, with great heed taken, thereby to avoid all
rebukes, whereunto commonly those which exercise Physic are subject.
Therefore the wounds which happen in the seames of Cranion are very dangerous,
and the more if they be in the forepart Signa and indicia.
of the head and temples, or in the sides thereof, but not so ill, if in the
hinder part, as Hippocrates does witness, and the more the bones are broken,
so much it is more dangerous, and especially if they hurt dura or pia matter,
for wounds by shot are made by such violence, that they not only burst that
they hit, but also the part^s joining thereunto, and so pull together the
parts farther distant that oftentimes it benu^meth the party and bring him in
case as he were dead, which is always a very evil sig^e, all which signs are
diligently to be noted that thereby you may know the better to minister
medicines, and to give a more certain warning to the friends of the patient,
those which have received deadly wounds, either dye by and by or else live a
very little while, even as the wound shall be greater or possess a dangerous
place, and sometimes, those which are less hurt (yea deadly) if a fever take
them, die in the 7. day or 11. or 17. These are signs of death nigh at hand,
wanness of color of the wound, the matter is little and stinking, the bone
is black, pustels appear on the tongue, redness of the eyes, and Signs of
death.
other some, which may be gathered out of the book of Hippoc. de vul. cap.
and* also frensinesse and crampes comes a little before death.

CHAP. II. Of wounds in the face with a fracture of the bones.
TO all other bones of the head being broken, as that which is called
Basilare, or both the iaw bones, they commonly use not Wounds of the face.
any other remedy, but a conuentent binding up of the wound, with applying of
such medicines as are used to broken and bruised bones. Therefore even at the
first dressing all things must be taken out, which are therein, whether it be
shot or any piece of bone lose, which may easily be taken out, otherwise stay
till such time as nature expel it of her own accord, either by that place
where the shot went in, or where it came forth, the which may be furthered by
the Chyrurgion by remedies described of us, in the former book. But if it
chance that the orifice of the wound be not large enough to take out things
therein infixed, as broken bones: Let it be enlarged with sponges prepared, and
if need require with an instrument: Moreover I think it good to make mention
of the deformities which are wont to remain after such wounds, whereof
greatheede is to be taken, and especially of such as happen in the face, for
it disfigureth greatly the man, and is much seen in that the face is never
covered. If a wound therefore be taken so nigh that the beard and skin are
burnt: you must have recourse to such medicines which help burning, whereof
mention is made before: but above all the rest, this following is of great
force, for it keeps back blisters, and causes hear to grow, as I learned
of a man of no small calling, who affirmed to have proved it oftentimes.

An excellent medicine, easy to be made, which is called in Greek (...),
Take the juice of Leekes roasted in the embers and strayned, wherewith annoint
three or four times a day the place burned and bald.

Another for the same proved.
Take of the juice of Leeks, and roasted onions, ana ii. aqud. sperranarum i.
olei visc. pomo. and populei, white wax, ana q. s. to make a linament,
wherewith twice a day annoint the burned part, and if it happen that any corns
of the powder stick in the skin, as oftentimes it does, first as nigh as may
be, they must be picked out with the point of a great needle, or any other
fit instrument, and then apply this lynament following.

For common soldiers.
Cast butter being melted, into the water of sperma ranar. or else in aqua
gamarorum prepared according to our order, and do that ten or more times,
until the butter be as white as milk, of that so prepared: take iii. and mix
it with i. of oil of the yeolkes of eggs made after our description, and make
thereof a lynament, and annoint the place, where the powder sticks, it is a
singular remedy for that purpose, and also to take away the burning.

Another most excellent for the same purpose to be used of the rich.
Take olei lithar ss. aqua ex gammaris extractae ii. balsam^ saturni i. water
of water lilies, ii. of the foresaid butter q. s. and thereof make a lynament,
and after the burning, let the face be anointed three or four times a day
with this following.

An unguent to assuage the burning of the face.
Take vnguentum citr. ii. spermat. ceti, i. oil of Roses, and of Lilies ana
ss. mix them.

Another more excellent.
Take unguent. pomatae. ii. Mucilag. sem psyllij extracted with Rosewater i.
caphurae i. oil of sweere Almonds ss. mix them, and to take away the
cicatrizes, and red scarres, use this medicine following.

Take olei lithar. ii. olei tartari, and balsami saturni ana i. camphere i.
spermates ceti i. oil of eggs ii. mix them and apply them four times a
day: But let the rich use oleum talci, which is the chiefest of al. But if it
chance, through taking of a bone out, y^ the lips of the wound do wrinckle and
wexe hard, whereby cicatrization is hindered, then you may repair to that,
which I mean singularly to entreat of, and let this suffiee concerning
wounds of the head, which are joined with fractures.

CHAP. III. Of wounds in which the bones of the arms, and legs are broken.
Such wounds wherewith the bones are broken, and does often happen to the
arms, and thighs, partly because they are of such greatness, that they
oftentimes meet the shot, and partly because these parts are commonly
vnharnessed, whenever therefore any patient shall be brought to us wounded in
such sort, we must straight ways search and seek with our fingers or
instruments, how the bone is broken, and especially then, when the wound is in
the shoulder or hipbone, because that a fracture in these places, is very
dangerous, for through extention, it hurts the muskles and sinews, which
brings great inflammations, with grievous pains and crampes, and other
dangerous accidents, through which death oftentimes insueth, without present
remedy be ministered, of which there be two kinds, the one miserable and
pitiful, yet necessary to preserve the rest of the whole body, which is,
taking off of the member wounded, in that it is so hurt and mainied that it is
past al hope of recovery. But yet in using of this extreme remedy in this
desperate case, the judgment of every common Chyrurgion is not to be followed,
which take upon them that most honest name, so soon as they have learned the
way to make m^ision, to cut off, to part a sunder, and as I may sayto play the
butcher, and have no other remedy but a saw, and certain cautarizes, wherewith
they get boldness, which they call hardiness, which I count to be most
pernicious and dangerous, except it be joined with wisdom and skill, for
because I have often seen great inconveniences, and somewhiles miserable death
to have followed such butchelie boldness, notwithstanding the greatness of
the grief being diligently wayed, and certainly found out, that by no other
means it is to be cured: then by good reason, let such be called, which are
both prudent and wise, and have had by experience trial in the like case, and
then let the member be taken of, if it may be, when as yet, there is no
inflammation or any other evil accident, that thereby the rest of the whole
body may be saved. But first let the Chyrurgion declare such dangers as are
requisite to be told of: neither is it to be doubted that auie less diligence
is required, then danger appears, especially when the bones of ye shoulders
or hip be burst, which never happenet^ without great tearing of the muskles,
and ^lso of the veins, and other parts, where hence comes commonly sudden
co^ulsions, inflammations, Gangrena, and at the last, mortification, for if
there are to be found of the ancient Physicians, which would in no case meddle
with ye only rupture of these bones, yea some willed the wounded member to be
cut off, when the bones but hanged out of y^ flesh, what would they say now I
pray you if they saw these horrible ruptures, which happen commonly through y^
violence of this deadly and devilish torments, the which daily is so
increased, by the wicked and naughty devises of some, that almost there cannot
any medicines be found to cure it, nor any harness sufficient to defend it,
but as concerning this heavy and sorrowful remedy, which is ye disine^bring
the member, we shall have a fitter place to entreat of it, in the chapter of
Gangrena and Sphacelus. For now we will go to the other remedy, which is
more profitable and better, and is done by manuell operation as they term it,
and must be assayed by all means, as we have said in the beginning of this
chapter. To which purpose the Chyrurgions, set down two intentions, whereof
the one respects the rupture, and wills as nigh as may be, that all the
broken bones be reduced to their natural seats, which being done, she
commands the whole joint to be rolled and pressed with linen clothes, wetted
first in some convenient liquor to keep back all accidents, the which some
allow at the first dressing, that the vnetion may be the surer, and would not
have it quite undone, till forty days be expired, but to lose it, and bind
it harder, in the mean space, as need shall require, except it be through
intolerable itching, inflammation, pain, or such like: and to remedy such,
they prescribe an orderly diet, or bloudletting, or operation, or such local
medicines, as shall be thought meet.

The other intention respects the wound, and forbids that it be hid and
rolled so fast, as is used in fractures, in that it requires to be dressed
often, that the filth and excrementes which nature expels may have issue, and
for that cause some use straightwayes setones (as they term them) if it may
easily be put in the wound, which they anoint first with meet medicines: And
some use only tents, and if need require, they also amplify and enlarge the
orifice thereof, and likewise the lower parts, whereby all filth and baggage
may issue out the better, and so the parts are broughtin a better case, and
easier to be cured, Likewise they daily diminish their tents, making them
shorter and shorter, whereby ye wound may heal the better and incarnate the
faster, to which purpose they use medicines meet for wounds by shot, of which
we made relation in the former treatise. Moreover to finish this last
intention, they have a great regard to charge the patient to use meats that
are iuicy and good, and such as conglutinate, till such time as Callus is
grown, and chiefly because the nature of those wounds is such, that they
seem to tarry for the consolidation of the bones. This manner of curing is used
now adays of diverse Chyrurgions, when ye bones are fractured, whose judgment
I could not but highly commend (because they have of their sides, the opinion
of most excellent men, which have and do use the same manner of curiyng) were
it not that the thing it self, and also experience did plainly teach me, and
as it were set before my eyes, the innumerable inconveniences, which happen
through these splintes, and hard binding, for they oftentimes bring accidents,
as pain, inflammation, and Gangrena, whereunto these kinds of wounds are
greatly subject, also they hinder the exhallations of these humors, which in
these wounds abound, and oftentimes choke natural heat, and do hinder the
knowledge of many grievous accidents, and letts, that remedy therefore
cannot easi^y be ministered as it ought, except it be, when it is too late when
they are compelled to loose these round and cross bands: which is done then
perhaps, when these commodities have so taken hold, that they cannot well be
remedied, as they might if in time they had been looked to: wherefore these
vulgar and common ligatures, meet only for fractures, by my judgment, is no
ways to be used in wounds joined with fractures, and especially in those
which happen by shot, and joined with fractures, as may be gathered by reasons
before alleged, in which case it behooves the Chyrurgion to be careful,
least he do any thing wilfully and rashly which after, too late he may repent.
Now in my judgment I think it best, that the bones by and by before
inflammation be engendered, be brought in their seat and natural form, with as
little pain as may be to the patient, and then to use such medicines, as are
profitable to both inte^ctions that is, for the wound and fracture, and because
I have seen the very same order used of most learned and skillful Physicians,
being of mine acquaintance, as well in Germany as in diverse other places. I
thought it not good to pass over this order, which they are wont to hold
and follow in curing wounds with fracture, especially because I judge y^ it is
most meet for wounds by shot, in that they discommend this common and hard
ligaturs or binding, for no other cause, but for the pain, inflammations, and
Gangrena, which commonly comes thereby, whereunto those wounds by sho^t above
all other (as we said before) are most subject, therefore so soon as the bones
be brought in their due places, and the member rightly placed as it ought, and
the wound dressed, spread this Cerote following on a linen cloth first wet with
oxyrhodino, and lay it about the wound, for it is very good for all fractures.

Take Rosen, wax, ana* lb. i. pull cort tilia iii. succi geranij, iiii. boil
them to the thickness of a cerote and use it.

Another which I alvvaies use my self.
Take the gum of the rotes of Comphery and vsci pomar. Caragmaticum,
Quercetam.
and popul ana iiii. suc ci geranij vi. lapid. sabulos. Rhenes. or Argill, rub.
or else bole* armeny iii. pull. cort tiliae ii. xx. yeolkes of eggs, turpentine
lb. ss, oil of worms, iii. boil them all together to y^ thickness of a
cerote, it is an excellent remedy for all wounds with fracturs, and to assuage
pain, inflammations and other accidents, let it be changed every xxiiii.
hours, at the beginning, and in a few days you shall see miraculous effects
in consolidating the bones. In the mean while in the would it self, and about
it, use fit medicines and defensiues, of which we have spoken before. Moreover
you must see that the wounded part be rightly placed, and if need be, rolled in
a plate of lead, bowed to the fashion of a leg or an arm, or else with sodden
lether fastened together with buckles, whereby the bones, which were broken,
may the surer be holden together, which ought not, (as little as may be) be
shaken and moved, until he is cured, and the bands loosed, and use also
vulnerary potions meet to that purpose, by which only I have seen fractures
cured, the bones being rightly placed, and that I have seen to be especially
observed in Germany. I remember also I learned at Reystadium not far from
Rayns, that the inhabiters there do use a certain stone named by his virtue
Beinbruch, they give one dram thereof in red wine in the morning, wherein
periuincle was infused all night, and continue so iiii. or v. days, and by
this means they take away pain and dangerous accidents, and heal the
fracture in four or five days, to the great admiration of all men, whereof I
my self am witness, and also Matheolus Lib. 5. cap. 109.
makes mention thereof in his commentaries: Also they are wont to use the
same stone made in form of a cataplasme, with Geranio bruised, and oil olive,
or oil of Roses, which comes to so good effect, that the bones do
conglutinate without any pain or inflammation, which were almost incredible:
were not, that besides my self, there were innumerable witnesses which have
seen it with their eyes. Wherefore I judge that this kind of medicine is most
excellent in these kind of wounds joined with fracture, for the greatest part
of the work is past, when the bones bru^ed be so soon and easy
conglutinated without any inconvenience, in that the fracture does nothing
hinder us, but that we may cure the wound: as if it were only contused.
Moreover it opens to us a compendious and brief curation, and most fittest
to ease the sick. But in so much as the stone is not to be had in all places
(that it were well if the pothecaries had it always to sell) you may use a
vulnerarie potion in steed thereof to cure wounds with fracture described in our
antidotary, which you shall find in cap* de potionibus vul. and in the mean
space, use my catagmatico, which is excellent for the same purpose: and if
there be no fear of inflammation, you may put to it the gum or juice of
Aristolochiae, adders tongue, boraxe, and crocus martis to harden Callus, and
to strengthen the member: but if the pieces of the bones be so small that they
may fall off, then use this iniect^on.

Take the juice of Aristolochiae, serpentary, ireos, periwinele, of each iii.
white wine vi. aqua vitae iii. myrrh sarcacolla, mastick, ireos guaiaci ana i.
aleos hep. m. mummiae ana. ss. cloves i. circulate the^ in B. iiii. days, then
sees the^ to ye consumtion of the third part, then strain it, and reserve it,
that you may use it with a siringe when occasion shall require. This iniection
besides that, is most excellent for the bones: it also cleanses the wound, and
by little and little does incarnate, and may be used to cure it thoroughly: but
if it happen the bone to be corrupted, and begins to putrify, which
oftentimes comes to pass through the coming in of the air, then the which,
th^re is nothing worse to a fracture, in which case you may use this remedy
following: and although there is no mention thereof before, yet is it very
profitable.

Take the oil of myrrh distilled per dissensum and purified with the spirit
of wine ss. oil of cloves it oil of sulphur* distilled with colcater i. ss.
mix them together, and when you will use it, touch the corrupted bone twice or
thrice, with a little cotton bound to the end of an instrument, and wetted in
the foresaid liquor, and then will the putrified bone heal, and all that is
rotten scale away.

Another.
Take oil of tartar distilled by a retorte, oil of guaici ana ss. oil of
sulphur and of vitrioll ana i. mix them and use it as aforesaid.

Another.
Take Balsalmo merc. ss. oil of Antimonie iii. salt of saturn ii. mix them
together. There cannot be devised or found out a better remedy, and more
fitter for this purpose: for it also cures naughty and ligne ulcers, and to
the lips of the wound, and about it, apply that emplaister which is most
fittest to draw out the cotton bones, and very good to cure the wound thoroughly.

CHAP. 1111. Of wounds by shot which perce the other part of the body without
fracture of the bones.
FUrthermore if the shot have perced the breast, sides or lower parts of the
belly: it must be considered whether the wound extends to the hollownes
thereof: and if it do, whether any principal part be hurt, that you may give a
perfect prognostication, as we have taught in the chapter de sig. and Iudic.
For if it perceth not the body, it requires not any other kind of handling or
healing then that generally described of us before: but if it happen otherwise
then there are some things to be observed properly and particularly, for if
case the breast be perced, and the bullet not gone through, we must assay to
take it out, and not only that, but also whatsoever is therein else: and we
must wisely weigh whether any blood he fallen in the hollownesse thereof, which
if it be, it must warily be taken ou^ in turning and placing the body of the
sick, in such wise as shall seem best. And all other kind of remedies for
this purpose, must be used by enlarging the wound, and leaving it open until
time require, that the blood may come forth the better, and by this means
diverse incommodities are withstoode, which commonly comes through the retention
of blood in these parts, whereunto these wounds are greatly subject. Also in
this case vulner arie potions are of great force, in that they dissolve y^
conieled blood, and keep it from coagulations, and minister them to the sick
first every morning, and also in the evening, as you have learned in the last
chapter of our Antidot. de potio vul. The rest of the curation you may perform
by such ways and remedies as are used in other wounds by shot. But yet this
one thing is singularly and particularly to be observed, that such medicines be
altered, and their forms changed into iniections, as need shall require: for
otherwise they cannot reach the bottom thereof to work their force, which
iniections may be made of these medicines which are prescribed of us in the
former treatise: and they must be cast in by a spoute, which I have proved to
errest all other instruments, in that it sucketh up again that which he cast
in, which is required in the use of the remedies. After this you shall fasten
some tent with a thread, and put it in the hollownes of the wound, of such
length as shall seem meetest to keep^ always the mouth of the wound open,
that the inward parts being purged and cleansed, may by little and little
incarnat, before the orofice be quite grown together, least otherwise the
filth within might be stopped. Moreover whiles the sick is a healing, he must
eschew the cold air: for nothing is more hurtful to such wounds, and if both
sides be perced, you must put tents in both holes, and by so much the more
keep them open the longer that the matter way the easier have issue. But if
that Callus happen to grow, as sometimes it does, apply such remedies as
hereafter shall be declared. As concerning his diet, let him keep such as is
prescribed in other wounds, that is cold, dry, and scle^der, but let him
abstain from astringent and sharp meats, and that from the beginning,
because they move the cough, and bring shortness of breath, which thing
commonly does greatly hurt the seely sick patient: contrariwise such things as
comfort the breast, are very good, as figs, raisons picked, barley and other
like, and bloodletting also is very good, and euacuation by glister, and
otherwise if the body be filled with ill juice: The like in all points is to be
observed in wounds of the belly, thecuration of which is not unlike to the cure
of other wounds by shot, which we have set down already, although these vulner
ary potions are more in use, in that in the parts they more perfitly work,
and show their strength. And such potious must be mixed as intentions shall
require, and more strengthners must be used, if any nutritive part be hurt, as
the liver and spleen, which also is good to foment outwardly: and sometimes
such wounds are cured by giving fit glisters, when they shall touch the lower
parts: but if the perce the body, and hurt the back bone, then you must use
these remedies which we have prescribed in wounds of the head: and the like
judgment is to be given, if the marrow of the back come forth, as was before
touching the brain.

But because it oftentimes happens, that the shot is drawn from the upper
parts lower, and so sticks in some member, and comes not out, in which case
the filth and matter cannot have issue out, then it must be wayed, where the
shot may without danger be taken out by the lower way, which the easier may
be done if you may feel it with your fingers, for yt ways it may far better
be taken out, as we said before, where we entreated of taking out things
infixed: but if that cannot be, then must we use compressions and hard
bindings, that there by the corruption may come forth the h^tter, for by
pressing of it toward the or^^ee it issues the better, also iniections are
good for these ^^^ewy wounds, because other medicines cannot reach the bottom
of them, but you must give endeavor, that you leave none thereof in the wound,
but draw it up again with your spout which cast it in. In these kinds of
wounds, tents made of sponges are very good, because they draw corruption and
suck it in, and dry the wound. But because oftentimes the lips of the wound
ware hard, which lets perfect consolidation, you shall therefore use the
remedies following, for they are most fitin this case and for all fistulaes,
neither shall you need to use hot irons, the which extreme remedy the common
Chyrurgeons are wont to apply.

Ad callum and fistulas curandas.
Take oil of honey drawn by heat of fire ii. oil of saturn and mercury
sublimate ana i. olei petr. and of cl^ues ana i. ss. let them be joined
together with turpentine and with tents or plegets, and apply to the wound.

Another excellent for the same.
Take Antimoni iii. of mercuyie sublimate i. ss. mellis vi. mix all together
and distill them in a retor^, according to art with a small fire, and there
will issue an oil most ex^ellent to cure al callous and mallgne vl^ers,
fistulaes, cankers, and also Gangrena.

CHAP. V. The order to correct such accidents as happen to these wounds.
ALllearned Physicians do grant, that those greenous accidents which do
greatly diminish and overthrow the strength of ye body, are first to be cured,
letting pass (for a while) the proper curation of the wound, and the curation
of these accidents is, not as an accident, but as the cause of pulling down
strength, or any other grievous affection. Therefore great pain, intempery,
impostumation, pals^es, Gangrena, seuers, cramp^es and Sphacelus, because they
are weighty and dangerous accidents, and do often happen to the wounds, must
out of hand be remedied in that they ^^^^ken strength, and bring perilous
diseases, in this case therefore, y^ method must be altered, least by the
violence of these accidents, the patient be killed, o^ else through the
cruelty thereof he be sore vexed, and let the curation begin, where the
siche is in most danger, for thither the Physician ought to direct his coming,
for no wound can perfectly be cured, except first such accidents be driven
away, Therefore I have thought it good to discourse of them all with a fit
method and order, and with few words to prescribe to each his proper remedy.

Of grief.
We assuage pain with onodinis, or else with paregoricis medicamentis, which
are temperate and agreeable to our bodies, and hold in the first degree, and of
a thin substance, and this we do with fometation and lynaaments.

Fomentations are made with the decoction of the root of hollihocke, sheep
heads, mallows, of the flowers of Mullein, camomill mellilote of the seeds
of linen fenigrecke and milk.

Lynaments are made of ye Macilage seminum psillij, fenigreck, and of hollihock
of butter, capons grease, and bawsons grease, of oesypo and oil of visci
pomorum.

Also Narcotica assuage pain, by henumming the feeling of the member and
making at first, that it cannot feel the raging of the pain, we use such when
through great pain, the strength is wasted, and fear of swounding draws on,
and when the pain comes of great inf^amation, Take the rotes of the henbane,
and waters lilies, ana lb. s. digest them in the son with vinegar of roses,
and oil of Nenuphar, for a fewdayes: then strain it, and therewith foment the
place agreeued, warm, and after annoint with this lineament.

Take the juice of the leaves of henbane and senegrene ana ii. olei visci
pomorum and nenuphar ana i. ss. fresh butter ii. mix them, and make thereof a
lineament, and let the wise Physician always mark this, that he be very
careful to assuage pain, for it always prognosticateth some ill: and let
this suffice, for that we have prescribed many medicines before this intention.

Of distemperature.
If a whote distemperature do molest the wounded part, which is easily known
by pain and blistering thereof, then anoint it with unguent nutrito, or
Caphurato albo with populion: and this following is of great force.

Take the juice of plantaine, night shade, houseleeke ana i. bolearmeny ss.
litharge washed with plantine water and tuttie prepared ana i. oleiros. omphac.
and of nenuphar ana ii. vinegar of roses and a little wax, and make an unguent.

But if it have a cold distemperature which is known by the fastness, then
is it remedied by fomenting thereof with wi^e, wherein was sodden dill,
lyneseed, and the flowers of Camomel. Whereof also you may make a cataplasine.
We speak nothing of Haemorrhagia, because we have made sufficient mention
thereof before.

Of the fever.
You must presently beware that a fever come not, but keep him back by a cold
and slender diet: by blood letting and by purging such humors as offend. But if
it chance that it increases (as I have often seen) and breed to an ague, then
the humors must be digested with some convenient decoction, and then purged
again, whereunto the Physician must take diligent heed, and by ali means
help the sick, least by the sharpness of the grief, death does follow.

Of conuulsions.
The Physicians affirm that conuulsions may come by three occasions: the first
is emptiness, which proceeds through overmuch purging, or immoderate
bleeding, which is dangerous, as Hippoc. witnesses Aphon. 3. lib. v. The
second is repletion or fullness, which happens through unnatural tumors
rising about the wound and suddenly vanishing away: and through overmuch cold
which contracteth the sinews, and staieth them back and fills them, the
which also Hippoc. has noted Afforisme 17. lib. 5. It happens also, the
brain being affected per consensum, by reason of great pain, when either a
synew is pricked, or else when sharp by^ing and venomous humors do alter and
corrupt nature: whereof comes pains, as Hippoc. witnesses, through which by
the vehemency of the sense, cramps arise.

Conuulsion coming through emptiness is thus cured: First let a diet be
prescribed which is moist, and let the sick take supings Conuulsion through
emptiness.
of almond milk, ptisan, or any convenient broth, and prepare him a bath
wherein has been boiled moist things and such as have virtue to assuage pain,
such are the heads and feet of wethers: also the roots of holihocks,
mallows, violets, and the leaves of mistelto of the apple tree, and let the
sick stand therein, if so his wound will suffer him, or else foment the
affected part therewith. After this anoint it with oleo visci pomorum and
violarum, or with some ointment made of the aforesaid things. And because this
conclusion proceeding through emptiness, being once consumed is incurable, as
Galen says in lib. 7. Meth. meden. We must have therefore recourse to some
excellent remedy, that is the tincture of gold, or of ye natural Balm, for if
there be any hope left, it consists in these two.

But if the conuulsion come through fullness, it is cured by a Conuulsion of
fullness.
slender diet, and in the beginning somewhat hot and dry: yet wine is to be
eschewed, for it increases fluxes, and hur^eth the synewes, and use to drink
in the steed thereof Hydromel maluacicum or smamon water, and after make
euacuation partly universally, as by Phlebotomy and purgation: and partly by
the part agreeued, which is done with vnguentis Aregonis and Martiati with oil
of castorie, of a fox, of baies and such like, wherewith (the body being
purged) anoint plentifully the neck and all the back bone, and also the
wounded member, but yet those which follow seem to me more profitable.

Take hearts tallow, bawsons grease and bears grease ana i. olei laurini i. ss.
olei vnlpini, castorei, terebinth. juniper. lumbr. ana. ss. vnguenti Agrip. and
Dialth. ana ii. turpentine washed in water of lillies i. Euphorbii i. and with
a little wax make thereof an ointment, or else thus.

Take rosme, ship pitch ana i. colophony and new wax ana ii. olibanum,
mastick, ceruse ana ounce ss. salt niter, sanguis draconis, turpentine, oil of
roses salt ammoniac, oil of ye yelkes of eggs ana ii. camphere i. ye mother
of perles i. amber i. ss. lodestone ounce ss. white coporus ii. make an
emplaister according to art.

Take balsam. gummi elemi and haederae ana ii. oiles of wax, turpentme, and
juniper distilled according to the Chimicall order ana ounce ss. oil of cloves
and of benioyn ana ii. mix them and make thereof a lynament and anoint
therewith the back bone and wounded member: or else thus.

Take the balm of visci pomor. and of Iuie, and hipericon ana ii. oil of sage
and turpentine ana i. oil of juniper ss. olei tartare faeten. iii. auxungiae
taxi ounce iii. mix them and use them as aforesaid: and use with all inwardly,
this following.

Take aquarum lilii conuallii and iuniperi ana i. oil of amber. ss. make
thereof a mixture: or else this.

Take the water of sinam^n and the water of Florum tiliae ana i. oil of
juniper drawn by Balneo, gut, iiii. oil of Amber. ss. of the spirit of
vitrioll gutij, mix them.

But if the conuuision shall come per conuulsio sympathiam by Conuulsio per
sympathiam
reason of great pain, let the pain be aswaged with such medicines as are
declared in ye chapter de dolor. And if it happen through the sharpnes of the
poison and venomous shot, which oftentimes happens to these wounds, the^ you
may use these remedies which we have set down in the Chapter de venenatis vul.
And if it happen through pricking or cutting of a nerve, which I have seen
oftentimes to happen, not through the stroke of the shot taken (which rather
bruseth the sinews, then cutteth or pricketh them) but by the vns kilfulnesse
of the Chyrurgion, in going about to take out the shot, or use any incision, do
oftentimes prick the nerves ouerthawrt, whereby conuulsion comes: especially if
they chance to touch any of those which go to the muscles. In this case now,
(that this dangerous accident may be withdrawn) such medicines must be chose^,
which by the subtlenesse of their substance, may perce to the very bottom of
the hurted nerve, and also digest and aswage pain, as Galen lib. Artis med.
does teach. And contrariwise such must be eschewed as are raw and cold, and
such as stop and hinder perspiration. Likewise Galen forbids the use of
hot water, as a thing very hurtful to ye wounded sinews, because they consist
of cold, moist and co^iealed substance, the which being so, must needs putrify
and resolve by the applying of such things as are hot and moilt. And therefore
hot water is hurtful to them, although otherwise it greatly aswageth
impostumation, whereof I admonish those which indifferently without any
regard, use this remedy in these wounds by shot: for Galen writes, in li. 6.
meth. med. that rather oleum iasminum, and especially sabinum veterum, are
most profitable for wounds of the sinews. He aloweth also turpentine and
rosine, and likewise Sulphur viuum, in the same book is greatly commended of
him in wounds of the nerves, in that it is of a subtle substance, and then it
must needs follow that these oiles drawn chymically out of turpentine, rosine,
wax, Sulphur, and sabine to be of a greater force, because by distillation
they are made much more subtiller: and thereby they do dry more strongly. The
which thing Galen says lib. 6. Meth. med. is to be observed in puncturs of the
nerves, for h^s words are these. Nerui vulnerati curatio medicamenta postulat,
quae and tepidum calorem, ex^tent, and valenter (sine molestia tamen) desiccare
possint. Tum quae ex substantiae suae natura, and tra^end* vim habeant, and
tenuim partium sint. And by y^ way this one thing is to be noted, that these
bodies which are strong, require stronger medicines, and such as are weak,
weaker: by which reason this following may be used.

Take olei sulph. terebenth, olei sabinae and therebenth. ana ii* oil of eggs
ss. mix them, and apply them warm to the grief.

Another.
Take oil of butter, and of rosine ana ii. olei cuphorbii distillati and oil
of juniper berries ana ss. oil of turpentine i. ss. oil of yelkes of eggs i.
mix them: but if the grief cease not by the application of the foresaid
medicines, then the nerve is whole to be cut a sunder: whereof as Galen says,
comes no danger, saving Lib. 6. meth. med. cap. 3.
only the member shall ever after be maimed.

De paralysi.
The Palsy, or resolution of the sinews (which oftentimes happens to such
wounds) must be cured by an apt di^t, and fit application of inward and outward
medicines: as fomentations, cataplasmes, lynaments, o^ntments, and such like.
Some higher commends oleum iasminum: olea saluiae, castorei, de lateribus,
vulpinum and such like. And it will prevail greatly, to use the^e medicines
following.

Take aquarum lilii conuallii and florum lauendulae ana iiii. boil these
perfitely with half a pound of sugar, and taking it from y^ fire, put thereto
olei succini flaui per descens distill. and rectified i. s. oil of sinamon and
essence of sage ana ss make lozings thereof, and let the sick use thereof. And
for a local medicine, use this following.

Oleum ad paraliso and Contracturas praecipium.
Take oil of Hipericon lb. i. turpentine lb. ss* oil. of bays iiii oil of
spike i. Juniper berries lb. ss. eastorie i. euphorbii. ii. Cloves, Mace,
Nutmegges, Synamon, ana.. i. ss. flowers of Lauender, Sage, and cillij
conuallij ana m. ii. Mastick, Myrrh, Frankensence, ana ii. Mumiae i. ss.
Brocks grease iii. digest them all for a month in horse doong, and then
distill them according to art^, and annoint the member having the p^lsie and
crampe, for it is a most excellent remedy.

Of Sownning.
Syncope or sownning is a dangerous accident, and signifies death to be not
far off, and is very incident to these kind of wounds, caused either
through great flux of blood, or else through vehement pain and grief. The
curation thereof is not to be neglected, but the spirits and strength must be
restored, by giving some nourishment, made of iellie, expressions, distilled
liquors, wine and spices. The ancients have commended cordial powders, ex
margaritis splend. ras. ebor. ex folijs auri and frag. pretio sorum. lap. which
must be ministered in wine, or y^ sirop of Citr^ns. But we judge the Tincture of
gold and coral, or thessence of these precious stones, to be of greater force:
the reason whereof we have declared in our book, de mid. mineral. spagir.
praepar. where also you shall find the order to prepare them.

De Gangrena and sphacelo.
We have written of sundry accidents and inconveniences happening to these
wounds, but yet there is none so pitiful and dangerous, as is Gangrena, which
is a token of corruption drawing on, which comes according to the opinion of
Paul, either because Lib. 4. cap. 19.
the inflammation was not defended, are brought to suppuratition, or else (as
others judge) when the abundance of humors, with some evil, and malign
quality, do choke and extinguish the natural heat of the member, which
happens in great inflammations, and obstructions through the use of
Emplasters, which hinders perspiration, as before we have noted: and
whenever a thin and virulent quitture issues, it is a manifest sign
thereof, whereunto except present help be ministered, it is to be doubted,
Signa sphaceli.
least the part corrupted and dead, will infect the parts adjoining next unto
it, and so to fall into mortification, the which they call sphacelus or
sideratio, the which is known, if the member be wan or black: and does
appear swollen, soft, and like death, and that without any beating of the
arteries, and without pain and feeling, yea that a man may thrust in the
in^ision knife, and never feel this mortified and dead member, must presently
be cut off, so far as it extends, and as for Gangrena, it must be cured
p^esently, all other things laid aside, the which is done by drawing out the
corrupted blood, from the member by lancing, and applying of such medicines, as
bring to putrefaction, as y^ foresaid Paul has taught the common Chyrurgions
so soon as they have scarified and launced the member, wash it straight with
salt water, or salt and vinegar. others use Egiptiacum, which is always to be
had at the Apothecaries, and if the grief mend not thereby, then they take
stronger, as causticks, and such as bring eschar, such are trochisci Andronis
and Arsnicke, and if great need be, they sear the dead flesh from the quick
with a hot iron. Also these medicines following are very good for Gangrena,
But first let the corrupted bleud be drawn out, and then washed with this
lotion. Take soot ounce iiii. honey, ss ii. of vinegar lb, boil them to half,
or this.

Take the juice of radish and selandine ana ounce. ii. oil of honey ss. the
sower fleame of alome iiii. salt Peter ii. salt of soote, i ss. mix them for a
lotion. Or else take the fleame of vitrioll and alome ana iiii. vinegar ii.
powder of ye root of aristolochie ounce i. ss. salt of Tarter ounce i. Myrrh
ounce ss. camphere ounce ss. boil the^ all together, tillhalfe be wasted, and
make a lotion which must be often used.

Another for the same.
Take Tartar calcined white ii. ashes of eg-shels and Aristoloc. roots, or of
Uine twigs ana i. ss. salt niter, Camphere ana. ss. phleme of vitrioll and
alome ana lb. i. boil them to half and make there of a lie, and use it as
aforesaid, the member being first scarified, and then lay thereon this Cerote
following.

Take wax, ship-pitch ana iii. liquor of Myrrh ii. colophonie ounc i. ss.
oil of Whe^te, and eggs ana ounce ss. make a cerote according to art, or else
thus.

Take honey ii. Crocus martis, Crocus vener. ana ss. powder of Myrrh and
Aristoloch. rotundae ana. ii. Camphere i. s. sower fleame of vitrioll iiii.
boil them to the thickenesse of an unguent, and put thereto mercur.
Precipitati ounce ss. and annoyntthe tents or plegettes therewith, or else thus.

Take butter of Arsnicke fixed ii. mercur. Precipitati. ss. oil of myrhe iii.
mix them with honnie first, washed with the juice of Selandine. There cannot
be found a better remedy then this for the cure of Gangrena, so be it, that
first you take away from the Arsnicke, all is venom, and black, naughty and
stinking furkes, which is done by fixing thereof, as shall be t^^ght in our
spagiricall Antidotary. For other wise I cannot allow the judgment of those
which will yt Arsnick crude and unprepared to be used in Gangrena because it is
a medicine corosiue, and putrifactiue, and through the evil and venomous
quality that it has, it destroys the substance of the flesh, and bringes it
to a rotten and stinking deadliness, which is far worse then Gangrena it
self, wherefore by their leave the use thereof is very dangerous, except
first (as we said before) it be rightly prepared. And shall not be amiss, in
the mean while to lay thereon a Cataplasme made with the flower of Lupins
orobus lentils, and beans, which may be boiled with oximell or the lie
aforesaid. But and if all these medicines do nothing prevail, but by the
foresaid signs, you perceive that Gangrena will grow to sphacelus, then must
you presently (if it may be) cut of the member, so much that nothing that is
corrupted remaynes: which some do, without any pain at all, with a thread
made de Alumine plumae and dippid in the oil of Mercury sublymate, called of
some, aqua infernalis. Others take it off with a saw, and then sear it with a
hot iron, and so by the advice of Galen, they stop quickly the flux of blood,
drive away putrefaction and strengthen the member. After that the putrefaction
is taken away, and the flux of blood stayed, they use such medicines as take
away the scarre, as unguent macedonicum, butter, and such like: and after yt,
such cure is conuentent as to other ulcers: but in the mean while, you may not
forget to prescribe an orderly kind of diet, and such a one as is both slender
and cooling, as bloodletting, or any medicines, which clarify y^ blood if
need shall require, neither forbid such medicines as defend the heart, (the
fountame of life) from all filthy and euillfumes coming from the sick member
to the same.

THE SPAGERICKE ANTIDOTARIE OF the preparation and making of medicines against
Gunshot.
IT is an old and true saying of the Poet. That there is nothing more
imperious then an ignorant man, which thinks nothing well done, but what he
does himself, which thing, as it may be seen in many other arts, yet most
specially in this, which is called y^ Spagericke art. For we see every where
certame men, I know not what they be, puffed up with a certain barbarous and
foolish pride, which with great scorn inuey against those medicines which are
drawn out of the mettaline mines: Which notwithstanding, it is apparent were
in use and had in great estimation with the chief ancient Physicians, as we
have declared in that book which we have set forth of the spagiricke
preparation of medicines. And what I pray you is the cause of this anger, or
rather madness: but that (as they themselves confess) they know not the
preparation of them. O happy arts, if only artificers might judge them, (as
Fabius is reported sometime to have said.) Then are they unhappy of whom the
ignorant and unlearned fear not so rashly to give judgment, which never yet
understood from whence, or why, this is called the Spagiricke art which
learned men of two Greek words have so named, because by that art, a
certain subtle and spiritual nature is drawn, gathered and pressed out,
wherein the force and effect of the medicine does chiefly confist. The great
and incomparable commodity whereof as it appears in many other diseases, so
shall it chiefly be known in curing wounds by Gunshot. As I trust (God
willing) it shall much more happily be tried and found out by the preparations
of medicines animal, vegetable, and mineral, and by other essences drawn out
of mercury, Sulphur. Vitrioll, arsenicke, Iron, Copper, Lead, and Litarge, and
also out of Antimony and such other mineralles, as also out of ye gross and
fattie bodies of simple metals: of whom it is far off, that the force
should be so great, although the ancient Physicians have used them to cure
wounds, and ulcers, (as their writings do testify) as the force of their
spirits, which may be called, as it were their souls. But (peradventure some
of those backebiters will say) why are not we content with those medicines which
the learned antiquity has delivered unto us, and that Hypocrates and Galen
the ancient pillars of our art and others have set forth in their monumentes:
Why do we seek new ways never heard of before, specially unknown to the
Apothecaryes: But some of us will answer, that the only remedy of Mercury
precipitate, is the only remedy (to pass over other) which very lately
they have begun to use, in curing of wounds by Gunshot and other malign
v^cers, were sufficient to answer this their question, yea and to reprove
their folly joined with intoller able pride. But if authority be asked for, I
think Gesner, Guinter, Andernacke, Seuerine (to pass over a great many other)
will be for us as great authority with the learned: as these slanderers.
Specially because the learning of these famous men is so confirmed by their
learned writings and monumentes, that those toonges might count it a greater
honoue unto them to confess themselves their scholars. It were easy for me
to bring forth many other arguments, if I did not see the folly of these
backbiters to be so great, whereof truly I am ashamed, specially when I behold
some of their books lately set forth, wherein, contrary to the purpose of the
treatise, strange things are infarced, that (as the old proverb says) the
ointment seems to consist in nothing: as though they pertained to the
purposed entreating of curing the gout, certain inuectiue digressions I know
not what, of the beginning of things, of the original of metals and
Philosophers stone (which of them is called Morosophocus) or did in any other
point seem to agree with it. Therefore again and again I am enforced to cry
out. O happy arts if only artificers might judge of them. How far unlike
was the purpose of many old men, the which if they were ignorant of any thing,
which they understood, was known of other, even in far distant countries,
they spared no labor to go see them. Plato inflamed with desire to learn
those things, which he knew not, went into Egypt, and after to Tarentum to
Architas, and over all Italy to hear the other Pythagoricall Philosophers,
Appollonius Tyanius travailed through the kingdom of Persia, and passed over
the mountain Caucasus, and visited the Albanes, Scythians, Massagetes, and all
the rich kingdoms of India. Afterward was carried unto the Brachmanes, and
heard Iarchus in his chair of gold disputing of the hidden causes of things,
and of the hidden mysteries of nature. From thence by the Elanutes,
Babylonians, Chaldees, Meedes, Assirians, Arabians, and Palestines, he returned
to Alexandria, and from thence went into Ethiopia to hear the Gymnosophistes,
and to learn their secret and hidden arts. This virtue is truly to be
followed, and not the sluggishnesse of those slothful followers, which having
searse once moved their foot from their country fires, yet will disalowe this
Spagericke art, and think ^o further labor to be taken in searching of the
truth, when notwithstanding the art does make open unto us the marvelous and
hidden secrets of nature: Neither in my judgment are they unworthily
contemned of those which with their manifold peri^les and travels have sought
out those secrets of nature. But I pray you, what foolishnes is this, to
forbid us to use any other medicines then those which were known in old time: As
though Rhabarbe, then which no medicine is more in use at this day, the^ were
known to the old Physicians. Further to what purpose is it that they object
unto us ye sulphurie metaline, and venomous stinckes (as they call them) by
whose smell and drawn breath (for these are their contumelious words) they be
almost strangled that come into the dens of those Cyclops? But is it unknown
unto those slaunderers and sicophantes, that the old Physicians made very
many medicines Gal. simpl. 10. cap. 18. 9. 10. 12. 13. Act Tetr. 1. sermon. 2.
cap. 110. Aegin. libr. 7. Dioscorid. lib. 2. cap. 90. Mercell. ca. 4. and 26.
Plin. libr. 28. cap. 4. and 15. Serap. simpl. cap. 453. and 466.
of most filthy things, as of the filth of ears, sweat of the body, of
women's menstrewes (and that which is horrible to be spoken) of the doong of
man, and other beasts, spittle, urine, flies, mise, the ashes of an Owls
head, the h^ues of Goats and Asses, ye worms of a rottentree, and the scur^e
of Mules, as may be gathered out of the writings of Galen, Aetij, Aegineta,
Diose. Plinius. Serap: to pass the metalines which it is evident they did also
use. Truly, when I consider with my self the pride of these fools which
disdain this mettaline part of Physic (which after their manner
contumeliously they call Chymericam, and therefore can neither help their own
nor many other diseases. I call to mind a story peradventure known unto the^
of Heraclito Ephesio, which being sick of a dropsy, dispising the help of
Physicians, annoynting himself over with Cowdoong, set himself in the sun
to dry, and falling a sleep was torn in pieces of dogs: but these are more
then sufficiently answered unto these scoles and slanderers. Now will I
declare what is my purpose and scope in this treatise: verily to prescribe
plainly hereafter, not those things which are already common, or (as it is
commonly said) known to blind men and barbers, least I might seem to
imitate those which write rhapsodias and heaps, but the method and way of
preparing medicines by Spagericke art, that pertain unto Gunshot, which I
know are yet unknown unto many Physicians and Chyrurgions. And this I can
truly confess that I am induced for two causes to do it. First to provoke
those that are better learned, if they have any better medicines, to utter
them, as also that I might specially help my country and mankind: unto the
which (the more is the grief) there is too much need of those kind of
medicines in these most lamentable and cruel times, wherein it has so long
been bloudied with domestical and Ciuell wars: but to encounter with their
slanders which cry out that these kind of medicines do not onele require
long and diffic^le preparation, but also that they are so dear that every one
cannot easily use them. I have thought good therefore first to set down common
medicines, and then to come to those which I do far more esteem, as indeed
they are far more excellent then the other, as by their preparation you may
know. Albeit also I have determined to have consideration of the poor and
common soldier, and to set down them apart that shall help the rich.

THerefore the Chyrurgions are to be admonished that when they go into the
wars that they take with them these things ready prepared, which are to be
had at most Pothecaries.

Suppurantia. Vnguentum Basilicum, of both sorts. Vnguentum Macedonicum.
Tetraphramacum Galeni. Vnguentum Resumpiiuum. The emplaister of Mucilages,
which may be dissolved with oil Olive if need be.
Detergentia. Vnguentum diapompholigos Nicolai. Vnguentum viride Andromachi.
Emplastrum diuinum disolued with oil of Roses. Vnguentum Apostolicum
Auicennae. Vnguentum Egyptiacum of the same.
Sarcotica. Vnguentum Aureum. Vnguentum ceraseos Mesuae vtrumque. Emplastrum de
Gratia Dei and de Ianua.
Cicatricem inducentia. Vnguentum de Minio. Desiccatiuum rubrum. Emplastrum de
cerusa.
Venenum attrahensia and res extraneas. Vnguentum fuscum Nicolai. Vnguenta
Magistralia of the Physicians of Florens described by Weckerus. Vnguentum de
calce viua.
Repellentia and astringentia. Vnguentumde b olo commune. Vnguentum Rosatum
Mesuae.

OR for the said intentions medicines may be made which need no other then
common preparations.

Suppurantia.
Take of new Butter and Oil, Olive. ana. ii. Wheat meal cleansed from his
bran, half a ounce, fair water iiii. boil all together.

Or take the leaves of Tussilage and Mallows, ana m. ii. roast them under ashes
and mingle them with bitter.

Or take of the juice of the roots of the Lillies first roasted under ashes.
iiii. of the grease of a hen, goose or swine, ii. with the oil of Linseede
or Olives, the yeolke of an egg and a little wax, make an ointment.

Detergentia.
Take of honey. iii. of bean meal, and barely meal ana ii. drams, boil them
with wine to the height of an ointment.

Or take of Plantaine leaves, and Smalege ana m. i. red Roses. p. ii. red wine
viii. boil it to half: strain it and dissolve in it of red sugar ii.
Turpentine i. Meal of Lupines and Orobus, ana i. Alloes and Myrrh, ana half
a drain, boil it again putting to so much wax as shall suffice to bring it
into the form of an ointment.

Or take of the juice of Plantaine and Agrimonie ana ii. ounces, Rose honey,
iiii. ounces, of the root of Ireos and Bean Meal, ana half a ounce, mingle
them toward the end with Turpentine, i. ounce, make thereof an ointment.

Sarcotica.
Take of Manna, of Frankinsens ana ii. drammes, of Meal of Fenegreke and
Orobus ana i. let them be wrought with honey and the yeolke of an egg.

Or take of Sarcocolle dissolved in milk. iii. Masticke, Olibanum, ana i.
Liquid pitche, and Turpentine ana i. ounce, mingle them and make on ointment.

Epollotica.
Take of white chalk ii. ounces, of ashes of burned leather iii. work them
with oil of roses.

Or take of quick lime so often washed in water, until it have lost all his
sharpness ii. ounces, of Terrae Armeniae i. ounce, boil them with oil of
mirtilles.

Of burnt Lead, burnt Stibium, Cadmia Pompholyge may also be made medecines
most fit for that purpose.

Advenenata vulnera.
Take of the juice of Anagallidis purpureae, of Cyclaminis, ana i. ounce,
Sulphur Viue mingled with man's spit^e, ss. mingle them.

Or take of Litarge ii. ounces, Galbanum ss. Greek pitch and turpentine, ana
ii. ounces, oil as much as shall suffice.

Or take of oil iiii. ounces, of Sagapenum, Mumiae and Amber, ana iii.
Frankinsens, Mastick, ana ii. the best Terrae Sigillatae and red Coral, ana i.
pitch, ii. ounces, wax as much as shall suffice to make an ointment.

Or take two Onions, of the leaves of Vincae peruincae scabiosae Risini of each
a handful, roast them under the ashes, and put thereto of treacle. ss. and with
turpentine make an ointment.

Ad ambusta.
Take of the juice of Onions roasted under ashes ii. ounces, oil of Nuts i.
ounce, mingle them together.

Or take of the leaves of black Iuie stamped with plantaine water m. ii. of
oil i. pound, boil them together with iiii. ounces of white wine, until the
wine be consumed, then put to wax as much as shall suffice to make it a salve.

Or take of lar^ molten in the ^lame ii. ounces, and pour it into the juice of
Beetes and Rue, the cream of milk i. ounce* Mucilege of the seed of
Cidoniorum and Tragacanthe, ana ss* mingle them.

Repellentia, and sanguinem cohibentia.
Take of the juice of the leaves of woodbind and of oken leaves, ana o^e ounce,
red roses i. Boli Armenae and Sanguis Draconis, ana ii. oil of roses iii.
ounces, wax as much as shall suffice.

Or take of the Pulpe of apples boiled in milk iii. ounces, of (...), ^^ the
seeds of Psillij and Cydone, ana ss. of the juice of Bursae Pastoris and
Poligonum ana i. ounce, of Acaciae and Sanguinis Draconis ana iii. of Terrae
Sagillatae ss. oil of Mirtils, iiii. ounces, white wax as much as shall
suffice to make an ointment.

But these medicines following are not so much used among the Apothecaries,
neither known unto the Chyrurgions, yet most profitable for wounds by shot,
and all other whose fit preparation the Spagericke Art does partly declare.

Suppurantia.
Take of the roots of holy Oak, and Lillies, ana iiii. Beetes with the roots
m. i. fresh butter half a pound, worms prepared in wine, iii. yolks of eggs
12. the marrow of a calfe, of turpentine ana v. ounces, oil Olive cleansed from
the Pheces i. pound, stamp those that are to be stamped, mingle all well
together, and digest them in warm donge one month, after press it out, and
with a fire on ashes boil it to the substance of a salve.

Or take of the juice of the herb Tussilage and Oxalidis, ana iii. ounces, fat
dry figs xx. Frankensence ii. ounces, rosen of the Larix tree i. ounce and a
half, grease of a Goose and hen ana two ounces, fresh butter half a pound,
Olei visci pomorum compos. i. pound, al mingled together, let them boil in a
double vessel luted with LutoSapientiae for ye space of six hours, and
strain it warm, and set it again in the sun, or boil it to a fit
substance: these medicines do quickly move matter, and are anodina very
commodious for wounds by shot.

Detergentia.
Take of the juice of Centuarie and Selandine, ana, iiii. ounces, of honey iii.
ounces, of flowers of Virbascum p. ii. of Frankensence, Myrrh and Masticke,
ana ss. oil of Turpentine vi. ounces, good white wine i. pound, putrify them
all in warm dongue, and boil them as before with a fire of ashes, until the
wine and juices be consumed, and it be brought to the form of an ointment,
then put to one ounce of this ointment i. of mercury precipitat dulcified. If
there be need of greater clensing.

Or take Visci herbarum saniculae, Pirolae, Aristoloch. and Uince Peruince ana
ii. ounces, of turpentine washed iiii. Crocus veneris ss. Balsami tartari ii.
drams, Sulphuris antimoni i. dram and a half, set them upon a fire of ashes
until it have the substance of a salve.

Sarcotica.
Take of Mucilage of the seed of Fenigrecke ii. of the juice of hounds
tongue, Persicaria and the great comferie ana i. and a half, oil of
Franken^ence and Myrrh, ana iii. oil of Hipericon simple ii. turpentine
washed with white wine ii. let them stand in the sun, or at a soft fire until
they wax thick.

Vnguentum de paeto.
Take of the juice of Petum i. pound, turpentine v. ounces, of compound oil
of Hipericon viii. ounces, good white wine half a pound, digest all viii.
days, after sees the^ until the wine be consumed, then put to Colophoniae
and wax, ana iii. ounces. Mumia and Amber ana ii. drams, melt them again at
the fire, and make an ointment according to art.

Take of the juice of Paetum and comferie, ana iiii. ounces, oil Another of
our description.
of turpentine i. pound, flowers of Hipericon and Verbas^us, ana m. ii. apples
of an elm tree, iii. ounces, the buds of the Poplertree, iiii. ounces, the
spirit of wine i. pound and a half, digest all these in horse dongue, or in a
warm bath in a glass vessel well stopped one whole month, then wring* it
out and strain it, and put to it of Frankensence, Masticke and Myrrh, ana ii.
ounces, Sanguis Draconis, half an ounce, Mumiae, vi. turpentine half a pound,
Benjamin i. ounce, circulate them together in a Pelli^ane viii. days after
with a moderate heat distill away the spirit of wine, and there will remain
in the bottom a most precious balm.

Cicatricem inducentia.
Take of burnt Allom i. ounce, Cretae vitrioli iii. drams, Crocus martis,
Crocus veneris, ana ii. drams, mingle them and make a powder which you may use
by it self, or mingled with honey.

Or take of Bole armenae prepared after our manner, ii. Calex of egshels ss.
the juice of unripe Damascens iii. ounces, boil them with a soft fire to a
perfect substance.

Ad Venena.
Take oil of Amber and turpentine, ana i. ounce, oil of Juniper ii. drams,
nettle seed and the root of Gentian, ana ii. oil of Sulphur Vitriolat i. ss.
read Coral, i. dram, mingle them together.

Or take of the juice of Pentaphillon, scabious and Rue ana ii. Olei Sulphuris
Rubei i. ounce, oil of myrrh, ii. Colophoni and gum of Iu^e, ana vi. mingle
them.

Ad Ambusta.
Take of larde molten and washed in water of nightshad two ounces, olei Saturni
ss. mingle them.

Or take of the Juice of the roots of Henbane, and flowers of red Poppie, ana
i. ounce, Sait peter i. Mucilage of Seminis Cidoniorum, iii. and with oil of
Camphire make an ointment.

Repellentia and sanguinem cohibentia.
Take of Bole-armene prepared after the Spagericke manner, ii. ounces, Crocus
Martis and Crocus veneris, ana i. ounce, mix them with oil of roses.

Or take of Colcotharis Dulcificuti, ashes of frogs burned, ana ss. mingle them
with the white of an egg.

There be made other remedies for the foresaid intents, the making whereof we
have described in their proper places, which I commit to the judgment of the
skillful Chyrurgion to use wisely, as the disease and party affected does
require. Now there rema^neth to speak of drinks for wounds, before we teach
the preparation of medicines.

De potionibus vulnerariis.
THese potions for wounds although they drive not out the humors downwards,
yet preu^il they very much to cleanse wounds, because they cleanse superfiuous
humors, and the blood from al filth, and by a certain marvelous quallitie
wherewith they excel, they knit the broken bones, and help the sinows that are
hurt by wounds, and helping nature, they at last fill the wounds with flesh,
and close them up without using any other remedy: when as I saw in Germany the
marvelous, and almost incredible effect which came by ye use of these potions,
eue^ in curing of desperate ulcers, I thought it not meet to pass over the
mention of them, and that so much the rather, because I knew the use of them in
time past was allowed, but now through the negligence of Physicians to be
almost grown ^ut of use. Also I have experienced those potions to be taken not
only as medicines, but also as no irisments, and to help all the passions and
incommodities whereunto wounds are subject. The simples whereof the medicines
are made, are these.

Cyclamin^s. Consolidae mayor. Consolida media, quam Sophiam nonnulli vocant.
(...). Galanga. Vincaperuinca. Centaurium. Ophioglosson. B^tonica*
Ar^stolochia. Veronica. Agrimonia. Verbena. Serpentaria. Persicaria.
Arthemisia. Lilium couuallium. Zedoaria. Pyrola. Sperma ceti. Cancri
fluuiatiles. Nux vomica. Astaci. Mumia. Macis. Bolus Armena.
You shall much better draw out the strength of those simples (...) sort, if
you put them into a tun of white must and digest them there two months, or
if you cut the green herbs very small, and wring out the juice of them into a
Pelicane, or blind Lunbeck, and circulate them 3. or 4. days in Balneo Marie.
This last way is most convenient for them that are forbidden the use of wine,
specially i^ they be wounded in the head. The distilled wa^^^ of them be also
good if they be taken daily by themselves morning and evening with do^e and
manner convenient: Or if white wi^^e be delayed with them (if it be granted to
the wounded) here follows the compositions of the vulnerarie potions.

Take of both Com^eties, Veronica, Sowbread, ana m. i. Astacos A vulnerarie
potion to be given the first seven days.
purges (...), iii. white wine two measures, circulate them in Balneo, 3.
days, strain it, and give every morning one spooneful.

Or take off the eyes of Crabs in powder ss. Mumia, ii drams, Bole Armenae i.
dram and a half, the herbs of Agrimoni Ophioglosson, Veronia and Sowbread
ana, m. i. Sperma Ceti, i. infuse them in white wine all a night in Balneo,
take of this two spoonefuls morning and evening if need be, it puts away
the inflammations very much, and helps the burning.

Take of Macis, the eyes of Crabs, Zedoarie ana iii. Mumia Potions to be given
other times of the grief.
Galenga^^ the less ana ii. banis. Nucis vomica i. dram and a half, beat
them grosely, and put them into a glass vessel, pouring thereto of white wine
i. measure and a hals^, ma^erate them in a so^t heat ii. da^es. The dose is
one sppo^e full in the morning and as much at night. The force of this potion
is so great, that it cannot be sufficiently commended.

Take of the flowers of Vinca Peruinca, Lilium Conualium, ^^a p. i. Galanga,
Zedoaria ana ii. drams Mumia, and Bole Armenia, ana A potion apt for poisoned
wounds by Gunshot.
i. dram, Sperma Ceti, half a dram, white wine two measures, digest and
circulate them in Balneo 4. days the dose is one spoonefull morning and
evening.

Take of Aristolochi, Sowbread, Adders grass, both comferies, A potion
Volnerary, where the bone is broken with Gunshot.
Gerami ana m i. Sanin M. ss. maces, Zedoariae, the eyes of Crabbes ana half
an ounce, Mumia, Galingale the less, ana i. ss. being cut small and b^used,
and the other things brought into a gross powder, boil all in a double
vessel 4. hours, with one measure of wine, use it morning and evening. This
medicine is much better then so many splentes wherewith many are tormented.

Take of flowers of Lilium Conualuim, Betonie ana p. ^. Galingale, Macis, ana
iii. Persicaria, Salend^ne, Vinca Peruin^a, Veronica and Centauri, A potion for
the wounds of the head.
ana M. ss. macerate them as before, and reserve them to your use.

Take of the mice of Veruen, Betonie, Veronica ana ii. Sinamon A potion for
wounds of the breast. For wounds of the stomach.
wateri pound, macerate them.

Take of Bole Armeniae half an ounce of both the Comferies ana m. i. Galingale
ii temper them with wine as aforesaid reserve them to use. D^uers descriptions
of potions may be made of the aforesaid simples, which I leave to the judgment
of the expert Physician notwithstanding, this one thing I will add, that the
use of them has many oportunities to cure wounds by gun shot, as also the
Canker, and all malign, desperate, and eating v^cers, of all which the
Physician shall take very great profit, if he prepare the potions with the
essence of the vulnerarie simples spagerically extract, as we have taught in an
other.

A brief declaration of Spagiricall medicines.
FOr as much as now remains to declare the Spagericke preparation of those
simples which pertain to the cure of wounds by gunshot, we will use the same
method we have before used, whereby this our treatise may be the plainer.

Supuran tia sunt igitur and Anodyna.
Oleum ouorum. Oleum butyri. Oleum resinae. Ol. visci. pomoru compos. Oleum
hyperisi simp^. Olea omniumaxung.
Detergentia.
Oleum myrthae. Oleum mastiches. Oleum tereointhmae. Oleum mellis. Viscus
centaurij. Viscus vincoe peruincoe Viscus aristolochioe. Sal foecum aceti.
Balsamus martis. Crocus vencris. Mercur. praecipitauis vulgaris. Mercur.
praecip. dulcific. Oleum guaiaci. Balsamus veneris. Balsamus Saturni. Balsamus
tartari.
Sarcotica.
Balsamus hyperici. Oleum thuris. Oleum sarcocollae. Oleum mannae. Viscus
consolide vtrisque. Viscus cynoglossi.
Epulation
Calx testarum ouorum. Calx testarum limacum. Bolus armenia praeparata. Alumen
adustum and preparatum. Crocus Martis. Creta vitrioli flaua. quae etiam
cicatrices decorant.
Ol. salis tartari. Ol.talci.

Repellentia and san guine^ cohibentia
Oleum visci pomorum simplex. Oleum Martis. Crocus Martis. Crocus Veneris.
Colcothar simplex. Colcothar dulcificatum. Bolus Armenia praeparata. Calx
testarum ouorum. Calx testarum limacnm.
Adve nena.
Butyrum arsenici fixum. Praecipitatus dulcificatus. Balsamus tartari. Oleum
Mercur, corporale. Oleum antimonij. Oleum sulphuris vitriolati^
Ad Ambusta.
Oleum ouorum. Oleum lardi. Oleum butyri. Aqua gammarorum. Aqua spermatis
ranarum. Aqua floru^ papauer. rubri. Viscus rad. hyoscyami. Oleum Saturni,
eiusque Sal. Oleum Lithargyri.
Attra hentia
Viscus aristolochiae. Viscus corticis med. tiliae. Succinum praeparatum.
Magnes praeparatus.


uered four fingers. Distill y^ vinegar in Balneo M. and there will come forth
a sweet liquor, then power on the vinegar again to distill, this do so long
until it be no more sweet but sower, as when you powered it on first and so
rise in the Limbecke. Then distill all in a strong fire by a Retort, and there
will come forth a hot oil, the commodities whereof can scarsly be declared.

After the same manner if you will you may distill all the salt of Tartar by a
Limbeck: whereof you shall make a most excellent and wholesome oil.

Vinegar being distilled by a Limbeck, the pheces remain in the Oil of
vinegar.
bottom of the vessel which first dried, afterward with a violent fire if
thee be driven out by a Retort, there will come forth a very red and sharp
oil, Then if you do again dissolve the dead head or ^ it of vinegar.
pheces in warm water, filter, and coagulate it, the salt of vinegar will rest
in the bottom, the which is very profitable for all eating ulcers.

Soote brought into fine powder, dissolved in distilled vinegar in Balneo, and
separating all the menstrue, that which remains Salt and oil of soote.
in the bottom dissolve and coagulate again so long till it come to a white
salt, which in a moist place will diss^^^ into oil, very apt to cure the
Gangrena and all malign ulcers.

Bole Arinoniack made into fine powder dissolve it in the sour fleame of Alum,
then separate the fleame by Balneum and pour The preparation of Bole Armenae.
on other. Do this three times, and then the Bole will be turned into a very
fat oil which with a very soft fire is dried and brought into powder,
most apt to staunch blood wheresoever it break out.

Take of Cloves beaten in powder one pound, simple water, or Aqua Vite which is
better, vi. pound, infuse them to digest in Balneo Oils of spices, tears.
woods, and gummes.
or doong iiii days, then put them in a Limbecke with his Refrigatorie,
distill it according to art, and separate the oil from the water by a
funnell, and keep it for your use. After the same manner shall you draw the
oils of Sage, Juniper, Amber, Turpentine, Myrrh, Frankensens, Sarcocolla,
Maflicke and Euphorbium. We have written another better way to draw oils out
of the foresaid things in the Spagericke prepararation of medicines.

Wheat being put into a Retort with the spirit of wine, digest it viii.
days, then distill it with a violent fire, that which is distilled pour
again upon the dead head, digest it again and distill it again, O^le of
wheat.
if you reiterate this three times, there will come forth a most excellent oil
for the Gangrena and Carcinomata.

Take of the flowers of Hipericon final cut ii. pound, oil of Turpentine i.
pound, yeolkes of eggs, 20. Aqua Vite half a The simple Balm of Hipericon.
pound, mingle them together and let it putrify in hot doong one whole
month, then wring it out and set it in the sun two months.

After the same manner is the Balm of Visci pomorum made or Balsamus visci
pomorum.
with oil Olive, first purified in Balneo.

Take of the flowers of Hipericon i. pound, of the Muslage of the root of the
great Compherie, iiii. ounces, flowers of Camomill, Verbascum, ana pug. ii.
oil of eggs and Turpentine, ana half a pound, Mirth, Frankensens, Masticke,
Mumie, ana ii. ounces, red sugar vi. ounces, putrify all in doong one month
in a vessel diligently stopped, then wring it out and circulate it in Balneo
three days, afterward with a soft sire boil it to the substance of a Balm.

Take of the leaves of the Misselto of the Apple Tree cut small ii. pound, put
them into a vessel of glass, putting there to buds of The compound balm of
visci pomorum.
the Popler tree half a pound, oil of the grease of a Badger and of Butter,
ana iiii. ounces, Turpentine vi. ounces, oil of worms ii. pound and a half,
good white wine ii. pound, digest all well stopped in very hot doong ii.
Months, then press it and circulate it, and with a soft fire boil it, until
the liquors be consumed, there can not be found a more excellent medicine to
assuage aches and pains.

The juice of the leaves and roots of herbs you shall purify until it be
clear: pouring it to so much Aqua Vite and digest it How the slime or muslege
is drawn out of hear b^.
in Balneo in a glass xv. days, then separated the water by distillation, and
there remains in the bottom the slyme or mustage of the herbs.

Steep the leaves and roots of herbs in common water filtred Another method.
or that which is better, in white wine eight days, then let them boil three
days with a soft fire under them. Then wring them out and purify it, then
boil them with a soft fire, until they come to the thickenesse of honey which
we call the slyme or muslage. By this rule you shall draw out of both
Comferyes Cynoglosso, Centaurie, Vinca peruinca, Aristolochie, the root of
henbane and the middle bark of Tillia their muslage very profitable for the
aforesaid medicines.

Out of the flowers of red Poppie or their juice* you shall draw a water by a
Limbecke very profitable to cool.

The salt of man's urine has anexcillent quality to clean^e. It Salt of urine.
is made thus. First the urine is to be fiitred, then coagulated, after with
distilled vinegar dissolved, and again coagulated this must be reiterated,
three or four times.

Melt wax at the fire and boil it with wine till it be consumed: do it so
long until it (...). Take one pound of wax Oil of wax.
thus prepared, Alum calcined half a pound, Sage leaves M. i. put all into a
Li^beck, with his receiver and distill it with a mean fire. First, there will
come forth a gross oil, thick, hard, and white, which must be distilled
againeos before, and three times reuerated, and so you shall make an excellent
oil of ware for all griefs of the sinews. In like manner is the oil of Rosen
and pitch made.

Out of honnie you shall first dr^we an excellent water by Balneum, The water
and oil of honey.
afterward you shall put unto the dead head Or pheces that are left sand or
flint stones calcined that the matter boil not up, which you shall drive out by
a (...) of glass giving fire by degrees and so you shall distill a yellowish
^^eare oil together with a gross impure oil. Let all digest again four or
five days, after distill it again by a Limbeck in sand, and there will come
out a pure red oil swimming upon the water. This water is sour almost ^ike
vinegar distilled, and is very good against the Gangrena: but the oil which
burns like Aqua Vite has marvelous qualities specially if it be circulated
certain days with the spirit of wine: for the spirit being after separated,
there remains a sweet oil of pleasant favor, good for woun^^s by Gunshot
and eating ulcers.

Out of the Pheces which remains is drawn a salt, first being The salt of
honey.
calcined with a fire ^^^r^uerbe^ation dissoluing it with his proper menstrua
or common water distilled filtring and coagulating it three times. It is good
for all (...) ulcers. This salt you shall mingle with his proper burning oil
according to art, and you shall ^^ape greater commodity thereof, then is
lawful to be spoken.

Take of honnie not separated from his wax ii. pound, Tartar Another oil of
honey more precious.
made into powder i. pound, let them putrify together in doong xv. days, and
distill it by a re^ort, and there will first come a clear water, then a
yellowish, Put th^^^ again upon the dead head, and putrify it again other
fifteen days, after distill it again, and this do three times, and you
shall have an excellent oil of home.

Take Butter first molten in white wine, and then distill it with a mean fire,
and there will distill out an oil greatly swaging pains and suppling. So shall
you make oil of Lard and of all greases. Oil of butte^ and lard.


Take 100. yolks of Eggs first sodden hard, put them into a Cucurbite, and
make a fire by degrees, first there will come out Oil of yolles of Eggs.
a water, after a yellowish oil swimming upon the water, last a thick oil.
The water is good for all spots in the face: the oil to appease all griefs or
aches.

Boil Creuises in water of Orpine in a double vessel well stopped one whole
day. After distall it, pouring the water three times Water of Creuises.
upon the Feces, then let it be kept it is very good for inflammations,
burninges and the Carcynomata.

The sperme or seed of frogs, is gathered in the month of March, and is
distilled by a glass limbecke: and thereof is drawn Water of the sperme of
frogs.
a water very commodious for inflammations and burninges.

Eggeshels or the shelles of snailes are reuerberated in a sharp fire iii.
days until they be brought into a very white Calce. But Calx of Egg shelles
and Snailes.
if they be sprinkled with vinegar whilst they are calcined, the Calce will
be the lighter and apter to work his force.

Mercury first washed and prepared, according to Gebers prescription, dissolve
with the double wait of common strong water, The common Mercury precipitate.
then distill it four times and pour it so often again upon the Feces, and
so it is brought into a very red powder, out of the which being reuerberate at
the fire are drawn away the spirits of the strong water, which otherwise
would move great pain. But it were better if it were washed with the fleame of
Alum and vinegar distilled, and the water of Eggs, for by that mean, the
sharpness is taken away.

But it is better to prepare Mercury with often sublimations, and to fix it
being quickened again and purged from his filthy Mercury precipitate fixed
and dulcified most profitable for the cure of wounds.
earth and superfluous humiditie with the water which we have described in the
book by me published of the Spagericke preparation. But if all men do not
understand that description for the dark words of Art, it shall not be
incommodious to fix the Mercury with common strong water three times powered
on and drawn away, and to bring it into a red powder, and that with a
sufficient violent fire, that all the sharpness and venom of the m^nstrew,
may be drawn away, which shall much the better be done if this water following
be mingled with it, and by often distillation separated.

Take of distilled vinegar ii. pound and a half of the fleame of Alum i.
pound and a half, Calxe of Eggeshels vi. ounces, distill all till it be dry.
Take of this water iii. pound, of Mercury precipitate as before i. pound,
mingle all well according to Art, distill it by a Limbeck pouring the water
again unto the Feces three times. Last of all drive all out until it be dry,
and there will remain a powder in the bottom which grind upon a marble and
put it into a Limbecke, pouring on the water aforesaid, which you shall three
times distill from the Feces as before. Lastly the Mercury precipitate must be
circulated with the alcole of wine 24. hours. The^ distill away the spirit of
wine that the matter may dry, then pour on new again and circulate it and
distill, as before, and that do four or five tunes, and then you have attained
the perfect preparation of Mercury, whose qualities cannot be sufficiently
commended in the curing of sundry diseases, specially of the Pox, whether it
be taken by mouth or applied to the place grieved.

Make Amalgama with four ounces of Mercury crude, and one ounce of the best
time. Spread this upon a plate of Iron, and Oil of Mercury corporal.
set it in a moist place, and all will dissolve into oil, it is also made with
Mercury alone, and a plate of Time.

Mercury as the manner is three times sublimed with salt and vitrioll, at the
last is mingled with the like portion of salt Armoniacke, Oil of Mercury
subblimed.
and again sublimed three or four times, all that sublimate is dissolved into
oil, out of which the spirit of the salt Armoniacke is to be drawn away,
circulating all with the essence of wine and distilling it so long vnt^ll the
oil have lost his heat and sharpness and the Armoniacke be separated.

It is also reduced by it self into an oil with a very soft heat of an
Athanor by long distance of time.

Sublime Mercury so often with the simple Calce of* eggs well prepared until
it be utterly extinct. To this mixture pour The balm of Mercury.
vinegar d^stilled alcolerated, that it may cover it four fingers, distill the
liquor from the Feces four or five times until the Mercury be come into a
very red powder, which you shall circulate with the alcoole of wine in a
Pelican eight days, separate the alcoole by a Limbecke, and there will
remain in the bottom the most precious and sweet Balm of Mercury. It
heals all desperate ulcers and also carunculam in v^sica, and greatly helps
these wounds by Gunshot. All other preparations of Mercury and the manner of
using it you shall gather out of the book which we lately set forth.

Upon the filinges of Iron often washed with salt water, pour Basamus ma^tis.
sharp vinegar that it may cover it four fingers, set it upon warm ashes
eight days every day moving the matter and separating the vinegar which will
be colored and pouring on again new, and that so long till the vinegar be no
more colored, which being vapoured away take the powder that remains in the
bottom, and subblime it with like portion of Armoniacke: the same subblimate
you shall ret urne again so often upon his Feces and subblime it again until
there appear the color of a Rubin: then cast all into scalding water, that
the salt may dissolve them by and by put to cold water, and the Balm of Mars
will rest in the bottom like the Calx of gold. Pour away the water and put to
fresh again that the Balm may be made sweet.

Of this with the spirit of wine alcolizat by circulations, you shall Oil of
Mar^^
make a red oil most excellent for all inward Hemerodes or issues of blood,
and to strengthen the bowels if one drop be mixed with conserve of Roses or
Comferie or giueu with wine.

The filinges of Iron first well washed, you shall calcine with Crocu^rs to is.
the flower of Sulphur or dissolve with strong water, then pour on very
sharp vinegar, and set it on a warm place certain days, then reuerberate it
with an open fire, as Art commands, one whole day gathering always the
flowers which remain above, until all be converted into a very red and light
powder.

After the same manner, you shall make the Balm, oil and Crocus The balm
oil, Crocus and vitriolum Veneris.
of Copper, out of the which, with the sour fleame of vitrioll, circulating
all artificially, you shall draw a blewshing vitrioll whose qualities we have
described in another place.

Out of Saturn calcined is drawn a sweetish salt in Balneo with distilled
vinegar pouring it so often upon the Feces until it Salt of Saturn.
draw no more. The menstrew euaporated, the salt remains in the bottom which
by often dissolutions and coagulations is made Christaline: and afterward
easily dissolved into oil being set in a moist place. But if you circulate
this Christaline salt in a Pelli^^n Oleum S^turni.
with the alcoole of wine 15. days, and after take away the menstrew by
distillation, and put to new wine, and circulate it pu^ting to a fit dose of
christaline salt of Tartar, you shall make a Balm sweeter then sugar, which
will marueilously prevail against Balsamus Saturni.
all malign ulcers and diseases of the eyes.

Decoct Antimonie made in powder with a capital lie prepared Sulphur of
Antimonie.
of Tartar calcined, and Soap ashes and quicklime, the space of one hour, then
let it cool, pouring upon it a little Vinegar, and there will appear a
certain redness swimming upon: which you shall gather: then again let it
boil for one hour or two: again let it cool and gather that which swimmeth
up. Do this so often until there appear no more redness. For it is the
sulphur of Antimonie which dried at a soft fire, you shall keep to good
uses.

Mingle Antimonie with sugar and alum, and put all into a Retort of glass:
make a soft fire for four or five hours, afterward Oil of Antimonie.
increase it, and there will come out an oil red like blood: It is also done
with Mercury sublimate: but great heed is to be taken least any error be
committed in the degree of fire.

Boil sulphur prepared with oil of Lynseede with a very soft fire, and it
will be like blood congealed. Let the matter cool, put Oil of Sulphur.
it into a Retort and give it fire, and there will distill out of a very red
oil of sulphur. It is also done, if you mingle bran with your sulphur and
distill it.

Take of sulphur Viue P. i. with which mingle with a soft fire, so much pure
vitrioll molten that it may be one body. Distill this Oil of sulphur
vitriolate.
by a discensorie, and there will descend a red oil* into the receiver.

If one pound of the flower of sulphur be mixed with two or three pound of
oil of Turpentine in a dry heat, the flowers will Oil of Sulphur
terebinthinat.
dissolve into a red oil. Then the menstrew rightly and artificially
separated, circulate the Rubin of sulphur with the Alcoll of wine eight days,
and you shall have oil of sulphur that has the qualities of the natural
Balm.

The sour oil of sulphur, is made of sulphur by setting it on fire, and
hanging over it a Bell or a large glass head, to keep Sower oil of Sulphur.
the vapors which are converted into that sour oil.

Put vitrioll beaten into powder into a Cucurbite giving it a fire of the
second degree, and there will issue a sour water which is The fleam^ of
vitrioll.
called the fleame of vitrioll.

Take the Feces which remain in the bottom of the vessel Oil of V^trioll.
which is called Colcothar, stamp that, and if you mingle flintes with all
with a violent fire, there will come out a red oil.

It is also made with the simple Colcothar driven out with a Another ways
violent fire three days space, and the^e will come forth a very hot oil,
which is made sweet by circulation with the spirit of wine Tartarizated.

But if the Colcothar be dissolved in warm water, and the redness Colcothar
dulcificat or creta vitrioli.
in it separated, and the water euaporated, the Colcothar will remain
sweetish: that which remains, the redness being taken away is called Creta
Vitrioli.

But if Vitrioll be drawn by the ninth a Limbeck pouring on always the liquor
upon the dead head, and after circulating all by Spirit of vitrioll.
the space of eight days. You shall have the spirit of Vitrioll very
profitable for many things.

The fleame of Alum is made like the fleame of Vitrioll. Fleame of allome and
the preparation.


But Alum is prepared if the fleame be five times powered upon the Feces, out
of which it was drawn and distilled: last of all drive out all the fleame
until it be dry.

Make brine of salt, into which cast hot burning stones, that they Oil of salt.
may be imbybbed, those stones so imbybbed, put into a Retort, giving fire by
degrees, there will come forth a very hot oil of salt.

I said before, that there was great force in Butyro Arsenici Butyru^, Arsenici
fixum.
fixo, to cure all venomous and malign ulcers, it is made in this manner.
Mingle Christaline Arsenick first subblimed with only Colcothar (which does
keep back his poison) with like weight of salt of Tartar and salt Peter, put
al into two glasses, and fix it, giving fire the space of xxiiii. hours,
first very gentle, then of the highest degree. You shall find the matter very
white fixed, resembling the color of Peerles, which dissolve in warm water
that you may draw the Alcoly from it. And the powder which remains unbybbe
with oil of Tartar, or of Talcum, which is better, and dry it at the fire,
and do this thrice. Again dissolve the matter in warm water that you may take
away his salt, and there will remain a very white powder and fixed, which will
dissolve in a moist place into a fate oil, which is anodinum like butter.

Out of Talcum rightly and artificially calcined, is drawn the Oil of talc^.
spirit with distilled vinegar. This is dissolved into a precious oil being
set in a moist place.

Take of the juice of Aristolochia Rotundae, and Sanin, ana iiii. The
preparation of Mag^^^*
Serpentariae ii. ounces, spirit of wine one pound, circulate them first the
space of xxiiii. hours, then distill them, of this water take one pound of
elect Magnes made into powder iiii. ounces, circulate them together, and
distill away the water from the Feces, reiterate this three times, and by this
means you shall obtain the preparation of Magnes.

But because (as we have said) ye noblest parts are to be strengthened,
^ordialls.
and the heart the principal organ of life, must always be defended, these
preparations following are to be used.

Take of Theriacae of Alexandriae ii. ounces and a half, the best The
composition of a theciacall water.
Myrrh i. ounce and a half, Saffron ii. drams, the spirit of wine vi.
ounces, mingle all these, and in ashes with a very soft fire distill it,
circulate that which is distilled in Balned eight days, and then distill it
again. This water has a excellent quality against the plague and al venomous
things, and does maruellously strengthen the heart.

We have showed the extraction of the Tincture of gold, Corals, natural
Balm, and the essence of Perle in the book which I wrote of preparation: now
rests for us to speak of the gold of life, which all shall know to be the
most excellent and extreme medicine in cuting all diseases, which do but
consider the singular excellency of gold in the cure of the leprosy.

Aurum vitae is made many ways, for being calcined after the Aurum vite.
Spagerick manner it is made light and spungcous, which cannot be reduced
again, from which with distilled vinegar it is drawn the salt in Balneo, whose
qualities by circulations with the spirit of wine are so increased, that they
seem to be incredible for the curing of innumerable diseases.

Calcine gold made into thin plates so often with salt preparate Another Aurum
vite more precious.
(by a Philosophical calcination) until it be made vnpalpable, the salt by
dissolutions being separated from the Alcoole of gold, then calcine it again
with very white sugared salt, and to this mixture power of the spirit of wine
alcolyzat with his proper salt. According to the precepts of art that it may
cover it over only four fingers, then set on fire that the alcooll may burn:
and this you shall do oftentimes, then power on new alcooll of wine, and
circulate all rightly and decently the space of four days. Then separate the
menstrew with compotent distillation, and power on new again, circulating and
distilling as you did before, so often until all the substance of gold be
carried out of the Limbecke: The menstrewe being separated as it ought, the
gold of life will remain in the bottom, the most excellent and best of all
secrets.

Omnibussed pancis luceo. FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE MOST ESPECIAL tinges contained in this Book.
A Air is the most moist thing. Pagina 21. Air by his moisture brings
putrefaction to the things it incloseth 32. Air, especially cold air, is
hurtful to these wounds. 32. 51. 63. Aires substance, how it is infected. 18.
Air what sort is to be chosen. 3. 21. 22. Air, how it is to be corrected
for the health of the vvounded. 23. Alexipharmacon, or an excellent medicine
against poison. 41. Another such like, easy to be made. 42. Another
Alexipharmacon for rich men. 43. Alphonsius Ferrius his error. 6. Apolonius
Tyancus Peregrinations. 73. Aqua theriacalis compositio. 94. Arts when they are
happy. 72. Arsnick unprepared hurtful to use. 71. Attractiue or dravving
medicines. 30. 31. 75. 77. 83. Auicens false opinion of blood-letting. 25.
Aurum vitae, 94.
B. Balm of Hipericon of two sorts. 87 Balsamus Martis. 91. Balsamus
Mercurij. ibidem. Balm natural in consolidating of vvounds, the chiefest
doer. 4. 32. Balsamus Saturni. 92. Balsamus Tartari. 85. Balsamus Veneris. 91.
Balsamus visci pomorum, of both sorts. 87. Bands to tie wounds, and how they
are fitted. 34. Bands or rovvlers, their commodity or use in binding vvounds,
among the ancients. 40. Belly bound, how it is to be opened before purgation.
27. Benbruch stones, their force and virtues. 59. Blood flowing into a bruised
place, is quickly thickened, and does easily putrify. 2. Blood stoppers. 34 35.
80. 83. Blood letting necessary to the vvou^ded 25. Blood letting on which
side it should be done. ibidem. Blood letting his time, ibidem. Blood letting,
what to be observed therein. ibidem. Bones corrupted, with their medicines.
59. 608. 4. Bole Armoniack his preparation. 86. Bross^us, though he were
grievously hurt, yet was he cured. 47. Bruses or contusions, their
inconveniences. 2. Brain comforted and strengthened. 85. Butyrum Arsenici
fixi, his preparation. 93. Bullet when it is to be drawn out, and what the
chyrurgion should especially look unto. 30. Burning how it chances to these
vvounds. 12. Burning, medicines most fittest for them. 44. 45. 75. 77. 83.
Bullet of it self brings no poison to avvound. 6. Bullets, especially of
lead, may be infected with poison. 7. Bullet fast in the body, how it is
pulled out. 30. Bullets poison, their signs. 15. Bullet, many times tarrieth
very long in the bodies of vvounded men without hurt. 7. 30. Bullet if it
neither go thorovv nor cannot be pulled out, how the vvound is cured. 62.
C. Calcinatum magnum Paracelsicorum. 37. Calx of eggshels and snailes. 88.
Catagmaticum Quercetani. 58. Cataplasme emolliatiue or softning. 37.
Chyrurgions reproved for their custom in applying medicines as well in the
first as in the second dressing. 30. 35. Chyrurgions of the common sort, their
boldness and their special medicines. 56. Cicatrices what things induce them
83. Cicatrises swollen up and red helped. 55. Clister emolliatiue. 27.
Colcothar what it is and how it is dulcerated. 93. Consolidatiues especial.
4. 31. Conuulsions and their causes. 65. Conuulsions of emptines and their
cure. ibidem. Conuulsions of fulness and there fit medicine. 66. Conuulsion by
simpathy or agreement how it is cured. 67. Coroboraters, or strengthners. 42.
85. Corruption and his matter. 3. Creta Vitrioli. 93. Crocus martis. 91. Crocus
veneris. ibidem. Cold things and greatly repressing, are hurtful to burnings.
44.
D. Dangerous affections are first to be cured before the lesser. 15. 17.
Dismembring how and when it is to be done. 56. Drinking of water hurtful to
certain wounded persons. 20. Deadly wounds of the head, when they bring death
53. Defensive medicines. 34. 38. Defensiuum Magistrale. 44. Detersiue, or
clensing medicines. 38. 52. 75. 76. 78. 83. Digestiues in b^used wounds, when
they are to be abstained. 3. Diseases public. 18. Drink what kind is most fit
for the wounded. 24.
E Emperickes from whence oftentimes they ambitiously seek praise. 18.
Emperickes rashness. 33. Epithemmata or moist medicines are to be applied to the
heart. 42. Emplaisters inducing cicatrizes. 75. 77. 79. 83. Extractions, the
use of them commended. 27. 29. External or outward things are first to be taken
from a wound. 30.
F Flesh putrified and corrupted, what helps it. 84. Fissures or cracks of the
skull, hard to know, and a method to find them out. 49. Fractures sundry of
the skull and their cure. 48. Face burnt what things heal it. 54. Fever, how
it is helped. 65. Figures of iron instruments are to be sought in the book of
Ambrosius Pareus. 30. 50. Fistulaes a linament to cure them. 63. Fomentation
mollifying and mittigating pain. 37. Fractures of all sorts, a most fit
cerote 58. Frications and their use. 24. Fruits how they are conserved. 33
Fire of his own force or virtue resists poison. 6. Fire sometime violent is
most fit to purge poison. 16. Fox tongue a special drawer. 44. Fleame of
Allome. 5. 93. Fleame of vitrioll. 92.
G Gangrena near at hand, his signs. 39. Gangrena, a sign of corruption
beginning. 69. Gangrena, his cure how it is performed. 70. Gunpouder corns if
they stick in the flesh, how they are to be pulled out, and how the place is
cured. 54. Gunpouder is by some dronk with wine. 7. Gunpowders nature or
essence not venomous, and wherofit is made. 5.
H Hair lost in burnt places, medicines convenient to restore it again. 54.
Heraclitus Ephesius torn of dogs. 74. Humiditie too much is the cause of
corruption. 3. Humiditie of air and water, how they differ. 21. Hairs burnt,
made to grow. 54. 55.
I. Iron, what things do harden it. 9. Iron, what things make it soft. 9.
Iron of old time infected with poison. 7. Indications curatiue, too commonly
received, to which the third and fourth are to be added. 4. 13. 29.
Indications subalterne or successiue. 29. Indications two out of Galen to cure
poisoned vvounds. 42. Iniections fit for dead and hollovv vvounds. 38. 59.
Intomperature as well hot as cold with their corrections. 64. Incarnatiues
or medicines called Sarcoticae. 75. 76. 79. 83.
L Lead, how it loses his softness and blackness. 9. Life led dissolutely,
what incommodity it brings. 18. Lenitiues applied to a face burned 55. Liver
corroboraters thereof. 85. Labor naught for the vvounded. 23. Laudanum
anodinum vel opiaticum his vvonderfull virtues. 35. Laurentius Ioubertus his
commedations. 1. 12. 33.
M Metals purified by the fire, do yet suck in a contrary substance from
nature. 8. Mercvry precipitate fixed and dulcified. 89. Mercury precipitate of
the common sort. ibidem. Menynx now covered, what is fit for it. 51. Menynx
or ryme of the brain detected, what medicines are to be put in. 50. Member
mortified, how to be cut off. 71. Member hurt when the dismembring is to be
attempted. 43. 47. Member hurt, presently at the beginning is not to be cut
off. 47. 48. Medicines easing pain, named Anodina. 63. 64. Medicines convenient
for these callous vvounds. 63. Medicines to be applied to a woun ded head, and
their descriptions. 49. 50. 52. 53. 54. Medicines to comfort the heart. 94.
Meat, how it is to be given. 23. Meats, in what vvounded persons to be
given, and in what to be forborne. 23. 24. Medicines most fit for burnings.
Vide burnings. Magnes or Lodestone his preparation. 94. Medicines most
stinking, used of the old Physicians. 74.
N Nature of sick me^ should be known to the physician. 27. Northern vvindes
in some places healthful, in others pestilent. 22. Nature contains in it
self an efficient cause of curing 1 2. 31. Nature helped with art, sometimes
does vvounders. 18. 47. Nature fills vvounds with flesh, and at last couers
it with a skarre 31. 38. Nerves or sinevves with their matter. 67. Nerves
pricked, and what helps them. 68. 69. 84. Nutritum Magistrale. 45.
O Oiles, that be hot are holsomly applied to wounds. 32. Oil infused upon
any liquor drives away putrefaction. 32. Oil for the palsy and contractions
68. Oil most excellent for hard and callous wounds. 63. Oil of vinegar. 86.
Oil of Antimony. 92. Oil of spices, gummes, herbs and woods, how they are
drawn. 86. Oil of butter. 89. Oil of wax. 8. Oil of wheat. 86. Oil of
lard, or grease. 86. Oil of they olkes of eggs. 89. Oil of Ion. 91. Oleum
mercurij corporalle. 19. Oil of Mercury sublimate. ibidem. Oil of honnie.
88. Oil of honny another kind. 89. Oil of salt. 93. Oleum salis Tartari. 85.
Oil of lead. 92. Oil of sulphur. ibidem. Oil of sulphur sower. ibid. Oleum
sulphuris terebinthinatum ibidem. Oleum sulphuris vitriolatum. ibid. Oleum
Talci. 94. Oleum Tartari Faetens. 85. Oil of Copper. 83. Oil of vitriol. 93.
Oxirhodinum. 31.
P Perturbations of the mind most dangerous. 24. Preparation of Allome. 93.
Pain vveakneth the strength, and engendereth dangerous diseases. 64. Pain
mittigaters. 37. Place and region with their aides or cure. 21. Places which
are to be chosen for the vvounded and which refused 22. Physicians duty what
it is. 25. Physicians ought to be circumspect in changing his medicine
sometimes. 4. Palsy how it is cured. 68. 69. Potion convenient for vvaterish
bodies* 27. For choleric, 28. For melancholy, 2^. Generally purging all
kind of humors: ibidem. Portions for wounds with their saeultie, 79. Diverse
kinds of them* 80. 81. 82. Potions vulneratorie most ap^ for wounds of the
lower belly, 62. Praecipitate of the common for the use discommended, 4.
Praecipitate rightly prepared, his virtues, 36. Praecipitate, his right
preparation, vide Mercurius. Powder skinning or bringing skarrs, 39. Purging
medicines to be used with choice, 27. Purging is profitable to the wounded, 25.
Purgation when it is to be used, 27. Purging whether it be convenient for
soldiers, 26. Purging what disease it helps, ibid. Purging of what things
it is to be, 27. Purgation what makes it fit and easy, 27. Pustules and what
restrayneth the^, 54. 55. Putrefaction diligently to be resisted. 34.
Q Quietness is convenient to the wounded. 24.
R Remedies here described their co^mendations, 1. Repercussiues, 77. 80. 83.
Rhabarbe not known to any ancient writers, 74. Rowles for the Palsy, 68*
S. Salt of Vinegar, 86. Salt of foot, 86. Salt of urine, 88. Salt of metals
and of the virtue ^ mean mineralles, 3. Salt Peter of our sort to cities from
the niter of Dioscorides* 6. Salt Peter not venomous, and where of it
consists, 6. Salt of Lead, 91. Salt of Tartar, 85. Sick men in desperate
diseases ar^ not to be forsaken, 19. Signs of combustions couple^ with a
wound, 16. Sutherne winds hurtful to these wounds. 5. 22. Suthern winds by
place, and fir^^ beginning cold, 21. Signs ofvenome joined with the^^ wounds,
15, 39. Suppuratiues are not rashly to b^ used, 2. 36. Supparating medicines,
35. 36. 37* 75. 76. 78. 83. Simptomates or accidents by an by in the beginning
are to b^ stopped 31. Simptomates of the grievous for are many times to be
looked in the diseases neglected, 29. Sownding by what means it is hopen, 68.
Scales and little pieces the skull how and when they a to be taken out. 48. 49.
Splinters to straight their disco^modities, 57. Splinters not to be applied to
these wounds without danger, ibid. Sicknesses how they are esteemed grievous,
16. Signs of death when a deadly wound is received in the head, 13.
Stupefactiue medicines, when to be ministered, 64. Suppuration in these wounds
is to be hastened, 35. Sulphur of Antimonie, 92. Sulphur a wholsome remedy,
5. Spirit of vitrioll, 93. Sphacelus, his signs, 69. Spagiricall medicines
there table, 82. Spagiricall art why so called, 73. what commodity it
brings, ibidem. Salt of urine, 88. Santalum, what it signifies to the
Chyrurgion, 50. Sclopetary or this book of Gunshot, why the author has put
it forth in Latin, and French, 74. Signs of every affection, are necessary
to be known of the Physician, 13. Signs, most evil in wounds, 3. Similitude
taken from a sayler, 39. Simples of the which vul^erary potions are made, 80.
Solution of continuitie, two sorts, 2. 14. Sleep how it is to be used, 24.
T. Tem^erament of the part, needful for the Physician to know, 3. Trappaning,
what it is, 48, when to be used, ibid. 49. to what place it must be applied
ought to be known to the Chyrurgion, 50.
V. Venom his dravvers among the old vvriters, 41. Venomous matters, 9.
Venomous mixtures have dry effects, 9. 10. Venomous wounds why their
knowledge is needful, 15. Venomous wounds, what medicines are first to be
applied to them, 36. Venomous wounds, and what belonges thereto, 79, 83. 75.
76. Venom to these wounds from whence it proceeds, 9. Venom mixed with
the bullet is not to be extinguished by force of fire. 11. Venom how it may
be drawn out, 25. Vitriolum veneris, 91. Vnguentum magistrale. 33. Vnguentum
de peto, 79. Vnguentum de peto aliud, 80. Viscus or muscilage how it is drawn
out of herbs, 87. Vinsius being forsaken of the Physicians, by what means
he was cured, 19. 34. Vinegar not convenient for burninges, 44. Vinegar
resists corruption, 34. Vinegar does cause slovve suppuration, 37.
W. Water conueuient to the cure of these vvounds and taking away
inflammations, 31. Water enemy to vvounded sinevvs 67. Water of Creuisses or of
Crabs, 89, Water of honnie. 88. Waters of niter and brimstone, to whom they
are good, 5. Waters of the sperm of frogs, 89. Waters venomous, 9. Warmth is
to be brought to these wounds, 37. Wounds in the head with fracture of
Cranium cured 48. Wounds of the head why most dangerous, 48. Wounds of the
head not to be neglected (says Hippocrates.) 52. Wounds of the head which
are most dangerous, 53. Wounds received what care is to be had of custom,
age, and time, 19, 20, Wounds contused are to be brought speedly to pass or
maturation, 36, Winds and what changes there qualities, 21, 22. Wounds in
the belly, their cure, 62, Wine to what vvounded men it is permitted to whom
not, 20. 24. Wine the use thereof not to be permitted to those vvounded in the
head, 52. Wounds receive in the head at Feraria, and wounds of the legs in
Florens are incurable, 22, Wounds made by Gunshot, the essence according to
Botallus P^reus and Ioubertus, 1, 5, Wounds of Gunshot (are often) or for the
most part joined with poison and burning, 5. Wounds of Gunshot and whereof
their differences do arise, 13, Wounds of Gunshot, and their intentions
curatiue, 19, Wounds less dangerous, 18, more dangerous 17. deadly ibidem.
Wounds how they become more dangerous, ibid. Wounds what is presently to be
applied in the first dressing, 32* what in the second. 35, and when they are
to be incarnated, 38, Wounds joined with a fracture, and there cure, 46.
Wounds of the head and their cure vide head. Wounds wherein the bones of the
arms or legs are broken their cure. 55. Wounds which pearce through the
body without fracture, their cure, 57, Wounds if they come to the chine or
ridge of the back, and thereby the marrovve issue out, how to be cured, 62.
Wounds of the face with shiuering of the bones, how to be cured, 53.
Wounds of the breast, their medicines, 61,

FINIS.
Especial faults escaped in the Printing.
Page 27 line 29. read i. 27. l. 33. read aniseeds. P. 28. l. 4. for oak fern,
read polipodie (...) new. P. 28. l. 8. far thereunto, read therein. P. 28. l.
20. put out, or else ii. P. 29. l. 4. read ci^rons. P. 34. l. 7. read bole
armoniack prepared. P. 34 l. 28. read visci pomorum simplex. P. 38. l. 22. read
hipericon compositum. P. 43. l. 17. read salt butter. P. 43. l. 19. read (...)
P. 52. l. 20. read peruincle. P. 60. l. 12 read aloes hepatica, m^^^iae. P. 60.
l. 34. read oil of antimonie.. iii. P. 68. l. 6. read oil of spike i. ss. P.
68. l. 2. read lilij. P. 70. l. 17. read honnie. ii. ibidem, read vinegar. one
pound. P 70 l. 29. read mirrhe. i. ss. P. 77. l. 1. read Epulotica. P. 77. l.
19. read Ricini. P. 81. l. 33. read veronica. P. 85. l. 30. for pheces, read
feaces. P. 93. l. 32* read alkaly.


