A LETTER UNTO THEM of The Romish Church,

By PETER du MOVLIN, Minister in the reformed Church at Paris.

Together with a true Iubile or general Pardon of Indulgence by the same
Author.

LONDON, Printed by H. L. for Matthew Lownes, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard.
1621.

TO The right worshipful, Master WILLIAM HAKEVVILL, Esquier, R. G. Wishes
(as in duty he is bound) all increase of grace and true happiness.
Sir:
THis little but excellent tract of Monsieur du Moulins being given me to
translate by your worthy brother (who formerlie, as your Worship may remember,
did once set me aworke in the like kind with no ill success) and being
desirous to have it patronized by some good friend as the custom is, I soon
bethought me how it might very acceptablie pass under your name, if so it
would please you to grace my poor endeavor, which in all humblenes I gladly
offer up unto you: first, as a thankful remembrance of your many charitable
favors toward me; and then as an earnest of my willingness to be doing as I
am able.

The discourse of it self in the original is of worth enough to give all good
men content, which love Gods true Religion together with the propogation and
increase thereof, and (as I hope) has received no great soil or blemish by
passing through my hands.

It seems it was intended by that famous man the Author, especially for his
own countriemen of the Romish Church: but alas who are so deaf as they that
will not hear, or blind like them that will not see? Yet as he says in the
end of his discourse, that Animam suam liberauit in case it work not amongst
them his wished effect; So likewise if it pass into English under your ^au^ur,
vous aurez aussi Monsieur ad^nce une bonne oeuure. So trusting to our Worships
gentle acceptance, I cease further to trouble you in your most worthy
employments for the common good; and remain,

Your worships most humble and ever much bounden, Ry. Goring.

A Letter to them of the Romish Church, by Peter du Moulin, Minister of GOD's
Word in the Reformed Church of Paris.
Translated into English out of the French Original.
My Masters:
THE things that I have to represent to you, would perhaps be more
acceptable from any other hand than from mine: and yet I may be bold to say,
that never did any man speak to you more void of hatred, or more desirous of
your good and salvation. The Word of God, from whence we draw our Religion,
commands us to love those that hate us, and to believe that those which do
persecute us do think they do God good service. Every spirit, which seeks
after the truth, ought thus to be disposed. Without this, it is impossible to
gather any fruit by our communication: for, never does any wound cloze up
again, during the inflammation. And even as in a house which is on fire, those
which speak are not understood: so shall we never understand one another,
whilst our spirits do burn with hatred and spleen. The study of the sacred
Word of GOD requires a quiet spirit, which wisely waigheth things without
exception against any man's person: for, what reason is it to hate any body
because he goes astray, or because we think we see more clear than he?

Now then, even as blinde-men are commonly wranglers and choleric; so also
such as are most violent receive least instruction: therefore he that shall
remedy this ignorance, shall likewise appease this furiousness. But, the evil
is without remedy in him that endeavors to be ignorant, and fears to know
the will of God, lest he should be so much the more obliged to follow it.
This is (my Masters) the disease of this Age: in which, people make profession
of following without knowing, and to believe his Church without knowing what
the Church ought to believe; and rests upon the faith of other, being
ignorant of the rule of faith, which is the Word of God: as if those that lead
us ought to be our warrants against GOD's judgment, or as if it were a virtue
to believe in God by Attorney.

Indeed, people ought to obey their Guides, in case God be their Guide; and
believe that which they teach, if so be that which they deliver be drawn
from the Word of God. The Index of books forbidden, together with the rules
which were made by the fathers that were chosen thereto by the Tre^t Synod. The
fourth rule. In as much as it is plainly seen by experience, that if the Bible
be every where suffered to be read in the vulgar tongue without any
restraint, more hurt then good will thence arise, by occasion of men's rashness.
He that without such like license shall presume to read or have the Bible, may
not have an absolution of his sins, unless he first deliver it up into the
hands of the Ordinary.
The which if they hide from the people, and hinder the reading thereof, it is
a sign that they find themselves guilty; or that, in stead of subjecting
themselves to this rule, they will have the sovereign rule to be their
authority. For, wherefore should the Word of God, contained in holy Scriptures,
be a suspicious thing unto us, and as it were a dangerous book? Wherefore
should not children be permitted to see their fathers Testament? The Apostle
Saint Paul has written his Epistles to the people of Rome, of Corinth and
Ephesus, to the end they might read them: wherefore then should Christian
people at this day be deprived of the reading of them? The Catholic Epistles
of Saint James, Where it is to be noted, that there it is spoken of Bibles
translated by Catholic Roman Authors.
S. Peter, and Saint John, are written to all the faithful in general:
wherefore then should not Christian people read those Letters which are
expressly directed unto them, and are written for their instruction? wherefore
may they not read the writings of the Prophets, as well as the people of Berea?
which, coming from Saint Paul's Sermon, went and conferred it with the
Scriptures. To what end are Texts alleged in Sermons, if it be not lawful
for the Auditor to go home and see in the Scriptures, Acts 17. 11
whether they be truly alleged or no? A horrible thing, that in those
Countries where the Inquisition reigns, it is a crime worthy the fire to have
a Bible in the vulgar tongue; whilst not only the reading of fables is
tolerated, but whoredom also established there by law and politic regiment.
If so be the Translation be not thought true by the Pope, his Holiness
should give order for a Translation fitting his judgment.

To say, that some abuse this reading, is to accuse the Apostles of folly to
have written their The Apostles did write in a language most publicly
understood.
Epistles to christian people, without foreseeing that they might abuse the
same: by the same reason, they might forbid the preaching thereof, because many
do abuse it. Men abuse even the very goodness of GOD. Nay, which is more, it
was never seen, that any of the people did ever forge any Heresy through
reading of the Scripture. All our Heresiarchs have been persons that have had
place in the Church. Now, if to read the holy Scripture, we must have
special leave given us, is it not a miserable thing that we may not obey God
but upon sufferance, and that God can have no servants without the Bishop of
Romes permission? Or if they say, it is not for ignorant people to read them: I
answer, that all men are ignorant in religion before they read them, and that
men may not without impiety ascribe any skill unto themselves in religion,
besides or without the Scripture.

Shake off then (my Masters) this scrupulous fear, by which God is wronged, as
if his Word were contagious, and a snare laid for weak consciences; lest upon
you be accomplished the Prophecy of Esaias, Esaias 5. 13
My people are in captivity, because they be without knowledge: and the saying
of our Savior, You err, not knowing the Scriptures. Let not this precious
treasure be wrung out of your hands; this contract of our spiritual marriage
with the Son of God: hold them as suspected persons, who during this night
of ignorance do hide this heavenly Light, and in the mean time light up their
own candles at high-noon. Hope not to be saved by the faith of others: for,
God declares unto us, Hab. 4. 2
that The just shall live by his own faith: Mat. 15. 14
and that If the blind lead the blind, they shall both fall into the ditch.

Now, that you may know that they take the Scriptures away from you, not to
keep you in sobriety, but to detain you in ignorance; consider, that in the
Roman Church they read publicly unto you some chapters of the Bible in a
tongue which you understand not. If in these chapters GOD were spoken unto, one
might excuse it; saying, that GOD understands all languages: but these chapters
are divine Lectures, in which God speaks unto men. Tell me in conscience,
wherefore should God be a Barbarian unto us, and speak to us in an unknown
tongue? Wherefore speaks he unto men, but to the end they should understand
him? Wherefore should those things, which every where else would be esteemed
ridiculous and against common sense, be thought good and comely in religion?
But, is it not a sleight of the enemy of our salvation; that he might make
Christianity ridiculous, and hinder the Word of God from being understood of
you? to the end likewise that the threatening may be accomplished which God
uses to a people with whom he is angry, I will speak to this people by men of
other language, 1 Cor. 14. 21.
and in a strange tongue, and so they shall not understand me.

This evil has produced another: for, in taking away from you the holy
Scriptures which make men learned, they have given you Images, which they call
the books of ignorant men, because they nourish ignorance: therewithal they
busy the people, in stead of instructing them; in stead of teaching them, they
make them passe-time. But because that against this same, the second of Gods
commandments is express, which forbids in matter of Gods service to make any
Image, and to fall down before any representation of any thing in Heaven or
earth; and that his Law, pronounced with thundering, affrighteth even to this
day this superstition: these Doctors have imposed silence unto this Law of
God, and dare to raze out this commandment out of those books, prayers and
service-bookes, which they appoint them to use: A thing wherein we may suspect
our own eyes, and hardly believe when we see it, that very worms of the
earth have made so bold as to correct the Law of God pronounced with his own
mouth; yea, that same Law, by which they shall be judged at the last day.

Unto such enterprises the holy and sacred name of Church serves as a cloak.
It is said that the Church cannot err; that she is sovereign Judge of the
points and doubts of faith; that she is the faithful interpreter of the
Scripture. By which Church, is understood not the Greek, nor the Syrian, nor
the African (although more ancient and more pure than the Roman); but only
the Roman Church, which, having never been but a particular Church, calls
herself the Universal. By this means the Church of Rome is becomne Judge in
her own cause. The Greek Chur. more ancient than the Roman, complains that
the Roman Church is revolted and separated from her, producing against her her
chaires, her succession, her antiquity. In this contestation, the Roman Church
vanteth herself to be Judge, and so will be both Judge and Party. In the
question whether the Roman Church can err, she herself will be Judge; and
(which is more) when there is question of deciding what the Churches duty is,
the Roman Church will be sovereign Judge, to the end she may have no other
laws but of her own establishing, and what she will carve out for her own
self. And, moreover, when the sense and interpretation of the Law of God lies
at the stake, she esteems herself the infallible expounder, and reputes her
own interpretation of equal authority with the Law of God; yet is it
certain, that by this Law she shall be judged at the later day. Now, there
is no rashness so extravagant, as to put sinners for infallible judges of the
sense of the Law, by which their sins are to be judged. What obedience think
you is the Sovereign Master to look for, if his servants may say unto him, Thou
have indeed commanded us that same, but we interpret it thus, and do judge
that thy commandment ought thus to be understood; and thou know, that we
are undoubted judges in such matters, and that our interpretations are of equal
authority to thy commandments? By this reckoning, it were better to be
servant than Master. By which of these two (think you) shall the Prelates of
the Church of Rome be judged at the last day? whether by the Law of God, or by
their own interpretations? I refer this to the judgment of any man that
has but the remainder of common sense left him, or any spark of free and
unpreocupate conceit, which of the two ought rather to be supreme Judge in
religion: whether God, ruling and teaching the Church by his Word; or the
church, that ought to receive this Word, and obey him. Who shall rather be
Judge, the scripture which commands there should be a Church, and gives it
laws; or the Church, which only gives attestation that that is the
Scripture? specially considering, that even this testimony may be given by a
corrupt Church, and disobedient to this Scripture. Who shall be rather Judge,
the Scripture which is one, and judges without passion; or the Church, which
is divided into contrary churches which cannot be assembled, and whose Pastors
are subject to ambition and avarice, and fitter to be had in suspicion when
there is any question of their profit or authority?

Here (my Masters) it is easy to show you, that they lead you in a way by
which it is altogether impossible you should be saved: for, you are taught
simply to believe the Church of Rome, and without farther enquiry to depend
entirely upon her authority; and yet you are deprived of all means to know
whether this Church, whereunto you give credit, be pure, and teaches true
doctrine. For, how should you know that? should it be by the holy Scriptures?
yea, but this book is not permitted you. At Rome and in Spain, to read in it,
is no less than burning at a stake: or would you know it by the Ancients?
those are greek and latin books which the people understand not. What knows an
artificer, or a woman, or an husbandman amongst you, whether the Church
teaches conformably unto the Scripture? or if their church be such as it was
some 12. or 1500. years since? or whether of a long list of Popes pictured, the
first have believed as the last, and that the times have altered nothing? In
brief, you have no other proof of the purity of your church, but the witness of
your Church it self: whose Prelates, vanting themselves that they cannot err,
in the mean time deprive you of all means to discern of error from truth; by
hiding from you the rule of truth, which is the holy Scriptures. But wherefore
should the Roman Church rather have this perfection, that the Greek or the
Syrian (more ancient and more pure than the Roman) founded by Ies. Christ
himself, and by his Apostles; and who also brag to have Saint Peter's chair?
Does the Scripture give unto the Roman Church any prerogative above others? or
does it give her the privilege of not erring?

From hence do ensue two things as clear as the day: the one, that your faith
is grounded only upon the authority of men, and by consequent that your
religion is a humane religion and not divine. Whosoever says, I believe the
Gospel and the Word of GOD, because the Church ordains it, makes the Church
more credible than God. To doubt of Gods truth, is a less crime, than to make
it depend upon men. The other is, that, of all humane witnesses, you ground
your selves upon the worst and most uncertain: for, you say, your Church is
good because she says it, and so do make her Judge in her own cause; not
considering, that by this word Church, you understand not Christian people, nor
the generality of Pastors, but the Pope and some few Prelates whose rules are
called Church-rules, although they tend only to the profit of the Clergy, and
the advancement of the Empire of the Bishop of Rome.

And you poor souls, whom God has framed after his own Image, whom he has
redeemed with the blood of his Son, whom God solliciteth by his Word, will you
languish always in this captivity? will you heap up unto your selves the wrath
and indignation of the Lord, by rejecting the salvation which is proposed you?

I confess, that the Roman Chur. in certain points alleges scripture, and
that between her and us there is strife about the interpretation: but we make
use of the Scripture in another manner than those which teach you.

For first, they are afraid the people should read the Scriptures: but we
exhort men thereunto.

Secondly, they persuade you, that the Scripture is obscure and ambiguous: but
we say, all things necessary unto salvation are therein laid down with much
clearness.

Thirdly, they say that the Scripture is an unperfect rule, they will needs
have another unwritten word, and traditions of the Church equal in authority
to the Scripture: we (on the contrary) say, that the holy Scripture can make
us wise unto salvation, 1 Timothy 15. 1
and that we ought not to be wise beyond what is written; 1 Cor. 6. 4
and that in that which is clear in the Scriptures, and needs no
interpretation, are contained all the doctrines necessary unto salvation.

Fourthly, when we allege the Scripture, we allege it as sovereign Judge,
and as it that rules the Chur. and gives her her authority: but the Roman
Church alleges the Scripture as a doctrine authorized by the Church, and that
you ought to receive it because the Church has ordained it.

Fifthly, when we interpret the Scriptures, we give not out our
interpretations for laws as does the Roman Church, nor call our selves judges
or infallible interpreters of the holy Scriptures.

Finally, when we interpret the Scriptures, we draw our interpretations from
the Scripture it self: but the Roman Church draw their interpretations from the
unwritten word and from tradition. For example: we expound those words, This
is my body, He took the bread, gave it, etc. Do this in remembrance of me.
By the bread which I give you is the commemoration of my body; the which
exposition is found in the text it self of the institution of the sacrament: or
by these words of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 10. 16, The bread which we break is the
communion of the body of Christ. Your Teachers do not thus interpret the
Scriptures: for, they draw their interpretations from the unwritten word and
from tradition. When the Lord said to Peter, I have prayed that thy faith fail
not; they say, that by these words Saint Peter and the Popes of Rome, his
successors, were promised the virtue that they could not err: but the
Scripture speaks not of Popes or of Bishops of Rome, nor grants unto Saint
Peter any successor in his Apostleship. So Malachie speaks of a pure oblation
which was to be made in all places; Mal. 1. 11
This oblation, according to the interpretation of these Masters, is the Mass;
in which they say the body of Christ is really sacrificed. But this
interpretation is taken out of the unwritten word: for, the holy scripture
speaks not of any Mass, nor of the sacrifice of the body of Jesus Christ,
nor establishes any sacrificers in the Church to sacrifice the Son of God. So,
when the Scripture says, Thou shall worship one God, and shall serve him
alone; The interpretations of these Masters is, that God forbids only the
worship of Latria, but not the adoration of Dulia, which is an inferior
religious service. But, the Scripture speaks not of the adoration of Dulia,
nor of any other religious service then that which is due unto God. These are
interpretations which the Roman Church draws from the unwritten word, which
is at the discretion of the Romish Church, nor can be learned but from her
mouth: for, I do not think there is any that ever has seen all the
instructions of this unwritten word reduced into one body; Bellar. in Barkl. c.
3. He thinks not rightly of the chur. of the chur. of Christ, that admits
nothing but what he reads expressly to have bin alleged or practiced in the
old chu. as if the Church of later time either ceast to be a chr. or has not
authority to express and declare, to decree also, and co^ma^d those things
which concern faith and Christian manners.
and that because this word changes according to the age, and is fitted unto
the time, and that the Romish Chur. has power also to add new articles
thereunto even in the points of faith.

The greatest mischief is, that these traditions and instructions of the
unwritten word are not only additions unto the Scripture, but also manifest
oppositions thereunto: whereof, the Mass alone does furnish us with many
examples. 1. For, Jesus Christ, administering the holy Sacrament of the
Eucharist, spoke in a tongue understood of the standers by: but the Priest in
his Mass speaks in an unknown language. 2. Jesus Christ administered to all
there present: but the Priest oftentimes eats and drinks himself alone. 3.
Jesus Christ communicated the cup unto all, and willed that all should drink
thereof: but the Priest drinks alone, and denies the chalice unto the
people. 4. Jesus Christ offered nothing to God: but the Priest prays in the
Mass, that God would be pleased with his oblation. 5. Jesus Christ made no
elevation of the host: but the Priest houldeth up an host to be adored. 6.
In the institution of this holy Sacrament there is no speech of a sacrifice,
nor of sacrificing the body of Jesus Christ: clean contrary, the Priest
pretends the sacrificing of the body of Jesus Christ in a real and
propitiatory sacrifice for the living and the dead also. 7. Under the Table of
our Lord there were no relics hid, We beseech thee, Lord, through the merits
of the Saints, whose relics we have here, and for the merits of all the
Saints besides, that thou would vouchsafe to pardon all our sins.
nor the bones of any Patriarch or Prophet: on the contrary, the Priest has
under the stones of his Altar the bones of the dead, without which relics an
Altar cannot be consecrated: and so accordingly the Priest in his Mass
craveth salvation by the merits of those Saints whose bones lie hidden under
that Altar; a thing that Jesus Christ never thought of. 8. Jesus Christ
witnessed, that it was the fruit of the Vine that he drank: but the Priest
denies that it is so. 9. Jesus Christ will, that we make commemoration of him:
but the Priest pretends to make Jesus Christ himself. 10. Saint Paul says
four times, that we eat and break bread: on the contrary, the Priest
maintains, that we neither eat nor break bread. 11. The Lord instituteth a
Sacrament: but the Priest celebrateth a Sacrifice. In a word, the one
administreth the Communion; the other sings Mass, expressly made to
dis-figure the holy Supper of our Lord.

These Masters think themselves well fensed with using a childish
recrimination in objecting unto us, that seeing we will imitate our Lord, we
ought all to celebrate the Communion after supper, and in a high chamber, and
not to admit of women: but neither the place, nor the hour, nor the sex of the
assistants, is either part or essence of the action; and without any of these
the action remains entire, nor has Jesus Christ touching the same given any
rule, or forbidden any circumstance. But the change which we object against
them, is in things essential, and which change the nature of the action;
seeing that thereby is introduced an adoration not commanded nor practiced by
the Apostles; and a sacrifice established, which our Lord has not ordained;
and an authorized superstition about dead men's bones; and a public repast
changed into a private Mass; and the people frustrate of understanding their
ordinary service; and instructed to take God, and to eat their Creator, and
adore the creature; and deprived of one half of the Sacrament, to wit the cup,
whereof Christ has said, 1 Cor. 8. 11.
Drink ye all of this: as also the Apostle commands the people of Corinth to
take the cup as well as the bread. Let a man prove himself, and so eat of this
bread, and drink of this cup.


Whereupon we propose a means of agreement, which cannot be refused but by
him that loves discord, or is thirsty of Christian blood, or which will war
against God: for, all Christians confess that Jesus Christ has done well, and
that there is nothing amiss in his institution, and that even when it might
be lawful to celebrate the holy Communion in some other fashion then he did;
yet all agree, that it would not be ill done to follow his example, speak as
he spoke, and do as he did. Now, this is that which we demand: and certain
it is, that the Pope might make an end of all conte^tions sprung from this
point, which trouble and divide Christendom, if he would restore the holy
Communion unto the form in which our Lord did celebrate it; laying aside all
disputes, and binding the people unto the example of the Son of God. What
incommodities or inco^veniences soever might be alleged against the same,
could not be put in balance against the obedience which we owe to Jesus
Christ, and against the peace of Christendom, and the reunion of that rupture
and separation of people, which has caused so many troubles, and spilt so much
blood, and which goareth the side of the To. Church as well as ours, exposing
it to the violence of Turks and Infidels.

Every spirit that is not preoccupated will easily acknowledge, that this is
the language of truth: wherewith, lest your consciences should be touched,
they use a device, namely, to represent unto you our religion altogether other
then it is, and paint it out unto you like a hideous monster, and to make us
speak things wholly against our belief. And thereupon, many amongst you are of
so easy belief, as to choose rather to learn what our religion is by our
enemies invectives, than by our own confession; yea, after we have protested,
not to believe any thing of all they father upon us, yet would they make us
persuade our selves, that we believe that which we believe not: wherein they
justify us before they be aware. For, thereby they privily confess, that our
religion truly proposed cannot be encountered; and that if it were represented
in as true colors, at the very first it would make a strong impression in the
mind of the Auditor through the evidence of the truth thereof. They tell you,
1. that our religion teaches, that good works are not necessary; 2. that the
Elect may without danger license themselves to do evil; 3. that God gives no
recompense to good works; 4. that God constrains our wills, and forces them
unto good; 5. that we accuse God of injustice, as having given us a law which
we cannot accomplish; 6. that we are enemies to the Saints and the Virgin
Mary; 7. that for the understanding of the Scriptures, every one of us vanteth
to have a particular inspiration; 8. and that we deny the Almightinesse of God
in the Eucharist.

Is not this all false, and contrary to our belief? 1. Our religion teaches,
that good works are necessary unto salvation: for, men go not to Heaven by the
way of hell, nor unto the Kingdom of God by serving the devil. 2. Our
religion teaches, that the predestined unto salvation are also predestinate
to live holily. To say, I may abandon my self unto evil seeing I am elected,
it is the language of a reprobate, who will be bad because God is good, and who
makes of the grace of God, which is a spur unto virtue, a pillow to sleep
upon in all vice. 3. Our religion believes, that God rewards good works, but
with a salary freely given. 4. We believe that God constrains not our wills,
but bends them, and causes them to give themselves willingly unto good. 5.
We esteem it not a thing unjust that God should demand at man's hands that which
he cannot, when man does owe it, and when his unablenesse comes of his own
default. fault. 6. We honor the Saints as they honored the Saints that were
before them. 7. For the understanding of the Scriptures, we content our selves
with that which we find clear in them, and leave particular inspirations to
frantic persons. 8. We deny not the omnipotency of God in the Eucharist, but
rule our selves according to his will: we use the Sacrament of the Communion,
not to make Jesus Christ, but to honor him; not to make his body descend unto
us, but to elevate our hearts to him. We undertake not to take GOD in this
life, but content our selves that he take us at our deaths. We fear not,
that God can fall to the ground, or be stolen away, or gnawn by mice, or eaten
by his enemies. We believe not that the Son of God and the devil could enter
both together into Judas; nor that Jesus Christ did eat himself, seeing it was
nothing necessary for our salvation.

Our religion is a religion which acknowledges no other head of the Church but
Jesus Christ, nor other rule of faith then his Word, nor other propitiatory
sacrifice then his Death, nor other purgatory then his Blood, nor other merit
than his Obedience.

It is a religion, which would have the people to read the word of God, because
we fear not to find our condemnation therein; and which speaks in a known
tongue, for that it is not ashamed of her belief.

It is a religion, which holds fasting to be in abstinence, and not in
distinction of meats: we fast for exercise of humility, and not in opinion of
merit or satisfaction: we borrow not other men's satisfactions; but we believe
with the Apostle, That every one shall bear his own burden.

It is a religion, which distrusting her own works believes in Gods promises,
which preaches the assurance, and not the doubt of her salvation, recommendeth
an humble assurance, and not an arrogant perplexity, by which they that set
forth their merits, make a profession to doubt of their salvation.

It is a religion, wherein men confess they have often don that which God has
forbidden, far from having done more than he has commanded; so far from
doing overmuch, as that they fail even of that which is necessary: they
pretend not to make God a debtor by their works of supererogation, but confess
themselves debtors through their disobedience.

It is a religion, which, in stead of forming of stones to the likeness of
man, endeavors to reform man unto the image of God; which, in stead of
adoring a wooden cross, adoreth the crucified, trusts in his passion, and
glories in his reproach.

It is a religion, which believes not that God takes pleasure to torment the
souls of his children in burning fire, and to punish them for faults already
ready pardoned, and for which Jesus Christ has fully satisfied by punishment;
which serves not to amend the sinner, but to content the Justice of God.

It is a religion, which makes not her prayers by count, nor places the power
of it in the number of the repetition of one and the self same prayer; but in
the faith and disposition of the heart.

It is a religion, which holds that faith consists not in ignorance, but in
knowledge: which equally distributeth holy things to rich and poor; not like as
in the Roman Church, whose dispensations and letters of absolution are sold,
and particular Masses never said for him that has nothing to give.

Briefly, it is a religion which has less splendor without, but more
solidness within; which will endure narrow sifting; which ordains few
ceremonies, but gives much instruction.

You will here say, But these things are new. How new, seeing Jesus Christ and
his Apostles have thus taught? Indeed these are new to persons brought up in an
inveterate error; and you know, that healing is always newer than sickness:
but we must always go up to the springhead of truth; in comparison of which,
all old error is new. Never did any man oppose himself to any rooted error
settled by long custom, who has not been accused of novelty. And this
reproach of novelty is very unseemly in their mouths who hide from the people
the true Antiquity, which is the holy Scriptures; and who to this day
maintain, that the Church can make new ordinances touching faith; and, by the
Church, understand no other but the Roman, who in the very first time after the
Apostles cannot show one man of their religion; and who know that in all
Antiquity there is no mention made of excluding the people from the cup, nor of
forbidding from the reading of the Scriptures, nor of reading the Scriptures
unto them in an unknown tongue which they understand not, nor of picturing the
Trinity, nor of adoring Images, nor the Host, with the adoration of Latria,
nor of private Masses, nor of the Bishop of Romes Court, nor of his Indulgences
and Church-Treasure, nor of his power to depose Kings, and draw souls out of
Purgatory, nor of many other new corruptions which they plaster over with the
fraudulent title of Apostlique traditions, as if they came from the Apostles.

The themselves, who thus vaunt of Antiquity, are those which use the ancient
Doctors most coursely, censuring and condemning them upon slight occasion: who
will that the Fathers should be interpreters of the Scriptures, in case they
themselves alone may be the fathers interpreters, and the Judges of Antiquity;
and who not only condemn every Father personally, but also whole Councels where
the Fathers speak in common.

Three universal Councils did condemn Honorius, Bishop of Rome, for Cotton in
the preface of his Catholic institution speaks thus of these two universal
Councels.
an heretic: but, at this day they maintain, that those Councels mistook
themselves. Greece began in the year 388. to rebel against the holy Sea, and
to thwart the Bishop of Rome, giving him the Bishop of Constantinople for a
Second.
At the first Council of Constantinople, in the year 381. there were a
hundred and fifty Orthodox Bishops, and 630. in the Council of Chalcedon, the
year 450. Neither this great number, nor their great Antiquity, hinders our
adversaries from condemning all those Fathers, for equalling the Bishop of
Constantinople to him of Rome in ecclesiastical matters.

And it is marvelous how these men dare speak of Councels, Afterward in the
year 450. they said they had the same privileges.
seeing they know, the day and night are not more contrary than the ancient
Councels and the new, in which the Pope rules and ordains all: but the other
bishops give their opinion only, with bowing of the head in sign of
approbation. At the beginning of which, they lay down the holy Scripture at the
Popes feet; in witness, that the Word of God is subject unto him: where the Pope
is seated on a high Throne, having the Emperor sitting at his feet. In brief,
we may see by the practice of these later Councels, and above all by the
Council of Florence, and the last of Lateran, and by the book of sacred
ceremonies, that a Council now within these few Ages is no other than a papal
consistory, though with more soleminity: whereas in the ancient Councels, the
bishop of Rome durst not be present, and his deputies ordinarily had no
precedencie there nor authority; far from ordaining, that no book shall be
canonical without the Popes authority, and that all Kings should kiss his
feet; and to declare, that there is no other name under Heaven but that of the
great Bishop: Annal. Baron.
which are the decrees of the Roman Council under Gregory the seventh, Anno.
1078
the year 1076. Briefly, it is certain, that they which buzze in your ears
the Fathers and Councels, do it not because the Ancients are favorable unto
them; but because they know that the people can know nothing of them, and
that they must needs in those things refer themselves unto them. But, as for
the Scripture, which you ought to know, and which rules all the Fathers, it
is that which is forbidden you. In sum, years are no rules, and lying is
ever since the beginning of the world. The Church is not in a Country, of
custom; but, where the written truth is. There is no prescription against
divine truth: yea, even in the time of the Apostles the mystery of iniquity was
a-brewing; how far ought it now then to be advanced? And indeed as well the
people as the pastors of the To. Church have these many Ages cried out, that
their Church had need of reformation. In the Council of Pysa, held in the
year 1411, Pope Alexnder the fifth, in the twentieth Session, promised solemnly
to intend the reformation of the Church, and to assemble for that purpose the
most learned of all Nations. A while after, was held a Council at Senes, the
year 1423. where the proposition of the reformation of the Church was revived,
and then put off to another time: for, they saw they could not stir this stone
without shaking the papal seat.

That which the great ones would not do, God has performed by the hands of
little ones; using unhoped for means to expose unto the view of the world the
doctrine of salvation maugre all the machinations of Satan.

Unto those that have endeavored, and do yet endeavor to perfect this work,
you are thus much beholding, as that the holy Scripture, which the people saw
not heertofore, is now translated into the vulgar tongue, and that the Spirit
of God speaks it; so, as none can be ignorant of the Word of God, but he that
hood-winks himself lest he should see the light. You are also thus much more
beholding unto them, that the Pope does less tyrannize over you than he did
some four or five hundredth years since, and that your servitude is by a
quarter less burdensome. Such Bulls are found in Math. Paris, and in the 3.
Tome of Councels, at the end of the Council of Lateran under Innocent the
third.
For, in those days the Pope gave to the French, which armed themselves for
him and at his commandment, besides the remission of all their sins, a degree
of glory in Paradise above others: whereas now if he should send them to go
into a far Country upon a Croysada, to fight against Heretics, or to
take-in some Towns of their neighbors to the Popes use, as was done not very
long since, you your selves would mock at his commandment. In former times,
when any King angered him, his custom was to interdite his Kingdom; and so put
(as far as in him lay) many millions of persons out of the communion of the
Church, cause all divine service to cease in a large Country, cause the Bells
to be still, hinder Burialls, and to expose the Country in preie to him could
first conquer it. England was six years and a half in this estate, in the time
of King John: but, now-a-daies he draws no more that weapon; lest, bestirring
himself too hard, he overturne his own chair, which the doctrine of the
gospel has already much shaken.

You owe them moreover this obligation, that you see not (as in the time of
Boniface the ninth, and Leo the tenth) Pardoners to run from house to house
through France, who for half a crown sold every one remission of all their
sins, and deliverance of a soul out of Purgatory.

The time has bin, that in France there was no speech but of miracles, and of
Saint Anthonies fire, and of the apparition of damned souls, or others
returning from Purgatory: of which illusions the greater part is vanished at
the Sunne-rise of the holy Scriptures, which the night of ignorance had hidden.
And if now they do any petty miracles, it is in secret, and never in our
sight: for, before a man that fears God, and knows him, Satan is as it were
afflicted, and loses his fense-play; yea, even your own Magistrates have
punished these deceivers.

There be but a few amongst you that do wholly believe your own religion,
but do find some fault in the Romish Church: for indeed, it would be a hard
matter to endure the decrees and glosses which say, that Tit. 8 de Praebend.
cap. Proposuit. According to the fullness of our power we may lawfully dispense
above law. Where the Gloss also; The Pope does dispense against the Apostle;
as also against the old Testament, as also in another. Glossa. did. 34. can.
lector. The Pope can dispense against the Apostle. Et causa 23. qu. 1. can.
Sunt quidam, The Gloss has it thus: He (the Pope) dispenses in the Gospel,
by interpreting it.
the pope is above law and right, and that he can dispense against the Apostle,
and against the gospel; and which calls Glossa extrav. Cu^ inter. Our Lord god
the Pope.
the Pope, god; and Council. Lat. ultimum sess. 9. The countenance of thy divine
Majesty. Bellarm. in Barkl. c. 31. Christ gave to Peter, in a good sense, power
to make of sin no sin; and of no sin, sin.
the divine majesty: or those fabulous Legends, which compare and equal in
many things, S. Dominick and S. Francis with Jesus Christ; or the opinion of
those which muffle themselves with the habit of S. Francis when they are on
their death-beddes, ready to give up the ghost, because (say their Doctors)
that this garment is as good as asecond baptism: nor the gadding of poor
people 200. leagues off, after pardons, seeing the remission of sins is offered
to us at home by the preaching of the gospel: nor those that teach, that the
Pope can make that which is sin to be no sin, and that which is no sin to be
sin. And certain it is, that though we should hold our peace, yet the truth
does speak in the consciences of many which are held in this captivity for
fear of men, and for their domestic affairs: for, the devil tickles men by
the panch, and rocks them a sleep with pleasures and honors; from whence it
coms to pass, that the sparks of the known truth are smothered in them; or,
if they be not quenched in them, they burn and torture the conscience, and make
them more culpable, not only for having buried their talent of the knowledge
of God, but even for having dissipated it; for having bin ashamed to confess
the Son of God before men, and not defending his cause in time of need; for
being more afraid of men's displeasure, than to offend God, whose promises are
certain, his threatenings horrible, and judgments eternal and inevitable: who
having now in our days done so many mavelous things, to build up again the
ruins of his Church, will not surely leave unpunished those which endeavor to
trouble his work, and who go purposely astray at highnoon.

All this discourse (my Masters) proceeds from naught else but a servent
desire that we have of your salvation, and that God might be served: for, we
have herein no other interest but your happiness; seeing that for defending
this cause we are like to purchase nothing but trouble, hatred and
discommodity. We rather desire a great deal more to live in peace and amity
with our fellow-citizens under one self-same religion, if we might do it
without offense to God. Nor cease we to beseech the Father of mercy, whose
compassions surmount our iniquties, that he would pardon those which hate us,
that he would touch their hearts with repentance, and inlighten their
understandings with his light, to know the day of their visitation, and the
way of eternal salvation; lest in the end he turn away his favor from a
people which turn their backs upon him; and pour out a darkness more thick than
the former upon a nation enraged against the light of the gospel.

If these considerations shall move any one, it will be a great joy unto me,
and an ample reward for my labor: if it shall happen otherwise, we shall have
at least delivered our own souls, freed our consciences, and born witness in
this hart-harned Age, until the Son of God com from Heaven to hear our griefs,
and deliver his children, and reward every one according to his work. To him
be glory world without end. Amen.

FINIS.
THE Great Iubile and Pardon of full remission for all true Christians.
THe true pardon and remission of all sins is made (...) the abundant mercy
of God, who pardons us all our sins by one alone Jesus Christ in the
shedding of his blood. Luke 1
Mar. 14
Ma. 1. 2. 6


For he is the propitiation of all the sins of the world, and has
manifested himself by taking our flesh upon him, also dying and bearing our
sins in his body to abolish them, Ephe. 1
(to the end he might purge us from the sins unto the which we were bound)
believing in him who is the Lamb without spot once offered for all. In such
sort as no oblation of sacrifice is now any more needful hereafter to
absolve us from our sins. Parali. 3
The which Lamb has been made to us of God, John 1
wisdom, Justice, sanctification and redemption, by which he has abolished
and wholly brought to naught our folly, Apoca. 1. 4
injustice, To. 4. 1.
abomination and obligation with which God the father has given us all things.
Unto which pardon he himself does inuit us as well by his Prophets as by his
Evangelists, saying; All ye that be athirst com unto the great spring, Tim. 1
and who have no money make haste to com, John. 18 ^
buy ye, drin ye, and eat ye.

Item, If any be adrie, Let him come to me and drink.

Item, Mat. 11. 28
Com unto me all ye that are weary and heauis laden, and I will refresh you.
John 16. 23
And for our assurance says thus unto us: If your demand any thing of my
father in my name he will give it you. And of whom the Apostle says, Heb. 7
Wherefore also he can fully save them which come near unto him, always
living to make intercession for them. Acts 4.
Saint Peter says there is no other name given under heaven unto men, by which
we must be saved, Gala. 1
nor is there salvation in any other: 2 Cor. 8
whereof the Bull follows.

These are the great Pardons and indulgences of full remission of sin and
punishment, given unto all the Church and House of God, that is, to all
faithful Christians, under heaven.
BY the authority and virtue of the Commandments of our holy Father God the
Creator our sovereign Lord, Psa. 109
and by Jesus Christ our soueragine Pastor and everlasting Bishop, Mar. 16
you are commanded and expressly enionin'd by your holy obedience, that you
read, Luc. 9. 10
understand, and give notice unto every one, of the great privileges,
remissions, and pardons of sin and punishment giune for ever by God the father,
Psalm. 18
to al faithful and true servants of Jesus Christ who with all their hearts will
render them selves unto him, Act. 3. 4. 5. 6
faithfully believing and hoping for everlasting life by his most precious
blood: Luc. 11. and 28
who has sent his Apostles through all the world to preach and declare his
holy gospel and good tidings containing the remission of our sins,
confirming their words by miracles which the Lord wrought by them, Psalm. 37
by the which we have full Iubile and general pardon of punishment and sin;
Ier. 23
as his most holy Father had ordained even before the creation of the world
and promised by his Prophets; Gal. 3
That at all and every time and times, in all places and as often as we
miserable sinners shall acknowledge our poverty and sinfulnes, believing in
him without doubting, Ioh. 5. 8
and craving pardon of him, we shall have what we desire: and all to show his
marvelous bounty and mercy which he intends toward us for his son Jesus
Christ his sake, Romans 5. 9. 7. 8 and 12
how great sinners soever we be; who being moved with pity considering the
bottomless gulf of all evil in the which we were held by the devil, Pet. ^
and subjects and slaves unto him by our own wills, did send his son Jesus
Christ at that time which he had appointed when all wickedness reigned, Romans 6
and that all the world through sin were his mortal enemies; Ephesians. 3
and that to make us know what great charity he bore to us his enemies that
we might be justified and made clean by his blood, Collos. 1
and to preserve us from his great fury. Acts. 2.
By the which Jesus Christ our true Pastor and Bishop, the father of mercy has
opened the inestimable Treasure of grace 1 Cor. 5
and mercy 1 Pet. 1
which is the Treasure of all faithful Christians under Heaven, to the end
that all those which trust and firmly believe that this blood was spilt for
the remission of their sins, might be saved and delivered from the snares of
the devil. Gal. 1
And so hereafter in steed of sinning we might do good works like unto our
Redemers, in loving our neighbors yea even our enemies, even as Jesus Christ
has loved us, Iam. 2
which were his enemies, Deuteronomy. 1
and therefore gave himself unto death for us; Leuit. 9
and that we should be helpful unto all in all we can, Mat. 22
with as free and good a will as he has done good unto us, not having respect
unto the reward, but only unto Jesus Christ. And to the end ye should not
think that these Pardons and Indulgences be false and counterfeit, we will
hereafter following recite the witnesses which were present when they were
granted, being all credible persons, and who were all expressly commanded to
bear witness thereof unto all in general.

The Witnesses of the Premises.
FIrst, as concerning the old Testament: Moses witnesses in his book of
Genesis, and other following, in diverse places, That by Jesus Christ (of the
seed of Abraham, Isack, Jacob, Judah, and David) all people shall receive
blessing and salvation.

Item, Esaias. 19. 2 33. 35. 43. 18. and 53
Esaie, Jeremy, Joel, Michay, Malacky, do witness, That the salvation of
Israel and of the elect people of God is in Jesus Christ. Joel. 2
Secondly, Mich. ^
that in the new Testament, Mala. 2
Saint Matthew witnesses that our great Bishop Jesus Christ says, I am not
come to be served, but to serve, and to give my life for the redemption of
many. Item, Mat. 9. 20. and 26
Behold my blood which shall be for the remission of sins. Item, he said
unto one sick of the Palsy that he should believe in him, Mar. 9. and 16
and his sins were forgiven him. The like unto the sick woman, unto the
Leper, unto the Blind and others. Saint Mark witnesses also, that Jesus said
unto the father of the Possessed, If thou can believe, all things are
possible unto him that believes. Item, in another place, Whosoever will
believe and be baptized shall be saved. And in many other places, Saint Luke
witnesses, saying: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel: for he has visited
and redeemed his people. Luc. 12. 24
Item Behold I bring you tidings of great joy unto all people, to wit, that
this day is borne the Savior which is Christ. Ioh. 13. 5
Item, it is written, So it behooved that Christ should suffer death and rise
again, and so enter into his glory, and that men should preach every where
in his name repentance and forgiuness of sins. Saint John witnesses that
Saint John Baptist did publicly approve Jesus Christ, saying: Behold the
Lamb of God which takes away the finnes of the world. Item whosoever belueeth
in Jesus Christ the son of God, he has everlasting life. Item, Verclie I say
unto you, whosoever hears my word and believes in him that sent me, he
has everlasting life, and comes not in to judgment, 1. Ioh. 2
but passes for^ death unto life. Apoc. 1
Item, We have an advocate unto God the father even Jesus Christ: and he is
the propitation for our sins, who has loved and washed us from our sins in
his blood. And in many places of the gospel, and in the Epistles of Saint Paul
he witnesses in many texts: and namely to the Hebrews, Heb. 1.
where he says, Jesus purges away sin; Actas ^.
Saint Peter also saying: It is Jesus Christ by whom we have remission of our
sins.

Conclusion of these Pardons.
Our holy father God the creator, who ever has been and shall be: has
confirmed all the graces, Judith 1
pardons and privileges of those reverend Legates above mentioned: and
excommunicateth all hinderers, murmurers and gainsayers of those said pardons
and indulgences. Deuteronomy. 18.
He which shall not hear my great Prophet, Gal. 1
shall be raced out of the book of life. And Saint Paul: If we or an Angel
from Heaven preach any other thing then that which we have declared and
preached, let him be accursed. And therefore we reco^mend unto you this noble
and most certain pardon: Iam. 2.
for it is that true pardon which may be got without gold or silver by a
lively faith which kindles a charity in all those which attain unto it, and
stirs them up to give alms unto all in want, and render to each one that
which appertains unto them: Phil. 4
unto this also tends the law and the Prophets.

Given in the supreme and sovereign Court of Paradise, ever since the first
beginning of the world.

FINIS.

