HERACLITVS: OR, MEDITATIONS upon the Misery of Mankind, and the vanity of
Humane life: With The inconstancy of worldly Things; as also the wickedness
of this deceitful age described.

Faithfully translated out of the last Edition written in French by that
learned Divine, Monsieur Du Moulin, By ABRAHAM DARCIE.

LONDON Printed by G. P. for Thomas Pauier: and are to be sold at his shop in
Iuie Lane. M.DC.XXIV.

TO THE ILLUSTRIOUS JOHN, Earl of Bridgewater, etc. And to the Princely Lady
FRANCES This Princely Dame, is a blessed branch of these famous Trees of Honor,
the most ancient House of Derby, and the Noble family of the Spencers.
his Noble Countess; As also to the Honorable Ladies, the Lady Honorable
branches of Honor sprung from the Noble House of Bridgewater.
FRANCES HOBART, and the Lady ARABELLA St JOHN their worthy Daughters:
And to the Honor of the Right Honorable, The Lord St JOHN, Baron of Bletso,
and the Illustrious Lady ELIZABETH Noble Twigs of virtue, issued from the
Illustrious family of the Paulets, and Marquises of Winchester.
His Noble and Virtuous Wife, with their Honorable Son, Mr* St JOHN. The Lord
HOBART L. Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and to the Religious Lady his
worthy Wife, to their Generous and virtuous Son, Sir JOHN HOBART.
True Patterns of Virtue and Piety, Noble Patrons and Patronesses of Honor
and Learning, ABRAHAM DARCIE wishes to these Noble Families, all internal,
external, and eternal Happiness and prosperity in Christ Jesus.

Right Honorable, Most Worthy:
THat great and wise Monarch, King SOLOMON, said long since, that there is no
end of making Books, Eccles. 12. 12.
and much study is a weariness of the flesh.

Which Paradoxe was never more verefied, then in these degenerate days of
Vanity, when ignorant as well as wise men will be still writing of themselves,
whereby the Press is even oppressed with multiplicitie of such idle Treatises,
more light then vanity it self. But for such Books as do either afford
direction to the Church, or a way to reform and better our Life, those are
most worthy to be read, and carefully observed.

This excellent Work, (first penned in French by one of the most learned
Divines in France) clearly showing us the Vanity, Misery, and Inconstancy of
this World, does warn and admonish us to take heed how we trust to it, and
that we must not build our happiness upon so deceitful grounds as Riches and
Earthly possessions, but to direct our Hearts, level and lift our minds and
thoughts to HEAVEN, to that Eternal and blessed Habitation of CHRIST JESUS.

Considering these things, what greater abomination can there be, then to see
the people of this miserable age delight to undo one another, Pyrrus King of
Epirots, that valiant and victorious warrior, is killed by a silly woman with
a tile stone.
envy, despise, curse, war, and finally kill one another? For a thing so
vain as this World, deceitful, miserable, inconstant, and damnable, He who had
filled the earth with the Trophies of his deeds, and triumphs of his
victories, Alexander of Macedonia, that most famous Monarch, died impoysoned by
his own servants.
which sometimes honors us, and presently contemnes us, calls us to high
Callings, and suddenly debases and degrades us; lifts us to high prosperity,
and immediately flings us headlong into low adversity. Therefore PHILIP King of
Macedonia, The chief of the Greeks, having escaped so many perils in the
Troyans wars, is cruelly murdered before his Castle.
acknowledging the worlds great inconstancy, having received many good news
in one day, prays the immortal Gods to stop the course of so greatioyes,
Great Pompey having shunned the bloody hand of his enemies, is killed by his
dear and obliged friend.
fearing lest some sinister actions, and mournful events should ensue them.

Right Honorable, this Book having past many Impressions in FRANCE, That
victorious French Monarch, Henry of Bourbon, the 4. of that name, whose
invincible valor made Spain quake, and Rome tremble, is in time of peace
lamentably murdered in his Coach, in the midst of his Royal city of Paris.
is now arrived, newly revived and augmented here in England; and though it be
little in show, yet it contains many good things, yea, matters of weight and
consequence, worthy to be read, known, and observed: As also very fit and
needful for a Christian to meditate. These examples do evidently show the
worlds mutability and inconstancy.
The exquisite worth thereof has moved me to translate it; but the fame of
your rare virtues has the more imboldened me to publish it under the banner
of your Noble protections. Accept it (most Honorable) as courteously, as
officiously it is Dedicated and Consecrated to the perpetual Honor, and
Honorable use of your Illustrious Houses and Noble Families, by

Your Honors and Worthiness humble and devoted obseruant, ABRAHAM DARCIE.

A Table of the Contents of this Book.
CHAP. 1. THe vanity and misery of the Nature of man. fol. 6 CHAP. 2. The
vanity and inconstancy of man in his action. 10 CHAP. 3. Of man's Ripe Age. 16
CHAP. 4. The life of Courtiers. 27 CHAP. 5. The life of Magistrates, and wicked
Judges. 31 CHAP. 6. Of man's estate being in Wedlock. 36 CHAP. 7. The vanity
and inconstancy of Women. 42 CHAP. 8. Of Covetousness, Envy, and Ambition.
45 CHAP. 9. Of Petty-fogging strifes, and law-contention. 53 CHAP. 10. Of
Philosophy, and the knowledge of diverse tongues. 55 CHAP. 11. Of Pilgrims, and
Civil virtues. 59 CHAP. 12. Of old and decrepit Age. 77 CHAP. 13. Of Death. 69
CHAP. 14. Of the terrible Judgment seat of God. 74 CHAP. 15. Of Heaven. 79
CHAP. 16. Of Hell. 81 CHAP. 17. The misery and vanity of our Life, and the
wickedness that now reigns.
HERACLITVS TEARS: OR, THE MISERY OF HVMANE LIFE. WITH The vanity and
inconstancy of worldly things.
IF we do but seriously consider this besotted World, how like a turbulent
torrent it is overflowed with all sorts of impertinent and importunate
affairs, which cut our time into a thousand pieces, we shall find, that each
of them takes from us one part of our life, leaving us no time but that which
we gain by theft; subtracting some hours for to examine our selves in
secret, and to entertain our mind with religious thoughts. These solitary
meditations have sufficient in them to employ our wits. For the first Subject
which does present it self to our perusal, is a consideration of the vanity
and misery of humane life, not for to molest us any way, while we are in it,
but to prepare our selves to depart well out of it. No man can aspire as he
ought to the future life, which does not contemn this present, neither can any
man contemn this present, which does not well know it: and the way truly to
know it, is to remove it far from us, to withdraw it from our heart, and to
banish it from our affection; For worldly goods being near at hand, do both
dazell the Mind, and distract the Judgment.

But let us first enquire, before we proceed, of some one that has passed
this way. King Solomon in the beginning of Ecclesiastes, entering into that
meditation does write, that vanity is most vain, all is vanity. That great and
mighty King, who had riches without example; peace, without trouble; glory,
without envy: who was obeyed of his Subjects, respected of his Neighbors, and
reigned forty years, which was a sufficient time to content his mind, in
sumptuous buildings, in multitude of Horses, in all variety of studies and
Sciences, who had trauersed his spirits through all the secrets of Nature, even
from the Cedar unto the Hysop. Nevertheless, in the conclusion of all,
considering how these sweets are confected with bitterness, how there is
little constancy in these things, how there is small content in all this
travel, he makes this the cloze of all his actions, That all is vanity and
affliction of spirit But before that Solomon had proved these things, Eccl. 1.
14.
he learned that lesson of David his father, which is written in the 39.
Psalm, Truly every man is nothing but vanity, he walks in a vain shadow,
and disquieteth himself in vain: he heapeth up riches, and knows not who
shall gather them. Let us therefore, according to the rules of such excellent
men, enter into that meditation, and taking that Instrument out of their hands,
make an Anatomy of our selves. There is no discourse more serious, then that
which treats of vanity: Nor contemplation more high, then to reason of our
own infirmities: seeing by that means man mainteining himself, is elevated
above himself.

This vanity linked with misery, is to be considered:

First, in the Nature of man.

Secondly, in his actions.

And thirdly, in his thoughts and desires.

CHAP. I.
The vanity and misery of the Nature of Man.
MAN being the image of God, and the chief work of Nature, is miserable even
in his original: For the most noble of them, yea, if he be the son of an
Emperor, does receive his form between the two excrements of nature, and
there he is nourished for a time with the most impure blood of all: he is
there subject to be bruised by the least fall of his Mother. His birth is
shameful, insomuch that women blush to be publicly seen in childbed.

The beasts and birds are brought into the world, either covered with hair,
feathers, or wool; not so much as the seeds and corn of the ground, but
nature has clothed them with ears and husks, man only excepted: for he
being once come from his mothers womb, seems no other thing then the
similitude of a poor worm, that comes creeping out of the earth, his
clothing is blood only, wherein he is bathed and covered, which signifies no
other thing but the image and figure of sin.

The beginning of his life is with sorrow: for at coming into the world,
weepings and wailings do accompany him, which are as messengers and
fore-shewers of his calamities to come; the which because he cannot express
in words, he witnesses by tears.

He is borne immovable, and tumbleth into his own filth. Other living
creatures are no sooner out of the womb, but they fall on their feet and are
ready to go; nor out of the shell, but they run for meat. The worm (be he
never so little) as soon as nature has brought him out of the earth,
begins to crawle and creep, and to seek for food: The little Chicken, as
soon as he is out of the shell, is found clean, and runs after the Hen,
knowing when he is called: he picketh and eats* he fears the Kite, and
flies danger, being guided only by nature. But behold, Man, so soon as he
is come into the world, is like unto a little Monster, and a lump of flesh,
which will let himself be eaten of other beasts, if he be not seen into; and
dye for hunger, before he can find his mothers breast, and will as soon eat
poison as good meat, and handle hot iron, before he can discern the good from
the evil.

Thus Man being brought into this miserable world, and plunged in the gulf of
miseries, he then requires to have nourishment, and clothing, to comfort the
infirmity of his nature; but behold, he is subject unto such necessity, that
he is glad to gain it with the sweat of his brows: Whereas other living
creatures do find all things ready prepared for them, Man only has need of
habiliments; for he that is the most noble in the world, is ashamed to show his
nakedness, and therefore hides himself under the spoils of other creatures.
He is subject to more maladies then all the beasts together; to which the
obscurest fogges or evening dew do no hurt. They never bleed at the nose,
although they go always declining toward the earth. They are ignorant what
the Catarre, Calcull, and diverse sorts of Agues mean.

Man only is capable to discern these differences, and to feel their
effects; for if there be any beasts which are more afflicted with diseases,
they are such as live limited within the precinct of some house, and so receive
it by contagion. But some will object that Man has reason above the beasts:
which is indeed the reason of his torment, in winning him to practice dangerous
and pernicious designs; to be subtle in contentions, to join himself into
other men's affairs, and being once satisfied, to stir up an artificial
appetite, and a desire to drink without thirst. I am ignorant what the reason
is, but we are much more sensible of ill then good; and that griefs do more
disturb us, then pleasures can content us. Scarce can we think of an absolute
health, but some torment or other does presently possess us, as the Toothache,
or pain in the fingers end. One drop of gall, will distaste a whole vessel of
sweets. How much then of happy fortunes is required to digest one affliction?

CHAP. II.
The vanity and inconstancy of Man in his actions.
MAn being borne so poor and base into this world, how many years steal from
him, Of Infancy.
before he receive ability to conduct himself? How long and laborious is his
instruction? What time is consumed while he trembles under Masters, for to
gain unprofitable words, and some little superficial knowledge? Also who does
not discern in this part of his age, an untoward peruersitie, a contradicting
humor, and in one infant spirit, all the vices of Man, as buds and grains of
some future infelicitie? The only mean to appease children, is to correct
some one before them: If any do but touch one of their toys, they ouerturne
all the rest for despite, The love and respect which they give to their
puppets, are eminent seeds of Idolatry. Such are the infants that are begotten
of the best of men: A grain of corn winnowed from the chafe, produces corn
with chafe; a man circumcised, begets an infant uncircumcised.

Therefore you may see by the peruersitie of your children, the image of your
corruption.

We have already discoursed what perils and dangers man has at his first
coming into the world, and in his infancy. Now therefore let us consider
what he is when he is sprung up, Of Youth.
and whether that there be an end of his miseries or no. Of which, if we be
equal Judges, we shall find, that he does rather increase then decrease in
miseries: for this is the time of man's life, wherein Nature does raise against
him a more furious combat; for now his blood begins to rise, the flesh
provoke him to his own pleasure, the wicked world espieth him, the Devil
tempts him, and his selfe-will'd youthfulnes leads him into all dangers,
and induces him to reject all instructions, insomuch as it is impossible but
that which is assailed with so many vices, and succored of none, in the end is
discomforted and overcome. For in the body of youth, riot, liberty, and
deliciousness abounds: for all the vices in the world (says Marcus
Aurelius) do there plant their siege. O how many persons in this age are
corrupted with too much pleasure, lulling themselves asleep, in the lap of
such as seek to strangle them! O traitrous Dalilah, which seek by thy
enticing flatteries, to deliver us to an enemy, far worse then the
Philistims, which is the Devil himself! Such pleasures are like unto gilded
pills, which under their external beauty include bitterness. They are also
like unto fresh Rivers, that end their course in the Sea, losing their sweet
relish in an ocean of saltnes. True zeal cannot flourish under so nice and
delicate a government; nor can the perfect knowledge of God (which is a
celestial gift) be subjected to the belly, it cannot remain amongst swine;
that habitation is only agreeable to the devil, who, by the permission of
Jesus Christ, having entered into a Herd of swine, compelled them to run
headlong to their own ruin: and who (as it is recorded in the holy Writ)
nourishes prodigal children with the husks of pleasures, in stead of their
parents bread.

It behooves the Husbandman, when the trees are young, Youth compared to young
trees.
to uphold them, and to lop the o're-weighty branches, if afterward he intends
to gather any fruit. Likewise, it is necessary for Parents, to reform and
correct the vices that reign in Youth, lest afterward it return to their
shame and reproach. But there are at this day many fathers and mothers, who for
not having well instructed their children in their youth, do receive much
sorrow and grief in their age: a just reward for such Parents, who (although
they be said to be nourishers of the bodies) are the destroyers of the souls
of their children.

If Ely was grievously punished with his children, for that he did not so
sharply chastise them, as their offenses did require, what shall become of
those fathers and mothers, which in stead of correcters, are the childrens
corrupters? Such Parents may well be compared to Apes, which kill their young
ones by too much clasping them between their arms, and keeping them so dear;
and this is the cause that so many fall into the hands of the Hangman, which is
to them reformer and correcter.

Many there be, that in stead of giving good exhortations to their Family, do
show them first themselves naughty and wicked examples. For the first
commandment that they give them how to live well, is to blaspheme, swear,
exercise gluttony and drunkenness, to spoil the substance of their youth; to
be fornicators, and to kiss women and maidens in their presence.

There be also many mothers here that learn their Daughters to Dance, to use
Rhetoric terms, to haunt companies, to scoff and flout, to paint and color
their faces, to deck their fingers with Rings, and their necks with Jewels, as
though they were Iewel-sellers, pretending to keep a shop: but in the end it
will happen to them, as it did to the Prophet David, 2. King. 13. and 15. whose
sin was punished in his children, which were most of them so wicked, that the
one of them defloured his own Sister, and the other killed his Brother, and
afterward sought the death of his own Father, and chased him out of his
Kingdom.

The ancient Philosophers maintained this argument, that all sins committed
in this world, were punished in the World to come, except the sin that Man
committed in the bringing up of his children, and for that he suffers
punishment in this world: for the father can give nothing to his child, but
frail and mortal flesh, by the corruption whereof, the life takes end; but
by good learning and knowledge, eternal praise and memory is gotten. Therefore
to conclude, if children have been in great misery, being nourished with
spotted milk, yet the misery doubleth in those that should cause them to be
instructed: for the food of the body is more vile then the food of the soul.

CHAP. III.
Of Man's ripe Age.
Having finished this our second discourse, Man is grown to his full
perfection both of strength and discretion, and his heat being allayed by age,
behold other vanities which attend on him, although not altogether so violently
scorching, yet more opinionated and troublesome, for he enters into deeper
cogitations and travel in the spirit. It is requisite therefore that he
frequent public places, that he haunt the company of those that are
touchstones, for to know the good from evil. If he be come of a great and
Noble stock, he must make many enterprises of War, put himself in perils,
hazard his life, and shead his blood, to die in the way of Honor, or else he
shall be reputed a dastardly Coward, and utterly despised of all men. If he
be of base estate, and that he be called to the knowledge of Arts, Sciences,
and needful trades; yet for all that, he runs into a thousand dangers,
travails, pains and troubles, as well of the body as of the soul, he
toileth day and night, and sweateth water and blood, to get a maintenance
during his life, and oftentimes it is seen, that what pains soever man takes
for his living, yet it is scant sufficient to serve his necessity. Let him be
of any Vocation or Calling whatsoever, there come unto him irremoueable cares,
domesticke troubles, or the knowledge of husbandry, or contentions in Law, or
the labor of painful Mechanic Arts; all to the end that he may get somewhat
for his children, who sucking from him (it may be) all that he has, is only
requited with ingratitude and reproach.

These infelicities are the occasion that man is always wearied with the
things present, desiring only things to come, and continually endeavoring to
catch at somewhat that is already escaped; whereas if by chance they obtain
it, it dissolueth to nothing, as it is in their hands, or if they enjoy it,
yields no contentment, nor does any wise appease their fear, or satisfy their
desire.

It is not therefore without cause that M. Aurelius was wont to say (when he
considered the misery of mankind) I mused in my mind, said he, whether there
might be found in any age, a man that could vaunt, that in all his lifetime
he never tasted adversity: and assuredly if there might be such a one found,
he would be such a fearful monster upon earth, that all living things would
be amazed to behold him. Then he concluded after this sort, saying; And in the
end I found my own thoughts true; for he that was yesterday rich, was to day
poor; he that was yesterday in health, was to day sick; he that laughed
yesterday, did to day weep: he that was yesterday in prosperity, was to day
in adversity; and he that was yesterday alive, was to day dead.

But let us now return to our former matter, and set down our discourses in
order.

What living man is he in all the world, that has given himself to any
Science, or otherwise to live, but that at one time or other he disliked of
his own profession, and is weary thereof?

And for the better understanding of the same, we will particularly discourse
the miseries and troublesome lives of all the principal estates, living upon
the bosom of the sinful earth.

Searching into all estates of men, we shall find that above all other mortal
creatures, Kings are most liberally provided for: for what makes man appear
more happy in this world, then Goods, Honors, Dignities and Rule; license to
do good or evil, without controulement, power to exercise liberality, and
all kind of pleasure, as well of the body, as of the mind: all that may be
wished for, to the contentation of Man, either in variety of meats,
magnificence in service, or in vestures, to raise at their pleasure the meanest
man to high place, and with a frown disgrace the mightiest? All which is
continually at a Princes command: there is nothing that may please the memory,
or flatter the desires of the flesh, but is prepared for them even from their
cradles, only to make their lives more happy and full of felicity.

But now if we judge of their lives uprightly, and weigh them in a true
balance, we shall find, that the selfsame things that make them happy in
this world, are the very instruments of vice, and the cause of greater
sorrows: for what avail their costly ornaments, honorable services, and
delicate meats, when that they are in continual fear to be poisoned, wrong
seduced, and often beguiled by their seruitors? Have we not had experience
thereof many times? Do not Histories report that some men have been poisoned
with Pages, and with the smoke of Torches? We may read likewise of certain
Emperors that durst not lie down to rest in the night, before they had caused
their beds to be lain in, and all the corners of their chambers to be
searched, lest they should be strangled or murdered in their sleeps. Others
that would not permit any Barbers to touch their faces, for fear that in
trimming of their heads or beards, they would cut their throats: and yet to
this day they are in such fear, that they dare not put meat into their
mouths, before their taster have tasted thereof.

What felicity can a Prince or King have, That Kings and Sovereigns are not
more free from misery then other inferior persons.
that has many thousands of men under their government, when he must watch for
all; hear the complaints and cries of every one; procure every man's
saufeguard; provoke some ^o do well by liberal gifts; and others, by terror
and fear? He must nourish peace amongst his Subjects, and defend his Realm
against the invasion of foreign enemies, besides many other calamities that
are depending upon a Regal Crown.

But now touching the unhappy states of wicked Princes, unto whom three kinds
of people are most agreeable and familiar. The first are flatterers, which be
the chief enemies to all virtue, and they that impoison their souls with a
poison so pestiferous, that it is contagious to all the world: their Princes
folly, they call Prudence; their cruelty, Justice; their wantonness, Love;
their fornications, Pleasures and pastimes: if they be covetous, they call it
good husbandry; if they be prodigal, they call it liberality. So that there
is no vice in a Prince, but they cloak it under the shadow of some virtue.

The second sort are such, who never rest night, The inuenters if new Patents.
but in the morning they bring in some new invention or other, how to tax and
draw money from the poor people; and generally all their study is employed to
be wastefull, and prodigal in the exactions and misery of the poor Commons.
Envious, and insatiable Courtiers.


The third and last sort are such, that under the cloak of kindness and
honesty (counterfetting good men) have always their eyes fixed upon other
men's livings, and make themselves reformers of Vices.

They invent wicked and false devices, not only how to get other men's goods,
but oftentimes their lives, who before God are most innocent.

Behold, here you may well see the manifold miseries that compass Scepters,
and States of Princes: Here are the thorns that they receive, in recompense
of their brightness and royal dignity, which ought like a Lamp to give light
to all the world: but when it is eclipsed or darkened with any vice, it is more
reproachful in them then in any other private person whatsoever: for they
sin not only in the fault which they commit, but also by the example which
they give.

The abundance of honors and pleasures that Princes enjoy, serves as a bait
to induce them to evil, and are the very matches to give fire to vice. Wealth
inticeth men to sin.
What was Saul before he was made King, whose life is showed in the holy
Scriptures, whom God did elect? Yet he made a sudden eclipse or changing. How
wonderful was the beginning of the reign of King Solomon; the which being
overcome with royal pleasures, gave himself as a prey to women! Of two and
twenty Kings of Judah, there is found but five or six that have continued in
their virtue.

If we consider the estate of the Assyrians, Persians, Grecians and Egyptians,
we shall find more of them wicked then good. If we consider what the Roman
Emperors were, (which has been the most flourishing Commonwealth in the
world) we shall find them so overcome with vices, and all kind of
cruelties, that I do almost abhortre to speak of their corrupt and defiled
lives. What was the estate of their Commonwealth, before that Scilla and
Marius did murmr against it; before that Cataline and Catulla did perturbe
it; before that Caesar and Pompey did slander it; before that Augustus and
Marcus Antonius did destroy it; before that Tiberius and Caligula did defame
it; before that Domitian and Nero did deprave it? For although they made it
rich with many Kingdoms, yet were the vices they brought with them, greater
then the Kingdoms they gained. For their goods and riches are consumed, yet
their vices remain unto this day. What memory remains of Romulus that
founded the City of Rome? Of Numa Pompilius that erected the Capitol? Of
Aurus Marius, that compassed it with walls? Did not they show what felicity
remains in high estates, who are more subject to the assaults of Fortune,
then any other earthly creature? For many times the thread of life breaks,
when they think least of death, and then the infamy of those that be wicked,
remains written in Histories, for a perpetual memory thereof. The which
thing all estates ought more to regard a thousand times, then the tongue that
speaks evil, which can but shame the living: but book record a perpetual
infamy for ever: which thing being duly considered of by many Emperors and
Kings in times past, forsook their Scepters, and Royal Empires, and betook
them to an obscure life, resting better contented with a little in quiet, then
to enjoy with full sail the crooked honors of the world.

CHAP. IIII.
The life of Courtiers.
But above other vanities and miseries which corruption does continually
attend, there does appear in Princes Courts a certain Noble captivity,
where, under the color of Greatness, is the highest Servitude, and those
gilded chains that fetter men's minds. He which will live here, must always
be masked, and prepared in one hour to convert himself into twenty several
shapes, to entertain many servants, but no friends. Their innocence is
accounted mere simplicity; and to affirm any thing, is to disprove the same.
There are two sorts of people in the Court which hate one the other, each
knowing of it: notwithstanding, there is always an emulation betwixt them,
which should first attempt any point of Honor, to do the other service, and
be the last that should end it. But such ridiculous complements are like unto
Anticke actions. Envy, which does supplant and deceive his neighbor, or that
does snarle in secret, is there perpetually, and to appease it, there is no way
but by misery. Vices and degenerate actions, are esteemed among Courtiers, as
precepts and part of their composition. Not to be corrupted by them, there
requires more faith then a grain of Mustardseed. As Crows build their nest
among the highest boughs, so does the devil among the highest of men, where
spreading his wings, he clocketh for his little ones, New Duels do add to one
much reputation: for as it is a shame for a man to come into the world; so they
hold it an honor to send him out of it.
which are his Vices, because there they remain more exposed to the sight, and
never appear but with authority. There also shall you see Caualiers, who out
of their gallant disposition will kill one the other, upon the interpretation
of a word: a manifest confession that their life is not much worth, since they
will sell it so good cheap. Notwithstanding these kind of men, that are in
these occasions so valiant, do fly away, when they should suffer the least
thing for Gods cause. Surely many such are required to make one good Martyr for
the holy Gospel.

There be some kind of Courtiers so subtle and crafty, that they do play as
the Fisherman, who as soon as he has gotten any thing in his Net, gives over
the Court, and goes his way. Other some there be that play all out: and other
that remain until they become wondrous rich, and in the end they are made to
restore all back again.

There are also others that do nothing but invent means to enlarge their own
treasures, and become vvealthy with spoiling poor people. Princes do by them
many times as we do by our hogs; we let them fatten, to the end we may
eat them afterward: so likewise are they suffered many times to enrich
themselves, to be disposed afterward when they are fat: and one that is new
come, oftentimes is preferred in their places.

By this you may see, that Courtiers oftentimes do sell their liberty, to
become rich, for they must obey all commandments; they must frame themselves
to laugh when the Prince laugheth, to weep when he weepeth, approve that
which he approves, and condemn that which he condemns. They must alter and
change their natures to be severe, with those that are severe; sorrowful,
with those that are sorrowful, and in a manner transform themselves,
according to the nature of him whom they will please, or else they shall get
nothing. To be brief, they must frame themselves according to his manners and
nature, and yet many times one little offense stayneth all the service they
have done in the life before.

Many in Princes Courts put off their caps to them, whom they would gladly see
cut shorter by the head, and often bow their knees to do them reverence, whom
they wish had broken their necks.

Here you may see the life of a great number of vicious Courtiers, which is no
life, but rather a lingering death: here you may see wherein their Youth is
employed, Men's reward for those follies and deboistnesse, committed in their
Youth.
which is no youth, but a transitory death: for when they come to age, they
bring nothing from thence but gray heads, their feet full of Gouts, their
backs full of pain, their hearts full of sorrow, and their souls filled with
sin.

CHAP. V.
The life of Magistrates and wicked Judges.
NOw our discourse of Courtiers being past, Magistrates and wicked Judges.
it is requisite we speak of things done in the civil life, and to how many
miseries it is subject. For although it be at this day a degree most noble, and
necessary for the peace of man's life; yet shall we find, that it deserves to
have his part in this Pilgrimage, as well as others: and if there be any
delectation, pleasure, or Honor, depending thereon, yet it is transitory and
inconstant.

First, knowing that all the actions of Magistrates pass before the eyes of
the common people, whose judgments in matters of State be but simple, yet have
they a certain smell or savor to know the good from evil. Wherefore those
that be Judges and Magistrates, be subject (as in a Play) to be hissed at, and
chased away with shame and confusion.

For the haire-brain'd people which is compared to a Monster with many heads,
are mutable, uncertain, fraudulent, apt to wrath and mutiny, ready to praise
or dispraise, without wisdom or discretion, variable in their talk,
unlearned and obstinate.

Therefore it behooves that the life of a Judge or Magistrate be sincere and
virtuous. For as he judges openly, so shall he be judged of the people
severally, A Notable ad^ertisement for Judges and Magistrates.
not only in matters of weight, and importance, but in those of small
consequence. For always the rude people will find somewhat to reform, as the
(...) at their Lawmakers Licurgus, for that he went always holding down his
head. The Venecians defamed wise Cato, in his eating, and accounted Pompeius
uncivil: for that he would scratch with one finger only: yet these are but
few in comparison of other good men, that the common sort have persecuted,
banished, and in the end put to death.

If that great Orator Demosthenes were alive, he could say somewhat, who
after he had a long time been a just and faithful Governor of the
Commonwealth of Athens, was in the end without cause unjustly banished. Moses
and many other holy men have so many times tasted the fury of the common
people, that if they were this day living, they would power out most grievous
complaints against them.

Now we have showed and set forth the miseries that proceed from common
people; so, must we in like sort put into the balance the errors and
corruptions that are found in wicked Judges; of the which sort, some are
corrupted with fear: for such fear they have, that rather then they will
displease a Prince or a great Lord, will violate Justice, like Pilate that
condemned Christ, for fear that he had to displease the Emperor Tiberius.

Other Magistrates are corrupted by love, as was Herod, who for to please the
foolish love of a Damsel that danced, condemned Saint John Baptist, although
that he knew that he was just and innocent.

Some are many times corrupted by hatred, as was the chief Priest that
condemned Saint Paul to be stoned to death, though he deserved it not.

Some Magistrates are corrupted by silver and gold, and other gifts and
presents, as were the children of the Prophet Samuel: and this disease is so
contagious, that I fear (at this day) many are infected with it.

They all love rewards (says the Prophet) they all look for gifts: they do
not right to the Orphane, and the Widows complaint comes not before them.
And in another place, Woe be to you that are corrupted by money, by hatred or
love; and which judge the good to be evil, and the evil good; making the
light darkness, and the darkness light. Woe be to you that have not respects
to the secrets of things, but to the deserts of men: that regard not equity,
but gifts that are given; that regard not Justice* but money. You are diligent
in rich men's causes, but you defer the cause of the poor: you are to them
most cruel and rigorous Judges, but unto the rich, kind and tractable.

The Prophet Jeremy cries out against wicked Judges, and says they are
magnified and become rich: they have left the Orphans, and have not done
Justice for the poor; Shall not I therefore punish these things, says the
Lord, and my soul take vengeance on such manner of people?

Here also the sentence that S. James pronounces against them at the day of
Judgment: You have condemned and killed the just: you have lived in
wantonness in this world, and taken your ease: Now therefore (says the Lord
of Hosts) weep and howl in your wretchedness that shall come upon you, your
garments are moth-eaten, your gold and silver is cankered, and the rust thereof
shall be a witness against you, and it shall eat your flesh as it were fire;
for the complaints of the poor are ascended vpto my Throne.

These are the complaints that the Prophets and Apostles made against wicked
Judges and Magistrates: and likewise the Censures that our good God has
thundered against them.

CHAP. VI.
Of Man's estate being in wedlock.
MAny hold, there is no joy nor pleasure in the world, which may be compared
to marriage: for, say they, there is such fellowship between the parties
coupled, that they seem two minds to be transformed into one; and likewise
that both their good fortune and bad is common to them both, their cares to be
equal, and their joys equal: and to be brief, that all things are in common
between them two.

Truly if we account it pleasure to commit our secrets to our friends and
neighbors; how much greater is the joy, when we may discover our thoughts to
her that is joined to us, by such a knot of affinity, that we put as much
trust in her, as in our selves, make her whole treasurer, or faithful keeper
of the secrets of our mind?

What greater witness of fervent love, and vndissolueable amity can there be,
then to forsake Father, Mother, Sister and Brother, and generally all their
kindred, till they become enemy to themselves, for to follow a Husband, that
does honor and reverence her; and having all other things in disdain, she
only cleaves to him? If he be rich, she keeps his goods; if he be poor, she
is companion with him in poverty; if he be in prosperity, his felicity is
redoubled in her: if he be in adversity, he bears but the one half of the
grief; and furthermore she comfort him, assisteth and serves him. If a man
will remain solitary in his house, his wife keeps him company: If he will
go into the fields, she conducteth him with her eye, so far as she can see
him; she desires and honors him: being absent, she complains, and
sigheth and wishes his company: being come home, he is welcomed and received
with the best show and tokens of love. And for to speak truth, it seems
that a Wife is a gift from heaven, granted to a man, as well for the
contentation of Youth, as the rest and solace of Age.

Nature can give us but one Father, and one Mother, but marriage presents
many in our children, the which do reverence and honor us, and are more dear
unto us then our own selves (for being young, they prattle, play, laugh, and
show us many pretty toys: they prepare us an infinite number of pleasures; and
it seems they are given us by nature, to pass away part of our miserable
life. If we be afflicted with age, they show the duty of children, cloze up
our eyes, and bring us to the earth from whence we came. They are our bones,
our flesh and blood: for in seeing them, we see our selves. The father
beholding his children, may be well assured that he sees his lively youth
renewed in their faces, in whom we are almost regenerate and borne again. Many
are the joys and sweet pleasures in marriage, which for breuities sake, I omit
and pass over. But if we do well consider it, and weigh it in a just
balance, we shall find that amongst these Roses, are many Thorns growing;
and amongst these sweet showers of rain, there falls much Hayle.

But with reverence now I crave pardon of all virtuous Ladies and Noble women,
that with patience I may discover my intent; and that my presumption may not
gain the least frown from their chaste brows: for to the vicious I speak,
and not to them whose breasts harbor the liberal Fountains of virtue and
wisdom.

The Athenians being a people much commended for their prudence and wisdom,
seeing that Husbands and Wives could not agree, because of an infinite number
of dissentions that chanced, were constrained to ordain certain Magistrates
in their country, whom they called Reconcilers of the married ones: the office
of whom was to set agreement between the Husband and the Wife. The Spartanes
and Romans had also such like laws and orders amongst them: so great was the
insolence and rashness of some women toward their Husbands.

In this age there are but few, I think, can bear patiently the charges of
marriage, or can endure the unbridled rage of some women: and to speak truth
without flattery, if thou take her rich, thou make thy self a
bond-slaue; for thinking to marry thine equal, thou marriest a commanding
Mistress. If thou take her foul, thou can not love her; if thou take her
fair, it is an Image at thy gate to bring thee company. Beauty is a Tower that
is assailed of all the world, and therefore it is a hard thing to keep that,
when every one seeks to have the key. This is the conclusion, riches causes
a woman to be proud, beauty makes her suspected, and hard-fauourednes causes
her to be hated. Therefore Diponares having tasted the Martyrdomes of marriage,
said, that there were but 2. good days in all the life of marriage; whereof
the one was the wedding day, upon which is made good cheer, the Bride fresh
and fair, and of all pleasures, the beginning is most delectable. The other
good day is, when the woman dies: for then the Husband is out of bondage and
thraldom. Yet for all this, a woman is to a man a necessary evil, and one
whom he cannot well live without; seeing that there is nothing more hard to
find in this world then a good woman, a good Mule, and a good Goat, being three
unhappy beasts. And to conclude, there is nothing more piercing then her
outrageous words; more to be feared then her boldness; more cruel then her
malice, nor more dangerous then her fury: besides many hurtful discommodities
of their Huswifery.

CHAP. VII.
The vanity and inconstancy of women.
THe most part of women are vain; The Author, as before, craves pardon of all
modest Religious, and virtuous women, whose virtue he does honor and
reverence.
not only out of weakness and example, but also by express profession: All
their study is how to establish vanity, and about this, they have great strife
and emulation. For amongst these worldly lustres, you shall see women corrupted
with delicacies, subiecting themselves to fashions, and aspects of others,
losing the use of their feet, by pleasing their fancy with too much neatness,
employing the fourth part of their life in attiring themselves: wearing hair
bought out of Tire-womens shops, painting their faces, Idolatrizing their own
bodies, yet nevertheless crucifying them with a just punishment, ignorant of
all things, yet studying to speak well, viewing themselves in a Looking-glass
a thousand times in a day, and calling consultations upon a particular hair.
Poor creatures! who in altering the color of their hair, and adding
somewhat to their height, by extraordinary shoes, would disprove the saying of
Christ, when he sought to verify, Mat. 15. 36. and 6. 27.
that man could not make one hair white or black, nor add one cubite to his
stature. Make but a collection of the time that a curious woman does spend
through al her life, in dressing her self, and you shall find that it is more
then a fourth part of her age.

This curiosity has some affinity with servitude, who amongst them will apply
so much time in doing good works: and how comes it to pass, that those
habits which were given unto man for to hide his sin, are now converted into
to sin it self? What is the occasion that that, which God has ordained to
cover man's shame, serves now to set forth his glory? That that, which was an
argument of humility, is now become the matter of pride? There is nothing so
contrary to the will and glory of God, as that vain vanity: for a woman that
hinders the going of her own feet, by wearing such nice and high Pantofles:
how can she fly away into a strange Country for Gods cause? A flesh that is so
delicate, how can it endure to take rest, being imprisoned for the testimony
of the Divine Gospel? A woman which by reason of her painting, cannot
tolerate the heat of the Sun; how can she endure the fire for the Word of
God? Observe our Preparations to suffer afflictions, and peruse our
Apprentiship to martyrdom, and in the end you will find that Solomon has not
seen such things in his time, and that the vanity of vanities which he speaks
of, is inferior to the vanity of this age.

But let such beware, that the same happen not to them, which the Prophets
write against the women of Jerusalem; who reproved their pride, their
vnshamefac't looks, their rolling eyes, their attire, Chains, Jewels,
Bracelets, and other their vainglorious fashions. It will happen to you
(says the Lord of Hosts) that in stead of perfumes, you shall have stink; in
stead of hair, baldnes, and the fairest young men among you, shall pass
through the edge of the Sword, and the strongest shall be slain, and perish in
the wars.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Covetousness.
But of all the miseries that happen to Man in this world, these hereafter
following, are the greatest.

And first, let us consider of Covetousness, wherewith many men are so far
overcome, that they will hazard their life to win a little money; that is, to
lose their being, for to gain the means to be: which miss the end to
obtain the accessories; as he which sells his Sword to buy a sheath; or his
Horse, to have some prouender; and to gain worldly pelf, not to serve his
occasions, but rather for himself to serve it; to have riches as one has a
Fever, which does more possess the grieved, than the grieved it. To be like
unto a greedy dogs, which lying upon hay, and not eating it himself, will
snarle if any other comes near unto it. O miserable people, that live
poorly, to dye rich! that are most covetous in their declining age, which is
to provide for a tedious journey, when it is even finished. But a man that
fears God, for to avoid so great an inconvenience, will consider in himself,
what is the worth and estimation of such dross: and will conceit, that these
things are often given to wicked men, as seducers of minds from true piety, and
the divine knowledge of the Almighty; who shows us what estimation we should
have of riches, in giving largely to the wicked; within whose breasts it does
fall, as a purse into a stinking privy. Jesus Christ does give us an example
what repute is to be had of it, in committing his purse to Judas, when as he
gave his holy Spirit to his faithful Apostles. And if he had thought wealth
to have been the true felicity, no doubt he would have gathered it more
abundantly: but he had not so much, where to lay his head on. He has willed
us to love poverty by his example: And the great King of the World will despise
all things, that shall entice us to affect the contrary. A little wealth will
suffice us to live well, and less to dye happily. 1. Tim. 6.
Godliness with contententment is great gain: we are come naked into the world,
and naked shall we go out; peaceable poverty is much better than troublesome
riches. But man is so foolish, that he had rather draw water out of a great
disturbed River, with difficulty and peril, then from a little clear brook,
with facility and ease; had rather take a great mass of gold with torment and
danger, then a little with peace and security; and in fine, he will be nothing
the more satisfied. Moreover, he thinks that to be lost, which was never
gained by him: This kind of Avarice is always linked with envy. If
peradventure a man lose his worldly fortunes, (according unto that which
Solomon says: That riches betaketh her to her wings) it does sometimes
distract humane sense; for, to ransacke a covetous person, is to flay his skin
from his body; to take from him his riches, is to deprive him of his heart;
since that such do wholly deuote both heart and affection to their wealth.

Who ever saw the sin of covetousness more deeply rooted in the world, then
at this day? for all the Cities, Provinces, and Kingdoms of the earth, be very
shops and storehouses of Covetousness and avarice. This is the world which
the Prophets did fore-shew, that men join house to house, and land to land, as
though themselves would alone dwell upon the earth.

Covetousness is the wellspring of miseries: Covetousness the source and
original of all wickedness and abomination.
for from thence proceed war and destruction, and the great effusion of blood,
wherewith the earth is overflowed. From Covetousness proceed Murders,
Treasons, Thefts, Vsuries, forswearings, the corruption of witnesses, and
perverting of Judgments; from Covetousness, the tedious delays in Law, and
lingering of Suites do proceed; And to be short, from thence comes all kind
of wickedness.

This grievous sin is grown so familiar among men, that many live without
mercy, in such sort, that now we may see the streets full of poor beggars,
naked and cold with poverty; with an infinite number of banished women, driven
out of their Countries, bearing their children in their arms; wanting that
which covetous men hoord up with such cares, that they rather make it their
god, and will rather let a poor body dye at their gates, then refresh him with
food.

Therefore let us now leave these wicked men, Of Envy, that cruel,
abominable, and bloody vice, which does generaly reign now in this our
degenerate age.
Idolaters of their treasures, with the covetous rich man mentioned in the holy
Scripture, and speak of another Vice, which is called Envy; a malady wherewith
many minds in this new world are grievously afflicted.

The time is now come, that the whole earth is nothing but a very place of the
Envious: a vice which is the oldest of al vices, and has bin used in the
worlds infancy: The experience thereof, was approved in the first Age, in Adam
and the Serpent, in Abel and Cain, in Jacob and Esau, in Joseph and his
Brethren, in Saul and David, in Haman and Mardocheus, the which pursued not one
another for their riches, but for the envy that the one bore to another. But
all this is nothing to the envy which is used amongst men at this day: which
wicked vice not only reigns among the common sort, but also amongst the
higher: for when they are mounted to the top of Fortunes wheel, and think
peaceably to enjoy the favor of Princes; behold, suddenly the envy of some
other conspires against them, and causes them to be disdained and cast out of
fauuor. Therefore I think there is no other means to avoid Envy, then to
avoid Dignity and Rule: The reason is, that we are the children of Envy, and
he that leaves most goods, leaves most envy.

For this cause, Of Ambition, the cause of our fall and ruin.
the Elders counseled the rich that they should not dwell near the poor, nor
the poor, near the rich: for the one are envied for their wealth, and the
other for their poverty.

Much like unto this is Ambition, which is an extreme desire to aspire to
honor and greatness. Bernard. Ambitiosorum Arcana sunt periculosissima.
Amongst that multitude of people which press themselves in mounting up, those
which follow, endeavor to march upon them that go before; and at length,
three parts of them being driven to stay behind, swell with envy and grief at
the rest: when as those that have attained to the height of honor, draw up
after them their scaling-ladders, fearing that otherwise some by aspiring,
might parallel their worth. But oftentimes, when they have possessed themselves
with these dignities, Maledictus superbus est, tam impudens voluntarte se
separeta Deo.
they are like Apes, which having once climbed to the top of a tree or house,
do sit, and make ill favored faces at passengers, and retain the people to
gaze at their moppes: For then ordinarily their weakness does increase, and
their vices grow eminent, insomuch that they find more care and fear in that
state of greatness, Man's felicity and happiness does not depend only upon
greatness and degnity: for contentment exceeds riches.
than when they were most mean. The highest boughs are most shaken by the
wind, and the points of Steeples most beaten with storms and lightening. A
man has least mind to sleep in beds of silk embroidered with gold. The
greatest fear of poisoning, is at Tables furnished with variety of delicate
dishes; whereas on the contrary, it has not bin heard that any have received
hurt out of wooden Cups.

After an innocent travel, sleep seems pleasing in a bed of straw.

CHAP. IX.
Of petty-fogging strifes, and Law-contentions.
But now behold another sort of vanity, which does much vex and trouble man;
A roaring, crying, and turbulent vanity, which is armed with stings, and
covered with subtilty, which imployeth all the best part of man's life in
petty-fogging strifes, Take Fees with both hands, gull their Clients, and make
them like bare-headed Vassals, pray and pay soundly, for their importunate
bawling.
and amongst the controversies of importunate process. Do but enter into some
great Hall or place of pleading, you will admire at the confused murmr, the
corrupted discipline, the wearisome courses, and contentious humors, and will
truly perceive that in carriage of all these things, there is no mention of
God, unless perchance in swearing. And that there in the mean time, while
that two persons do consume their estates to gain a process, comes a third
and beguileth them both of the prey, and oftentimes their charge in following,
surmounts the principal. O how many men do live by the loss of others? How
many would fast without riches, if all those that endeavor to consume one the
other, An excellent Simile.
should but enter into familiarity and friendship, I do think that God does
perceive this confused and murmuring multitude, in the same fashion as we do
see a little Hillocke full of Ants running together pell mell, without order or
reason. Some one knowing these things to be true, will say nevertheless,
that there is in humane life, some honest study; some laudable knowledge; and
many civil and religious virtues, which cannot be comprised under vanity, but
deserve to be much esteemed. In this opinion does principally appear the
vanity of man's spirit: for if the best of humane actions be but vain; how much
more is vanity it self? Let us first begin to examine Studies and Sciences.

CHAP. X.
Of Philosophy, and the knowledge of diverse tongues.
IN this modern time, Learning is only reputed to be the knowledge of
Languages, and those that are learned, do busy themselves to find out how
the Romish women did speak two thousand years since: how the ancient Romans
did apparel themselves: how people did then affect Comedies, and to refine
some Latin or Greek words, that are now grown out of use by antiquity. This
kind of course is to use a golden Scepter for to take up dung, to employ the
understanding, which ought to flourish in one, to some base occupation, and to
make a feast of nothing but sauce. For the knowledge of these things, is only
profitable to season, no way good to nourish.

Also there are some, that when they have attained old age, do then search for
words, when they should have the things. The vanity, simplicity, and folly of
aged men.
Many there are also that begin to read Grammar, when they are come to use
Spectacles. They learn Rules to speak eloquently in Latin, when they are
barbarous in their own native language; So that their life is a continual
incongruity.

Philosophy and the Sciences have many things not only more high, but also
harder: like unto Pine-Apples in the highest part of a Pine Tree, which many
seeking to obtain, do fall in climing for them; whereas others do break
their teeth, that strive to open them. Such is this learning, that as it
indueth a man with much knowledge; so also it adds unto him more care and
trouble of mind. For Solomon says, that he that does augment his knowledge,
does but increase his sorrow. Ignorance is never without some commodity: And
in conclusion, when we have gotten all the precepts of this knowledge, it
extends it self not far, and is of small use. For Man cannot by all his
Philosophy, attain to the perfect knowledge of a small fly, or garden Lettice,
much less of his own composition. We desire to trauerse our spirits through
all things, He that knows much, and knows not himself, knows nothing.
but remain strangers to our selves. We will know much, and perform little.
To speak more properly, our study is not labor, but rather an idle action,
which does torment us without any hope of advancement: Simile.
Like unto the Squirrels that run continually within turning Cages, thinking
to get away, when as after all their paines-taking, they still remain in the
same place. We learn little with great pain, and that little does scarcely
amend our imperfections, but rather oftentimes add more to them.

One drop of wisdom, guided by the fear of God, is more worth then all
humane learning. For what does it profit a Lawyer in taking pains, to gain
the process of another, if he himself be at variance with God? What
commodity reapeth a Physician, to judge of another man's health, if he himself
be not as yet resolved to feel the pulse of his own conscience?

What good is it to any that have learned the ancient Histories, if they be
ignorant of those things that pass in this time? Or to have learned by
Astronomy the motions and influences of heaven, if they know not the means how
to come thither?

CHAP. XI.
Of Civil virtues and Pilgrims.
THere be some that undertake long tedious voyages, gaining many Oasts, but
few friends, promising to learn much in their journey, when as oftentimes
they return more foolish then they went; and perchance having circuited the
earth, do sorrowfully bequeath their body to it, for a conclusion to their
perfected resolutions, as flies when they have passed many times round about
the Candle, at length enter into the flame, after they have seen so much land
there, only require a handful for to cover them. With this vanity are they
justly afflicted, which make long Voyages toward some Saint, for to desire
that they may get children, when it may be, at their return, some officious
neighbor has discharged them of that care.

Yet some again, perchance, will say, that our Civil Virtues have some things
that are of more consequence. But here out of this also does bud another
vanity, seeing that those virtues have no mention but by Vices: for Choler
gives an edge to Valor; Cowardice does make a man to be more circumspect and
wary; Ambition, Avarice, and Envy, are as stings to study and industry. Such
minds incite whores rather then chaste and virtuous women.
The fear of an ill report in many women, is the cause of chastity: many are
sober out of a covetous humor; other for necessity: friendships are
contracted, either for the desire of pleasures, or for the hope of profit. The
first being no otherwise then a paltry broker; nor the last then a Merchandise.
Religion it self does often serve for a cloak to such covetous persons: for
many follow Jesus Christ (in the desert, only to have bread, which is to
subject their understanding only to the belly, and the chief of virtues, only
to the meanest of vices: but I know not which is worse, either to fly away from
Christ, or to follow him for gain; to serve him for money, or to serve the
devil for gain; whether it does seem most injurious, or ignominious toward
God, either to leave his Son Jesus Christ, or in following him wrongfully, to
make him a Vallet to our concupiscences. What can these virtues then be, that
march under the pay of the devil? Surely this is also a great vanity, and
manifest corruption. Wherefore some (not perceiving any thing in the world,
which is exempted out of this vanity, and that vices and impiety have
infected all sorts of estates and conditions in humane life) do think to
wrest themselves out of it, by confining their bodies to some desert, and
condemning their mind to a perpetual care: where being secluded from all
company, they live in continual silence, never speaking but with God and
themselves.

This solitary humor in many, does proceed from a brutish conceit; in others,
from a weak spirit, incapable of humane society; in others, from an ambition
to be remarkable for some extraordinary profession, and in others out of
discontent-and envy, that they are wearied in swimming against the current of
this worldly stream; and in having received all things still contrary to
their desire. Notwithstanding, I do not doubt, but that there be some which
do embrace this sort of solitary life, to banish themselves from the vices of
this world, and to serve God with more liberty. But such are much deceived, who
willing to forsake the world, do return farther into it by other means, and
are assaulted by worse temptations: for then passionate griefs, curious
cogitations, peevish idleness, Hypochondriacall humors, despair,
presumption, and selfe-admiration, do insensibly glide into men's spirits,
under the profession of an extraordinary sanctity; all which do render the
spirit discontented of an insolent melancholy, and presumptuous devotion, which
oftentimes degenerateth into madness, and want of sense. With good reason S.
Austin said, That Man pleases God the best, that, circled with beauties, in
the mids of Princes magnificent Palaces, could fly their alluring temptations.
A solitary man, in the extremity of his griefs and sadness, has no body to
comfort him: and comparing himself with none but himself, has this conceit,
that he is some excellent thing. But then lustful desires do doubly burn
within him: For man is of this nature, that he thinks those things most
beautiful, which are farthest remote from him. So S. Jerome being in the
midst of a Desert, and in his greatest abstinencie, does confess that his
mind was then amongst the Dances, and Ballads of young maids; and that he did
burn with incontinency and desire. Besides, the Devil following Jesus Christ
into the Desert, does plainly show that he did judge that place most
convenient for temptation. A notable comparison to confound the folly of men,
who think to avoid temptations, by rendering and making themselves Anchorites
and Hermites.
Then if the Son of God was assailed by the Devil in the Desert, how scapeth
an Hermit, or secluded person, that can never be exempted? Therefore the surest
way for a man to separate himself from the world, not with his feet, but with
his affection: to expel it altogether from him and his heart, fearing
otherwise that departing from this world, notwithstanding he carries it with
him. For as it is possible to be worldly and vicious, living far from the
world: So it is possible to leave the world, without flying into a Desert, and
to live alone in the midst of company; to be within a Court or Palace,
spectator of vanity and troubles, without participating of them; and in the
midst of a babbling multitude, to talk only with himself, and to entertain
his thoughts with God. And in the mean time, to employ his endeavors to the
edification of the Church, stretching out his hand to the erroneous, for to
re-guide them into the right way of Salvation, rather then to hide his Talent
in the earth, and to cut himself clean off from the body, and all civil
society, as an unprofitable member. So did the Apostles and those glorious
Lamps, which have enlightened the Church of God, and which shine amongst us to
this day, they being dead.

I know well, that the opinion of Aristotle, in the beginning of his Politiques
is true, that he which is of a solitary disposition, is either of a most
divine, or very base spirit, because that he does estrange himself from all
society, either for that he has virtues more then humane; or that he is so
contemptible, and mean, in respect of Man, that he is unworthy to approach
near him. But let him know which does affect solitariness, because he does
surpass all men in understanding and virtue, that he ought to repel that
humor, and to condescend by humility and meekness, to the imperfections of
others, laboring for the good of the Church or Common Wealth, either by word
or work: For what are all those perfections more then shadows, and obscure
traces of those perfections that are in Jesus Christ; Non quaere-Christus Jesus
glariam suam omnia. Igitur relinqnere debes etiam te ipsum spernere and
abnegare vt frauris amicitia Ihesu Christi.
notwithstanding he took upon him our shape, and conversion among men, that
thereby he might save them, and win souls to heaven. Therefore to conclude
this point, If to fly from the World be a vanity, how much more to follow it?
If vices and torments do harbor in the desert, how much more in presses and
throngs of people? Truly, if vanity be in every place, let us say, that all
is torment and affliction of Spirit.

CHAP. XI.
Of old and decrepit age.
But in the mean time that man is busied about al these vain conceits, while
he is pushing time with his shoulder, endeavoring nothing all days of his
life, but to rise, and to go to bed, to apparel himself, and to make
himself unready, to fill his belly, and to euacuate his stomach: which is no
more then a circle of the self same importuning occupations; much like unto a
Millers horse, that always treads one compass. While he is thus busied with
such occasions, behold, old age stealingly arriueth, to which few do attain,
and all desire: But if any do peradventure gain that time they desire, to
have it prolonged to the utmost; this age (being as Grapes which have lost
their juice, and as the sincke of man's life) is without question, the most
unhappy for those men that are worldly, as no the contrary it is most blessed
for such as are godly: For worldly men in this age are doubly possessed with way
wardnes; their fear and distrust does increase, their judgment waxes weak,
and begins to diminish: Wherefore we do wrongfully call a melancholy humor,
wisdom; a dis-abilitie, sobriety; because old age leaves not pleasure, but
pleasure leaves it.

And therefore he does undeservedly complain, that the time and manners of men
are changed into worse, while nothing is changed but himself: for in his youth
all things pleased him, if they were never so bad; in his old age, all things
dislike him, if they were never so good: Like unto those which being in a Ship,
think that the banks move, when it is only themselves. It is also a vice
incident to this Age, to speak much, because they are no more able to perform
any thing; and that they also think themselves most fit to propose precepts to
youth, and to declare things of time long since: Like unto a declining State,
as that of the Roman Empire, where there are many talkers, but few valiant,
and not much different from the aged time of the world, where are many curious
disputers, but few of the true Religion. In this Age also, does increase the
love of wealth; and earthly cares do summon new forces against man, he waxes
all gray, and every thing in him begins to wither, only his vices excepted.

That ancient man, of whom the Apostle makes often mention, being ready to
dote, waxes not old in worldly age, but then he is in full vigor: He
therefore fears approaching death, and holds his life like unto an Eele,
which slideth away. Simile.
In the mean time, he determines of tedious designs, A pitiful example of
Man's Wolfe-like appetite, his insatiate desire of riches, and ugly terror of
deformi^y.
and heapeth up riches, as if death stood a far off, and durst not appear.

But now that age is come, and the time that he ought to rest; his griefs and
dolours are renewed, the heart afflicted, the brain troubled, the face
withered, the body crooked, the sight dimmed, the hayres fallen, and the teeth
rotten; and to be short, the body is as it were, asimilitude of death: yet does
he prepare himself least, to gain the future bliss; and though many times
death takes for a gage one part or other of his body, as an arm, an eye, or a
leg, to serve for an advertisement that he will shortly fetch the rest, yet
he is so affianced to the earth, that he is unwilling to go to it, when
nothing remains in him, but evil.

CHAP. XIII.
Of DEATH.
THus after Man has sorrowed all his days, Than the Day of Death there is
nothing more certain, nor nothing uncertain.
under the heavy burden of his sins, and in conclusion of all this
unprofitable and wearisome travel, behold the approach of death, before he has
learned to live, much less to dye: The most part being taken out of this
world before they know to what end they entered in; they would willingly prolong
the date of their life, but death admits no composition: for it has feet of
wool, but arms of iron; it comes vnsensibly, but having taken once hold, it
never loses her prize. To this pace or step, man comes so slowly as
possibly he can: For if a Ship should sink among the waves two hundred leagues
from Land, notwithstanding every Passenger would strive to swim, not with an
intent to save his life, but to repel death for some minutes, and to render
nature her last inevitable tribute. Every man trembles at this passage, and
labors to settle himself here, yet is forced at last to yield unto Death;
and yet by no means may be known after what manner he shall end his life.
Some there be that are forced to dye by hunger; others, by thirst; others, by
fire; others by water; others, by poison; others, are smothered; others are
torn in pieces by wild beasts; others, devoured of the Fowls of the air;
others are made meat for Fishes, and others for Worms: yet for all this, Man
knows not his end; when he thinks himself most at rest, he suddenly
perishes.

What a dreadful sight is it, to see him lying in his bed that is oppressed
with the pains of Death? What shaking and changing of all the bonds of nature
will he make? the feet will become cold; the face pale; the eyes hollow; the
lips and mouth to retire; the hands diminish; the tongue waxes black; the
teeth do cloze; the breath fails; the cold sweat appears by the violence
of sickness. All which is a certain token that nature is overcome.

But now when it comes to the last gasp, or at the sorrowful departure that
the soul makes from his habitation, all the bands of Nature are broken.
Besides, when the Devil or wicked spirit is assured of our end, what furious
assaults will he make against our souls, to make us despair of Gods mercy?
It is the hour when as Satan does his power to strive against GOD, for to
hinder the salvation of mankind; and he is more boisterous in these latter
days, for that he knows that his time is but short, and that the end of his
kingdom is at hand, and therefore he is the more enflamed: for he never more
tormenteth those whom he does possess, then when he knows that he must
depart.

But now when Man has passed the bitter anguish of Death, where is then become
his glories? Nota. This is weighty to be observed, not ouely of the poor and
inferior persons, but more to be apprehended with fear, by the^ most mighty
Sovereigns and greatest men of this world, that they may not build their
happiness upon the deceitful ground of their riches, and transitory
possessions.
Where are his pomps and triumphs? Where is his Voluptuousness and
Wantonness? Where is his Majesty, excellency and holiness? They are vanished
as the shadow, and it is chanced to them, as to the garment that the worms
have eaten; or as the wool that the moth has devoured.

Let us behold Man, when he is in the grave! Who ever saw a Monster more
hideous then the dead carcass of Man? behold his excellency, Majesty and
Dignity, covered with a lump of earth. Here you may see him that was
cherished, reverenced, and honored, even to kiss his hands and feet, by a
sudden mutation, become a creature most abominable; and to them it happens
as Solomon writes in his book of Wisdom; What has it profited (says he)
the pride and great abundance of riches? All these things are passed as is the
Arrow shot to the white, or as is the smoke that is dispersed with the wind.

The sole memory of Death, Death is a terror to those ignoble minds, whose
pride of life, makes them weak, timorous, and most undoubted Cowards to the
least object Death shall present.
mournful Funerals, and the reading of Inscriptions, engraven in Sepulchers,
does make the very hair to stare and stand an end, and strikes Man with an
horror and apprehension of it.

Some represent Death terrible to the aspect, and deprived of flesh; other
consider it with compassion, mixed with dread. Some particular man, which not
long since was clad in Silk, and shined with Diamonds, is now assaulted with
troops of Worms, and breathes forth intolerable sents, while that his heir
does laugh in secret, and enjoys the fruit of all his labor, which he
himself never enjoyed. The Rich unprofitable Mizerburns in Hell for his
Avarice, while his son in the world, dancing a Whore on his Lap, sets all
prodigally flying.
And nevertheless in this his very dust and corruption, does appear an
Ambition, and pride does rest within his Tomb. For then behold, stately
Sepulchers, engraued stones, that report some famous actions, and proud titles
upon his Tomb, set out with false Narrations, to the end that Passengers by
may say, Here lies a goodly stone, and a corrupted body.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the terrible Judgment Seat of God.
BEing dead in this world, he must then appear before the Judgment Seat of
God, with such a terror to those that consider it well, that there is no
member but trembles. It is the Day that the Lord will come like a tempest,
when every ones heart shall fail them, and all the world shall be astonished:
for even as Lightning which rises from the East, and extends to the West; so
shall the coming of the Son of Man be. Tribulation shall then be so extreme
and great, as the like has not been seen since the beginning of the world,
till now, nor ever shall be the like: The Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon
shall give no more light: the Stars shall fall from Heaven, and the waves of
the Sea shall rage, and men shall be amazed with fear, and the powers of
Heaven shall move.

Woe shall be in those days to them that are with child, and to them that give
suck. For as it was in the days before the Flood, they did eat and drink,
marry, and were married, even unto the day that Noah entered into the Arc, and
knew nothing till the Flood came, and took them all away: So shall the coming
of the Lord be; and then all kinreds of the earth shall mourn, and shall hide
themselves in Dens, and Caves, and in the Mountains, and shall say unto them,
Fall upon us, and hide us from the face of him that sits upon the Throne.

Blow out the Trumpet, says the Prophet Joel, that all such as dwell in the
world may tremble at it: for the Day of the Lord comes, and is hard at hand;
a dark day, a gloomy day; yea, and a stormy day. Before him shall be a
consuming fire, and behind him, a burning flame. Then the dead that are in the
graves shall rise, and come forth; the bones and the other parts shall find
out their joints, for to join again together with the body, that the earth
has putrified, and corrupted.

All those that the Beasts and Birds of the air have devoured; all those that
the Sea has swallowed up; all those that are vnvapoured in the earth, and all
those that the fire has consumed, shall be reduced and brought to their
former estate.

All the blood that Thieves, Tunc: Post vnam voluptatem sequuntur mill dolores.
Pirates, Murderers, Tyrants, and false Judges have unjustly shed, shall then
appear before the Majesty of God. So that there shall not one drop of blood
be lost, from the time of Abel, that was the first slain of men, unto the
last, so that there shall not one hair perish.

If the veil of the Temple did break with the Earthquake, Simile. Most worthy
to be read and considered with terror and true repentance.
the Sun darken and change his brightness, for the wrong that was done unto
JESUS CHRIST being on the Cross, although in nothing he did offend: what
countenance may the poor sinners show, that have offended him innumemerable
times? who then shall abide the shining brightness of Gods Majesty, Ver
Aeternum plenisfima delitiarum quam pura es.
sitting upon his Throne of glory?

It is the dreadful hour, when wicked Monarkes, Kings and Princes shall give
account of their unlawful exactions that they have made upon their Subjects;
The Majesty of God in the general Judgment Day, shall be more terrible to the
impious Monarks of the earth, then either the world on fire round about them,
Hell gaping to swallow the ugly Fiends to torture, or the pains of Hell can
affright them.
and of the blood that they have wrongfully spilled. It is the hour, wherein
Merchants and such as have traded in the circle of the world, that have
beguiled and sold by false weights and measures, shall render a just account of
the least fraud that they have committed. It is the hour that covetous men and
Usurers, that have beguiled some, and undone others, shall pay themselves the
cruel interest of that which they have ill gotten. It is the hour, when
Magistrates and wicked Judges, that have corrupted, violated, and suspended
Justice, shall be accountable for their corruption and iniquities. It is the
very hour, wherein Widows, Orphans, and other afflicted persons shall make
their complaints before God, of the wrong and oppression that have been showed
them. It is the hour wherein the wicked shall say (repenting in themselves,
troubled with horrible fear) Behold, these which in times past we had in
derision, infamy, and reproach, are now accounted among the children of God,
whose portion is amongst the Saints. It is the hour wherein foolish and dumb
persons shall be more happy then the wise and eloquent. Many Shepherds and
Carters shall be preferred before Philosophers; many Beggars, before rich
Princes and Monarchs; and many simple and ignorant, before the witty and
subtle.

Let us therefore that are Christians, look to our selves, and take heed we
be not counted under the judgment and sentence of the most greatest miseries
of all miseries. The which sentence is recited in the 25. Chap. of S. Matthew,
where it is said; Go ye cursed into everlasting fire.

CHAP. XV.
Of HELL.
MAny and great are the miseries which man suffers in this world, but yet all
of them are but as Roses, in respect of the Thorns which follow: for the vanity
and travail of the temporal life is a happiness, in regard of the torments
of eternal death, which does swallow the most part of men. It is a large way
which leads to perdition, and few do find the way of Salvation. Death
comes here to leuy souls for Hell, and does enroll great and small, learned,
and ignorant* rich, and poor; yea, many which are esteemed holy, and live
covered under the cloak of Hypocrisy, to the end that they might go to Hell
with the less noise, and not be stayed by the way.

This Hell is a place of flames, and yet there is perpetual darkness, where
souls do wax old, and yet never die, and where they live, continually to
die: Where they burn without consuming; where they mourn without compassion;
are afflicted without repentance; where torment is without end, and past
imagination. There the vnpappy rich man, Remember Hell it is not a feined, but a
place most fume, most fearful.
which refused to give poor Lazarus a crumme of bread, does now beg of him a
drop of water, although whole Rivers be not sufficient to extinguish his heat.
What if the rods that God does punish his Infants withal, do sometimes make
them almost despair, and even curse the day of their Nativity, Poenitentia
sera raro vera.
as Job and Jeremy did? What are those afflictions that he does oppress his
Adversary withal? It is a horrible thing (says the Apostle) to fall into the
hands of the Living God. For because he says in his anger, as it is written
in the 32. Chapter of Deuteromie, I have lifted my hands toward heaven, and
said, I am the everliving God; If I whet my glittering sword, and my hand take
hold on judgment, I will execute vengeance on mine enemies, and will reward
them that hate me. Praised be God, which has delivered us, and drawn us from
that burning furnace of hell, by his Son Jesus Christ: who (as S. Paul says
to the Galatians) was reviled for our sakes, and has called us our of
perpetual darkness, to his marvelous light: 1. Pet. 2. 9. Is it possible for us
to be ignorant what that torment is, and not know how much he has suffered for
to retain us in fear, and to make us know the greatness of the grace of God,
and the excellence of our Redemption in Jesus Christ his Son, who is also God
eternally blessed. How Gods incomprehensible Providence frustrates the designs
of men, making their enterprises of no validity.


This precedent discourse has led us through all ages, and through all the
most ordinary conditions of humane life; yet in this voyage, we have known
nothing but vanity and torment of spirit: And it has chiefly appeared, when
we have cast our eyes upon the divine providence of God, which does from the
highest Heavens view all the actions of man, not as an idle spectator, but as a
wise Conductor, and just Judge: And there from above, he laughes at the
designs of great men, and frustrateth their enterprises, destroys their
tongues and spirits of Babylonian builders, ruineth their greatness, and
breaks their Scepters into shiuers; teaching man that he is nothing but dust,
and his wisdom but mere blindness, to the end that he may learn to contemn
the world, and transport his hopes from earth to heaven; and that having seen
some beams of this terrestrial splendor, which vanishes as Lightening, he
does say with S. Peter, Luke 9. and 99.
It is good that we be here, let us make our selves here Tabernacles. Happy is
that man, which having well known the vantiy of this world, does retire
toward God; thot he being in a sure Haven a far off, and that being under
his shadow, as under a sure covered place, may contemplate the ruin of the
wicked, the instability of their designs, the folly of their hopes, and the
effects of the Judgment of God. Thereupon the Prophet David, in Psalm. 92.
says also: O LORD, how glorious are thy works! and thy thoughts are very
deep: an unwise man knows it not, and a fool does not understand this. When
the wicked grow as the grass, and all the works of wickedness do flourish;
then they shall be destroyed for ever. It behooves us, here to note carefully,
that this Psalm is entitled, A Song for the Sabbath day: for by it he does
advertise us, that this meditation requires a quiet and resting spirit, which
being restrained from the press of humane actions, does retire it self into
the House of God; according to that which he says in the 73 Psalm; where he
does confess, that the prosperity of wicked men has offended him, and that
he could hardly digest it, until that he had entered into the Sanctuary of the
Almighty, and considered the end of such men: For, to understand what the true
happiness is, and to unmask himself to the imaginary felicity of this
world; it is not necessary to go to Philosophical schools, or to build his
resolutions upon the opinion of the Vulgar, but to enter into the holy House of
God* and there learn what the difference is between the riches which he
scatters upon this great multitude, and that which he reserueth for his
little ones, Consider the subtilty of Satan, and man's sudden ruin.
what the uncertainty of this worldly prosperity is, in respect of the
certainty of Gods promises. But with what insensible chains does Satan lead
men into perdition? Memento decimo sexto die Octobris, ^^ilo Antiquo and quinto
die October. slilo Nouo. MDCXXIII*
How does he triumph over those which triumph in this world? how they that
think themselves most sure, are upon the point of their ruin and perpetual
destruction?

Let us furthermore consider how vain the glory of man is, Of the vain glory
of men most corruptible and transitory*
in that some one does boast of his particular strength, wherein it is
impossible for him ever to equal a Bull.

Some other do glory in their beauty, when as it is only a superficial
color, which covers the blood, bones, and brains, hideous things to see. It
is also a thing that age and many maladies have power to deforme.

Some other does glory of his honor and greatness, when indeed he is possessed
in this state, with most trouble and fear, and less liberty: besides, he is
mounted so high, that he cannot fall but with breaking of his own neck. The
just reward of Kings proud mounting Favorites.


Some other does glory to be more drunk then his companions, but if his belly
be greater in capacity then others, notwithstanding it will never exceed a
Barrel.

These former things are general; for vanities and miseries are common to all
men, since that sin has subjected mankind to them. But notwithstanding
there are some more then other, which are made examples of extreme misery; As
poor beggars, which are constrained through necessity to lie upon the bare
pauement; Necessitas non habet legem.
as Gallyslaues, and as those miserable slaves which are made mercenaries.

The hundredth part of humane kind does imperiously and impiously torment the
rest, and those that are feeble and mean, serve as preyes to the mighty.

Amongst the Turks and Pagans, which possess three parts of the world, men
are bought and sold in the same fashion, as horses in a Fair: for the buyer,
marketh their fight, makes them show their teeth, and feels the sinnewes of
their arms and legs.

Great Princes keep millions of chained Slaves for to labor, in making of
Sugar, in working of Mines, to serve in Galleys at Sea, and to perform such
kind of seruilitie, that Death is more tolerable to them then this kind of
life.

There are certain people, which have for the space of six months continual
night, who live in Cauernes, and in the extremity of the extremest degree of
coldness, having no heat to comfort them, but only cruelty.

Others there are on the contrary, who live amongst Sands, continually scorched
by the Sun, a country barren in fruits, and fertile in Serpents and Lions.

Our climate, in respect of such intemperature, is as the garden of Nature,
where God has planted most wealth and riches: but where he has reaped least
fruit of graceful actions: And where these natural blessings are so ill
husbanded, Of the vanity of humane thoughts, desires, and judgments.
that amongst all that abundance, there is nothing to be seen but misery and
poverty.

Now that we have formally and superficially represented as with a coal the
vanity and misery of our Nature, and the actions of Man: Let us now examine his
thoughts. David in the 94. Psalm says: The Lord knows the thoughts of man
that they are vanity.

For if any could but make a true collection of his thoughts, which have only
passed through his brain in one day: the confused multitude, and variety of
them, being all very foolish, would astonish him. The diverse fictions* and
strange Ideas that Painters conceit in respect of these, Idle and most
unprofitable thoughts.
are nothing. For some man, when he has settled himself in his study, or some
place where he thinks to have his spirit busied about the most serious
affairs, does then begin to count the Quarrees of his window; or as the
Emperor Domitian, Read Swetons Work.
to pursue little flies both with eye and hand.

Some one again perceiving himself destitute of company, and being very
pensive, does advise with himself what he would do if he were a King: A true
Simile of those that build Castles in the Castles in the air.
or if that he had a million of Crowns, how he would spend them: or thinking
of his own domesticke affairs, does thread a chain of tedious hopes, and by
degrees becomes very rich in his discourse: at the conclusion of which, he
frustrateth all that imagination, and returning to the consideration of his
present poverty, he moderateth his passions. A principal and most worthy
observation.
Yea also during the time of Sermons and Prayer (when God speaks unto us, or
we to him) our minds are abstracted, and thinking of some other thing.

There if our best actions are infected with idle cogitations; how much
moreover unprofitable hours are ill spent time?

These frivolous thoughts, mixed with vain desire, and a like ignorance, The
profit of solitariness.
do labor the mind, and gives it no repose: for man in his solitary thoughts
does ruminate the evils past, vexing himself with the things present, and
fore-fearing things to come, yea, those things that shall never happen: he
changes his doubtful fear, into certain miseries: many being miserable, out
of a fear that they shall be miserable; and many dying, out of a fear that
they shall die. Death terrible to the fool.
Every day has sufficient affliction to torment us. For who can ever be in
ease, if all the past and future evils do render themselves present to us: the
first by our memory, and the last by our fear? This natural unrest, is the
cause that Man loves change, like unto one that is sick, who desires
continually to change his bed: Yet notwithstanding finds himself more
distempered in the last then in the first, Man's uncertainty where to rest.
thinking no repose to be but in weariness. For he always carries his grief
with him, and finds little ease in changing of sides; yea, I dare say, if God
had placed Man betwixt good and evil, to take his choice of either, and as it
were to cut what he thought good out of the whole earth, his blindness is
such, that he would quickly convert it into ill. If God send such no griefs,
they will send themselves some. If their own griefs do not trouble them, the
happiness of others will torment them: and envy is more stinging then
affliction.

From it also does it proceed, Foolish and vain desires.
that men desire always they know not what themselves: they are greedy to
desire, but weak to put in Execution: as a Bird that does covet to fly, but
uses only one of her wings.

Also men are distracted with contrary cogitations.

One complains that his Wife is dead.

Another that she will not dye.

One mourns for the loss of his children.

Another that he has some that be very wicked.

One disturbed with business, praises domesticke repose, and that opinion of
Saul, who did rather affect to live obscurely in the basest poverty, then to
be exalted to the highest Dignity.

Another being excluded from public command, does notwithstanding break his
own neck to attain it. Every thing does seem to us beautiful, but that
which we have; and nothing delights us, but that which we cannot obtain.
Nothing does so much rejoice us, as the hurt of another man: of some decay in
Fortune we smile; but it grieueth us to see him receive any Honor.

In this vanity of thoughts, and uncertainty of desires, does appear a great
weakness of spirit: for our affections are swayed more by gestures, and
external appearance, then by the thing it self. Like unto some Spectators at
a Tragedy, who notwithstanding that they know the argument to be fabulous, and
nothing concerning them, do weep out of compassion, when as they will not
shead a tear for their own unfeigned griefs.

Some there be also that hang themselves out of despair, Despair animates
man to hasten the destruction.
which the selfsame hour would have run away from the thrust of a sword,
because that this last kind of Death comes accompanied with horror and
fear, whereas the former is so quickly dispatched, that the sight of it does
nothing amaze one. Opinions do more govern us, then the things themselves:
many do sometimes eat meat which they know not, and yet they find it
pleasing to the taste; but after, when some one has told them what it is, The
strong operation of conceit.
their conceit will make them so sick at heart, that they will vomit it up
again.

Some others have more fear of a Mouse, or a Hem, or a Toad, then of a sword;
certainly such peevish weakness, or fantastical actions do govern our
imaginations.

Truly I know not how, but men study to deceive themselves. Some one will
recite a tale for truth, which he knows to be most false, and that so often,
and with so great assurance, that himself in fine does believe it.

A Husband that knows his Wife to be deformed, notwithstanding, because she
is painted and disguized, will begin to persuade himself that she is fair,
and she her self will believe it, and think to be reputed so.

How many be there which believe in a Religion, because they will believe it,
which contest against their own sense, which say among themselves, that surely
is absurd, and not agreeable with the Scripture, I will have it thus, and will
believe so. This is to have a constrained belief, not to have his will
subjected to Religion, but Religion to his will.

The infirmity of man's judgment does especially show it self in Religion:
for what he thinks touching the service of God, does manifestly appear by
his exterior actions. In matters of news we do sooner believe one that has
seen it, then the common report.

But in matters of Religion it is contrary, for most do follow the vulgar
opinion, which is as much as to maintain that which is most absurd, and then
to hide himself amongst the multitude.

Observe many other things, The vain and superstious follies of ignorant
Idolaters.
which any may easily perceive to be most ridiculous:

As to cloth in Silk and Gold the images of men; while that a poor Beggar
goes naked, which is the Image of God.

To wear a Cross hanging down upon the belly, while that the belly is an
enemy to the Cross of Christ.

In going to a Bawdy House, or returning from some wicked fact, to say certain
Pater-nosters.

To kneel down at the box which keeps the Host, when it returns empty
from some sick body, as when it went full.

To adore the Host passing by a little box, and not to respect it in a man's
body, which is come newly from receiving it.

To make their Creator with words, Gross errors which like a foggy mist blind
and confound the sight and sense of men.
and presently to devour him with their teeth.

To be insolent and deboshed one day before Lent; and the next day following
to be very grave and sorrowful. Adherents of the Church of Rome.


To employ their blessed Beads for to obtain remission of their sins.

After the death of any great Personage, to cloth with black the Image of our
Lady, to the end that she may participate of their griefs.

To whip themselves in public, for to content God, or to release a soul out
of Purgatory. In honor of the Saints, to burn Candles in the midst of the day.

To conclude, man has forged many strange things in his brain, and would have
God to approve them. Nay, he is come to that pass, that he does assume to
himself the distribution of Offices in Paradise, making one Protector of a
Country, another a healer of some particular disease, as if little Ants had
power to dispose of affairs belonging to the Crown of France.

This is also a vanity of vanities, and an extreme imbecilitie of judgment.

Our selves which have the true Word of God for a rule to frame our actions by,
are not exempted: and our folly and vanity does mix it self with our best
actions. For in our civil actions, if we have need of counsel, we presently
address our selves to some friends. But in matters of Gods divine service, we
take counsel of our minds, and concupiscences, which are our domestical
enemies.

If money be due unto us from one, we had rather always have the money then
his promise: in celestial matters it is contrary. For the holy Gospel is an
obligation, by which God has promised us salvation, and has sealed it with
the blood of his Son: but we had rather keep the obligation, then receive
the payment, We must not think to make with our wealth and worldly riches a
composition and truce with Death; for Nature requires a tribute at our hands.
which is due at the day of death: nay, we do endeavor to prolong the date of
it.

Some do record in the Emperor Honorius, a great simplicity, and childish
weakness: that having a Hen, nominated by him, Rome, which he did cherish,
and so infinitely affect, that when one came unto him, and said that his Rome
was lost, he answered very sorrowfully, Alas! she was here but even now. But
the other replying, said, And it please your Highness, I speak not of a Hen, but
of your City of Rome, which has been surprised, and sacked by Alario Goth. A
Simile worthy of observation.
The Emperor hearing this, was somewhat comforted, thinking that loss to be
more tolerable.

Such is our simplicity, we will not suffer one to touch our riches, but We
are so rooted in this worlds abomination, that we prefer a minute of worldly
pleasure, before heavens everlasting joys, incomprehensible and immutable.
we will endure any to entice us to Vice; to seduce us into error, and to
poison our souls.

It is a great folly to refuse a medicine, because the Physician is not
eloquent: Why do we not then make account and estimation of the preaching of
the Gospel, if the Preacher be not eloquent, seeing that the holy Gospel is
the medicine of our souls?

Is it not then an extreme brutishnes, for some vicious person to slighten the
holy Writ, because it is not adorned with Flowers of Rhetoric? What is the
reason then, that the Word of God does please us, if it be not decked with
Flowers, and composed with Art, seeing that it is that sacred work, and
Doctrine of Reconciliation with God? We do not receive willingly the
correction of our Parents, if it be not very mild. This is also a vanity,
distaste, and childish humor.

Touching our Judgment which we have of others, either in esteeming, or
contemning them, it is most vain, and ridiculously ignorant.

For if there be a question about burdens, we account him most strong, which
can carry the heauiest. On the contrary, about quarrels we esteem him the
most valiant, which can bear nothing; attributing force and valor to
weakness and impatience.

In matters of ornament, we do not judge of the goodness of a sword, by the
beauty of a scabberd: nor of the metal of a Horse, by the fairness of a
Bridle and Saddle. Men ought not to be regarded not respected for their gallant
and gorgeous apparel only, but more for their virtues.
Why do we then measure our estimation of a man, either by his good or bad
apparel? And if it be necessary that we salute one for the stuff of his
clothes which he wears; why do we not salute the same stuff in the Shops?
Why do we judge discreetly in the estimation of vain and triuiall things;
when as in a matter of such importance, as of the estimation of man, we are
most void of reason? So some do respect a Merchant, or Rentgatherer, because
he summeth up exactly his accounts, when he lives in such fashion, that he
cannot give an account unto God.

Some labor to till their Gardens, and other grounds, and by it win much
praise; when as themselves are barren, and bring forth no fruit of good works.

We are much vain and childish in our fears, as in any other thing. For as
little Infants do play with fire and burn themselves, but fear when they see
their Father coming, masked with a frowning countenance toward them: So men
desiring to dally with pleasures, Man Iull'd in the Labyrinth of pleasures,
knows not how to get out.
because of their luster, at the length lose themselves amongst them: yet
notwithstanding they fear God their Father, when he comes unto them under
the mask of afflictions or death.

Also man does engender in himself either foolish or pernicious fears.

Some one being jealous that his wife does affect others, endeavors to espy
and search out that which he fears to find: and by this means angreth her
so, that she seeks to be revenged, in such nature which he formerly
suspected.

Some other fearing to live without honor, commits such things as subject
his body to some cruel torment, and staineth the memory of him with perpetual
infamy.

Some other fears the want of riches, The custom of the world.
but he shall want it, and dye without it.

Some again fears he shall die before marriage, Marriage without love and
means, breeds the most woeful experience of a miserable life.
but God well observes that time, and by wedlock will make him twice miserable.

When I consider what humane wisdom is, I find it agreeable to the industry
of Moles, which dig underground with much dexterity, but are blind when they
come into the Sun.

So we have much skill in earthly affairs, to sell, to covenant, and to
supplant any one.

But take one of these men which is is most subtle in these things,
Worldlings most wise in knowing the way to get riches: but to seek after the
riches of Heaven dull Animals.
and bring him to the brightness and light of the holy Gospel, and there he is
altogether blind, and of a self-conceit will continue so.

For during the time that he does foresee future events, and alterations of
estate, he is ignorant of his own destruction: while that he discourses on
the affairs of Kingdoms, he is a Slave to the Devil: And notwithstanding
that blind judgment of his, dares contest against the Everliving GOD, the
folly and foolishness of the children of darkness, against the Divine
wisdom of the Father of Light; and the discretion of man, against the
Providence of the Almighty. For the wicked do cover themselves with silence,
craft, and dissimulation: Like unto little children, which think that they are
sufficiently hidden, when their eyes are closed; Believing that no body sees
them, when they see no body. But in the mean time, God perceives them both
naked, and uncovered; yea, better then they themselves. For God is not only
all hand, in holding and conducting the whole Universe: but also all eye, in
seeing and discerning all things in it. The thickest bodies are to him
transparant; and darkness it self, is to him light: and therefore the Prophet
David does justly reprehend that foolish wisdom in the 94. Psalm, where he
says: Understand ye unwise among the people, and ye fools, when will ye be
wise? He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? or he that formed the eye,
shall he not see?

Now, in this place he calls them unwise, not which are fools, and run up
and down the streets: nor those private and particular men, which are without
Office; nor the heauy-spirited Commons; but such as are crafty, and manage
affairs with dexterity, thinking by their sagacity, to cover themselves from
the wisdom of God: or to dazzle the eyes of his providence sacred: Like unto
the most dangerous Agues, which are under the appearance of Coldness: So the
most ridiculous folly, is that which lies under the appearance of wisdom.

It behooves also the Faithful to exercise his meditation, and to be a
spectator of the actions and thoughts of men, and of all the unprofitable
labors of his life: For it is in humane life, as in a Fair, where there
comes two sorts of people; one for to buy and sell, the other only to see.

Man that fears God, is like to one of those which come to see: he is not
there idle, and to search nothing, but to contemplate the work of God, and
humane actions. Omnia sub sole vanitas.


But he may say (when he has seen all the delights that the curious vanity of
men can show forth)

O how many things are there in this world, which I have nothing to do
withal? What if during this contemplation, some one does iustle or throng upon
him, or if one cut his purse, that it do afflict, or deprive him of any thing?
All that such a one will do, is, to go out of that company; and knowing
himself to be a stranger in this world, will travel toward his Country, where
that Celestial Habitation is; pressing always, (as the Apostle says) toward
the mark, for the price of the high calling of God, in Christ Jesus.

If the world contemn him, he will contemn that contempt, as knowing
himself better then the world, and to be called to a better hope: Happy the
man that follows this blessed example.
he will esteem the promised allurements of the world, vain; the occupations
of men, base and importunate: and, according to the example of Mary, in the
tenth of Luke, he will choose the good part, which shall not be taken from
him: concluding all his meditations after the same manner as Solomon does in the
end of Ecclesiastes: The end of all is the fear of God, and the keeping of his
Commandments: for in it is comprised the sum of man's being.

Now therefore after all this meditation, let us rest our selves upon these two
Maxime's and Propositions, which are the true foundation that zeal is grounded
upon.

The first is, for to love God, it behooves to contemn the world.

The second is, that for to contemn the world, it is necessary for the
Faithful to know his own worth, nobleness, and excellency of vocation.

The first Maxim is taken out of S. John, in his first Epistle: Love not the
world, neither the things that are in the world:

If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him: For all
things that are in the world (as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes,
and the pride of life) is not of the Father, but is of the world: And the world
passes away, and the lust thereof; but he that fulfilleth the will of God,
abides for ever.

Nothing does so far separate us from the love of God, as our affection to
the world; seeing that the holy Scripture, for to admonish us, does call the
world, The Kingdom of the Devil.

But as the Moon has no light but from the Sun; so, our souls have not any
light, but by the regard of God; and by a consequent, neither more nor less:
But even as the Moon does lose her light, when she is hidden within the
shadow of the earth; so also do our souls lose their brightness, (for they
are called in the holy Scriptures, The children of light) when they molest and
wrap themselves within the shadow of earthly things, cares and worldly
concupiscences: which we ought to tread under our feet, according to the
example of the Church; which, as it is written in the 12. of the Apocalypse,
has under her feet the Moon; that is, the mutable instabilitie of these
inferior things.

To this purpose Jesus also would that the penny should be restored to Caesar,
because that it had his Image on it.

Let us therefore then give our selves to God, seeing that we bear his own
Image.

But the inconvenience is, that we do often abolish the Image, in rubbing it
against the earth, and polluting our souls with worldly thoughts and desires.

That we may therefore contemn the earth, and all that the world does
promise, it requires that we come to the second point, which is, to know
perfectly what the worth and excellency of the faithful is. For when as men by
an unfriendly amity, and cruel well-willing, The world's a Where, full of
deceitfulness.
do solicit some one to do ill, which has the fear of God, and to offend
his Conscience, in offending God, it behooves the faithful to think in
himself: There is no true friendship but among good men, very scant in this
Age.
What? I that am a Child of God, and am of a celestial nobleness; that am one
of the firstborn, whose names are registered in Heaven! shall I esteem the
promises of the world, which when they are most certain, they are too base for
me to meditate on? To delude the son of a Prince with an Apple; To entice
with Silver the Son of the King of Heaven: to offend his Father; and after
the example of Esau, to sell my birthright for a mess of pottage? Such
persuasions shall not by any means possess me: God will not afflict me with
so great a blindness. We are unworthy to be followers of CHRIST, if we do
not esteem our selves to be better then the world.

Was it not for the love of the faithful, that the world was framed? God in
his infinite mercy ruinates the building of sin in the body, to re-build the
Soul an everlasting Mansion in Heaven.
Will not God ruinate it again, for to reedifie for them a fair house in
Heaven, where shall be the fullness of glory? For this Heaven or climate, is
inferior to the worth and dignity of the children of God.

You that fear God, and trust in his Son, know, that it is you that
underprop the world, and that nourish the wicked in it.

Therefore the enemies of God are bound in obligation to you. For he does
conserve the world out of a respect, which he has toward his chosen and
elect, whereof some are mixed among the evil, and others are yet unborn. It
is written in the sixth of the Apocalypse; That GOD does attend, until our
fellow-seruants be accomplished.

And therefore this is one of the reasons why that Christ does call the
faithful, The salt of the earth; which is as much as a little part amongst
men, which conserueth the rest, and delayeth their destruction.

For God conserueth the sinful, because of the good, to the end that they
should serve as medicines to them; and that the might and power of our
Adversaries might serve to compel us to the fear of God, and to trust in his
promises.

Such being the excellency of Gods elect above the rest: it behooves us to
respect the pleasures, riches, and greatness of the world, as things that are
most ridiculous, and as the painted kingdoms which the Devil showed unto
Christ.

Like those which from the highest part of the Alps, The Alps be inexasible
high and great Mountains, which divide France from Italy.
do look into Campania, where the greatest Cities seem like unto little
Cottages; how much less and base will they seem then, if they were discerned
from Heaven? From thence therefore it behooves that the faithful contemplate
humane things, and that he transport instantly his heart to Heaven, since that
there is his treasure.

And considering from thence the Palaces of Princes, he will esteem them as
habitations of Ants, and the turbulent murmuring of men, as the buzzing of an
angry swarm of Bees, and contemplating from thence, what things are most
great and apparent in the earth, he will say, The vanity of vanities, all is
vanity.

That holy glory will not hinder Christian humility. For we knowing the
worthiness of our selves, do find our dignity in Jesus Christ.

If Repentance does humble us, Faith does exalt us.

If we are nothing before God, we are somewhat in God, and in his fatherly
affections.

And therefore in this the faithful are contrary to worldly men: for they do
lift their eyes to heaven by too much pride, but press down their heart on
the earth with Avarice and Incontinency: whereas the godly on the contrary,
has his eyes upon the earth by humility, as the Publican which durst not lift
his eyes to Heaven, but has his heart in Heaven by faith and hope. The
contempt of this world proceeds not out of a love to himself, but out of a
true affection to God.

THE MISERY OF MAN'S FRAIL AND NATVRALL INCLINATION AND Of the Wickedness and
Perverseness that now reigns in this wretched AGE.
COnsidering to my self the miseries of Humane condition, my mind and spirit
is so confounded with diversity of thoughts, that I enter (as it were) into a
Labyrinth of confusion, whose issue is most difficult. For if I settle my
considerations upon Nature, humane qualities or effects, those three objects do
so obfuscate my powers, that all the knowledge that I can gather, is
impossibility never to attain to the perfect knowledge of the numberless
number of those miseries, mis-haps, and vanities affected, as inseparable to
humane kind; and to that end do challenge all the most profound and serious
senses of the wisest and most learned men, Man borne in misery and most
miserable even from his Cradle.
to effect the definition thereof. Let them consider from its source and
original; yea, even from the Cradle, where humane nature shall be found
senseless, deprived from the usage of all the noblest faculties of the Soul;
and so weak, wretched, and capable only of tears and weepings; expressing
thereby in complaining her miseries, which do increase faster then she grows
in years: She has no sooner given over the Milk of her Nurse, but she begins
to go, or rather to fall, since her going is in danger of sore hurts by a
continual experience in falling. Can she go? She knows not whither to go,
but must have a conduct during the time of her second Infancy: what form of
bringing up soever she takes upon her, the first impressions thereof are most
costly, in respect of the time, and their labor and trouble which have the
care thereof, which is incredible. For as she receives some document of
worldly science and discipline, which if it be a true doctrine, will instruct
her, that whatsoever qualities, sciences, and learning she possesses, yet she
is still ignorant, and knows (in a manner) nothing, and all that she knows
not, can never be by her learned or conceived, although she have so many
lives, as this world abounds with creatures.

And which is more, Man's life assaultod by peril I and eminent dangers.
she has not so soon escaped, and passed over the perils of her Youth, but
she comes and enters into those infinite dangers of her ripe age: and that
which is most deplorable, and lamentable, is, that in that fiery and burning
age, she utterly consumes and wastes her self. Or if she escape, and moderates
the fury and violence of the heat of that age, it is but for a time for what
way so ever she treads Nature, she still approaches near unto death, being
always in the ready way to her grave, where by degree, time hunts her under
the conduct of old age, not without many crosses, sorrows, and tribulations;
for she must pass through cruel and tedious straights of anguish and
miseries, no less innumerable, then infinite; which astonisheth and wears
out, even the most constant, who are in a manner not able to endure them with
patience.

If we will see the body of this Tree, we must break the bark of our
condition: for it is the true portraiture of our selves, and so we may
clearly apprehend it with the very same reason; considering what an infinite
number of mis-haps, miseries, and mischiefs we are subject unto in this
transitory world, that the infinity of them is impossible to be related: for
if examples be vain to manifest it unto us by comparison, our imbecilitie in
expressing it alone, may be in some fashion eloquent: for to treat some part
thereof, and that wherewith the afflicted are most comforted, is, through the
assurance they have that all men together are subject to the like miseries, and
ill fortunes, except none but those who are not yet borne, or those, who in
their Cradle ending their lives, find their Sepulchers: otherwise let the most
happy and the most contented man that now lives on earth gainsay it,
alleging this for his reason, that he knows not what mis-haps and miseries
mean, and that in so sweet ignorance he has passed not only the spring of
his Youth, but likewise the Summer, and part of the Winter of his age, that it
is well hitherto, but it is without consequence, times past can conclude
nothing of the future; and though it seems to this happy man, that although
crosses, troubles, tribulations, and miseries, should as it were assault him in
the end of his race, time should be wanting to make durable and lasting the
grief of his evils and afflictions: Forasmuch as death does always and
lawfully succeed old age, which should hinder and interrupt the course and
proceeding thereof: but to that I will truly answer without many needless
proofs: for surety that his last day only is able sufficiently to make him
feel and have trial of the most cruel and sensiblest grief and torments,
wherewith any mortal body can be vexed: therefore the most fortunate man that
is, cannot account himself happy, but at the end of his racei since oftentimes
before an haven Town many suffer shipwreck, that have escaped miraculously
many eminent dangers, in the midst of Storms and Tempests.

But to proceed further, No man free from sorrows and miseries.
I say, that although there were such a man found in this world, of so happy
condition, as to have always sailed in the ship of his life, in this rough and
inconstant Sea of the earth, with the agreeable winds of his desire, and
without the least dangers, but rather continually to have enjoyed a sweet and
immutable calm; yet notwithstanding, this kind of life full of Roses, There
is a time pre-ordained for every thing.
will prove full of Thorns at his death, in considering, that loss and
deprivation of all those pleasures, do produce and bring forth cruel sorrows
and griefs to the possessor thereof, whose mind will be so extremely vexed
and tormented, that his pains and sufferings can be rather endured, then
expressed: which may easily be proved by the continual experience that we
have in worldly things; by this Maxim, the greater the contentments are, the
more extreme is the displeasure and anguish in the deprauation of them, even as
gain and profit produce feelings of joy; so loss and damage by different
effects, breed sencible torments and griefs: which moves me to conclude,
according to my first Propositions, that there is no life, although never so
happy, that can be free and exempted from sorrows and miseries: and to add
my opinion to it, I hold, that the most unfortunate, are the happiest,
considering the conclusion and end of all things; how the calm follows still
the tempest; the day succeeds the night; fair weather, rain; and joy is still
attended with annoy and sorrows, according to the maxim of Heaven and Earth:
all the difference there is, is, that this worlds happiness and joys are
temporal, and limited; and in the other World, eternal and infinite.

But to return to our condition: to make it appear unto you all together
wretched and miserable; we must consider how time plays with it; sometimes
raising us as it were to prosperity, and in a moment casting us headlong into
adversity; it serves for a Mark to aim and level at, and an habitation and
lodging of all evils: For hope deceiues our condition; vanity flouts it;
ambition mockes it; vices are her beloved children, and virtues her greatest
enemies: pleasure cheates her; the flesh tempts her; riches commands her, as
her Sovereign; and finally, the Devil maintains a continual war with her
until her end.

Let us judge then if pride and arrogance become us well, considering all these
our infirmities and defaults. We must not therefore wonder, Humility, the
Queen of Virtues.
if Humility be the Queen of all other virtues, since Arrogance has been,
and is still Princess of Vices. Pride, the Princess of Vice.
I hold opinion with that worthy Philosopher, which in one lesson only taught
all sorts of Sciences, comprehended and abridged in that admirable precept and
instruction of Cognosce Teipsum; and truly who in that knowledge is not
ignorant, and that in knowing himself, will auow that he does not perfectly
know himself. The way that we lead to arrive at this blessed iourneys end unto
which we aspire, is most long and tedious. So that it were much better for us
to arm our selves with a generous resolution, to forsake the world, before it
does leave and abandon us; for the soonest we can, will be late enough, to
execute so glorious an enterprise: For when I think and behold the miserable
state of this transitory world, and how it is infected with all sorts of
execrable sins, a trembling horror unties my bodies ligatures, my very knees
beat together, and I could unfeignedly wish my sinnowy structure, to be
transformed, into a lump of snow, that the ardour of my souls vexation, might
dissolve it into penitential tears: for men do act sin with an auaritious
appetite, and all varieties of abominations are lifted to their Arcticke point.
Does not Satan coin them so fast, as men would willingly put them in practice?
Did pride ever so strut it upon the Tiptoes, as now it does?

Can the Devil, out of his shape of fashions, lay open more Antike-like forms
then are forged on the Anuill of man's invention? In Court, the Nobility are
hardly distinguished from their followers. In City, the Merchant is not known
from his Factor. In Country, the Gentry cannot be descryed or described from
the Rusticke; and in general, the body public is so ouerspred with the
Leprosy of that garish Strumpet, Pride, as there is scarce any difference
between Countess and Curtezan; Lady, and Chambermaid; Mistress, and greasy
Kitchen Wench; Gentleman, and Mechanic. As for Knight and Tailor, there goes
but a pair of Sheares betwixt them. How many mis-spend and profusely lavish
their fore-noones hours, in the curious pranking of their sinnepolluted
bodies! but how few reserve one poor brace of minutes, wherein to provide
spiritual indewments to houze their naked sinful souls! Never was the
Apophthegme of old Byas the Philosopher more verified, then in these our
frantic times.

Most men carry their wealth about with them, not as Bias did, in learning and
virtue; but upon their back in gorgeous apparel. Women do so commonly
sophisticate their beauties, that one (though Linceus-sighted) can hardly
judge, whether they possess their own faces, or no? and, which is more than
most lamentable, every snowy-headed Matron, every toothlesse Mumpsimus, that
one may see the sun go to bed through the furrows of her forehead, must have
her box of odoriferous Pomatum, and glittering Stibium, wherewithal to parget,
white-lime, and complectionate her rumpled cheeks, till she looks as smugge
as an hansome painted Close stool, or rotten post. But as for them that lap
up their bodies in the pleasant mists of aromaticke perfumes, let them withal
swallow this Pill: Within a sweet and ciuet lurking body, often is imprisoned a
loathsome stinking soul.

Murder is accounted but manly revenge, and the desperate Stabber cares no
more to kill a man, then to crack a Flea. Usury and Extortion are held
laudable vocations; Covetousness is styled thrift; Luxury and whoredom are
reputed but youthful tricks: And as for Drunkenness, why that is a tolerable
recreation: Do not men pursue it with such inordinate affection, that they often
neglect their functions, bid farewell to that domesticke care they ought to
entertain; dislodge that humane providence which should be shut up in the
Cabinet of their reasonable part, and solely prostitute themselves to quotidian
carousing, till their breaths smell no sweeter then a Brewers apron, whilst
their families are wrung and grip't in the clutches of poverty, locked up, and
imprisoned from those necessary supplements, which should keep both breath
and body together at union? This is a worthy Fathers opinion: That a man
possessed with a Devil, may be thought to be in a more hopeful state then a
Drunkard: for albeit that he be possessed, yet is it compulsiuely, and against
his will; but the Drunkard wholly adopts and dedicates himself, with all the
powerful faculties of his soul, voluntarily to the service of Satan. S.
Augustine likewise describes three fearful properties in a Drunkard: It
confounds nature, says he, loses grace, and consequently, incurres Gods
wrathful indignation to be powered out upon the imbracer thereof.

Swearing, and blaspheming Gods great and glorious Name, is reckoned for a
moral virtue, the grace of birth and honor, the cognizance of an high-bred
spirit.

What Christian can refrain, (that has any spark of Divine intellect in him)
to vnsluce the flood-gate of his eyes, and let his melting heart gush through
with tears; when in the streets he shall hear little Children, scarce able to
go, or speak, to be understood; volley forth most fearful oaths, and with
such procliuitie, as if they had bin tutored in their mothers wombes; whilst
their parents standing by, offer not to check them, with so much as a sour
reproof; but seeming rather to solace themselves in their Childrens sins,
and delight in their own damnations: like those who dye in a Sardinian
laughter? If the penal Law of Lodovicus were put in practice; who hearing one
swear, seared up his lips with an hot iron) scarce ten, in as many Parishes,
but would be glad to be in league with the Apothicaries lippe-salue. How many
miraculous Judgments has God shot out against the blasphemers of his sacred
Name; whose instances would be too prolixious? What sin can be more damnable,
and yet more practiced? None can sooner plunge the soul into the implacable
gulf of perdition, and yet no sin, by intentive endeavor, more easy to be
cropped off, and weeded up: for that it is no incidentall issue of natural
corruption, but an accidental monster, inegndred of corrupted custom. A
learned Father confesses, That at every other word he once used to swear, but
at length, endeavoring to lock up the door of his lips, to set watch before
his tongue; employing divine assistance therein, and entreating moreover his
friends to smite him with the rod of reprehension; in forty days he utterly
lost the abusiue use thereof: So that now, says he, nothing is more easy to
me, then not to swear at all.

It is recorded, that Lewis the 7. King of France, diuulged an Edict, that
whosoever was known to war against heaven with oaths, should be branded in
the forehead, as a capital offender: Should not then every Christian labor to
set a watch before his mouth, and keep the door of his lips, that no
rebellious words salley forth against his Creator? If not for fear of
temporal Justice, yet, lest the God of Justice should brand his soul with the
dreadful stigme of eternal damnation, which no salve can heal, Haliacmons
Flood wash out, nor length of time wear off. O lamentable* when the Turks and
Ethnicks outstrip us in their cloudy and ignorant zeal: they will dispute in
the heart of their highest Streets, about their Alcoran, and Mahometish
religion, with holy intended devotion. But what voice is heard in our Streets?
Naught, but the squeaking out of those obsceane and light Iigges, stuffed with
loathsome and unheard of ribauldry, sucked from the poisonous dugges of
sinne-swelled Theaters; controuersall conferences about richest beer, neatest
wine, or strongest Tobacho, wherein to drown their souls, and draw meager
diseases upon their distempered bodies.

And tell them moreover, that by their nocturnall superfluities, and insatiable
quaffings, they set but feathers in Times wings, and (as a worthy homebred
Author says) spur but the gallopping horse; hasten on their speedy deaths,
and dig their own untimely graves.

More have recourse to playing houses, then to praying Houses; where they set
open their ears and eyes, to suck up variety of abominations, bewitching
their minds with extrauagant thoughts, and benumming their souls with
insensibility, whereby sin is become so customary to them, as, that to sin,
with them is deemed no sin at all: consonant to that Theological Maxim; The
custom of sinning, takes away the very sense and feeling of sin. And
semblable to Pythagoras his conceit of the Sphericall harmony: Because (says
he) we ever hear it, we never hear it.

Many set fair outside colors upon their profession of religious honesty,
but being strictly looked into by the penetrating eye of practice and
performance, prove seldom di'de in grain. Some glitter like gold in their
conversation, but put once to the Touch, are found but counterfeit Alcumy.
Others will needs seem a substantial body in integrity of life; but shaken
and sifted with the hand of trial, become but an Anatomy of bones.

To give alms, is thought but a fantastical ceremony, and to refresh the
comfortless Lazarus, is deemed but the maintenance of idle and exorbitant
vagabounds. O where is Charity fled? Is she not whipped and foysted out of great
men's Kitchens, glad to keep Sanctuary in straw-cloath'd Cottages? Are not
larger beneuolences often distributed at the door of one russet-clad Farmer,
then at ten mighty men's Gates? The Magnificoes of this world rear up sumptuous
buildings, only for show and ostentation; whiffing more smoke out of their
noses then their chimneys; and it begets more wonder to see them shake down
their bounty into the poor man's lap, then to see a Court-Lady unpainted, or to
find an openfisted Lawyer, that without a Bribe will faithfully prosecute his
Clients cause. Notwithstanding all this, so parcimonious are they in their
domesticke provision, that not a Rat of any good education, but scorns to
keep house with them.

In those golden times of yore, Charity was the rich man's Idol: for they did
emulate each other in supplying the Widows want; in comforting the Orphans
misery; and in refreshing the Travelers weariness.

And it was their earthly Summum bonum, to be open-hearted and handed to each
hungry stranger: This inscription commonly engraued upon the front of their
gates:

O gate, stand open to all, be shut to none. But in these our modern days,
they can cunningly transpose the point, and and thus pervert the sense, Stand
open (gate) to none, be shut to all.

Do not these heauen-tempting Nimrods depopulate and level with the ground
whole towns, crowd and iustle many honest and ancient Farmers out of their
Demesne, deuastate their Possessions, and expose them with their Wives,
Children and Families, to be Camerades with palefac'd beggary, only to lay the
Basis of their Babel-out-brauing Palaces, abillimented with Punkish outsides,
to cheat the speedy approaching Traveler of his hungry hopes, as Zeuxis did
the silly Birds with his liuely-limbed Grapes: as if they be in-lined with
quaint garnishing, and costly furniture, and beautified with curious pencild
pieces, whereon thy eye may glut it self by gazing, yet perhaps may thou be
chap-faln for want of victuals?

These glittering objects are the Medusas that inchant the violent
instigations, that spur on young luxurious heirs to hurl out their Angle to
catch their fathers lives, and languishingly to long, till they see their
mossie-bearded Sires topple up their heels into their graves.

And when their Fathers surrender up their breathes to him from whom it was
first diffused: then do they mourn (forsooth) though ceremonially, not for
that they are dead, but because they died no sooner.

The premises pre-considered; what can be expected then, but an imminent
desolation, or conclusiue dissolution of this foolish doting world, since
universally it is but an indigested Chaos of outrageous enormities? Religion is
made the Canopy to shroud the putrefaction of Hypocrisy, and it is grown the
highest Maxim in mundane policies, to seem (not be) religious: equall-handed
Justice is rushed aside, by stubborn authority, and all Moral virtues
embraced in their contraries.

How long then (most mild and more merciful God) will thou forget to be just!
Oh how long will thou shut up the vessels of thy wrath, and protract revenge?
Art thou not the powerful God of Justice? how can thou then be any thing but
thy self? What infinities of sins are shot up to Heaven against thee? Yet
still and still thou wooest us with the heavenly breath of thy holy Gospel,
uncovering those inexpressible wounds thou receiuedst for our Redemption from
sin, and Satan, that we might with pitiful commiseration behold them, and
incessantly crying out unto us: How often (O my dear children, whom I have
bought with the price of my most precious blood) would I have gathered you
together, even as the Hen does her Chickens, and yet, nor yet, you will not be
collected!

How often has he thundered and knocked at the doors of our hearts, with the
power of his Spirit, to wake from the profound Ecstasm o f soule-killing
sins! yet still lie we snorting on the bed of security, and cannot be rowzed.

How often, O how often has he outstretched his all-sauing hand, to heave
and help us out of the slimie mudde of our impieties! yet still lie we
groueling and ouer-whelmed in the insensible Lethargy of abominable
transgressions.

How many warning-pieces has he discharged upon us! How often has he displayed
his milke-white Ensigns of peace unto us! What devouring plagues; what fires;
what inundations, what unseasonable Seasons, what prodigeous Births, what
unnatural Meteors, what malevolent Conjunctions, what ominous apparitions,
what bloody assassinations of mighty Kings: what Rapes, what Murders, what
fraudulencies betwixt brother and brother? what horrible conspiracies by sons
against fathers? All these sent as Heralds against us, yet will we not come
and be reconciled.

These prodigious precursions, or precursiue prodigies, should deter each
humane creature from spurning against his Creator. These pre-monitions should
instruct us, that Gods dreadful vengeance waits at our doors and like a
starved Tiger gapes for our destruction: And notwithstanding he do for a while
fore-slowe to let fall his flaming rod of fiery indignation upon us, yet is
the Axe already laid to the root of the tree, and God must and will assuredly
come to judgment; seeing that now not any of those ancient predictions
mystically pointed out unto us, in the soule-sauing Writ by the holy Prophets,
remain unfinished, but only the final destruction of that Romish
seuen-headed Monster, together with the recollection of the vagabond Jews,
into the sheepe-fold of Jesus Christ.

Does not an uncouth terror seize upon a man, when in the depth or noone of
night this sudden and unthought of outcry of fire, fire, shall fill his
affrighted ears, and chase him out of his soft and quiet slumbers; whereat
skipping from his easefull bed, and distractedly gazing through the Casement,
shall behold his own house o're-spred with a bright-burning flame, and
himself together with his Wife and Children, servants goods and all, most
liable to the devouring rapacitie of imminent danger? O consider then, wicked
man, how thy soul will be beleaguered with anguish and horror, when in that
last and terrible Day thou shall behold with thy mortal eyes, the Cataracts of
heaven, vnsluced, and hushing showers of sulphurious fires disperse themselves
through all the corners of the earth and air: the whole Universe o're-canoped
with a remorselesse flame; when thou shall see the great and glorious Judge
appear triumphantly in the skies, whilst mighty-winged clouds of devouring
flames fly before him, as Vshers to his powerful and terrible Majesty,
attended with countlesse multitudes of beauteous Angels, golden winged
Cherubims, and Seraphims, sounding their Trumpets, whose clamorous tongues
shall affright the empty air, and call and awake the drowzy dead from their
dark and duskie cabins, when thou shall see the dissipated bones of all
mortals since the Creation (concatenate and knit in their proper and peculiar
form) amazedly start up, and in numberles troops flock together, all turning
up their wondering eyes, to gaze upon their high and mighty Creator. Then, O
then will thy conscience recommemorate afresh thy past committed sins, and
with the corroding sting of guilt, will stab through thy perplexed soul. Then,
O then, will it be too late to wish the Mountains to fall upon thee; for they
themselves for fear would shrink into their Center. Alas, it cannot then be
available to woo the waters to swallow thee, for they would be glad to
disclaim their liquid substance, and be reduced to a nullity. What will it
boot thee then to entreat the earth to entombe thee in her dankish womb, when
she her self will struggle to remove from her local residence, and to fly
from the presence of the great Judge? The air cannot muffle thee in her foggy
vastitie: for that will be clearly refined: in her will be celestial flames,
before contaminated with humane pollution. In fine, how will thy soul
tremblingly howl out, and break forth into bitter exclamations, when thou
shall hear that definitive, or rather infinitive sentence denounced against
thee, I know thee not, Depart and go into everlasting torment, whilst Legions
of devils, with horrid vociferations muster about thee, like croking Ravens
about some dead carcass waiting to carry thee?

O thou Usurer, and thou that grindest the faces of the poor, thy gold cannot
ransom thee. Then, thou mighty man that rackest the Widow, and circumuentest
the Orphane of his successiue right, thy honor cannot privilege thee: then,
thou murderer, adulterer, and blasphemer, thy colorable excuses will not
purge thee.

Then, O thou uncharitable Churl, who never knew, that a rich man treasures
up no more of his riches, then that he contributes in Alms.

Thou that never imbracedst the counsel of that reverend Father, who cries,
Feed him that dies for hunger. Whosoever thou art that can preserve, and
wilt not, thou stand guilty of famishing: then I say, in that day shall thou
pine in perdition.

Then, O thou luxurious Epicure, that through the five senses, which are the
Cinque Ports, or rather sinner-ports of thy soul, gulpest down delightful
sin like water, they will be to thee like the Angels books, sweet in thy
mouth, but bitter in thy bowels.

Then O thou gorbellied Mammonist, that pilest up and congestest huge masses of
refulgent earth, purchased by all unconscionable courses, yet carriest nothing
with thee but a Coffin and a winding sheet! Thy fair pretenses will be like
Caracters drawn upon the Sands, or Arrows shot up to Heauen-ward, they cannot
release thee from Satan's inexpiable servitude.

Then O thou Canker-worme of Commonwealths; thou Monster of Man; thou that
put out the eye of Justice with Bribes, or so closely shutst it, that the
clamorous cry of the poor man's case cannot open it. Thou that make the Law a
nose of Wax, to turn and fashion it to thine own private end, to the utter
disgrace of conscionable Justice, and to the lamentable subversion of many an
honest and upright cause: thy quirkes, dilatory demurres, conueyances and
conniuences cannot acquit thee, but thou shall be removed with a Writ, into the
lowest and darkest dungeon of damnation. No, no, the Lord of heaven and earth
(who is good in infiniteness, and infinite in goodness,) will winnow, garble
and fan his corn, the choice wheat he will treasure up in the garners of
eternal felicity; but the Chafe and Darnell must be burnt with unquenchable
fire. There must you languish in torments vnrelaxable; there must you fry and
freeze in one selfe-furnace; there must you live in implacable and tenebrous
fire, which, as Austin defines, shall give no light to comfort you.

Then will you wish (though then too late) that you had been created loathsome
Toades, or abhorred Serpents, that your miseries might have clozed up with your
lives: but you must be dying perpetually, yet never dye, and which enuirons
me with a trembling (terror) when you have languish't in inexpressible
agonies, tortures, gnashings, and horrid howlings ten thousand millions of
years; yet shall you be as far from the end of your torments, as you were
at the beginning.

A confused model, and misty figure of hell have we conglomerate in our
fancy, drowzily dreaming, that it is a place under earth incessantly (
Aetna-like) vomiting sulphurious flames: but we never pursue the meditation
thereof so close, as to consider what a thing it is to live there eternally.
For this adiunct, Eternal, intimates such infiniteness, as neither thought
can attract, or supposition apprehend. And further, to amplify it with the
words of a worthy Writer, though all the men that ever have or shall be
created, were, Briareus-like, hundred-handed, and should all at once take pens
in their hundred hands, and should do nothing else in ten hundred thousand
millions of years, but sum up in figures as many hundred thousand millions
as they could, yet never could they reduce to a Total, or confine within
number this Trisillable word, Eternal.

Can any Christian then (upon due consideration hereof) forbear to prostrate
himself with flexible humility before the glorious Throne of Grace, and there,
with floods of unfeigned tears, repentantly abjure and disclaine the
allurements of carnal corruption, the painted pleasures of the world, and the
bitter sweetness of sin, which is the death's wound of his soul? for a
Weapon wounds the body, and sin the soul: For what profits it a man to win
the whole world, and lose his own soul? The soundest Method therefore, to
prevent our exclusion from the Throane of Gods mercy, is, to imagine, we still
see him present in his Justice, whatsoever, or when soever we attempt any
black design: Let us but adumbragiously fancy (as one has it) the Firmament
to be his Face; the all-seeing Sun, his right Eye; the Moon, his left; the
Winds, the breath of his Nostrils; the Lightening and Tempests, the troubled
action of his Ire; the Frost and Snow, his Frowns; that the Heaven is his
Throne; the Earth his Footstool: that he is all in all things; that his
omnipotence fills all the vacuities of Heaven, Earth, and Sea; that by his
power, he can vngirdle and let loose the Seas impetuous waves, to o'rewhelme
and bury this lower universe in their vast wombs, in a moment that he can let
drop the blue Canopy (which has nothing above it, whereto it is
perpendicularly knit) or hurl thunderbolts through the tumorous clouds, to
pash us precipitate through the center, into the lowest dungeon of Hell.

These allusiue cogitations of Gods omnipotent Majesty, will curb in and
snaffle us from rushing into damnable actions, if we vnremoueably seat them in
our memories.

Make then a covenant with thine eyes and heart, O man, lest they dote on
earthly grass, surfeit on the sugared Pills of poisonous vanities, and so
insensibly hurl down thy better part into the gulf of irreuocable damnation,
if not for thy self sake, yet iniure not thy Creator, who halh drawn thee by
his own pattern, molded thee in his own form; and, to make thee eternally
happy, has infused his own essence into thee; for thy soul, by the
Philosophers confession, is infusion celestial, no natural traduction, and in
that respect another calls it an arrachment, or cantell, pulld from the
celestial substance which cannot terminate it self within a lump of flesh:
Even as the beams of the Sun, though they touch the earth, and give life to
these inferior creatures, yet still reside in the body of the Sun whence
they are darted: So thy soul, though it be seated either within the filme of
the brain, or confined in the center of the heart, and conuerseth with the
senses, yet it will still have being whence it has its beginning.

Remember then thy Creator in the days of thy youth, call upon him while it
is called to day; for as the Poet no less sweetly then discreetly sung, Who
knows ore night that he next morn shall breathe? Then take David's Early in
the morning, not the Devils Stay till to morrow: for thou know, God will
bring thee to Judgment, yet thou know not when, nor in what year, nor in
what month of the year, nor in what week of the month, nor in what day of
the week, nor in what hour of the day, nor in what minute of that hour, nor
in what moment of that minute; for he will come like a thief in the night
suddenly, before with a wink thou can lock up thine eye, or in thy brain
create the nimblest thought* Can thou then hope to stand justified in thy
Makers presence, when thou have cramd the devil with thy sap of strength,
and full gorged him with the purest Acorne Mast of thy siowy virility, if at
last thou come limping on Times tottering crutches, to present unto him the off
all husks, and morosity of thy doting decrepit age.

What thank is it to pardon our enemies, when we cannot hurt them? to give
away our goods, when we can enjoy them no longer? to abandon our pleasures,
when we cannot use them? to forsake sin, when it biddes farewell to us? and
at last only to surcease to offend, when ability of offending is taken from
us? No, no, he will then parallel thee with the sluggard, that never would
acquire food till he was first starn'd, and rank thee with the sottish
idiot, that could not know a fish, till he was already stung with a Scorpion:
thy palsie-shaken prayers will be like Cains oblation, unacceptable to the
Lord, and noisome to his nostrils. Think thou to expiate Gods Justice, when
thou have prodigally swealed out the blazing lamp of thy brightest day in the
Devils chapel, if at last thou come creeping (when thy breath lies twinkling
in the socket of thy nostrils) to set it up in Gods Sanctuary, hoping then and
there to have it replenish't with his all-sauing grace and mercy? O mock not
thy soul with these deluding phantasma's: for as Alexander seeing one of his
soldiers whetting his dart when others of his fellows went forth to fight,
casheer'd him, saying, He Is unfit to bear arms, that has them to make ready
when he should skirmish: So will God send thee packing (as he did the foolish
Virgins) with this retorsion, Thou come disfurnish't, with no oil in thy
lamp, and thou deseruest no mercy, that never desiredst it till now in
misery. Gather thy self betimes then within the weapons of Faith, Hope,
Charity, Repentance, and Perseverance, and let Prayer stand perpetual
Sentinel: for if the Devil once get footing within thee, he will hardly be
eiected, so wily is he in perverting thee, that thou can not be too wary in
preventing him; For as Iphicrates answered his General, (who asked him why he
surrounded his soldiers with a Wall, when there was no fear of foe-mens
approach?) A man cannot be too provident in preventing obuious and occurrent
dangers. So can thou not be too cautelous in repelling the perilous
stratagems of the Devils assaults: therefore may I cloze up the precedencie
with that worthy saying of a more worthy Epigrammatist, No man needs fear,
that fears before he needs. O cleanse and purify thy heart then by earnest
prayer and powerful ciaculations, which is made the loathsome cage of sin,
the silent receptacle of diabolical cogitations, and the dismal dungeon of
malignant motions, that the Spirit of grace may there find harbor, and take
delight to be thy inmate.

Remember, O thou mighty man, that swelling titles of Honor are but the leaves
of vanity.

Remember, O thou rich man, that terrene and transitory pleasures are like the
Be, though they yield honey, yet carry they a sting, and are but as the
Lillies of the earth, more delectable in show, then durable in continuance.

Remember, O thou extortioner, thou cruel man, thou Murderer, thou Adulterer,
thou deceitful man; thou unconscionably deteinest the hirelings wages; and
thou that actest inexorable villainies secretly in the dark, imprisoned from
the worlds dull eye, that if the Eagle can discern, as one has it, the Hare
under the Bush, and the Fish under the Waves, much more can God, who is the
Creator of creatures, penetrate the closet of thy heart, with his all-seeing
eye, and discern thy clandestine sinful practices before, and in their very
conception, and for them he will bring thee to judgment.

Remember, O thou that swayest the Sword of Justice, to strike or save, as thou
art suggested by thine own ends, profits, or affections, that though thy
covert proiects be not envulgard to the worlds general eye; yet a day of
Revelation will come, when all thy partial and private practices shall be
stripped, euiscerate, and laid as apparently open, as the sheep upon the
Gambrell.

But now with reverence and Douelike humility to you (which are Iehouahs
Ambassadors) the light of the world, and salt of the earth, do I address my
speech, mustered up in the meanest and mildest rank of words. O, I could wish
that all of you stood without the list of that reprehension of Vices, which
once an ancient and honest Historian twitted the Monks of Canterbury with.
Some rise early in the morning, to see their hounds pursue the prey, but not to
pray: some delight to catch Fowls, but not Souls; some take pleasure to cast
a Dye well, but not cast to die well. Does the wild* Ass bray, says Job,
when he has grass; or loweth the Ox when he has fodder? But I dare not say,
No more do some of you preach, when you have once got a Benefice. If there be
any that entertain Religion with their Lord, preach the praise of their
Patrons; preaching in the Pulpit, chatter in their Chambers, suiting their
Linsie Wolsey professions* with their several ends: O let those remember how
God met with a mischief that notorious Nestorius, who for his temporizing
inconstancy, set worms a work to eat out his tongue. O let them look into
the Story of one Hecebolus, a Sophister, who accommodating his profession to
the fashions of the Emperors, fained himself in the days of Constantius, to
be a most fervent Christian.

But when Julian the Apostata was Ruler, presently he turned Paynim, and in his
Orations proclaimed Julian a god. And when Julian was dead in Iouinians time,
he would have turned back to Christianity. Whereupon for his mutabilitie and
lightness in his Religion, his horrid conscience drove him to the Church
gates, and there hurling himself flat, cried and bellowed with a loud voice,
Trample me under your feet unsavory salt that I am; entirely wishing out of
his souls agony, that he had never seen the light; or at his conception, his
tongue had been riuetted to the roof of his mouth.

Lastly and indefinitely to all; Remember so to live, as you still may be
prepared for the stroke of Death: then will you desire to be dissolved, and to
sleep in peace reclusiuely from the turbulent sea of earthy careful miseries,
discerning clearly by the spiritual eye of understanding, that man's life is a
wayfare, because it is short and a warfare, for that it is sharp, and that
worldly delights are deceitful, and of no durabilitie; like the water-Serpent,
no sooner bred, but dead. Collecting likewise out of humane experience, that
the best life is but a weary and tedious pilgrimage, and feels no touch of
true solace, till at the evening of his days he lodge at the Inn of death:
for death is the path of life, a Gaole-deliuery of the soul, a perfect health,
the haven of heaven, the final victory of terrestrial troubles, an eternal
sleep, a dissolution of the body, a terror to the rich, a desire of the
poor, a pilgrimage uncertain, a thief of men, a shadow of life, a rest from
travel, an Epilogue to vain delight, a consumption of idle desires, a scourge
for evil, a guerdon for good: it dis-burdens us of all care, vnmanacles and
frees us from vexation, solicitude and sorrow.

Of all those numberless numbers that are dead, never any one returned to
complain of death, but of those few that live, most complain of life. On
earth every man grumbles at his best estate.

The very elements, whereby our subsistence or being, as the secondarie cause,
is preserved, conspire against us: the fire burns us; the water drownes us:
the earth annoyes us; and the air infects us; our days are laborious, our
nights comfortless; the heat scorcheth us; the cold benummes us; health swells
us with pride; sickness empaleth our beauties; friends turn Swallows; they
will sing with us in the Summer of prosperity, but in the winter of trial,
they will take wings and be gone. Enemies brand our reputations with deprauing
imputations; and the envious man hurleth abroad his gins to ensnare our lives:
who would then desire to live, where there is nothing that begets content? for
this world is a Theater of vanities, a Chaos of confusions, an Ambassador of
mischief, a Tyrant to virtue, a breaker of Peace, a Favorite of War, a
friend of Vices, a coyner of Lies, an Anuile of Novelties, a table of
Epicurisme, a furnace of Lust, a pit-fall to the rich, a burden to the poor,
a Cell of Pilgrims, a den of Thieves, a calumniator of the good, a renowner of
the wicked, a cunning Impostor, and a deceiuer of all.

How is the progress of poor proud man's life violently agitated (like the
river Euripus) with contrarious motions? The pleasure of the wyly world thus
inueigles him; Come unto me, and I will drown thee in delight. The corruption
of the luxurious flesh thus ingles him; Come unto me, and I will infect thee;
the Devil he whispers this in his ear, Come unto me, and I will cheat and
deceive thee: But our sweet and sacred Savior Jesus Christ, with perswasiue
inducements thus intreates him; Come unto me (I pray thee) that art heavy
laden, and I will receive and exonerate thee, and with the mighty arm of my
mercy and compassion lift off that unsupportable load, which crusheth down to
Hell thy groaning soul.

Study then to live as dead to the world, that thou may live with God: for
the just man is said, never to live till after death. Endeavor thy self to
march fair through this worlds Labyrinth, not to squander and look asquint
upon the Circean allurements thereof. But without turning either to the right
or left hand, run straight on in that Eclipticke line, which will conduct
thee to that celestial Jerusalem, where (with that immaculate Lamb Jesus
Christ) thou shall enjoy pleasure without pain; wealth, without want; rest,
without labor; joy without grief; and immensiue felicity without end.

Moreover the contempt of the world, born of the love of God, shall at length
grow to hatred of the world, when that besides the vanity and misery of it, he
shall contemplate the mischief and enmity against the Almighty which there
reigns; when besides that vanity which some do lay open to the view of all,
he will represent to himself the iniquities which are closely kept, and the
Treasons, Adulteries, Murders, which are privately and lurkingly committed,
when he shall consider the vials of Gods wrath and displeasure powered generally
upon all mankind: for in the consideration of this world, it behooves us to
leave out no part of it, but to observe all manner of nations and people:
amongst which there are many Pagans, which not only by a consequent, but also
by express profession, adore the devil. The East Indies dedicate their
temples to him, and reverence him with all respect. The West Indies are
afflicted and tormented ordinarily with evil spirits. In most part of the
North, lurking deceits, and assuming strange shapes, are very common among the
Inhabitants. Sorcery is there an ordinary profession, and the Devil reigns
without contradiction. In that Country which did once flourish, where the
Apostles had planted so happily the holy Ghost, the Churches are now changed
into Mosques, and Temples of Idolatry. In the West, the head of the visible
Church is become an earthly Monarch, and banks are erected in those places,
where, in times past was the House of God. Amongst those erroneous and envious
people are scattered the Jews, which blasphemed against Jesus Christ, and
having persecuted him in his life, do injuriously wrong him after his death.
The Country from whence came Decrees and Orders for Religion, has in it
public Brothel-houses, and Sodomy is there an usual custom. Here it is also,
where doubts in Religion that concern a man's faith, are decided in the midst
of corruption. There only remains in the world a handful of people which
serve Jesus Christ in truth and verity; and they can scarce receive breath in
this air which is so contrary to them; being here as fishes without water; as
the remainders of great Massacres; as pieces of boords scattered after the
breaking of a great vessel; and yet nevertheless, among these few that are
subtracted out of the rest of the world, corruption does increase as a Canker
or Ulcer, Quarrels, Vanity, Superfluity in Apparel, Avarice, Ambition;
Sumptuousness, which spends foolishly, does infect the one part of this
small troop; for GOD is ill served in private families, their alms are cold,
they pray seldom, and read never: IN brief, a contagion of vices by
conuersing with our adversaries, does infect us, which is the first step to
superstition; for error creeps in to us by vice, and spiritual fornication by
corporal. If therefore where God is most purely known, he be there ill
served, how much more amongst the rest of the world? If vices do harbor in
the Sanctuary, how much more in the body of the church and habitation of the
wicked? Therefore Christ does rightly call Satan, The prince of the world; and
Peter does justly write in the second of the Acts, Save your selves from that
perverse generation, for Satan lies in ambush for us all. This age is
infectious, vices are like unto glue, temptations strong, our enemies mighty,
our selves feeble and ignorant, and the way of salvation narrow and full of
thorns; And few there be (says Christ) that find it: And those which find
it, do not always keep it; but many having known the truth, do leave it,
and return to their vomit. Let us know then a place so dangerous, that we may
pass by as strangers, which do not only pass, but also run from it,
flying from the world, to come unto God, for we shall never have repose,
unless we rest our selves upon him. The heaven moves always, and yet it is
the place of our rest. On the contrary, the earth rests always, and yet it
is the place of our motion. The Quadrants and Horologies imitate the motion of
heaven; but the faith of the believers does imitate the Rest which is above
all. Ulysses did more esteem the smoke of his own house, than the flame of
another; How much more then would he esteem the flame of his own chimney,
than the smoke of another? We are here strangers, this is not our house:
our habitation is in heaven. Let us compare the smoke of this strange house,
and the darkness of the earth, with the beauty and splendour of our own
dwelling, which is the in Kingdom of heaven: Here is the reign of Satan,
there the Kingdom of God; here is a valley of tears, there the height of
mirth; here we sow in sorrow, there we reap in joy; here we see the light
of the Sun through two little holes, which are called the eyes; there we
receive light from God on every side, as if we were all eyes. Therefore,
because God is all in all; to him be honor and glory in this world, and in the
world to come. Amen.

FINIS.
ON THE WORTHY NAME OF MY NOBLE and learned Author, that excellent Divine,
Monsieur PIERRE DV MOVLIN, the Mirror of our age.
PRaise mis-bestow'd on him, to whom none belongs,
ILl fits the Praised, and the Praiser wrongs:
ERror in praising, may the praised defame,
RAising up worth on an unworthy Name.
REst weake-wing'd Muse: strive not this worth to raise;
ELated by its self, its self can praise:
DV MOVLIN'S worth, I mean, whose sacred skill,
Under has brought Belarmine.
Romes Champion to his will. He also by his most excelent and admirable Book,
entitled, [The BVCKLER OF THE FAITH] does utterly confound the Roman Church:
And many Jesuits, in presuming to dispute with this rare Divine, are put to
their Non plus vltra! Yea, the most famous of the^, Mr. Arnoux the Jesuit, is
put to his Shifts and, Euasions.

MY Muse, be mute: forbear his worth to express.
O! Wrong not that, by praise, to make it less.
Unto the world's broad Eye, what riches rest
Locked in the closet of His pious breast,
IS clearly seen; and specially appears
NOw more transcendent in's Heraclits Tears.
Devoted to your Virtues, ABR. DARCIE.

THE TRANSLATOR TO the impartial Reader, all Prosperity.
ALl is corrupt and naught, all every where:
BElow high Heaven There Is not a corner Clear.
RIch subtle worldlings wise, cramd with wealths store,
ARe but the fools of Fate, exceeding poor;
HOnor, Wealth, Beauty, Pomp, in the best degree,
ARe subject all to change; no State lives free,
MONARKS, nor Kings; the glory they live in,
DEath shall deface, as if the had never bin.
ATtend fair Virtue then, Vice dis-respect:
REbuild thy sunk foundation, Architect.
Climb Heaven, brave spirits, let your Tears expel,
IN fair Repentance showered, the worst of hell,
EVer to gain those Joys no tongue can tell.
FINIS.

