A DISCOVRSE OF THE PRESERVATION OF THE SIGHT: of Melancholic diseases; of
Rheumes, and of Old age.

Composed by M. Andreas Laurentius, ordinary Physician to the King, and
public professor of Physic in the University of Mompelier.

Translated out of French into English, according to the last Edition, by
RICHARD SVRPHLET, Practitioner in Physic.

AT LONDON Imprinted by FELIX KINGSTON, for RALPH IACSON, dwelling in Paul's
Church yard at the sign of the Swan. 1599.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR THOMAS WEST KNIGHT, LORD LA WARE, and the right
virtuous Lady Anne his wife.
IT has been usual and accustomed (Right Noble and worthy Sir) in all ages,
and amongst all sorts of people (though otherwise never so rude and barbarous)
to adorn and eternize the manners, lives, conversation, gests, birth and
sayings of their famous and renowned, with monuments either openly and in
lively sort containing and specifying the same: or more closely and secretly
insinuating as much, that so the praise and fame thereof might remain and live
throughout all ages. The course was good and commendable; for so the excellent
and renowned deceased had but his due: the excellent and renowned living, a
glorious and beautiful spectacle, to stir them up unto courageous and
undaunted perseverance in still making usury of their excellency: and the
base, vile, and abject persons (the spots and blemishes, yea the puddle and
mudpit) of active, pregnant, and nimble nature, might rouse themselves from the
lolling bed of their continual snorting and dead sleep. I mean not to blazon
and decipher particularly, and from point to point the original and antiquite
of your Nobility: The vprightnes, innocence, mildnes, humanity, bountifulnes
and love, in matters concerning your own private affairs and businesses,
wherewith your Honorable condition is richly set and garnished. (The vehement
suspicion of undermining flattery, the discontenting of your affections
leaning to the contrary, and the stirring up of adversary emulation and
repining envy utterly dissuading me). Neither yet do I mean to proclaim and
lay abroad your faithfulness in the actions of Justice, your wisdom in the
discerning of things necessary, and swaying of matters most conveniently for
the weal public, or your prowes and valorousnes in warlike feats and
Martial affairs; howsoever the cause of God, your Prince and Country: your
birth, Dignity and leisure, has (I doubt not) put both you and many other
godly and religious Noble men within this Realm in mind thereof, and stirred
you up amongst other your godly cares and studies, to strive to become able and
worthy, if her sacred Majesty should at any time call you or them unto the
same. But leaving all these and whatsoever other praises, that might justly be
given to the manifold virtues, shining both in your self, as also in your
Honorable Lady, holding out the marks of a good profession in the love of the
truth, with sobriety, modesty, and a good conversation (notwithstanding the
seas of sin roaring round about, and ouerflowing almost all estates and
persons) and that so clearly in the eyes and minds of all such as do not
willingly wink, and cover the bright light of inward touch, with the veil of
wilful sencelesnes: my only endeavor and drift is to entreat your Honors to
receive with favorable acceptance and good liking these first fruits of my
public labors, as undertaken for the good of all: so especially dedicated
and devoted unto your particular service and use, not so much in respect of any
your present necessities, through any infirmities that I am privy unto, as to
make way for the shutting out of such, as hereafter might creep upon you to
your untimely annoyance, assuring my self that in the reading thereof you shall
find a well stored treasury of rich and rare Jewels, and in the practicing of
it, the comfort of health and contentation in satietie of days. Which the
Ancient of days, with all increase of Honor, wealth, and piety grant and
give unto you, and all your succeeding posterity.

Your Honors most unfeignedly affected: RICHARD SVRPHLET.

To the Reader.
COnsidering (gentle Reader) the lamentable times and miserable days, that are
come upon us in this last and weakest age of the world, partly by reason of the
commonnes and multitude of infirmities, partly by reason of the strangenes and
rebelliousnes of diseases breaking out more tediously then heretofore: and
considering herewithall how apt and prone the multitude and common people are
to affect, nay (which is more) to dote upon and run after the painted crew of
seeming Physicians and prattling practisers both men and women, gathering their
skill, honesty and most precious secrets, from the rich mines of brasen-faced
impudency and bold blindness: I could not but admonish thee, as thou tenderest
thy health and wealth, to avoid such noisome vermin and deep deceivers. And
on the contrary, I can but exhort and stir thee up to buy and read this and
other such like treatises, that so thou may be the better prepared, (though
not to take upon thee the cure of thine own or others their sick estate) to
discern betwixt the ignorant and the learned, and the skillful in word only,
and those which are skillful in deed. As also that thou may be the better
able to manifest and make known by word or writing the state and true
condition of thy disease, unto the profound and long studied in that
profession, who for the keeping of a good conscience and thy welfare, have not
spared their bodies or goods, or refused any good means, whereby they might
become fit to furnish thee with wholesome counsel and due relief in the
days of thy distress. Here shall thou find by serious suruay, great
dimensions within small and narrow bounds. This volume shall thou find stuffed
full of Physic, as teaching by the lesser, what is to be conceived of the
greater: and by a few, what is to be followed in many. Full of Philosophy, as
not resting in the things of the body, but deeply and divinely laying open the
nature of the soul. Herein is contained not only great plenty of precepts,
but also many controversies of great moment and difficulty, sharply and
pithily decided: and that with such variety of authority, as is not almost in
any other to be found. This treatise shall thou find full of pleasantnes, as
both the store of histories, and means of dispelling the mournful fantasies
of melancholic moodes, do give thee to conceive: full of delight as
maintaining the sight, the conductor and conueier of delights unto the mind:
full of healthfulnes, as teaching the way to avoid the rheum, that pregnant
mother of so many maladies. And finally full of instruction and relief for the
mitigating of the annoyances and inconveniences of drouping old age, as showing
the manner how to square out and piteh down the firm and durable props of the
continuing and long inioying of strong and lusty years. Which if thou strive
and seek accordingly to attain, then shall thou be the better able to
discharge the duties of thy calling whilst thou live, and purchase to thy
self a million of good witnesses, to rejoice and glad thy heart withal in the
day of thy death and dissolution.

Farewell.
TO THE NOBLE LADY, MADAME, DVTCHESSE OF VZEZ, AND COUNTESS OF TONNERA.
MAdame, since the hour that I had the hap to become known unto you, you have
done me the honor as to commit your health altogether into my hands, and to
vouchsafe me as great credit, as if I had been a second Aesculapius. This
affection and goodwill, which I acknowledge to proceed more of your kindness
and natural inclination, then of any deserts of mine, have so prevailed with
me, that neither the love of my country, nor the number of my friends, which
was not small, nor the honorable place of public Lecturer, which I
discharged with sufficient commendation in one of the most famous Universities
of Europe, could stay or hinder me; but that passing over all difficulties, and
breaking all these bonds, I have entirely and wholly devoted my self unto you,
and have followed you, wheresoever it has pleased you to command me. I have
wherein I may exceedingly praise my self, and as hitherto to rest contented
with my fortune, which has been so favorable unto me, as to make all my
service profitable and well liked of, I am verily persuaded Madame, that it was
Gods will to use me as the means for the lengthening of your years, and
making of your old age more blessed and happy. You have had sufficient trial
thereof within these two years: for being very forcibly assailed with three of
the most violent and extraordinary diseases that ever man has seen, and
which were strong enough to have shaken the best complexion in the world, and
to have spilt the prosperous estate of a more flourishing age then yours, yet
you have not felt any eclipse of your vigor and lustines. This is of God
alone, (which has opened my understanding to find out fit remedies, and
himself to give good success thereunto) to whom I am bound to render all
glory. There now remains in you only your three ordinary diseases, which I
labor to vanquish day by day, by observation of good Diet, and such gentle
medicines as are no way able any thing to alter and hurt the good disposition
of your natural constitution. In your right eye, you have some small
beginnings of a Cataract, but the other is perfectly sound. You feel at
certain times some touches of the windy melancholy, but so slight, as that
they vanish away like the smoke. The thing that is most tedious and troublesome
unto you, is those petty distillations and fluxes of humors which fall down
upon your eyes, teeth, arms and legs. Your spirit, which is able to conceive
of any thing in the world, be it never so rare and strange, has been very
inquisitiue to understand the causes, and to know from whence all these
accidents should proceed, which I have oftentimes spoken largely of, and that
both in vulgar and common speeches, as also in the artificial and plain
terms of Physic. In the end my reasons became so well liked of by you, that
(when you had withdrawn your self to the Abbey of Marmonster, to sport your
self with the beauty of the place and goodness of the air) you commanded me
to set down the same in writing, and to cause them to come to light, under the
shield of your authority. I cannot with honesty deny it unto you, howsoever
yet it were meet, that so weighty a matter according to the desert, should
be garnished with infinite variety of authorities and proofs from the
learned, which my memory could not afford, through my want of books. I have
therefore fitted up and made ready three discourses for you, touching your
three diseases: the first is, Of the excellency of the sight, and the means
to preserve it: the second is, Of windy melancholy, and other melancholic
diseases: the third is, Of Rheumes, and the means for to heal them. And unto
these in the end I have joined a little treatise of Old age, which may be
for your use against the time to come. For there is no shadow of reason why I
should as yet call you old, seeing you are not incombred with any of the
infirmities of old age. For is not this one of the miracles of our age, to
hear your communication so wise and grave, to see your understanding and
judgment so sound and vncorrupt, your memory so fresh and plentiful, and
your senses so absolute, as that on your sound eye you use to read a far off
the smallest letter that any man can bring unto you, without spectacles? Your
hearing also continues very easy and quick, and your taste also as exquisite
and dainty as ever it was: your heart so courageous and lusty, as that
notwithstanding all the assaults that ever your windy melancholy could give
unto it, yet it has not been able at any time so to shake it, as that it could
make it alter his course: your liver so liberal, as that it ministers store
of blood more then is needful: in so much as that we are constrained to cause
you to tame it once a year. I will say nothing of the goodness of your stomach,
you your self know it well enough; having an appetite at every hour, and
disgesting whatsoever you bestow upon it. Seeing then the faculties of the
soul do every one of them so well execute and perform their functions and
offices, can a man call the instrument thereof ouerworne or old? I am persuaded
(Madame) that no man can call you old in any respect, if it were not that you
are past fifty, and that custom in accounts has designed the first degree of
old age to this number. You have great occasions to praise God: for this long
and happy life is a certain testimony of his love, because the most
excellent reward which he promises unto them whom he loves in this world, is,
that they shall live long upon the earth. Cheer up your self then Madame, you
are but yet on the first step of your old age, which is ouergrowne with
flourishing green, and affoording an undaunted courage; you have other two
behind and remaining. God who has given this strength unto your body, and
which has honored you with so gracious and good a soul, vouchsafe to make
them as happy, as your Ladyship can wish or desire them.

Your most humble and obedient servant: ANDREAS LAVRENTIVS. B

The Author to the Reader.
I Doubt not but that these treatises are in danger to be evil spoken of, and
bitterly inueighed against by an infinite number of persons, which are borne
for nothing else but to carpe and find fault, before they be well known. Some
Physicians will find themselves grieved, for that I have made vulgar the
secrets of our Art, and they will be able to allege that the Egyptians (which
were the first inuentors of Physic) to the end they might not make so divine
and sacred a gift of God profane and common, did write their medicines in
enigmaticall and unknown letters: but I will answer them with Aristotle, that
a good thing by how much it is the more common, by so much it is the better,
and that the Physicians of Greece came once every year into the beautiful
Temple of Aesculapius, which was erected in Epidaure, to write in the sight of
all the people, whatsoever rare and strange thing they had observed in their
patients. The natural Philosophers, will be offended for that I now and then
grapple with that great interpreter of nature, Aristotle: but they shall have
no other reply of me, the^ that of Aristotle himself. Plato (says he) is my
friend, and Socrates also but yet the truth is more friendly unto me. I shall
have more to do to satisfy them, which busy themselves with nothing else but
fair speeches and proper terms: for without doubt they shall find an
infinite number of rude words, which may offend their too dainty and delicate
ears: but if they will not consider how that I make it not my profession to
write in French, yet I would have them to hold me excused, because I am of
opinion, as all other wise men are, that such curious sifting and hunting of
words is unworthy of a Philosopher, and that therefore I am contented
(avoiding barbarism, whereof I know they shall never be able altogether to
condemn me) so to speak, as that I may cause to be understood the thing
whereof I entreat. And as concerning all those envious and malicious persons
which will not cease to bark at me though they know not how to bite me, I do
one (...) wish that they themselves would enter the lists and do something
themselves, that so I might see if they were as good in correcting as in
carping. I am certainly persuaded that this my small work will be accepted of
all them Honorable: and it is to them that I frame and fashion my self, then
boldly may I proceed under the shadow and covert of their wings.

DECASTICON IN ANGLICAM versionem scripti Laurentiani.
QVae de Oculis nuper Medicorum scripsit Ocellus
De Senio, and Succis, Senibus, cunctaeque molestis
Aetati, mira doctus Lauraentius art;
Surphlettus (tanto ne Gallia solapotiri
The sauropossit) donauit vest Britanna.
Gallia ne inuideas, nec enim tibi nascitur vni
Laurus tam florens; nostri hanc coluere Britanni.
Tit turpes oculi maculas Surphlette suetus
Artisici remouere manu; (non vltima laus haec)
Nunc grato hoc multo melius noscere labor.
F. Hering Med. Candidatus. Idem de eadem Idiomate Anglico.
FAmous Fernelius, worthy heir Laurentius,
To whom that Galen of our age did dying leave
His divine Physic Muse amongst other learned works,
This treatise fraught with skill, did write in vulgar tongue
Of The Eyes, Melancholy, Old Age, and troublous Rheum,
Which Surphlet famous for his art-taught cunning hand,
In clearing The Eyes of spots, and noisome Catarrhacts,
(Least France the happy nurse and mother of great wits,
Should sole enjoy this pearl) has clad with English weed
A work of worth for Councellers and men of great estate,
For Ladies, Students, such as (...) love.
Hence base Quack-saluers, boasting Thrasoes loathsome brood,
Impostors, Parachymists, Latrons, Homicids,
Who blindly and boldly rush into that sacred Art,
Which none but Phoebus sons and Darlings of Minerue
Could ever rightly exercise: Hence, hence apace,
Pollute not with your filthy fists and pur-blind eyes
These golden Theorems, these skillful Medicines:
For you poor sots (I wisse) the pains were never meant.
IN D. ANDREAE LAVRENTII D. MED. TRActat. De conseruando visu: De Melancholia:
Catarrhis: and Senio; in linguam Calydoniam, per D. Rich. Surphlettum traduct.
Carmen (...).
HVmanum mala quanta premunt, quot monstra fatigant
Sedibiss infernis eiaculata, genus?
Vertigo, Febris, Tussis, cum Peste Catarrhus,
Tabes, Syntexis, Stupor and Asthma, Bilis.
Haec fera tartareis not vexant monstra flagellis,
Nostraque funereo carcere corda premunt.
Haec multos tetricas mittunt Acherontis ad vndas,
Quos fouet in cunis torua Megaerasuis.
Ergo Deus nobis languentibus obtulit artem,
Morborum tolli qua genus omne potest.
Artibus, huic nomen Medicina, celebrior vllis,
Sola leuat morhos, corpora sana facit.
Hac sine nullasalus, properantis munera vitae
Prorogat, and longos dat Medici^na dies.
Tu Surphlette pijs studijs addicte, peritus
Art Machaonia, quam, Deusipse dedit.
Perge salutifera morbos depellere dextra,
Regnaque Plutonis fac populosa minus.
Sic te fama feret candentibus aurea pennis,
Sicque tui celebris fama laboris erit,
Inter honoratos Medicos numeraberis olim,
Te dicent Coo, Phylliridaeque parem.
GABRIEL. POVVEL.

Ineruditissmum D. Andr. Laurentij Tractatum Anglice versum, (...).
DAs Surphlette tuis longaeuae munera vitae,
Quid melius nobis viuere vita dabit?
Obstas ne stygij per lurida transtra Charontis
Ferali Parca corpora raptamigrent.
Cumque dolent homine, illis das rite valer^
Attollens morbos. Pharmaca sana doce^
Extremis obstare malis, vitaeque labantis
Art grauescentes multiplicare dies.
Omnia quid referam? neque enim bona nouimus illa:
Deficit ars arts sat celebrate tuas.
Hac mortale genus, licet, immortale videtur:
Si quid in hac vita, vincere fata valet.
EPHRAIM PAGIT.

In commendation of M. Andreas Laurentius, Doctor of Physic, his Treatise of
Sight, Melancholy, Rheumes, and Old Age: Englished by M. Rich. Surphlet.
IF thou desire preservatives for Sight;
If Melancholic sickness thee onnoy;
If noisome Rheumes thou would avoid outright;
If thy old age thou would in health enjoy:
Since fading Sight, Rheumes, Melancholy, Age
Are vital spirits harm, and life's engage.
Lo here a sovereign salve for sickly Eyes,
A good restraint for Melancholies rage,
A drier up of Rheumes that do arise,
And a conseruer of declining Age,
For Darkness, Dumps, Catarrhes and forces faild,
Light, Mirth, Mercury fixed, and Strength vnquaild.
Right worthy then thy praise O Surphlet flies
Through whirling air, as famous for thy art,
In curing of blind catarrhacted eyes,
And for this work performed on thy part;
So that unto thy labor and practice,
A twofold praise most justly does arise.
John Nut-hall Gent.

Roger Fox Gent. to the Reader.
INgenious Surphlet finding in this work
Such store of treasure in abstruse to lurk,
Thought he should do his Countrymen great wrong,
Had he it shrouded left in foreign tongue.
Wherefore in love unto his native soil,
He took upon him this laborious toil.
Yet toil no toil, he does the same account,
So kind acceptance to his hope amount.
Thank's all he craves, then cun him thank it is small,
If he have thanks he thinks it all in all:
The profit's yours, it was his industrious task
To pluck you off that strange disguising mask.
FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS CONtained in this Discourse.
The first Discourse, wherein is handled the excellency of the sight, and the
means to preserve it.
That the brain is the principal seat of the soul, and that in
consideration hereof all the instruments of the senses are placed round about
it, Chap. 1. How that the outward senses being the trusty messengers of the
mind, are only fi^e, and all of them placed without the brain. Chap. 2 That
the sight is the most excellent of all the senses. Chap. 3 Of the excellency
of the eye the proper instrument of sight. Chap. 4 Of the composition of the
eye in general. Chap. 5 A particular description of all the parts of the eye,
and first of the six muscles thereof. Chap. 6 Of the six coats of the eye.
Chap. 7 Of the three humors of the eye, of the beauty and excellency of the
christalline. Chap. 8 Of the sinews, veins, arteries, and other parts of the
eye. Chap. 9 How we see, as whether it be by receiving in or sending forth
something. Chap. 10 How many ways the sight may be hurt. Chap. 11 A brief
rehearsal of all the diseases of the eye. Chap. 12 A general and most
exquisite order of Diet for the preservation of the sight, in which is showed
very particularly all that may hurt or do good unto the eyes. Chap. 13 Choice
remedies for the preservation of the sight, and the order to be observed in
applying of them. Chap. 14
The second Discourse, wherein is entreated of Melancholy diseases, and of the
means to cure them.
That man is a divine and politic creature, having three special principal
powers: Imagination, Reason, and Memory. Chap. 1. That this creature full of
excellency is now and then so abased and altered, by an infinite number of
diseases, as that he becomes like a beast. Chap. 2 Who those should be that
are called melancholic, and how we ought to put difference betwixt
melancholic men that are sick, and those that are sound. Chap. 3 The
definition of melancholy, and all his differences. Chap. 4 Of melancholy
which is seated in the brain, and of all the accidents that follow it, and
whence arises fear, sadness, watchings, terrible dreams, and other accidents.
Chap. 5 Whereof it comes that melancholic persons have particular objects
quite differing, whereupon they dote. Chap. 6 Histories of certain
melancholic persons, which have had strange imaginations. Chap. 7 An order of
diet for melancholic men, that have their brain sick. Chap. 8 How to cure
such melancholic men, as have the disease settled in their brain. Chap. 9 Of
another sort of melancholy, which rises of outrageous love. Chap. 10 Chap. 11
The means to cure those which are follish and melancholy by reason of love.
Chap. 12 Of the third sort of melancholy called windy melancholy, and the
differences thereof. Chap. 13 Of the signs of windy melancholy, and from
whence the accidents which follow it, arise. Chap. 14 Histories worthy the
observation, of two parties troubled with the windy melancholy. Chap. 15 Of
the curing of the windy melancholy.
The third Discourse, wherein is entreated of the generation of Rheumes, and
how they are to be cured.
Chap. 1. That the brain is the seat of cold and moisture, and by consequent
the welspring of Rheumes. Chap. 2 What this word rheum does signify, what
disease it is, and wherein his nature consists. Chap. 3 The differences of
Rheum. Chap. 4 The causes of Rheum. Chap. 5 A general order of diet to be
observed in Rheumes. Chap. 6 A general method to cure Rheumes. Chap. 7 The
means to preserve the teeth.
The fourth Discourse, wherein is entreated of Old Age, and how we must succor
it.
Chap. 1. That man cannot continue in one state, and that of necessity he must
wax old. Chap. 2 A very notable description of old age. Chap. 3 An order of
Diet to preserve the life long. Chap. 4 What air is to be chosen for the
lengthening of life, and which is most fit for old folk. Chap. 5 General
rules to be observed in eating and drinking, thereby to lengthen the life. Chap.
6 How we must in particular nourish old folks, and with what victuals. Chap. 7
What drink is most fit for old folk. Chap. 8 Of the exercises of old folk.
Chap. 9 What rules are to be kept in sleeping. Chap. 10 How we must cheer up
and make merry old men, putting them out of all violent passions of the mind.
Chap. 11 What medicines are fittest for old folk, and by what skillful means
we may help to amend the infirmities of old age.
THE FIRST DISCOVRSE, WHEREIN IS ENTREATED OF THE excellency of the sight, and
the means to perserue it.
That the brain is the true seat of the Soul, and that for this occasion all
the instruments of the senses are lodged round about it.
CHAP. 1.
THe Soul of man (that most noble and perfect form, that is under the face of
heaven, bearing for a sign and token of his excellency, the lively and true
image of the Creator) although it be in all points like unto it self, not
consisting of matter, or subject to any division, and by consequent whole in
all the body, and wholly in every part of the same: yet the case so stands,
that in respect of the diversity of his actions, of the difference of his
instruments wherewith it serves it self, and of the variety of objects set
before it: that it may seem and appear to the common people (after a certain
manner) to consist of diverse parts. The Philosophers themselves seeing the
noblest powers thereof to shine more in one place then in another, have gone
about to lodge, and (as it were) to bound the limits thereof within the
compass of one only member: in like manner as the Divines (carried away by the
wonderful things which more clearly manifest themselves in the heavens, then
in any other part of the world) do say that the heavens are the throne of God,
although his essence be infinite, incomprehensible, and stretching it self
through every thing that is). Diverse opinions of the seat of the soul.
For Herophilus believed that the Soul was lodged only in the lowed part of
the brain: and Zenocrates (on the contrary) in the uppermost part thereof:
Erasistratus, in the two membranes covering the brain, called of the Arabians,
Mothers: Strato, betwixt the brows: Empedocles, suborned by the Epicures and
Egyptians, in the breast: Moschion, in the whole body: Diogenes, in the
arteries: Heraclitus, only in the circumference of the body: Herodotus, in
the ears: Blemor an Arabian, and Syreneus a Physician of Cypers, in the eyes,
because that men in them as in a glass, do behold all the passions of the
soul: but all these in my judgment are nothing else but fantasies and mere
fooleries. Aristotle his opinion.
There is a great deal more likelihood in the opinion of Aristotle, that great
expounder of nature, who thought that the soul had his proper seat in the
heart, because that natural heat, the principal instrument of the soul, is
found in the heart, and this (says he) lives first and dies last, the only
storehouse of spirit, the original of veins, arteries and sinews, the
principal author of respiration, the fountain and welspring of all heat,
containing within the ventricles thereof a subtle and refined blood, which
serves as a burning cole to kindle and set on fire all the other inferior and
smaller sorts of heat, and to be brief, the only Sun of this little
world. And even in like sort, The heavens and the heart finely compared
together.
as the heavens are the principals, whereon depend and rest all other elemental
generations and alterations: so the heart is the first and principal original
of all the actions and motions of the body. The heavens bring forth their,
wonderful effects, by their motions, heat and influence: the heart by his
continual moving (which ought no less to ravish us, then the flowing and
ebbing of Euripus) and influence of his spirits, does put life into all the
other parts, endoweth them with this beautiful and vermillionlike color, and
maintains their natural heat. The moving and light which are in the
superior bodies, are the instruments of the intelligences and of the heavens:
of the intelligences as being the first cause of moving in others, being
themselves immovable: of the heavens, as first moving the other, and being
themselves moved. The moving of the heart and vital spirit, which distributeth
it self like unto light, throughout, and that as it were in the twinkling of
an eye, are the instruments of the mind and heart: of the mind, which is a
chief and principal mouer, and yet not moved: of the heart, as of a chief
and principal mouer which is moved of the mind. It is therefore the heart,
according to the doctrine of the Peripatetikes, which is ye true mansion of the
soul, the only prince and governor, in this so excellent and admirable
disposing of all things in the government of the body. Chrysippus and all the
Stoikes have followed the same opinion, and do believe that all that region
which contains the parts which we call vital, is named of the Grecians and
Latins Thorax, because it keeps within it, as it were under lock, this
heavenly understanding (so called of Anaxagoras): this burning heat, (so
called of Zeno) replenished with a million of sciences: this admirable fire,
which Prometheus stole out of heaven to put soul and life into mankind: this
altering spirit, whereof Theocritus made so great account. Behold how these
Philosophers have diversely spoken of the seat of the soul. It is not my mind
to bestow any time in the particular examination of all these opinions, either
is it mine intent in this place to enter into any dispute, intending to content
my self with the simple delivery of the truth. That the brain is the
principal seat of the soul.
For I assure my self that it shall be strong enough to overthrow all these
false foundations. I say then that the principal seat of the soul is in the
brain, because the goodliest powers thereof do lodge and lie there, and the
most worthy actions of the same do there most plainly appear. All the
instruments of motion, sense, imagination, discourse and memory are found
within the brain, or immediately depending thereupon. Anatomy manifests unto
our eyes, The reasons to prove the same. The first.
how that there issue out from the lower part of the brain seven great pair
of sinews, which serve at a trice to convey the animal spirit unto the
instrument of the senses, and do not any of them pass out of the head except
the sixth pair, which stretch out themselves to the mouth of the stomach. We
see also that from the hindermost part of the brain (where the great and
little brain do meet together) does proceed the admirable tail, the
beautiful and white spinall marow, which the Wiseman in his book of the
Preacher calls the silver thread, how it is carefully preserved within a
sacred channel, as Lactantius calls it. From the same, men see that there
rise a million of little sinews, which convey the powers of moving and
feeling, unto all such members as are capable of the same. Men do also
perceive the outward senses placed round about the brain, The second.
which are as the light horsemen and messengers of the understanding, the
principal part of the soul. Philo says, that when men come within the view
of a princes guard, they think himself not to be far off: we see all the
guard and servants of reason, as the eyes, the ears, the nose, the tongue, to
be situated in the head: whereupon by consequent we ought to judge that this
princess is not far off. Experience also gives us to understand, that if
the brain have his temperature altered: The third.
as for example, if it be too hot, as it falls out in such as are frantic:
or over cold, as it falls out in melancholic men; it corrupts presently
the imaginatiue faculty, troubles the judgment, weakeneth the memory: which
is not incident in the diseases of the heart, as namely, either in a hectic
fever, or when a man is poisoned. The soul (says that divine Philosopher
Plato) does not please and content it self with that brain which is too soft,
The fourth.
too close and compact, or too hard: it requires a good temperature. If the
proportion of the head be but a little out of square, so that it be either too
great or too little, or too coppeld, as that which men read of Thersites in
Homer: or altogether round and not flat on the sides, as naturally it ought to
be: men may perceive all the actions of the soul to be depraved, and thereupon
do call such heads, foolish, without judgment, without wisdom: all which
ought to make us as well to believe that the brain is as much the organe and
instrument of all these actions: as the eye is the instrument of sight.

Furthermore, this kind of round shape which is peculiar unto mankind, The
fifth.
this head thus lifted up to heaven, this great quantity of brain (which is
almost incredible) does show very well that man has something in his head,
more then other living creatures. The wise Sages of Egypt have very well
acknowledged the same: for they did not swear by any other thing but by their
head, they ratified all their covenants by the head, and forbad the eating of
the brains of living creatures: for the honor and reverence sake which they
bare to this part. I think also that the falling sickness was not for any other
reason called sacred of the ancients, but because it did assail the sovereign
and sacred part of the body. Let us then acknowledge the brain to be the
principal seat of the soul, the original of moving and feeling, and of all
the other most noble functions of the same. I know well that some curious
spirits will ask me, how it can be the author of so many goodly actions,
seeing it is cold, and that the soul can do nothing without heat. But I
answer, The cause why the brain feels not.
that the brain has not any particular feeling, for that it being the seat
of common sense, must judge of all such objects, as about which sense is
occupied. But a good judge ought to be free from all passions, and every
organe (says Aristotle) must be without quality, according whereunto agrees
that, that the christalline humor has no color, the care has no particular
sound, nor the tongue any taste. But and if it come to pass, that any
organicall part decline from his nature, as if the christalline become yellow,
all whatsoever presents it self to the sight of that eye, will seem to be
of the same color. As then the brain neither sees nor hears, nor smells
nor tastes any thing, and yet notwithstanding judges very rightly of colors,
sounds, smells and tastes: so neither was it any reason, that it should have any
particular sense of feeling, which should cause it to feel the excess of
those qualities, which are termed the objects of feeling and handling; it is
sufficient for it to have the knowledge and discerning thereof. As touching the
other point, I affirm that the brain is in very deed hot, and that it cannot
be called cold, but as it is compared with the heart. It behooved it of
necessity to be of this temperature, that so it might temper the spirits
which were of a fiery nature, The causes why the brain is of such temperature.
thereby the better to continue the kinds of living creatures, and to preserve
them long alive. For and if the brain were as hot as the heart, there would
day by day arise trouble and sedition amidst the noblest powers of the soul:
all the senses would be straying and wandering, all the motions would be out of
square, all our discourses mixed with rash headines, and our memories very
flote and fugitive, even as betideth unto frantic ones. Let nothing then
hinder us from acknowledging the brain to be the most noble part of the whole
body. This is that magnificent and stately turret of the soul, this is that
goodly royal palace, the consecrated house of Pallas, this is the impregnable
sort, environed with bones, as with strong walls, wherein is lodged the
sovereign power of the soul, (I mean reason) which comprehends and
compasses as with embracing arms, the whole universal world in a moment,
without touching of the same, which flies through the air, sounds the
depths of the sea, and surmounteth at the same instant, the pauements of the
heavens, and which walking upon their stages, measuring their distances, and
communicating with the Angels, pearceth in even unto the throne of God, and at
such time as the body is asleep, suffers it self by a holy flight, or
delectable and sweet rauishment, to be carried even to the beholding of God,
according to whose image it was first framed. To be short, it is all in all (as
says Aristotle) for that by the power it has, it possesses all, as being the
place wherein (I say) this great princess would rest her self as within her
castle, from thence to command the two inferior regiments, to hold in
subjection the two lower forces, (I mean the Irascible and concupiscible)
which would every day be ready to fall away and revolt. And yet I dare be bold
to add further, and (in stead of having named it among the chief and
principal) to say that there is not any other part of the body besides the
brain, which can truly be called noble and sovereign, and that because all
the other parts are made for the brain, and pay tribute thereunto as to their
king. Behold here the strength of my argument, Most clear and evident proof
of the excellency of the brain.
which in my judgment is as clear as the Sun in his brightest shine.
Mankind differs not from beasts in any thing but reason: and the seat of
reason is in the brain: It is requisite the more commendably to reason and
discourse, that the imaginatiue part of the mind should set before the
understanding part of the same the objects whereabout they be occupied
altogether simple without mixture, without matter, and freed from all corporal
qualities. The Imaginatiue part can not conceive them of it self, if the
outward senses (which are his trusty spies and faithful reportsmen) make not
certificate of the same. Hence then rise the necessity of framing the
instruments of the senses, the eyes, the ears, the nose, tongue and membranes
as well inward as outward. The senses the better to take acknowledgement of
their objects, have need of a local motion. For man, if he should not stir
from one place, but abide immovable like an image, should not be able to
convey any store of variety unto the imagination. It is necessary then for the
benefit and perfecting of the senses, to have certain instruments of motion:
these instruments are two, the sinews and the muscles: the sinews by reason
of their continued conjunction and adherence unto their original, (being like
unto that of the Sun beams with the Sun) do convey from the brain that
moving power, seated in a most subtle body, namely, the animal spirit: the
muscles after the manner of good subjects obey unto their commandment, and
incontinently move the member either by stretching it forth or bowing it in, as
the appetite or imagination shall wish and desire. The brain then (as is
manifest) commands: the sinews carry the embassage, and the muscles obeying
thereunto, express the intent of the mind. And even in like sort as the
skillful horserider manageth the horse with the bridle, causing him to turn on
the right hand or on the left, as best pleases him: even so the brain by the
sinews boweth or stretches the muscles. These two instruments of voluntary
motion; should not know either how to be, or undergo these their offices, if
they were not fixed unto some solid and immovable body. Therefore it was
behouefull to raise up pillars, such as are the bones and cartilages, from
whence the muscles do rise, and into which they do insert themselves again:
and for that the bones could not be joined or fastened together without
ligaments, it must needs follow that they should have their membranouse coats
to cover them withal. And all these parts for their preservation, stood in
need of natural heat and nourishment: this heat and nourishment being
derived from elsewhere, must needs have their passages prepared by certain
pipes, and those are the veins and arteries: the arteries draw their spirits
from the heart, the fountain of the same: the veins receive their blood from
the common storehouse of the same which is the liver. And thus returning by the
same steps, by which we came hither, we shall well perceive, The conclusion.
that the heart and liver were not made for any other thing, but to nourish the
heat of all the parts: the bones and cartilages, for rests and props unto the
muscles and sinews, the instruments of voluntary motion: the muscles and
nerves for the perfecting of the senses: the senses, to set before the
imaginatiue power of the mind their outward objects: the imagination to carry
along the forms of things void of substance, to be more deeply weighed of
reason, which thereupon commends them to the custody of memory her
treasuresse. Thus every thing yielding obedience unto reason, and the brain
being the principal seat of reason, we must needs affirm, that all the parts
of the body were made for the brain, and must therefore acknowledge it as their
chief and Sovereign.

I will yet add one other plain and evident argument (which in my judgment
is not common) to testify the excellence of this part: which is, that it
gives shape and perfection unto all the rest. For it is most certain, that of
the shape and quantity of the brain, depends the grosnes, greatness,
smalnes: and in a word, every manner of proportion happening to the head,
forasmuch as every containing thing does conform it self continually unto the
contained, as the thing for which it was created and made. Jointly after the
head, follows the back bone, which is framed of four and twenty vertebres,
besides the bone called Sacrum, and makes that which men call the truncke of
the body. If that hole in the head through which the marrow of the back
falls be great, then must also the vertebres be large. Upon this back bone
do all the rest of the bones stay and rest themselves, as the upper timbers
do upon the keele of a ship. As by name upon high the shoulder bones,
(whereunto are fastened the arms as well on the one side, as on the other) and
the twelve ribs: and below the bones of the small guts and hips, into whose
hollow cauities the heads of the bones of the thighs are inserted: so that if
all their proportions be duly observed, it will appear that the greatness and
grosnes thereof is answerable to that of the head, and by consequence to that
of the brain, as the chief and principal. Unto the bones are fastened the
muscles, the ligaments, and the most of the other parts of the body do rest
themselves thereupon, and within their circuit and compass are shut and made
sure the most noble parts and the bowels. In few words: the bones impart unto
the whole body the shape which themselves have received from the brain. This
is the same which divine Hippocrates has very well observed in the second
book of his Epidemiques, saying, that of the greatness and grosnes of the head,
a Physician might judge of the greatness of all the other bones and parts also,
as veins, arteries, and sinews. Let us therefore conclude with the truth,
that the brain having such advantage against the other parts, ought to be
esteemed the chief and principal seat of the soul.

CHAP. II. How the outward senses, the proper messengers of the soul, are only
five, and all placed without the brain.
SEeing it is most evident that the soul is shut up within the body, as it
were in a dark dungeon, and that it cannot discourse, neither yet comprehend
anything without the help of the senses, which are as the obedient servants
and faithful messengers of the same: it was needful to place the instruments
of the senses very near unto the seat of reason, and round about her royal
palace. Now the senses which we call external are only five; Why there are
but five senses.
the fight, the hearing, the smelling, the taste and handling, of which
altogether depends our knowledge, and nothing (as says the Philosopher) can
enter into the understanding part of our mind, except it pass through one of
these five doors. Some men striving to show reason for this number, The first
reason.
say that there are but five senses, because that whatsoever is in the whole
world, is compounded and made of only five simple bodies, as the four
elements and the firmament, which they call the fifth simple nature, being much
of the nature of the air, free from all impurities, and abounding with shining
lights. The sight (say the Platonists) which has for his instrument these two
twinne-borne stars, all full of bright strains and heavenly fire, which
gives light and burns not, represents the sky, and has the light for his
object. The hearing, which is occupied about nothing but sounds, has for his
object the beaten air, and his principal instrument (if we believe Aristotle)
is a certain air shut up within a little labyrinth. The smelling
participateth the nature of fire: for smells have their being only in a dry
quality caused through heat, and we receive it for a principle, that all
sweet smelling things are hot. The taste has moisture for his object. And
handling the earth for his.

The second.
Othersome say that there be but five senses, because that there are but five
proper sorts of objects, and that all the accidents which are to be found in
any natural body, may be referred, either to colors, or sounds, or smells, or
tastes, or to those qualities wherabout touching is occupied, whether they be
those which are principal, or those that spring of them.

The third,
Some there be which gather the number of the senses to be such, from the
consideration of their uses, which are their final ends. The senses are made
for the benefit of man: man is compounded of two parts, the body and the soul:
the sight and hearing serve more for the use of the soul then of the body: the
taste and touching more for the body then the soul: the smelling for both the
twain indifferently, refreshing and purging the spirits, which are the
principal instruments of the soul. But of the five senses I say that there
are two altogether necessary and required, to cause the being and life simply:
and that the three other serve only for a happy being and life. Those without
which one can not be, are taste and touching. Touching (if we will give credit
to natural Philosophers) is as the foundation of liuelihood (I will use this
word, because it expresses the thing very excellently). The taste serves for
the preservation of the life. The sight, hearing and smelling serve but for to
live well and pleasantly. For the creature may be and continue without them.
The two first (for that they were altogether necessary) have their mean
inward, and so joined to the member, as that it is (as a man would say)
inseparable. For in tasting and touching, the Physicians do make the mean and
the member all one. The other three have their mean outward, and separated
from the instrument, as the sight has the air, the water, and every such body
as is through clear, for his mean. Aristotle in the beginning of his third
book of the soul, has played the Philosopher in more serious sort then any of
all these, but yet so darkly, as that almost all his interpreters have found
themselves much busied to find out his meaning, in such manner, as that he may
seem to have gone about to hide the secrets of nature and mysteries of his
Philosophy, not with the veil of fained fables, as do the Poets; neither yet
with any superstitious conceit of numbers, as Pithagoras his sect were wont to
do; but by an obscure brevity: resembling the cuttle fish, which to the end
that she may not fall into the hand of the fisher, casts up a blackish water
and so hides her self. The fourth.
The senses (says Aristotle) are but five, because the means by which they
work, cannot be altered any more then five ways. Aristotle his proof for the
number of the senses.
The means by which we have the use of our senses, are only two, the one is
outward, the other is inward: the outward is the air or the water: the inward
is the flesh or the membranes. The air and water do receive the objects that
are outward, either as they are transparent, and then they serve the sight; or
as they are moveable and thin bodies, and then they serve the hearing; or as
moist ones do receive and embrace that which is dry, and then they be the
subjects of smelling. The flesh or membranes may be considered of two manner of
ways; either according to the temperature of the four elementall qualities,
and then they be the subjects of feeling; or else according to the mixture of
the qualities dry and moist, and then they are the subjects of relishes for
the taste. But howsoever the case stands for the reason of this number, we
see there are but five external senses, which are all placed without the
brain. These are the proper posts and messengers of the soul; these are the
windows by which we see clearly round about us. These are the watch or door
keepers which make us way into their most privy closet: if they perform their
faithful service unto reason, then do they set before her a million of
delightsome objects, whereof she frames marvelous discourses. But (alas and
woe is me) how often do they betray her? Oh how many dangers do they inwrap her
in, and how subject are they unto corruption?

The senses become the cutthrotes of reason.
It is not without cause that this thrice renowned Mercury does call the senses
tyrants, and the cutthrotes of reason: for oftentimes do they make captive the
same unto the two inferior powers; they make her of a mistress a servant; and
of a free woman, a drudge and thrall to all slavery. She may well command,
but she shall be obeyed all one, as laws and Magistrates are in an estate
troubled with civil dissentions. Yea tell me, how many souls have lost their
liberty through the sight of the eyes? How that the senses steal away and rob
reason of her liberty.
Do not men say that that little wanton, that blind archer does enter into our
hearts by this door, and that love is shaped by the glittering glimces which
issue out of the eyes, or rather by certain subtle and thin spirits, which
pass from the heart to the eye through a strait and narrow way very secretly,
and having deceived this porter, do place love within, which by little and
little does make it self Lord of the house, and casts reason out of the
doors? How often is reason bewitched by the ear? If thou give thine ear to
hearken unto these crafty tongues and cogging speeches, unto these cunning
discourses full of honey, and a thousand other baits, doubt not, but that thy
reason will be surprised: for the scout watch being fallen asleep, the enemy
steals upon them softly, and becomes master of the fort. The wise Ulysses,
did not he stop the ears of his companions, fearing least they should be
bewitched and besotted with the melodious tunes and sweet songs of the Sirens?
The licorishnes of the taste, surfeiting and drunkenness, have they not spoiled
many great personages? And the sense of feeling, (which nature has given to
living creatures, for the preservation of their kind) being the grossest and
most earthly of all the rest, and so by consequent the most delicate of all the
rest, does it not oftentimes cause us to become beasts? Reason then is never
overtaken, but through the false and treacherous dealing of these door
keepers: no man can at any time come within her palace, but by the priuitie of
these watchmen, for that (as I have said in the beginning of this chapter) the
soul being fast shut up within the body, cannot do any thing hut by the aid
and assistance of the senses.

CHAP. III. That the sight is the noblest of all the rest of the senses.
AMongst all the senses, that of the sight, in the common judgment of all the
Philosophers, has been accounted the most noble, perfect and admirable. Four
things proving the excellency of the sight.
The excellency thereof is to be perceived in an infinite sort of things: but
most principally in four: as first, in respect of the variety of the objects
which it represents unto the soul: secondly, in respect of the means of his
operation, which is (as it were) altogether spiritual: thirdly, in respect of
his particular object, which is the light, which is the most noble and perfect
quality that ever God created: and lastly, in respect of the certainty of his
action. First therefore it is out of all doubt, The first.
that the sight causes us to know greater variety and more differences of
things, then any of the rest of the senses. For all natural bodies are visible
and may be seen, but all of them cannot be felt, neither do they all
afford smells, tastes or sounds: the heaven, the worlds ornament, and most noble
substance amongst all the rest, will not suffer us to touch the same; neither
can we hear the sweet harmony which proceeds of the concords and
agreements of so many diverse motions. There is nothing but the sight which
acquainteth us therewithal: soft bodies make no sound; neither is there any
taste in the earth or fire, and yet every one of these may be seen. The
sight, besides his own proper object, which is color, has an infinite sort of
others, as greatness, number, proportion, motion, rest, situation and distances.
And this is the cause why the Philosopher in his Metaphysiques calls it the
sense of invention, as for that by the means thereof, all the goodliest
Sciences and Arts have been invented and found out. By the means of this noble
sense, it came first to pass that man should begin to play the Philosopher:
for Philosophy was not begot, but by admiring of things; and admiration sprung
not from elsewhere, then from the sight of pleasant and beautiful things.
Whereupon the mind raising it self on hie toward heaven, and ravished with
the consideration of so many marvelous things, was desirous to know the cause
of them, and thereupon began to play the Philosopher. And yet I will say
further, that the sight is the sense of our blessedness. For the chief
felicity of man consists in the knowledge of God. But there is none of the
other senses that gives us better directions for the same, then the sight. The
invisible things of God (says the Apostle) are manifested and made known unto
us by the visible. This first and principal cause, which is infinite and
incomprehensible, cannot be known but by his effects. Moses never knew how to
see God, otherwise then upon the back and hinder parts; for from his
countenance proceeded such a shining brightness, as that it did altogether das^e
his sight.

A thing worthy to be considered of Atheists.
Come hither then thou Atheist whosoever thou art; set on work this noble sense
thoroughly to view, this excellent and perfect workmanship of God, this huge
mass which contains all things. Lift up thy sight up on high from whence
thou have taken thy beginning. Behold the throne of his Majesty, which is
heaven, the most complet and fully furnished of all his corporal and sensible
works: look upon ths infinite number of burning fires in the same, and among
the rest, those two great flames which show us light, the one by day, and the
other by night. Mark the gloriousnes of the Sun when it arises, how it
stretches forth his beams in a moment, from the one end of the world unto the
other, and how at night it sinketh his chariot in the Ocean Sea. Consider the
variable disposition of the Moon in changing her face and shape, the diverse
motions of the Planets, which move continually with an incredible swiftnes and
equalnes, and that in such sort as that they never strike one upon another. If
thou be ashamed to look up to Heaven, for fear of being constrained to
confess a Deity, then cast down thine eyes upon the waters or earth: see and
mark in the Sea a great wonder, how continually it threatens the earth, and
yet never ouerfloweth it: how it swalloweth up all the rivers of the world, and
swells never a whit the more, neither has it been seen thereby to pass his
limits. Weigh with thy self how the earth hangs in the air, and so bears
up it self, notwithstanding the huge massines of the same. Call to mind the
differences of living creatures, which are all most perfect in their kinds;
the beauty of stones; the infinite number of plants, the which are not less
variable, then admirable for their properties. If all this cannot stir thee up
to the acknowledgement of this first and principal cause; if thy delight draw
thee away, and steal from thee that time which thou ought to spend in the
due consideration of such a manifold variety, then come hither, I will show
thee in less then nothing, the sum and brief of the great world; the head
and chief of all that ever God wrought; the pourtraiture of the universal
world: that then being ravished with so merueilous and cunning a piece of
work, thou may be constrained to cry out with the great Magician Zoroaster,
O man, thou wonder and uttermost endeavor of nature. I will not at this time
set before thine eyes any more then the head, in as much as the clear signs
and marks of the divine nature do shine therein most evidently. View well
this royal palace within, without, and throughout; behold the cunning
workmanship of the brain, the three pillars which bear up the roof of this
magnificent buildings, as an Atlas supporting the Heavens with his shoulders:
behold also his four closets or cells, wherein the principal powers of the
mind (if we will believe the Arabians) are lodged, as for example, the
imagination in the two foremost, the reason in the middlemost, and the memory
in that which is hindermost: observe moreover his christallike clear looking
glass, his admirable net, which like to an intricate labyrinth is wouen of a
million of small arteries, interlaced and wrought one within another, in which
the spirits are prepared and refined; the original of sinews, the silver
thread, and his incredible fecunditie in the bringing forth of sinews; the
channels and water pipes, through which the excrements of the brain are purged.
But and if thou will not be kept up within this royal palace, come forth and
thou shall see in the forepart of the head these two bright shining Stars,
the two looking glasses of the Soul, as those that shadow out unto us all the
passions of the same: thou will admire their beautiful christalline humor,
which is more clear and pure, then any oriental pearls; the pollished and
exquisite garnish of the coats, the marvelous nimblenes of the muscles, but
especially of the amorous pulley. On the sides thou shall see the ears, which
will no less astonish thee: for is it not a witty exploite of nature to close
up in so small a hole, a drum hard laced, having on the hinder part two small
strings, and three little bones, resembling a forge, a hammer and a stirrup,
three small muscles, and a labyrinth containing the inward air; two windows,
round, after the fashion of an egg, one nerve, and one gristlie vessel, which
stretching it self to the roof of the mouth, causes that goodly sympathy or
mutual suffering, which is betwixt the instruments of hearing and speaking?
And what will thou say to that little piece of flesh which moves it self a
hundred thousand ways, like unto an Eele, I mean the tongue, which is the
reuealer of all our conceits, the principal messenger of the mind, which
sings (as says the Apostle) praise unto his Creator, and oftentimes curses
men, which rauisheth, bends, thundreth, encourages the generous mind to
fight, which has power to destroy and ouerturne most flourishing Empyres, and
to set them again in their former state. To be short, O thou Atheist consider
at once, and all together (if thou be not disposed to take the pains with
every part by it self) the beauty and majesty shining in such sort in the
face, as that it causes all other living things to tremble thereat: shall thou
not find therein some sparkles, or rather I know not what bright beams of the
Deity? Shall thou not therein also find the marks and engraven form of the
Creator? And having viewed the whole proportion or the same, shall thou not,
whether thou will or no, be constrained to cry with the kingly Prophet: Thy
hands O Lord have fashioned me, I will magnify thee as long as I live. How
surpassing excellent then is the sight, seeing that in acquainting us with so
many wonderful things, and such diversity of objects, it leads us as it
were by the hand unto the knowledge of God?

The second proof of the excellency of the sight.
The second point, declaring unto us the excellency of the sight, is the means
of his operation, which is altogether lively: for the sight performs his
office at an instant, and that in places far removed and distant, without
moving it self from place to place. I intend (to the end that every one may
know the perfection of this sense) to compare the same, and make it like unto
the understanding. Even as the understanding part of the mind receives from.
the imaginatiue the forms of things naked and void of substance: A comparing
of the sight and understanding together.
even so the sight is the subject of forms without body, which the
Philosophers call intentionals. The understanding comprehends the universal
world, no place or room in the understanding taken up, or any whit more
pestered thereby, it contains Heaven and earth, without any manner of
encumbrance from the one to the other so contained therein: the sight
comprehends also the Heaven, without admitting of any place thereto; the
hugest mountains in the world do enter all at once, and that undiminished
through the apple of the eye, without any manner of offense through straitnes of
entrance. The understanding judges at one and the very same time of two
contraries, as of right and wrong, places them indifferently in it self,
attaineth to the knowledge of the one by the other, and bandeth them under one
and the same science. The eye at one instant receives and is occupied about
black and white, and distinguishes them perfectly, the knowledge of the one
being no manner of impeachment to the knowledge of the other, being yt which the
other senses are not capable of. For if a man have tasted any bitter thing, his
knowledge to judge aright at ye very same instant of that which is sweet will
fail, and deceive him. The understanding in a moment whirleth round about the
world: the sight likewise receives at one instance of time the whole widenes
of heaven. All the other senses do move by intercourse of time. And this is
the reason why men see the lightning, before they hear the thunder, although
that neither of them be made before or after other. The understanding is free
of it own nature, and has a will either to discourse or not to discourse: The
sight in his function has as it were a certain kind of liberty, which
nature has denied unto the other senses. The ears are always open; so as the
nose is also, the skin is always subject unto cold and heat and other the
injuries of the air: but the eyes have eyelids which open and shut when we
will, for the furtherance or staying of our sight, as best shall please our
selves.

The third thing which I have to testify the excellency of the sight, is the
certainty of the function. For it is out of all doubt that this is the most
infallible sense, and that which least deceives: according to that which me^
are wont to say, when they will assuredly avouch any thing, namely, that they
see it with their own eyes. And the proverb used amongst men of old time, is
most true, that it is better to have a witness which has seen the thing, then
ten which speak but by hear say. Thales the Milesian Philosopher said, that
there was as much difference betwixt sight and hearing; as betwixt true and
false. The Prophets themselves to confirm the truth of their prophesies,
called them by the name of visions, as being most true and certain things.
Finally, the excellency of the sight appears in his particular object, The
third proof of the excellency of the sight.
which is the most noble, common and best known of all others: I call it the
most noble, because it is endowed with the goodliest quality that is in the
whole world (that is to say) the light, which is of an heavenly offspring, and
which the Poets call the eldest daughter of God. I call it the commonest,
because in differently it communicates it self unto all. And I call it the
best known of us, in as much as all other natural bodies do more or less
consist of mixed color: and for that there cannot be any part thereof in the
world, but that it will be attained and gotten by sight. Let us then say with
Theophrastus, that the sight is as it were the form and perfection of man:
with the Stoikes, that the sight makes us to draw near unto the divine
nature: and with the Philosopher Anaxagoras, that it seems that we were borne
only to see.

CHAP. IIII. Of the excellency of the eye, the proper instrument of sight.
IF the sense of sight be wonderful, the member or instrument serving for the
same can not but go beyond all wonder: for it is framed so cunningly, and of
such beautiful parts, as that there cannot be the man, which is not ravished
with the consideration of the same: and for my self, I know not whether with
Plotine and Sinesius I should call nature some magical inchauntresse or
iuglar, for having enclosed in so small a star so manifold gracious
influences, and made a work so far surpassing all other her common and
ordinary ones. The Egyptians have worshipped the Sun, and called it the
visible Son of the invisible God: and wherefore shall not we admire the eye,
which (as the ancient Poet Orpheus affirms) is the Sun of this little world,
more notable without comparison, then that of the great world? The great Sun
by the stretching forth of his beams does enlighten the whole world, A
comparing of the Sun and the eye together.
but it reapeth neither profit nor pleasure by this his ministry, neither
does it self see any thing of all that, which it causes us to see: The eye,
that petty Sun, in representing unto us whatsoever colored bodies that
there are, does therewithal see and acknowledge them all it self, yea it
pleasantly delights it self therein together with the mind, and also
perceives the fashion, greatness, and distances of the things about which it is
occupied, which no other of the instruments of sense can do. Plato for the
honor he bare unto this divine part, called it celestial and heavenly, he
believes that the eye is all full of such strains and fire as the stars
have, which shines and burns not. Orpheus called the eyes, the looking
glasses of nature: The eyes are the looking glasses of the mind.
Hesichius, the doors for the Sun to enter in by: Alexander the
Peripatecian, the windows of the mind, because that by the eyes we do
clearly see what is in the same, we pearce into the deep thoughts thereof,
and enter into the priuities of his secret chamber. And as the face does shadow
out unto us the lively and true image of the mind, so the eyes do lay open
unto us all the perturbations of the same: the eyes do admire, love, and are
full of lust. In the eyes, thou may spy out love and hatred, sorrow and
mirth, resolution and timorousnes, compassion and mercilesnes, hope and
despair, health and sickness, life and death. Mark I pray thee, how in the
feats of love the eyes can craftily flatter thee, how they become courteous,
kind, full of favor, crafty, alluring, All the passions of the mind are to
be espied and seen in the eye.
rolling, and strangely enchaunting thee: in hatred how they look fierce and
stern; in bold attempts, lofty and continually glistering; in fear cast
down, and as it were set fast in the head; in joy, pleasant and clear; in
pensiuenes, all heavy, mournful and dark. To be short, they be wholly given
to follow the motions of the mind, they do change themselves in a moment,
they do alter and conform themselves unto it in such manner, as that Blemor
the Arabian, and Syreneus the Physician of Cypres, thought it no absurdity to
affirm that the soul dwelt in the eyes: and the common people thereabout,
think so until this day, for in kissing the eyes they think they kiss the
soul.

Momus condemned.
See here thy self condemned, O shameless find fault, and vtterterly overthrown
in thine action, and delay not but come and make condign satisfaction, by
honorably recompencing of nature, whom thou have so maliciously and falsely
accused of folly, in the framing of man's body, for that she did not set two
windows, next neighbors to the heart, through them to spy all the passions
of the same. Can thou wish more goodly windows then these of the eyes? Do
thou not see therein as in a glass, the most hidden things of the mind? The
poor man, at the bar does he not read written in the eyes of his judge his
sentence either of condemnation or absolution? There is (says Theocritus) a
broad trodden way betwixt the eye and the heart: a man can not so dissemble the
matter, but that such will be the passion of the eye, as is the passion of the
heart. It grieueth me that ever I should find so vain a discourse, as should
contain the eger desire of any man to have the bread framed of christalline
cleerenes, to the end he might see what is within the heart, seeing we are
already possessed of this round christalline humor within our eyes, which
casts forth most lively light, much like the glittering beams coming from a
shining glass moved in the Sun. But if it may be granted me to mix one dram
of Physic amongst the large mass of these Philosophical and Poetical
sentences, I dare avouch that in the eyes we perceive and discern, the whole
estate of the health of the body. That the eyes do show the whole estate of
man's health.
Hippocrates that sacred Oracle of Greece (which all the world as yet even to
this day has in singular reverence and rare admiration) has observed the same
very well in his Epidemickes, and in his treatise of Prognostications he
commands the Physician, when he goes to see the sick party, to behold and
look well upon the face, but chiefly upon the eyes, because that in the^ as in
a glass, is easily espied the strength or weakness of the animal powers: if the
eye be clear and bright, it makes us well to hope: but and if it be dark,
withered, and clowdie, it presageth death. Galen calls the eye a divine
member, and that part of every living thing which most resembles the Sun, and
therewithal does so highlye steeme of it, as tha the verily believes that the
brain was made only for the eyes. The Lawyers do hold it as a Maxim, that a
blind man cannot plead or handle a case well, because he cannot see the
majesty of the Judge. Arislotle that light of nature, in his second book of
the generation of living things, says, that from the eyes men take infallible
signs of fruitfulnes, as, if in dropping some bitter water into a woman's eye,
she by and by feel the taste thereof upon her tongue, it is a sign of her
aptnes to conceive. The eyes (says the same Philosopher) are full of spirit
and seed: and this is the reason, why in new married persons, they be so much
the lesser and as it were languishing. But what need I to allege so many
proofs concerning the excellency of these two Suns, seeing that nature her
self does sufficiently demonstrate the same unto us? Let us read in the book
of nature, Natures care for the preservation of the eyes.
and see how careful she has been to preserve the eyes, as her most de are
and trusty messengers: let us admire the art and skill she has used in
working their safety and defense, we shall find her not to have forgotten or
left out any thing, but so to have bestirred her self, as those men which have
a purpose to fortify a place, and make it impregnable. The fortifications
serving for the safety of the eye.
First she has lodged them, as in a bottom or little valley, that so they
might not be subject to the assaults of manifold dangers and hurts: and to the
end that nothing might command this little valley, she has raised up four
notable bulwarks all fortified with bones, as hard as any stone, which in such
sort do swell and bunch out, as though they were little hillockes made to
receive the blows, and bear off the violence of every enemy that might
assail them. Above them is the brow bone, underneath them the cheek bone: on
the right and left hand the two corners, the one of them somewhat greater then
the other, and is that which is next the nose; the lesser one being that which
is set right over against it. And for as much as the forepart of this place lay
wide open without any cover, (for fear that the prince commanding the same
(which is the eye) should be overtaken or offended with too much wind, cold or
smoke) nature has made as it were a drawbridge, to be pulled up and let down
as the governor shall command, and this is the eye lid, which opens and
shuts as best pleases us. The chains by which this bridge is drawn and
let fall, are the muscles, the instruments of voluntary motion. It appears
then plainly enough, by this great care which nature has for the preservation
and defense of the eyes, how excellent they are, and therewithal we have our
lesson taught us, how careful we ought to be for the preservation thereof.

CHAP. V. Of the composition of the eye: in general.
SEeing it is now time to lay open the skillful workmanship of these bright
stars appearing and rising together, I purpose to describe them in such
lively sort and perfect manner, as that the most curious, and such as are borne
only to carpe (it may be) will content and hold themselves satisfied
therwithall, letting pass all those notable objections and questions, which
might be made about the parts of the eye, for that I have at large handled
them in the sourth book of my Anatomicall works. And even as Cosmographers
and those which travailing apply themselves curiously to observe and mark
things, do first inquire of the names of the provinces, view and consider the
situation, beauty, largenes, strength and entrances of cities, together with
whatsoeuerels may be seen without, before they enter into them: so will I
describe the form, situation, fortresses, largenes, use, and number of the
eyes, with whatsoever else may be marked in general, before I enter into any
particular search of the particular and petty parts of the same.

The names of the eye.
The Grecians call the eyes (...), because they make us see, and the Poets
affirm that they are the children of the Nymph Thea. The Hebrews have called
them by the name of High, to put us in mind from whence we sprung, as also to
teach us, that our eyes must serve us to behold the things which are high. The
Latins call them Oculi, because they are as it were hidden and enclosed within
a hollow valley.

The form of the eye.
The shape and figure of the eye is round, but not every way: for it is somewhat
long and steeple fashioned, having his foundation outward, and his top inward
toward the sinew of sight. This figure was most agreeable unto it, The cause
of the roundnes of the eye.
to the end it might contain much, move nimbly, and free it self of offered
injuries. The Mathematicians do maintain, that the sphericall figure is of
all other most apt to contain much: and Ophthalmists do confidently affirm,
that if the eye had not been round, it could never have comprehended the
hugenes of great bodies, neither yet could ever have seen at one time many
objects, because that no man can see but by a direct line. On what side soever
then that the eye turns it self, many lines do offer themselves at once to
the apple of the eye which is round: but this could not by any means come to
pass if it were flat or fouresquare. This circular shape does also serve the
eye, that it may move the more nimbly and easily, whether it be upward or
downward, to the right hand, or to the left, or circularly: for sphericall
bodies do move as it were of themselves, being stayed and resting only upon a
narrow point. And I conceive this roundnes not to be unprofitable for the
defense of the eye: for amongst all the sorts of figures the sphericall or
round figure is the strongest, and withstandeth the assaults of outward hurts
and harms, because it is all alike, and has no vneuenes in it: therein a man
shall neither find corner nor point, which may work the ruin and dissolution
of the same. The eyes are seated upon high in the body, in the forepart
thereof, The situation of the eye.
and as it were in a valley. Upon high, to discover from a far, and to keep
that nothing may assail us at unawares: they serve the creature for spies and
watches, and are oftentimes called Phares in the holy Scripture. The cause why
they be situated on high.
But watchmen are usually wont to be placed in such plots as do ouerlooke all
the rest: and no man assigns any other place to the lantern, but the top of
the tower and highest place of the ship. They are set in the forepart of every
creature rather then behind, And the cause why before.
because that every living thing moves forward: by which means it has the
opportunity to spy out whatsoever might offend it: and indeed it is not at
any time permitted the watch, to stand with their backs or blind sides toward
the enemy. Such as write of Anatomy, say, that it was necessary to place the
eyes forward: for that the sight had great need of a very soft and marrowish
sinew, that by it upon the sudden there might great store of spirits be
brought unto the eyes: and that such sinews cannot possibly be found to put
forth backward, seeing that way there is none that spread themselves, but such
as are too hard and dry. I my self have elsewhere approved this reason, but
having afterward observed, that all the nerves do rise from the hinder part of
the brain, and having seen the optickes to rise also from thence as well as
the rest, I was enforced to change mine opinion. The cause why they be set in
a hollow place.
Finally, the eyes are fastened within a little hollow pit (which the common
people call a collet) for their better safetic, and to prevent the prodigal
expense of spirits. This little valley is fortified and entrenched on every
side, either with the brow bone, or with the bone of the nose, or the
cheeke-bone, all which are raised round about the same in manner of little
hillockes: and and for that the forepart was without any thing to cover it,
nature has shut it in with a lid, which opens and shuts at our pleasure,
for fear that the eye should be corrupted and turned from his nature, either
by the offense of too much light; or leaft that it being alwais open, his
spirits should spend and quite vanish away; or least in sleeping, it might be
hurt by outward causes. To which causes I will yet add one other of mine own,
which is, that if the eye should never shut, and thereby the spirits
incessantly be gazing upon the light, it would come to pass that they would
be unable to withdraw themselves so speedily into their center, and our sleep
would never be so peaceable:for the Philosophers are of opinion, that sleep is
caused by the retraction of the spirits into their secret and inner rooms.

The substance of the eye.
The nature of the eye, which men call in anatomic all terms the substance of
the eye, is altogether soft, bright and shining clear, thick and waterish:
soft that so it may readily admit and receive the forms of things: shining and
through clear, that so the light may pearce it through, as also that thereby
the instrument may have some correspondencie with his object: thick, to the
end that his objects may have, wherein the better to rest themselves. Now it is
the water alone, that can have all these properties: whereupon it comes to
pass that the eye is of a waterish substance, and not of a fiery substance,
as Plato said: which thing I shall handle more largely in the 10. chapter.

The use of the eye is double: The use.
the one is to serve as a guide and watch to discover whatsoever might annoy,
and this is common to all living creatures: the other is proper to man alone,
being to teach him the knowledge of God by the things that are visible, to
perfect his understanding, and thirdly to consummate his happiness: for by the
sight man is made partaker of the beauty of the heaven, by which means his
understanding part is much beautified and enriched, and he himself made as it
were like unto his Creator.

The number.
The eyes are two, and that because of the excellency and necessity of this
sense, that thereby the one might serve, if that the other were either diseased
or utterly lost. They be also two in respect of the better perfecting of the
sight, for by that means a man may see many things at once: for if that man
had but one eye, and that placed in the midst of the forehead, as the Poets
feign of the Cyclops, we should only see the things right before us, and not
those which should be on either side. These two eyes, although they be far
enough separated the one from the other, That they can not move the one without
the other.
have such a fellow-feeling, and do so well agree the one with the other in
their actions, as that the one of them cannot move without, or otherwise then
the other: for it is not in our ability, to look up with the one and down
with the other, or else to stir the one and hold the other still. Aristotle his
error.
Aristotle imputes this to the conjunction of the sinews of sight, and is
persuaded that the eyes do move together, because they have the original and
principal cause of their motion, which is found to be in the conjunction of the
sinew of sight: common. But this worthy man deceives himself in this, as he
is overtaken almost in all other things, wherein he has to do concerning
Anatomy. The nerve optic medleth not at all with the motion of the eye, it
only brings the spirit of sight: for being stopped in the disease called
Gutta Serena, the sight is quite lost, and yet the motion thereof abides still.
It behooves us therefore to attribute the cause thereof, to the end and
perfection of this sense. The eyes must move together, that so the objects
thereof may not seem double. For if we could look up with the one and down
with the other, at one and the same time, this sense which is the worthiest of
all the rest, should evermore delude it self and become most imperfect, in as
much as every single thing that it should behold, would appear double: the
proof whereof may easily be had, if with thy finger thou force the one of
thine eyes either higher or lower then the other.

Their tempenature.
The temperature of the eye is cold and moist. It feels most exquisitely, and
has a merueilous fellow-suffering with the brain.

Their feeling.
Man alone has his eyes of sundry colors: and this variety comes either of
the humors, The colors of the eyes.
or of the grape colored coat, or of the spirits. The variation by humors, is
because they alter three ways, as either in their situation and placing in the
eye, which is sometime more deep and inward, and sometimes more superficial
and outward; or else in their substance, as that which may be gross or
subtle, clear or dim: or lastly in their quantity. If the christalline humor
be very bright, clear and subtle, if also it be large, and placed forward in
the eye, the eye will seem fiery and sparkeling; if contrariwise it be
duskish, gross, and set very much inwardly, the eye will show black or
brown: the grape-like tunicle, being oftentimes of diverse colors, is also a
cause of this variety, and the spirits do not a little further and serve to
procure the same.

CHAP. VI. A very particular description of all the parts of the Eye, and
chiefly of the six muscles of the same.
IS it not one of the wonders of the world, that this little member (which
seems as though it were nothing) shall be made of more then twenty sever all
parts, all differing one from another, and yet so decently joined, and
incorporated one with another, as that all the wit of man is not able to blame
the same, either of want or surplussage? I purpose to describe one after
another, and that in such order, as is to be observed, if one should go about
to dissect or anatomise the same. The eye then is framed of six fleshie
strings, A briese rehearsal of the parts of the eye.
which men call muscles, and these cause it to move upward, downward, to the
right side, to the left, and circularlie, of six coats or tunicles, which
inwrap all the parts together, nourishing and containing the humors every one
of them, within their own precincts and bounds; of three humors, all clear
and thorough-shining, which do receive, alter and keep all the objects of
sight; of two sinews which convey the animal spirit, the one serving the
sight, and is therefore called the nerve opticke, the other serving for the
motion of the eye, of many small veins which serve for victualers; and of as
many arteries to prolong the life thereof; of much fat, by his slipperines to
make it nimble, and of two little glandules or kernels, which keep it moist
and fresh, least by his continual motion it might be over heat, and so over
dry.

The description of the muscles.
The muscles were of necessity provided and given to the eye, that so it might
move on every side: for if the eye stood fast, and immovable, we should be
constrained to turn our head and neck (being all of one piece) for to see:
but by these muscles it now moves it self with such swiftnes and nimblenes,
without stirring of the head, as is almost incredible, and this is the cause
why they are termed of the Poet rolling. The four straight muscles.
The muscles of the eye are only six, four direct or straight, and two
oblique or crooked ones; the direct serve for direct motion, as the first of
them draws the eye up, the second down, the third toward the nose, and the
fourth from the nose. The old writers being groslie conceited in matters of
Anatomy, The error of the old writers.
have thought that these four muscles sprung from within, from the membrane
called Dura matter, but they were foulie deceived, for so they ought not, and
much less could they. They ought not, because the said membrane is a very
sensible part, and covers the sinews of sight, in such manner, as that the
muscles performing their offices, and moving backward toward their root and
original, should press the sinew, hinder the passage that should be at
liberty, for the spirit to pass through, and for the exquisite sensiblenes
that is in Dura matter, their motion should be always joined with much pain.
They cannot rise from thence, because their foundation and stay would not be
firm and fast enough, their pillar would have been to weak, for it is a point
of necessity, that the drawing part should ever be stronger then that which is
drawn. We must therefore believe and hold, that these four muscles do take
their begininng from within the collet, from some part of the bone, called
Sphenoides, and holding diverse courses, do fasten themselves vnro the white
coat: the two other muscles called oblique, The two oblique muscles.
do stir the eye in his oblique, and as it were circular motion, the one
above, and the other below, always outwardly, and never inwardly, because the
eye has nothing within to behold or look upon. The first of the obliques
springs from the place of the four direct ones, The amorous pulley.
and as it comes near unto the great corner, it makes a round and white
string, which passing through a little pipe or cartilagenous ring inform of a
pulley, makes a semicircular motion, and inserteth it self in oblique manner
into the membrane coniunctiue, or white coat before spoken of. This skillful
piece of work has lain secret until this age, wherein an ingenious
Anatomist, named Fallopius, has detected the same. The other there springs
from the great corner, Pleasant devised names for every one of the six muscles.
and fastneth it self in the little, drawing the eye in oblique manner toward
the ear. We will give for sport sake, unto every muscle his proper name, and
so that which draws the eye upward, shall be called proud and haughty: and
that which moves it downward, humble and lowly: that which moves it toward
the nose, reader, or drinker, because in reading or drinking, we turn our eyes
toward our nose: the fourth which moves the eye toward the less corner,
disdainefull or angry, for that it makes us look awrie: the two oblique or
circular ones shall be called rolling and amarous, because they make the eye to
move privily, and to cast out wanton glaunces. The error of the old writers,
about a sementh muscle.
All Anatomists do add a seventh muscle, which should cover the nerve
opticke, keep it firm, and stay the eye that it go not out of his place: but
they are deceived, for there is no such found, but in fourefooted beasts, which
have their eyes so much hanging down toward the earth; but man ordinarily
carrying his face lifted up to Heaven, had not need of any such, Some there be
which think this muscle to be as necessary for men as beasts, to the making
of a settled and direct motion, and such as should resemble the musical rest,
as also to keep the eye stayed and steadfast, when we do earnestly behold any
thing: but I assure you, that such direct and bent motion is made, when all the
six muscles together indifferently do stretch their fibers, as in like sort,
when they slack themselves, the eye stands not still but moves incessantly.
If these assertions do not satisfy them, then let them show me this seventh
muscle, that I may behold it with mine eye, and I will believe them.

CHAP. VII. Of the six coats of the eye.
THe eye being christallike clear, and of a waterish substance within,
required necessarily, some staying hold by bodies more stable and steadfast,
for otherwise the humors would tumble as storme-beaten ships, never being at
rest. The necessity of the coats of the eye.
Therefore nature to prevent this mischief, has framed certain little filmes
or skins (which are called of some tunicles or coats) which unite and fasten
together the whole eye, cause the several humors to abide within their proper
bounds, and therewith all, convey their nourishment unto them. The certain
number of these tunicles is not thoroughly concluded of: for some make more, and
some fewer. Hippocrates does acknowledge but four, Galen has observed five,
That there are but five tunicles or coats.
and the Anatomists of our time make up the number of nine. As for my self,
having with all carefulnes perused the leaves of this book of nature, I cannot
find any more then six, which are, the white, the hornie, the grape-like,
cobweb-like net-like and glassie coat. For whereas some do count of one that
should be like unto the eye-bries; it is nothing else but an appendant part of
the vitreous: as that which they call the hard coat, is a parcel of the
hornie. As concerning the ninth, which is made of the ends of the muscles,
there is no show of reason, why it should be called a tunicle proper to the
eye. For if this were granted, it would also follow, that the common membrane
which covers the muscles of the eye, should be graced with the same
privilege. The first therefore and largest of all the rest, That the white
tunicle is the first.
is called the white coat, or the white of the eye, or otherwise the
coniunctiue membrane: I say nothing in this place of the greek and latin
names, for that a man may see them in mine Anatomy. This tunicle is very
strong, and rises from the edges of Pericranium: it compasses not the eye
round about, or every where: for it ends at the circle called Iris, by reason
of the variety of the colors thereof. I confess that there are three uses of
this coat. The threefold use of the same
The first whereof is, that it lets all annoyance which might happen to the
eye, by the hardness of the bones about it. The second, to hold the eye firm,
least that either by some manner of excess, or else some over violent motion, it
should fall out of his place. The third and last, is to stand fast unto all the
six muscles, as whereupon they should not fail to find sure footing.

The hornie membrane.
The second membrane is called Cornea, or hornie, because it is clear and
polished, as the horns of lanternes be: or because it may be divided into many
little skins or thin membranes: it is also called hard, because of his
hardness, and for that it comes from the thick membrane compassing the
brain, called Dura matter. The substance thereof is thick, for the better
withstanding of outward miuries: it is also transparent or through clear, that
thereby the light may quickly pass through it: it is smooth, polished and
without all color, because that serving as a glass or spectacle unto the
christialline humor, it would have made every thing which we should have
looked upon, to have been of the same color with it self, if it had been of
any color at all: this is also the cause, why there are not any veins or
arteries to be seen in it. But if it happen that this skin grow white, as
sometimes it does through ulcers in the same, or by having been scorched by
some hot thing, (in such sort as the Turks use them which will see Mahomet his
sepulcher) the sight is lost, the glass being darkened. This tunicle serves
for three purposes. The threefold use of this coat.
For first it serves to defend the humors: secondly, to compass and keep
them in: and thirdly, to be in stead of a spectacle unto the christalline
humor.

The grapelike coat.
The third tunicle is called Vuea, being like unto the skin of a black grape:
it is also called Choroides, because it contains all the vessels which serve
for the nourishing of the other coats: or because it comes from the thin and
tender skin compassing the brain called Pia matter, which is of Galen
oftentimes called Choroides.

This skin compasses the eye round about, except before only, where being
bored through, it makes a little round hole, which is called the apple, and is
the principal window of the eye, which being shut in by chataracts, causes us
to line in continual darkness: and this is the only coat that is
partie-coloured. On the fore side it is as it were black, thereby to hold
together the form of objects: on the innermost or hinder side it is blew,
green, and of many other colors, thereby to refresh the christalline humor
when it is wearied. This skin does notable good service to the christalline
humor, and other parts of the eye. The offices of Vuea.
For first it is the means to hinder that the hardness of the hornie membrane
should not hurt the crystal: then it refreshes the same with the variety of
his colors: thirdly, it keeps together and hemmeth in the spirits, which
otherwise would spend and disperse themselves abroad: and lastly, does store
with nourishment, the hornie and netlike membranes, as also the humors: and
this is the cause why nature has made it soft and full of vessels.

The fourth membrane is called Aranoides, because it is very fine, and
resembles the ciper web, The cobweblike coat.
or threeds which the Spider draws out with her feet: it covers and lies
close unto the christalline humor, and serves to unite and retain the forms
of things, as the lead does in looking glasses.

The netlike coat.
The fifth is the netlike tunicle, ouercast with a million of little threeds,
after the fashion of a net. It grows from the softest part of the sinew of
sight, which naturally is given to dilate and widen it self: and this is the
cause why when it is cast into water, one shall perceive it to be all white,
soft, and as it were marrowlike. The use thereof is to convey the inward light,
The use thereof.
which is the animal spirit, unto the christalline humor, and to carry back
again whatsoever received forms first unto the nerve optic, and from thence
to the brain to judge thereof.

The glassie tunicle.
The last is called the vitreous or glassie tunicle, because it covers and
contains the glassie humor. The learned of ancient time have not known it.
There is to be seen in the midst thereof a round circle like unto the eyebrie:
I suppose it to be a number of small veins, which convey blood unto the said
vitreous humor, that there being labored, it may be made white and fit for
the christalline humor.

CHAP. VIII. Generally of the three humors of the eyes: but more specially of
the becautie and excellency of the christalline humor.
The excellency of the christalline humor.
Lo thus all vailes, shadows and covert being taken away, it is now time to
make a plain and open show of the most precious jewel of the eye, that rich
diamond, that beautiful crystal, which is of more worth then all the pearls
of the East. This is that icelike humor, which is the principal instrument of
the sight, the soul of the eye, the inward spectacle: this is that humor
which alone is altered by colors, and receives whatsoever forms of the
things that are to be seen. This is that christalline humor, which in more
hardy wise then Hercules, dares to encounter two at one, That all the parts of
the eye are servants to the christalline.
namely, the outward and inward light. This is that only christalline humor,
which all the other parts of the eye acknowledge their sovereign, and
themselves the vassals thereof: for the hornie tunicle does the office of a
glass unto it: the apple, the office of a window: the grapelike coat is as a
fair flowring garden, to cheer and rejoice the same after wearisome labor:
the cobweblike coat serves as lead to retain such forms as are offered: the
waterish humor as a warlike foreward, to intercept and break off the first
charge of the objects thereof, assaying all upon the sudden, and with headlong
violence to make breach and entrance: The vitreous humor is his cook,
dressing and setting forth in most fit sort his daily repast: The nerve
opticke, one of his ordinary messengers, carrying from the brain thereto,
commandment and power to see, and conueying back again with all speed
whatsoever has been seen: The muscles are his lofty steedes and courageous
coursers, whereupon being mounted it aduanceth it self aloft, casts it self
allow, turns it self on the right and left hand: and finally in every such
sort, as seems best unto it self. In brief, this is the principal part of
the eye, which I intend to describe, when I shall have showed you that which is
before it, I mean the waterish humor. All the Anatomists agree that there are
three humors in the eyes: the waterish, The description of the waterish humor.
the christalline, and the glassie. The waterish, called also the white humor,
has this name, because it is of the consistence of water, and is (as it were)
like unto the white of an egg. Why the watrie humor is set before the
christalline.
Nature has placed it before the christalline to be in stead of a rampire, to
the end it might not be hurt by the hardness of the membranes, and that the
first and fierce assaults of objects, might be somewhat rebated: and in such
manner, as that it may seem to be an inward mean to convey the forms of
objects unto the christalline humor. And look how the lungs undertakes the
first encounter of the air, and makes it true favorite unto the heart: even
so the waterish humor alters the light which comes from without, and
reconcileth it to that which is within. This humor serves also to water the
christalline and to keep it moist: for being dry it can not admit the forms
of things. It manageth also the spirits, which otherwise of their own nature
would always be mounting aloft and wandering abroad, and will not suffer them
in such sort to spend themselves, being set before them as a bar to keep
them in. It also keeps asunder the grapelike coat and the christalline
humor, and stretches forth and fills continually the hornie membrane, that
so by the withering and shrinking thereof the sight may not be lost. This
humor having all these goodly virtues: That the watrie humor is a part of the
eye.
it is not very like that it should be an excrement of the christalline
humor, as Auicen the prince of Arabia for Physic has seemed to affirm. And
I am so far from being of his mind, as that I take it for a spermaticke
part, not yielding any thing in title of eldership unto the christalline, as
having over and besides his limited proportion or permanent quantity, his
constant abiding place, and his double partition wall of two membranes, keeping
it and the christalline asunder: whereunto may be added, that (contrary to the
nature of an excrement) if it be once lost or spilt, it can never be recovered
again, but causes us to lose our sight.

The next in sequence is the christalline humor, The description of the
christalline.
which is bright and icelike, as is the crystal which is pure and well
pollished. This is the steele-glasse of the mind, by which it looks upon the
forms and faces of things, and combineth the lights which before were several
and asunder. Some men are of judgment, that the invention and use of
spectacles was taken from the christalline humor, because that if it be laid
upon a written paper, it causes the letters to show twice so great as they
are. The substance thereof is waterish, The substance thereof.
but it runs not abroad as the others do; it is faster and more solid, to
the end that the forms of objects, may settle themselves therein; it is also
through-cleere, and full of light, to the end it may have some correspondencie
with his object, which is lightsome; it is of no color, that so it may receive
all manner of colors the more indifferently: for if the christalline humor
should be tainted either with green, or red, or yellow, all the objects
thereof would appear and seem to be of the same color. Why the christalline
humor is not nourished with blood.
Here we cannot but wonder at the prouidentnes of nature, which would not have
this christalline to be nourished with blood, as all the other parts of the
body are, for fear that the blood should make it red, but for the better
assurance has dedicated unto it the vitreous humor, to turn his nutriment
into a white color, and play the part of a cook, according as the need
thereof should require. His shape.
The shape is round, and yet not altogether and exactly sphericall, but some
what flat on the two sides as is a fetch, or the end of a pestell: and this is
the reason why the Grecians have called it (...). I conceive that it was thus
shaped, that so it might abide more firm, and not to be thrust out of his
place upon every violent motion of the eye. For such things as be
exquisitelyround, do move (as it were) of themselves, and have no stay,
resting themselves but upon a point. His situation.
It is placed in the midst of the eye, as in his center, to the end it may
equally and indifferently intertaine and admit of both the lights. On the
hinder part it is vnderlaid with the vitreous humor, and feemoth (as it were)
to swim upon the top of the same: on the forepart it has the waterish
humor, and round about it is wrapped in his proper coat called Aranoides.

The glassie humor.
The third and last humor is called glassie, because it resembles in color
and consistence the moulten glass. The chief use thereof is to prepare
nourishment for the christalline humor, not that the christalline humor
should feed upon it own substance, as Auicen has thought. For one part is
never nourished or fed of the substance of another: but this does blanch or
turn white the blood, and serve for cook to the christalline. It presserueth
also the christalline from all annoyance that might happen by the hardness of
the membranes, and keeps in the spirits.

The quantity thereof is in greater abundance then any of the rest: it is
clothed with his own coat, which is more then the ancient learned in this
profession did ever attain unto to know.

CHAP. IX. Of the sinews, veins, arteries, and other parts of the eye.
The sinew of sight.
THere are as yet remaining untouched, though necessary sarie helps to the
sight, two pair of nerves, and certain other small arteries. The first pair
is called opticke, From whence it springs.
and it brings the animal spirit and inward light unto the christalline
humor. This pair springs not from the first ventricle of the brain, as the
Arabians would have it, neither yet from out of the midst of the lowest part of
the brain, as the Grecians have persuaded themselves, and as all Anatomists of
our time do as yet believe; but from the hinder part of the brain, where the
great and little brain do join together. This observation is new, but most
true, and I receive it, because I have often seen it. Why the sinews of sight
do grow into one.
The opticke therefore coming from the hinder part, and having finished more
then half his course, in corporateth it self the one with the other, and so
becomes one, not growing one unto another only, as the common sort does
think, much less only touching one another, as the mullet does the millstone,
but (as has been said before) they do in such sort incorporate themselves the
one with the other, as that no man is able by any cunning skill to separate
them. The first reason.
This incorporation was needful for that they being very soft, and having such
a large piece of ground to trauerse, might have bended and becoming crooked,
could never have carried directly forward their spirit, if they had not by this
their combination, one strengthened the other. It was meet and convenient that
these two nerves should The second.
apply themselves wholly to the service of the christalline, and that they
should be drawn along as in the same level or directline with the eyes,
otherwise the sight would have bin continually false, for every simple object
would have appeared double. But in very deed it had not been possible for them
to have continued their level, being so long and so tender, if they had not
been thus united in the midst. The third.
I will yet add unto these fomer a third benefit by this union, and it is to
show that by this means the perfection of the sight is greatly furthered and
advanced: for by this means even in a moment the spirit may pass from one eye
to the other, and then the one eye being stopped, the other will become fuller of
spirit, and so more strong and able to see a far off: for so are we
accustomed to do, namely, to shut the one of our eyes, if westriue to behold
anything a far off. The insertion of the sinews of sight.
The opticke nerves after this their union, do again divide themselves, and
march on forward, either of them grafting himself into his proper eye: the
inward part of the sinew being marrowish, does in large it self and makes the
netlike tunicle: the outward part does make the me^branes called Cornea and
Vuea. Herophilus, Galen, and almost al other Anathomists, have supposed this
sinew to be hollow, but it is only spungie: for it is not possible for any man
to find any cauitie in the same. The sinews of the eye, serving for motion.
The other couple of sinews march on unto the muscles of the eyes, and serve
to help their motion: their dividing of themselves is pretty, full of kindness,
for they send to every muscle as it were a little fine thread.

The veins and arteries.
There are in the eye many pretiesmall veins and arteries, which bring life and
nourishment to the same: they all spring from the branches of the veins and
arteries called Iugulares and Carotides.

The fat.
The fat that lies about the eye does keep it moist, thereby keeping it from
withering: it keeps it also from the injury of the cold, preserving his
natural heat: which is the cause that the eye is never tainted with a
shiuering or quaking cold.

The glandules.
There are belonging to the eye certain glandules or kerneis which water the
eye, as also drink up like a sponge, the moisture falling upon them from the
brain.

CHAP. X. How we see, as namely whether it be by the sending forth of spirits,
or by taking in of the forms of things.
I Think my self by this time to have deciphered exactly enough the whole
workmanship of the eye, and of all his parts, let us now look about and see
how it discharges his function, which is sight, and how it is accomplished.
The things necessary to make us see.
All Philosophers have well agreed in this one point, that there are three
things necessary for to make the sight perfect: that is to say; the instrument
which is the eye; the object, which is the color; and the means enlightened,
which is the air, or the water, or some other thorough-cleare and
christal-like thing: but when it should come to pass that they should join
these three together, and show the manner of this action, (which is the
liueliest and briefest of all the other senses) they jar among themselves and
cannot agree. Some of them would have that there should issue out of the eye
bright beams or a certain light which should reach unto the object, and
thereby cause us to see it: other some would have it, that the object comes
unto the eye, and that nothing goes out of the eye: the first do hold that we
see by emission or having something going forth of the eye, the latter by
reception or receiving of the object into the eye. The former sect do
ordinarily allege Plato as their prince and chief pillar: Plato his opinion,
how that we see sending forth of some thing.
one of his princip all foundations stands upon this, that the eye is all
full of light, and of the nature of fire, not such as uses to burn and give
light together, neither yet that which burns but gives no light, but such as
gives light and burns not, like unto the celestial fire. This foundation
seems to rest upon some show of truth, The found tion of this opinion.
for the eye being rubbed, (yea though it be when it is most dark) does cast
forth some bright streams: and commonly we see the eyes of such as are
angry, all fierce and fiery. Reasons to prove the eye to be of the nature of
fire.
Pliny has observed that Tyberius Casar did make afraid many soldiers with
his only look, it was so quick and full of light. Aristotle reports that
one Antipho, a young man, did always see his own image by the reflexe of the
bright strains which came forth of his eyes. Galen tells of a soldier, who
becoming blind by little and little, perceived every day as it were a light
to come forth of his eyes, and returned not again. And do we not in the night
perceive the Cat, the Woolfe, and many other living creatures to have shining
eyes. Moreover, the more then credible readiness and nimblenes of the eye, the
performance of his actions in a moment, and without local motion, his
steeple-like shape, do all evidently testify, that it is of a subtle nature,
and full of fire: the eye also is never seen to quake through cold, although
it be in the cold, because it self is all on a flame. Finally, it cannot be
denied but that the instrument must be suitable to his object, the object of
sight is color, and ancient writers have defined color to be a flame going
out of bodies: it is of necessity therefore, that the instrument should be of
the same nature. If this be true (I mean that the eye is full of fire and
sparkling streams) we shall be forced to believe, that the eye sees by
emission. This is also the most common received opinion, and that which has
drawn many great learned Clerks after it, as Pithagoras, Empedocles,
Hipparcus, Democritus, Leucippus, Epicurus, Chrysippus, Plato, and in a manner
all others which have written of the eyes. And now take a view of their
principal reasons.

Reasons to prove that we see, by sending forth something.
The Basiliske by his sight poy soneth all them which look upon him; women
having their natural courses, infect the looking-glasses upon which they cast
their eyes. Some report, that if a Woolfe do first see a man, that then such a
man will become hoarse. The first.
Men of old time have thought, that with the look one might be bewitched and
enchanted, according to the complaint of the Poet: I know not what eye has
bewitched my tender lambs. The second.
If a man come near to one that has enflamed eyes, and behold him earnestly
which has red eyes, without all peradventure he shall be troubled with the
same disease: all which shows that there comes something out of the eye.
Whereupon is it that a great whitenes does hurt the sight, but only for that
it wastes the spirits which come forth of the eye? Wherefore should the eye
grow weak with looking, The third.
but because there comes out of it too much light, and that all the spirits
vanish and fade away? The fourth.
Whence comes it that such as would see a very little thing a far off, do
claspe their eyes, and half close their eyelids? It is not that so they may
unite the beams, and join together the spirits, The fifth.
to the end that afterward they may cast them out more forcibly cibly and
directly? Go not the Cats on hunting in the night? and then do they cast out
some glittering streams. The sixth.
Furthermore, if we should not see by sending something forth of the eye, it
should seem unnecessary that the eye should turn it self unto his object,
the form thereof should offer it self sufficiently to us, yea, we should see
in not seeing. The seventh.
If we should see only by taking and receiving something into our eyes, then
great eyes should see better then small ones, because they are the more
capable: and so also such eyes as have large apples should see better then
those which have small ones, which is quite contrary to truth: a small thing
should be as soon seen as a great, The eight.
and it would be as easy to see a far off as near, if the forms be al in
the air. Look well (say they which write of the eyes) upon a small needle
which has his point standing up, yet at the first cast thou shall not disceme
the point: but afterward having turned thine eye on the one side and the other,
thou shall see it, because that by such turning, some one bright strain or
other, will have met with it: of the same reason and nature is that which
happens in small things that are on the earth, The ninth.
a man cannot tell how to behave himself to see them at the first dash.
Finally, if we see by taking something into the eye, the eye should contain at
one and the same instant two contrary things, which is against the laws of
nature, neither could it being so small contain the greatness, no nor yet the
shape of great mountains: whereupon we must needs conclude, that we see by
sending forth something. Behold here all the fair and goodly forces on this
side, which I am now about to pitch and plant in the plain field: and now let
us go to view the squadrons on the contrary side.

The contrary opinions of such as hold that we see by taking in something.
Chief captain and general of the same is Aristotle, whose followers be the
whole band of the Peripatetikes, as also Auerrhoes, Alexander, Themistius, and
an infinite number of others. All these hold that we see by receiving
something into the eye, and that there does nothing go out of the eye which
may help us to see, but that either the object or the form there of does come
unto the eye. The foundation and maine reason is clean contrary unto that of
the Platonists: for Plato was verily persuaded, that the eye was all full of
fire, and Aristotle maintains that the eye is all full of water, and this he
demonstrateth most excellently, and therefore accordingly I will do my
endeavor to set it out most plainly. A clear and plain proof, that the eye
is all of water.
The instrument of the sight must be thorough clear, and transparent, that is
to say clear as crystal, to the end there may be some likeness betwixt the
object and the instrument, and that there maybe some equality betwixt the thing
doing, and the thing suffering. This principle is clearly agreed upon in
natural Philosophy. But of the things which are christal-like clear, some
are of subtle and thin bodies, and othersome are more compact and thick. The
eye was not to be made christal-like clear and thin, because yt so it could
not have retained his forms, they would have speedely past away, not finding
any resting place, as do the bodies which are in the air: and the glass it
self which is in looking glasses, would never make show of any picture or
resemblance, if it were not steeled or leaded on the backeside? Whereupon it
follows that the eye must be christallike clear and thick. Now of all the
elements there is no one that is so clear and thick besides the water, for
the air and fire are in deed clear, but therewithal thin: it follows
therefore, that the eye is of the nature of the water. This firm and
demonstratiue argument is underpropped by another which cannot be gainesayd.
Another plains and strong proof.
The chief part of the eye is the christallike humor, which is nothing else,
but a congealed water, which has before it the waterish humor, and behind it
the vitreous which does feed and nourish it: if you pearce the eye, you shall
not perceive any other thing to come forth but water, so that we must rather
believe that the eye is of the nature of water, then of fire. Reasons proving
that we see by taking in something.
This foundation thus laid, it will be easy to make sure the rest of the
building, and to maintain that we see by receiving of some thing into the eye;
and the rather, because it is the property of moist things to receive and take
in. Lo here the chiefest reasons of this sect as they follow. The action of
every sense is a suffering, and to do the office of any of the senses, is
nothing else but to suffer: The first.
every action therefore of the senses is accomplished by receiving, and not by
sending forth of anything, which is an action; as for example the ear hears
by receiving of sounds; smelling, by receiving of odours; taste, by receiving
of tastes; and feeling, The second.
by receiving of such qualities as may be felt: and then why should the eye be
debarred of this receite? Aristotle says, that they which have their eyes very
moist, do seem to see things bigger then in deed they be, which argues
that the forms of things are received into, and as it were, graven in the
christalline humor: for bodies seem always to exceed themselves in greatness,
being within the water. Every object exceeding in his quality, The third.
does destroy his sense, as an exceeding great whitenes does dim and dasle
the sight: then it must follow, that it is violently received. Aristotle in his
Problemes moves a question, The fourth.
which may be of some force in this place: as, wherefore the right hand is
ordinarily more nimble and strong then the left, and not one care given to
hear more readily then the other? Whose answer is, that the faculty which
causes the hands to move, sets it self on work, and that that which
causes sight and hearing is set on work: in such sort as that the eyes and
cares may equally receive and suffer. Old men commonly do see things a far
off, The fifth.
better then those which are at hand, and this cannot happen of any fiery
streams or light, going out of the eye, because that those in them are of
small quantity, and greatly delayed with darkness; the cause must needs be
referred to the form, which coming from a thing far removed, becomes more
fine and subtle, and less participating of material substance, and by
consequent no more fit to be received. The sixth.
In winter if the weather be calm and fair, the Stars are often seen at
midday; which never happens in summer; which is, because in winter the air
being more gross and thick, the forms thereof do consist and abide more
permanently, as also in greater number in the air: but in summer by reason of
the thinnes and subtilenes of the air, their said forms, have no staide
abode or means to multiply: and this shows, that we see by receiving in,
and not sending forth of any thing. Finally, the eye is like unto the looking
glass, The seventh.
and this receives all such shapes as are brought unto it, without sending any
thing of it own unto the object. They differ only in this, that the looking
glass has no power to recommend his forms and shapes unto their judge, as
the eye does unto the common sense by the nerve opticke. Lo here the two
battles orderly in array, and right over one against the other, I could wish my
self able to agree them, being the same that Galen has attempted, but in
deed there is little likeliehoode. For the truth cannot uphold and defend two
things, The Author his opinion.
contrary one to the other. I will therefore set in foot with the stronger
side, and maintain with Aristotle, that we see by receiving only and that
there goes nothing out of the eye, which may serve for the making of us to
see. I will use for my first encounter this reason, which as it seems me is
sharp enough. If there go any thing out of the eye, it is either some fine
and subtle body, Arguments plainly conuincing the Platonists.
as the animal spirit, or else some stream only. If it be a body, how can it
be carried forthwith and in a moment as high as heaven, seeing that every
bodily substance requires time to move in, but the sight is finished at one
instant? This bodily substance shall it not be beaten, scattered and deceived by
the winds, before it come to the object? This body thus going forth of the
eye, shall it pearce the air? or shall the air give place to it? pearce it
cannot, because that nature can no more abide the pearcing of bodies, then she
can abide that there should be a place wherein should be no body: if the
air make way for it, then there will never be any sight: for so the coherence
and continuitie of strains would be interrupted, because the air would
follow it hard at the heels, and thrust it self betwixt the two. If to avoid
the push of these pikes, That it cannot be any bright beam which goes out of
the eye.
which yet are sharp enough, thou would say, that that which goes out of
the eye is a bright beam or light, which pearceth the air, and communicates
it self in a moment with all that which is the mean, as does the shine of the
Sun, which inlighteneth the whole air without any motion; I will urge thee
more nearly, and will cause thee to see that there is not light enough in the
eye to reach up to heaven. Mark well and consider, that a flame of fire
casts not his streams any further then the proportion of the bigness there of
will bear it out: one candle cannot give light enough to one whole parlour,
and how can thou imagine that this little member should be able in a moment
to reach heaven with his bright beams? It is no difficulty for the Sun,
because it is as great as the whole earth, to cast forth his beams, and to
spread them over the whole world, but it cannot be so said of the eye.
Therefore there can nothing go forth of the eye, that can reach to the things
to be seen. Furthermore, if the streams going forth of the eye should be
the cause of sight, then they should return unto the eye again, or else stay
by the way: if they come not back again, neither can they make return of
such bodies as they touch; if they do come back again, yet there is nothing
but bright glittering bodies, which can be seen, because no other then these
give any reflection, and so it should follow, that huge and great hills should
not be seen. Let us say more, that if these streams serve to cause us to
see, that then of necessity, they must either return empty or laden with
their backs full of bodies: if they come empty, there will be nothing to see:
if they bring forms or semblances of things with them, then have we our
desire, that is, that we see by receiving something into the eye. The
ground-proofes of the Platonists.
As concerning the foundations of the Platonists, it is easy to overthrow them
all. I confess that the eye has great quantity of brightness in it, but it
proceeds not from fire, it comes of the christalline humor, and of the
shining of the tunicles: for all polished substances, being after the manner of
the hornie membrane, do shine in the dark. The action of the eye performed on
the sudden, and the great quicknes of the same, cannot compel me to think
that it is full of fire. For, the action is sudden, because the eye receives
but the bare shapes or likenesses of things without matter and body. For the
nimblenes and dexterity thereof, we may conceive that it is no great piece of
work for six muscles readily to move so small a member. The eyes do not at
any time quiver with cold, because (as Aristotle says in his Problemes) they
be full of fat, which accidentarilie does keep them warm, as our garments
do us: or because they be in continual motion. There is no fire then within
the eyes, there is nothing to be found but water, crystal and glass. Answer
to the reasons of the Platonists.
And as for ye reasons which they allege, they be very light: for the Basilisk
and the inflamed eye do not infect us by the bright beams which come from
them, but by a natural substance, which is very subtle, that is to say by a
vapor insensibly breathing out of the whole body, which infecting the air,
is by it transported to us. That which is alleged of the wolf, The second.
is no better worth then to be derided. And as for any enchantment proceeding
from the eye, we hold, that naturally there can no such thing be. Exceeding
much whitenes does overthrow the sight, because it draws out all the spirits,
which ought to keep within the eye, to enable it the more unto the performance
of his office. The third.
The eye grows weak and weary with looking, as every other part will do,
which is, for that the natural heat and spirits (which labor and take pains
in the motion of the eye, as also in the holding of the same still) do spend
and waste themselves. The fourth.
We do half shut our eyes, when we would see a far off, not to the end to
unite the shining strains of the eye but rather that the outward light should
not suddenly rush in and scatter the inward. The fifth.
The eye must needs turn it self toward his object, because sight does
never act but by a direct line. The sixth.
Great eyes, and those apples of eyes which are broad, see not so well as the
contrary, because the inward spirits are thereby lost, being very necessary in
the receiving of those forms which are to enter into the eye. The seventh.
As concerning the needle, I answer* that at the first we see not the point*
because it is not proportionable. The receiving of two contraries and of the
most huge mountains, The eight.
is no absurdity, seeing the eye in all cases medleth with nothing but the
forms of the things, which are without all matter and substance. Wherefore let
nothing let us to conclude, that the sight is effected by the receiving in of
some thing. A plainer declaring of the manner of receiving in something.
But the manner of this receiving is a very difficult thing, and understood of a
very few. To make plain therefore the same, I will do my endeavor to search
out, what it is that the eye receives; in what part it receives the same;
when it receives in any thing and how. Concerning the first point, What it is
that the sight receives or takes in.
I find great odds in opinions. Democritus and Leucippus do firmly hold,
that we receive in bodies more small then that they will suffer any division.
Epicurus thinks that we receive in the only beams of the object. Alexander
the Peripatetick, the image of the object, and that not as in his proper
subject, but as it were in a looking-glass. Aristotle maintains, that we
receive in nothing but the form which is produced of the object, and
multiplied or continued in an inseperable continuitie in and by the air, as
the body makes and produces the shadow, and the Sun the light. And this is
the soundest judgment of all the rest, but such as needs a plainer
declaration: That the eye receives nothing but the forms of things.
for every man is not able at the first blush, to understand what is meant by
the form of the object. We affirm then that this form has not his seat and
place in the understanding, as also that it is not the same which schoolmen
call Ens rationis, What this form is.
but that it is a certain real thing seated in the air and eye. Now
whatsoever has a real being, is either a substance or an accident. This form
cannot be a substance, because that thereby it should be more noble and perfect
then his object which is color. Then it is an accident. But what kind a one?
Shall we call it a quantity? No, for then it would have the allowance either
of height, breadth or depth: and we dare not call it a relation, because
relation has not the force to do any thing, but this form causes us to see.
And least of all may we reduce and bring it unto the predicament of Action: It
must then needs be a quality, without matter or body, and incapable of all
manner of division: such a form is called of the Philosophers intentionall,
which has respect unto the object, and is immediately produced and made show
of, as the shadow of the body. This form does multiply it self throughout
the air: for the air being subtle and moist, is apt to receive all the
forms: and receiving one part of the object, represents the whole object.
This form is not seen, but makes us to see, for there is nothing but the
object which can be seen.



and hence it is that we see a thing in a moment, and not by intermission of
time, as all the other senses have their operations and actions. In what part of
the eye this receipt is made.
Now let us see in what place, that is, whereabout or in what part of the eye
this form is received. Some there are which think it to be received in the
brain, because it is the seat of common sense, and for that there is none of
the senses which has not his original from the brain. Auicen did verily
think, that this receipt was where the nerves optickes do join together, and
that the object does not appear double, because the forms are united in this
conjunction of the sinews. Others are of mind, that this receipt is
accomplished in the cobweb-like tunicle, which is more clear and bright then
any looking-glass. But we hold with Aristotle, Galen, and the truth also,
that this receipt is effected in the christalline humor, because this is the
most noble part of the eye, having such a substance as none other has, and the
same seated in the midst of the instrument, as in his center, where the two
lights do meet each other; the outward, which enters at the apple of the
eye, as at a window; and the inward, which is brought thither by the nerve
optic. Notwithstanding, if thou be disposed to reconcile all these several
opinions, The true and proper means by which we have sight.
thou may say that the receipt is made in the christalline humor, the
rebating of their violence in the tunicles, the perfect consummation in the
conjunction of the nerves optickes, the knowledge, trial, or discerning of the
same in the substance of the brain. Of all this long discourse these are the
fruits which we shall reap; that the sight is effected only by receiving of
some thing into the eye, and not by sending any thing out of it; that the
christalline humor (being the chief instrument of sight) receives nothing
but forms, which are as the shadows of things that may be seen; that these
forms being produced and multiplied along throughout the air, are by a direct
line and not else received, and that at an instant. I am constrained to add
this disputation in this small treatise of the eye, as having been vrgently
pressed, or rather expressly commanded to do the same.

CHAP. XI. How many ways the sight may be endamaged and hurt.
THe whole discourse, which I have gone about to make concerning the
excellency of the sight, the cunning workmanship of the eye, and of all his
parts, (besides the delight which it will bring to such as are curious) will
not (in my judgment) be unprofitable unto them, which shall earnestly desire
to know the diseases of the eyes, and would undertake to heal and cure the
same. For we hold it for a principle in physic, that no man can know that
which happens contrary to nature in any part, if he do not first know that
which is natural unto the same part. The direct (says Aristotle in his first
book of the soul) or straight line, is a rule both to judge it self and the
crooked by. It behooves then that the Physician should know the natural state
of the eye, and whatsoever is needful for the execution of his office, if so
be he be desirous to know how many ways it may be hurt. Every action (as Galen
observes in many places) may be hurt three ways, How many ways a function
may be hurt.
for either it is wholly lost, or else greatly impaired, or else corrupted and
depraved. These three faults may happen to the sight, the impeachment or
weakness thereof is ordinary with old folks; the sight is then depraved,
when the object shows other then it is, the utter loss thereof is called
blindenes. The sight grows weak, How the sight is weakened.
either through default of his faculties, or through the evil disposition of
the instrument. The faculty which is that power of the soul, which makes us
see, has his seat in the brain: if then the brain be altered in his
temperature, (as when it falls out to be too hot, cold, moist or dry; or
when it is not fashioned well and commendablie) then all the senses will bewray
a great impeachment in their actions, but above all the rest the sight, because
the eye being next neighbor unto the brain, and of a merueilous simpathy with
the same, will suffer first of all. The evil disposition of the eye, weakeneth
the sight very often, although that the faculty be entire and strong. Such
disposition is found sometimes in the whole eye, as when it is too fat and
great, or too small and lean, sometimes in some special parts thereof, as in
the tunicle, humors, muscles, spirits, sinews, veins and arteries, unto every
of which do happen their particular diseases, which I will run through in
the chapter following.

The sight depraved and falsified.
The corrupting or falsifying of the sight falls out; when the object shows
it self to be of another color, form, quantity or situation then it is; as
for example, if a white thing should show yellow or red, because the instrument
of sight is tainted with some color: this it is which makes them that have
the yellow Iaundise, to see every thing yellow: when the thing which stands
fast, seems to move, as it falls out in them which have the disease, called
Vertigo, through the disordered and extraordinary moving of the spirits; and
when one single thing seems two, and this falls out, either through default
of the instrument, or through the evil situation of the object, or of the
eyebeames. If both the eyes be not in one and the same level, but that the one
be high, and the other low, out of doubt every thing which they behold will
show double: the causes hereof are oftentimes a palsy in the one, and a
conuulsion in the other. The nerve opticke also being relaxed and mollified on
the one side, causes all things that are looked vpen to seem double, as it
happens to such as are drunk. If you press and bear down the one eye with
your finger, not touching the other, you shall see every thing double* of which
missight the situation of the instrument is the principal cause: and the
situation of the object is the next. As if you whirle a staff round about, you
would think that it were a circle, and if long wise, you would judge it to be
nothing but a long stretched line; which happens by the swift moving of the
object out of his place, for so, before the first figure be worn out, a second
comes into his place. The last cause consists in the diverse situation of
the eye beams; as if you look yourselfe in a cracked looking glass, your face
will seem two faces unto you.

The loss of the sight.
The utter loss and deprivation of the sight, which we call blindness, comes
either of the dryness of the humors, or of the hindering of the two lights,
that they cannot meet and join together in the christalline humor. The
inward which is the animal spirit, is hindered by the obstruction of the nerve
opticke, and this disease is called gutta serena; the outward is hindered by the
cataract, which shuts the apple of the eye, the window of the christalline
humor. Therefore the sight cannot be hurt, but by one of these three ways.

CHAP. XII. A brief rehearsal of all the diseases of the eye.
I Do not intend here to trouble my mind in drawing forth an exquisite
description of all the diseases of the eye, the attempt would be too great, and
I could not make so few as twenty chapters of the same, seeing there are so
many particular diseases of the eye. I will content my self to lay out the way
and best ordered course thereunto, for the benefit of young Physicians and
Surgeons, for whose sake I have made choice of this chapter.

The division of the diseases of the eye.
Now then as concerning the diseases of the eye, some of them are common to the
whole member, some others are proper unto some particular part of the same.
Those which concern the whole eye, are either similar or isntrumental, or
common. The similar ones, are the moist, the dry, the hot, the cold
distemperature, The diseases to be referred to the whole eye.
as also the simple, the compound, the distemperature without matter, and that
which is accompanied with matter. The isntrumental do show themselves in the
evil shape of the eye, as when it is over great or over little, or not so
situate as were requisite for comelines and use. The diseases coming of the
bigness of it, are when the eye is either too great or too little; The greatness
of the eye.
the great eye is called the ox eye, it hinders the action of the eye, for
the sight is not so quick, by reason of the excessive expense of spirits,
neither is it so ready in motion. The cause of this greatness is either the
error of the first form and shape committed by nature, or else some accident
whether flegmatike humor, or inflammation, or else some great flux of humors
falling down upon the same. The disease contrary to this, The smalnes of the
eye.
is the smalnes of the eye, which either is the work of nature, and is called
the Pigges eye, or else happens by some other means, as by wasting of the
natural heat, by suffering of intolerable pains, much watchings, sharp
rhewmes, and continual agues; in such cases the whole eye being weakened, it
attracteth not his natural nourishment, or though it do, yet it cannot
concoct it, and this disease is called the pining away, or leanenes of the eye.

The eye bolted out*
The diseases of situation is when the eye is out of his place, as when it
comes out, and when it falls quite down; if it come forth, it is called a
falling out of the eye, in greek (...). Auicen observes, that it happens
either of an outward cause, as of a blow, a fall, or strain in coughing,
vomiting, blowing, or of an inward cause, as of some sudden falling down of
humors, which loses all the muscles and whole body of the eye, or of a great
inflammation or other humor.

Solution of continuitie.
The common disease is called the solution of continuitie, which happens when
the eye is burst, or when all the humors thereof are mingled and iumbled
together.

Lo these be the diseases which may be referred to the whole body of the eye:
for the diseases called Nictalopia, Myopiasis, and Amblyopia, are Symptoms,
touching only the spirits or humors, and not the whole eye.

The particular diseases of the eye.
The particular diseases differ according to the parts of the eye. Now we have
already observed for parts of the eye, the humors, coats, sinews, and muscles
of the same: so then there are diseases proper unto every one of these parts. I
will begin to describe those which happen to the humors, as being the noblest
parts of the eye, as also because Galen in his book of the causes of accidents
has taken the same course.

The disease of the christalline humor. Glaucoma.
The christalline humor is subject to all manner of disease, but the most usual
is a dry distemperature, and his going out of his place. His dry
distemperature is the cause of an accident, which the Grecians call (...),
which is a shrinking together, and drienes of the christalline humor, thereby
becoming as it were white. Hippocrates in his third book of Aphorisms
observes that this disease does seldom happen but to old folk, and we
judge it incurable. The christalline may shift out of his place many ways: for
either it may shift to either side, or rise higher, or fall lower, or it may
shrink further into the eye, or come forward toward the forepart of the eye.
Howsoever it remove and shift, The accidents that fall out when the
christalline humor is removed out of his place.
it hurts the sight very much: if it be sunk far back into the eye, it
causes that we cannot behold things which are near at hand: if it be set too
forward, it lets from seeing a far off: if it be more to the one side or
to the other, we see a squint: and when it is too high or too low, every thing
seems two, because they are not level.

The diseases of the watrie humor.
The waterish humor being also a part as well as the others, has his
particular diseases. If it be too much dried, as it falls out very often in
cataracts, it takes the sight clean away. If his store be greatly diminished,
the christalline humor dries, the grape-like coat withers, the hornie
membrane shrinketh, and the outward light is not rebated. As concerning the
glassie humor, writers have not noted any diseases properly belonging thereto:
but, in my judgment, it is subject to the same affects that the waterish, both
in his temperature, substance, and quantity.

The diseases of the coats.
The tunicles of the eye are six, but there are not any more then three, which
have been noted to have particular diseases, that is to say, the coniunctiue,
the hornie, and the grape-like: for no man has designed any unto the
cobweb-like, net-like or glassie one.

The diseases of the white coat. Inflammation.
The diseases proper unto the coniunctiue are three; inflammation, the nail
called in Latin Pterigium, and mortification. The inflammation of this
membrane is sometime so slight, as that it heals of it self, and then it is
called of the Grecians (...). The cause thereof is for the most part outward,
as smoke, wind, the Sun, dust, open air, the smell of onyons: if this
inflammation be greater, it is absolutely called Ophthalmia: if it be very
great, in so much as that it causes the white to be very much puffed up, and
thereby the apple of the eye to seem to stand in a hollow, the Greeks do
call it (...). There are inflammations proceeding of blood, others proceeding
of choler, others of fleagme, The differences of the inflammation of the the
eye.
and some of melancholy: Galen speaks both of moist and dry ones;
Hippocrates of symptomatical and critical ones; Trallian of such as are
accompanied with a consumption, and such as are not of malign ones, such as
are usual in the plague time, and such as are not malign, of continual ones,
and such as keep ordinary returns. The nail.
The second kind of disease is called Pterigium. This is a sinewy flesh, which
begins to grow most commonly at the great corner of the eye, and from thence
spreads it self like a wing unto the apple of the eye: it is also sometime
like unto a nail, it follows very often the inflammations that are not
orderly cured, it is accompanied with some itching, as also with a little
rednes and with some tears. The several sorts of it.
There are many kinds of it, which are all distinguished either by their
color, or manner of fastening of themselves, or by their substance, or
greatness. As for the difference of color, there are white, red, and yellowish
ones. They differ in respect of their fastening, because some stick fast and
close to, whereas others do suffer themselves to be easily separated. They
differ in substance, because some are thick, and some thin, some soft, some
hard, some membranous like skins, some fatty and like unto grease, and some
varicous, which are like unto a net, knit and made of many small veins and
arteries. The bigness makes the last difference: for some are so small that
they pass not the white: othersome so great, as that they reach unto the apple
of the eye, and do greatly hinder the sight.

The third and last disease proper to the white tunicle, Mortification.
is called (...) blacknes, or the mortification of the eye. Paulus Aegineta and
Aetius, had defined it a bursting of the veins of the eye, which causes the
blood to settle it self all under the white tunicle, and the hornie also,
making all things seem red unto the eye. The cause hereof is ordinarily
outward; as some blow or fall: sometimes it is inward, as the fulness of the
veins and the thinness of the blood. There are some other diseases of the
white tunicle; as pustules and white spots in manner of a skarre, but they are
common with this unto the hornie membrane.

The diseases of the hornie membrane. Pustules.
The diseases of the hornie membrane are, pustules; common, malign, and
cankerous ulcers; the retention of purulent matter called (...): the skarre and
the rupture. The pustules are called (...) of the Grecians, and Bothor of the
Arabians. These are like unto little bladders, proceeding of a thin and
waterish humor, which gathers amongst the small skins of the hornie
membrane, and sets them upon the stretch. The diverse sorts of pustules.
Their differences are known by their color: for some are black, and
therefore growing betwixt the first and second leaf: and some are white, and
do grow betwixt the third and fourth leaf. They differ in situation, because
some are more superficial, and others more deep. They differ in respect of
matter, because some do rise of a choleric humor, others of a clear and
thin water. Ulcers commonly happening in the hornie membrane.
If the purulent matter continue long after that the pustules be broken, it
makes an ulcer in the hornie membrane. The Physicians both Greek and Arabian
make seven sorts of ulcers, three inward, and four outward: the first of the
inward is called (...), Three ulcers within the hornie membrane.
of Paulus Aegineta and Auicen annulus, of others Fossula: that is to say, a
small, streite, hollow ulcer, having no matter in it: the second is wider and
not so deep, Paulus calls it (...), Auicen, lilimie: the third is very
filthy and croustie, the Grecians call it (...), the Arabians Alficume. The
outward ulcers are four: The four ulcers in the utter part of the horny
membrane.
the first is like unto a gross smoke, and makes the apple of the eye black,
they call it (...): the second is more white and deep, and is called (...):
the third is round, and appears in the circle of the eye; this is Paulus his
(...): the fourth and last is very filthy, of the color of ashes, much like
to a lock of wool, which is the cause that Auicen calls it the woollie
ulcer. Galen was the first that observed all these differences, in a little
treatise of the eyes, but he gave not particular names to every of them: The
correcting* of a piece of text in Galen.
and throughout this whole treatise there is one notorious fault to be found,
which is, that this word inward is always put for the word outward, and
contrariwise. Manardus has gone about to carpe at Auicen, for notes of
difference which he has set down about these ulcers, but he has no just
reason so to do. There grow other ulcers in the hornie membrane which are
malign, and are termed (...), Malign ulcers.
and these fret and spread unto the muscles and eyelids. There are also in the
horny membrane cankerous ulcers accompanied with pricking pains; Cankerous
ulcers.
these are bred of a sharp and melancholic humor, being of the nature of a
canker. The skar is a disease of the horny membrane: A skarre in the hornie
membrane. Hypopion,
for it takes from it his color and cleerenes, making it altogether white, it
is called (...), or Albuge. Hipopion comes very near unto it, for it is a
collection of purulent water, possessing the black of the eye. Rupture in the
hornie membrane.
Lastly, the hornie membrane is sometimes bursten, and then it causes a
disease, which is proper unto the grape-like coat, which we will describe
hereafter.

The diseases of the grape-like coat.
In the grape-like tunicle we are to consider a body and a hole, which is the
apple of the eye: the body or substance of it has a particular disease, which
is the falling down of the same: the apple of the eye is subject unto three
notable diseases, which are the excessive widenes and narrownes of the same,
and the cataract. The falling down of Vnea is called of the Greeks (...), The
falling down of Vnea.
which cannot happen without the bursting or fretting asunder of the hornie
membrane which is made to serve in stead of a bar unto it: the rupture of
Cornea is almost always of an outward cause, but the fretting a sunder of the
same is of an inward. Four kinds of the foresaid disease.
There are ordinarily made four kinds of this falling down of Vnea, which
differ only in greatness: for if it do fall down but a very little, it is
called (...) the head of a fly, but of Auicen, Formicalis, if yet it fall
down more, and as it were to the greatness of the skin of a grape, it is called
(...) if yet is fall down further and hang as it were a little apple, it is
called (...): if unto all this it grow hard and been me brawnie, it shall be
called (...), Clauns.

The diseases of the apple of the eye.
The apple of the eye has three diseases, for either it becomes too broad or
too narrow, or else altogether shut up. The over much broadnes called of the
Greeks (...), The disease Myd^iasis.
is a disease of the instrument, because that the hollownes thereof is greater
then it ought. Galen makes two kind of this dilatation, the one natural, the
other accidental, both of them do hurt and hinder the sight very greatly,
because the inward light does spend it self too fast, and as Auicen says the
forms of things are not received so quickly and sharply as they should: The
causes of such dilatation
This dilatation comes of too much narrownes of the grape like tunicle, and
it is made narrower, either by being swelled up by too much moisture, or drawn
together by extreme dryness: moisture if it be without mixture paraliseth
the membrane, but if it be joined with matter, as it is in the tumors,
abscesses, and other fluxes falling upon the eye, then it trusseth it up (as it
were) into a narrower room. Dryness does pull in the edges of Vnea making
larger the hole, as we see parchment that is very dry. The disease contrary to
this is called of the Greeks (...), The diminution of the apple of the eye.
the consumption or straitnes of ye apple of the eye, that which is according
to nature, is very available tor the sight, but that which is accidentary,
does no good, but hurts always: the cause hereof is the falling together of
the edges of the grape-like coat: it shrinketh together through great store of
moisture, which is no where else, but on the side of the hole; or else by
reason of the wasting of the waterish humor, which filled all this space. The
Cataract.
The last disease of the apple of the eye, is called of the Grecians (...), of
the Arabians a drop or water, of the common people a Cataract or a pin and a
web. We define it to be an obstruction of the apple of the eye, caused of an
unnatural humor, which having fallen down thither, grows thicker by little
and little, betwixt the hornie membrane, and the christalline humor. The cause
of the Cataract.
The next cause thereof (called the continent cause) is an unnatural humor,
and herein it differs from Glaucoma, which happens through the congelation
of the natural humors of the eye; this humor at the first flows like water,
but in the end it thickneth and resembles more an earthie substance. This is
the cause why Paulus in his third book defines a Cataract or suffusion by
this word effusion, and in his sixth book by this word concretion, or
congelation, in the first place, speaking of that which was the beginning of
the disease, and in the second, of that whereunto it was grown. This humor,
The place where the humor causing the Cataract is settled.
if we will believe Halyabbas, Haly, and Azarauius, is gathered betwixt the
grape-like coat, and the christalline humor; but if we had rather believe
Auicen, Mesue, and Albucasis, we must think that it gathers betwixt the
hornie and grape-like tunicle. As for my self, I think it may abide in all
that space, which is from the inner part of the hornie coat, even unto the
christalline humor, and that it oftentimes mixeth it self with the waterish
humor. This web or spot does hinder the sight many ways: for if it stop all
the apple of the eye, which is the window of the eye, the sight is clear lost:
if there be but one part of the window shut, as the right or left, the upper or
nether, the eye will then see the objects that shall be set before it, but it
cannot see any more then one at a time: if the obstruction be even in the
midst of the apple of the eye, all the things which it beholds, will seem
to be divided, and as it were cloven, and withal it is not possible for such
persons to see the midst of the object: if the water be not as yet gathered
close together, but that it be scatteringly dispersed here and there, one shall
see as it were flies to fly in the air. The differences of Cataracts are
gathered from their greatness, The differences of Cataracts.
substance, color, fastening, situation and manner of growing. For there are
some great, and some small, some thick, and some thin, some white, some of
color like ashes or chalk, some red, some black, Their inward causes.
and some of a citrine color. The inward causes are the humors and vapors
which grow thick, the humors come either from the brain, by the sinews,
veins and arteries, or else are engendered in the member it self, by reason of
the weakness of the concocting and expelling faculty. The imaginations going
before Cataracts.
Cataracts have always for their forerunners, certain false visions, which
men call imaginations: for men think they see flies, hairs, or threeds of a
spider web in the air, which yet are not there. The cause of these visions is
a dark shadowie vapor, got betwixt the hornie membrane and christalline
humor. This vapor shows not it self in his proper form: for then the
grape-like coat should as well be seen, but in one of those forms which are
in the air: it is true that the christalline humor judges these vapors to
be without the eye, because it is so accustomed to see outward objects, that it
thinks that which is within the eye to be without it. These vapors rise
sometimes from below, sometimes from the humors which are in the brain, or in
the eye it self.

The diseases of the muscles of the eye. The wrested eye.
The diseases of the muscles of the eye, are principally three, the wrested or
wrie eye, the shaking eye, and the astonished eye. The wrested eye is called
(...) or (...), and is caused either of a Palsy, affecting some of the
muscles, and then the part diseased, yields unto the sound part: as it
happens in all other parts that have the Palsy and opposite muscles: or else
it is caused of a conuulsion, affecting some of the muscles, and then the sound
part of the eye yields unto the diseased. Whatsoever it is, this disease is
caused either of drynes, or of superfluous moisture: now in this disease the
eye is wrested and set a wrie many ways, The diverse sorts thereof.
as on high, a low, and then there is nothing seen but the white of the eye:
Hippocrates calls it (...), where the eye is wrested to either side, and
makes the squint eye. The shaking eye, The shaking eye.
called (...) is a fault in the muscles of the eye, being so much weakened,
that they cannot hold the eye still. All the ancient writers have believed,
The error of the ancient writers.
that this shaking of the eye did proceed of a seventh muscle, which does
embrace the nerve opticke, but they deceived themselves: for it is not found in
men as I have showed in the history of the eye. I believe then that as the
pausing motion, which naturally holds the eye firm and immovable is then
accomplished, when all the six muscles draw equally: that even so this shaking
is caused, when the said muscles loose their fibers, not drawing or bending the
same at all. The fixed eye.
There is a disease clean contrary to this, as when the eyes are let in the
head, and cannot move. Hippocrates calls it (...) and (...), and it happens
then when the muscles have lost all their power of moving, either by
obstruction or Palsy possessing die sinew that brings motion.

The diseases of the sinew of sight. Obstruction.
The diseases of the nerve opticke, are obstruction, compression, the Palsy,
the falling and bursting thereof, a hard and melancholic humor, inflammation.
Obstruction is suddenly caused through a cold and gross humor, in as much
as the hollownes of the sinew is very small: It is pressed together through some
blow: Compression. Palsy.
the Palsy takes it, by reason of some thin and waterish humor, which does
mollify and soften it. The falling thereof is called in Greek, The falling of
it together.
(...), when the membranouse ends thereof fall together not leaving any space
for the marrowie substance which should be betwixt them: the bursting thereof
comes of a blow, The breaking of it.
after which the eye first starteth out, and after sinking in again, pineth
away. All these diseases of the sinew of sight, do make one common disease,
which the Greeks call (...), and the Arabians, Gutta Serena. This as Aetius
does very well define it, Gutta Serena.
is a blindenes and utter loss of the sight, without any fault or let
appearing in the eye: this blindenes comes by hindering of the course of the
inward light.

The disease of the spirits. Day blindness. Night blindness.
The best learned Physicians do number the spirits among the parts of the eye,
and assign them their diseases, as (...), and (...). In the first, one cannot
see but in the dark, as in the dawning of the day, and twylight, for at midday
this disease will not let a man read. In the other it falls out clean
contrary, for it causes that a man cannot see, except he be in a very clear
light; some impute this unto the spirits: those which have subtle and thin
spirits cannot see in a great light, because such spirits (...) thereby
scattered: such as have gross spirits have need of a clear and bright light
to enlighten them.

Lo here in a short brief, the principal diseases of the eye. I meddle not
with those of the eyelids, of the corners of the eye, or of the bordering
parts, because I fear me I have wandered too far out of my way already,
having purposed with my self only to show the excellency of the sight, and
how men may learn the way to preserve the same: I will therefore return
again into my way.

CHAP. XIII. A general and most exquisite regiment for the preservation of the
sight, in which it handled very particularly, whatsoever may hurt the eyes, as
also whatsoever is profitable for them.
IT is now high time to mix some profitable thing with the pleasant and
delightsome: whosoever they be that feel some impairing of their sight, or
fear some future weakness of the same, shall see in these two chapters
whatsoever precious and excellent thing that is to be found in the gardens of
the Greek, Arabian, or Latin Physicians, for the preservation thereof, seeing
I have sometimes delighted my self to crop and pick out thereof, whatsoever I
could find or see to be fair and for profit. But for as much as one of the
principal causes of the weakness of the sight (yea I dare be bold to say,
that it is more common then any of the rest) does proceed of a superfluous
moisture of the eye, and of the impurenes of the spirits: I will ordain an
exquisite order for the same, which shall serve for a pattern and scantling
the better, to aim at the curing of all the rest of the diseases of the eye.
The art which teaches to heal diseases, called by one word of the Grecians
(...), is ordinarily performed by three instruments, as Diet, or the manner of
living, Chirurgerie, and Medicine.

Good diet has the first place in the curing of whatsoever diseases.
The manner of living is always set in the forefront, and has bin judged of the
ancient learned to be the chief and most noble part, because it is most
favorable and familiar to nature, not disturbing her any manner of way, or
molesting her in any respect, so, as medicines and manual operations do. This
manner of living does not consist only in meat and drink, as the common
people imagine, but in the ordering of the six things which the Physicians
call not natural; and these are the air, meat and drink, sleep and
watching, labor and rest, emptines and fulness, and the passions of the mind.

The power of the air.
I will begin my order of diet at the air, in as much as no man can want it the
least minute, and for that it has a marvelous force to alter and change our
bodies on the sudden: The direct passages thereof is through the nose to the
brain, and through the mouth to the heart, by the pores of the skin and
moving of the arteries it goes throughout the whole body: it provides matter
and nourishment for our spirits. This is the cause why that famous Hippocrates
did note very well, that of the constitution of the air does wholly depend the
good and ill disposition of our humors and spirits. The qualities of the air.
In the air we must look unto his first and second qualities: his first are
heat, cold, moisture and drines, of which the two first are called active,
and the two latter passive: the second qualities are when the air is gross,
thick, subtle, pure, dark, light: but let us now make our profit of all
this. What air is good for the sight.
It behooves us for the better preservation of our sight to choose an air which
is temperate in his first qualities, as being neither too hot, too cold, too
moist or dry. It is not good to abide in the heat of the Sun, neither in
the beams of the Moon, or in the open air. The Southern and Northern
winds are hurtful to the eyes. The winds that are bad for the sight.
Read that which Hippocrates writes in his third section of Aphorisms. The
South wind (says he) makes a troubled sight, hardness of hearing, a heavy
head, dull senses, and all the body lazy and lither, because it begets
gross spirits. The North wind is very sharp, and therefore (as says the
same author) it stingeth and pricketh the eyes. The places that are low,
waterish, moist and full of marshes, are altogether contrary to the welfare of
the sight. It is better a great deal to dwell in dry places, and such as are
somewhat rising. If a man be forced to dwell in moist places, his help is to
alter and rectify the air with artificial fires, How to correct the air by
art.
made of the wood of Laurel, Juniper, Rosemary and Tamariske: or otherwise to
very good purpose he may make the perfume invented of the Arabians, and use it
in the chamber where he keeps most. Take of the leaves of Eyebright, A
perfume.
Fennel, and Margerome of every one an ounce, of Zyloaloe finely powdered a
dram, of Frankincense three drammes: mingle them altogether, and perfume your
chamber oftentimes therewith.

How the air must be affected in his second qualities.
As concerning the second qualities, a gross, thick, and foggie air is
contrary to the sight, we must choose such a one as is pure and clean, purged
from all waterish, earthie, nitrous, sulphurous, and other such like metal
like vapors, especially those of quicksiluer: the dust, fire, and smoke do
wonderful harm to the eye: and this is the reason why such as have a weak
sight should never intermeddle with Alchimy, for so at once they should consume
both their sight and their purse: the vapors arising out of standing waters
and from dead bodies are very noisome. Neither yet must the air be too
lightsome: What light is bad for the sight.
for an excessive light does scatter the spirits, and causes the sight
oftentimes to be lost. We read that Zenophanes his soldiers having passed
the snow, became all of them as it were blind: and Dionisius the tyrant of
Sicile, did after the same manner put out the eyes of all his prisoners: for
having shut them up in a very dark hole, caused them to be led forth on the
sudden into a very bright light, so that they al thereby lost their sight.

What colors do comfort the sight.
Unto the light we will adioyne colors. All colors are not profitable for the
sight; the white color scatters the spirits, drawing them to it; the black
makes them too gross: there is not any but the green, blew and violet, which
do much comfort it. And this has nature taught us in the framing of the eye:
for she has died the grape-like coat with green and blew, on that side which
is next unto the christalline humor. The color of the Sapphire and Emerauld is
very commodious for the sight. If you desire often to look upon these two
colors mixed together, I will show you to attain thereunto very easily. Take of
the flowers of Borage, and of the leaves of Burnet, and when you are disposed
to drink cast them into the glass: and this will serve you for two purposes.
The color will comfort your eyes, and the herbs by their property will
repress the vaporousnes of the wine. And thus much let be said of the air.

Of meats and drinks.
The second point of ordering thy diet aright, consists in meat and drink.
It behooves therefore to know what victuals are good, and what they be which
can hurt the sight. A man must altogether refrain such victuals as are of
gross nourishment, as also slimie, vaporous, salt, windy, sweet, and sharp
meats, and such as make many excrements, there must also be made a more spare
supper then dinner.

Of bread.
The bread must be made of clean wheat, well leauened and some what salted,
wherein may be put Fennel or Anise-seede: it must not be eaten new, nor
after it is above three days old. Unleavened bread does hurt the sight
extremely, especially if there be any darnell therein: for some are of opinion
that the use of darnell does destroy the sight. I have sometimes read in
Plautus a pleasant treatise of a page, who not daring to call his companion
blinkard or blind-beetle, mocked him with having eaten of darnell.

Of flesh.
All flesh that is easily disgested, and does not abound with superfluous
moisture, is most fit to be eaten, as Chicken, Capon, Hen, Partridge,
Feasant, Pigeon, Larkes, Turtles, and other mountain birds, which may be
stuffed with sage or mountain hissope.. There are certain sorts of flesh
which have a certain special property for to strengthen and clear the
sight, as the flesh of the Pie, the Swallow, the Goose, of Vipers well
prepared, of the Wolf, of the he-gote, and other ravenous birds. The Arabian
Physicians have observed, that the eyes of living creatures, do (I know not by
what property or simpathie) comfort the sight. They do often use the flesh of
Swallows and Pyes dried in an oven to pepper their meats withal. They forbid
us the use of gross flesh, as of Porke, Hare and Heart.

Of fish.
Fish (if we credit Auicen) is enemy unto the eyes: but I think he
understands it of such as live in standing waters, which have a slimie
substance and flesh, or such as be salted: for such as have a fast flesh, as
Troutes, Rochets, and such like, are not against the eyes. New and soft eggs
with a little sugar and Cinnamon, do marueilously clear the sight: but if they
be fried with butter, they hurt exceedingly.

All meats made of paste, all baked, and milk meats do hurt the eyes.

As concerning salt meats, spices and fauces, all of them are not forbidden:
we use to make artificial salts, which serve marueilouslie to clear the
sight: and therewithal must ordinarily meats be salted. Of artificial salts.
The salt of treacle is most excellent, whereto may be added some Nutmeg, Mace,
Cloves and Fennel seed. There is likewise made salt of Eyebright, after this
manner: Take of common salt one ounce, of Eyebright two drammes, of Cinamom and
Mace the weight of half a crown, mix them altogether, and use it as salt
unto your meat. There be some which add unto these salts, the powder of the
flesh of a Pie dried in the oven.

Strong spices, Spices.
as Ginger, Pepper, and mustard do hurt the eyes: it is meet to rest contented
with Nutmegs, Cloves, Cinamom and a little Saffron.

All pulse is mightily against the sight, except it be Lupines, which
strengthen and help them by a certain property.

As for herbs that are good for the eyes, Herbs.
these are commended; Fennel, Sage, Margerome, Rosemary, Betonie, Mints,
Mountain time, Asparagus, Burnet, Succorie, and Parselie: On the contrary side
these are forbidden; Lettise, Cresses, Dill, Basil, Purselane, Leekes,
Coleworts, Garlike, Onions, and all bulbouse roots, as also Waterchestnuts,
and Toadstooles. The Arabians, which were more addicted to dishmeate then the
Greeks, do commend Turnips: but with all these it is very certain that we
must mix Fennel or Aniseede, because they be very windy.

Raw fruits, Fruits.
and such as abound with much moisture, do hurt the sight: before meat
presently, one may use stewed Prunes, and presently after meat a Pear or
Quince well preserved, to close the mouth of the stomach, and to hinder
vapors from ascending up into the head. It will not be amiss after meat to
take a little Fennel or Annise seed comfits, a morsel of Cidoniatum, or of
preserved Mirobalanes or Nutmegs. Figs and Raisins are not forbidden, but
nuts, Chestnuts, and Olives that are very ripe, are well forbidden. And thus
much for meats.

Drink. What quantity is to be used. What quality it must be of.
As for drink, we are to observe two things therein, the quantity and the
quality. Archigenes the great Physician, speaking of the quantity says, that
in all diseases of the eyes, it is very hurtful to drink much. Aristotle in
his Problemes speaking of the quality says, that they which drink water have
their sight more subtle: notwithstanding Auicen and Rhases do condemn the
use of water, and I am verily persuaded that they do not displease the sect of
good fellowship, which had rather loose their eyes then their wine. To grant
the same which they affirm, I hold it needful to alay the wine well with
water, and to make choice of some small wine, so that it be not sharp or
vaporouse: sweet and new wines are very fuming, thick wines stay too long in
the stomach, and send too great a quantity of vapors unto the brain. We use
to make an artificial wine of Eyebright, Artificial wines.
which is very singular for the preservation of the sight. Arnaldus de
Villanoua, a famous Physician does confidently affirm, that he cured an old
man almost quite blind, by the only use of wine of eyebright. Also it will
do well to cast a bunch of Eyebright in the wine which one drinks
ordinarily, or otherwise, as I have already said, some Burnet with the
flowers of Borage; for besides that they comfort the sight with their color,
they will help to purge the spirits, and to repress vapors. The herbs are
common enough, and to be come by at all seasons. Such as will not use wine,
Hydromell.
shall drink a simple honied water, or else compound one in manner as follows.
Take of cesterne or fountain water fifteen pounds, of good honey one pound,
mingle them both together in a pot, adding thereto some Fennel, Eyebright, and
Mace, made up in a little bag, the weight of a French crown, boil all
together, unto the consumption of the third part, evermore looking well to the
taking off of the scum of the honey.

Of watching and sleeping.
In watching and sleeping, it behooves to keep a mean: to sleep very long
hurts the sight, and to sleep at noones makes ablowne pair of cheeks,
troubles the sight, and makes all the body lither and lazy: it is best to
sleep upon the side, having the head raised high enough. Immoderate watching
do spend the spirits, cool the brain, and hurt the sight infinitely.

It is good to go to bed three or four hours after supper, and to rise very
early, to walk up and down the chamber, to hake and spet, to cleanse the
ears, to empty the body of his ordinary excrements and after that to comb
the head, and that always against the hair, keeping it very clean, and not
to accustom to wash the face and eyes with cold water, as is ordinarily
accustomed; for cold is an enemy to the eyes and brain: it were better to
use in steed thereof, a little white wine warm, with some Fenell and
Eyebright water.

Of the exercising of the whole body.
The moderate exercise of the whole body, is good in a morning, neither in
deed can any man live in health (as Hippocrates notes) if he labor not, to
waste the superfluities of the third digestion.

Particular exercises also, as the rubbing of the thighs and legs, will be of
good use, to divert and turn away the vapors which rise up to the eyes.

The particular exercises of the eyes.
The eyes have their particular exercise: to move them very suddenly and
circularlie, does weaken them: as also to keep them fixed a long time in one
place, and as it were immovable, does yet weary them more, for that in this
pawsing motion, all the fibers of the six muscles are equally stretched, as
we see in birds which houer in the air, not stirring out of their place. It
is better therefore to keep them in a moderate motion, for that the muscles
performing their actions successively, do comfort and relieve one another. It
is not good to read much, especially after meat, nor yet to trouble himself
with too small a letter, or any other curious and choice piece of work,
because that both the faculty or power, and instrument are put to great
pains, being occupied about these little things. It is not good to behold
things that move swiftly, nor yet such as turn round.

Of the passions of the mind. The belly must be kept soluble.
All passions of the mind do much hurt the sight, but above the rest,
melancholic dumpes and much weeping.

The belly must be soluble always in all the diseases of the eyes: which
Hippocrates observed by the example of them, which have blood-shotten eyes, as
also such as are vapour-eyed. But and if it be costiue, it must be helped by
all means that are gentle and easy, as laxatiue brothes, Prunes and Raisins
laxatiue, lenitiue clisters and such others. Some cause damask Prunes to be
stewed in a syrope, with Seen, Agaricke, and Sugar, whereof four or five are
to be taken in the morning before breakefast or dinner.

CHAP. XIIII. Select and choice remedies for the preservation of the fight, and
the order that is to be kept in the application of them.
SEeing that the weakness of sight comes ordinarily, either of the
distemperature of the brain, or of the evil disposition of the eye: the
rational and methodicall Physician ought always to have regard unto these two
points. The brain if it be too moist, must be dried; and the eye if it be
weak, must be strengthened. Plato in a dialogue of his, does counsel us,
never to attempt the drying or strengthening of the eye by outward remedies,
without having first purged the head. The purging of the whole body and of the
brain.
We will therefore take our beginning at the purging of the head; and for as
much as it is hard to purge the same well, if the whole body (which does
ordinarily send great stoare of excrements thither) be not very clean, it
will be requisite to choose a remedy, which in purging the brain, may gently
empty the whole body also, and therewithal somewhat respect the eye. That
form which is proper to pills, is most fit for this purpose. The Arabians
commend the pills, called Elephangine, the pills of Agaricke, and pillulae
lucis maiores and minores: We may prepare a mass of this mixture.

A description of such pills as are to be used.
Take of Aloes well washed in Fennel and Eyebright water, three drams, of good
Agaricke one dram and a half, of Rubarbe, a dram, of the flesh of Citrine
mirobalanes, chafed in the oil of sweet Almonds, four scruples; of Seen of
the East well powdered a dram; of Masticke, Ginger, and Cinnamome, of each
half a scruple, of Trocisks al and hall five or six grains to acuate it
withal, infuse all these in the juice of Fenel, and sirope of Stechados, and
make up a mass thereof take a dram twice every month, either at evening or
morning. Or else,

Take of the powder of Hiera two drammes, of good Agaricke four scruples, of
Anise seed, Fennel seed, and Seseli seed, of each half a scruple, of Maces,
Cinnamome, and Mirrhe, of each five grains, with honey of Roses, Rosemarie
flowers and the water of Fennel; make these up in a mass, and take thereof a
dram every week: they which cannot swallow pills, shall use this magistrall
sirop.

A magistrall sirope.
Take of the root of Fennel, Acorus, and Elecampane, of every one an ounce, of
the leaves of Eyebright, Betonie, Fumitorie, Mercury, Succorie, Germander, and
Veruaine, of every one a handful, a dozen of damask Raisins, and as many
Prunes, of Anise and Fennel seed two drammes, of the flowers of Sage,
Stecados, Rosemarie, and eyebright, of every one a pugil: boil them all in
fair water, and when you have strained it, add thereto the expression of
three ounces of Seen which have bin infused a good while in the foresaid
decoction warm: as also the expression of an ounce of Agaricke, with a dram
of cloves and as much Cinnamome: boil them all together again with a
sufficient quantity of Sugar until it have the consistence of a sirope that is
well boiled, aromatize it with half a dram of Nutmegs and as much of the
powder of Diarrhodon. If in the end and shutting up of this sirope there be
put thereto the infusion of the weight of half an ounce of Rubarbe strongly
pressed out, it cannot choose but be a great deal better. Hereof one shall take
every five days the quantity of two ounces, more or less according to the
working, and that in some broth or decoction appropriate unto the head and
eyes. Clisters.
The often use of Clisters is requisite in all the diseases of the eyes, ears,
and head.

Decoctions provoking sweat.
If the brain should be very moist, and that the temperature of the body do
not withstand, the use of the root China, or of Zarza, Perilla, putting
thereto of the leaves of Eyebright, and of the seed of Fennel, would be of
very good effect. For together with the consuming of the superfluous moisture
of the whole body, it would strengthen the brain and the eye: and yet I
believe that the use of Sassafras having the smell of the Anise-seede, would be
a great deal more fit.

The body being purged by these universal remedies, the brain may afterward
with greater security be euacuated by the mouth and nostrels, which are the
ordinary draines that nature has ordained for the cleansing thereof; I should
better allow of Masticatories then Irrhines, because the nose is seated very
near unto the eyes, and communicates greatly therewith, Masticatories.
by the hole which goes through them to the great corner of the eye, in such
sort as that there being any forcible attracting of any humor through the
nose, it might be the occasion of drawing the same unto the eye, which is the
part that is diseased. This is also the appointment, of that great Physician
Hippocrates, in the second section of his sixth book of Epidemicall diseases.
It is meet and necessary (says he) that humors falling upon the eyes,
should be diuerted unto the palate and mouth. It were better therefore to chawe
and masticate something as damask reasons, sprinkeled with a drop or two of
the essence of Fennel, or else to rub the palate with the said essence alone,
whose vapor ascending up to the brain and eye, will shengthen them, and not
suffer them to attract any vicious humors.

Rubbing of the head.
Fricasies and rubbings of the head, made against the hair with bags, perfumes,
and artificial coiles, such as we will prescribe in the chapter of rheum,
will euacuate the brain by insensible transpiration.

Hippocrates in the diseases of the eyes, Cupping-glasses.
applies cupping glasses unto the neck, and hinder part of the head, to the
shoulders and thighs.

We must not forget among the particular euacuations of the head, Causticks.
to speak of cauteries: it is very true in deed that Physicians do not
accord of the place where they are to be applied. Some there be that apply
them upon the top of the head: but I am jealous of that place, for that I have
seen fearful accidents to happen by reason of Pericranium, when the
causticke has searched too deep: and I could like it better, that it should
be applied behind: for such reuulsion would work more effectually, and
further, it is very certain that the rising of all the sinews lies behind.
This is a worthy thing to be noted, A worthy observation of the original of
the sinews.
and that which but a few men have marked, I have oftentimes showed the same
both in my public and private dissections. There is a certain Italian
Physician, which boasts himself to have been the first founder and finder of
this matter: but I have long since read the same observed of Hippocrates in his
book of the nature of bones. This cauterie is not to be applied upon that part
of the head called Occiput, because that thence there would issue nothing, The
fittest place for the application of cauteries.
but over against the space which is betwixt the first and second Vertebre:
being the very place, where Setons also are ordinarily set. In old and
inueterate diseases of the eyes, I could approve of that deriuation made by
cauterie behind the ears, because the branches of the veins and arteries
called Carotides and Iugulares, (from which the eye has all his outward store
of veins and arteries) do pass along that way. And these are the most proper
and fit means (in my judgment) to euacuate as well sensibly as insensibly the
whole body, the head and the eyes. I have not spoken of blood-letting, because
there is not any place for it here: Blood-letting.
and it is so far off from profiting them which are weak sighted, that it
weakeneth them more, taking away blood, which is the storehouse of nature, and
that juice, whereby it is most cherished. And yet in great pains,
inflammations and sudden fluxes of humors, it may do good.

After euacuation, we must think how to strenghthen the brain and the eye, to
which use and purpose there are opiates, lozenges and powders, which have
property to clear and strengthen the sight, as Treacle and Mithridate are
greatly commended and commanded, for such as have their brain and eyes very
rheumatike and moist.

Medicines to strengthen and sharpen the sight.
The conserues also of the flowers of Betonie, Sage Rosemary and Eyebright,
there may be framed a composition or Opiate in manner as follows. Take of the
conserues of the flowers of Eyebright, Betonie, and Rosemary, of each an ounce,
of old Treacle three drammes, of conserve of Roses half an ounce, of the
powder of Diarrhodon a dram and a half, of Maces two scruples: make an
Opiate hereof with the syrope of Citrons, and take thereof of oftentimes in the
morning when you rise.

A confection.
One may also make a confection, with two ounces of rosed Sugar, and as much of
the sugar of Borage flowers, with two drams of the powder of Diarrhodon, and
half a dram of the powder of Eyebright, Betonie and Fennel, which may be
taken in the morning.

A powder to be taken at night.
At night going to bed, there are certain powders to be used and taken inward,
that so the virtues thereof may be conveyed, together with the vapors of the
meat. Take of Eyebright three drammes, of Fennel two drammes, of Anise and of
Seseli a dram, of Mace two scruples, and of Cinamome and Cloves as much, of the
seed of Rue and Germander half a dram, of the seed of Pionie a dram, of
roses Sugar so much as needs: make them into very fine powder, and take
thereof a spoonefull at your going to bed.

A powder helping concoction.
After meat also one may use digestive powders, with Coriander, Fennel, red
Roses, Coral, Pearl, Eyebright, Mace, and rosed Sugar: or else use this
condite. Take of Fennel and Coriander Comfits, of each half an ounce, A
condite.
of the rindes of Citrons and Mirobalanes condited, of each two drammes, of
dried Eyebright one dram, of Mace half a dram, of rosed Sugar so much as
needs: make thereof a condite, whereof take a spoonefull after every meal.

The Arabians do highly commend this powder to be taken after meat. Take of
the Trociskes of Vipers a dram, of the powder of Eyebright four scruples, of
sweet Fennel two scruples, of the stones which are found in the eyes of a
Pike, one scruple, of rosed Sugar four ounces: and make thereof a powder.

And hitherto concerning inward medicines, which serve for the clearing and
strengthening of the sight: and now we are to lay out the outward, which are
waters, colliries, and ointments. There are an infinite number of receipts, but
I will put down three or four of the most exquisite and best approved.
Outward remedies.
As for to wash the eyes in the morning use these distilled waters. Take of the
crops of Fennel, Rue, Eyebright, Veruaine, Tormentil, Betonie, A distilled
water.
wild Roses, of male Pimpernell, Burnet, Clarie, Agrimonie, Cheruile,
mountain Hissope, and mountain Siler, of every one two good handfuls: shred
all these herbs very small, and infuse them first in white wine, and
afterward in the urine of a young boy that is in perfect health, and thirdly in
woman's milk: and lastly in good honey: after which distill the whole, and
keep this water carefully, putting every morning a drop thereof into the eye.
You may also every morning wash your eyes with wine, Another water.
wherein has been boiled Fennel, Eyebright, and a little of Chebule
Mirobalanes. Some make a water of the iuyces of male Pimpernell, Germander,
Clarie and Rue: putting thereto afterward of Cloves, Mace, and Nutmeg two on
three drams, and have infused them all together in white wine, to distill them
with good honey. I find the remedy which I now set down, A very good
medicine for the eyes.
to be very good for the preservation and strength of the eyes. Take of the
water of Eyebright and Roses well distilled, four ounces: afterward provide
two or three small bags in which is contained a dram and a half of Tutia well
prepared, and of good Aloes a scruple: hang these bags in the waters
aforesaid, and wash your eyes therewith every night.

An excellent water of bread
The water of bread (so called) is very excellent. You must make paste with
flower grossly sifted, and the powder of Rue, Fennel and Clarie, which they
call great Celondine: of this paste you must make a loaf and bake in the oven,
which so soon as it is baked must be cloven in two, and put betwixt two silver
plates, or peauter dishes, made very close in such sort as that there may
nothing breath out: and so you shall thence gather a water, which must be kept
for the eyes. Some also do much commend the extraction of Fennegreek with
Honey. The water of blew flowers called Blew-bottles and growing in the corn,
distilled, is excellent good for the preservation of the sight. Some also take
the stalk of Fennel a little above the root, and cutting it, fill it with
the powder of Sugar candy: whereupon comes forth a licour which is singular
for the eyes. I cannot but highly praise this water, which I am about to
describe. A water.
Take of White wine a pound and a half and as much of good Rosewater, of Tutia
well prepared an ounce, of the rind of Nutmeg called Mace, half an ounce: put
all these together in a glass violl close stopped, and set it in the heat of
the Sun twenty days, stirring it every day till it become very clear.

An ointment for the eyes.
There is a singular ointment for the preservation of the eyes. Take of Hogs
grease very new, two ounces: steep it in Rosewater six hours: after wash it
again twelve several times in the best White wine that may be got, by the
space of five or six hours more, add afterward unto this grease of Tutia
well prepared and finely powdered one ounce, of the stone Hematites well washed
a scruple, of Aloes well washed and made into powder twelve grains, of powder
of Pearl three grains: mix all together with a little of the water of
Fennel, and make them up in an ointment, whereof ye may put a very little in
both the corners of your eyes. There is great store every where of other
outward remedies which may serve for the eyes, as Colliries, or Eyesalues and
powders, which are blown into the eyes: but I find them not so fit for the
purpose as waters.

Washing of the head.
The Arabians use washing of the head, the better to preserve the sight but it
is not very good in the weakness of the eyes to trouble the brain: but if
there be any such thing used, it may be done in this sort. Take the lie that
is made of the Vine ashes, of the leaves of Stechados, Betonie, Eyebright,
Celandine and Camomill, of each a handful, of Agarick and Chebule Mirobalanes
tied in a cloute of each two drammes: boil all together till the fourth part
be consumed, and therewith wash your head. Or else take dried Eyebright, and
make it into ashes: then add thereto the water of Eyebright, and make thereof
a lie.

Lo these be the means whereby we shall be able to preserve the sight,
especially if the diminution thereof come by some great moisture of the brain
and eyes, as is that of my Ladies the Duchess of Vzez, to whom this whole
discourse is particularly dedicated. I do not set down the remedies, which are
proper to the several diseases of the eyes, for so I should spend too much
time. It was my purpose only to prepare this general regiment, which might
serve as a pattern for the curing of all the rest. Monsieur Guillemeau the
kings Surgeon, has put forth a very learned treatise, wherein are to be
found, the most exquisite remedies set down and used by the old and new
writers. Unto his book I refer the reader, seeing it is extant in our common
language.

An end of the first discourse.
THE SECOND DISCOVRSE, WHEREIN ARE HANDLED THE diseases of melancholy, and the
means to cure them.
CHAP. I. That man is a divine and politic creature, endued with three
several noble powers, as Imagination, Reason and Memory.
ABdalas the Sarrasin being importunatelie pressed, and as it were forced to
speak and tell, what it was that he found to be most wonderful in all the
world: answered at last with great commendation, that man alone did surpass
all other wonder whatsoever. An answer in truth beseeming a great
Philosopher, rather then a rude and unlettered man. For man having the image of
God engraven in his soul, The praise of mankind.
and representing in his body the model of the whole world, can in a moment
transform himself into every thing like a Proteus, or receive at an instant
the stamp of a thousand colors like to the Chamelion. Phauorine acknowledged
nothing to be great here on earth but only man. The wise men of Egypt have
vouchsafed him such honor, as to call him a mortal God. Thrice renowned
Mercury calls him the living creature full of divine parts, the messenger of
the Gods, the Lord of the things below, and fellow companion with the Spirits
above: Pithagoras, the measure of all things: Synesius, the Horizon of things
having and not having bodies: Zoroaster in a certain kind of rauishment
proclaimed him, the mighty work and wonder of nature: Plato, the marvel of
marueiles: Aristotle the politic living creature, furnished with reason and
counsel, which is all, as possessing all things by power, though not really
and in very deed (as Empedocles would have it to be) but by the comprehending
and conceiving of the forms and several sorts of things: Pliny the ape or
puppie of nature, the counterfeit of the whole world, the abridgement of the
great world. Amongst the Divines, there are some which have called him, every
manner of creature, because he has intercourse with every manner of creature; he
has a being, as have the stones; life, as have the plants; and sense or
feeling as the beasts; and understanding, as have the Angels. Othersome have
honored him, giving him the title of universal governor, as having all
things under his empire and jurisdiction, as being he to whom every thing
yields obedience, and for whose sake the whole world was created. In brief,
this is the chief and principal of Gods work, and the most noble of all
other creatures. But this his excellency, From whence the excellency of man
springs.
whereby he is more glorious then all the rest, is not in respect of his body,
although the shape thereof be more exquisite, better tempered, and of more
comely proportion then any other thing in the world, serving as Polycletus his
rule for the fashioning of other things, and being as a platform, whereby the
master builders may frame and contriue their buildings. This noblenes (I say)
comes not of the body, which consists of matter and is corruptible: no,
the extract thereof, or that which is indeed excellent therein, is further
fetched: It is the soul alone whereby he is so renowned, The excellency of
mankind.
being a form altogether celestial and divine, not taking his original from
the effectual working of any matter, as that of plants and beasts does. It is
created of God, and comes down from heaven to govern the body, so soon as
the members thereof are made: the effects thereof do sufficiently prove unto
us, the worthiness of the same. For besides the vegetative and sensitive
faculty, it inioyeth three special powers and faculties, which extol and
advance man, above all other living creatures: and these three are the
Imagination, Reason, and Memory. Of these, The three excellent powers of the
soul.
reason is the principal and chief: the other two, because they are her
ordinary handmaides, (the one to report; the other, to register and write
down, do enjoy the privileges of renowned excellency, do lodge within her
royal palace, and that very near her own person, the one in her utter, and
the other in her inner chamber. The imagination.
The imaginatiue faculty does represent and set before the intellectual, all
the objects which she has received from the common sense, making report of
wharsoeuer is discovered of the spies abroad: upon which reports the
intellectual or understanding part of the mind, frames her conclusions,
which are very often false, the imagination making untrue reports. For as the
most prudent and careful Captains undertake very often the enterprises which
prove foolish and fond, and that because of false advertisement: even so reason
does often make but foolish discourses, having been misse-informed by a feigned
fantasy.

The opinions of the Grecians against the excellency of imagination.
Some Greek Philosophers there be, which would debar the imagination of her
reputed renown and excellency, straining themselves to make her as base as
the other actions of the senses: and I have in place where, read two several
opinions to that end: the first is of such as think that the imagination and
common sense is all one: the other is of them, which affirm that brute beasts
have an imagination as well as men; and that either of these two being true,
there is not any cause why it should be inthronized among the worthies. The
error of the Philosophers.
But I will cause it to appear manifest unto every one, how fondly they have
suffered themselves to be abused.

All such as have applied themselves to play the Philosophers after the most
commendable sort and manner, do hold it for granted and out of all question:
that the imagination is a certain thing surpassing the common or inward sense,
which judges of all outward objects, and unto which as unto their center, all
the forms of the other senses do betake themselves: for the common sense,
receives at one and the same instant with the outward senses the forms of
things; The difference betwixt the imagination and the common sense.
and that (if I may be allowed to use school terms) with the real power of
the object, but the imagination receives and reteyneth them without any
presence of the object. The imagination compoundeth and joins together the
forms of things, as of Gold and a mountain, it makes a golden mountain,
which the common sense cannot do: for the inward sense cannot take hold of
any thing, save that which the outward senses perceive, but the imagination
proceeds further: for the silly Sheep having spied the Wolf, gets
himself by and by out of his way, as from his enemy; this enimitie is not
known by the sense, for it is no object of the senses, but it is the mere
work of imagination to know the same. This then is a power far differing
from the common sense, which in deed is found truly to be in beasts, but the
other cannot possibly be found in them in that degree of excellency that it
is in men. I would that every one should see the difference betwixt that
imagination which is in men, and that which is in beasts. The imagination which
is in beasts, The difference betwixt the imagination of men, and that of beasts.
serves them only to follow the motions and passions of their appetite, and
is not employed, but only about action, that is to say, either in following
that which may do them good, or in avoiding of that which may annoy them. The
imagination of man serves both for action and contemplation. The first.
The imagination of beasts cannot counterfeite any thing further, then as it is
present and before their eyes; The second.
but man has the liberty to imagine what he lists, and although there be no
present object, yet it takes out of the treasury, which is the memory
whatsoever may content it. The beasts have their imagination occupied only
when they are exercised, The third.
and not when they are out of work and labor; but man has the use of
imagination at all times, and at every hour. The beast has no sooner
imagined, but he moves himself by and by, The fourth.
and goes after that which his appetite stirs him up unto; but man
follows not always the motions of his appetite, he has reason to bridle the
same with all, as when it finds out any error therein. The imagination of
beasts cannot frame to it self any mountains of gold, neither yet can it
feign the things that are dark and subtle, The fifth.
or flying asses, as the imagination of man can. Finally, The sixth.
the imagination of man seems to enter into some manner of discourse with the
understanding. For having beheld a painted Lion, it perceives that it is not a
thing to be feared, and at the same time, joining it self unto reason, does
confirm and make bold. Behold now, how the imagination of man does magnify
it self above that of beasts, and for what cause I have set it in rank
aamongst the excellentest and noblest powers of the mind. The Arabians have so
highly commended it, The effects of imagination.
that they have verily believed, that the mind by virtue of the imagination
could work miracles, pearce the heavens, command the elements, lay plain
the huge mountains, and make mountains of the plain ground: and to be short,
that unto the jurisdiction thereof were subject, all manner of material forms,
and they called all the three powers of the mind, most excellent and renowned
minds, and therefore that which is called imagination, is the first faculty or
power of the mind.

Of the understanding, the second power of the mind.
The understanding follows next in order, and awaketh at the knock of
imagination, it makes things sensible, universal, discourses, gathers
conclusions, reasons from the effects to the causes, and from the beginnings,
even to the midst, and so to the ends and issues of things. Of understanding,
called passible or suffering.
The Philosophers distinguish this understanding power, into a suffering and
doing power: the suffering, is that which receives the forms of things, pure
and free from all matter, and is as it were the subject of all manner of forms:
Of active understanding.
the doing power is as it were a light, which makes clear and perfect the
suffering: in such manner, as that the one does as it were serve in stead of the
matter, and the other of the form, and both joined togetgher, Reason.
do perfect and make up reason the sovereign and predominant power of the
mind, proper unto man, which can do much without the body, and unto which
the body very often is a let and hindrance, being that alone which is without
matter, being also not subject to passions, immortal, differing from the
senses, How reason differs from the senses.
and all other corporal actions, because the senses are lost by the violence
of some great object, as the hearing, by a strong and forcible sound; the
taste, by tasting some extreme favor; the sight by an excessive whitenes;
witness hereof is the Sicilian tyrant, who by cunning practice put out the eyes
of all his prisoners: but the understanding, the more excellent and surpassing
that the object is, the more it shows forth his own perfection and noblenes,
the contemplation of high and divine things does ravish it, yea herein it
finds greatest contentation, herein it places his chiefest felicity. This
is that only power which grows more and more, when the body declineth,
which then is in his chiefest strength, when the body grows faint and
feeble: which becomes strong and lusty, when all the senses grow weak and
feeble, which whirleth through the air, and walks over the wide world, when
the body is immovable, which causes us when we are in sleep, oftentimes to
see some glaunces of his divine nature, in foretelling things to come, and, if
it be not overwhelmed with the Sea of vapors, rising of excessive cramming in
of belly cheer, it lifts it self above the world, and even above his own
nature, and beholds the glory of the Angels and mysteries of heaven.
Finally, reason having thus swiftly conveyed her self to take the view of
whatsoever is, and having discoursed and conceived a million of goodly and
pleasant forms, being unable any longer to retain them, commits them to
the custody of memory, which is her faithful secretary, and wherein,
Memory.
as in a place of greatest trustines to keep the same, the most precious
treasures of the soul are placed. This is that rich treasury, which incloseth
within one only inner room all the sciences, and what else soever has passed
since the creation of the world, which lodges every thing in his several
place, not shufling them up disorderly together, which observes time,
circumstances and order, and which is (as Plato terms it) a cesterne to
contain the running streams of the understanding: this faculty is called
remembrance, and is proper unto man alone: for beasts have likewise a certain
kind of memory, but they cannot call to mind the time, order and
circumstances, this cannot be accomplished without a Syllogism. See here the
mind of man attended by these three famous faculties, the imagination, reason,
and memory, all which three are lodged in one selfsame palace, and within
this round tower, which we call the head: The diverse opinions concerning the
seats of these powers.
but whether this fall out to be in all the brain equally, and alike, or that
every one of them should have his several chamber, it is not fully resolved
upon. I know very well that there is a great quarrel betwixt the Greek and
Arabian Physicians, The Grecians would have them diffused through the substance
of the whole brain.
about the lodgings of these three princesses, and that no man hitherto has
bin able to reconcile them. The Greeks would lodge them in every part of the
brain; the Arabians quarter out every of them by it self. The Greeks
maintain that in all places where the reason is, that there the imagination
and memory do accompany it, and that all the three are as much before as
behind: finally, that they be al of them in all and every part of the brain.
They allege for one principal reason on their side, that every similar action
is wholly and entirely in every part of his subject, as for example,
nourishment is equally and alike in all the bone, and whatsoever part of the
bone it be, there is to be found continually these four faculties, that is,
the attractiue, retentiue, digestive and expulsive. On the contrary the
Arabians will have, The contrary opinion of the Arabians.
that every one of these faculties enjoy his proper seat: and they have very
goodly reasons for that which they hold. The first reason.
First, it is very certain, that there are diverse petty chambers in the
brain, which the Anatomists call Ventricles, these chambers are not for
nothing, yea and there is no man that can think, that they were made for any
other use, then to be lodgings for these three faculties: and that, as though
the imagination should be lodged in the two first, Reason in the middlemost,
and Memory in the hindermost: and the appearance of the truth of this thing is
very great: for the imagination receives all the objects of the senses, and
therefore ought to be placed very near unto the senses: but so the case
stands, as that all the senses are in the forepart of the head: the
imagination presents all these objects unto the reason, which makes them
void of matter and universal, so that of necessity it must follow as second.
The reason having after some time served and satisfied it self of these
pleasant forms, commits them to the custody of memory: whereupon it
follows of necessity, that it should be placed behind, and as it were in
her inner chamber. The second.
Furthermore, imagination being effected by receiving in of forms, must have
his seat in the softest part of the brain, because the prints of pictures are
most easily set in a soft body: Memory which keeps and retayneth the
forms, craves a more hard part, for else the picture would be defaced by and
by after that it should be printed: Reason, as the greatest of renown ought to
be placed in such a part of the brain, as is most temperate. But there is no
doubt, but the forepart of the brain is the softest, and the hinder part the
hardest, and the middlemost the most temperate: so then we must believe that
imagination is before, and memory behind.

Philosophers that have written of Phisiognomie, The third.
say that such as have the hinder part of the head hanging out much, have a
good memory; that such as have large and high foreheads, and therewithal as
it were bossed, are of pleasant imagination: and that such as in whom these two
eminences are wanting, are blockish, without imagination, and without memory.
The fourth.
If we will (says Aristotle in his Problemes) enter into any serious and deep
conceit, we knit the brows and draw them up: if we would call to mind and
remember anything, we hang down the head, and rub the hinder part, which
shows very well that the imagination lies before, and the memory behind.
Men have very often marked, The fifth.
that if the hinder part of the head be hurt, the memory is lost at the very
same time. The sixth.
I will add further for the more strengthening of the side of the Arabians,
that the fashion and widenes of the ventricles of the brain, do serve to
point out with the finger, the places of these three faculties. The fourth
ventricle is somewhat sharp poynted, to the end that forms may be the better
united, and that the reflexe thereof may the more fully cast it self upon the
third, wherein reason lodges: the two first are the widest, for that they
receive the first objects which are not as yet refined: that in the midst was
fittest for reason, because it might receive the images or forms of the two
first, and having forgotten them, might seek them out; as it were in her most
close and secret place of custody, contrived for that end behind. Finally,
The seventh.
that which has made the Arabians to stand so stiffelie in their opinion, and
to maintain that these three faculties, have every one their several lodging,
is because they have oftentimes observed, that one of these three may be hurt,
and not the other; the imagination is very often corrupted, the reason standing
sound and intier: and contrariewise, how many frantic and melancholic men be
there, which discourse very excellently, notwithstanding their foolish and
vain imaginations. Galen writes two histories of two frantic men, the one
of which had his imagination troubled, and his reason sound, the other his
reason troubled, and his imagination sound. We see an infinite number which
have utterly lost their memory, and yet fail not to discourse very well.
Thucidides mencioneth, that in that great plague which dispeopled almost al
Greece, there were more the^ a million, which forgot every thing even to their
own name, and yet notwithstanding did not thereupon become fools. Messala
Coruinus in his recovery of a certain sickness, did not remember his own name.
Trapezontius was very wise whilst he was young, but drawing near unto old age
he quite forgot all. Seeing therefore that one of these faculties may be hurt
without the other, we must believe that every of them has his particular
place. The conclusion.
If it were committed to me to give judgment in this controversy, I should
say that the Greeks had plaide the more subtle Philosophers, and that their
opinion is the more true: but that that of the Arabians will ever be more
followed of the common people, for that it has in it a greater show of evident
cleerenes. I will not draw on this disputation to any greater length: it is
enough for me to make it appear that the mind has three most excellent
faculties, al which lodge within the brain, and cause man to appear more
admirable, then any other creature, which enable him also to govern all the
world, and which give him the title of a sociable and politic living creature.

CHAP. II. That this living creature full of the image of God, is now and then
so far abased, and corrupted in his nature, with an infinite number of
diseases, that he becomes all like unto a beast.
Coming to extol man unto the highest degree and step of his glory, behold
him I pray thee the best furnished and most perfect of all other living
creatures, having (as I have said) in his soul the image of God, and in his
body the model of the whole world. The misery of mankind.
And now I intend to set him out unto thee as the most caitife and miserable
creature that is in the world, spoiled of all his graces, deprived of
judgment, reason and counsel, enemy of men and of the Sun, straying and
wandering in solitary places: to be brief, so altered and changed, as that
he is no more a man, as not retaining any thing more then the very name. The
mind alone corrupted the body standing sound.
This alteration is seen oftentimes in the soul alone, the body standing
sound and without blemish: as when a man by his malicious will becoming an
apostate and revolt, defaceth the engraven form of the Deity, and comes by
the filth of sin to defile the holy temple of God, when through an unruly
appetite, he suffers himself to be carried in such headlong wise after his
passions, either of choler, envy or gluttony, as that he becomes more
outrageous then a lion, more fierce then a tiger, and more filthy and
conte^ptible then a swine. I go not about to redress this deformity, I leave
the discourse for the learned Divines. Yea and if a man do but take some
pains in moral Philosophy to read it, he shall find right wholesome
precepts, for the staying and brideling of these foolish passions.

The mind corrupted through a corrupt body.
I come to the other deformity, which is violently thrown upon man, and may
happen unto the most religious, being, when the body, which is as it were the
vessel of the soul, is so greatly altered and corrupted, as that all the
noblest faculties of the same, are likewise corrupted, the senses seem all of
them to wander and go astray, every motion to be out of order, the imagination
troubled, the reason foolish and rash, the memory altogether given to let slip
and fly away whatsoever it should retain. The first deformity deserves
correction, as coming of a malicious mind and voluntary action: but as for
this which is constrained and violently inflicted by diseases, it deserves to
be weighed of every one with a tender and charitable compassion. The diseases
assailing our mind.
But the diseases which do most sharply assail our minds, and captiuate and
make them thrall unto the two inferior powers, are three; the frenzy, madness,
and melancholy. Look upon the deeds of frentike and mad men, thou shall not
find therein any thing worthy of a man, he biteth, he shriketh, he belloweth
out a wild and sauadge voice, rowleth about his fiery eyes, sets up his
hair, runs himself headlong into every thing indifferently, and very often
murthereth himself. See how melancholic men do now and then so cast down and
abase themselves, as that they become companions to the brute beasts, and have
no pleasure to be any where but in solitary places. I am about to describe
him out unto thee in most lively manner, and then thou shall judge what a manner
of man he is. The lively description of a melancholic person.
The melancholic man properly so called, (I mean him which has the disease
in the brain) is ordinarily out of heart, always fearful and trembling, in
such sort as that he is afraid of every thing, yea and makes himself a
terror unto himself, as the beast which looks himself in a glass; he
would run away and cannot go, he goes always sighing, troubled with the
hicker, and with an inseperable sadness, which oftentimes turns into despair;
he is always disquieted both in body and spirit, he is subject to
watchfulnes, which does consume him on the one side, and unto sleep, which
tormenteth him on the other side: for if he think to make truce with his
passions by taking some rest, behold so soon as he would shut his eyelids,
he is assailed with a thousand vain visions, and hideous buggards, with
fantastical inventions, and dreadful dreams; if he would call any to help
him, his speech is cut off before it be half ended, and what he speaks
comes out in fasling and stammering sort, he can not live with company. To
conclude, he is become a sauadge creature, haunting the shadowed places,
suspicious, solitary, enemy to the Sun, and one whom nothing can please,
but only coffeehouse, which forgeth unto it self a thousand false and
vain imaginations.

Then judge and weigh if the titles which I have heretofore given to man,
calling him a divine and politic creature, can any way agree with the
melancholic person. And yet I would not have thee (O thou Atheist whosoever
thou art) hereupon to conclude, Against Atheists which think the soul to be
mortal.
that the soul of man suffers any thing in his essence, and thereby to
become subject to corruption: it is never altered or changed, neither can it
suffer any thing, it is his instrument that is evil affected. Thou may
understand this matter if thou will, by a comparison drawn from the Sun: for
even as the Sun does never feel any diminishment of brightness, althought it
seem oftentimes to be dark and eclipsed; for this happens either by the
thicknes of the clouds, or by reason of the Moon coming betwixt it and us:
and so our soul seems oftentimes to suffer, but indeed it is the body
which is out of frame. There is an excellent sentence in Hippocrates, in the
end of his first book of diet, which deserves to be written in letters of
gold. A pregnant place proving the immortality.
Our soul (says he) cannot be changed in his essence, neither by drinking nor
eating, nor by any excess, we must impute the cause of all his alterations,
either to the spirits where with it chiefly has to deal, or unto the vessels,
by which it diffuseth it self throughout the body. Now the instrument of these
noble faculties is the brain, which is considered of by the Physician, either
as a similar part, whose health and welfare consists in a good temperature;
or as an isntrumental part, and then the health and welfare thereof consists
in a laudable shape both of the body, as also of the ventricles of the same.
That a good temperature and laudable figure are requisite for the actions of
the soul.
And both these two sorts are requisite for the well executing of these three
faculties: It is most true that Galen attributes more to a good temperature,
then to a commendable shape, and in one whole book maintains with strong and
firm argument, that the manners of the soul do follow the temperature of the
body, as thou shall see in the chapter following. And yet I for my part will
not yield so much either to temperature or shape, That natural inclinations
may be corrected by studied and labored ones. A most excellent history of
Zopyrus and Socrates.
as that they can altogether command and overrule the soul. For such
qualities as are natural, and as it were borne with us, may be amended by
those qualities which the Philosophers call acquisite, or purchased and gotten
by other means. The history of Socrates makes this plain enough. Zopyrus a
great Philosopher, taking upon him to judge and know at the first sight, the
disposition of every man, as upon a day he had beheld Socrates reading, and
being vrgently pressed of all them that sat by to speak his opinion of him:
answered at last, that he well knew that he was the most corrupt and vicious
man in the world. The speech was hastily carried to Socrates by one of his
disciples, who mocked Zopyrus for it. Then Socrates by the way of admiration
cried aloude; Oh the profound Philosopher, he has thoroughly looked into my
humor and disposition; I was by nature inclined to all these vices, but moral
Philosophy has drawn me away from them. And in very deed Socrates had a
very long head and ill shaped, his countenance ugly, and his nose turning up.
These natural inclinations then which proceed of the temperature and shape of
the body (foreseen that these two vices be not exceeding great, as in
melancholic persons) may be reclaimed and amended, by the qualities which we
get unto ourselves by moral Philosophy, by the reading of good books, and by
frequenting the companies of honest and virtuous men.

CHAP. III. Who they be which are called melancholic persons, and how one
should put difference betwixt melancholic men that are sick, and those that
are sound and whole.
ALL such as we call melancholic men, are not infected with this miserable
passion which we call melancholy: there are melancholic constitutions, which
keep within the bounds and limits of health, which if we credit ancient
writers, are very large and wide. We must therefore for the orderly handling of
this matter, set down all the sorts and differences of melancholic persons,
to the end that the likeness of names may not trouble us in the sequel of this
discourse. That there are four humors in our bodies.
It is a thing most freely agreed upon in Physic, that there are four
humors in our bodies, Blood, Phlegm, Choler, and Melancholy; and that all
these are to be found at all times, in every age, and at all seasons to be
mixed and mingled together within the veins, though not alike much of every
one: for even as it is not possible to find the party in whom the four
elements are equally mixed; and as there is not that temperament in the world,
in which the four contrary qualities are in the whole and every part equally
co^pounded, but that of necessity there must be some one evermore which does
exceed the other: even so it is not possible to see any perfect living
creature, in which the four humors are equally mixed, there is always some
one which does overrule the rest, and of it is the parties complexion; named:
if blood do abound, we call such a complexion; sanguine; if phlegm,
phlegmatike; if choler, cholerike; and if melancholy, melancholic. These
four humors, if they do not too much abound, may very easily stand with the
health of the party: for they do not sensibly hurt and hinder the actions of
the body. It is most true that every constitutions brings forth his
different effects, which make the actions of the soul more quick and lively,
or more dull and dead. Phlegmatike persons are for the most part blockish and
lubberlike, having a slow judgment, The effects of phlegm.
and all the noblest powers of the mind, as it were asleep, because the
substance of their brain is too thick, and the spirits labored therein too
gross: these are no fit men for the undergoing of weighty affairs, neither
apt to conceive of profound mysteries; a bed and a pot full of pottage is
fitted for them. Whereunto the sanguine complexion is inclined.
The sanguine persons are borne for to be sociable and lovers of company: they
are as it were always in love, they love to laugh and be pleasant: this is
the best complexion for health and long life, because that it has the two
maine pillars of life, which are natural heat and moisture in greatest
measure, and yet such folk are not the fittest for great exployts, nor yet for
high and hard attempts, because they be impatient, and cannot belong in doing
about one thing, being for the most part drawn away, either by their senses,
or else by their delights, whereto they are naturally addicted. Cholerike
persons being hot and dry, have a quick understanding, The properties of a
cholerike persons.
abounding with many slight inventions: for they seldom sound any deep and
hidden secrets, it fitteth not their fist to graple with such businesses as
require continuance of time and pains of the bodies, they cannot be at
leisure; their bodies and spirits do let them: their spirits are soon spent
by reason of their thinness, and their weak bodies cannot endure much
watching. I will add also that one thing which Aristotle mentions in his
Ethickes, as that they love change of things, and for this cause are not so fit
for consultations of great importance. The melancholic are accounted as most
fit to undertake matters of weighty charge and high attempt. That melancholic
persons are ingenious and witty.
Aristotle in his Problemes says, that the melancholic are most witty and
ingenious: but we must look that we understand this place aright, for there
are many sorts of melancholy: That there are three sorts of melancholy.
there is one that is altogether gross and earthie, cold and dry: there is
another that is hot and adust, men call it atrabilis: there is yet another
which is mixed with some small quantity of blood, and yet not withstanding is
more dry then moist. The first sort which is gross and earthie, makes men
altogether gross and slack in all their actions both of body and mind,
fearful, sluggish, and without understanding: it is commonly called Asse-like
melancholy: the second sort being hot and burnt, does cause men to be
outrageous and unfit to be employed in any charge. There is none then but that
which is mixed with a certain quantity of blood, that makes men witty, and
causes them to excel others. Why melancholic men are witty.
The reasons hereof are very plain, the brain of such melancholic persons is
neither too soft nor too hard, and yet it is true, that drynes does bear the
sway therein. But Heraclitus oftentimes said, that a dry light did make the
wifest mind: there are but small store of excrements in their brain, their
spirits are most pure, and are not easily wasted, they are hardly drawn from
their purpose and meaning; their conceit is very deep, their memory very
fast, their body strong to endure labor, and when this humor grows hot, by
the vapors of blood, it causes as it were, as kind of divine rauishment,
commonly called Enthousiasma, which stirs men up to play the Philosophers,
Poets, and also to prophecy: in such manner, as that it may seem to contain
in it some divine parts. See here the effects of the four complexions, and how
they may all four be within the bounds of health. It is not then of these
sound melancholic persons that we speak in this treatise: We will entreat
only of the sick, and such as are pained with the grief which men call
melancholy, which I am now about to describe.

CHAP. IIII. The definition of Melancholy, and all the differences of it.
DIseases commonly take their names, either from the place which they seize
upon, or of some irksome accident accompanying them, Whence melancholy took
his name.
or of the cause which causes them. Melancholy marches in his hinder-most
rank: for this name was given it, because it springs of a melancholic
humor. We will define (as other good authors do) a kind of dotage without
any serve, having for his ordinary companions, fear and sadness, without any
apparent occasion. Dotage in this definition stands for the Genus, the
Greeks call it more properly, (...) the Latins Delirium. The diverse sorts
of dotage.
There are two sorts of dotage, the one without a fever, the other with a
fever: that which is joined with a fever, is either continual, and haunteth
the sick continually, or else it takes him at certain times, distinguished by
distance: that which is continual, is properly called frenzy, and it comes
either through the inflammation of the muscles, called Diaphragma: and this is
the cause why the ancient Greek writers do call the said muscle (...) that
dotage which commenth by fit, happens commonly in burning agues, and in the
stage or full strength of fevers tertains, and it is called (...). The other
sort of dotage is without a fever, and it is either accompanied with rage and
fury, and then it is called Mania, or madness: or else with fear and sadness,
and then it is caled melancholy. Melancholy therefore is a dotage, What
dotage is.
not coupled with an ague, but with fear and sadness. We call that dotage, when
some one of the principal faculties of the mind, as imagination or reason is
corrupted. All melancholic persons have their imagination troubled, for that
they devise with themselves a thousand fantastical inventions and objects,
which in deed are not at all: they have also very often their reason corrupted.
Why melancholy is not accompanied with a fever.
Wherefore we cannot make any doubt, whether melancholy be a dotage or no, but
it is ordinarylie without a fever, because the humor is dry, and has these
two qualities, coldenes, and drynes, which are altogether contrary unto
putrefaction, so that there cannot any putrisied vapor breath out of them, (no
more then there does out of mere ashes) which might be conveyed to the heart,
there to kindle the fire and procure a fever. Fear and sadness are inseparable
companions of this miserable grief, for some reasons which I will set down in
the chapter following. Behold here the description of melancholy, as it is a
symptom or accident, which has relation to some action, hurt and hindered,
that is to say, to the imagination and reason depraved and corrupted. This
accident is as it were an effect of some cause, and depends immediately upon
a disease; for as the shadow follows the body, even so the symptom
follows and accompanies the disease. Melancholy is a similar disease.
All the Physicians both Greeks and Arabians, do thike that the cause of this
accident is a similar disease, that is to say, a cold and dry distemperature
of the brain. The brain then is the part grieved and hurt, How that in it the
temperature of the brain is hurt.
but that not by reason of any misshapednes of the same, either by any tumor
against nature, neither yet by any thing oppressing or obstructing his
ventricles, as it happens in the Apoplexy and falling sickness, but in his
proper substance and temperature; the temperature is corrupted, it is become
too dry and cold. How it comes to pass that melancholic men fall into the
falling sickness.
Hippocrates has observed the same in his Epidemikes and Aphorisms very
excellently. Such (says he) as have the falling sickness, become melancholic,
and such as are menlancholicke fall into the falling sickness, according as the
menlancholike humor does possess the ventricles or the substance of the
brain, if this humor corrupt the temperature, which he calls the mind
(because that it seems that the most excellent powers of the mind do
execute their functions by the help of this temperature) without doubt it will
cause melancholy: but if it shut up it self in the ventricles and cauities of
the brain, it will cause the falling sickness, because the ventricles being
stuffed, and the spirit not being able to pass freely to the sinews, the
brain draws it self together thereby to enlarge his ventricles, and in this
retraction, does equally, and as much draw and pull his great tail from
whence all the sinews do arise, as it self, and thus thereupon arises an
universal conuulsion. I take it that the definition of melancholy is made
clear and plain enough, by this little discourse: Now let us come to the
differences and diverse sorts thereof. The differences of melancholy.
There are three kinds of melancholy: the one comes of the only and sole
fault of the brain, the other sympatheticallie proceeds from the whole
body, when as the whole temperature and constitution of the body is
melancholic; the third arises from amongst the bowels, but especially from
the spleen liver and the membrance called mesenterium. The first is called
simply and absolutely by the name of melancholy, the latter is called the
windy melancholy with an addition. The first is the most tedious of all the
rest, it vexes the patient continually, affoording little or no breathing
whiles unto him: that which rises from amongst the bowels, does handle the
grieved nothing so roughly, it has his periods, oftentimes making truce with
the diseased. The first has many degrees of afflicting: if it have nothing in
it extraordinary, it shall not alter his name, but and if it fall out to
affect the party altogether with savage conditions, it shall be called Wolves
melancholy; if with raging and violent passion of love, Knights melancholy.
The flatuous or windy melancholy has also his degrees, for there is some
sorts of it but easy and light, and there are other some that are very fierce
and violent. And now intending to handle all these sorts in order, I will begin
with that which has his seat in the brain.

CHAP. V. Of melancholy which has his proper seat in the brain, of all
accidents which do accompany the same: and the causes of fear, sadness,
watchings, fearful dreams, and other Symptoms.
THat melancholy with comes of the dry and cold distemperature of the
brain, is ordinarily accompanied with so manifold and tedious accidents, that
it should stir up every one to be moved with pity and compassion; for the
body is not only cast into a trance, but the mind is yet a great deal more
violently set on the rack. The accidents happening to melancholic persons.
For here behold all the tirannous excecutioners and tormentors of
melancholy: fear keeps company with it day by day, and now and then
assayleth the party, with such an astonishment, as that he is made afraid,
and becomes a terror unto himself; sadness does never forsake him, suspicion
does secretly gall him, sighings, watchings, fearful dreams, silence,
solitarynes, bashfulnes, and the abhorring of the Sun, are as it were
inseperable accidents of this miserable passion. Here we have ample occasion
administered to enter into some Philosophical discourses: and for pleasure
sake, I mind to recreate my self in searching out all the causes of these
accidents, beginning with that of fear. The greatest Physicians are at
controversy, from whence this fear in melancholic persons should come. Why
melancholic men are always afraid. Galen his reason.
Galen imputes all unto the color which is black, and thinks that the
spirits being made wild, and the substance of the brain, as it were cloudie
and dark, all the objects thereof appear terrible, and that the mind is in
continual darkness. And even as we see the night does bring with it some
manner of fear, not only to children, but sometimes also to the most
confident: Auerrhoes mocketh Galen.
even so melancholic persons having in their brain a continual night, are in
incessant fear. Auerrhoes that had deeper insight in Philosophy, then same
for his skill in Physic, and being the sworn enemy of Galen, The color of
the humor is not the cause of fear. The first reason.
laugheth to scorn this reason. The color (says he) cannot be the cause of
this fear, because colors can alter nothing but the eyes, being only the
object of the sight, so that the mind can see nothing without the eyes. But
there is never an eye in the brain; how then can it find it self agrieued at
the blacknes of the melancholic humor, seeing that it cannot see it? The
second.
I add for the more confirmation of Auerrhoes his argument, that the blacknes
of the color is so far from being any cause of this fear in melancholic
persons, as that it is rather that color which they most love, as being
enemies to Sun and light, and following darkness altogether, seeking after
shadowed places, walking often in the night, and that with greater boldness then
upon the day. The third.
Furthermore, madness is caused of an humor, as black as that which causes
melancholy, for the humor called black choler is altogether black and
glistning like pitch, and therefore can make black the spirits and brain, as
well as the other. But we see it falls out, that mad men are nothing
fearful, but rather bold and furious, not taking acknowledgement of any
danger, as appears in their headlong casting of themselves into the devouring
fire, The fourth.
and upon the murtherous knife. Finally, if blackenes should be the cause of
such fear, it should follow on the contrary, that whitenes should make them
bold; but how is it then, that such as abound with Phlegm are also commonly
fearful? the color therefore cannot be the cause of this fear. But says
Auerrhoes, Auerrhoes his opinion.
it must needs be, that the cause hereof is the temperature of the
melancholic humor which is cold, and works effects contrary unto those of
heat. Heat makes men bold, quick of motion, and headlong in all their
actions: cold on the contrary makes them fearful, leaden-heelde, and not
resolving of any thing. All such as are of a cold temperament, become
fearful: old folks ordinarily are fearful, and so are gelded men also:
women are always more timorous then men, and to be brief, the qualities of
the mind do follow the temperament of the body. The authors judgment.
Lo here here the contrary opinions of these two great and famous men: I
think they may be reconciled, if we would join these two causes together,
that is the temperature of the humor, as the chief and principal, and the
black color of the Spirits, as that which may much further and help forward
the same. The melancholic humor being cold, does not only cool the brain,
but also the heart, (being the fear of this courageous faculty of the Soul,
which men call the instinct and pronenes of nature unto anger) and rebateth the
flames therein; hence creeps out fear: the same humor being black, causes
the animal spirits, which ought to be pure, subtle, clear and lightsome, it
makes them I say gross, dark, and as it were all to be smoked. But the
spirits being the chief and principal instrument of the mind, if they be
black and ouercooled also, do trouble her most noble powers, and principally
the imagination, presenting unto it continually black forms and strange
visions, which may be seen with the eye, notwithstanding that they be within.
This is a deep reach, which no man hitherto (it may be) has attained, and it
serves infinitely for the defense of Galen: That with our own eyes, we may
see something within the same.
The eye does not only see that which is without, but it sees also that which
is within, howsoever it may judge that same thing to be without. Those which
have some small beginnings of a Cataract, do see many bodies flying, like to
Ants, flies, and long hairs, the same also do such as are ready to vomit.
Hippocrates and Galen place amongst the signs adn tokens of a critical flux
of blood, these false apparitions, as when one sees red bodies hanging in the
air, which yet notwithstanding are not there, because that then every one
should see them: this is an inward vapor which offers it self unto the
christalline humor in his natural color, and so if it arise of blood, it
appears red: if of choler, yellow: and wherefore then should not the vapors
of the melancholic humor, and of the spirits being black, ordinarily
present themselves, and appear in their natural color unto the eye, and so
unto the imagination? The melancholic party may see that which is within his
own brain, but under another form, because that the spirits and black
vapors continually pass by the finewes, veins and arteries, from the brain
unto the eye, which causes it to see many shadows and untrue apparitions in
the air, whereupon from the eye the forms thereof are conveyed unto the
imagination, which being continually served with the same dish, abides
continually in fear and terror. That which makes me to join the black
color with the temperature, is, because the brain is very often of cold
distemperature, and notwithstanding we find not the party troubled, either
with such fear, nor yet such gastlie sights. Fleagme is yet more cold then
melancholy, and notwithstanding it troubles not the imagination, because his
whitenes has some resemblance of the substance of the brain, That the
melancholic humor is altogether contrary to our spirits.
and with the color and cleerenes of the spirits: but the melancholic humor
is altogether opposite and enemy unto the same. Our spirits account cold and
darkness to be their enemies, feeling the cold, they drawn themselves in, and
as darkness presses on more and more, so they fly black into their fort and
castle, forsake the utter parts, and procure us to sleep: the melancholic
humor has both these properties, it is cold and dark, it ought not
therefore to astonish us, if that we see it to molest the most noble and
principal powers of the mind: seeing it tainteth and brandeth with blackenes
the principal instrument thereof, which is the spirit, which passing from the
brain to the eye, and from the eye to the brain back again, is able to move
these black sights, and to set them incessantly before the mind. Lo here
the first accident which haunteth melancholic persons: they are always full
of fear, for they fear every thing, even that which is furthest off from
fear: they are hartlesse, they honor their enemies, and abuse their friends,
they conceive of death, as a terrible thing, and notwithstanding (which is
strange) they oftentimes desire it, yea so eagerly, as that they will not let
to destroy themselves: but this falls out then only when fear is turned into
despair, it is true in deed, that this happens so often unto those whom
melancholy simply assaileth, as unto those which are mad. Mad men do more often
kill themselves, then melancholic perspons.
We have very few examples of mere melancholic persons which have slain
themselves, but of mad men very many are found, and those of great reputation.
Empedocles Agrigentinus became mad, and cast himself headlong into the burning
flames of the mountain Aetna. Examples.
Ariax the son of Telamon was out of his wits, for that he was not thought
worthy of Achilles armor; but that it was adjudged unto Ulysses. Whereupon he
passed over some part of his fury in killing all manner of cattle he met
withal, thinking he had slain Ulysses and all his companions. Cleomenes being
likewise out of his wits, slew himself with his own sword. Orestes having
slain his mother Clytemnestra, was so furiously outraged, that if his dear
friend Pylades had not carefully watched over him, he had destroyed himself a
hundred times. It falls out therefore more often unto mad, then to melancholic
men to kill themselves.

Why melancholic persons are sad.
The second accident which almost never leaves melancholic persons, is sadness:
they weep and know not wherefore: I believe the distemperature of the humor
is the cause thereof: for as joy and cheerefulnes proceed from heat and
moisture well tempered, so heaviness and sadness come from the two contrary
qualities which are found in this humor. For the most part of men of sanguine
complexion are cheerful and merry, because they consist of a mixture of
moisture and heat: cholerike persons are way ward and unpleasant, because
their heat is dry, and has as it were an edge set upon it: melancholic
persons are sad and perverse, because they be cold and dry. Even so it befell
the silly Bellerophon, who (as he is very artificially set out in Homer) went
wandering through the defart places continually mourning and lamenting. And the
Ephesian Philosopher named Heraclitus, lived in continual tears, because
(says Theophrastus) that he was possessed of melancholy; and as his writings
altogether confused; and darkened with obscurity do sufficiently witness the
same.

Why they be suspicious.
The accident of suspicion follows the two former hard and close at the
heels: the melancholic party is evermore suspicious, if he see three or four
talking together, he thinks that it is of him. The cause of such suspicion
rises of the former fear, and of a corrupt kind of reasoning: for being
always in fear, he thinks verily that one or other does lie in wait for
him, and that some do purpose to slay him. Melancholic men (says Aristotle)
do deceive themselves commonly in matters which depend upon choice, for that
they oftentimes forget the general propositions wherein honesty consists,
and choose rather to follow the motions of their foolish imaginations.

The cause of their restlesnes.
They are never at rest either in their bodies or in their spirits, they can
make no answer to such questions as are propounded them, they oftentimes
change from one kind to another. This disquieting and distracting of
themselves, arises of the diversity of matters which they propound and set
before themselves, for receiving all manner of forms, and stamping them with
the print of dislike; they are constrained oftentimes to change, and to find
out new things, which being no more acceptable to them then the first, do
still continue them in these restles distractions.

The cause of their sighing.
Melancholic folk are commonly given to sigh, because the mind being
possessed with great variety and store of foolish apparitions, does not
remember or suffer the party to be at leisure to breathe according to the
necessity of nature, whereupon she is constrained at once to sup up as much
air, as otherwise would serve for two or three times; and this great draught
of breath is called by the name of sighing, which is as it were a reduplicating
of the ordinary manner of breathing. In this order it falls out with lovers,
and all those which are very busily occupied in some deep contemplation.
Silly fools likewise which fall into a wonder at the sight of any beautiful
and goodly picture, are constrained to give a great sight, their will (which is
the efficient cause of breathing) being altogether distracted, and wholly
possessed with the sight of the image.

Why they watch and can not sleep.
There is yet another accident which is very tedious, and even consumes these
poor melancholic men, even continual watchings. I have seen some that have
abode three whole months without sleep. The causes of sleep.
Now the causes of such watchings are easy enough to understand, if we know
what it is which causes us to sleep. Men are given to observe in sleep the
material, formal, final and isntrumental cause. The material is a pleasant
vapor, which is cast up from the first and second concoction, which when it
comes to slacken and stop all the sinews by his moisture, it causes all
sense and motion for to cease. The final cause is the repair of spirits, and
the rest of all the animal powers which having been wearied by continual
labor, do crave a little relief and recreation: this end cannot be obtained,
if so be the mind which sets all the powers of the body on work, be not
vouchsafed some manner of peaceable rest: in this sort the silly Dido all over
whelmed with musing pensiuenes, could not epsy the approach of night to the
shutting up of her mournful eyes, or easing of her oppressed heart. The
formal cause of sleep consists in the withdrawing of the spirits and
natural heat, from the outward parts, to the inward, and from all the
circumference unto the center. The isntrumental cause is the brain, which
must be of good temperature: for if it be too hot, as in frenticke folks; or
dry, as in old folks, the sleep will never be with peace and quietness.

The causes of all that watchfulnes which is in melancholic persons.
In melancholic persons the material is wanting, the mind is not at rest, the
brain is distempered, the matter is a melancholic humor, dry as ashes, from
whence cannot arise any pleasant and delightsome vapor, the brain is
distempered, and greatly ouerdried, the mind is in continual restlesnes: for
the fear that is in them does continually set before them tedious and grievous
things, which so gnaw and pinch them, as that they hinder them from sleeping.
But if at one time or other it fall out, that they be overtaken with a little
slumber, it is then but a troublesome sleep, accompanied with a thousand of
false and fearful apparitions, and dreams so dreadful, as that it were
better for them to be awake. The causes of all these dreams are to be
referred to the property of the humor: The causes of all their fearful
dreams.
for as the phlegmatike partre dreameth commonly of rivers of water, and the
cholerike of flaming fire: so the melancholic person dreameth of nothing but
dead men graves, and all other such mournful and unpleasant things, because he
exercises his imaginations with forms altogether like unto the humor which
bears sway in him upon which occasion the memory begins to stir and
rouse up her self, or else because that the spirits being grown as it were
wild and altogether black, ranging the brain throughout, and bending
themselves to the eye, do set before the iamgination all manner of dark and
obscure things.

The cause why they love darkness.
Melancholic men are also enemies to the Sun, and shun the light, because
that their spirits and humors are altogether contrary to the light. The Sun
is bright and warm, the melancholic humor is black and cold. They desire
solitarines, because they using to be busy and earnestly following their
imagination, do fear to be drawn away by others their presence, and
therefore do avoid it: but the cause of such their incessant perseverance in
their imaginations, is because their spirits are gross, and as it were
immovable. They have their eyes fixed, and as it were set fast, by reason of
the cold and drines ofthe instrument; they have a hissing in their cares, and
oftentimes are troubled with swimmering or giddiness: Why they love to be
silent.
and as Galen observes, they love silence out of measure, and oftentimen
cannot speak, not for any defect of the tongue, but rather because of I cannot
tell what manner of conceitednes: finally, they invent continually some one or
other strange imagination, and have in a manner all of them one special object,
from which they cannot be weined till time have worn it out.

CHAP. VI. Whence it comes that melancholic persons have all of them their
particular and altogether diverse objects: whereupon they dote.
THe imagination of melancholic men brings forth such diversity of effects,
according to the difference of the matters where about it is occupied, as that
a man shall searse find five of six among then thousand, which dote after one
and the same manner. Whereupon ancient writers have compared this humor to
wine: for as wine (according to the temperature and disposition of them that
drink it) causes sundry and diverse effects, A comparing of wine with the
melancholine humor.
making some to laughed, and some to weep; making some lumpish and drowsy, and
othersome over watchful and furious: even so this humor affect ethithe
imagination after diverse sorts and fashions. Whence it comes that
melancholic men have so searfull objects.
This difference arises either from the disposition of the body, or from the
manner of living, or from such studies as the parties do most apply themselves
unto, or from some other secret and hidden cause. The disposition of the body
does propound and set down such objects as are all alike, or at the least or
very near resemblance, foreseen that the occasion (that is to say some
outward cause) be joined therewithal.

The first cause.
Such as are of an extreme dry temperature, and have the brain also very dry;
if they happen commonly to look upon some pitcher or glass (which are things
very usual and common) they will judge themselves to be pitchers or glasses.
Such as are troubled with worms either in the stomach or guts, will easily
receive, if they be melancholic disposed, that they have some serpent viper,
or other living thing in their bellies. Such as are trouled with very much
windines, will oftentimes imagine themselves flying in the air, and to become
birds. They that abound in seed, will rune a madding after women, having the
same for continual objects before their eyes. All these imaginations follow the
disposition of the body: and as we see that in sleeping it befalls us
oftentimes to dream of a thousand strange things, which are suitable to the
temperature of the body and natural humor, which does chiefly reign (and
this is the cause why such dreams are called natural) even so melancholic
folkeboth waking and sleeping, may be haunted with a thousand vain inventions
such as are suitable to the disposition of the humor. Notwithstanding there is
difference in the manner of their impressions, for such fearful visions as in
sleep are seen of the healthful, do speedily pass away, not making any
abode, because such parties are but slightly affected: but in melancholic
persons, the brain may seem to have gotten a habit, and therewithal the
humor which is dry and earthie, having set his stamp in a body that is
hard, suffers not it self easily to be blotted out.

The second cause of the diue: sitie of melancholic me^ their imaginations.
There are other imaginations in melancholic folks, that proceed not of the
disposition of the body, but of their manner of living, and of such studies as
they be most addcted unto. All the conditions of men and all their properties
are not like. One man feeds himself with covetousness, and another with
ambition; this silly man is led captive of love, and religious devotion
prevails with another. This humor then will imprint in melancholic men the
objects most answerable to their condition of life and ordinary actions. If an
ambitious man become melancholic, he straight way dreameth that he is a King,
an Emperor, a Monarke. If he be covetous, then all his foolish imaginations
will run upon riches. If he be given to be religious, he will do nothing
but mumble of his beads, and you shall never find him out of the Church. If he
be addicted to Venus darlings, he will do nothing but plot the purchase of
his love, and sometimes run after his own shadow. As much may be said of them
which love to contend in law, or of them which in their health were devoutly
addicted unto some one particular thing. The third cause
Finally, we observe and find such strange imaginations in some melancholic
men, as cannot be referred either to the complexion of the body, or to their
condition of life: the cause thereof remains unknown, it seems to be some
secret mystery. The old writers have thought that there is some divine thing
in this humor. Rhazis and Trallianus write that they have seen many
melancholic persons, which have oftentimes foretold what afterward has come
to pass. A comparison betwixt melancholic me^, and a good huntsmen.
There is an Arabian Physician, which compares melancholic men to good
huntsmen. For even (says he) as a good huntsman before he strike or let go
the string of his bow, does assure himself of the fall of the beast: even so
the melancholic person, by the forwardnes of his imagination, does oftentimes
see that which must come to pass, as though it were present before him. We
read that one Marcus, and one other called Melanthius of Syracuse, became good
Poets after their melancholy. Anicen notes that melancholic persons sometimes
do such strange things, that the common people imagine them to be possessed.
How many famous men be there in this our age, which make scruple to condemn
these old witches, thinking it to be nothing but a melancholic humor which
corrupts their imagination, and fills them with all these vain toys. I
will not cast my self any further into the depth of this question, the matter
craves a man of more leisure. Let us conclude therefore, The conclusion.
that the variety of things which the melancholic man busieth himself
withal, comes either of the disposition of his body, or of his condition of
life, or of some other cause which is above nature. They which cannot at the
first time conceive al these reasons, shall understand them (in my judgment)
if they with patience will take the pains to read this little treatise, which
shall very greatly further the making plain of this matter, and it shall not
be from the purpose. It happens all alike to melancholic persons as to those
which dream, and as much do we observe the causes of the one aas of the
other: for dreams have recourse unto the imagination as well as melancholy.
But let us make three sorts of drames; the one sort is of nature; Three sorts
of dreams. Natural dreams.
the other of the mind; and the third is above the other two. Those which are
of nature, do follow the nature of the humor which does most rule: the that
is cholerike, dreameth of nothing but fires, fightings and burnings: the
phlegmatike thinks himself always to be in water. The knowledge of these
dreams is necessary for a good Physician, thereby to know the complexion and
constitution of his sick patient. Hipocrates has written a little treasite
thereof: whereupon the famous man Julius Caesar Scaliger has commented. Galen
also has made another, wherein he teaches that by these natural drames, one
may foretell the issues of diseases. They (says he) which should sweat,
dream commonly that they are in a bath of warm water, or in some river. There
was one that dreamed that his thigh was become a stone, and as he awoke, the
same thigh fell into a palsy.

Dreams rising of the troubles of the mind.
The second fort of dreams is that which comes of the mind, as caused by
some manner of disturbance happening to the same. Some define this kind of
dream to be nothing else but that which has passed the day before either
through the senses, or through the understanding. This kind of dream
happens oftest: for if we have seen, or thought upon, or talked of any
thing very earnestly in the day, the night following the same thing will offer
it self unto us. The fisherman (says Theocritus) dreameth commonly of fishes,
rivers and nets: the soldier of alatums, taking of nothing in the night, but
of their loves object.

Supernatural dreams.
The last kind of dreams exceed the course of nature, the power of the
senses, and the reach of man's understanding: these dreams are either
immediately from God, or from the Devil: those which come from God, Divine
dreams.
do oftentimes put us in mind of that which must happen unto us, and makes
us partakers of revelations, containing in them great mysteries. Such have been
in the old Testament of the drames of Abraham. Jacob, Joseph, Solomon,
Nabuchadnezzar, Pharaoh, Daniel, Mardoche: and in the New Testament, of holy
Joseph, the three kings of the East, and Saint Paul.

Dreams stirred up the devil.
The dreams called Diabolical, happen very often of the subtlety of Satan, who
goes walking round about us every day, and seeks to entrap us waking or
sleeping. Wherefore he sets before us oftentimes strange things, and
discovers unto us hid and unknown secrecies in our sleep, even such as
nature her self may seem to have concealed, he troubles our imaginations
with an infinite number of vain illusions. Lo, here be all the causes of
dreams.

The imagination of melancholic men is troubled three wares.
We may say as much of melancholic persons. Their imagination is troubled only
three ways: by nature, that is to say, by the constitution of the body: by
the mind, that is to say, by some violent passion, whereunto they had given
themselves: and by the intercourse or meddling of evil angels, which cause them
oftentimes to foretell and forge very strange things in their imaginatio^s.

CHAP. VII. Histories of certain melancholic persons, which have had strange
imaginations.
I Have largely enough described all the accidents which haunt those which are
properly to be termed melancholic persons, and have searched out the causes
of al these varities: it behooves me now in this chapter, (to the end I may
somewhat delight the reader) to set down some examples of such as have had the
most fantastical and foolish imaginations of all others. Strange histories.
I will pick some out of the Greek, Arabian, and Latin writers, and I will
add some such as I have seen with mine own eyes. Galen in his third book of
diseased parts, makes mention of three or four, very well worth the marking.

The first.
There was a melancholic man which took himself to be a pitcher, and prayed
all that came to see him, not to come near unto him, least they should dash
him in pieces.

The second.
Another imagined himsefe to be a cock, and did crow when her heard other
cocks crow, and bet his arms, as the cocks do clap their wings.

The third.
Another melancholic man was greatly perplexed in himself, fearing that Atlas
in the end would be weary of bearing up heaven, and so might let it fall down
upon him.

The fourth.
Aetius writes of one, which thought himself to have no head, and did speak
it openly every where, that there was one which had cut it off for his
tyrannous dealings. This man was cured very cunningly, by the skill of a
Physician named Philotimus. For he caused a skull of iron waying very heavy to
be put upon his head: and he thereupon crying that his head did grieve him,
was by and by confirmed by all them that stood by, which also cried: then you
have a head; which he acknowledged by this means, and so was freed from his
false imagination.

The fifth.
Trallianus writes, that he saw a woman which thought that she had swallowed a
Serpent, he healed her causing her to vomit, and casting now and then a Serpent
(which he had and held all ready in his hand) into the basen.

The sixth.
I have read that a young scholar being in his study, was taken with a strange
imaginaton: for he imagined that his nose was so great and so long, as that he
durst not stir out of his place, least he should dash it against something:
and the more he was dealt with and dissuaded, so much the more did he confirm
himself in his opinion. In the end a Physician having taken a great piece of
flesh, and holding it in his hand secretly, assured him that he would heal
him by and by, and that he must needs take away this great nose: and so upon
the sudden pinching his nose a little, and cutting the piece of flesh which
he had, he made him believe that his great nose was cut away.

The seventh.
Arthemidorus the Grammarian, having seen a Crocodile, was taken with such a
fear, as that he forgot all that ever he had known, and settled this opinion
so deeply in himself, namely. that he had lost an arm and a leg, as that
he could never be persuaded the contrary.

The eight.
There have been seen very melancholic persons, which did think themselves
dead, and would not eat any thing: the Physicians have used this slight to
make them eat. They caused some one or other servant to lie near unto the
sick party, and having taught him to counterfeite himself dead, yet not to
forsake his meat, but to eat and swallow it, when it was put into his mouth:
and thus by this crafty devise, they persuaded the melancholic man, that the
dead did eat as well as those which are alive.

The ninth.
There has been seen not long since, a melancholic man, which affirmed
himself the most wretched and miserable in all the world, because he was
nothing.

The tenth.
There was also of late a great Lord, which thought himself to be glass, and
had not his imagination troubled, otherwise then in this one only thing, for
he could speak meruailouslie well of any other thing: he used commonly to sit,
and took great delight that his friends should come and see him, but so as
that he would desire them, that they would not come near unto him.

The eleventh.
There is yet an honest man, and one of the best French Poets that is in this
Realm, which is fallen within these few years into a foolish conceit. Being
coursed with a continual fever, which was accompanied with much watching, the
Physicians appointed for him a stupefactiue ointment, called Populeon, and
therewith rubbed his nose forehead, and temples, since which hour, he has
Populeon in such hateful loathsomenes, as that ever since, he casts them
from him, and will wear them no more: in other points he is able to talk
very sensibly, and cease not to go forward in his Poetry. It has been
attempted by all the skillful means in the world, to take from him this
foolish conceit, he has been showed the description of the ointment, to put
him out of doubt that there goes no dangerous thing to the making of it, he
knows it, and is of the same mind, but yet this conceit is so deeply
printed in him, as that hitherto no man has attained to know how to displace
it.

The twelfth.
Aretaeus in his first book of long diseases, says that he has seen a
melancholic man, who has imagined himself to be of brick, and would not
drink therefore, fearing least thereby he should have been dissolved.

The thirteenth.
Another imagined that his feet were made of glass, and durst not walk least
he should have broke them.

The foureteenth.
A Baker had conceived that he was made of butter, and no man could make him
come near either the fire or his oven, he was so much a fraide of being melted.

The fifteenth.
The pleasantest dotage that ever I read, was of one Sienois a Gentleman, who
had resolved with himself not to piss, but to dye rather, and that because he
imagined, that when he first pissed, all his town would be drowned. The
Physicians showing him, that all his body, and ten thousand more such as his,
were not able to contain so much as might drown the least house in the town,
could not change his mind from this foolish imagination. In the end they
seeing his obstinacy, and in what danger he put his life, found out a pleasant
invention. They caused the next house to be set on fire, and all the bells in
the town to ring, they persuaded diverse servants to cry, to the fire, to the
sire, and therewithal send of those of the best account in the town, to crave
help, and show the Gentleman that there is but one way to save the town, and
that it was, that he should piss quickelie and quench the sire. Then this
silly melancholic man which abstained from pissing for fear of loosing his
town, taking it for granted, that it was now in great hazard, pissed and
emptied his bladder of all that was in it, and was himself by that means
preserved. As concerning those which think themselves Kings, Emperors, Popes,
Cardinals, and such like, seeing that such foolish conceits are common enough.
I have purposed only to name those which are most rare. And thus much for
melancholy, which has his seat in the brain, which is caused of a cold and
dry distemperature, either simple or mixed with matter. It follows sometimes
the hot sickenesses of the brain, as frensies and burning feauers, and then
the face appearethred. Auicen observes that stammerers, and such as have
rolling eyes, and such as are hairie and black, such also as have great veins
and thick lips, are most incident to this kind of melancholy: sadness,
fear, deep muses, the use of gross and melancholic meats do oftentimes
cause this disease.

CHAP. VIII. An order of diet for such as have this melancholic disease in the
brain.
How greatly good order of diet does avail and profit in old diseases.
IT seems to me that I have read some where in Aretine, that (in old
diseases, which have gotten some certain habit) the manner of living is to more
purpose, then whatsoever can be drawn out of the most precious boxes of the
Apothecarie. Auicen the chief prince of the Arabians, does teach us, that the
manner of living being neglected, may corrupt the best state and constitution in
the world, and contrary wise being carefully observed, may amend the worst. And
therefore I will begin the cure of these melancholic men, by setting down the
way to order and govern themselves.

The air.
They must make choice of such an air, as is temperate in his active qualities,
and which is moist concerning the passive. It may be made such by art, casting
abroad in your chamber good store of flowers, of Roses, Violets, and water
Lyllies. Or else you may have a great vessel full of warm water, which will
keep the air moist continually. It will be needful to perfume the chamber
with Orange flowers, Citron pills, and a little Storax: the chamber must be
lightsome, and standing toward the East. A gross, dark, gloomish, stinking
air, is very contrary, howsoever such persons do desire the same altogether.
It is good to accustom them to behold read, yellow, green and white colors.

As concerning their meats, all such as are gross, slimie, windy, Meats.
melancholic, and of hard digestion, do hurt exceedingly.

They must have their bread of good wheat, which is pure, Bread.
and purged from bran, without fault, and which is (if possibly it may be)
knodden with rain or fountain water.

Their flesh must be very young, for that is the best, Flesh.
as for example among the rest that which is of a calfe, kid, mutton, pullet,
partridge: and contrarily, that which is old, and makes a gross
nourishment, as is beef, porke, hare, waterfowles, and all wild beasts, as
the wild Bore and Hearts, are very bad. Galen forbids the flesh of
hee-goates, Bulls, Asses, Dogs, Camels, and Foxes, but he might have spared this
his inhibition, for their daintines is not such, as that men should delight in,
much less doat upon them. The Arabians commend the brains of things to be
good against melancholy, by I cannot tell what property: but in my judgment,
they be not very proper and fit, seeing they are enemies unto the stomach, and
I take them to have been too superstitious in a great number of things.

The fishes that live in standing waters, as also those of the Sea, Fish.
which have a gross and melancholic flesh, as the Tunnie, Dolphine, Whale,
Seal, and all such as have scales are evil, and not to be used in this
disease: one may eat of the fishes which live in clear and bright waters, and
running streams. Salted or powdered fish is stark naught. Eggs that are new,
soft and potched, and eaten with vinegar, or veriuce, are very good.

The use of pottage and brothes is very good and necessary, Pottage.
because this humor being dry, must be moystned. The herbs ordinarily to
be used in them, are Borage, Buglosse, Burnet, Endive, Succorie, Hoppes, and a
little Balm; there must great heed be taken, that there come not any Cole,
Blites, Rocket, Cresses, Turnips, Leekes, or very bitter and biting herbs in
them: husked Barlie, blanched Almonds, and gruell, do serve very excellently
well, to send up pleasant vapors unto the brain.

There must care be had to abstain from all manner of pulse, Pulse.
as peason, beans, and fetches.

As concerning fruits, Fruits.
we will allow, Plumbes, Pears, sweet Pomegranats, Almonds, Raisins, Pine
apples, Citrons, Melons, and especially those apples which have a merueilous
property in curing melancholy: we forbid dry Figs, Medlers, Ceruises,
Chestnuts, Nuts, Artichoakes, Thistles, and old chief.

As concerning drink, Drink.
there is some disagreement amongst Physicians, for some do allow, and
othersforbid wine. I am of mind, that as concerning mad men, and them which
have much heat about the inward parts or bowels, and in the brain, wine is
very contrary: but in melancholic persons that are cold and dry, as those
of whom we entreat in this place, a little white or claret wine, which is
neither sweet nor thick, but indifferently delaied, is very good. Zeno said
oftentimes, that wine does mitigate the sharpenes of men's manners, as water
takes away the bitterness of Lupines. And Auerrhoes writteth, that wine
rejoices the mind and spirits. Artificial wine.
One may make in the vintage time, an artificial wine with Borage and
Buglosse, (which is most singular in all melancholic diseases) and drink his
first draught thereof, either at dinner or at supper. If a man doubt the sweet
sent, he may cast a bunch of the flowers of Borage only, or of the herb it
self also into the wine which he ordinarily drinks.

Watching is altogether enemy to those that are troubled with this disease,
for we must with all the skill and cunning we can, procure sleep, the means
to do it, follow in the next chapter. Moderate exercise may serve to very good
purpose, but it must be done in pleasant and delightsome places, as gardens,
meadows, greene-plots, in places where there are many water springs, or some
rivers: a man must not tire himself in these exercises, he must rest himself
often.

Melancholic persons should never be alone, they should always have some such
company left with them, as might best like and please them, sometimes they
must be flattered, and yielded unto in some part of that which they desire,
for fear least this humor which is rebellious by nature, and given to self
wilfulnes, should grow raging and furious: some whiles they must be chid for
their foolish imaginations, as also reproched and made ashamed of their
cow-hardinesse, they must be imboldned to the uttermost that we can, and
praised in their actions: and if they have in some cases done something worthy
of praise, we must put them often in mind thereof, uphold them with merry
tales: we may not call to their mind any thing that might cause them to
fear, not yet bring them any unpleasant tidings. To be short, we must turn
back and drive away as much as we can from their understanding, al manner of
passions overthrowing the mind, especially choler, fear and sadness: for as
Plato says in his Dialogue called Charmides, the greatest part of the
mischiefs that fall upon the body, do come from the mind. Music very
meet for melancholic persons.
The old writers do commend Music in all melancholic diseases, whether they
be hot or cold. The Arcadians did reclaim the manners of such as were sauadge
and unnurtured, by Music. Empedocles Agrigentinus, did mitigate and appease
the furiousnes of a certain young man, with the melodiousnes of his song.
Clinius the Musition as soon as he perceived his melancholic fit to come upon
him, would betake him to his harp, and keep back by this means the motions
of the humor. David also when the evil spirit came upon Saul, made him merry
with his harp, and he found ease thereby.

The belly must be kept soluble
The belly must be kept always soluble in all melancholic diseases, and
therefore if it need we must stir it up by all the means we can.

CHAP. IX. How we must cure such melancholic persons, as have the disease
growing in the brain.
All melancholic diseases are rebellious and very hard to be cured.
DAily experience plainly teaches us, that all melancholic diseases, are
rebellious, long and very hard to cure, and the reason thereof is as clear:
for the melancholic humor is earthie and gross, enemy to the light,
contrary to the two principles of our life, heat and moisture, resisting the
means and remedies, neither giving ear to good advise, nor yet obeying the
wholesome precepts of Physic. And to be short it is the very scourge and
torment of Physicians. Aristotle in his seventh book of Ethikes says, that
melancholic folk have always something which does gnaw and feed upon them:
and this is the cause why they are always running after the Physician, and yet
we ought not to leave them helpless. I will set down in this chapter the most
special remedies that I have been able to observe, together with the order how
such melancholic persons must be handled.

Three sorts of remedies requisite in melancholic diseases.
It seems unto me that for the cure of melancholy, we had need of three
kinds of remedies, that is to say, diminutiues, alteratiues, and
comfortatiues. The diminutiues are either letting of blood, or purgation. As
concerning the letting of blood which is universal, Blood-letting respecting
the whole body.
Galen appoints it to be ministered, in that melancholy which is within the
veins, and throughout the whole habit of the body, and wills that if the
blood issuing show fair and thin, that it be stayed by and by: but in that
melancholy which has his seat in the brain, and which comes of a cold
and dry distemperature, he has forbidden it most expressly. The Arabians
commend in the cure of this kind of melancholy, Blood-letting respecting some
particular parts.
the letting of blood called particular, to the taking away of the conjoined
cause: they open the veins of the forehead, of the nose, and of the ears;
they set cupping-glasses upon the shoulders, having first scarified the place;
they apply horseleaches upon the head, and in all melancholic diseases,
whether essential or accidental; they cause the hemorrhoides to be opened,
having the eleventh Aphorism of the sixth book for their ground and warrant,
which says, that in melancholic and mad men the varicous tumor or
hemorrhoides appearing, do heal the same: but all these particular openings
of a vein have no place in the beginning of this disease. Purging.
We must begin with that other kind of euacuation, which is purgation. It may
be performed by the often using of Clister, Decoctions, Syrupes, and Opiates:
the form of an ordinary Clister for melancholic persons, shall be such as
follows. Take of the roots of Holihocke one ounce, of the leaves of
Mallows, Mercury, (...) Clister.
Violets, and Hops, of each a great handful; of Anise and Linseede, of each
two drammes, of Damask prunes one dozen, of the flowers of Borage and Violets,
and of Barlie a handful: boil all together in clear water, and strain them;
add thereto afterward of Cassia an ounce, of Catholicon half an ounce, of
oil of Violets two ounces, and as much of honey of Roses: make thereof an
ordinary Clister. A potion minoratiue.
The Arabians use in the disease of melancholy, pills of Aloes of Hiera, and
of Lapis lazulus: but I do not so well like of this form as of the liquide:
it were better therefore to use decoctions. This potion may serve in the
beginning for a minoratiue. Take of Licotice half an ounce, of Polypodie of
the oak three drammes, of Borage, Buglosse, Balm, and Hoppes, of each half a
handful, of Anise and Citron seed, of each adramme, of oriental Seen three
drammes, of the three cordial flowers a pugill, boil them all: take of this
decoction four ounces, and infuse therein of Rubarbe a dram and a half: after
the straining of it, dissolve therein of the syrup of Roses an ounce, and of
the syrup of Apples as much: make thereof a decoction, which you must take in
the morning, and keep your chamber. There are some which take in the broth of
a chicken half an ounce of Seen: others an ounce of Cassia, or else the
infusion and expression of ten drams of Catholicum.

The manner of preparing of the melancholic humor.
This slight purgative having gone before, the rest of the humor must be
prepared: for, to think of the rooting out of the preparing of whole at the
first blow forcibly, (as the Emperickes do) were to overthrow the sick
party. We must attenuate, soften, and dissolve the same, and follow the
precept of famous Hippocrates, which says in his Aphorisms, that when we will
purge any body, we must first prepare it and make it fit to flow: for such
preparation there is good use to be made of Iulebes and Apozemes.

An Apozeme
Take of the roots of Buglosse and Elecampane, of the rindes of the roots of
Capers and Tamariske, of every one an ounce, of the leaves of Borage Hops,
Succorie, Fumitorie, Capillus Veneris, crops of Time and Balm, of each a
handful; of Anise, Fennel, and Citron feed, of each two drammes; of the
three cordial flowers, of the flowers of Oranges and of Epithymum, of each a
pugill: boil them all in fountain water, and after you have strained out a
pound and a half, put thereto of the syrup of Hops two ounces, and as much of
the syrup of Fumitorie, and make thereof an Apozeme, clarify it and aromatise
it with a dram of the powder of Cinamome, or of Electuarium de gemmis: it must
be taken four mornings together.

Stronger means for the purging of this humor.
The humor being thus prepared the body may be purged again with the
decoction before appointed, whereto you shall put of Catholicum, or else of
Confectio Hamech, which purges melancholy very well: or ir you please, you
may prepare an Apozeme, which will purge every second time it is taken: the
same which is already set down will serve, if you boil some oriental Seen
and Polypodie in it. If this humor be too rebellious, and that you cannot
purge and avoid it by these benedicts and gentle remedies, you must be forced
to come to such as are stronger. Piolomeus the king used in rebellious
melancholy Electuarium Hieralogadium: but the Hieras do dry over much. The
Arabians commend the pills of Lapi, lazulus, Pillulae Indae, pills of
Fumitorie, and those of Lapis armenus. There are some which make a powder for
melancholic persons, and it is an excellent one. A purgative powder.
Take of Lapis lazulus, well washed in Violet water, an ounce, of oriental Seen
two ounces, of good Polypodie an ounce and a half, of Anise and Citron seed,
half a dram; of Sugar candy three ounces, of the four cold seeds, two
drammes; of the flowers of Elder-tree three drammes: make thereof a powder;
take thereof the weight of two French crowns. All, both Greek and Arabian
Physicians, do appoint in such diseases of melancholy, The use of Hellebor.
as are old and hardly removed, Hellebor should be given. It is true indeed
that we must in this case use discretion, and not to give it in substance: for
the decoction or infusion thereof must be taken, and choice made of that which
is black and good: for the Apothecaries do oftentimes sell for black
Hellebor a kind of Aconitum, which is very hurtful and pernicious, the white
is not to be used at all in these cases: there must also diligent care be had
not to mixc any thing with the Hellebor we use, which has any astringent or
binding faculty, such as are Mirabolanes, least thereby it might be stayed
too long in the stomach. The Poets that have written long ago, have
acknowledged this property of Hellebor that it has against melancholic
diseases, when as they send melancholic persons unto Anticyra where the best
Hellebor grows: and in Homer in his second Odissea, Melampus a great
Physician is brought in healing the four daughters of king Pretus with
Hellebor, who because they would be equal in beauty to Juno, were for a just
punishment of their arrogancy and pride, made fools. Some there be which use
Antimonie prepared: Antimonie.
but all such forcible means must be prescribed advisedly and with discretion.
I could like it better to use milder things, and to reiterate them the oftener,
as a good magistrall syrup, or else some Opiate. A magistrall syrup.
The syrup may be made of the iuyces of Borage, Buglosse, and Apples, with
some Seen: or else you may use the syrup of the Apples of Sabor the king.
There may an Opiate be made after this fashion. Take of good Cassia drawn in
the vapor of the decoction of Mallows, an ounce and a half: or (if you will
have it somewhat stronger) in the vapor of the decoction of black Hellebor,
for so it will retain some little part of the force and virtue thereof:
afterward take of Tamarisk an ounce, of Catholicum six drams, of Seen half an
ounce, and as much of Epithymu^, 3. drams of good Rubarbe besprinkled with the
water of Endive, until it become soft and relenting: incorporate all together,
and mingle them with the syrup of Violets or Apples, and make thereof an
Opiate: whereof you shall take every five days in form of a bole, the
quantity of an ounce more or less, according to the effect and working
thereof. And thus much of purgatiues.

Alteratiue medicines.
The second kind of remedies is such as does alter the melancholic humor, that
is to say; which does take away the distemperature thereof. This humor
offends in coldness and drines, but more in drienes, and this is that very
quality which makes it so rebellious, and hardly to be removed: the
alteration of it the^ does consist in the moistning of the same. That there is
more good done by moystening then by purging of the melancholic humor.
Galen in his third book of diseased parts, as also Trallianus do make more
account of these alteratiues, then they do of the diminutiues, and do
confide^tly profess to have cured more melancholic persons by moystening the
humors then by purging of it. This moystening is accomplished by inward and
outward means: the inward are brothes, apozemes, syrupes. I have sometime
caused a melancholic man to use for a long time together the broth of a
chicken, with Borage Buglosse, Brothes.
Succorie, Burnet, and a little Saunders, and Sassefras, which I caused to be
added thereto: whereupon he found himself exceedingly well amended. The sympe
of Apples, Buglosse, Hops, Syrupes.
and Violets do macerate this humor in very good sort: You may prepare an
apozeme with the same herbs which I have mentioned here above. The use also
of Whay, and Goats or Asses milk will serve well to water and moisten this
humor withal.

Outward remedies.
The outward remedies are either universal or particular; the universal are
bathes. Galen boasts himself to have cured many melancholic persons with
the only use of baths of warm water, Bathes.
or else you may if the whole body be very dry, and the skin very rugged,
make an artificial one with the roots of Holibocks, leaves of Mallows,
Violets, Lettuses and Succorie, with the seeds of Melons and Gourds, Barley,
and the flowers of Violets: you must bathe often, and stay long in at a time, but
not so long as to cause any sweat. At the time of being in the bath you may
have two bags filled with sweet and bitter Almonds, and the seed of Melons,
grossly pownded, and therewith rub all the skin over. If you will make your
bath well, you must put warm water in your bathing tub over night, and there
let it stand and breath till morning, Ointments for the whole body.
at which time you shall go into it. There be many practicioners in Physic
which make such baths of milk only, as also it is oftentimes done in the case
of consumption. In coming forth of the bath, there are some which inioine the
body to be anointed al over with the oil of sweet Almonds, Violets, or new
and fresh butter. Applying of remedies unto the head.
There are which apply remedies unto the head as being the part most affected,
and they use such as do moisten, whether they be lotionsor embrocations, and
these made of warm water, and of the same decoctions, or else of the oils of
the seed of Gourdes, sweet Almonds, and Violets, or else of milk.

Comforting medicines.
The third kind of remedies good in melancholic cases, is of such as do
strengthen and cheer up the spirits, which are (as Auicen says) become wild
and duskish. It behooves therefore to strengthen the brain, and to cheer up
the heart: the which intentions are effected by inward and outward means: the
inward Sytupes, Opiates, Lozenges and pouders: Inward remedies.
the outward are Epithemes, bags and ointments. I will give you an example of
each of them: An excellent Syrope.
The fittest syrup that I have found both for the cheering and moistening of
melancholic persons, is this, which I am about to set down, being first
invented by Mounsieur Castellane mine uncle, and one of the greatest and
happiest Physicians of his time, and ordinarily employed in his calling by
Kings and Queens. Take of the juice of Borage and Buglosse a pound and a
half, of the juice of apples that are very sweet a pound, of the juice of
Balm half an ounce, of Diers grains infused in the former juices a long
time, and after strained out, three drammes; of Saffron half a dram, of fine
Sugar two pounds: make these in a syrup boiled to his height, and aromatize it
with a dram and a half of the powder of the Diamargaritum that is cold, and
four scruples of the powder of Diamber, there must be taken of it evening and
morning two or three spoonefull.

There are many sorts of Opiates, but I will content my self to set down this
one. Take of the Conserve of the roots of Buglosse, Opiates.
and of the flowers of Borage, of each one ounce, of preserved Mirabplanes, and
of the rindes of Citrons condited, of each half an ounce, of the confection of
Alkermes three drammes, of the powders of Diamargariton and of the Electuarie
of precious stones, of each one dram: make thereof an Opiate with the syrup
of Apples, whereof you must take a little in the morning, drinking after it
some Claret wine delayed with the water of Buglosse. I will set down some
receipts of lozenges and powders in the chapter entreating of that melancholy
which is begot amongst the bowels and called the flatuouse or windy
melancholy.

Outward remedies for the cheering up of the spirits.
The outward remedies are applied unto the brain and heart. Unto the brain
there are applied powders, and caps. But in as much as the greatest part of
these aromaticall things are hot and dry, we must use them but sparingly.
Unto the heart we may more boldly apply Epithemes, Bags, and ointments. An
Epitheme for the heart.
Take of the waters of Borage and Buglosse, of each half a pound, of the
waters of Balm and Scabiouse of each four ounces, of good white wine two
ounces, of the powder of cold Diamargaritum one dram, of the confection of
Alkermes three drammes, of the seed of Balm, and Diers grains, of each one
dram; mix al together, and make Epithemes thereof and apply them to the
region of the heart with a piece of scarlet. If liquid Epithemes dislike you,
then you may use a solid one, with the cordial conserues, or else you may
wear bags upon the region of your heart; the descriptions whereof I leave
until I come to the chapter of windy melancholy, where they shall come in
more fitly for the purpose, in as much as those which are troubled with the
windy melancholy, have almost continually the panting and beating of the
heart. And thus much for the three kinds of remedies, which are (in my mind)
needful for the curing of that melancholy which is settled in the brain, being
purgatiues, alteratiues, and comfortatiues.

The means to remedy too much watchfulnes.
There remains as yet unremoved a tedious and trouble some accident which is
continual watching, which now and then whippeth melancholic men so cruelly,
as that thereby many have been plunged into the pit of despair. Wherefore I
will address my self with all the best wits I have or devises I can invent to
set down the means of their comfort. Inward means to procure sleep.
Sleep is procured by inward and outward means. We will have diverse sorts of
the inward, because melancholic persons do love variety. We shall make for
them mundified barlie, a Condite, an Opiate, a Tart, a Restauratiue, a Potion,
a bole, and mass of pills: all given to procure sleep. A mundified barley.
The mundified barley is made with the flower of barley prepared as is meet,
with Almonds which have been infused in Rose water, with the four cold seeds,
the seeds of Poppie, and rosed Surgar. A Condite.
The form of the condite shall be such. Take of the conserues of the flowers of
Borage and Buglosse, of each three drammes, of the pulpe of Gourds confected
and of the rindes of Citrons, of each two drammes, of white Poppie and Mellon
seeds, of each a dram, of rosed Sugar so much as is needful: make thereof a
condite, whereof you shall take at night two or three, spoonefuls. An Opiate.
The Opiate shall be thus made. Take of the conserues of the pulpe of Gourds,
and of the roots of Lettuse, of each an ounce; of the conserve of Roses and
Water-lillie, of each half an ounce; of the powder of the cold Diamargaritum
a dram, of Poppie seed two scruples: make thereof an Opiate with the syrup of
Violets. Of this you must take at night the quantity of a chestnut. For
variety sake you may make a Marchpane. A Marchpane.
Take of sweet Almonds blanched and washed in hot water, and afterward infused
in Rosewater, a pound and a half; of white Poppie seed very new and well
mundified, three ounces; of fine Sugar two pound: work them into a paste, and
with the water of Roses make a Marchpane: of this you shall take when you go to
sleep. There are in like manner resumptiues, Restauratiues.
or restauratiues of a liquide form. Take the white of a good Capon, of water
of Roses and Water Lillies, of each a quart; of Buglosse, Purcelane, and
Sorrel waters, of each four ounces; of the powder of cold Diamargaritum, two
drammes: distill all these together in Mary's bath. The potion may be
prescribed after this manner. A Potion.
Take of the syrup of Violets, Apples and Poppie, of each half an ounce, of
the powder of Diamargaritum, a scruple: make hereof a potion with the decoction
of Lettuses and Endive. And for such as may delight in a bole, this which
follows may serve. A Bole.
Take of the conserve of Roses three drams, of Requies Nicolai, one dram: and
with a little Sugar make a bole. Orelse: Take of the conserve of the flowers of
red Poppie two drammes, Pills.
of new Treacle one dram, and with a little Sugar make a bole. If pills be in
request, then let there be made as follows. Take of the pills of
Houndstongue, or of Styrax, one scruple, let them be moystned with the syrup
of Apples. The Chemists make a Laudanum. But in the use of all these
stupefactiue medicines taken inwardly, we must take heed to deal with very
good advise, for fear that in stead of desiring to procure rest unto the
silly melancholic wretch, we cast him into an endless sleep.

Outward means to procure sleep.
The outward remedies are not altogether so dangerous, and we may frame ten
or twelve sorts of them: as head powders, frontlets, bags, emplasters,
ointments, epithemes, nosegaies, pomanders, and lotions for the legs. Take of
the flowers of red Poppie and red Roses, of each three drams; of Lettuse, A
powder.
Purcelane and white Poppie seed, of each two drams; of red Saunders and the
seed of Coriander prepared, of each a dram and a half: make them all into
powder, and cast it upon the head, the hair being shaued. A Frontlet.
Of the them same powder may a Frontlet be made, putting thereto of the
flowers of Water Lillies and a little Margerome. You may make great bags
after the fashion of pillowes, Bags.
which shall be filled with the flowers of Roses, and the leaves and seeds of
white Henbane. An Epitheme.
You may apply this Epitheme unto the head. Take of the distilled waters of
Lettuse, Sorrel and Roses, of each three ounces; of the powder of cold
Diamargaritum one dram; of red Roses and red Saunders two scruples: make
thereof an Epitheme. Let the ointment be like unto this. An ointment.
Take of populeon half an ounce, and as much of Galens colling ointment; of
oil of Roses an ounce, mix all together with a little vinegar, and therewith
annoint the head, brows and nostrils. You may also make this plaster. An
Emplaister
Take of Castoreum a dram and a half, of Opium half a scruple: mix both
together with a little water of life, and make two small plasters thereof, and
apply them to the temples. You may make Nosegaies of flowers of Violets,
Nosegaies.
Roses, of Willowe and a little Margerome, they must be dipped in rosed
vinegar, and in the juice of Lettuse and Poppie, wherein a little Opium and
Camphire has been dissolved. Or else: Take two heads of Poppie beat together,
Nodules.
tie them up in three nodules or knots: then having in readiness of Styrax three
drams, of Rose water six ounces, and a little Opium: dip these nodules in the
licour, and smell unto them oftentimes. A pomander.
There may also an Apple be made to smell unto. Take of the seed of Henbane,
of the rind of the roots of Mandrags, of the seed of Hemlocke, of each one
dram, of Opium a Scruple, of the oil of Mandrags a little: mix all these with
the juice of Fumitorie and Houseleeke, and make an apple thereof: which if you
smell unto, it will cause you now and then to sleep: put unto these to correct
them a little Amber and Musk. There are some which with good success do
apply Horseleaches behind the ears, Blood suckers or horseleaches.
and having taken away the Horseleaches, they put by little and little a grain
of Opium upon the hole.

Lotions for the legs.
Lotions for the legs do much avail to cause one to sleep. Take of the
leaves of the Orange tree, and of Margerome, of each a good handful; two heads
of white Poppie, of Roses, and Waterlillie flowers, and Camomill, of each a
pugill, boil them all together in two parts of water, and one of white wine:
and herewith you must wash the thighs and legs of the sick party at night,
letting it be good and hot. I think that by this means you may procure sleep
unto the most melancholic man in the world. It is true, that, to prevent that
these cooling things may not altogether quench that small store of natural
heat that is in them, you must cause them to take now and then some cordial
Syrupes, or comfortable Opiates. And thus much for the cure of that melancholy
which chiefly affects the brain. That melancholy which comes of a dry
distemperature of the whole body, is cured almost by the same helps. I come
therefore unto the windy melancholy: but because there is one kind of this
essential melancholy, which happens through raging and fond love, and that
it requires a special manner of curing, I will first speak of the same.

CHAP. X. Of another kind of melancholy which comes by the extremity of
love.
THere is another kind of melancholy very ordinary and common, which the
Greek Physicians call Erotike, The names of amourous melancholy.
because it comes of a fury and raging love; the Arabians call it Iliscus,
and the common sort, the divine Passion; imputing the cause thereof to the
petty god, which the Poets have made so great reports of. Cadmus Milesius (if
we may credit Suydas) has written fourteen great volumes of this subject,
which are not at this day to be found: I will only make two chapters of it,
the one describing the malady, the other the remedies. I will not here
curiously search out the crimologie of love, and why this name Eros was given
unto it; neither will I undertake to define it, seeing very famous and worthy
men have taken the work upon them, but have not brought it to any good end:
neither will I examine the differences or royal descent of the same, let them
that list, read what Plato, Plotinus, Johannes Picus comes Mirandolae, Marius
Equicola, and Leon Hebraeus have written thereof: I will satisfy my self with
the reuailing of one of those thousand effects which it brings forth. I
intend to manifest unto every man by the description of this melancholy, how
greatly a violent and extreme love may tyrannize in commanding both mind and
body.

How love is begotten.
Love therefore having abused the eyes, as the proper spies and porters of the
mind, makes a way for it self smoothly to glaunce along through the
conducting guides, and passing without any perseverance in this sort through
the veins unto the liver, does suddenly imprint a burning disire to obtain
the thing, which is or seems worthy to be beloved, sets concupiscence on
fire, and begins by this desire all the strife and contention: but fearing
her self too weak to encounter with reason, the principal part of the mind,
she posteth in haste to the heart, to surprise and win the same: whereof when
she is once sure, as of the strongest hold, she afterward assaileth and
sets upon reason, and all the other principal powers of the mind so
fiercely, as that she subdueth them, and makes them her vassals and slaves.
Then is all spoiled, The effects of violent love.
the man is quite undone and cast away, the senses are wandering to and fro, up
and down, reason is confounded, the imagination corrupted, the talk fond and
senseless; the silly loving worm cannot any more look upon any thing but his
idol: all the functions of the body are likewise perverted, he becomes pale,
Signs and tokens of amorous melancholy.
lean, souning, without any stomach to his meat, hollow and sunk eyed, and
cannot (as the Poet says) see the night either with his eyes or breast. You
shall find him weeping, sobbing, sighing, and redoubling his sighs, and in
continual restlesnes, avoiding company, loving solitarines, the better to feed
and follow his foolish imaginations; fear buffeteth him on the one side, and
oftentimes despair on the other; he is (as Plautus says) there where indeed
he is not; sometime he is as hot as fire, and upon the sudden he finds
himself as cold as ice: his heart does always quake, and his pulse keeps
no true course, it is little, unequal, and beating thick, changing it self
upon the sudden, not only at the sight, but even at the very name of the
object which he affects. The history of Erasistratus.
By all these tokens the great Physician Erasistratus perceived the disease of
Antiochus the son of Seleucus the king, who was ready to dye for the love of
Stratonica his mother in law. For seeing him to blush, to wax pale, to double
his sighs, and change his pulse so often at the very sight of Stratonica, he
deemed him to be troubled with this eroticke passion; and so advertised his
father. Galen by the very same wile did find out Insta the wife of Boethius
Consul of Rome her sickness and disease, as that it was her burning love she
bare to Pylades. Lo here the effects of this affection, and all such accidents
as accompany this amorous melancholy. Let no man therefore hereafter call it
a divine and sacred passion, if it be not only to signify the greatness
thereof: for the Poets would call the greatest fishes, sacred, and the
Physicians have given the same name unto that bone, which is the greatest of
all the vertebres. Neither let any man call it the sweet passion or affection,
seeing of all other miseries, this is the greatest misery, yea so great as
that all the tortutes which have bin so exquisitely devised by the wit of
tyrants, will never be able to exceed ye cruelty thereof. The cruelty of love.
The Philosopher Thianeus knew well what to say to the K. of Babylon, which
prayed him to invent some cruel torment for the punishing of a gentleman who^
he had found in bed with his paramour: for (says he) let him live, and in time
his love will punish him sufficiently. The Poets have very well laid open unto
us the cruelty of this passion, in that their fained fable of Titius: The
fable of Titius.
who for his exceeding love unto the Goddess Latona, is fained to have his
liver ordinarily fed upon by two gryphens, and the fibers thereof every day to
grow again. But how should we not call this a miserable passion, seeing it
has brought many to such extremity and despair, as that they have killed
themselves. Lucretius the Poet who had written the cure of love, Of such as
have killed themselves for love.
became so mad of love, as that for it he slew himself. Iphis in despair to
win the favor of Anaxaretes, hanged her self. A noble young man of Athens
fell so far in love with a marble picture that was very cunningly wrought, as
that having requested of the Senate that he might buy it at any price that
they would ask, and being denied, as also forbidden to come near unto it, for
that his foolish love did offend all the people: overcome of despair he slew
himself. See here how love corrupts the imagination, and may be the cause
of melancholy or of madness. For in thus busying both the body and mind, it
so dries the humors, as that the whole frame of temperature, especially that
of the brain, is overthrown and marred.

A second kind of amourous melancholy.
There is another kind of amorous melancholy, which is a great deal more
pleasant, as when the imaginations is in such sort corrupted, as that the
melancholic party always thinks, that he sees that which he loves,
running after it continually, and kissing this his idol in the air, daintily
intertaining and welcomming it as though it were present: and, which is
strange, howsoever the thing which he loves be ill favored, yet he thinks
it the most beautiful in the world: The description of perfect beauty.
he is always in hand with the deciphering of the rare beauty therein, he
seems to himself to see long golden locks, finely friseled and curled with
a thousand roundes and winding twirles; a high brow, like unto the bright
heavens, white and smooth, like the polished Alablaster; two stars standing
in the head very clear, resembling the beautiful flowers and sufficiently
defended, casting out in most sweet sort a thousand lovely streams which are
as pearcing arrows; eyebrowes black as the Ebene wood, little and arched like
a bow; a pair of cheeks of white and vermillion color, like unto the purple
lilly and damask rose, showing in their sides a little double trench; a mouth
of coral, having within it two sets of small oriental pearl, white and close
joined, and coming out of it a breath more sweet then Amber and Musk, and
more fragrant then all the odours of Mount Libanon; a chin, having a little
round pit, of an uniform dye, delicate and smooth as the which Satin; a neck
of milk; a throat of snow; a bosom full of gelliflowers; two little apples
like alablaster balls, white puffed up are apt to quiver like a qua^iemire,
though afterward by little and little they falling down all flat, do resemble
the flowing and the ebbing of the Sea; in the midst thereof two knobs of
greenish and carnation-like color, and betwixt this little pair of mountains
a large valley; a skin over all the body like a Jasper or Porphirie, in the
viewing whereof do appear many pretty azuie veins. To be short, this poor
melancholic man goes always imagining and dreaming that the six and thirty
beauties requisite unto perfection are therein, and that with such a grace and
stately majesty, as surpasses all the rest; he doteth continually upon this
object, runs after his shadow, and is never at rest. There are now some
certain years past, since I saw a gentleman overtaken with this kind of
melancholy, he talked being alone unto his shadow, he called it, welcomed it,
kissed it, ran after it every day, and would ask us if ever we saw so fair
and beautiful a thing: and this his disease did thus hold him for three
months, and afterward he was curred thereof. Aristotle makes mention of a
young man named Antiphon, which saw his own picture continually before his
eyes. Some there are which attribute this to the reflection of the beams which
went out of his eyes: but I think rather that it was the weakness and error of
his imagination.

CHAP. XI. The means to cure the loue-foolish and melancholic.
Two ways to cure this disease.
THere are two ways to cure this amourous melancholy: the one is, the inioying
of the thing beloue: the other rests in the skill and pains of a good
Physician. As concerning the first, it is certain that the principal cause of
the disease which is this burning desire, being taken away, the diseased party
will find himself marueilously relieved, though notwithstanding there may
remain behind some certain prints and skarres in the body. Histories. The
first.
So Erasistratus having discovered unto Seleucus the grief of his son
Antiochus, who was like to dye for the love of his mother in law, saved the
life of the young man: for the father having compassion upon his son, and
seeing him in extreme peril of his life, suffered him (as being a Pagan) to
enjoy the use of his own wife. The second.
Diogenes having a son forciblie and ragingly distracted by unbridled lust,
was constrained (after he had consulted with the oracles of Apollo) to suffer
him to enjoy his best beloved, and by this means to heal him. The third, and
that very pleasant.
I have in times past read a pleasant history of a young man of Egypt, who
suffered extreme pinching gripes, for the love of a Curtisane called Theognis,
and yet was not regarded of her, as one that stood upon an excessive sum of
silver. It happened that this miserable loueslaue dreamed on a night, that he
held his mistress in his arms, and that she was altogether at his commund:
whereupon when he a waked, he well perceived that this inward fire which whilome
fed greedily upon him, and thereby about to consume him, was become cold and
utterly quenched, so that he sought not any more after the Curtisane: who when
she was advertised of the whole matter as it stood, caused the young man to be
called before the seat of Justice, alleging for such her fact, this only
reason, namely that she had healed him. Bochor the Judge did by and by appoint
that the young man should bring a purse full of crowns, and power them forth
into a basen, that thereby Curtisane might pay her self of the ringing sound
and color of the crowns, as he had satisfied himself of the sole
imagination. The sentence was well like of all, excepted only the cape
Curtisane Lamia, which showed unto her friend Demetrius, that the dream had
utterly quenched and taken away all manner of Just from the young man, but that
the sight of the gold had inflamed and increased a great deal more Theognis
her desire, and that for this cause the matter was not equally proceeded in. My
purpose in alleging these three histories, is to show that this rage and
fury of erotike love, may be stayed by the inioying of the thing beloved. But
this course of cure being such as neither ought nor can always be put in
practice, as being contrary unto the laws of God and men, we must have
recourse unto the other which depends upon the industry of the good
Physician. The second way to cure the amorous melancholy. Fair words and
cunning speeches.
If therefore it happen unto any Physician to meet with some of these
melancholic patients, thus ravished of love, he must first of all assay to
draw him with fair words from these fond and foolish imaginations, showing him
the danger whereinto he does cast himself headlong, and setting before him the
examples of such as have been overthrown thereby, as not only losing their
lives, that their souls also. If all this do no good, we must by some other
wile, and by the setting a work of diverse men, strive to make him hate that,
which so tormenteth him, as in affirming the thing to be evil, in calling his
mistress, light, inconstant, foolish, devoted to variety, mocking and
laughing to scorn this his grief and corrasiue, disdainful as not
acknowledging his deserts, and one which loves better a base companion to glut
her brutish lust, then to intertaine an honest and chaste love. And look how
deeply you dispraise his Lady, so highly shall you praise himself, declaring
the excellency of his understanding, his worthiness and deserts. If words be
not sufficient and able to cure this inchauntment, as in very deed they can
do very little in place where melancholic conceitednes has taken root, we
must bethink our selves of some other course. Removing, that is to say, the
changing of the air, Change of air.
is one of the rarest remedies, because that under color of that we may
bestow him in some remote place, and send him quite out of the country: for
the sight of his mistress does daily blow up the coals of his desire, and the
only reciting of her name, serves as a bait for his ardent affections to bite
upon. It will be good for him, Exercises.
to lodge in the fields, or in some pleasant house; to cause him to walk
often; to keep him occupied every hour with one or other pleasant pastime; to
bring into his mind a hundred and a hundred sundry things, to the end he may
have no leisure to think of his love; to carry him out a hunting; to the
fenceschoole; to hold him up sometimes with fine and grave stories; sometime
with pleasant tales; and therewith to have merry music: you must not feed
him too full or daintily, least the blood beginning to wax hot, should rouse
up the flesh and thereby renew the old fire. Take away idleness, take away
belly cheer, and quaffing of strong drinks, and without doubt lechery will
fall stark lame.

The Poets faigne that Lady Lechery could never ensnare (notwithstanding all
her wiles and subtle inchauntments) these three Goddesses, Pallas, Diana, and
Vesta: Pallas painteth out unto us the state of warriors; Diana of hunters;
and Vesta of such as are given to fasting and austerenes of life. If all these
plots, and an infinite number more, set down by Nigidius, Samocrates and Ovid
in their books of the remedies of love, prove nothing worth, and that the
body be fallen into such extremity, as that it compels the mind to
follow the temperature thereof: then must we hindle these amorous persons in
such manner, The same course of Physic is to be taken with these amorous ones,
and after which is appointed for the melancholic.
and after the same order which I have appointed for the melancholic in the
chapter going before, and almost with the very same remedies; we must purge at
sundry times, and with gentle medicines the humor, which has graven such a
dry distemperature in the brain; we must moysten him by universal bathes,
and by particularly applying of remedies unto particular places, by an order of
diet that is very moist; you shall feed him with broths, with Almond-milke,
with mundified barley made into a creanie, and with the broth and milk of a
kid. If watching do oppress him, then you shall make your choice out of such
medicines as I have set down against it. You must also sometimes cheer up the
heart and the spirits with some cordial Opiate. Devilish and forbidden means.
There are certain remedies which the old writers have set down for the
cuting of this raging love, but they are devilish, and Christians ought not to
use them. They cause the party to drink of the blood of him or her which is
the object of the mischief, and do warrant that the parties grief shall
incontinently dye and decay. The history of Faustina very strange to consider.
I have read in Julius Capitolinus, that Faustina the wife of Marcus Aurelius
confessing her grief, caused to be assembled all the Chaldeans, Magicians, and
Philosophers of the country, to have a speedy and certain remedy for this
her malady: they in the end gave counsel to cause the teacher of defense
secretly to be slain, and to cause his wife to drink of his blood, and the
same night himself to lie with her. This thing was accordingly put in
practice, and Faustina her fire was quenched: but so, as that of this fiery
conjunction was inge^dred Antoninus Commodus, which was one of the most bloody
and cruel Emperors of Rome, resembling rather the swash buckler than his
father, and which never stirred from amongst the company of masters of
defense. See here how Satan uses every day his malicious crafts, and as it
were a sea of deceivers and brazen faced fellows, which go about abusing the
world.

CHAP. XII. Of the third kind of melancholy, called the windy or flatuous
melancholy, and of his differences.
THere is a third kind of melancholy, which is the sleightest and least
dangerous of all the rest, but the most difficult and hard to be thoroughly
known: for the greatest Physicians do make doubt of his essence, causes, and
particular seat of residence; it is commonly called Hypochondriake or
flatuouse, Why it is called the Hypochondriake or windy melancholy. Diocles,
his opinion.
because it has his seat universally in the region of the body, called
Hypochondria: it is called the windy or flatuouse melancholy, because it is
always accompanied with windines, Diocles supposed it to be an inflammation of
Pylorus, which is the nether mouth of the ventricle, because the party
affected does feel himself greatly oppressed in that place, as also greatly
pained and swelled in the stomach, enduring a vehement heat, and as it were a
burning fire throughout his belly, and much windines, which breaks upward,
with a waterishnes, which ordinarily runs out of the mouth, as if it were
some humor flowing from the brain. Galen his opinion.
Galen in his third book of diseased parts, seems to approve this opinion,
nevertheless it has been confuted and reproved by all the later Physicians:
for that if it were an inflammation of the stomach, it would be accompanied
with a continual sever, and the disease would be sharp, or of a shot crisis:
but we see the contrary; for the Hypochondriake melancholy, is a diuturne
disease, not judged but in longtime, and seldom consorted with an ague.
Theophilus thinks that it is an inflammation of the liver, Theophilus his
opinion.
and of the entrals: if he mean that it is a dry inflammation, called (...),
his opinion is the better to be liked of, but if he understand by inflammation,
the tumor called Phlegmon, which is a swelling (caused of blood) against
nature, it may be condemued in him as well as in Galen for that every Phlegmon
of the liver and guts, is counted in the number of sharp diseases. The
difinition of the Hypochondriake disease.
The most learned Physicians of our time, have defined the Hypochondriake
melancholic, to be a dry and hot distemperature of Mesenterium, the liver
and spleen, caused by an obstruction, coming of gross humors, which being
heated, do breath abroad many vapors, which cause al such accidents as we will
speak of in the next chapter. This definition contains all the essence of
the Hypochondriake melancholy, in as much as it touches and teaches the
parts The parts affected in this disease. The midriffe.
and the causes of the disease. The parts where the Hypochondriake melancholy
is begotten, are the Mesenterium, liver and spleen: the Mesenterium has a
large compass, for it contains a million of veins, an infinite number of
glandules, and all that red substance which is called Pancreas. This
Mesenterium, is as it were the mine of a million of diseases, and especially
of intermitting agues. There may rest and grow hot, the humor causing the
Hypochondriake melancholy, and that not alone in the veins thereof, but
oftentimes in the red substance, called Pancreas, which comes very near unto
the stomach, and lies upon the gut Duodenum or Pylorus: and hereby may
Diocles and Galen be excused, which took the nether mouth of the stomach for
Pancreas, by reason that these two parts do touch one another. The liver.
The other part where the Hypochondriake breeds, is the liver, That the
Spleen is for the most part the seat of this disease.
when it is much heated, and draws from the ventricle the meats therein,
half disgested; or else burns the humors very much, and keeps them in his
own veins: but that part which procures the Hypochondriake melancholy most
of all, is the spleen in as much as nature has made it for the purging of the
blood of feculent and melancholic juice: in such sort as that, if it attract
and draw not the same unto it, or cleanse it not to nourish it self withal,
or expel not that which is superfluous, as in duty it ought: we need not
doubt, but that this gross juice, casting it self into the next veins, does
there take an unnatural heat, and makes a marvelous hurlie-burlie in the
whole order of nature. Thus you may here behold and learn the parts affected
in Hypochondriake melancholy, The cause of the Hypochondriake disease.
that is to say, the Mesenterium, the liver and the spleen. The cause of their
disease, is an obstruction, for the veins of these parts are stuffed and
filled of some kind of humor. This humor is sometime simple, as only a
natural melancholic humor, or a humor adust and made of black choler, or
else a flegmatike and raw humor: sometimes it is mingled of two or three
together, which falls out a great deal more often, but always it is required,
that this humor should grow into some excessive heat, for to cause the
Hypochondriake disease to arise thereof. If the matter be choleric or adust,
it is quickly and easily set on a heat, if it be cold by nature, as is
fleagme and melancholy, the long continuance of it in that place, and the
breathing of it out being hindered, may cast it into a heat, or else there
need no otherthing, but a little leaven (which will be supplied by a small
portion of choler adust) to leaven the whole lump, and set it in a heat: this
heat has been called of old writers (...), in such manner as that we may
define the Hypochondriake disease, to be a dry inflammation of the veins of
Mesenterium, The diverse sorts of this disease.
senterium, the liver and spleen, rising of the suppressing of some gross
humors, from this definition we shall gather all the different sorts of the
Hypochondriake disease: which are taken either from the part affected, or from
the matter, or from the accidents thereof. If we look unto the parts affected,
we shall find three kinds of the Hypochondriake disease: that is, Hepatike,
Splenetike, and Meseraicke. The Hepaticke.
The Hepaticke is caused through the fault of the liver, which draws by his
excessive heat, ouergreat a quantity of crudities from the stomach, and also
it self ingendreth through the same distemperature over hot humors, which it
either retayneth in his own veins, which are in so great number, as that no
man can describe them, or else distributeth them amongst all the branches of
the vein called Porta. The Spleneticke comes through defaulte in the
Spleen, The Splene-t cke.
when it cannot either attract, digest or expel the melancholic humor.
These defects happen when it is too great or too little; or when being puffed
up with wind, it cannot attract or retain all the feculent and gross part of
the blood, whereupon it must needs cast much of it out again, and all the
body grow lean. This is it which Hippocrates has observed very well in his
Epidemikes, when he says, that they who have a great Spleen, become lean of
their body: and the Emperor Traianus was wont to compare the Spleen unto the
Exchequer: for look how the enriching of the Exchequer is the impouerishing
and ruin of the people: even so the greatness of the Spleen, does make a thin
and lean body: the smalnesse also of it coming through default of the
framing faculty, may be an occasion of this accident: for being disabled
thereby to attract or retain all that melancholic humor which it ought, it
is constrained to cast it up again, and to disperse it throughout all
Messenterium. There is a house of great nobility, which is subject unto this
Hypochondriake disease, there have been three or four of them which have died
at the age of thirty five, and no other cause found of such untimely death,
but only the littlenes of the spleen, for it was so little and strait, as
that it could not do his office.

The Mesenteriacke.
The last kind of the Hypochondriake disease, is that which is called the
Meseraicke, which is begotten either in Panchreas, or in the veins and
glandules of the Meseraicke membrane. Hippocrates and many other Physicians, do
acknowledge an Hypochondriake disease, caused of the womb or matrix, after the
suppression of the terms, or some other matter: it causes the same accidents
that the other, and is oftentimes most fierce and furious, because of
merueilous sympathy which the matrix has with all the rest of the parts of
the body.

The second difference.
The second difference of the Hypochondriake disease, is in respect of the
matter: there is one kind which is made of that melancholy, which is cold
and natural, which keeping it self within the veins, and being there pinched
for lack of room, grows hot: another is caused of an adust and burnt
humor; and the third of fleagme, and other raw crudities mixed with some small
quantity of choler. The last difference.
The last difference is taken from the accidents: for there is some kind of
Hypochondriake disease that is slight and easy, and there is some other that
is more churlish and violent. There is some but young and in the beginning, and
there is other some which is come to his state and perfited.

CHAP. XIII. The signs of Hypochondriake melancholy, and the causes of all
the accidents that accompany it.
The accidents of the Hypochondriake disease complete and come to his
perfection.
THe Hypochondriake disease being thoroughly grown and perfected, is commonly
coupled with an infinite number of grievous accidents, which by times hold the
party with such pangs, as that they think to dye every moment: for besides
the fear and sadness they suffer, as common accidents to all manner of
melancholy, they feel a burning in the places called Hypochondria, they hear
continually a noise and rumbling sound throughout all their belly, they are
beaten with wind on both sides, they feel a heaviness in their breast, which
causes them to fetch their breath double, and with a feeling of pain;
oftentimes they spit a clear and thin water; they have a swilling in their
stomach, as though it did swim all in water; they feel an extraordinary
and violent kind of moving of the heart, called the beating of the heart, and
on the side of the spleen, there is something which biteth and beats
continually; they have some little cold sweats, accompanied sometimes with a
little sowning; their face is oftentimes very red, and there appears to them
in manner of a flying fire or flame which passes away; their pulses do change
and become little and beating thick; they feel a wearisomnes and feeblenes
all over their body, and yet more specially in their legs; the belly is never
loose; in the end they grow leaner and leaner by little and little. The
particular causes of all these accidents. The cause of heat.
All these accidents depend upon the general cause which I have set down, but
we must therewithal search and find out the special. The heat and burning
which they feel on the spleen side, on the liver side and about Mesenterium,
comes of the burning of this gross humor, whether it be phlegm or black
choler, which in this his heat coming as it were to boil, is puffed up and
sends his vapors into all the parts near thereabout. The noise which they
hear in every part of their belly, The cause of windines.
comes of the wind which does run to and fro in every place, and does so
much accompany this melancholic disease, as that for this cause old writers
have entitled it the windy melancholy: we will observe in the begetting of
this windines the material and efficient cause. The material is a gross,
black, cholerike or flegmatike humor. The material* cause.
These two humors are almost always mixed in this disease, because that the
liver being ouerheated (as it is ordinarily in Hypochondriake persons)
attracteth and snatcheth from the stomach, which is his very near neighbor,
such meats as are no better then half concocted: so that there is heaped
together a world of crudities within the veins by such attraction of the
liver: as also there is made a brood of hot and burnt humors by the
distemperature of this noble part, in such manner as that thereby is caused to
be continually in the veins some humors that are raw and not sufficiently
concocted, and other some that are over much concocted: the crude and scarce
disgested was attracted too speedily, the over much concocted and burnt was
begotten in the member it self. The weakness of natural heat is the
efficient cause of windines, The efficient cause.
for in moving and stirring of the matter, it is not able to overcome it
thoroughly, and although the agent or natural heat should be strong enough, yet
not being like unto the matter in proportion, it may be called weak.

The cause of heaviness.
The heaviness which they feel in their breast, comes either of wind or
gross vapors, which bear down the muscle called Diaphragma, the principal
muscle of respitatio^, or else they pitch themselves upon the muscles running
betwixt rib and rib; or lastly, within the coats of the ribs either inward or
outward: and hence come those great tormenting pains which rise up to the
shoulders, and go down again oftentimes unto the arms, by the continued
proceeding of the membranes, and sympathy of the muscles. The cause of the
water and swilling which they have within them.
The water which melancholic persons do ordinarily avoid at their mouth, is
one of the most infallible tokens of the Hypochondriake disease, if we will
believe Diocles the cause thereof must be imputed unto the coldness of the
stomach, which fills all full of crudities. This coldness comes of the
excessive heat of the liver, which draws the chylous matter out of the
stomach altogether unprepared, wastes and consumes all the fat of the
stomach, and seedeth rauenously like a gulligut upon the heat of all the
parts near about it. I add further, that oftentimes while the humor is near
unto boiling, the crudest parts thereof are cast back again into the
stomach, and cools it, in such sort as that we may observe therein the two
kinds of cold, that is to say, the privative and the positive, as the
Philosophers are wont to speak. The cause of the beating of the heart.
The inordinate motion of the heart and all the arteries is caused of the
vapor of this matter so stirred, which setting upon the heart with great
force, and seeking the overthrow thereof, as commonly happens in every
conflict and fight, causes it to bestirre it self with a double diligence,
but so, as that therein it loses oftentimes his just and well proportioned
stroke, and thereby the pulses also fail sometimes in that just measure and
time which they ought to keep. The causes of the rednes and flushes appearing
in their face. The cause of their cold sweates.
The rednes which appears in the face, the universal beatings over all the
body, and the tickling stingings which they feel in every place, as it were
little Pissemires, arises either of a sharp and subtle wind, or else of
vapors sent from the lower parts. Cold sweates happen when the vapors rising
from the places, called Hypochondria, as from a fournace do pitch themselves
upon the skin, which is a great deal more cold, and therefore does congeale
and turn them into a thicker substance. The cause of their lassitude.
The lassitude or wearisome feeblenes, which they feel in all their parts,
comes partly of vapors, which running amongst the empty spaces of the
muscles, and mingling themselves with the substance of the sinews, do make
them more loose and lanke, and make as it were a sencelesnes: and partly of
crudities and waterish parts, which are in the blood. The cause of their
leanenes.
Leanenes happens because there is defect and want of sufficient store of
good and laudable blood. The belly is hard and given to costiuenes, by reason
of the excessive heat of the liver, which wastes all the moisture of the
excrements.

CHAP. XIIII. Very worthy and not able histories of two persons grieved with
the Hypochondriake disease.
THere are found sometimes diseases so strange in their kind, as that even
the best able and most sufficient Physicians know not what to judge of them. I
have feene two Hypochondriake persons so raging mad, as that the former ages
never saw the like, and it may be the ages to come shall not see such other two
of a long time. The first history.
There was at Mompelier an honest Citizen of a melancholic disposition, and by
constitution most subject to black choler, who having been grieved by the
space of two or three years, with a milder and lighter kind of windy
melancholy, suffered the disease to grow so far, as that at length he saw
himself brought to this extremity. He felt twice or thrice every day a light
kind of moving all over his belly, but chiefly on the side whereupon the
spleen lies: there was also so great a noise made in his belly, as that not
only the sick party, but also all those that stood by heard the same. This
rumbling would last about half a quarter of an hour, and afterward upon the
sudden, a vapor or wind seazing upon the midriffe and the breast, did lie
so wonderfully heavy upon him, and so accompanied with a dry cough, as that
all men would have thought him to have been short breathed. This accident
being somewhat lesned, all the rest of the body was in such sort shaken, that
you would have judged it like unto a ship tossed with a most raging storm: he
heaued and set, and his two arms were seen to move, as if they had endured
some conuulsion. In the end, these winds having coursed through his whole
body, and ransackt every part thereof, brake forth with so great violence at the
mouth, as that all those that stood by were afraid, and then the fit ceasing,
the sick party felt himself relieved. And yet this is not all, for two or
three months before he died, he had every day two or three little and light
soundes, his heart fainted and failed him by reason of an extreme great desire
that he had to piss, and when he had pissed, became to himself again: but
the fiercenes of the sickness was so great, that the Soul in the end was
constrained to forgo her lodging. I was called to the opening of the body,
because that ordinarily I had counseled him in his sickness, together with
one of my fellow Physicians, Mounser Hucher Chancellor of our University,
whom I am willing for honor sake to name, and as knowing him to be one of the
most learned and best practiced Physicians of our times. I found his breast
half full of black and stinking water, therewith the left ventricle of the
heart was all filled, and in the trunk of the great artery, a man might see
the same color. At which time I calling to mind a notable place in Galen, in
his sixth book of diseased parts, I showed unto the company, that the cause
of these faintings, and of his earnest desire to piss, came of this cursed
humor, which having pained the heart, passed from thence by the arteries unto
the reins, A worthy observation for the defense of Galen.
and from thence unto the bladder. It was my intent to stand upon this by the
way, that so I may take occasion to defend Galen against the false accusations
of young Physicians, which think that putrified and purulent matter gathered
in the breasts of those which are troubled with the disease Empyema and
Pleurisies, cannot purge and convey it self away by the heart or arteries. I
have handled this matter more largely in the third book of my Anatomicall
works.

The second history.
The other history is also very strange, I observed it this winter at Towers,
and was called to counsel about the same, with Mounser Anselmeau, Valeseau
and Vertunian, very learned Physicians, and of great experience. A young Lord
ever since he was eight or nine years old, was troubled with this
Hypochondriake disease: he heard every day about nine of the clock in the
morning, a little noise on his spleen side: afterward he perceived avapour to
rise which made all his breast and face red, and seized the top of his head,
the veins of his temples did beat very forciblie, the veins of his face were
puffed up, and at the corners of his brows where the veins do end, he felt
an extreme pain, which passed not the breadth of a shilling, the rednes ran
all along his left arm, even unto the fingers ends, and was like a Saint
Anthonies fire or cholerike tumor, called Erisipelas, the right side went
altogether scorfree. All the time of the fit, he was so cast down, as that he
was not able to speak a word, tears trickeled down his cheeks abundantly,
and out of his mouth ran an incredible quantity of water: without he burned,
and within he was cold asyce: his left leg was all full of swollen veins;
and that which I find most strange; on the left side of the head, where the
hard and rockie bone grows, there was a piece of a bone carried and sunk
somewhat inward, and that without any apparent cause, as blow, or fall going
before, neither could he suller one to touch him in that place: the disease
has hitherto been so rebellious, as that all the remedies which the best
learned Physicians have appointed for him, could never find the way to assuage
and cure it. It was agreed upon by all our consents, Or new remedies devised of
our own brains.
that it should be impugned by extraordinary remedies, and by inward cordials,
whereof we have not as yet heard what is the success. See how these gross
burnt, and melancholic humors, continuing in the veins of the liver,
spleen, and Mesenterium may cause an infiuite number of strange accidents, and
are the occasion of a very great jar and strife, to the disturbing of all
that good order and government which should be in the whole body.

CHAP. XV. The cure of the Hypochondriake disease.
THere are necessary for the curing of the Hypochondriake disease, two sorts
of remedies. The one to be appointed and used when the fit is not, and they are
called preservatives: the other are to be used in the time of the fit, even
then when the party is haunted of all these accidents: but I will begin with
the former. The preserving of a man from this disease, To preserve a man from
the Hypochondriake diseease. Euacuating medecines. Blood letting.
is attempted by three kinds of remedies, namely, Diminutiues, Alteratiues,
and Corroboratiues. The Diminutiues are letting of blood and purging:
universal Phlebotomie may serve to correct the hot distemperature of the
liver, and to empty away some part of melancholic blood; it must be done upon
the Basilike vein, which the Arabians call the black vein. The opening of
particular veins, as the Hamorrhoids is counted amongst the number of the most
famous and sure remedies for the cure of the Hypochondriake, in as much as they
empty the spleen, and all the Meseraicke membrane. There are some which
praise the opening of that vein which goes to the little finger of the left
hand, which is called Saluatella. Furging.
The other diminutiue is performed by purgation, which must not be strong,
least this humor should grow more fierce. You must purge therefore very
gently, and at several times. The purgations must be such as purge fleagme
and melancholy, because these are the two humors which do most offend: Seen
and Agaricke have the chief and principal place. I have described in the
chapter of the first melancholy, the receipts of many purgations which may
serve here in this place, but for as much as the humor causing the windy
melancholy, is compound, pound, we must beforced to set down some other fort.
A magistrall Syrup.
I like and approve of magistrall syrupes and Opiates greatly, and they may be
framed after this fashion. Take the roots of Buglosse and Asperagus, the
rindes of the roots of Capers-tree and Tamariske, of each an ounce, the roots
and leaves, of Succorie, Borage, Buglosse, Hops, Fumitorie, Ceterach, Maidens
hair, of each a Handful, of Sea wormwood and Balm a pugill, of Licorise and
Corans washed in warm water, of each an ounce, of the seeds of Citrons,
blessed Thistle and Endive, of each two drammes, of the three cordial flowers,
of the flowers of Succorie, of the crops of Time and Epythymum, of each a
pugill, boil them all in a sufficient quantity of clear water, and having
strained it well, take two pintes thereof, and add thereto of the infusion of
oriental Seen, made in the former decoction, with a dram of Cloves, an ounce
and a half of the infusion of Agaricke, made in the water of Minthes, with a
scruple of Ginger, and with a sufficient quantity of Sugar, boil them all
together, to the height of a syrup, which you shall keep for your ordinary
use. Hereof you must take two ounces once every month, or twice, with the
broth of a Chicken, wherein are put Borage, Buglosse, Hops, and the Capillar
herbs: you may make a syrup with the iuyces of the same herbs, and put
thereto the same laxatiues. An Opiate.
The Opiate that I have set down, may serve here, but it may be made of a far
other fashion, which purges most gently. Take of the juice of Mercury well
purified, as much as shall need, infuse therein for the space of four and
twenty hours, two ounces of Oriental Seen, and causing them to boil once,
afterward strain them strongly, and after boil the licour strained out, with
Sugar, till it come to the form of an Electuarie, whereunto you shall add of
Cassia new drawn out of the cane, two ounces, of Epithymum, half an ounce, of
Cloves made in powder, two drammes, the mixing all well together, you shall
make an Opiate whereof you may take half an ounce or more.

They which cannot use decoctions nor Opiates, shall take pills, The extraction
of Seen to be made into pills.
made of the extract of Seen, Agaricke and Rubarbe, for other pills are not so
fit in this disease. Take of good Polypodie four ounces, the roots and leaves
of Succorie, Buglosse, Fumitorie, Hops, of each a handful, of damask Raisines
a dozen, of the three cordial flowers one handful: make a decoction unto a
pint, and boil therein two ounces and a half of Seen, of Epithymum six
drammes, of good Agaricke half an ounce: all these having infused together one
whole night, strain and press them out very strongly, putting thereto of good
Rubarbe, which shall be infused in the foresaid decoction with a little
Cinamome, half an ounce: afterward you shall put all this together upon hot
ashes, you shall thereupon dry them, til they come to a reasonable thick
consistence, and then putting thereto of Epithymum three drams, you shall make
all up into a mass of pills, which will purge very gently if you give thereof
at one time the quantity of four scruples. And let these serve for gentle and
easy purgations; only you may add hereunto the often use of Clisters, which
may serve for the windy melancholy. But for as much as this humor is gross,
and for the most part lurking in the most inward veins, it is not very easy
to purge it well, if it be not first prepared: we must come therefore unto
the second kind of remedies, which we have called Alteratiues.

Inward Alteratiues.
The alteration to be made must consist in moystning and making thin of this
humor: this may be done by inward and outward remedies. Apozemes.
The inward are Apozemes, which must be somewhat opening because of
obstructions, and it must be looked unto with great care, that they be not made
with too hot a fire. It will be very fit to make them of such herbs as
properly respect the liver and the spleen, and amongst the rest we must not
forget Wormwood: for all good practitioners do confidently affirm, that the
only decoction of Wormwood has preserved an infinite number of persons from
the windy melancholy. It will not be amiss to lay in steep these gross
humors, and for the opening of the vessels to command to be used the
decoction of the root China with a little Sassafras for the space of twelve or
fifteen days. The use of the root China. Broths.
Broths that do alter and moysten the humor, the manner of living and use of
milk will serve marueilously well for the preparing and moystning of this dry
humor.

Outward alteratiues.
As concerning outward remedies, bathes for the whole body deserve to be most
chiefly accounted of: there may fomentations also be applied to the spleen,
and all over Mesenterium, as also ointments and liniments. The fomentations
must be mollifying, somewhat opening and making thin or apt to attenuate,
having mixed therewithal some carminatiues or things to break wind: the
manner of making them is common enough. The oils of Capers, bitter Almonds,
Broom, Elder, Lillies, Of the berries.
Camomil, and Danewort berries, are most fit and proper. The last kind of
remedies is of such as are corroboratiues, Comiortable medicines.
for there are in this disease of the windy melancholy many parts that are
much weakened, having bin branded with this humor: as the heart, the stomach and
the brain. The weakness of the heart is caused through the beating and light
faintings ofthe same; the weak stomach fills all full of cruditie; the
weakened brain causes that the imagination and reason are oftentimes troubled
in this disease. We must therefore have regard unto these parts. Means to
comfort the heart. An Opiate.
The heart is strengthened by inward and outward means: the inward, are
Opiates, Condites, and Lozenges. Take the conserve of the roots of Buglosse,
and of the flowers of Borage, of each an ounce; of the flesh of Mirobalanes and
of the rindes of Citrons confected, of each half an ounce; of the confection
of Alkermes two drammes; Confectionis laetificantis.
of Pearl and of the powder of Mirth, of each one dram: make thereof an
Opiate with the syrup of Apples, whereof you must take twice or thrice every
week, with a little of the water of Buglosse. Take of the powder of the
electuarie of precious stones and of Mirth, of each a dram; Lozenges.
of the confection of Alkermes half a dram; of Pearl and Emerald made in
powder, of each one scruple; of Sugar dissolved in the water of Buglosse or
Balm so much as needs, make up Lozenges of the weight of 3. drams: you must
take hereof evening and morning twice or thrice every week.

For such as are more delicate and dainty, there are some that make
confections of Musk. Musk-cordials.
Take the third part of a Nutmeg confected, of the rindes of Citrons three
drammes, and as much of Mirobalanes confected, of Ambergrise half a dram,
and as much of Musk, of Sugar the double quantity of all the rest, and with
the muscilage of Gum Tragacanth drawn in the water of Buglosse make
Muscardins. You must not often use these hot medicines in the Hypochondriake
disease, for fear of moving and enraging of the humor.

Outward remedies. Liquide Epithemes.
The outward remedies to fortify the heart withal, are liquide and solid
Epithemes, oils, ointments and bags. Take the waters of Buglosse, Balm and
Roses, of each four ounces; of white wine an ounce and a half; of Dyers
grains, of cordial flowers, of each a dram; of the powder of Diamargaritum
and Diamber, of each half a dram; of Saffron half a scruple: mix all
together and make thereof Epithemes, which you shall apply unto the heart.
Solid Epithemes.
Take of the conserve of the flowers of Borage, of Roses, and a Balm, of each
two ounces, of the confection of Alkermes and of the Iacinth, of each two
drammes, of the powder of precious stones and of Mirth, of each half a dram:
make thereof a solid Epitheme in form of a cataplasme, with the water of
Balm, or of the flowers of Oranges, and this you shall spread upon a piece of
scarlet, Oils.
and apply it to the heart. Take the oil of lesamin and of Costus one ounce,
of Amber grise three grains, chafe therewith the region of the heart, or else
provide you some natural Balm. An ointment.
Take of the flowers of Camomile, Rosemarie and Orange tree, of each two drams,
of Ziloaloe, of sweet Saunders, of each one dram, of the oil of lesamin and
natural Balm, of each one ounce; of Amber and Musk six or seven grains:
make hereof an ointment with a little white wax, and annoint therewith the
region of the heart. Bags.
Take of the leaves of Balm, of the flowers of Borage and Buglosse of each
half a handful, of the rindes and seed of Citrons two drams, of the seed of
Balm, Basil, and Cloves, of each a dram; of the powder of Pearl, Emerauld
and lacynth, of each half a dram; of the bone of a Hearts heart one dram, of
red and yellow Saunders one dram, of good Amber four or five grains: pound
them all and make a stomacher of red taffata well quilted, and wear it
ordinarily upon the heart. Thus much concerning the proper remedies as well
inward as outward for the strengthening of the heart, and taking away of such
weakness, as commonly happens to them that have the windy melancholy.

Means for the strengthening of the stomach
The other part to be strengthened is the stomach, and to prevent that it may
not beget such great store of crudities, you shall use powders helping
disgestion, and certain oils properly used in such cases for the annoynting
thereof: The digestive powder must not be too hot. A digestive powder.
Take of Anise and Fennel confected of each three drams, of the rindes of
Citrons confected one dram, of prepared Pearl and red Coral, of each one
half a dram, of fine Cinamome two scruples, of rosed Sugar four ounces: make
them in powder, and take thereof a spooneful always after your meat.
Outwardly you may strengthen the stomach, Means to be applied outwardly to
the stomach.
by annoynting it with the oil of Nutmeg, Spikenard, Wormwood, or with some
bag made of Wormwood, Balm, Cloves, Macis, Cinamome, red Roses, and such like
powders: it is meet that diligent care be had that they be not applied upon
the place of the liver, because the hot distemperature of this part is
commonly the original of all Hypochondriake diseases. And for this cause you
may anoint the liver with the ointment of Roses and Saunders well washed in
Succorie water: or else you shall apply thereupon Epithemes of the waters of
Succorie, Endive, Sorrel, the seeds of Endive, cordial flowers and red
Saunders. As concerning the brain which is weak, to the end it may not be
subject to so great quantity of vapors, you may strengthen it with powders
appropriate for the head, and slight parfumes.

And thus much as concerning preservatives which are to be used when the fit is
not, and which without all doubt will keep the fit from coming: for taking a
way the cause of accidents, it must needs fall out that the effects cease.
Remedies to be used in the access of the disease.
But when the fit of the windy melancholy shall put the sick party in
pains, you must use other means, which the Physician shall alter and vary
according to the accident, which is most strong and urgent. As, if it be
feeblenes, Remedies and helps against feeblenes.
you shall leave to do all other things, and only strengthen the heart, and
that by using the remedies before described. As, you may take of the confection
of Alkermes, of bread dipped in wine, of Lozenges, cordial Opiates, and the
rindes of Citrons. You shall also apply unto the heart, liquide and dry
Epithemes, oils, baulmes, ointments and bags. Remedies against oppression
through windines.
If heaviness (which is the most common accident in the windy melancholic, as
that which is caused of the gross vapors, or of the wind which waigheth
down the midriffe and membranes) do lie grievously upon the party; it will
be good to chafe and rub the thighs and legs lightly, to minister a Clister to
break windines, to apply great cupping glasses upon the region of the spleen,
upon the navel and all over the belly: and if the grief of these winds be
very great, you may take a spoonefull of Ros Solis, or Cinamome water
distilled, or Aquacoelestis, or else two or three drops of the essence of Anise
seed in a little broth very hot, or a little Treacle and Mithridate: if the
wind do continue unremoved, and will not stir out of the breast, you shall
remove them with some bags applied very hot, and these shall be made of the
flowers of Camomile and Melilot, of the crops of Dill, of Millet and fried
Oats. You may in like manner apply upon the region of the spleen
fomentations, which will resolve and waste some part of these gross vapors.
These are the three sorts of melancholy, which ancient writers have delivered
unto us, that is to say, that which has his seat in the brain, that which
comes of the sympathy of the whole body, and that which arises ordinarily
from the places about the short ribs, which is more common then either of the
other, and which is so often happening in these miserable times, as that there
are not many people which feel not some smatch thereof. I come to the third
disease of Madame Duchess of Vzez, which is the Rheum.

THE THIRD DISCOVRSE, WHEREIN IS HANDLED THE breeding of Rheumes, and how they
are to be cured.
CHAP. I. That the brain is the seat to cold and moisture, and by consequent
the fountain of rheumes and distillations.
IT is not without cause that Hippocrates (that great oracle of Greece) that
written in diverse places, That the brain is the mansion of cold and moisture.
that the brain is the principal seat of cold and moisture: for if we look
unto his marrowie substance, his cold temperature, his round form, hollow and
somewhat long like to the fashion of a cupping glass, and his high situation,
receiving all the vapors of the inferior parts: we shall find that all these
dispose it and make it apt to beget and contain great quantity of water. The
substance of the brain was of necessity to be soft and marrowie, that so it
might the more easily take the stamp of forms: and to the end that sinews
which must spring and rise from thence, might with least annoyance and pain
bend or bow themselves. But indeed this marrowie substance is not so called for
any resemblance it has with the marrow in the hollow parts of other bones: for
it serves not for nourishment unto the skull; it melts not with fire nor
consumes; his original is more excellent; for it is made with the other
parts, that are of the purest and finest portion of the two seeds. The
temperature of the brain must be cold, Why the temperature of the brain is
cold.
thereby to temper the spirits of sense and motion, to resist their aptnes to
be wasted and spent, and to keep that this noble member (which is commonly
employed about so many worthy actions) should not set it self on fire, and
make our discourses and talk rash and headie, and our motions out of order, as
it befalls them which are frenticke. It has often astonished me to think, how
that great Philosopher Aristotle, Aristotle his error.
durst say, that the brain was made cold, only to cool the heart, not
acknowledging any other use of this his temperature. If the time and place
would permit me to confute his error, I would make it appear that the heel
has more force to cool the heart, then the brain: but fearing to wander too
wide out of my way, I will refer the reader unto that which Galen has
written in his eight book of the use of parts. I will follow the leuelling
line of my discourse, and say that the brain being of a soft substance and of
a cold and moist temperature (being compared with the rest of the parts of the
body) does beget many excrements: That the brain does beget great store of
excrements of it self.
and for that it is nourished with a cold and raw blood, there must needs
remain great surplussages, and so it cannot but beget great store of
superfluities: in such sort as that of it self and of it own proper nature it
is continually disposed, to beget and contain water. It be gets much also
in respect of his shape and situation. His form which is round, hollow and
long, after the manner of a cupping glass, draws unto it from all the parts
of the body their exhalations. His situation which is aloft does easily
receive them: so that these hot vapors falling into a part or member that is
more cold, do grow thick and turn into water. As we see the vapors rising,
upon the fire kindled in the parts about the short ribs, when they come to the
skin (which is more cold) to congeale and turn to sweat: Or a s exhalations
drawn up by the heat of the Sun, do thicken in the middle region of the
air, and turn into rain, hail, and snow. See then how the brain both of it
self, as also by accident, is apt to engender excrements, and how in every
living thing it may be called the principal seat of cold and moisture: but
chiefly in man, for as much as according to the variety of the animal
functions which he executes, he abounds with greater quantity of brain,
then any other living thing does besides.

Two sorts of excrements.
But these excrements (if we believe Hippocrates and Galen) are of two sorts;
the one gross, and the other refined. The subtle and refined do breathe out
by insensible vapors; the gross do stand in need of troughs and channels for
to rid them by. Conuciances for the emptying of the said excrements.
Nature has so prouidently forecast for them both, as that no man can but
marvel at her industrious pains taken therein: for, to help and further the
exhalation of the thinner and refined, she has pierced the skull, and made all
those seames which we see therein, which stand in like stead to the body, as
a chimney or breathing place does to a house: and for the gross excrements,
she has framed two conueiances and particular water draughts, by which all the
water-poole does empty it self, the one of which betaketh it self unto the
nose, and the other unto the roof of the mouth. That in the palate is the more
common of the two, The conueyance unto the palate of the mouth.
and it rises from the third ventricle of the brain, it is wide above, and
growth narrower and narrower, like a funnel: and that is the cause why the
Anathomists do call it Infundibulum. By this channel all the waterie
substance of the upper ventricles do purge themselves, and betake themselves
to a certain glandule called the spitting kernel, which drinks up like a
little sponge all their water, and after suffers it to glide away very
smoothly through many pretty little clefts, which are to be seen by the side
of the feate of the bone called Sphenoides, and so from thence betake
themselves to the palate.

The conueyance carried unto the nose,
The other channel is led along to the nose: these be the two bunches of the
brain, which are fashioned like unto paps. Their principal use is to receive
the smells, and to convey them unto the brain: but when there is great quantity
of excrements, nature does offer them some hard measures, in causing to run
down by these two bunchie excrescences the waterish humors, which otherwise
do pass by some part of the bone called Ethmoides, which is pierced in manner
of a searce. These are the two conducts, I mean the nose and the palate, which
nature has ordained for the purging of the brain.

There are some others, but not ordinary, which Hippocrates has well observed
in his Book of Glandules, as the eyes, Extraordinary conueyances.
ears, spinall marrow, veins and sinews: but these do serve but at such
times, as things are all out of order, and that the natural government of the
brain is quite perverted.

CHAP. II. What this word Rheum does signify, what manner of disease it is,
and in what the essence thereof consists.
IF the brain be of a good temperature, it will not engender any excrements,
but such as are natural to it, and accordingly avoid them every day by such
passages as nature bath assigned it: but and if it be distempered, it will
gather a great deal more then it ought, which either of their own weightines
(such is their elementarie form) will fall down into the lower parts, or else
will be thrust out into some other part, by the virtue expulsive of the brain,
which shall feel it self oppressed, either with the quantity or evil
quality of the same. This falling down of humors in what manner so ever it
be, What is meant by the word rheum.
is generally called of the Greeks a Catarrhe, which signifies as much as
distillation. I know very well, that there is a more strict signification of
this name, and that as Galen observes very well in his third of the causes of
accidents, a Catarrhe is properly when the humor falls down into the mouth:
but I will rest my self in this place with the most common signification, and
will call all manner of falling down of humors from the brain, into what part
soever it be, a Catarrhe, rheum, or distillation.

Rheum if we believe Galen, is an accident of the third kind, that is to say,
That the rheum is an accident.
an error in the excrements: this accident ordinarily follows another, and
that is the weakening of some action; the action in this case weakened or hurt,
is concoction. For the brain not being able to digest his nourishment well,
ingendreth greater store of superfluities then it ought. This disease that
causes this accident.
The concoction offended, being an accident: does immediately depend upon some
disease. I think that this is for the most parta cold and moist
distemperature; a dry distemperature may by accident sometimes be cause
hereof, as in detayning the vapors, and hindering them from passing any
further; a hot distemperature also may be the cause in resolving the humors
present, and too much drawing of the vapors absent, but this happens but
seldom. The brain then is the part that is principally diseased in the case
of rheumes. The disease is a distemperature, which immediately hurts the
digestion of the member distempered, and of this hurt of disgestion comes
that, which is amiss in the excrement. The definition of rheum.
But to understand the nature of a rheum, it is needful to play the
Philosopher in this sort. A rheum* or distillation, is no other thing then the
moving of humors from one place to another, which the Philosophers call
local. But in every local motion, Five things to be noted in a rheum.
Aristotle has observed five things in his Physic: The moveable, that is to
say, the thing which is moved; the moving, that is to say, the thing which does
make the motion; and three terms or limits, as the place from whence the
motion began, the place by which the motion was made, and the place where such
motion stayed and ended. In rheumes the moved, is a humor of what condition
soever it be, as whether hot or cold, gentle, sharp, salt, thin, 1. The
moved.
thick, simple or compound. The mouer of this humor, 2. The motive or mouer.
and causer of it to change his place, (which is called in one word the motive)
is twofold, the one inward, and the other outward. Again, the inward is
twofold: the form of the humor, and the foul, The inward mouer.
that is to say, the power expulsive: the humor if it follow his nature* and
clementarie form, must evermore of necessity fall downward, because it is
heavy and weighty. But it often falls out that the humor being no longer
within the power and jurisdiction of the soul (as when the retentiue faculty
is altogether weakened) falls down of it self, having no other motive of
such motion, but only his own form or weightines. So we see the most part of
them which die, to be smothered with a rheum, the brain having altogether
lost his force, and being (as it were) resolved. The other original that
moves the humors being inward, is the soul; for nature has given unto every
living part a virtue expulsive, to expel whatsoever may annoy it. The brain
then (being stirred up, either by the abundance of the humor which oppresses
it, or by the quality which stingeth and biteth it) straineth it self to
expel it, The outward mouer.
and to thrust it from it, as far as ever* it can. The outward motive is all
that which from without may pinch and press together, relaxe or loosen, or
shake the brain: the cold air presses the brain together, and causes the
humors to fall down; the air and bathes that are hot, do loosen and
resolve the humors; strokes falls, and violent passions of the mind, may shake
the humor which is within the brain, and make it change his place. And thus
much for the moving or motive. It remains that we find out the three terms
or bounds within which every local motion is bounded. The place from whence
the humor begins to move, The end whereas the motion begins.
is within, and without the brain. The humor oftentimes keeps within the
ventricles, and the whole substance of the brain, and begins to depart
from thence: sometimes it keeps without the brain, betwixt the bone and his
membrane, and causes outward distillations. The places by orthrough, The
bounds through which.
which the humor falls (which is the second bound) are the ordinary and
extraordinary passages of the brain, the ordinary are the nose and the
Palate: the extraordinary are the eyes, ears, sinews, marrow, veins,
arteries, and space which is betwixt the bones and the membranes, or the spaces
of the muscles. The bounds, where it ends.
The term and limit where the humor ends his course, may be any part of
the body, provided that it be in an inferior region, or place that is lower
then the head, and therewithal weak; for you shall never find a rheum to
rise from a lower part upward. And thus much for the unfolding of the
definition of a Rheum, let us now come unto his differences.

CHAP. III. The differences of a Rheum.
Differences of rheumes according to the matter that makes them.
THe principal differences of rheum, are taken from the matter that falls
down; from the parts receiving or sending, from the accidents accompanying the
same, and from the manner of their generation. The matter of al rheumes is a
humor: I call a humor all that which is actuallie liquid, and swimmeth. But
in the humor we may observe many things: the substance, temperature, quality,
taste, and mixture, and from every one of these we shall draw some differences
of rheumes. The substance or consistence of the humor (for so Physicians are
accustomed to speak) is either thin and subtle, The first difference drawn
from the substance of the humor. The second difference from the temperature.
or gross and thick, or indifferent, and betwixt both. There are then some
rheumes that are subtle, thin, and sharp, and there are others more thick.
The temperature of the humor is hot or cold, so then there are hot, and
there are cold rheumes; but cold rheumes are more common, and are begotten of
a cold and moist distem perature of the brain: the cold distemperarure
weakeneth the concocting faculty, and causes the brain to gather more
excrements then it needs, and that it cannot digest the remainder of his
cold nourishment. The moist distemperature weakeneth the retentiue faculty,
and suffers the humors to fall down, although they be not superfluous.
Signs of a cold rheum.
Men may discern this cold rheum by many signs, for the humor that falls
down, is nothing sharp or pricking, the brain is drowsely inclined, the eyes
daseled, the hearing heavy, the nostrils stopped, all the senses dull, the face
pale, the body slow, heavy and lumpish, because that the strength of the
arms and legs, comes of the stiffenes of the muscles and sinews, but in
this case the sinews are softened, and as it were relaxed, because the brain
which is their common original and fountain, does swim all in water. The
Physician shall observe yet for his further assurance, the temperature, age,
dwelling place, season of the year, and order of life: for if the body be of
a cold temperature, if it be old, if he dwell in cold, waterie and marishie
places, and that it be in winter; if he eat ordinarily of raw fruits, of
moist and cold victuals, and if he live an idle and slothful sitting life,
we need not doubt but that it is a cold rheum. There be also hot rheumes,
Hot rheumes.
howsoever that many learned Physicians deny it, for we are confirmed in the
contrary, both by the authority of Hippocrates, and our own experience.
Hippocrates makes mention of a summer squinancie, which comes of a subtle,
sharp, and hot distillation: and we see come forth at the nose oftentimes, a
yellow and choleric humor, which takes off all the skin, and it is
engendered ordinarily of choler in the brain, which is purged out from thence
by the cares. The old writers have observed very well, that there are three
sorts of excrements engendered in the brain, as, one sort of fleagme; another
sort of melancholy, and another sort choler: The fleagmatike pass away by the
mouth and nose, the melancholic by the eyes, and the cholerike by the ears:
we see also when we make clean our ears, that all that comes forth is
yellow, and extreme bitter. Then there are hot rheumes, which are such either
by their generation, as if they be made of choler; or by corruption, as when
fleagme putrifieth, it gets a certain acrimonie, and becomes salt. The
signs of a hot rheum.
It is easy to find out these hot rheumes: for if the humor pass by the
palate and mouth, they taste it bitter and pricking, it burns and takes off
the skin every where, where it comes; the face is all red and fiery, the
forehead extreme hot, and commonly it walks hand in hand with an ague: we
must add unto all this a temperature that is hot and choleric, a hot
constitution of air, a manner of living, and all other things which are apt to
heat the humors, and to engender such as are hot. The third difference
rises from the quality of the humor.
We observe furthermore in the humor (besides his substance and temperature)
what his quality is, that is to say, the manners thereof: for there are some
humors which are malicious, and have a certain secret malignitie, there are
some more gentle, there are some that are concocted, and some that are crude
and raw. From these conditions we shall find a difference of rheumes; as,
there are some that are rebellious, as those which accompany the french
disease, or which rise of some remainder thereof, and these are not cured by
ordinary remedies, they must be overcome by sovereign cordials and
preservatives: there are other some more gentle, Signs of concocted, and
unconcocted rheumes. The sourth difference rises from the taste of the rheum.
which are easily cured and helped by some simple purgation: there are some
that are crude, and some concocted: it is known to be crude, when we see it
clear, thin, unequal, green, yellow, bitter or pricking: contrarily, if it
be equal and every where alike, and a little thick, we judge it to be
concocted. We take some difference of rheumes from the taste and savor which
is in the humor, there are salt, sweet, sharp, and tastlesse savors: the
salt ones are always most dangerous, for if they fall ones upon the Lungs,
they cause an ulcer; if among the guts, a bloody flux: finally, we may draw
from the mixture of the humors, these differences. There are simple rheumes,
caused of one only humor, and there are others which are made of the mixture
of many. And thus much concerning the particular view of the first difference,
which is taken from the matter.

The second difference taken from the parts.
The second difference may be gathered from the parts: now we have two forts of
parts to look into, as the sending, and receiving parts: those which send, are
either within or without the brain. Those within are commonly full of
excrements, both because of their cold distemperature, and also of their
marrowish substance; those without also, as betwixt the scull and the membrane
next covering it, and betwixt this inner membrane, and the uttermost skin may
be retained and gathered in great quantity of water, either by the vapors,
which not being able to pass any further, do there grow thick, or by the
breathing forth of waterish humors out of the veins and arteries, which there
stay and abide. From these parts then we shalf draw these differences of
rheumes, there are outward ones which come from without, and run down by the
continued proceeding of the membranes through all the outward parts, even unto
the joints, and make oftentimes the Gout: There are inward ones which come
from within the brain, and run diverse ways to the inward parts. If they
take the way of the spinall marrowe, they will cause an Apoplexy, Palsy,
astonishment, and trembling: if they pass and fall into the eyes and ears,
they will cause blindness and deafness: if they fall into the nose, they
will cause the disease, called Coryza: if into the palate and rough artery,
they will cause hoarcenesse; as also shortness of breath, the cough, the
consumption, if into the Lunges; and the flux of the belly, called Lienteria,
they fall into the stomach.

The third difference taken from the accidents.
The third difference shall be taken from the accidents. There are rheumes which
choke up the parties, and kill them suddenly, and they are those which
Hippocrates calls (...), the other are without danger, and distill but
softly. There are rheumes without feauers; and there are some that are
accompanied with the fever: there are some also that are painful, and here are
some withour pain.

The last difference.
The last difference is taken from the manner of their generation and the
efficient causes. There are some rheumes that are of themselves as being
begotten of the sole defect of the brain, all the rest of the body being
found; and there are some which come by consent, as those which are caused of
the ill disposition of the other parts: as of the liver too much heated, and of
the stomach too much cooled; the liver over hot does send great quantity of
vapors unto the brain, and the stomach too much cooled does fill all full of
crudities. There are epidemike or popular rheumes, and there are erraticke or
hereditarie ones: the popular rheumes happen of the constitution of the air,
as was the whupping or crowing disease which happened this year, and that
which ran through all Europe about ten years ago. The erraticke or
hereditarie rheumes come of a particular constitution of the body, and of the
manner of living, which is particular unto every one.

CHAP. IIII. Of the causes of the Rheum.
THe causes of the rheum are either outward or inward: the outward do
ordinarily arise of the corruption of the air, and of the manner of life. The
air may alter and change us three manner of ways; by his qualities, by his
substance, and by his sudden alteration and change: that which is too cold,
too hot, and too moist, is apt to beget rheumes: the hot air does it by
resolving and melting such humors as are contained in the brain, for thus it
makes them the more apt to fall down: the cold air is the cause of
distillations, because it presses the brain together: and even as a sponge
full of water being pressed, we may behold the water to run out like a river
on every side: even so the brain being shrunk together by cold, lets all
her humors glide and slip away: the same cold air may also be the cause of
rheumes, by repelling and causing to retire the natural heat from the utter
parts, to the inner. The Southern and Northern winds are mighty causes to
move and make rheumes: for those do fill the brain and make it heavy, but
these do cause it to shrink together. Long tariance inthe Sun or open air
does effect as much. The sudden change of the air, and alteration of seasons
are of the number of those causes which enforce the rheum. As also if the
seasons do keep their natural temper, as Hippocrates has very well observed
in his third book of Aphorisms, the year will greatly incline unto
rheumatikenes. If together with this party alteration, or utter overthrow of
the temperature, there be any particular defect in the substance of the air,
as some secret and hidden corruption or infection, then it will engender a
popular and pestilent rheum.

The manner of living may likewise be put in the scrole of outward causes,
which do engender and beget the rheum: much eating and drinking do likewise
fill the brain, and this is the cause why drunkards and gluttonous feeders,
are ordinarily subject unto the Wrangling rheum.. Great abstinence may
likewise cause rheumes in attenuating and making thin the humors; as also for
that the stomach being empty, and not provided of any thing to fill it self
withal, is constrained to make attraction of such moisture as is in the parts
near about. Long watching, continual study, extreme violent passions of the
mind, in as much as they spend and waste the natural heat and cool the
brainer do engender rheumes: to live all idle, does keep the excrements
unconsumed. Great euacuations, but especially often letting of blood, and in
great quantity, do cast headlong the body into old age, and make it altogether
rheumatike. Much sleep puffs up the body and makes it moist, especially
that which is taken at noonetide. And thus much for the outward causes which
may. cause and move the rheum: let us now come unto the inward.

The inward causes are either remote, or else conjoined: the remote (which it
pleases some better to call Antecedents) have relation to the evil
disposition of the brain, head, liver, stomach, and sometimes of the whole
body. The distemperature of the brain causes rheumes.
The cold, moist and hot distemperature of the brain do oftentimes cause
rheumes, the cold and moist of their own nature, the hot by way of accident:
the cold distemperature weakeneth natural heat, does not make good disgestion
of nourishment, neither yet spend and waste unnecessary superfluities:
whereupon it follows, that it must needs store up abundance of excrements.
The hot distemperature attracteth more nourishment then it can well digest,
and more vapors then it can dispatch and make away withal. There are some
which have very wittily observed, that the closenes of the substance of the
brain, is oftentimes the cause of rheumes, because it retains the vapors,
and suffers them not to spend by breathing out and euaporation. The evil
shape of the head.
The bad form or shape of the head is likewise very forcible to procure
rheumes: for such as have thc seames of their head very close set together, or
which have not any at all, (as we have seen very many) are subject to
distillations, because the vapors retained do turn into water, and in deed
the seames were chiefly made to serve for a vent, and as it were a chimney unto
the brain.

The distemperapture of the lower parts.
The distemperature of the lower parts, and especially of the liver and
stomach, is one of the most ordinary causes of the rheum, if we believe
Auicen the prince of the Arabians. For from the liner, being excessiuely hot,
do come as it were from a great burning cole many hot exhalations, which by
the cold temperature of the brain do congeale and turn into water: I say
further, that they which have a very hot liver, have also their veins very
hot, in such sort as that there rise continually very hot vapors from them.
The cold distemperature of the stomach ingendring many crudities, my also be a
cause of rheumes: for thereby all the body is cooled, the second disgestion not
being able to correct the error of the first, But if it should so be as that
all the causes should concur and iumpe together, that is to say, that the
brain should be cold and moist, the lieu hot, the stomach cold, there were
no doubt, but that thereupon would follow a perpetual generation of excrements
in the brain: and this is that which the Arabians would have said, when they
wrote that an unequal distemperature of the principal parts is the greatest
occasion of distillations. And thus much concerning the remote causes. The more
near or antecedent causes not only of rheumes, but of all other fluxes of
humors are three; The causes more necrely procuring rheumes are three. The
partsending.
the part sending, the part receiving, and the nature of the humor. In the
part sending we observe his high situation, and his strength: if it be endued
with these two qualities, it will easily cast his burden upon all the
inferiour-parts, which are as it were vassals unto it. Hippocrates has well
observed it in the book of the wounds of the head, when he says, that amongst
all the parts of the head, the brow is most subject unto inflammation, because
the brow is contained, but every flux is from the part containing unto the
part contained: the brow is contained both in respect of the low situation
thereof, as also in respect of the production of vessels. The part receives
the humor, either because it is inferior, or because it is weak; The part
receiving.
or because it draws it unto it. Every inferior part is subject to receive
the burden, of that which commanded it: but and if the part be weak, it will
yet be the more apt. This weakness comes either of it self, and from the
proper nature of the part, or else by some accident: The weak part.
the rare and spungie parts are naturally weak, such as are all the
glandules, and it seems that nature of set purpose has made them such, to
the end that they should receive the excrements and superfluities of the
principal parts. Hippocrates has debated this matter so well in his book of
Glandules, as that a man cannot tell how to add any thing thereunto. The skin
was by nature made weak, to the end it might contain all the superfluities that
are from within, whereupon some call it the universal emunctorie. Parts may
also be weak by some accident, as by a fall, or blow, or some diste^perature:
in what manner soever they be weak, it makes them apt to receive the refuse
of their neighbor parts. How the part attracteth the humor to it self.
The last cause is the part his attraction of the humor. The Arabians have
acknowledged three causes of this attraction; heat, pain, and the avoiding of
vacuitie. Heat attracteth of it own nature, because it rarifieth the parts
near about, attenuateth and makes thin the humors, and enlarges the ways
and passages, for the humor to run through. How pain attracteth.
Pain does not attract of his own nature, because it is an affect of feeling:
but feeling is a patient and no agent, and every one of the senses is executed
by taking in of some thing: but the humors flow to the pained part, by reason
of the weakness of the same; as also because the natural heat thereof is
weakened by the pain and cannot well concoct the humor, it must needs be
that it should stay in that place. They who affirm that the humor flows
unto the part which feels the pain, because nature sends thither both
spirits and blood, that she may comfort the same, do deceive themselves in my
judgment, and offer great wrong unto nature: for if she knew that such a part
stood in need of spirits and blood, she would know therewithal, that in sending
this blood, she should profit the part nothing at all, but rather hurt it: so
that pain does not properly attract and draw. The last cause of distillations
is imputed to the humor. For if it be thin in substance, hot in temperature,
sharp and pricking in quality, it will be a great deal the more apt to flow.

CHAP. V. A general order of diet to be observed, for the preventing and
curing of Rheumes and distillations.
I Will follow the same order and course in the laying down of this regiment,
which I have taken in the other two going before. We must therefore so dispose
of all the six things which are called not natural, as that they may not only
hinder the engendring of rheumes, but also consume and cure the same being
already begotten. Let every man therefore make choice for himself of such an
air as is temperate in his active qualities, and as for the passive that it
be altogether dry: I say that it must be temperate in heat and cold, because
that a hot air resolving the humors of the brain, and a cold pressing them
out, causes them to fall down abundantly. If the air be too cold, it may
be corrected with good fires made of Juniper, Rosemarie, Bay Tree, Oak, and
Fig Tree: if it be exceeding hot, it may be cooled with herbs and flowers
that are endued with such property. There must care be had to avoid the
Northern and Southern winds, because the one fills the head full, and the
other presses it out. You must not abide much in the Sunne-beames, nor yet in
the open air. The winds which pearce through chinkes and rifts, are
extremely dangerous for the rheum. The inequality of the air (as Celsus
observes very well) does mightily further the begetting of rheumes: it is
called an unequal air, when it is now hot, now cold. As concerning the passive
qualities, the ayre-must in all manner of distillation incline unto drines: and
for that cause it is good to dwell upon mounted places, and such as are far
from rivers.

In meats three things are to be observed; the quantity, quality, and manner
of using them. As concerning the quantity, In meats three, things are to be
observed.
all repletion and full gorging is enemy to such complexions as are subject
unto rheumes: we may not at any time eat to the full, it is better to rise
from the table hungry, and he cannot but fare the better, which cutteth of
one meal in a week. As concerning the quality, it must be contrary unto the
disease, or the cause thereof: the cause of rheumes is a superfluous humor, so
that it will be fittest to use such meats as may dry up the same. All
vaporous meats in general must be abstained, as also meats that are gross,
windy, full of excrements, and hard to digest. In the manner of using of these
meats, there must many rules be observed: as, there must no new meat be
taken into the stomach, before the former be thoroughly disgested. You must
content your self to feed upon one only dish, and that such as is good: for
variety fills all full of cruditie, and it mingleth it self with the blood
in the veins, and ministers rheumatike matter unto the brain. You must use
to eat more at dinner then at supper, in as much as sleep which succeeds
supper within a short time, does send great store of vapors unto the brain,
which are afterward turned into water.

The bread must be of good wheat, and thoroughly baked, Bread.
not clean purged from his branne, but retaining a little branne and mixed with
some salt; it must never be eaten hot: at the latter end of meat you may eat
biscuit, wherein some Anise and Fennel seed have been put.

Roasted meats are much better then boiled, Flesh*
and of them such as do not abound with humors: we allow the use of Capon,
Pigeon, Partridge, young Hare, Kid, Heart, Feasant, Quails, Turtle doves, and
all birds of the mountains, all which maybe interlarded with Sage and Hissope
of the mountains. The use of waterfowles, Porke, Lamb, Mutton, and young
Veale is forbidden: broths and pottage are very ill.

Fish is exceedingly contrary. Fish.
All sort of milk-meates is an enemy in rheumatike diseases, as also all manner
of pulse.

As concerning herbs, Herbs.
the Arabians recommend unto us, Sage, Hissope, Mints, wild Time, Margerome,
Rosemary, Burnet, Cheruill, Fennel, and Costmarie. Aetius tolerateth Coleworts
and Leekes, but he forbids in express terms Garlic and Onions, (because
they send up many vapors) and all cold moist herbs, as Lettuse, Purcelane,
Sorrel, and such like.

All fruits that abound in moisture, Fruits.
as Apples, Plums, Melons, Cucumbers, and Mulberies are forbidden. But as for
such as have property to dry, as Pine apples, small nuts, Pistaces, Almonds,
Pears, Quinces, Figs, dry Raisines, Medlers, Ceruisses, they may be used
after meat. And thus much concerning meat.

As concerning drink, Drink,
cold water, and all manner of licour that is actually cold, it is enemy to al
such as are subject to the rheum, if so be that such rheum be not extreme
hot pricking, and accompanied with an ague; Barley water with a little Sugar
and Cinamome is very good and fit, or a Ptisane, or water and Honey boiled
together.

If the stomach cannot endure the use of these waters, Wine.
you must make choice of some well conditioned Wine, which is small and neither
sweet nor biting. Muscadels, Hypocras, and such like mighty and strong Wines,
do altogether strike up into the head, and fill the brain with vapors. To
drink as soon as a man is set down at the table, does cause and increase the
rheum mightily: and there is nothing so dangerous to them which are troubled
with the rheum, as to drink when they go to bed.

Excess of sleep makes the body heavy, and heapeth together store of
excrements: Sleep.
it shall be sufficient to sleep six or seven hours, and in the mean time
the head and the feet must be kept covered: for as Aristotle observes, cold
taken in the uttermost parts does infinitely indamage them which have a cold and
moist brain. In sleeping it is good to lie with the head somewhat high, and
upon the sides: for to sleep upon the back heateth the body of the great
hollow vein, which lies upon the backbone, and sends great quantity of
vapors unto the brain. Let every man watch well over himself, that he use no
sleep at noone, neither yet by and by after meat; it will be more healthful
to bestow the time in some short or gentle walk, or in some pleasant and
religious talk. You must not straightwaies after meat apply your self to
reading or writing, or any deep meditation, because such action might turn
the course of natural heat out of the way, which ought altogether to be
employed in making disgestion.

Long watching may hurt as much as over much sleep, for that it spends
natural heat, and cools the brain. Watching.
It is good to rise early, and walking up and down the chamber, to cough,
spet, and free ones self of all natural excrements.

The exercises of the whole body are much commended of Hippocrates that famous
Physician, Exercise.
and those which are of particular parts, as frictions will serve for good use:
Frictions.
but if the head be weak and very replete, it will require that such friction
be begun in the lower parts, and from thence to come unto the thighs, back,
arms and neck, and to rub the hinder part of the head with bags or spunges
artificially contained and made. And seeing the head is the fountain of all
distillations, it will be meet and convenient to have a special regard and
consideration thereof: it must not be ouerladen, neither yet too slightly
covered, but after a mean and middle manner, and yet it is always better to
endure too much heat then too much cold upon it: it is not good to tie it too
hard, least it might draw humors from below. The belly must be kept soluble
continually.

CHAP. VI. A general method for the curing of Rheumes.
FOr as much as in all distillations there is a part sending, and another
receiving; the Physician must have special consideration unto them both. The
head is the welspring and fountain of all distillations: wherefore we must
bestow one part of our labor and travel to purge the head, and to dry and
strengthen it, that it may not gather any new excrements or superfluities. I
will appoint and set down an order to be used in cold distillations, coming
of a cold and moist distempcrature of the brain, because that those are most
incident, and this method may serve for a rule unto the other sorts.

The first intention.
The first intention which we are to propound and set before our selves, is to
purge this welspring, to draine it, and utterly to dry it up if we can. This
will be effected and wrought by universal and particular cuacuations: the
universal must always be first used. Blood-letting.
If it be a full body, a hot rheum, an ague accompanying the same, and that
the liver be exceedingly hot, blood letting will profit very much, but if no
one of these particulars fall out, then it has no place, and profitcth
nothing, and this is it which the Arabian writers mean when they say, that the
rheum merely considered as a rheum, does never require bloodletting, but
only when it is accompanied with some accident. Purging.
We will come therefore to the manner of purging, which must first begin with a
Clister which will purge the whole body, and draw also from the head.

A Clyster.
Take of the common decoction (whereunto has been added Margerom, Hissope,
Sage, of each a handful) the quantity of a pint, of Annise seed three
drams, of the flowers of Camomile, Stechados, and Rosemarie, of each half a
handful, after you have strained the whole, dissolve therein of the blessed
Laxatiue one ounce, Benedict^ Laxatiua.
of Diaphenicon an ounce, of the honey of Rosemarie flowers or Mercury
oneounce, of oil of Dill two ounces, of salt a little, and make hereof a
Clyster.

Pills. A potion.
The day following, you shall take a dram of Pillulae Cochiae, which shall
serve in steed of a minoratiue, or else this potion. Take of good Agaricke one
dram, of Rubarbe as much, infuse them all one night with a little Cinamom and
a few Cioues, in the water of Hisope or Minthes: and after you have pressed it
out, dissolve therein of Diaphenicon, or else of Diacarthamum, two drams, and
of syrup of Roses laxatiue, one ounce, make thereof a potion.

Preparation of the humors. An Apozeme.
If the humors be cold, gross and, slimie, it will be good to prepare them
with this Apozeme. Take of theroores of Acorus, of Cyperus, and of Galanga, of
each half an ounce, of the leaves of Betonie, Hissope, Margerome, Sage, Balm,
Agrimonie, of each a handful of Anise and Fennel seed of each three drams,
of the flowers of Rosematie, Stechados, and Betonie, of each a pugill, boil
all together to a pint and a half, wherein dissolve of he honey of Rosemarie
flower, or of course Sugar, three ounces, and make thereof an Apozeme, clarify
it and aromatise it with a dram of Aromaticum Cariophillatum, and with a little
Cinamom, to take four mornings together. After this, the body shall be purged
again with ye same pills, or with the pills of Agaricke, Sine quibus, or Pillulae
foetidae, and the same potion, but in somewhat greater quantity. The Arabians
make a pretty observation about pills, as that they must be somewhat great,
that so they may abide the longer time in the stomach, and so not being so
soon disolued, may draw from further of. And thus much concerning purgations
usually to be taken in such rheumes.

Decoctions procuring sweat.
Diet drinks that do provoke sweat, may be put in the number of universal
euacuations, for they avoid all the waterish parts which are contained in the
veins, and dry up the superfluous moisture which is within the bowels. We
shall make them with Guaiacum, Zarza-perilla, the root China, and Sassafras,
the manner of the setting down of such, as also of the using of them is
sufficiently known unto every one. The body having been purged by these
universal means, there may be used particular purges for the brain. The
euacuation may be sensible or manifest to the senses, or insensible, and such
as the senses cannot discern: the sensible euacuation is effected by errhiues,
masticatories, gargarismes, vesicatories, sinapismes, cuppings, scarifications
and cauteries, the insensible, by powders, bags, cupping without scarification,
and perfumes. Errhinesdoe purgethe brain by the nose: Enhines.
there are diverse sorts made of them, as some are dry, and some liquide: the
dry are made with powders of pepper, the seed of Stauesacre, and white
Hellebor: the liquid ones with the juice of Margerome, Mercury, Male
Pimpernell, Beetes, and Coleworts, with white wine, there are some which
greatly commend the oil of nigella, Masticatories.
if the nostrels be anointed therewith within. Masticatories do purge the
head very strongly, and they are made with the roots of Pellitorie, or with
Masticke, Nutmeg, Cubeb, Damask raisins, fteeped in the water of Sage, or in
the essence of Sage and Time. Vesicatories.
Gargarismes are not in so great use. Vesicatories applied upon the head, do
also purge the same sensibly: they are made with very strong leaven, dung of
Pigeons, the flies called Cantharides, Emplaisters.
and a little Aqua vitae: you may likewise make emplasters which will draw
forth water, with the roots of Brionie, of Tapsia, Hot bread.
Mustard-feede and Euphorbium. Bread very hot applied upon the head and nape of
the neck, with a little Aqua vitae, does draw it self all full of waterish
excrements. Cupping glasses with scarification, Cuppingglasses.
will serve to make euacuation in this case. Finally, in rheumes that are old
and rebellious, cauteries do profile very much, Cauteries.
to draw dry the fountain, and to divert the humor: they are to be applied
upon the head, behind in the neeke, and in the arms. Insensible euacuation.
There is another insensible euacuation, which is then wrought, when any humor
is discussed and resolved in such sort as that it turns into a vapor, and
thereupon does breath out by an insensible transpiration: the same may be done
by bags, powder and perfume. Bags.
Take of Millet, and Otes a good handful, of bran and salt one ounce: fry all
these together, and close them up in a bag, which you shall lay very hot upon
the coronall future; orelse: Take of Annise seed, Fennel seed, and Bay
berries, of each two ounces, of Millet four ounces, and as much of common
salt, of the crops of Dill, of Camomile and Rosemarie flowers, of each a
handful, fry all these, and put them up in bags, to be applied upon the head.
Perfumes.
Perfumes that draw out and resolve, arc thus made: Take of Storax, Beniouin,
and of Nigella Romana, of every one three drams, of cloves, and of the trocisks
of Gallia Moscata, of each one dram, make thereof a perfume, and perfume the
head clothes there with. Or else take of incense, Ladanum, Beniouin, of each
three drams, of gum Hedera, of Juniper berries, and Coriander prepared, of
each two drams: mix all these, and make thereof a perfume. By all these
helps, we may accomplish our first scope and intention, which is to cleanse the
brain, and draine the fountain of rheumes.

The second scope is to fortify and strengthen the brain.
Our second scope and drift must be to strengthen the brain, and take away the
cold and moist distemperature, which causes a continual ingendring of
excrements and turns all into water: for in vain shall we due up this
spring, except we take away all means whereby it may fill up again, and for
the effecting hereof we may use inward and outward remedies. The inward are
Opiates, Inward remedies.
Lozinges, and powders; Treacle and Mithridate are very singular good, as also
the conserues of Betonie, Rosemarie, and Stechados. Take of the conserues of
Rosemary, Stechados, and Betonie, of each one ounce, of old Treacle two
drammes, of the powder of Aromaticum Rosatum, and Diagalanga, of each one dram;
make thereof an Opiate with syrup of Stechados, An Opiate.
taking thereof to the quantity of a small nut at night when you go to bed,
you shall make lozinges to ye same effect after this manner. Lozenges.
Take of the powder of Aromaticum Cariophillatu^ one dram, of Diagalanga half
a dram, of Nutmeg a scruple, of Sugar dissolved in the water of Betonie or Balm
so much as shall need, make thereof an electuarie in lozenges, every one
weighing three drams, of these you must take one in the morning two hours
before dinner, and another at night one hour before supper. A digestive powder
after meat will serve to strengthen the brain and stomach. A digestive powder.
Take two drammes of Anise seed confected, of Cinamome two drammes of Nutmegs
one dram, of red Coral two scruples, of Pearls prepared, and Hearts horn,
of each one scruple, of rosed Sugar and white Sugar, of each four ounces; make
thereof a powder, of which you shall take a spooneful after every meal: if you
make it for them that are rich, you shall add thereto a little Amber grise,
Aqua coelestis, Theriacalis, and Imprialis are very good to dry and strengthen
the brain and especially in old folk, and such as are of a cold
distemperature.

Outward remedies. A head powder. Bonnets or coifes.
The outward remedies which do strengthen the brain are head powders, which
shall be cast all over the head, or else you shall make caps thereof. Take of
Clones, Maces, and Ziloaloe, of each two drams, of red Roses, and Betonie well
dried, of each three drams: make it into a powder, which you shall ordinarily
scatter over all the head: or else make a little cap after this fashion: Take
the leaves of Betonie, Balm, Margerome and Mints well dried, of each three
drams, of Clones, Mace. Nutmeg, of each one dram, of red Roses and Rosemarie
flowers a dram and a half, of Dyers grain, and of Ziloaloe, of each a dram:
make them into a powder, and mingle them with Cotton wool, to make a little
quilted cap thereof with red Taffata. An emplaister to strengthen the brain.
Also you may make emplasters to apply all over the head, which may strenothen
and dry it very much: Take of Laudanum and Mastick that are very pure and
clear, of each half an ounce, of incense and Sandaraca, of each three drams,
of the roots of Cyperus, of Cloves, and of Ireos of Florence, of each half a
dram, of the flowers of Sage, Rosemarie, and red Roses, of each half a dram,
of Cubebs two scruples, mix all this with oil of Ireos and a little
Turpentine, and make thereof a plaster. There has been brought us certain
years since, a very excellent Gum called Tacamahaca: it is applied upon the
head, in form of an emplaster, it strengthens the brain, stays all
rheumes, and has such property to appease and take away pains, as that the
Indians use it in all manner of aches, if it fall not out that there be some
inflammation manifest and apparent. I my self have seen very notable success
in the use thereof. Lotions for the head.
All the ancient practicioners do greatly praise for the drying and
strengthening of the brain the Lotions of the head that are made with herbs
appropriate for the head, as Betonie, Balm, Margerome, Lauander, flowers of
Stechados and Rosemarie. Asope for the purpose.
There may be made a very good soap and fit for the purpose, after this
fashion. Take of good Soap three ounces, of Agarick three drams, of Ireos of
Florence two drams, of Cloves and Mace, of each one dram; make them into a
Soap. Natural bathes of sweet water as they are called, Natural baths.
are much commended, because they be actually hot and sulphurous, as are those
of Balaruc, Oiles to be put in the ears.
which are four leagues from Mompelier. Some there be which put certain drops
of the oil of Turpentine every night in the ears and stop them afterward with
musked or sweet Cotton wool: and assure themselves that this dries and
strengthens the brain mightily, All these remedies will serve in cold
rheumes, and in such as have the brain cold and moist. If the rheum be hot,
and the brain hot, the Physician shall be of judgment able to alter the
remedies, and to appropriate them to the distemperature. Lo here the two
several intentions, which respect the member sending, and lead us first to
the drawing of it dry, and afterward to the strengthening of it, for fear it
should engender new and fresh matter.

We must now advise what is to be done unto the member receiving. Every
inferior and infirm member is apt to receive, but yet the care to be had of
it is greater or lesser, according as the patt is more or less excellent and
serving our necessity: if the rheum fall upon the eyes, I have already set
down the remedies: if upon the nose, it must be turned some other way: if upon
the teeth, you shall see in the chapter following how they are to be preserved:
if upon the stomach, it may be cast out by the belly. The most dangerous of
all is that which takes his course unto the rough artery, and falls
suddenly into the breast or lungs, for it hinders respiration, which is a most
necessary action, and so stisleth the pattie. Such must be cared for and
helped with all speed, and that by using all those remedies which I have set
down, to euacuate, divert, and turn away this motion of humors: but if it
should fall out to be too swift, When we must stop the rheum.
we shall be constrained to cut it short with remedies that shall be held in
the mouth, and which one may swallow down, beginning with the sleightest, as
Bole Armoniake, Terra Sigillata, Gum Tragacanth, conserve of old Roses and
rosed Sugar, of which there may be made pretty receipts. Take of the conserve
of old Roses a dram and a half, of the powder of Gum Tragacanth a dram, of
Terra Sigillata, Little Lozenges.
and Bole Armoniake oriental, of each two scruples, of Sugar dissolved in the
infusion of Gum Tragacanth, so much as needs: make thereof pretty small
pellets. If this will not serve them, we must come to the remedies which are
stronger, as Diacodium, new Treacle, Pillulae de Cynoglossa, or else those
which are described of the old writers, and are made of Styrax, Galbanum, Opium
and Mirrh in equal portions. These remedies are not to be appointed, but in
extreme necessity, and when the present and sudden stifling of the party is
feared Outward remedies staying the theume
.

The rheum may also be slayed with outward means, as parfumes and
emplaisters. Take of red Roses, and of Corianderseed prepared, of each a dram
and a half; of Mastick, Sandaraca, and Gum Hedera, of each a scruple; of the
seed of Poppie half a scruple, of Myrtle berries half a dram: make them in a
powder to parfume the head, and the same fume may also be taken either at the
mouth or nose. The gum Tacamahaca (whereof I have spoken somewhat before) is
very good to stay up the rheum, and to cause it to cease suddenly. The rheum
being somewhat stayed, we must cleanse out that which is fallen into the
breast, and euacuate it by the remedies usual for the cough. I will not set
down any particular remedies in this place, for as much as I teach the
general method only, which may serve for the curing of rheumes.

CHAP. VII. The means to preserve the Teeth.
FOr as much as rheumes do oftentimes fall down upon the teeth, and spoil
them very mightily, I am persuaded that I shall not displease the Ladies and
Gentlewomen, if I deliver in a small chapter the means to preserve the same.
Wherein consiseth the fairenes of the teeth. What may happen to the teeth.
To have fair and sound teeth, it behooves that they should be white, smooth,
hard, standing fast, and that the flesh of the gummes be whole, hard, and well
trussed up. I purpose first to show and make known that which may loosen,
black, or canker them: and after I will describe the remedies which are most
exquisite, and may best serve for the making of them fair. The air.
The cold air, as Hippocrates observes in the fifth book of his Aphorisms,
is enemy to the teeth. All raw, Meats.
slimie, sweet, sharp, fat, hard, vaporous meats, and such as are actually
cold, do hurt the teeth infinitely. The raw meats do send up very many
vapors which canker them, and make them black: sweet, slimie, and fat meat
do leave much filth about them: sharp meats set them on edge, and cause a
numnes in them, by reason of their roughnes and vneuenes: hard meats do shake
them very much. It behooves to use flesh of good juice, and which is disgested
easily: for who so will keep their teeth fair, must above all other things
take care of their stomach. The common use of milk, cheese, paste meats,
tarts and pulse do destroy the teeth: Sugar amongst other things does make
them black. It is not good to chaw the meat upon one side only, but rather
on both sides equally, because the teeth that are not used will corrupt. All
flesh of Lamb and Swine, and all fried meats, are extremely contrary unto
them, as also the ordinary use of fruits which are very moist. All writers have
marked that Leekes do wholly spoil both teeth and gummes.

Wine must be well delayed before it be drunk, Wine.
and it must not be sweet, nor very cold. Very hot broths, as also all other
meat exceeding hot do spoil them. There is care to be had in keeping of
them very clean after eating: and therefore the tooth-pickes of Masticke tree,
Mulberie tree, Rosemary, Cipers, and other woods which have some binding
faculty are very fit: there may be added unto the former a little of the wood
of Aloes: They must not be made clean with a knife, pin, or with any thing
of gold or silver, as many do, because that it does loosen the ligaments. It
must also be avoided to lie digging at them any long time, especially of such
as are subject to distillations. After that the teeth are thus picked and
cleansed, they may be washed with wine delayed. The continual and common use
of Sublimatum, Sublimate hurts them.
does black and spoil the teeth very mightily: but and if you would prevent
that it should do no harm, To use sublimate so as that it may not hurt the
teeth.
it must first be well prepared, and afterward never to use it, but when it
has been steept in water three or four months, changing the water the first
month every day, and once or twice a week in the rest: it must also never be
used about the face, but the mouth must first be washed and the teeth cleansed,
and water kept in the mouth. And thus much for the things which may hurt the
teeth.

Let us now see what things are good and profitable for them. There are some
that have their teeth very white, but they are not fast, because that either
the ligaments are loosened, or for that the gummes have lost part of their
fleshie substance: other some have their teeth fast, but they be black.
Wherefore there are two sorts of remedies to be provided: the one to blanch
and make white the teeth: the other to fasten them and incarnate. There are an
infinite number of those which do make white the teeth, but I will choose the
most fit and convenient. The Greek Physicians commend the pummice stone burnt
and made in powder, Things to make the teeth white.
more then any other thing, and their ordinary remedy is this. Take of
pummice stone and burned salt, of each three drammes; of Iuncus Odoratus two
drams, of Pepper a dram and a half: make them all in powder, and therewith rub
the teeth. We shall make a powder which in my opinion will be very fit. Take of
pure Crystal a dram and a half, A powder.
of white and red Coral of each one dram, of pummice stone and cuttle bone, of
each two scruples, of very white Marble, of the toote of Florentine Ireos, of
Cinamome and Dyers grain, of each half a dram, of common salt one dram, of
Pearl well prepared a scruple, of Alablaster and Roch Alome of each half a
dram, of good Musk ten grains: make them all into very fine powder, and rub
the teeth therewith every morning, wasning them afterward with white wine. With
the very same powder there may be made Opiates, putting thereunto some honey.
The spirit of Vitrioll mixed with a little common water, does white the teeth
marueilously, and is one of the rarest and most singular medicines that is.
There are some which do much esteem Aquafortis well delayed with common water.
There may also a water be distilled, which will make them white. Take of live
Brimstone, Alome, A distilled water.
Sal Gemma, of each a pound; of Vinegar four ounces: others use the spirit of
Vitrioll in stead of Vinegar; distill hereof a water with a retort, using a
gentle fire, that so it may not smell of the Brimstone. This water does make the
teeth very white, and cleanses rotten gummes. If the teeth be very black and
filthy: Take of Barlie meal and common Salt two ounces, A powder.
mix them with Honey and make a paste, which shall be wrapped in paper and
dried in an oven: you shall take of this powder three drams, of Crab-shels
burned, pummice stone, egg shells in powder, and Alome, of each two drams; of
the rind of dry Citrons one dram: they shall all be mixed together, and the
teeth rubd therewithal. The roots of Holihocks well prepared, The prepared
roots of Holihocks.
do mightily cleanse and whiten the teeth. The way to prepare them is in this
sort: Take the roots of Holihocke being made clean, and cut them in many long
pieces, boil them in water with Salt, Alome, and a little of Florentine Ireos:
afterward dry them well in an oven, or in the Sun, and rub the teeth
therewith. If the teeth be not fast but shake to and fro: Take of the roots of
Bistort and Cinquefoyle, To fasten the teeth that shake and are loose.
of each one ounce, of the roots of Cypers two drams, of red Roses, the roots
of white Thistle, and of the leaves or bark of Mastick tree, of each half an
ounce, of Sumach two drams, and of Cloves a dram: boil al these in Smithes
water and red wine, wash therewith your gummes, putting thereto a little Alome.
Or else: Take red Coral, Hearts horn and Alome, of each a dram and a half, of
Sumach, and of the roots of white Thistle of each a dram: make them in powder,
which you shall mix with the juice or wine of Quinces, and apply them upon the
gummes and to the roots of the teeth in the form of an ointment. To beget
flesh about the teeth.
If the teeth be bare and without flesh, they must be covered by causing flesh
to grow again with such remedies as follow. There shall be made a powder,
with Alome, red Coral, gum and rind of the Frankincense tree, with a little
Ireos and Aristolochie. Or else take plume Alome, Pomegranat flowers and
Sumach, of each two drammes, of Aloes wood, of Cyperus, of Mirrhe and Masticke,
of each a dram: make thereof a powder. An Opiate.
Opiates also are very fit to beget flesh, and do abide better upon the place.
Take of Roch Alome half an ounce, of Dragons blood three drammes, of Mirrhe
two drams and a half, of Cinamome and Masticke of each a dram: make them all
into very fine powder, and with a sufficient quantity of Honey make an Opiate,
which you shall apply at evening upon your gummes, and there let it remain all
night: the next day morning you shall wash them with some astringent decoction
or red wine. There be some that take a corn of Salt every morning in their
mouth; and letting it melt, do rub the teeth with their very tongue, holding
that this does white and make fast the teeth, hindering and keeping corruption
and putrefaction from the teeth. And thus much for the preservation of the
teeth.

THE FOVRTH DISCOVRSE, WHEREIN IS ENTREATED OF old age, and how we must succor
and relieve it.
CHAP. I. That a man cannot always continue in one state, and that it is
necessary that he should grow old.
THis is a general and solemn decree, published throughout the world, How
every thing that is must have an end.
and pronounced by Nature her self, that whatsoever has a beginning (so that
it consist of matter) must also have an end: There is nothing under the cope of
heaven (except the soul of man) which is not subject to change and corruption.
All the great and famous Philosophers and Physicians that ever were, have
without any contradiction put to their hands to this writ of arrest.
Hippocrates in his first book of diet, Aristotle in a little book which he
made of the length and shortness of our life, and Galen in his first book of
health have given so clear and apparent reasons for the same, that there is no
way to withstand or gainsay it: add hereunto, that experience does so far
confirm us, as that he which should doubt should be holden for a fool, and
one bereft of understanding. We celebrate day after day the funerals of our
ancestors. Every hour do we grieve and stand astonished at the consideration
of the loss of so many great personages: and of all whatsoever has been since
the creation of the world, there is nothing remaining but that which the
memory of history has reserved to succeeding ages. It is not my purpose here
to sift out by piece meal all the causes which may alter and corrupt natural
bodies, I have nothing to do with the transmutation of the elements, the
corrupting of metal, the dying and growing old of plants: I will only make
evident that which may alter our bodies, and whatsoever may cause them to wax
old. My reasons shall be drawn from the living and clear springs of
natural Philosophy.

The causes of old age.
The causes of our dissolution are either inward, or outward: the inward are
borne with us, abide with us daily, and accompany us even to the grave. The
outward do spring and rise from without, compass us round on every side, and
though a man may keep himself from some few, yet there are an infinite number
besides, which cannot be avoided. The inward causes of our death. The
contrariety of the clements.
Those which are borne and bred with us are two, the contrariety of the
elements, whereof our bodies are framed, and the working of our natural heat.
The elements accompanied with their four contrary qualities (which are heat,
cold, moisture and drines) the better to mix and unite themselves together,
do make a kind of league, every one of them willingly for going some of his
right and sovereignty, and thereby reducing themselves unto a mediocritie,
which is called temperature; but this bond of unity does not long last, for
the quality which does over rule, and give the name unto the temperature,
begins the discord, sets upon his contrary which is more weak, and
cease not to impugn it, until it see the utter ruin and overthrow of the
same: this is one of the unavoidable causes of our death, and that which we
bring with us from our mothers womb; for there is not one body in the whole
world to be found of so equal a mixture, as that there is not some excess in
one of the four qualities over and above the rest. That temperature which the
old writers have described and called ad pondus, is only imaginary, not
serving for any other thing then to judge of the rest by, seeing it is not any
more to be found, then Plato his common wealth, or Tullie his perfect Orator.
This jar therefore which is found in our complexion, is the principal cause
of our old age. And it is the same which Aristotle has well observed in the
book alleged, when he says, that in every thing wherein contrary things
concur, it must needs come to pass, that corruption do follow. The
operation of our natural heat, is the second cause of old age.
The other cause of our death and dissolution, is the work and operation of
natural heat. Our life is stayed upon two pillars, which are the radical
heat and moisture; the radical heat is the principal instrument of the
soul, for is it that concocteth and distributeth our nourishment, which
procures generation which stretches out and pearceth the passages, which
fashioneth all our parts, which makes to live (as says Trismegistus) all the
several kinds of things that are in the whole world, and governs them
according to their worth and dignity. This heat being a natural body has
need of nourishment; the humor which is called the radical moisture, is the
nourishment thereof, as the oil which is put into the lamps, does maintain
and feed the flame; this humor once failing, it must needs fall out, that
the natural heat should perish, but this humor cannot last for ever, seeing the
natural heat is daily threatening and consuming the same. But thou will say,
that it is continually repaired and renewed, and that the heat and moisture
influent, which come from the heart, as from a lively fountain, and are
conveyed along by the arteries, as through certain pipes, may restore and put
as much again in place, Our natural moisture cannot be renewed with his first
and former qualities.
as has been lost and spent. But then I would have thee to know, that the new
reparations cannot be so pure; as also that it never falls out to be in like
quantity. As for the pureness thereof, it is easy to see, that the moisture
which comes in place of that which was lost, cannot attain the same degree
of perfection with the former; for our solid parts wherein consists the
foundation of life, are made of seed that is most pure, thoroughly wrought and
concocted, and refined in all those turning and winding labyrinths, which are
to be seen in the vessels of seed, and now they are nourished only with
blood turned white by virtue of the said solid parts, and that which passes
not through so many refining pipes, whereby it comes to pass, that as wine
the more that water is mixed with it, becomes so much the more waterish, and
in fine changes altogether into water: even so the radical heat and moisture
wax weaker and weaker every hour, by the coupling of them with new
nourishment, which is always infected with some adversary and unlike
quality. And seeing it is a general unchangeable and infallible rule in
Philosophy, that every natural agent does become a patient, and sufferer in
the performance of his action, and so by consequent does weaken it self: our
natural heat weakening it self every day, cannot repair that which is
lost, and place in other of the same degree of perfection; it must of
necessity therefore grow old, and in time dye right out. The like quantity
of natural moisture cannot be repaired.
And as forth quantity of that which (as things that run out) is wasted, it
cannot be repaired altogether in the same proportion and measure, for the wast
is incessant, but the repair is by little and little, and that after an
infinite number of alterations. See here how that which should preserve us,
does ouerturne and destroy us, and how our heat consuming our radical
moisture, does thereby in the end cut it own throat. These two causes do
spring, grow and are nourished together with our selves. There is not that
Physician in the world, were it Aesculapius himself, which can save and
deliver us. All the precious licours that are, Aurum potabile, conserues of
Rubies and Emeralds, Elixir vitae, or the fained and fabulous fountain of
restored youth cannot withstand, but that our heat must at length grow weak
and feeble.

The opinion of the Egiptians condemned.
Galen derideth very well an Egyptian Sophister which had drawn commentaries
of the immortality of the body. If a man (says he) could when a thing is
come to his perfection, renew the same, at that very instant, and make the
principles thereof in like manner new, without doubt such a body would become
immortal: but this thing being impossible, it must needs fall out that every
natural agent must weaken it self, and so of necessity wax old. The men of
Egypt and Alexandria did believe that the natunall cause of old age did come
of the diminishing of the heart: they said that the heart did grow till-fiftie
years the weight of two drams every year, and that after fifty years it
waxed lesser and lesser, till in the end it was grown to nothing: but these
are nothing but vain imaginations and mere fooleries. We have caused many old
men to be opened, whose hearts have been found as great and heavy as those of
the younger sort. There is then but two inward causes of our old age, the
contrariety of the principles whereof we are composed and framed: and the
action or operation of our natural heat, which consisting in the consuming of
his radical moisture, does by little and little fall a drying and cooling of
our bodies.

Outward causes of our old age, that cannot be avoided.
There are other causes also of our dissolution, which are outward and such as
cannot be avoided. For seeing that our bodies are compounded of three
substances which are subject to waste, the one whereof is subtle and of an
airie nature, the second liquide, and the third solid: it must needs be that
we have some outward thing for to repair them: otherwise our life would never
last longer then the seventh day: for this is the term which Hippocrates has
given to perfect bodies, and such as have much natural heat. That which
repayreth our nature, is called nourishment, and it is three fold, the air,
drink, and meats: the air vpholdeth and maintains the substance of
spirits, the drink, all that which is liquide, and the meat, that which is
solid. This threefolde kind of nourishment, how well soever it be cleansed
and purified, has notwithstanding evermore something disagreeing with our
nature, and that so much, as that it cannot assimilate and turn it into it
own nature, and therefore makes an excrement of it, which being retained,
alters the body, and makes an infinite number of diseases. See and behold
how meats do of necessity alter out bodies. I leave to speak of all other
outward causes, (as over violent exercises, an idle and sitting life, long and
continual watching, the passions of the mind (which of themselves can make us
old, as fear and sadoes) because we may in some sort avoid and shun them.
I leave also to say any thing of chancing causes, or such as may befall us by
hap hazard, as hurts: I am only purposed to show that it is of necessity that
every living creature must wax old, that he sostereth within himself, the
natural causes of his death, and that he has outward causes thereof hanging
about him, which cannot be avoided.

CHAP. II. A very not able description of old age.
SEeing is is most certain that our bodies, Distinction of ages.
even from the day of our birth are subject unto many alterations and changes,
the physicians having regard unto such alterations as are most sensible and
apparent, have divided the whole life of man into many parts, which they have
called ages. The opinion of the Egyptians.
The Egyptians have made as many ages as there are seuens in the number of an
hundred, for they verily believed that a man could not live above a hundred
years. The Pythagoreans, The opinion of the Pythagorists.
which were very superstitious in their numbers, have published in their
writings how that in every seventh we feel some notable change, both in the
temperature of the body, and in the disposition of the mind, and that all this
ought to be referred and attributed to the perfection of the number of seven. I
purpose not here to discuss the question of numbers: I have handled it largely
enough in my third book of critical days: it is sufficient for me to sit down
and rest my self with all the most famous writers, in saying that man
following the natural course of life, undergoes five notable alterations and
changes in his temperature, and runnoth through five ages, which are, Five ages.
Infancy, Adolescencie, Youth, Manhood or the constant age, and Old age.
Infancy is hot and moist, Infancy.
but moisture exceeds and keeps heat so under foot, as that it cannot
show his effects, it lasts till thirteen years of age. Adolescencie
follows next, Adolescencie.
which yet is hot and moist, but so as that heat begins to play the master:
the sparks thereof are seen to glitter, twinckle and shine in every thing. In
the mankind the voice grows greater, all their ways and courses stretch and
reach further and further, they cast their first wool. In the female kind their
paps grow hard and great to the sight of the eye, their blood stirs it self
throughout all their body, and causes it to give place and make way for it,
till it have found out the door: this age holds on to twenty four or tweny
five years, which is the appointed and prefixed term for growth After this
comes Youth, Flourishing youth.
which is hot and dry full of heat, liuelihood and nimblenes: it has his
course till forty years. The manly age.
Then the body is come to his full stature, and this is called the man's age or
constant age, it is the most temperate of all the rest, participating the four
extremities indifferently, and continues to the fiftith year. Old age.
And there begins Old age which contains all the rest of our life. But
yet notwithstanding, this old age may further be divided into three ages:
Three degrees of old age.
there is a first old age, a second, and a third. I have nothing to do with
that which is caused by sickness, and called Senium ex morbo. The first old age
is called green, because it is accompanied with prudence, The first.
full of experience, and fit for to govern commonweals. The second begins
at seventy years, The second.
and is encumbered with many small disaduantages, it is very cold and dry. As
for the coldness there are so manifest signs and tokens of it, that no man has
ever made any doubt of it, for if you do touch them; you shall always find
them as cold as ye, they have no lively or vermilion color, all their senses
are weakened, and become subject to an infinite number of cold diseases: but
as for the other quality which is drynes, some there are which take upon them
to overthrow it, and say that this old age is moist and not dry, because a man
shall see the eyes of these old men always distilling tears, their nose
always running, there comes out of their month evermore great store of
water, yea, they do nothing but cough and spet: The temperature of old men, is
cold and dry,
but Galen answers very learnedly in his book of temperatures, that old men
are moist through a superfluous moisture, but that they are dry concerning
radical moisture: and in the first book of the preservation of the health he
says, that old men have all those parts dry which infants have moist, that is
to say, the solid parts, of which depends the constitution of the whole
body. This is the opinion coming nearest to the truth, and which we must take
hold upon: for their leannes, wrinckles, stifnes of sinews and skin, and
stifnes of ioints do sufficiently show their dry temperature: the ringwormes
also and itches over al their bodies, the scales which they have on their
heads, makes it plainly appear unto us that their brain is full of salt
humors, and not of sweet phlegm. In the end comes the last old age, which
is called decrepite: in which as the kingly Prophet says, The last degree of
old age is called, decrepise.
there is nothing but pain and languishing grief: all the actions both of the
body and mind are weakened and grown feeble, the senses are dull, the
memory lost, and the judgment failing, so that then they become as they were
in their infancy: and it is of these that the Greek proverb ((...), that is
to say, that old men are twice children) is to be understood. This last old age
is described in the twelfth chapter of Ecclesiastes, in so notable an
allegorical sort, that there is not the like again for excellentnes in all
the world. It was also the greatest Philosopher and profoundest scholar in
natures works that ever was, which took the same upon him: this is that sage
Solomon, which elsewhere is said to have known all the secrets and mysteries
of nature, which has discoursed of all the plants of the field, from the Ceder
of Libanus to the Hissope which grows out of the walls, that is to say, from
the tallest and highest; unto the least and lowest: for by this Hissope, we
understand one of the capillar herbs which is called Saluia vitae, which is
one of the least herbs that may be seen. I will set down the whole manner of
this description from the beginning to the end, because that besides the
pleasantnes of it, we may reap instruction, and a plain and manifest
declaration of the thing we have in hand.

An excellent Allegory describing and laying out the estate of old age.
Remember (says he) thy Creator in the days of thy youth, before the Sun,
the stars and light grow dark, and the clouds return after rain: for then
the keepers of the house will tremble, and the strong men will bow themselves,
and the grinders will cease and be no more: in like manner, the lookers
through the windows will be darkened, the doors will be shut without, because
of the base sound of the grinding: and he shall rise up at the voice of the
bird; so shall all the singing maids be humbled, they shall fear the hie
thing: the Almond-tree shall flourish, and the grasshoppers shall grow fat; the
Caper-tree shall be withered, before that the silver chain do lengthen it
self, or the ewer of gold be broken, and the water pot dashed in pieces at
the head of the spring, or the wheel broken at the cesterne, and that dust
return unto the earth, as it was from thence, and the spirit go unto God. See
here the description of the last age, which is admirable, and which has need
of a good Anatomist to help out with the true understanding of the same.

The interpretation of the Allegory.
In decrepite old age the Sun and stars do wax dark, that is the eyes,
which do lose their light. The clouds return after rain, that is to say,
after they have wept a long time, there passes before their eyes, as it were
clouds, being nothing else but gross vapors, which grow thick and foggie.
The keepers of the house tremble, that is, the arms and hands, which were
given unto man for the defense of the whole body. The strong men bow, that is
to say, the legs which are the pillars whereupon the whole building is set.
The grinders do cease, that is to say, the teeth which serve us to bite and
chaw our meat. The seers grow dark by reason of the windows: those are the
eyes which are covered and ouergrowne oftentimes with a cataract, which
shuts up the apple of the eye, which is commonly called the window of the
eye. The doors are shut without, because of the base sound of the grinding,
that is the jaws, which cannot open for to eat any thing, or the passages of
meat which are become narrow and streite. They rise up at the voice of the
bird, that is to say, they can not sleep, and are always wakened with the
cockcrow. All the singing maids are abased, that is their voice, which fails
them. The Almond-tree does flourish, that is the head, which becomes all
white. The grasshoppers wax fat, that is, the legs become swollen and puffed
up. The Caper-tree withers, that is, their appetite is lost: for Capers have
a property to stir up appetite. The silver chain grows longer, that is
the fair and beautiful marrow of the back, going all along the bone, which
grows loose and boweth, and causes them to bend in the back. The golden ewer
is broke, that is the heart, which contains (much after the manner of a
vessel) the arteriall blood, and vital spirit, which are somewhat yellow and
of golden color, which cease to move, and cannot any longer contain or
hold, much after the nature of a thing that is broken. The water pot is broken
at the spring head, that is, the great vein called the hollow vein, which
cannot draw blood any more out of the liver, which is the common storehouse and
fountain which waters all the body; in such sort as that it yields no
more service then a broken pitcher. The wheel is broken at the cesterne, that
is, the reins and bladder, which become relaxed and cannot any longer contain
the urine. Then, when all this happens, dust (that is to say, the body which
is material) does return to the earth, and the spirit (which is come from
above) does return to God. Lo here the five ages described and bounded with
their number of years, according to their several contents.

That the number of years does not make old age.
But I would not that from hence any man should so tie himself to the number of
years, as that he should make youth and old age necessarily to depend
thereupon: but that he would rather judge thereof by the rule of the
temperature and constitution of the body: for every man that is cold and dry,
is he whom I may call old. There are very many which become old men at forty,
and again there are an infinite sort, which are young men at sixty: there are
some constitutions that grow old very speedily, and others very slowly. They
which are of a sanguine complexion grow old very slowly, because they have
great store of heat and moisture: melancholic men which are cold and dry,
become old in shorter time.

Why women grow old sooner then men.
As for the difference of sexes, the female grows old always sooner then the
male. Hippocrates has very well observed it in his book entreating of the
seventh month childbirth. The females males (says he) as they are in their
mothers womb, are formed and grow more slowly then males: but being once out,
they come sooner to growth, sooner to ripenes of wit, and sooner to old age, by
reason of the weakness of their bodies and of their manner of living. Weakness
makes them to grow up sooner, and to wax old sooner: for even as trees which
are short lived, grow up to their height by and by; even so the bodies, which
must not long continue, come very speedily to the top of their perfection.
Their manner of living also does make them to wax old, because they live as it
were always in idleness. But there is nothing that hasteneth old age more then
idleness.

CHAP. III. An order of government for the prolonging of the strong and lusty
estate of man.
SEeing that the natural and unavoidable causes of our old age are three; as
the contrariety of the principles of our life, the waste of radical heat and
moisture, and the excrements which are ordinarily engendered by our nourishment,
it behooves us (if we will keep our bodies in good plight, and preserve them
from waxing old so soon) so to dispose of and order these three things, as
that the agreement and unity of the elements (which is called temperature) be
thoroughly provided for, that our heat and moisture (which waste every hour)
be well repaired, and that the excrements (which hide themselves and stay
behind in the body) be hunted out. We shall obtain all this very easily, by
keeping good order of government and diet, without having need to have recourse
to Physic. Now this name of Diet (as I have already said) comprehends many
things, all which may be referred to six. The Physicians call them, not
natural: because that if they be rightly used, and that a man know how to make
the best manner of service of them, they do preserve the health, and may be
called natural. But and if a man abuse them, if they be used either too
little, or too much, though it be never so little, they are the causes of many
diseases, and may be said to be contrary to nature. They are these which
follow; the air, meat and drink, sleep and watching, labor and rest,
emptines and fulness, and the passions of the mind, which I am about to run
through in order.

CHAP. IIII. What choice we must make of the air, for our longer life, as
also what air is most fit for such persons as are old.
The necessity of the air.
AMongst all the causes, which may alter our bodies, there is not any one more
necessary, more headlong, or which concerns us more nearly then the air.
The need we have of it, does sufficiently appear in sicknesses, which
abridge and deprive us of breathing: for if it happen that any one of the
instruments which are appointed either for the giving of entrance, or receiving
or preparing of the air be greatly impeached, the man dies by and by
strangled, in so much as it seems hereby, that the air and life are things
inseparable in all such kinds of creatures as are called perfect. The natural
heat (if we believe Hippocrates) is preserved by moderate cold, and if you
take the air away from the fire, which is as a continual bellows unto it, it
is quenched and choked incontinently. Our spirits which are the principal
instruments of the soul, are begotten and nourished by the air, they do not
uphold nor purge themselves but by the passing of the air in and out: this is
the cause also why all the body is porouse and perspirable, this is the cause
why our arteries do continually beat, and that nature has made so goodly and
wonderful doors and entrances for the two vessels; in such sort as that I
dare be bold to say, that the air is as needful for man, as life it self.
The quicknes and celeritie of the air.
As for the celeritie and swiftnes which it participateth, we perceive it
every day. In a trice it passes through the nose to the brain; and pressing
through a million of streits, which are to be seen in the admirable net, it
enters in into the most secret chambers thereof, it dispatcheth it self
downward after that, with like incredible celeritie and swiftnes, through the
mouth unto the lungs, and from thence unto the heart, it pearceth (and cannot
be perceived) the pores of the skin, and enters by the transpiration of the
arteries unto the most deep and hidden corners of our bodies. This is a body
so common and near unto us, that it compasses us about continually, without
forsaking us any moment, yea we must whether we will or no, make our daily
supping meat thereof. Divine Hippocrates having very well perceived this
powerfulnes of the air, says in his Epidemikes, and in his second book of
Diet, that the whole constitution of our spirits, humors and body, does
depend wholly upon the air. Wherefore the choosing of a good air, and of a
fair and pleasant dwelling place, must always in all good order of diet keep
the first and chief place. Wherein the goodness of the air consists.
The Physicians take acknowledgement of the goodness of the air by his
substance and qualities. By his substance, as when it is well purified, not
having any seeds of corruption in it, neither yet being infected with any
venomous vapors, which might rise from dead bodies, priuies, and filthiness of
towns, or from the putrefaction of standing waters. There are also certain
plants which a man must hardly come near unto to make his ordinary lodging,
because they have a contrary quality unto the animal spirit, as the Nut tree,
Fig tree, Colewort, Danewort, wild Rocket, Hemlocke, and an infinite sort of
others. The vapor of forges and mines, is a very great enemy unto the heart,
and causes (as Aristotle observes) the greatest part of them which labor
therein, to fall into a consumption.

How to rectify the air.
If the air be corrupted, and that we cannot avoid it very quickly, we must
purify it with artificial fires, of Rosemarie, Juniper, Cypers, Bay tree, and
with parfumes of the wood of Aloes, Saunders, Juniper beries, Fusses, and such
other aromatical things. The vapor of Vinegar does marueilously correct ye
maliciousnes of the air. As for the qualities of the air, all excess of
heat, cold, moisture and drines is evil: it must be chosen such as is (if it
be possible) of a mean temperature. The signs of a good air.
It is known to be such, if it grow warm shortly after that the Sun is up,
and contrarily grow cold after the Sun is set. If there cannot be found an
air of such a temperature, it were better that it were a little too dry, then
too moist. For (as Hippocrates says in his fifth Aphorism of his third book)
drines generally is always more wholesome then moisture.

What air is fittest for old folks.
For old persons there must choice be made of a hot air, an their chamber must
never be without fire: for it is very certain, that they fare and do a great
deal better in summer; because they carry a winter about with them
continually. They must be lodged in a place that is raised hie, and their house
must be open on the East Side, that so the morning Sun may come into their
chamber; and on the North-side, the better to purify the air, and to drive
away al evil vapors. I will refer unto this choice of air, the use of
sweet savors, which marueilously rejoice the heart and spirits. It is good
daily to carry some good smell, to keep ones self cleanly and handsome, and
to change ones linnens very often. The air then, if it have all these
properties, will serve to repair our first substance, which the Physicians
call spiritual, which is engendered, nourished, and preserved by the air.

CHAP. V. General rules to be kept in eating and drinking, for the longer
preservation of life.
Meats and drinks must keep the second places: for the one repaireth the
loss of that which is liquide, and the other does preserve and uphold that
which is solid. I will not here particularly describe all the meats which may
hurt or profit; or which are of a good or evil juice, let those which are
disposed read what is written by Galen in his books of the properties of
nourishments, and in his books of the preservation of health. I will only in
this chapter deliver the general rules, which I have drawn out of other
Physicians, and above all out of Hippocrates, which shall serve all sorts of
ages to keep them from growing old soon, and the first of them is this.

The first rule.
A man must never eat but when he has some feeling of hunger: for the stomach
makes small reckoning of such meats as it coueteth not, and oftentimes
disgesteth better the worst sorts of meats when it receives them with an
appetite, then the most delicate which do not delight and please it. This rule
is to be found in the 38. Aphorism of his second book. The second.
The second rule is, that the meat be well chawed before it be swallowed: for
there follow two discommodities when it is swallowed before it be well chawed;
the first is, that one shall eat more then he should, and thereby ouercharge
his stomach; the other is the greata do that the stomach has to concoct
that which is not chewed. The teeth and mouth do as much service and help in
making preparation for the first disgestion, as the air does for the cooks,
when it makes their meat tender: and this is the reason why they which have
many teeth do live long, namely, because they chaw their meat well. This
sentence is to be found in the sixth section of the ^. book of Epidemicall
diseases. The third.
The third rule is, that we must beware of glutting the stomach: for he that
would live long; must rise up from the table always with some hunger. The
reason is very apparent, because if you load your stomach too much, you put
the natural heat (being the principal instrument of the soul) to too much
pains, and cause it to languish in the end, because every natural agent, does
suffer in doing. Hippocrates has very well noted the same in his 6. book of his
Epidemicall diseases. This (says he) is one of the principal heads for to
preserve health, not to feed unto the full, and not to bestow to labor. The
fourth.
The fourth rule is, not to eat of more then one or two sorts of meats: for
variety hurts infinitely and overthrows our stomachs, because meats are
not all of one quality, and by consequent one degree of heat will not suffice:
some sorts are concocted sooner, and other some more slowly, so that thereby
all the kitchen is out of order. You may join here to, that eating variety of
meats and sawces, a man is constrained to drink the oftener: but this manner of
drinking does hinder disgestio^, as you see that the putting of water sundry
times into the pot, does hinder the broth from boiling. Therefore you must
never abuse the stomach, although it be very good, because that if you
displease the cook, you are like to dine but badly. Read the worthy sentence
of Hippocrates in the 3. section of his 6. book of Epidemicall diseases. The
slothfulnes of the slomack (says he) comes of the disordering of the whole
body, and of the impuritie of the vessels. And as fulness does greatly
damnifie, and fill al full of crudities; even so too much abstinence may heap a
whole measure of discommodities unto the health, because the stomach being
empty, does fill it self with evil humors. And Galen also observes, that a
famished stomach, if it be not satisfied with some delectable licour, draws
first from the brain a world of water, and after that the grossest excrements,
that are in the gut Ileum. The fifth rule teaches to observe such an order in
eating, The fifth.
as that those meats which are easily corrupted be first eaten, because that
if they be taken in the end, they destroy and corrupt the others: such as are
concocted with less pains, and sooner disgested, ought first to enter into
the stomach: but gross meats, hard and heavy meats shall be the last, quite
contrary to the fashion of our artificial kitchins. Such meats as are apt to
loose the belly, as plums, apples and potage, must also be the first. The sixth.
The last rule is, that we must accustom ourselves to eat more at supper
then at dinner, I mean if the body be sound and not subject unto rheum. The
reasons thereof are very plain: for there is more space from supper to dinner,
then there is from dinner to supper, so that there is more time to concoct and
distribute the nourishment. It is most certain that when we sleep, heat is
stronger, for that it withdraws it self wholly unto the center of the body.
I will add thereto how that to make good disgestio^ we have need of rest: but
in the night all the animal functions cease, there is nothing to draw aside our
heat, so that it may concoct a great deal better. Thus also have all the
famous and great Physicians, Hippocrates, Galen and Auicen, determined the
case. Thus have all the elder times practiced. Wrestlers (as Galen observes in
the fifth book of the conservation of health) did never eat flesh but at their
supper. The Pythagoreans (as Aristoxenus writes) took nothing to dine withal
but a little bread with honey: and during the siege of Troy, the Grecian
soldiers (if we give credit to that which Philemon reports) made four
meals a day, but they took nothing but bread and wine at the three first, and
at the last which was their supper, they did feed upon porke. Behold here the
general rules which are to be observed in eating, whereto I will add for an
end, that the fittest hour to eat at, is that hour of the day which is most
temperate, as in winter that which is most hot, in summer that which is most
fresh, and that also with some moderate exercise having gone before.

CHAP. VI. How we must in particular nourish old folk, and with what manner of
victuals.
THe victuals wherewith old men are to be nourished, must be provided
according to the degrees of their old age. The first kind of old age which is
yet green and strong, may take direction from all those rules, which I have
set down in the chapter going before: but the other two kinds of ages, have
need to be guided after this fashion. They must be heated and moystned,
because their temperature is cold and dry. Let them therefore have even all of
them, their lodging in a very warm air, and let their chamber be never
without fire. The quantity of their meat.
In serving them with meat, there must regard be had of the quantity,
quality, and manner of using of it. As concerning the quantity, we must never
ouerloade them with much meat, because (as Hippocrates observes in the
fourtenth Aphorism of the first book) they have very little quantity of
natural heat, and that would be quenched, as it falls out when a great
deal of wood is cast upon a little deal of fire, and furthermore (as the same
author says) because they can endure fasting very easily. The quality.
As concerning the quality, it is requisite that their meats be of good juice
and easy disgestion, and of a light matter, in as much as the substance of old
folk does not lightly wast and spend it self. They must be forbidden all
slimie, gross, windy, flegmaticke, melancholic and obstructing meats, which
may stop the passages. The manner that they must be made to use in taking them,
is to nourish them a little and often, principally those which are of a decrepite
age: others which remain somewhat Iustie, shall be content with three meals
a day. So were the two old men fed, of whom Galen speaks in his fifth book of
the preservation of health, that is to say, Antiochus the Physician, and
Telephus the Grammarian. Their bread must be of good wheat well baked,
leauened well, and having a little salt mixed with it; they must not eat it
hot, because it is not so easily disgested, it makes a great deal more
alterations in the body, ingendreth obstructions, and sends many vapors to
the brain, it must be of the same day or two days old, if it pass three
days it dries too much, and staieth too long time in yt stomach. Al manner of
cakes made with cheese, milk, butter; and all other sorts of unleavened bread,
are very hurtful unto them. Flesh.
Flesh is a very good nourishment, for it nourishes much, and turns easily
into blood. All flesh that is hard of disgestion and clammie, is altogether
contrary unto this age; the flesh of birds is sooner concocted, then that of
four footed beasts; and such as feed in dry places are more wholesome, then
those which feed in waterish places. We must make choice of such flesh as is
of a middle age, for old folk: for young flesh is too moist, and old flesh is
too dry. Their nourishment must be of good Capon, Chickens, Partridge,
Feasant, Hen, Mutton, Veale, God wit or Morehen, and young Pigeons. The Arabians
highly commend Turtle doves, because they turn into good juice, and make all
the senses the more subtle and fine. Some there be which praise porke,
because it comes next in temperature unto man: but I forbid it unto old men,
because it ingendreth much superfluous moisture. All the brains of beasts are
hurtful unto the stomach; livers do engender a gross blood; the utmost
parts, as the head, the tail and feet, are hard of disgestion, and of small
nourishment. The flesh of Lamb, Beef, Wild-bore, and birds of the river, are
naught for the stomachs of old men; they must have made some delicate
gallimaufrie with some sauce, good coolasses, gellie, and white meat. Eggs.
Eggs new laid and soft are very good for them, for they nourish much and
quickly; if they be hard or fried, they be naught, because they engender a
gross juice, and stay too long in the stomach. Potched eggs ate most
wholesome; and those which are boiled in hot water (which Aetius terms to
stifle) are much better then them which are roasted in hot ashes, because they
are boiled in every place equally and alike. But in what manner soever they be
eaten, they must be eaten always with salt, to the end they may go out of
the stomach the sooner: the white of the egg does nourish but a little, and
troubles the stomach. Fish.
The use of fish is contrary to their age, they may eat of a Rochet, Sole and
Trout, but they must be sowst with salt, sage, fennel and wine. Meats of a
sharp taste and which bite a little, as also powdered meats, are not evil,
because they stir up the appetite, awake natural heat, and consume all that
store of gross phlegm which is within the stomach. Spices.
It is good to spice their meats, with Pepper, Ginger and Cinamome, and to use
gray mustard. Onions and Garlike are not evil for them, if they love them, and
have been accustomed to eat them. Cheese is naught: butter is wholesome for
them, because it moystneth and heateth them, and also gratifieth the breast:
sweet oil Olive is also excellent good. Milk is good for some: but in such
as are subject to many obstructions, it rather does harm. They of old time
have much esteemed the use of Honey in this age, spreading it upon their bread,
putting it in their sauces, Fruits.
and almost in all their meats. Raw fruits, and such as are very moist, are
not good for them, because they are easily corrupted. Damask and dried
Raisines are good for the liver, stomach, reins and bladder. Almonds do
procure sleep, increase (if we believe Auicen) the substance of the brain,
and cleanse the passages of urine. Dry Figs, Pistaces, Dates, small nuts
roasted, nuts confected with Honey, Mirobalanes, Olives, and Pine-apples are
very fit for old men.

CHAP. VII. What manner of drink is best for old folks.
Drink is as necessary and profitable for old men, as it is hurtful for
children. There is an old proverb which says, that old folk live only on
the pot, as old Eagles do upon the juice of carryon. Wine is all their
refreshment, The praise of wine.
and therefore some do call it old folks milk; it heateth all their parts,
and casts out the waterish parts of the four humors by urine. Plato in his
second book of Laws writes, that wine heateth the body, and reuiueth the
drouping spirits of old men, even as the iron relenteth with the heat of the
fire. Zeno said oftentimes, that wine corrects and makes pleasant the
manners of the most harsh and churlish natures. One of the most renowned
Physicians that ever Arabia bred, writes, that young folk must refrain wine:
but so soon as they be forty years old, look how often they either see or
smell it, they ought to praise God, and give him thanks for creating of so
pleasant and delightsome a licour. The wine that is chiefly to be made choice
of for old folk, What wine is best for old folk.
must be an old, red, and good strong wine, and it must not be much delayed.
New, sweet and gross, are not good, because they stop the liver, the spleen
and passages of urine, and make old age subject unto the dropsy or stone. It
is not good to drink wine fasting, nor after that one is thoroughly heated,
because the vapor thereof ascends by and by up into the head, hutteth the
sinews, and causes conuulsions, sudden rheumes and apoplexies. Old men must
drink a little at once and often. Galen commends artificial wines, made of
Betonie and Parcelie, for the Stone and Gout, Hippocras, Malmesie and Candie
wine; foreseen that they be not counterfeited, neither yet contrary to their
natures. Honyed water is commended of all men, they may use the common for
their ordinary drink, and the other (which is called the counterfeite of
wine, being strong like unto Malmesie) they may take in the morning with a
toste,

CHAP. VIII. Of the exercises of old folk.
IT is most certain, that all manner of nourishment how clean and puresoeuer
it be, has always something in it not agreeable unto nature. It must
necessarily therefore follow, that in every concoction there be engendered some
excrement, which being kept and not avoided, may be the cause of an infinite
sort of diseases. The grosser kind of excrements do purge themselves, by a
sensible and manifest kind of euacuation: but the more subtle and fine maybe
wasted and resolved by exercise.

This is the cause why divine Hippocrates in his books of Diet, The necessity
of exercise.
has affirmed, and that very well, that man cannot live in health, if he join
not labor and food together, because (says he) that the one repayreth
natures expenses, and the other spends her superfluities and surcharging
burdens. Plato in his Theaetetus writes, that exercise vpholdeth and
preserves the good state of the body, and that idleness on the contrary does
overthrow it. Exercise moderatly and orderly used, preuenteth repletion, the
mere nurse of a thousand diseases, increases natural heat, keeps open
both the sensible and insensible passages of the body, makes the body plyant
and nimble, prepares and disposes all the superfluities and excrements, as
well universal as particular, unto auoidance, strengthens the sinews
marueilously, and makes all the joints more firm. And this is it which
Hippocrates says in his Epidemicall treatises, that as sleep is requisite for
the inward parts, so labor serves to strengthen the joints. There is a
notable treatise in Celsus, which I must not pass over with silence. Sluggish
slothfulnes (says he) does make the body loose and heavy, but pains and
labor does make it firm and nimble: idleness makes us soon to wax old, and
exercise preserves our youthfulnes long and many years. How we must use our
exercises.
But we must carry our selves cunningly in the manner of our exercises: first,
it must be done before we eat, because thereby we awake natural heat, that
it may be the readier to digest, and not asleep when it should be doing his
duty. Hippocrates his Aphorism is most plain and evident: Let labor go
before meat. This exercise must be moderated according to our meat: for they
that eat much, must work much; and they that eat but a little, must labor
the less. This exercise also must be moderate and equal. I call that
moderate, which makes not weary: and I call that equal, which exercises all
the parts of the body both upper and lower alike. Violent and unequal
exercise overthrows the strongest bodies, weakeneth their joints, and makes
all the muscles loose, wherein consists a part of nimblenes. The morning
exercise is best, or else at after dinner when the two first concoctions are
perfected: that which is used by and by after meat, begets an infinite
number of obstructions, fills the veins with raw humors, and causes the
meat to descend too soon out of the stomach. In winter we must walk more
swiftly, and in summer more softly: and always the Physician must have regard
to that whereunto the party is accustomed: for as Hippocrates writes in his
second book of Aphorisms; They which are accustomed to take pains, do bear
it the more easily, although they be weak, and come to old age. There are
universal and particular exercises. The universal (if a man can do them) are
the better: and amongst them, one praises especially the ball play,
foote-walkes, and riding. The particular are fricasies, which avail much to
the stirring up of natural heat, to make attraction of nourishment to any
part, and to consume the vapors and excrements of the third concoction, which
lie lurking oftentimes in the void spaces of the muscles and among the
membranes.

Old folk must content themselves with moderate exercise, The exercise of old
folk.
for fear that the little natural heat which they have should be spent.
Frications, or rubbing of the parts are most fit for them. They must be rubd
and chafed in the morning after they be awake, until the parts begin to be
red and warm. The rubbing must begin at the arms, and from thence to the
shoulders, back and breast, from thence we must go down to the thighs, and
rise up again from thence to the shoulders; the head must be the last, which
must be combd and trimd up every morning. There are other particular exercises
of the eyes, voice and breast, which are of use.

CHAP. IX. What rules are to be observed in sleeping.
Sleep is one of the chief points of well ordering and governing ones self:
concerning which there are certain general rules to be observed of the^ which
are desirous to keep back and hinder the hasty access of old age. It is good
(says Hippocrates) to sleep only in the night, and to keep waking in the
daytime. Sleeping at nooneday is very dangerous, and makes all the body heavy
and blown up. It must be observed not to go to bed under three or four
haures after supper, and then also to take a little walk up and down the
chamber before you go into bed. The best and most natural sleep is that
which lasts seven hours, and in that time not to have over many clothes upon
the bed, to the end the vapors may have the freer passage. One must sleep
having their head somewhat raised, least the meat should rise from the bottom
of the stomach unto the upper mouth thereof; and in sleeping he must not lie
upon his back, least the ordinary excrements of the brain, which are purged
by the nose and mouth, should fall upon the back bone; and least also that by
lying upon his back, he should heat the gross hollow vein and great
artery, which are fastened to the loins, and so these vessels thus heated,
should increase the heat of the reins, engender the Stone, and send great
quantity of vapors unto the brain. It is good to take his first sleep upon
the right side, for sear the liver should fall upon the stomach and oppress
it, as it would do if he should he upon the spleen; and further because that
lying on the right side, he liver vnderlaieth the stomach, and serving it in
stead of a chafing dish, helps disgestion very much. After this he must turn
him upon his left side, to the end that the vapors retained by lying on the
right side, may breathe out: and finally he must lie upon the right side, to
the end that what shall be concocted, may descend the more easily. The parts of
the body must not be stretched out al along in sleeping, they must be somewhat
drawn up: for as Galen observes in his first book of the moving of the
muscles, the rest of the muscles consists in a mean kind of contraction. And
that is the figure, which the Anathomists call the mean or middle figure,
which is most natural and least painful. And thus much for the general rules
of sleep, which seeing all old men cannot tell how to keep, we will permit
them to sleep a little after dinner, in as much as they cannot but lie waken
almost all nights long. Some refer the cause of their lying awake to their
temperature, which is dry, and to the sharp vapors which commonly are raised
of salt phlegm.

Chap. X. How we must make old folks merry, and put them out of all manner of
violent passions of the mind.
PLato in a Dialogue, which he intituleth Carmides, writes as the truth is,
that the most violent and dangerous diseases that the body suffers, do come
from the mind: for the mind (says he) having a sovereign power and absolute
authority to command the body, The power of the mind over the body.
moves, alters, and changes it in a moment as it pleases. How many
diseases do we see to rise, and to be cured by the only force of
imagination? How many examples have we of such as sudden and extreme joy has
brought unto their end? And griefs, pensiuenes, and sadness, do they not cast
us headlong into an infinite number of melancholic diseases, which serve for a
scourge unto the Physician, and their own confusion for their obstinacy? We
have read many histories of such as have grown white haired in four and
twenty hours, upon fear only and a conceited opinion of death. So that he
which would live long and in health, must keep himself as much as he can free
from all violent passions. But old men more then any other must beware, both
because they are ordinarily more subject to fear, taking of offense, and
waywardnes, because of their cold distemperature: as also because of the
weakness of their brain. And other men must endeavor to take from them all
occasion of fear and sadness, least they should thereby become more cold. There
is no danger now and then to move their choler, thereby to rouse them up and
warm them a little: they must be made merry as much as may be, and every
thing ministered unto them that may content and please them. But for as much as
all the pleasures and displeasures which we feel in our minds, do rise from
the senses, which are the trusty spies, and faithful messengers thereof, we
must (if we will content and please old men,) flatter and tickle their
senses, the sight, hearing, smelling and taste, in providing for every one of
them, matters that are most agreeable and fit for them. The eye delights it
self wonderfully in the beholding of beautiful women; The pleasures of sight.
and I am of opinion that such sight only will content old men. Variety of
flowers, and diversity of fair colors does rejoice them infinitely. They must
wear continually some one or other rich and precious Jewel, and amongst
others the Saphir and Emerauld, because there is not any other color that does
preserve and comfort the sight so much as does the green and violet. The
hearing has his particular delights, which pearce yet more deeply, The
rauishment of the ear.
and sound the very bottom of the mind. Music with voices and instruments,
does calm and make gentle the most outrageous, rough and stern natures.
Clinias (as I have observed in the treatise of melancholic diseases) so soon
as he saw any passion to assail him, took his harp, and by this means kept
away the motions of his humor. Old men must be held up with such discourses as
they like of; they must be praised, they must be flattered, they must not be
gainsayd in anything, and there must be propounded unto them matter which may
please them, and whereunto they have been brought up; as lucre and gain unto
the merchant; great exploytes and feats of arms, to the warrior; learned
discourses, to such as are learned: for these do hold them awake and content.
Witness hereof is that good old man and grave lawmakers Solon, who being in
his deathbed, and seeing two or three of his friends whispering together, for
fear they should offend him, did list up himself luftely, and desired them to
speak aloude, thinking himself most happy if at his last hour he might
leame any thing. The pleasures of smelling.
As concerning the sense of smelling, it is most certain that good smells do
make the heart joyful and merry, and purify the spirits. I am of opinion
therefore, that it were good for old men to carry about them some good
odours, as chains and balls of Musk, that they have always in their chamber
some good parfumes, that they wash their beards, The pleasures of the taste.
hands and faces with sweet waters. As for the taste, it is to be referred
unto the victuals, and for it there must daily be provided some dainty dish,
and some one meat or other that is sharp in taste, to stir up their
appetite. Behold therefore and see wherein consists the manner of diet to be
observed of old folk: and it behooves (that I may make an end of the whole
discourse) that every one become wise, to know his natural inclination, and
that experience of such things as do him good or harm, make him a master and
Physician unto himself.

CHAP. XI. What medecines are most fit for old folk, and by what means, the
discommodities of old age may be amended.
SO many are the discommodities which old age brings with it, as that the
learned of old time did think it to come nearer to the nature of a disease
then of health. The discommodities waiting upon old men.
You shall see old men commonly to be costiue, to abound with fleagme, and
sharp waterish humors, which causes some small itchings and burning of urine,
they are all full of windines, and feel an universal weakness over all their
bodies, because they have a weak stomach, and the natural heat of their
whole body is faint and languishing, they are in a manner altogether subject to
theumes, and cease not either to cough, spit, or weep. All these infirmities
may be provided against by some gentle and delightsome medicines. And first of
all, the belly must be made good, How the belly may be kept soluble. A
laxatiue broth.
(that is to say loose) with artificial brothes, which may be prepared
diverse ways. Take of the tender crops of Mallows, of Mercury, Garden and
wild Artichoke, and of the herb called Cynocrambe, boil them with a
Chicken, and take it in the morning. The broth of red Coleworts with oil, is
very good, but the broth of a Cock is the excellentest of all the rest: it
must be made thus. Take an old Cock, pull him and beat him well, afterward
kill him, The broth of a Cock.
and having taken out his guts, wash him twice or thrice in white wine, and
stuff his belly with a handful of the roots of Percely, the leaves of
Borage, Buglosse, Burnet, Mercury, Artichoke of the garden and field, fat
Figs, damask Raisins, Dates, Iuiubes the seed of Carthamus and Hisope, boil
all these together perfectly, and afterward strain them very well for the
purpose, and cause it to be taken three days together. Some put thereto a
little of the salt of Tartar, to give it some sharpenes. This broth serves
exceeding well for old men, for it keeps the body loose, cleanses the
ways of Urine, and is very profitable for the breast, and shortness of breath,
whereunto they be subject. Suppositories must be ordinarily used of them, as
also mollifying Clysters. Galen would not that we should use any strong and
sharp Clysters, he rests contented in the only use of oil Olive. For
inward Laxatiues I like well and allow of the pills of Hiera, of Aloes well
prepared, and those which are called Mastichinae. Turpentine cleanses and
purges all the inward parts, Remedies for the weakness of their stomach.
without danger for the weakness of their stomach, and to discuss the winds
which put them to pain, the root of Ginger confected, Lozenges of Aromaticum
Rosatum, sugard Anise seed, Cinamome water, the essence of Anise seed, To
stir up the heat of old folk.
of Juniper berries and Cloves is commended. To stir up the heat which may
seem to be asleep all over the body, I find nothing better, then to cause
them to take oftentimes the weight of two French Crowns of Amber Grise in a
very new egg. I allow also of the use of Treacle, Mithridate, Confectio
Alkermes, Aquae Theriacales, Imperiales, and Caelestes. The compositions
whereof I set not down, because they are at this day very common. All the
parts also may be strengthened with outward medecines, as the brain by caps and
head powders, amongst which Auenzoar praises Cloves powdered and scattered upon
the Coronall suture, the heart by emplasters, ointments, and bags, the stomach
by ointments and bags. Finally, we must think, that all aromaticall things,
and those which smell well, are good for old folk.

FINIS.

