LAWS and Ordinances, set down by ROBERT Earl of LEYCESTER, the Queens
Majesty's Lieutenant and Captain GENERAL of her army and forces in the Low
Countries:

Meet and fit to be observed by all such as shall serve her MAJESTY under him
in the said Countries, and therefore to be published and notified to the whole
Army.

Jmprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens most
excellent Majesty.

royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

Laws and Ordinances set down by Robert Earl of Leycester, the Queens
Majesty's Lieutenant and Captain General of her Army and Forces in the low
Countries: meet and fit to be observed by all such as shall serve her
Majesty under him in the said Countries, and therefore to be published and
notified to the whole Army.
FOrasmuch as there is not any governed Estate, which in peace or war can be
accounted sure, or preserved from dishonor and ruin, unless it be supported
and borne up by Justice duly administered, and discipline orderly observed: And
for that no man can be so ignorant as not to know, that honor, fame and
prosperity, do duly follow that common Wealth or Nation, wherein good laws
are established, the Magistrate ministering Justice is duly regarded, and the
people fearing to offend, are drawn under the rules of Justice and obedience:
And seeing that martial discipline above all things (proper to men of war)
is by us at this time most to be followed, as well for the advancement of Gods
glory, as honorably to govern this Army in good order: And least that the
evil inclined (pleading simplicity) should cover any wicked fact by
ignorance: Therefore these martial Ordinances and Laws following are
established and published, whereby all good minds endeavoring to attain
honor, may stand armed, and receive encouragement to persevere in well doing,
and such as are inclined to lewdenesse, be warned from committing offenses
punishable. Which being embraced with careful respect, and followed with
obedience, do promise good order and agreement amongst our selves, with
victory and good events against our enemies.

1 First, every chief Magistrate, Captain, inferior Officer, Soldier,
Pioner, or what person else receiving her Majesty's pay in Field or Garrison,
shall solemnly swear, and by corporal oath be bound to perform the under
written Articles, so far as to each in their several qualities shall
appertain: the violating or breaking whereof, is to be punished by the
Generalles direction, according to the quality of the offense.

2 For So Much as the holy Name of our most mighty and invincible GOD, with all
reverence ought to be regarded, and that destruction is pronounced to such as
blaspheme or abuse the same: it is therefore ordained and commanded, that no
person whatsoever, either in common conference or communication, or for any
cause whatsoever, shall blaspheme being thus admonished, or take his Name in
vain, upon pain of loss of v.s. to the relief of the poor for the first
offense: for the second, five days imprisonment: for the third, loss of his
place and wages.

3 And because the continual and unspeakable favors of our Almighty God, by
our unthankfulness may be taken from us, and that no good event of any action
can be expected, wherein God is not first and principally honored and served:
It is therefore especially ordained and commanded, that all persons whatsoever,
shall upon general warning given either by sound of Trumpet or Drum, repair
to the place appointed, where the Divine service is to be used, there to hear
the same read and preached, unless for the present by sickness or other
service he be impeached, upon pain to lose his days wages for the first, two
days wages for the second, and so to be increased by the discretion of the
Judge, and for every such default in the Soldier, as well the Captain as his
inferior officers, to be punished with like penalty.

4 And seeing it well beseems all Christians, especially such as profess the
military service, to pass away the time in matters requisite for their
profession: And because no time can be more vainly spent, then that which is
confumed in unlawful games, besides the breeding of much contention and
quarrelles: And for that there be many allowable and commendable exercises for
all sorts of men to use: Therefore it is straightly commanded, that no private
Soldier or inferior Officer shall frequent the playing at Dice and Cards,
nor any other unlawful games, upon pain of two days imprisonment for the
first time, and for after committing the like, to be further punished by the
Judges discretion.

5 And for that it often happens, that by permitting of many vagrant and idle
women in an army, sundry disorders and horrible abuses are committed:
Therefore it is ordained that no man shall carry into the field, or deteine
with him in the place of his garrison, any woman whatsoever, other then such as
be known to be his lawful wife, or such other women to tend the sick and to
serve for launders, as shall be thought meet by the Marshall, upon pain of
whipping and banishment.

6 And insomuch as elementie amongst men of war in some respects is a
singular virtue: It is ordained that no man in any part of this service that he
shall do, shall lay violent hands upon any woman with child, or lying in
childebed, old persons, widows, young virgins, or babes, without especial
order from the Magistrate, upon pain of death.

7 What person soever that shall be commonly given to drunkenness, or
riotously behave himself, shall be banished the Army.

8 Whosoever shall conceal, or in any sort keep secret Treason, any
dangerous Conspiracy, or other practice which may be hurtful, and may
concern the peril of her Majesty's person, or of her General, or the estate
of this Army, and shall not with all diligence reveal the same either unto
the General, or some other Officer of especial trust, shall incur the
pains of death with torments.

9 No man shall have speech or conference, send message, deliver or receive
letters to or from the enemy, or any his confederates, either secretly or
openly, without manifesting the same presently unto the General or Marshall,
or having former authority so to do, upon pain of death.

10 No man being in this service shall depart ye Camp or place of Garrison for
any cause whatsoever, without the Generals especial Pasport, or other head
Officer authorized, upon pain of death.

11 No man shall break out or leave the order of his rank, being once ordered
in the field by the Marshall or Sergeant Mayor, without some great occasion
first made known unto the said Officer, upon pain of loss either of life or
limme, at the discretion of the General or of the Marshall.

12 No man appointed to watch or ward, shall shun or depart the place, neither
shall sleep, or neglect his duty therein, especially after the watch is set
and the word given, unless he be orderly relieved, or for some great
occasion enforced, with license of his Captain or Officer, upon pain of death.

13 No man shall bewray the watchworde to the enemy or to any other, or give
any other word then is delivered by the Officer, upon pain of death with
torment.

14 No man shall raise any mutiny, or procure unlawful assemblies upon
private, secret, or hidden purpose, whereby to disturb the peace and quiet of
the Army, upon pain of death.

15 No man shall lift up his weapon against the Magistrate, his Captain or
Officer, upon pain of death.

16 No man shall quarrel, brawle, or make any affray within the Camp or Town
of garrison, upon old malice, or new occasion whatsoever, but shall complain
to the Officer, who is to decide the cause and punish the party offending,
upon pain of loss of life or limme, at the discretion of the General or
Marshall.

17 And whereas sundry nations are to serve with us in these wars, so as
through diversity of languages occasion of many controversies may arise or
happen to grow: It is therefore ordained, that if any person of English nation
shall find him self agrieued with any wrong proffered him by any forreiner,
that then without profering further revenge he shall signify the same unto
his Captain or other officer, whereby order may be taken so, as no further
quarrel grow thereof, but that quietness in all respects may be preserved,
upon pain of such punishment as the head officers shall think meet, either
by loss of life or limme.

18 No man appointed to the defense of any Breach, Trench, or Straight, either
Captain or Soldier, shall willingly leave it, or upon any false or imagined
cause or excuse shall absent himself from the place, without sufficient
warrant, upon pain of death.

19 No Captain, officer, or other person, shall receive or entertain any
other man's Soldier or servant, without consent of his former Captain or
Master, neither shall entice an other man's Soldier from him, upon pain of
loss of a Months wages, and to restore the party to his former Captain or
Master.

20 No man shall enrolle his name under two Captains, nor muster in several
companies at one time, or otherwise pass in another man's name, or lend
Armor, weapon, or other furniture upon the muster day, whereby to abuse her
Majesty, and weaken the present service, upon pain of a months imprisonment,
and banishment.

21 No man shall embezill or diminish any of his Armor, weapon and furniture,
which is appointed him by his Captain, unless he can prove that he lost the
same in service. And that no man shall take in pawn any Soldiers weapon or
furniture, upon pain to the Soldier of loss of his place, and to the other
that shall take it in pawn, the loss of the double value.

22 No man shall play away, engage, or lend away his furniture, but shall
always keep his Armor and weapon clean and serviceable, upon pain of being
discharged.

23 No man shall deceitfully take away his companions provision, victuals, or
furniture, upon pain of imprisonment.

24 No person traueyling, lodging, or abiding in any the Towns or Countries of
her Majesty's friends or Allies, shall in any wise exact or take by force from
the people either victual or other their goods whatsoever, without present
payment, or other sufficient order to the just satisfaction of the party, upon
pain of death.

25 No man shall forestall any victuals brought for the Camp or place of
garrison, but suffer the same peaceably to come into the Market place, there to
be rated and priced by the Marshall or his officer, before he buy the same,
upon pain of death.

26 No man shall rob or spoil any Shop or Tent, or any victualler or
Merchant coming for relief of the Camp or garrison, but in all good sort
shall entertain and defend them, upon pain of death.

27 No Soldier commanded at any time to take victuals for certain days,
shall exceed the same days, or spend the same otherwise then according to the
proportion and time allowed him, upon pain of imprisonment, or other such
punishment as the lawful officers shall appoint.

28 No man shall distress or spoil any person standing on her Majesty's
party, or being under the Generals protection, upon pain of death.

29 No man shall disobey or transgress any Proclamation made by Drum or
Trumpet, set forth by the General, upon such pain as he shall set forth.

30 No man shall resist the Provost or his other officer in apprehending of any
malefactor, but if need require, shall aid and assist him therein, or
otherwise if by such occasion any escape be made, it is ordained that every
person by whose defaulte the escape was committed, shall suffer like punishment
that the parties so escaped should have endured.

31 No man shall molest or trouble any person being under his own regiment,
or the leading of any other, once placed by the Marshall forrier, or Harbinger
in the Camp or Town, but quietly to permit and suffer every one to enjoy his
several room or lodging, unless it be by mutual consent and agreement,
neither shall any man lodge out of his Captains quarter without license, upon
pain of imprisonment.

32 No man contrary to order shall set on fire or burn any house, milne, or
corn, nor at dislodging or remoouing shall set the Camp on fire, without
special commandment from the General or other head Officer present, upon
pain of death.

33 No man without great occasion shall make any Alarm, but if any chance to
arise, then shall every man presently repair in all haste unto his appointed
place, unless some true excusable cause do hinder him, upon pain of death.

34 No man shall harbor or receive into his lodging any person being a
stranger, or of our own nation not being enrolled in her Majesty's pay, but
shall presently acquaint the General or Marshall with his name, country, the
time of his coming, and business, upon pain of imprisonment, and loss of his
place and wages.

35 No man shall talk or have conversation with any Trumpetter or Drummer of
the enemies, or other sent in message, but such as be appointed by the
General, upon pain of death.

36 No man shall attend upon the cariages, but such as are appointed to that
charge, neither linger, or loyter behind with them to ride or ease themselves,
unless it be such as by sickness, hurtes, or other infirmities known to the
officers, to be permitted so, upon pain of imprisonment, and loss of wages.

37 No man shall attempt to go a forraging, without the officer appointed for
that purpose deliver them a sufficient guarde for their defense, upon pain of
death.

38 No Captain shall send forth any men to do any enterprise, without
knowledge of the General, or chief officer appointed thereunto, upon pain of
loss of his place.

39 All private Captains, being no head Officers, shall watch and ward with
their Ensigns, unless it be by special leave, upon pain of the loss of a
months pay, and for the second time, loss of his place.

40 Every Soldier shall present such prisoners as are taken, to their Captain
immediately at their return to the Camp, and none shall either kill them, or
license them to depart, without commandment or leave from the General, or
other head Officer thereunto appointed, upon pain of being disarmed, and
banished the Camp.

41 Every Soldier at all times in service shall be obedient and faithful,
as well to their Captains as other inferior Officers, and not to refuse
direction of any under whom they are appointed to serve, upon pain of
imprisonment, and loss of a months wages.

42 Every man shall support and defend his own Ensign both night and day,
and shall resort unto the same upon the first warning, and not depart until it
be brought into safety, upon pain of death.

43 Every soldier shall diligently observe and learn the sound of Drums,
Fifes, and Trumpets, to the end he may know how to answer the same in his
service.

44 No man shall slaughter or kill any beast of what nature soever within the
Camp or Garrison, but in such places as are appointed for that purpose, nor
shall suffer the garbage to remain unburied, neither shall any man trouble or
defile the waters adjoining, but in the lower part of the stream some good
distance from the Camp, upon pain of imprisonment.

45 No man shall ease himself or defile the Camp or Town of Garrison, save
in such places as is appointed for that purpose, upon pain of imprisonment,
and such further punishment, as shall be thought meet by the chief Officers.

46 No Captain shall sell or ransom his prisoner without license of the
General, and shall not suffer them to depart without making the high Marshall
privy to the same, upon pain of loss of his prisoner, and imprisonment.

47 If any man do take a prisoner or booty, he shall immediately after he is
returned unto the Camp or Town of Garrison, make his Captain or Governor
acquainted therewith, and the Captain shall declare the same unto the
Marshall, who every eight days shall make certificate thereof unto the
General, upon pain of imprisonment, and further punishment as the General
shall set down.

48 In Marching by the fields, no man at the putting up of any Hare, or any
other beast shall make any shout or cry, whereby to disquiet or stay the rest
of the bands, but to use all quietness and silence in their march, upon pain
of imprisonment.

49 No man shall give up or deliver unto the enemies any place left to his
charge or keeping, upon pain of death.

50 If any man fly to the enemies, or be taken upon his departure toward
them, he shall suffer death.

51 Any Captain finding any Soldier of what band or company so ever, which
has transgressed any of these Laws and Ordinances, may take him and bring him
unto the Marshall to be punished.

52 That whosoever shall be enrolled into pay after the oath be ministered to
others and he not present, and if afterward he shall transgress any of these
Ordinances, he shall be as well punishable by virtue of these Articles, as if
he had been present at the first.

53 That no Captain shall receive or enroll any person into his pay under
him, but that he cause the said Soldier to receive the oath, as is set down
in the first Article; upon pain to the Captain for not observing the same, of
loss of a months pay.

54 That no person whatsoever shall pass by any other way either in Town or
Camp, but at the ordinary gates and passages, upon pain of death.

55 All other offenses and Acts that may tend to disorder, not comprised
within these Articles, shall be subject to such manner of punishment, as the
Lieutenant General shall inflict upon them, as if it had been specially
expressed and set down.


