The grieuances of the Owners and Masters of shipping trading to the
Southwards, against the patent for Dungennesse lights.
What was consented unto.
IT is true that some of us gave consent to the setting up of a light at
Dungennesse: which was intended should have bin a fair stone-tower, wherein to
hane kept a blazing fire light: and for the charge of building and maintenance
thereof, consent was likewise given to pay a penny upon the tun of all ships
that should take benefit thereby; and this penie to be paid, part by the Owner
and part by the Merchant, at the return of the ships The Patentees abuse of
the consent: in erecting an unfit light, and ill keeping thereof.
from their voyages, and not before.

But the Patentee has abused this consent: for in stead of a stone tower, he
has erected slight structures of 3 or 4 masts: and on the top thereof keeps
only a candle light, which is nothing fit for that place, for that we cannot
have any benefit thereby, because it cannot be seen, till ships come very
near it: and also that candle light is so euilly kept, that it is suffered in
many dark nights to go out, to the often endangering of our ships and men's
lives.

The Patentee receives as much again, as was consented unto, and receives it
of those that have no benefit by the light.
And in stead of a penny upon the tun to be paid at our ships return* the
Patentee has inserted a penny out, and a penny in, which is two pence upon
the tun, every voyage. Which two pence we refusing at first to pay, he
procured his Majesty's letter to the Custom House, to have our entries
refused, and our Coquets stayed until payment were made of the said two pence
upon the tun. And also he receives the like imposition of all ships that
bring salt, wines, or oils out of the Low Countries, ^^though they come not
near the said lights by 18 or 20 miles, nor can have any benefit thereby.

What we now desire.
We do therefore humbly pray this honorable Assembly to provide that a fair
tower may be built, wherein may be kept a blazing fire-light, at the charge of
a penny upon the tun, to be paid part by the Owner, and part by the
Merchant, at the return of our ships: or otherwise altogether to extinguish
the light: for much better were it to have none, then such a one, by which we
can have no benefit, but are often endangered to lose both our ships, goods and
lives.


