TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, Mr. Edward Stafford, of BRADFIELD in the County of
BERK: Grace and glory.
SIR: It has pleased GOD, since my departure from the College, to visit me
with continual sickness, (I am the man that has seen affliction in the rod
of his indignation,) Lam. 3.1.
a Burning-Feuer, having for these nine Months exhausted my body, and made it
almost a Scheleton: All which time of my weakness, when my indisposition, by
my cruel disease, would permit, my study was wholly in the Psalms of David; a
Book fit for one in my case, being full of Psalms of humiliation under Gods
rod: what comfort I found therein, I feel in my soul, I need not, I cannot
express. Among many other Psalms of sad subject, I was much affected with the
79. Psalm, the reporter and bemoner of Ierusalems destruction: an argument
full of heaviness, agreeable to my dull and sad disposition; on which Psalm I
then conceived some Meditations, which for some reasons, I am willing to impart
to the world, and have vowed in my self, if this first Essay be kindly
accepted, to bestow now in my health, better pains upon all the whole Book of
the Psalms, and to make this Schedell a just Volume. J present it to you as
the first fruits of my active life, being moved thereto by duty and respect:
and somewhat to incite you to make this Book the object of your Contemplation.

Believe me, Sir, other Books make men good Scholars, but above all, the
Book of the Psalms makes men good Christians. I doubt not of the acceptance
of this poor Mite, or the imploiment thereof. God who has given you in your
youth, a sober and honest heart; give also that by my unworthy service, you may
continue, increase, and grow old in his Grace: so my study shall be ever
profitable, and you blessed. Which I heartily wish, and remain

Your Worships in all duty and observance I. Dunster.

HIERVSALEMS destruction.
PSALM. 79. O God, the Heathen are come into thine inheritance, thine holy
Temple have they defiled, and made Jerusalem heaps of Stones.
SAint Hilarie, in his Prologue upon the Psalms observes, that to every
Psalm there belongs proper Keys; by which we may open and enter into the
sense thereof: and those Keys are said to be twain: 1 The Inscription. 2 The
person to whom, of whom, against whom, the Psalm is indicted.


1 The Title or Inscription of this Psalm, is, Psalmus Asaph, in Saint Hieroms
translation Canticu^^ Asaph, the Song of Asaph, either because composed by
Asaph, the son of Barachiah; or rather, because sung by that company of
Levites, or Singing-men, which were under Asaphs government: for we find, 1
Chro. 25. that there were three orders or forms of singing-men; some under
Asaph, others under Idithun, and the third under Ethan.

2 The person of whom or against whom this Psalm is penned, according to the
diverse opinion and judgment of the learned, is likewise diverse: Lyran.
some will have the person to be Nabuchadnezzar, and the Babylonians, by whom
the first Temple, Augustinus. Cassiodorus.
built by Solomon, was defaced, and Jerusalem sacked. Others, Antiochus,
surnamed Epiphanes; who burnt Jerusalem, and polluted the second Temple,
built by Zorobabel, after the captivity: and this opinion is most probable,
for 1 Macca. 7.17. we find the third verse of this Psalm, ( Their blood have
they shed like water round about Jerusalem) applied to Antiochus his cruelty,
by the ministry of Alcimus: Remigius.
Some there be that understand it of Vespatian and Titus, Josephus says that
the Priests did first set fire on the Temple and afterward came to yield
themselves to Titus, who made them this answer, Decere sacerdotes, intirire
Templo? What use was there of Priests when there was no Temple?
who made desolate the City Jerusalem, and burnt the third Temple, which was
40. years in building by Herod the first, surnamed Asealonita, who slew the
little children in the Gospel. But I do not see how venerunt in haereditatem
tuam may be verified of the Jews under the Romans, because they were now
repudiated, and the Gentiles subrogated into their place.

But whosoever the person be against whom this Psalm was indicted. Sure I am it
is a mere Elegy and mournful lamentation; literally of the Jews, for the
destruction of their City and Temple; Tropically of Christians, bewailing the
deuastation of Christ his Church here on Earth by the malice of cruel
persecutors, whether that Aper de sylua, the Turk, or the Purple whore, the
great Antichrist of Rome.

Verse 1. O God, the Heathen are come into thine inheritance, etc.
Here is a patheticall exclamation, O God! and the reason thereof, the Heathen
are come into thine Inheritance, etc.

O God! Deus! ah Deus! aspicis haec? O God! Let men be in prosperity they
seldom think of, or pray to God.

Rarae fumant foelicibus arae. Sil. It.
Men in prosperity seldom need or use Sacrifices at the Altar to purchase
Gods favor, but men in calamity think they never do enough. They were a
stubborn people, Vt afflictio facit religiosos, rebus secundis nec Deus nee
diuus quispiam nobis venit mentem. Erasm. in Naufr.
of whom it was said, Clama^erunt ad Dominum cum tribularentur, yet their
necks being bended by tribulation, they bowed their knees and hearts likewise.
On a Feast, or Marriage-day few talk of God, but if a house be on fire, or the
pestilence in the City, all men hold up their hands to Heaven. Fill their
faces, O Lord, with shame, and they will seek thy Name, says the Prophet
Isay. It is said of Jonas, Zeno Episc. ver. lib. 2. Ser. 38.
Vigilat in ceto qui stertebat in naue. Mira res. A wonderful matter! He that
slept in the Ship is broad-waking in the Whales belly, praying unto God so
zealously as if he would force Heaven with his prayers.

2 The cause of the exclamation, The Heathen are come into thine inheritance.]

Idolaters, who know not thee to be the true God, have invaded, yea, possessed
as their own, yea rauaged and forraged in thine inheritance. The Gentiles,
cursed, abhorred Gentiles, dogs, wild Olives, if not Brambles rather, of whom
thou saydst, Lamen. 1.10.
They should not enter into thy Church, have with the foot of pride and
disdain trodden upon thine Altars, profaned thy sacred Temple, slain thy
Priests, and done violence to the Apple of thine own eyes. (Custodiu^t quasi
pupillam oculi sui, Deuteronomy. 32.10.) The Chaldaeans, or Antiochus, or the Romans,
have broken down the hedge of thy Vineyard, thy people, that thy people, whom
thou louedst as thine own soul ( Dedi dilectam animam meam in manus
inimicorum, Ierem. 12.) have they in miserable captivity. O God! Deus! ah
Deus! aspicis haec?

Thy holy Temple have they defiled.] Whether that of Solomon, if you understand
this Psalm of the Chaldaeans, or that of Zorobabel; if of Antiochus, or that
of Herod; if of Vespatian and Titus: Thy Temple they have defiled,
coinquinated, profaned, either by overthrowing thine Altars, and demolishing
the Temple it self; or by exportation of the holy vessels into profane
banquets, Dan. 5. 1 Mac. 1.57. Stupris and alijs immandicis illud polluerunt.
Haymon Remegius.
or by placing in thy Temple the Image of Jupiter Olympius, or by abusing our
wives and daughters in thy Temple: either by some or all these ways have they
defiled thy Temple.

-- Fuerat hoc prorsus nefas Sen.

Danais inausum, Templa violastis.
Haereditatem tuam, Templu^ tuum.]
Thine inheritance, thy Temple. Have regard to thine own worship: defend thine
own Altars: sauegard thy Priests: keep thine own house, I do not say from
Buyers and Sellers, but from the invasion of thieves, who are already entered
therein, and have made thereof a Den of thieves. The zeal of thine house has
eaten me up, and forces me to say once again, O God! Deus! ah Deus! aspicis
haec?

And made Jerusalem heaps of stones.] Jerusalem, famous for her first Founder,
Melchisedech, King of Salem, a notable type of Christ: for her Antiquity,
builded in the days of Abraham: for her situation and form, being the
platform and type of heaven: for her Temple, all of gold, even to the
Snuffers: for the Kingdom and Priesthood both resident in her: for her name,
Jerusalem, the vision of peace; where the God of peace was to seal the
covenant of peace, and whence was to be sent abroad the Instrument of our
peace, the Gospel of Reconciliation. This Jerusalem, the City of God, the
holy City, the City of the great King the School of our Faith, the cradle of
our Salvation, the bed in which the life of the world slept, rose again, and
ascended into heaven; this Jerusalem is now made in Pomorum custodiam, as a
lodge in a Vineyard, or Garden of Cucumbers: nay, in a lodge there is fashion
of orderly building, in aceruum lapidu^, heaps of stones, Mat. 23.
not one stone left upon another in orderly building.

-- Columen euersum occidit
Pollent is Asiae, Sen.
caelitum egregius labor.
-- Hostis -- horrei afflictam quoque
Victa^que qua^uis videat haud credit sibi
Potuisse vinci. --
Is this the City that men call the perfection of beauty, and joy of the
whole earth? Lam. 2.15.

O God, the Heathen are come into thine inheritance, Tollebant manus prae
admiratione. Thomas.

O quanta i^^tatio rerum! Rupertus.


thine holy Temple have they defiled, and made Jerusalem heaps of stones, etc.

Why God should thus forsake his inheritance, and not remember his Footstool,
in the day of his Wrath. The causes I take to be two: 1 His love to his People.
2 His hatred to the sin of his people.


His love to his people: Whom God loves he corrects, You only have I known
of all the Nations of the earth, therefore I will visit you for all your
iniquities, Amos 3.2. he scourges every son whom he receives: the more his
anger, the greater is his love. His best people, chosen and culled out of all
the nations of the earth, tasted almost of an Anniuersary Captivity.
(Jerusalem taken 1 By Iebusites.

2 By David.

3. 4. By Nabuchadnezzar.

5 By Sesack, King of Aegipt, in Roboams time.

6 By Alexander the great.

7. 8. By Antiochus.

9 By Pompey.

10 By Herod.


ten times, before her desolation by Vespatian and Titus,) often captiuated,
yet never extinguished; yea, God has reserved a remnant of Israel to be saved
in the end of the world, after their so long dispertion. Moab is therefore more
full of sin, because never dealt withal as Jerusalem, never removed from her
lees, never poured from vessel to vessel, says the Prophet. While God
strikes us, it argues he has his face toward us, and not his back, which
is the greatest judgment of all, when God goes from us as if not caring for
us. I will not visit your daughters when they are harlots, nor your spouses
when they are whores, Hos. 4.14. My wrath is departed from me, I will cease,
and be no more angry, Ezekiel. 16. Nolo istam misericordiam: I will none of that
mercy (says S. Bernard.) Ser. super Cant. Misericordia puniens: and parcens
crudelitas. Aug.
This pity is beyond all wrath: Hic vrat, hic secet, dum parcat in aeternum;
let him cauterize, let him use incision in this life, so he spare in the life
to come. Ex hoc intelligimus, nos Deo curae esse, quoniam cum peccamus
irascitur: By this (says Lactantius) we know that God cares for us, because
when we sin he is angry.

The bitter pill of afflictions is no way to be shunned of a good Christian.

1 Because they come from GOD, howbeit sometime inflicted by Satan, Gods
instrument. Behold it shall come to pass, that the Devil shall cast some of
you into prison, that ye may be tried, and ye shall have tribulation ten
days. Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee the crown of
life. Reu. 2.10.

2 Because they work for our good: We are chastened of the Lord, because we
should not be condemned with the world. 1 Cor. 11.32. Amarasalubria: bitter
Potions are wholesome.

3 Because they assimilate us to Christ: He suffered and so entered into his
glory. He went to heaven by weeping Cross, and we must follow him the same
way. It were monstrous there should be delicata membra sub capite spinoso,
says Saint Bernard.

4 Because howbeit they be grievous, yet they be but short, for a little while
have I forsaken thee, but with great compassion will I gather thee: for a
moment, in mine anger, I hid my face from thee for a little soason, but with
everlasting mercy have I had compassion on thee, Isa. 54.7.8. The Sun is not
always ouercast with a cloud; It is not ever winter; Mariners feel not
always the fury of Winds: Nec fera tempestas toto tamen errat in anno, Ovid.
in Fast.

Et tibi, creed mihi, tempora Veris erunt.


Every affliction has (...), 2 Cor. 2.10.
a forth, Intermissa gratior libertas, ac reddita quam seruata. Petr.
or an escape: Sorrow and mourn o Daughter Zion! like a woman in travail, for
now thou shall go and dwell in the field, and go into Babell, but there shall
thou be delivered, Micha 4.10. (...), He has, he does, and yet he will
deliver us, There befalls us no other temptations, 1 Cor. 10.11.
but such as befall men. According to our weakness, God proportionateth his
cup of affliction: therefore I think called a Cup of affliction, Matthew. 20.
because no Physician more carefully assigns a potion for his Patient, nor
waigheth out more accurately ounces and drams, then God does afflictions for
his children.

2 His hatred to the sin of his people: Puto, (says Titus) if the Romans
had not come up against them, they would have bin swallowed up of the earth, or
perished in another Noes-floud, or have bin burnt with lightning. Ios.
surely had not Jerusalem been so sinful God would never have dealt so
hardly with his own inheritance. He would never have taken the girdle from
his loins, and said; Non es populus meus; thou art not my people. It is their
own confession, capti sumus in iniquitatibus nostris: and it was Gods
profession, Israel, si in via Dei ambulasses, habitasses vtique in pace super
terram. Numb. 31.16.
Balaam knew that if Balak could but make the people of Israel sin, that God
would eftsoons forsake them, and therefore he advised him to put stumbling
blocks before them, even that great stumbling block of the world (Quid non
mihi faemina praestas?) These caused the children of Israel, through the
counsel of Balaam, to commit a trespass against the Lord. Iud. 5.
The garish beauty of lascivious women^ a Cosby to tempt Zimry. And Ach^or (in
the Story of Iudeth) tells Holoferues, that if the Jews were guilty of any
great sins, then they should easily conquer them, for God would forsake them;
if not, si non est offensio populi huius coram Deo suo, all would be but in
vain they should attempt. When Calice was taken by the French, under Charles
the 7. and the Frenchmen, in scorn asked the English when they would come for
Calice again; a wise Captain made answer; Cum peccata vestra erunt nostris
grauiora, when your sins shall be more then ours: intimating that for sirme
God gives over a Kingdom, or a City to the spoil of enemies.

Now the sins for which Jerusalem is indicted in the Book of God, and so
often found guilty, are especially three:

1 Idolatry: According to thy Cities are thy Gods o Israel! They served
Chemosh, and Melcome, and Astheroth, and Baalim: and indeed they were
insatuated with this sin. You know of old they said to Aaron, fac nobis
Deos? Make us Gods. Ab homine exigunt vt Deos faceret, they require a man to
make them a God What stock or stone would ever have made such a foolish
petition?

2 Cruelty toward the Prophets and Servants of God, Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
which killest the Prophets, etc.

3 And above all, the sacrilegious parricide of our blessed Savior: other
sins caused only their transportation into Captivity, this their final
desolation. The anger of the Lord has scattered them he will no more regard
them, Lam. 4.16. (Of the Romans) out of their hands, I will not deliver them
Zach. 11.6.

Verse 2. The dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat unto the
Fowls of the Heaven, and the flesh of thy Saints to the Beasts of the earth.
Verse 3. Their blood have they shed like water round about Jerusalem, and
there was none to bury them.
THE Jews first bemone the wrong done to God, and to his Temple; [they have
defiled thy Temple;] now they lament their own calamity: they were slain
with the edge of the sword; but yet if they might be interred in their Fathers
Sepulchers, or but buried at all, their misery would be so much the less;
Sense in Deel.
Quid in morte miserius quam sepeliri non posse? What is more grievous in
death, then not to be buried? But behold Burial is denied them: Zenacherib
commanded Tobiah to be slain for burying the Jews. Tab. 1.
Antiochus says, Macc. 2.9. that the Jews are not worthy of buryall, but to
be left to be eaten up of ravenous Birds, and wild beasts: and under Titus the
slaughtered bodies were so many, they could not be interred, (there died by the
Famine, Sword and Pestilence, eleauen hundred thousand: Joseph.)

It is a true saying of S. Augustine, Lib. 1. de Ciuit. Dei. cap. 12.
The care of our Funeral, the manner of our Burial, the exequiall pomp, all
these Magis sunt viuorum solatia quam subsidia mortuorum, are rather comforts
for the living, then any way helps for the dead. To be interred profits not
the party deceased, his body feels it not, his soul regards it not; and we
know that many holy Martyrs have been excluded from burial, who in a
Christian scorn thereof bespake their persecutors, in their words which were
slain at Pharsalie. Nil agis hac ira, tabesne cadauera soluat,
An rogus, haud refert.
-- Luc. But yet there is an honesty which belongs to the dead body of man.
Quisquis hon^^ tumuli. Virg. 10. Aen.
Iehu commanded Iezabel to be buried. David thanked the people of Iabes Gilead,
for burying of Saul. Peter that commanded Ananias and Saphira, those false
abdicators of their patrimony to die, commanded to have them buried being
dead. Eccles. 7.
It is an axiom of charity, Mortuo non prohibeas gratiam: withhold not
kindness from the dead. It shows our love and regard to men in our own flesh
to see them buried; it manifests our Faith and Hope of the Resurrection; and
therefore when that body, which is to rise-againe, and to be made glorious and
immortal in Heaven, shall be cast to the Fowls of the air, or Beasts of the
Field, Ier. 22.11.
it argues in God great indignation against sin. (Of Iehoiakim, He shall be
buried as an Ass is buried, and cast forth without the gates of Jerusalem:)
in man inhumane and barbarous cruelty.

I only dislike these three things in burial.

1 The ambitious desire of ungodly men to be buried in the Church; of some, if
superstitiously affected, in the Quier nay under the Altar: and to purchase
this, thy give a great legacy, whereas Constantine the great thought himself
not worthy to be buried in the Church, but at the Church door whence, I take it
is that Saint Chrysostom called him Petri piscatoris ianitorem. S. Hom 66. ad
Pop. Antioch.
Peter the Fishermans porter Our Savior condemned sitting in the first place
in men alive, and will he approve of the like contention in the dead?

2 The superfluous pomp of Funerals; to be attired with rich apparel in stead
of a winding sheet; to be spiced with Balmes, Mirre and Aloes, to feast the
worms withal; to have a long black army of mourners; to have their Arms
carried in triumph before them; to have a sumptuous and tedious banquet after
the exequies; as if men who never care to follow Christ in their lives, would
emulate him in their deaths: and because it is said and was fulfilled of him,
Erit Sepulchrum eius gloriosum, Isay 11. Therefore their Funerals shall be
glorious also. Yet I know there is a state which belongs to Princes, below
which, as they might not live, so neither may they die.

3 The cost and magnificence of their Sepulchers, matchable with Artemisias
Mausoloeum, and the Egyptian Piramides, when (me thinks) it should be enough
for us Christians, who in this last age of the world are in continual
expectation of a sudden resurrection, to be covered with a bed of thin earth,
I may say, Vt quid perditio haec? Sure I am, it were better if not for their
bodies, yet for their souls, and for occasioning of a blessing upon their
posterity, that this cost had been bestowed to Charitable uses.

Verse 4. We are a reproach unto our neighbors, a scorn and derision to them
that are about us.
TO have a good Neighbor is a good purchase, and therefore Themistocles being
to sell his Field, (...). Hes.
commanded the Crier to add among other commodities, that it had a good
neighbor. But our Jews have not only enemies from far, Chaldaea and Rome,
but in vicinia, round about them; in their dwelling, Moabites, Ammonites,
Idumaeans, Philistines, who were so far from helping them against the enemy,
that they did not pity them; from pitying of them, that they did reproach,
scorn, and deride them. Totus iste textus a Principio crescens schema istud
nobilissimum facit, quod vocatur Auxesis. Cassiod. in hunc verse.


It is misery enough to be in adversity, but greater misery not to find
comfort in distress, but to be scorned in stead of comforted is a weight of
misery, able to make the stoutest heart heavy to death. I do think the
mocking of our Savior with Aue Rex Iudaeorum, and vah qui destruis Templum,
was more bitter to him then the Sponge of Vinegar he tasted off on the Cross.
Homines contumeijs magis mouentur quam verberibus (Plutarch. in Timoleon.) Men
are more moved with contumely then with stripes. Saint Chrysostom gives the
reason thereof: Because the feeling of a stripe is equally distributed between
soul and body, but the sense of reproach seazeth only and immediately upon the
soul: And Tullie in his fifth against Verres, Habet quendam aculeum contumelia
quem pati prudentes and viri boni difficillime possunt; contumely has a sting
with it, which makes to bleed the heart of wise and good men, Leuiter volat,
sed grauiter vulnerat; leuiter animum penetrat, sed non leuiter exit, etc.
says Bernard: It is a good rule, Afflicto non est danda afflictio. We must
have a hand to help not a foot to keep down men in affliction.

Verse 5. Lord, how long will thou be angry? for ever? shall thy jealousy burn
like fire?
ENemies are cruel, Neighbors are scornful and what hope or help is there
but in thee, O Lord? and thou art angry too: how long will thou be angry, for
ever? Spare us now at length, deliver us from our enemies: It is time that the
Lord have mercy vp^n Zion, yea, the time is come. Psalm. 102. -- Miseris
coelestia numina parcunt. Ovid.

Nec semper laesos and sine fine premunt.
We have endured 70. years under Nebuchadnezzar, 3. years under Antiochus,
many hundreds of years since our crucifying of Christ, and vsque quo! How long
Lord will thou be angry? for ever? (Will he keep his anger for ever? will he
reserve it unto the end? thus have thou spoken, but thou do evil even more
and more, Ierem. 3.5. Ye have kindled a fire in my anger, which shall burn for
ever.) Lord, how long wilt be angry? shall thy jealousy burn like fire?
Domine and zelus tuus. Lord, and thy Jealousy: they imply God to have been
the Author of all the evils which have befallen them. The Lord has trodden the
Winepresse upon the virgin, the daughter of Judah, La. 1.15. Who gave Jacob for
a spoil, and Israel to the robbers? Did not the Lord? because we have sinned
against him, Isa. 42.24. Not how long will Nebuchadnezzar or Antiochus be
angry? They indeed have done this unto us but as thy instruments, as thy rods.
The Sabeans robbed Job of his substance, yet he perceived a higher hand,
Dominus abstulit, the Lord has taken; and Shimeis tongue was the whip by which
God scourged David, Sinite Shimei vt maledicat David, Dominus praecepit ei.
Evils which befall us in this life are of two sorts: 1 Malum Culpae. and
Poenae. 2 Malum Culpae. and Poenae.
God is not the Author of the first evil of sin, but the Devil tempting,
and man consenting; but of the latter of Malum pone peccatum, as the Schoolmen
speak, God is the Author punishing justly what sinfully we have committed:
that defiles a man, this but chasteneth and afflicts him, that is evil in
doing, this but in suffering; that in nature, this but in feeling: Si erit
malum in Ciuitate and Dominus non fecerit? Amos 3.6. Messana a Spaniard
paraphraseth it thus: Erit poenae malum in Ciuitate quod Dominus non fecerit,
sed casus, fatum, fortuna vel hostis?

Verse 6. Pour out thy wrath upon the Heathen that have not known thee, and
upon the kingdoms that have not called upon thy name.
WE, howbeit we be a wicked seed, yet are we semen Abrahae, of Abraham's
race and lineage: Mali filij, filij tamen, evil sons, yet sons; but the
Heathen are not of thy household, they are strangers from the Covenant of grace,
and without God in this world. We, howbeit miserable sinners, do know and
invoke thee only for our God; they are ignorant of thee, and do not desire
the knowledge of thy ways, therefore Pour out thy wrath upon the Heathen,
etc. Non optamus sed prop^etamus, we wish it not out of desire of particular
revenge, Minuet vindicta dolorem.
nor any way to ease our grief, by their Taliation. (It was the speech of an
Heathen man, to go to hell with him: Vindicta bonum, vita iucundius ipsa.
Revenge is sweeter then life.
Chrysippus, Iuuen.
non dicit idem nec mite Thaletis
Iegenium, dulcique senex vicinus Hymetto.


Philosophers; Chrysipp^^s, Thales, Plato: sure I am, Christ Jesus taught
otherwise, not to return evil for evil: Take heed, Romans 12.
see to it, that no man return evil for evil: nay, more patience then so, 1
These. 1.
not to resist or repel evil, but to give both cheeks to the nippers. We
must leave vengeance to him whose it is; Deuteronomy. 32. Heb. 10.30.
Vengeance is mine, I will repay) but prophecy, and denounce, and consent it
should be so. We know where it is written he will revenge the blood of his
Servants, Deuteronomy. 32. Dico vobis quia cito faciet vindictam illerum. Now shall
not God revenge his Elect, which cry day and night unto him, yea, though he
suffer long for them? I tell you he will avenge them quickly, Luke 18.7 8. And
it is the Apostles Oracle, He that does wrong shall receive for wrong he has
done, Col. 3.25.

That we may pray for revenge upon our and Gods enemies, it appears hence,
otherwise the souls under the Altar would never cry: How long Lord, righteous
and true? Revel. 6.10.
otherwise Paul would never have imprecated upon Alexander the Copper-Smith. 2 Timothy 4.14.
All men grant it is lawful to pray for temporal evils against our enemies,
that they may work their conversion; and I think for eternal likewise, if
they be Gods enemies also; and his Church cannot possibly have peace unless
these members of Satan and Antichrist be cut off. See Zanch. de redempt. in 3.
praecept. Call. in Gala. c. 6. Buc. in Psa. 16.

Verse 7. Comederunt Jacob:] For they have devoured Jacob.]
O Lord, let there remain some holy seed, let thy Church not wholly perish
from the face of the earth.

The Catholic Church consisting of all Nations, places, and times cannot be
devoured; but some part thereof, an arm or a leg may be in the Dragons
mouth. ( As a Shepherd takes out of the mouth of the Lion two legs and a
piece of an ear, so shall the Children of Israel be taken out, Amos 3.12.

Particular Churches are sometime more conspicuous then other. Jerusalem
Templum Domini, Templum Domini, was once the most glorious visible Church of
GOD: and she, if ever any, was the City seated on a hill, which could not be
hid: and yet all vision is now ceased, there is no Prophet, nor Altar, nor
Sacrifice, nor Temple, nor City, all being buried under ashes: and let Rome
exalted upon seven hills, who brags so much of the glory and splendour of her
church, beware least her Sun loose not his beams, and grow dark at
noonday (too much prosperity, or confidence at least thereof, is ever
attended with an unexpected ruin.) Ab altitudine dicitimebo (says the
Psalmist.) And a King of Egypt spoke out of experience, concerning the never
interrupted felicity of Policrates, Herod in Thalia.
Tam diuturnus foelicium rerum cursus, animum meum aliquantisper habet
sollicitu^, quippe qui sciam, quam inuidiae secunda fortuna obnoxia sit. And I
nothing doubt but that the mystical Babylon, who is already fallen in Gods
decree, and in her type, shall fall from, or be plucked out from her chair of
pride, by the forcible arms of Christian Princes. The Woman in the Revelation,
after the Ascension of her Son, was driven into the wilderness, and then it
was true to say, Ecce in deserto est Christus; for, caput est in corpore suo:
and in the time of the ten persecutions, she was intrusa antris, shut up in
caves, or in private houses, and then it was true to say, Ecce in penetralibus
est Christus. The Sun it self is ouer-cast with a cloud, and Eclipsed by the
dark body of the Moon, and when he is gone down to the other Hemisphere, he
seems to be lost to us. And what wonder then if Tabernaculum in Sole positum,
so much urged by our Adversaries of Rome, be sometimes so ouer-cast and
darkened that we cannot see it?

Verse 8. Remember not against us our former iniquities, etc.
EIther done by our Fathers, for it is just with God to visit the sins of the
Fathers upon the children, (...).
unto the third and fourth generation. God, thou recompensest the iniquities of
the Fathers into the bosom of their children after them. Ier. 32.18. Our
fathers have sinned, and are not, and we have borne their iniquities, Lam.
5.7. And the question in this sense was well asked John 9. That this man is
borne blind, who has sinned? be, or his Parents? God does punish the sins
of the Fathers upon the children in things temporal, in their bodies and goods
which they received from their Father: to wound the Father at the heart, he
lays his rod upon the Son as being the tenderest part in which he could
affect him. -- Heu nunc misero mihi demum Exilium infoelix, Vir. de Lausi
orcisi patre. Aen. 10
nunc alie vulnus adactum.


But God does never punish the Son to his condemnation for his Fathers sin:
for the saying is express, Ezekiel. 18.20.
Filius non portabit iniquitatem patris, to wit, to the danger of his
salvation: and so Thomas accords Moses and Ezekiel, that Moses speaks of
temporal, Ezekiel of eternal punishment; but yet I doubt not but God who is
debtor to no man, moved only by occasion of the Fathers sin, does detain
his grace from the Son, and leave him to the conduit of his own sinful
will, (...).
and to the power of Satan, to work in him pertenacie and obduration of
heart, that at length he may be a mark for the exercise of his justice. Or in
their imitation by us: either in our youth, ( Vicina est lapsibus adolescentia,
says Ambrose: Ovid.
-- Neque enim robustior aetas
-- Nec quae magis ardeat vlla est.)
or in our stronger age: O Lord! we were conceived, and have grown up in sin
from our cradles: we have done all we can to fill up the measure of our
Fathers iniquities. O Lord! accept of our humble, ingenuous, and penitent
confession of our sins, and Remember not against us our former sins.

Verse 9. Deliver us, and be merciful unto our sins.
THE order should have been thus; Be merciful unto our sins, and deliver us.
For if sin was the cause of their misery, no deliverance thence till our
sins be expiated: therefore, O be merciful unto our sins. Non operuised
aperui vt operires, I have not covered, but uncovered, that thou may cover my
sin. I know if I would have use of the Physician, I must open my disease unto
him; for quod ignorant medicina, non curat (says Hierome.) The Heathen (says
S. Augustine, wonder that we teach, sins committed in deed, to be purged in
word; actually, to be done away verbally, Potest qui homicidium fecit homicida
non esse? but such is the power of humble confession, that it obtains pardon
and release; yea, full expiation for all sin. David guilty of two foul
sins, after the confession of his sins, was as white as the Snow in Salmon;
O quantum valent tres Syllabat, Ambros.
Pecc^^i? a word of three Syllables is able to do all this. God made the World
of nothing, and me, a man, of dust the worst of anything, and is he not able
to make me of guilty, innocent?

Verse 10. Wherefore should the Heathen say, Where is now their God?
BY our misery and affliction the Heathen discredit our faith and confidence in
thee. It is their persuasion, true Religion should ever be prosperous ( accedit
vtilitas quae maxim homini diuos asser it, Symmac. lib. 10. epist. 54.) nam
cum ratio omnis in operto sit, vnde rectuis quam de memoria atque documentis
Rerum secundarum cognitio venit numinum? and this heathenish opinion has
infected the Church, which calieth her self Catholic, Bell. lib. 4. de
eccles. Milita. cap. vlt. makes temporal felicity a note of the true Church.
They never will believe Electos Dei pia agere and crudelia ^olerare, as S.
Gregory speaks, that Gods elect do well and suffer ill, and therefore Tullie
proves the Jews to be hated of God, because they were so miserable. Miseriae
Iudaeorum testantur quam non sint chari Deo pro Flacco.
The miseries of the Jews do testify against them that they are not beloved
of God: and no doubt, but the Turks at this day are more confirmed in their
Mahumetan impictie, by reason of their good success against Christians: and
therefore, O Lord, to free thy name, stop the mouth of this blasphemy, pull
thy hand out of thy bosom, let them at length perceive that thou carest for
thy Church. Remember the blood of thy slain servants. Remember gemitus and
compedes, the sighings of the prisoners yet alive, but children of death,
aiudged and destinated for death. Antiochus felt the effects of this
imprecation, 2 Mac. 9. etc.
for lying on his deathbed, worms crawling out of his bowels, howbeit he did
promise to set free Jerusalem, to make the Jews equal to the citizens of
Athens, and to rebuild and adorn the Temple which he had spoiled and to allow
for sacrifices out of his own revenues; nay himself to become Jew, to
glorify that GOD whom he did now feel to have offended, yet God would show
him no mercy.

Verse 12. And render to our neighbors seauenfolde the reproach wherewith they
have reproched thee O Lord.
FOrget not, good LORD, our neighbour-enemies; let Ismaels mocking of Isaac be
remembered: remember the children of Edom, how in the day of Jerusalem they
said, Down with it, down with it, even down to the ground. Let the Moabites
taste of thy rod as well as the Chaldaeans, let them have no mercy from thee
that had no mercy for us.

Verse 13. So we thy people, and sheep of thy pasture, shall praise thee for
ever, and from generation to generation will set forth thy praise.
THey promise thankfulness, and (because primum Senescit beneficium, and
nihil facilius quam amor putrescat. Sen.) this thankfulness to be perpetual
in themselves and their posterity. They have nothing else to return God for
his cup of salvation, but the kindness of their lips; which, if unfeigned,
Psalm. 50.15.
is the best and sweetest incense: Call upon me in the time of thy tribulation,
and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me.

The sum of all, is, Anfer iniquitatem, dabonum, and reddemus vitulos
labiorum nostrorum. Hos. vlt.
Pardon our sins, return us prosperity, so will we render the calves of our
lips.

FINIS.
To the Reader.
THus have thou (gentle Reader) the literal Exposition of this whole Psalm,
there is behind the Exposition according to the Trope, the destruction of
spiritual Jerusalem, the Church militant, by the Turk and Pope. Priuata
iniuria mayor quam Deus and pietas, and defendenda cruore religio? Mantuanus
Tom. 1. Exhort ad Reg.
This latter I intended first, but that building could not well be without
this foundation. It grieueth me, that the City where our salvation was
wrought, should be in the power of Infidels. God forgive it them that have
been the cause thereof, Quis ferat obfuisse (reip.) ecclesiae priuata
certamina? Symmachus. While Maximilian wars against the Swissa^^ Baiazel makes
his impression upon the Venetians; while Charles the fifth is busy to recover
Milan from the French, Solomon takes Belgrada. Jerusalem shall be trodden under
foot of the Gentiles until the time of the Gentiles be ful^^^^^d. Luke 21.24.
We Christians fight one against another as in the day of Madian, and that
Homo ferus aduanceth his victory by our discords. If we cannot, or it may be,
may not regain the holy city, yet let us keep the holy Church from the rage of
the wild Boar, and from the Beast in the Revelation, who, what wrong they
have done, shall appear in my next, of which I send this only as a Prodromus.
Pray for my health, and I will labor and pray for thy spiritual profit.

FINIS.

