PETER DV MOVLIN. HIS ORATION in the praise of Divinity. WHEREIN IS SHEVVEN
that Heathenish fables were first derived from holy SCRIPTVRE.

Transl. by J. M.

LONDON, Printed by B. A. and T. F. for Hen: Shepherd, and are to be sold at
his shop in Chancery Lane, at the sign of the Bible. 1640.

PETER DV MOVLIN HIS ORATION in the Praise of Theology.
Spoken at Sedanum in an Auditory of Divines, VIII of the Ides of December,
1628. Before the Inauguration of the learned ALEXANDER COLVINUS to the degree
of a Doctor, and before his admission to the profession of Theology.
THE Inauguration of a Doctor, and Professor of Divinity, which we are now
preparing (most accomplished and courteous Auditors) does require, that we should
first speak something of the nature and dignity of Theology. Not as if this
sacred Profession could be more adorned by our commendation; but that your
industry may be inflamed to embrace these studies, which by the unhappiness of
these times are very little regarded.

Many men do suppose, that it is a difficult thing to set forth slender and
small matters in cellency of speech, and to add weight unto things which are
light, by reason of the tenuity of the matter; neither have there wanted some,
who that they might become famous for their wits, have written in praise of a
Fly, and a quartaine Ague; nor was I SOCRATES ashamed in a long Oration to
extol the praises of BVSIRIDES, a man who seemed to have cast off man: whom I
esteem (as says the Proverb) to have powered oil on Lintels, and to have
sought for renown out of a matter very easy to be done. For what is more
ready then to speak untruths? What field is more copious then lying? Or how can
they want matter of discourse who out of an extreme delight in faining, have
little regard, whether their words be correspondent to the things, or their
speech unto the truth.

But to me it seems a matter far more difficult, to express great subjects
in equality of language, and so to speak of the greatest argument, that its
value may not be impaired, nor its splendour overcast by the dullness of the
speaker. So whereas the virtue of God does in an infinite distance surmount the
virtue of man, yet it is a thing more difficult fitly to praise God, then Man.
But to endeavor to illustrate with words a thing which is not seen with
outward beams, but with its own natural light, what is it but to point with
ones finger at the Sun.

And indeed, the very greatness does confound me, whilst I attempt to speak
of the most weighty argument. And the very incitations do hinder me. For that
excellency of the matter which does instigate the endeavor does cumber the
success. But pardon is easily granted by favorable Auditors. And that
especially in a divine subject, whose least knowledge it is better to obtain,
then the most accurate of humane things: no otherwise then the least ray of the
Sun is more excellent then a thousand candles.

In which discourse do you not expect from me the flourishes of Rhetoricians,
nor the ornaments of Orators, nor the equal smoothness of Sentences, nor that
my speech should be swollen up with bubled vanity, nor that I should scatter on
your heads some crumbs out of Aristotle's concise speech. It is sufficient for us
to be understood. He is abundantly eloquent in this argument, who speaks
truth; nor does that simple majesty of Divine wisdom stand in need of borrowed
colors. Therefore as the nature of the thing shall require, and as occasion
shall lead us, shall our speech run on plainly, and inelaborately.

Theology, if thou look after the Etimologie of the word, is a speech of GOD:
And he is commonly called a Theologer or Divine, who knows, or professes the
knowledge of Divine things. With this title were the ancient Poets graced in
times past. So does Aristotle call them in the 12. of his Metaph. and Cicero in
the 3. book of the Nature of the Gods. And Clemens Alexandrinus in the 5. of
his Tapist. says, That Orpheus was called a Divine.

There were amongst the ancient Grecians three kinds of Theology: one Fabulous,
the other Phylosophicall, and the third Politic. Fabulous is that wherein
Poets do versifie. Philosophical that which the natural Philosopher does
touch, and therein ends; the Metaphysitian does more fully express. But the
Politic was amongst the Priests, and consisted in Ceremonies and Pontificiall
rights. The first was fit for Theaters, the second for Schools, the third for
Cities and civil society.

But we who are Christians call that Theology, which is a science of Divine
things, and which treats of God, not according to humane reason, but divine
revelation, which shows not only what GOD is in himself, but also what he
is toward us; nor does it only discuss of his nature, but also of his will,
teaching us what God expects from us, and what we should expect from God,
what we should hope for, what we should fear: which learning when the Apostle
St. JOHN had copiously, and sublimely handled, in the Argument of the
Revelation he is justly styled the Divine.

Which notwithstanding I would not have so understood by you, as if Theology
comprehended nothing but Revelation. That natural impression. That there is a
God appertains to Theology; and also those natural notions of equity and
goodness, implanted in Barbarians without any instruction, as being nothing
else, but that law of God which was engraven in the hearts of men, before the
publishing of the Law. The Apostle testifying it in his Epistle to the Romans,
chap. 2. where he says; That the Gentiles by nature did the things contained
in the Law, and showed the effect of the law written in their hearts. But these
notions, like unto decayed Characters are made more express and illustrious:
after that divine Revelation is added unto natural knowledge. The Divine does
also by sense, without revelation, know, many things of the works of God, but
which do then at last begin to be comfortable, when out of the revealed word of
God, there is engrafted in the mind a certain persuasion of the love which
Christ bears toward us. Then does a man begin to live in the earth as in his
Grandfathers lands. The^ does he walk through the fields and woods, as through
his Fathers garden. Then does he behold the Heavens as the frontispiece of his
Fathers palace, in which he knows he has a habitatio^ provided; nor does
he feed his mind with speculation without hope, as is the contemplatio^ of
Astronomers. And as by the guidance of the smalleft river we may at last come
unto the sea: so do the least creatures by silent, but not obscure instructions
lead us unto the immense depth of Gods wisdom, and omnipotency,
notwithstanding, those alone do reap this fruit by the documents of these
dumb Schoolmasters, who faithfully have received the doctrine of the Gospel.

For as often as a man rowleth his eyes through this whole university of
things, and comtemplateth the Heavens and the Earth depending upon the least
beck of divinity, he meets with that unapproached light wherein GOD dwells,
and his terrifying Majesty strikes a blindness into the eyes of the
understanding. He sees his Majesty armed with lightnings, and Angels waiting
on him as Ministers, and appariters; which Contemplation would serve only for
our astonishment, if peace with God were not revealed unto us by the Gospel,
and horror cast off were turned into reverence and trembling into a filial
confidence.

For this reason did GOD put on Man, that he might be (...), the more easily
accessible, and whilst he went unto Man he might go unto God. And as MO^ES
descending from the Mount covered his shining face with a veil, that with its
splendour he might not dazell the eyes of the Israelites: So God, and the same
son of God, descending unto us from heaven, shrouded his Majesty in a veil
of humane nature, that we might not be stricken down at his presence, and
trembling at his face as a judge, be confounded by his glory. Nor was there any
arbitrator more fit, by whose mediation the discord between God and Man might
be compounded, then he, who being both God and Man, did participate of both
parts in a communion of nature.

All these things tend hitherto, that I may show, that that part of Theology,
which is gotten by sense or natural knowledge, is unprofitable, unless the
other part be added unto it, which is gotten only by Revelation.

In this place it is not necessary for us to dispute, whether Theology be
Sapience, or Science, in that manner, as these faculties of the mind are
defined by Aristotle in the sixth of his Ethics. The Apostle has cut off this
controversy speaking thus of the doctrine of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 2.6. We
speak wisdom among them that are perfect, and cap. 12.8. To one is given the
word of Wisdom, to another the word of Knowledge, by the same Spirit. But if
skillful Ditchers and Plowmen, are by Homer called Wisemen, as (...), etc.

By much better right shall the knowledge of the greatest and divine things be
called Wisdom. This is that true prime Philosophy and Metaphysics, not
indeed that which tortures the wit about the universal affections of Ens, but
that which demonstrateth God a Posteriori, as he was seen of MOSES behind: and
which following, the enchained order of things which are moved, does from the
motion of inferior bodies ascend unto the Primum Mobile, and from the first
Moveable to the first Mover, who must necessarily be immovable, and so by
motion comes unto rest; Of which Aristotle is a most copious witness, who
concludes his Physickes, wherein he largely discourses of Motion in the Prime
Mover, well knowing that this is the end of natural knowledge, to lead unto
things which are supernatural.

Indeed the principles, of a Science must be known by nature, as Arist,
teaches in the first book of his Poster. But the Principles of Divinity are
not known by nature, as being only obtained by Revelation. But that which is
wanting to the light, and perspecuity of the principles is abundantly requited
and amended in the authority of the teacher.

It is wont also to be disputed, whether Theology be Speculative or Practicke:
I will determine the matter in few words. That part of Theology which handles
of our manners, and the well ordering of our lives, is merely practique: for
it is wholly referred unto action, whereunto no one can attain, without the
guidance of contemplation, but such as is wholly destinated unto action.

But that other part of Theology, which treats of God and his nature, of his
simplicity, Eternity, infiniteness is altogether contemplative. For these
things fall not within compass of action. I do not deny, but that the
knowledge of these things also does conduce much unto good works, so far
forth as the love of God is stirred up thereby, and his reverence augmented.
But this is only by occasion, as when a scholar learning of his Master the
precepts of Philosophy, perceives in himself some sparckles of love to be
kindled toward his Master, which notwithstanding is not the end of Philosophy.
It is one thing to command the love of God, another thing to give occasions to
love him. Yea I will boldly say, that Theology is more contemplative then
practique, seeing that contemplation is the scope of action; For by good works
we aspire unto the beatificall vision of God.

These lets being removed, we will more attentively behold the face and habit
of Theology. Let this daughter of God come forth and appear, ^ndeed in a
sordid weed, drawing poverty with her for her companion, and besprinckle with
the blood of many of her Disciples, but whose face is ^efulgent with Celestial
rays, and which tryum^hing over time, does ^ndure for everlasting. which light
that it may not enlighten the eyes of the spectators, Satan out of the
bottomless pit does belch up black globes of smoke, and gathers a thick
darkness of errors, and least the true face of Theology should be discerned
he feigneth certain apparitions, and goblins, which countefeit the title, and
image of Divinity; which with much applause he brings into the theater, here
enticing with blandishmen^s, there terrifying with threatenings: and oftentimes
reterating that of his, I will give thee. But this daughter of heaven faintly
drawing breath, and long hidden under the bushel, has oftentimes broken her
bonds, oftentimes remooved her obstacles, and dispersing all clouds has often
appeared on a sudden, the Devil gnashing at it, and her adversaries repining.

Which indeed does so far excel all other sciences, as heavenly things do
surpass earthly, and divinity humanity. Insomuch that all other science is
fallacious, and (...) faithfully (if this be faith) deviding the spoil amongst
themselves, which indeed is not justice, but equality.

But if thou consider the original of arts and sciences, they have their
beginning from experience. For by many particular experiments the mind does
collect one thing universal. And of many universals appertaining to the same
subject, and disposed in a certain order, is made up the body of any faculty,
or science. But if as men say Mnemosyne (which signifies memory) be the mother
of the Muses, experience must needs be their gra^dmother, as being that which
brings forth, and confirms the memory. But the inve^ters of every Art are
much renowned. And as every one by some profitable invention was beneficial to
civil society, so was he enthroned in heaven, and esteemed for a God. Such an
one amongst the Egyptians was Osyris the inventer of Husbandry. And the boy
that showed the use of the crooked Plow. Triptolemus amongst the Grecians: and
Dagon the God of Palestina, who by Eusebius in his first book of Evangelicall
Preparation, Chap. 11. is called (...) and (...), as much as to say a God of
corn, for Dagan among the Hebrews does signify bread-corne,

But Theology did flow from God, and the Prophets and Apostles were his
writers, and Instruments of the holy Spirit. The Apostle bearing witness in
the 1 Cor. 2. Where he says: We speak wisdom among them that are perfect;
yet not the wisdom of this world, nor of the Princes of this world, that come
to naught; but we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery. For this is that
fire which Prometheus by touching the wheel of the Suns Chariot with his
staff, brought down unto the Earth.

But these things will be more illustrious, if we make a comparison between
Divinity and every other Science.

The first we meet with is Philosophy, of which Cicero in his fifth Tusculane
question says, That one day spent according to the precepts of Philosophy, is
to be preferred wholly before immortality. He could not have founded louder,
nor in a small matter have used an higher speech. But amongst wise men he shall
never win belief. For those things which Philosophy stateth of the
Sovereign goodness are so diverse and repugnant, that they seem not to
consist by nature, but opinion. Augustine in his 19. book of the City of God,
Chap. 1. recyteth out of M. Varr^ 288. differing opinions of Philosophers
concerning the chief goodness. But if nothing certain can be determined by
Philosophy concerning that which is the chief, and principal thing of all,
you easily conjecture, what we may judge of the rest. It is necessary that he
wavereth in the means, who fails in the end; and that the strokes of the
contention are not sure, nor according to aim, if there be no certain scope
or mark whereat to strike.

Add hereunto, that Philosophy does by many means endeavor to perfect the
intellect, but Theology with one only, which is union with God. But
multiplicity of means, which are not subordinate, is an evident token of
imperfection.

Neither has natural Philosophy any thing in it which may satisfy the
appetite, because man is borne to some thing more excellent then all nature.

And how languishing affections are stirred up by Philosophy from hence is
apparent, because there was never any hitherto found, who would under go death
for Plato's or Aristosles Philosophy: but for true Theology and sincere faith
in God, death has not been only expected, but desired, and willingly met
with, and to effuse ones life for its sake is reputed for gain.

Moreover, as now the case stands, Philosophy is almost reduced unto
Schools, and they are very few who recall it to the common use and exercise of
life. For it is all cumbred with briers, and is wholly busied in tying
indissoluble knots, and vnweaving what it self has woven, and offers us stony
bread, which breaks the teeth, and tyreth the wit with sharp and difficult
trifles.

I omit that the old Christian Church found Philosophers most eager enemies to
the doctrine of the Gospel. Tertullian who calls a Philosopher, a creature
of glory, does also call Philosophers the Patriarchs of Heretics.

It is commonly known that precepts of virtue are not so much borrowed from
Philosophers, as taken from them as unjust possessors, that they may be
converted unto a better use. And they are compared unto those gold and silver
vessels, which without hope of restitution, or intention to restore, the
Israelites borrowed of the Egyptians, which afterward in adorning the Temple
they consecrated to God. But as that rich household stuff which was brought
our of Egypt and placed in the Tabernacle was but of slight and small
estimation, in respect of the riches and splendour of Salomons temple, which all
over did shine with Gold: so those instructions which Divines do borrow from
Heathens, are in no wise to be compared with the abundance, and the high value
of sacred precepts which are read in the holy Scriptures.

Add that whileft the Philosopher deriveth precepts of honesty from nature,
and bids us follow nature for our guide, and referres his documents to good
fame, or the commodity of humane Society, but not unto the glory of God, nor
deduceth from the love of Gods duties toward our Neighbor, he only
shadoweth forth a few fading images of virtues, and substitutes in the place of
true and genuine virtue, certain gay and resplendent vices, counterfeiting and
belying the title of virtue.

But as for Medicine, and civil Law, there is no man of reason does doubt, but
that they are excellent gifts bestowed by God on Man, for the preservation of
the body, and the maintenance of humane society. But what is their comparison
with Theology, Christ himself shows, saying Luke 12.23. The life is more
then meat, and the body is more then raiment. These are those three kinds of
goods, as of mind, body, and fortune. Theology takes care for the good of the
mind: Medicine for the good of the body, which is the health: And civil Law is
exercised in the goods of Fortune, rendering unto every one what is his own.

Perchance some one will say, that Medicine does instruct the mind in Moral
virtue, in that it enjoyneth sobriety. It may also be added, that Physicians
and Chirurgions do teach men patience whilst they put them to pains. But it
is most evident that sobriety is not prescribed by the Physician for honesty,
but for health. And truly the care of good health does much more rightly
appertain to the Divine. For there are three most certain preservatives of
health, sobriety, labor, tranquillity of mind. These three does Theology take
care for, in that it forbids to be luxurious; it restrains lust; it exhorts
us to labor, and brings forth true hilarity, and tranquillity of the mind, by
infusing into it a persuasion of the love of GOD toward us, whereunto all
sleepy potions and stupefactive Medicines are not to be compared. Neither does
any thing procure so sweet a sleep, or so effectually dispell all cares, as
does the Spirit of adoption giving testimony to our hearts that we are the
Sons of GOD. But how uncertain is medicine, how often Physicians grope out
their way in darkness, and by officious diligence kill their patients, is made
manifest by daily examples.

We have said that the civil Law is practiced in goods of fortune. For it is
wholly busied in this that every one should receive that which is his owae.
What (thou will say) does not Law instruct the mind in Justice, which is the
principal of all virtues, and ought it not to be reckoned amongst the goods
of fortune? Did not Justinian begin his Institutions with the definition of
Justice? Truly whosoever says thus is not of my opinion. Civil Law does not
impresse Justice it self into the mind, which is an habit of the regulated
will, but only it governs exterior actions, prohibiting violence, and
recompencing damages. Only Theology gives Laws to the affections, and
instilleth honesty into the will, in which the formal and essential nature of
virtue does consist. For even by a wicked man, and one that labors of inward
vices, may the duties of a good Citizen be performed. He satisfies the civil
Law who deeply concealing his hatred withholds his hand from the injury,
being restrained by fear of the Laws. Neither is virtue the end of civil
Laws, but peace and concord. And truly they are infinitely mistaken who
suppose that the efficacy of civil Laws does consist in this that they are
just. For a Law has its authority not because it is a Just, but because it is
a Law, and a rule established by him that has power, yea men live peacefully
under evil laws, and miserably under good ones. They live peacefully under
wicked laws when the Citizens do agree in the observation of them. They live
miserably under good laws when the disobedient Citizens do contemn the
authority of the Law giver, and the force of the laws does lauguish. From
hence it is that diverse people do live after diverse Laws. That by the Law of
the twelve Tables it was lawful for Creditors to cut in pieces the Debtour
that was not able to pay them. That by the same Laws a father might thrice
sell his Son, and a Husband might kill his wife, if his wine did stincke, or if
she counterfeited Child-b^r^h. That amongst the Lacedaemonians theevery was
permitted; and that in Cyprus Virgins got their dowry by the use of their
bodies. That amongst the Calecut Indians that wife that was more beloved of her
husband then the rest, being gorgeously apparelled even to allurement, is led
forth unto her Funeral, and burned alive with her husband: that Kings are not
to take to themselves wives but first lain withal by their Priests which are
called Bramins. That among the Turks Polyga my is lawful that men go to
Market to be sold as Cattle, and to drink wine is a matter of conscience. Of
all which things no one is observed amongst us: so that it is evident that that
Justice, which is commanded in humane Laws, is not so much a virtue, as a
custom, and that therefore are things just, because they are decreed; but not
decreed, because they are just; and lastly, those Laws are just, which being
founded upon nature, are consentaneous to the Law of God.

If any one does object to the contrary those intricate contentions of Divines,
and that men in matters of religion encounter with most inveterate hatred, we
answer that it is not the fault of the faculty but of men, who seek a knot in
a bulrush (as says the Proverb) and abuse the depravation of most certain
things for their avarice and ambition. He does ill that attributes the faults
of artificers to their Arts, as if any one should impute his blearednesse to
the Sun, or being stricken with sudden blindness, should think that the Sun
does suffer an Eclypse. But whosoever does not obstinately stick to prejudicate
opinions, nor has made his faith subject to his belly, nor enslaved it to
another will, he shall find in the holy Scripture many evident sentences, and
needing no interpretation which are abundantly sufficient unto salvation.

But whereas the nobility of practique sciences does consist in the nobility of
their end, and in the fitness of means to attain unto this end, it cannot be
spoken, how many degrees Theology does herein excel all other Arts and
Sciences. For every Science does propose unto it self some particular end,
which is not extended to our whole life, much less does it reach unto those
things which ensue this mortal life. So Economy serves for the instruction of
an Nouse-holder; Politickes of a good Subject, and a good Prince; Tactickes for
the well marshalling of an Army. Astronomy measutes the motions of heavenly
bodies. Their number, and distances. Only Theology does instruct a man as he
is a man: and co^prchendeth the whole life of man: and extending its care bey
and the bounds of nature, is sollicitous for the life to come. But men being
preposterously wise, and adicted to present things do deliberate of the
several portions of their lives, and have the manner of the whole disordered,
and fail of their universal end. From whence it comes to pass that by many
things prudently provided for there amounts one general imprudence, whilst
they endeavor to abound in good things, when themselves are evil. Only
Theology designeth the last end, which is union with God, and supplying fit
means thereunto, it lays open a way which was never trodden by any humane
wisdom. It only restores the Image of GOD in Man which was almost defaced.
It only poynteth out the way unto salvation. It alone teaches us to live as
in the sight of God, by whom the coverts of the darkest hypocrisy are most
clearly seen through: before whose tribunal are admitted no exceptions, nor
procrastinations, nor escape by idle excuses. Theology instructs the heart
with holy meditations, represseth anger, bridleth the appetite, detesteth fraud
and lying, by the fear of God expels all fear of men, by the more vehement
affection of the mind subduing, and as it were swallowing up all inferior
perturbations. And it so elevateth the soul above the body; that it becomes a
candidate of Divinity, and begins to live an heavenly life in this mortal
body. For whereas the soul is united with the body in a twofold bond, whereof
the one is natural the other voluntary, Theology either loses or cutteth off
the voluntary, so long as by the Law of nature, or the will of God, a natural
dissolution is expected. That J may not hold you long. I esteem that man truly
a Divine who is a Divine not only in his word but in his life. Cicero defined
an Orator: A good man skillful in Ornaments of language. But we more rightly
define a Theologer a good man skillful in divine things. For (as say the
Apostle) 1 Cor. 4. The Kingdom of God does not consist in word, but in virtue.
This truly is a great praise of Theology, and a remarkable perogative, that
whereas there are but few Physicians among common people, and few who are
versed in the Laws, only Theology does form and instruct every common man:
and in the Amphitheater of this life sits not only amongst Senators, and noble
personages or amongst the fourteen orders; but is also extended to the very
utmost scaffold, and the meaner sort of people.

We will also speak somewhat of the Antiquity of Theology, for that also
does much conduce unto its praise. It is delight to contemplate the venerable
Antiquity of this sacred Discipline.

Where in much ancient hoarinesse is seen.
But such old age as is both fresh and green.
We are wont to wonder at the Pyramids of Egypt, being the most ancient
structure in the whole world. And those raw Scholars who are called
Philologers do with great labor search after the old inscriptions of Tombs,
Coins eaten and worn out, and Words which are moldy, and obsolete with age,
and preserve them as precious treasuries. But how late and fresh are these
things, yea how frivolous are they in respect of the reverend age of Theology,
which does almost challenge the Sun in Antiquity, and deriveth its original
from the infancy of the world, as being the Daughter of the ancient of Days,
and from her fathers bosom sent down unto the Earth?

But if any contest in antiquity of books and letters, the Greeks are reputed
to be the Princes of all learning, and Greece the mother of Arts, and the most
ancient ingrosser of wisdom. But first of all Cadmus brought the letters into
Greece out of Phoeniciae which is near bordering on Judea, and anciently did
use the Hebrew idiome. Which the Greek Characters do make manifest, being not
much unlike to those amongst the ancient Samaritanes, and the names and order
of the Greek alphabet but little differing from the Hebrew. And also the name
of Cadmus, which signifies a man of the East.

Homer the most ancient of the Greek authors that is extant, was after Moses
six hundred and odd years. Moses was five hundred and fifty years before
David, in whose age notwithstanding the Grecians did fetch both their food and
the oracles of their God from the Oak and Walnut tree. From whence juglans was
as much as to say, Iovis glans.

The first amongst the Greeks renowned for wisdom were the seven Wise men.
But their age was in the time of Cyrus, Cambyses, and Darius, which was the age
of Zacharias and Aggai, the latest of the Prophets.

We can also prove by six hundred examples, that the Grecians were Scholars
unto the Hebrews, and that they drew out of the Theology of the Hebrews,
whatsoever is contained in their Philosophers, or their Poets concerning divine
things, agreeable to the truth: but these things are so corrupted by the craft
of the Devil, that to find out some small particles of Gold, a whole heap of
dung is to be remooved.

I. I will take my beginning from those names of God, which are attributed to
him in Scripture. In the old Testament the name of JEHOVA is most frequent: and
God calls himself by this name, Exodus 3.6. From this name it is evident-that
the name of Jove amongst the Greoians was deduced. There is extant in Ensebius
his 10. book of Evangelicall preparation a fragment of Porphyry a most cruel
enemy unto Christians, citing a place of Sanchoniata Beritius a most ancient
Author, that writ before the time of the Trojan wars; where he says, that
he received his Commentaries, from Ierombaall a Priest of the GOD Jove, which
name is not much unlike to the name JEHOVA. And this Beritius was of Phoeniciae
which is adjacent to Judea. Add hereunto that Diodorus Siculus in the 1. book
of his Histor. Library says, that the God of Moses was called IA.

II. But even God himself gives himself this name. I am, or he who is, as if
in comparison with God other things had no being. Which learning Plato
following, calls God (...) him that has being. Whose words are cited by
Eusebius in the 11. of his Evangelicall Preparat. Cap. 8. out of his books of
the Laws where Plato sets down two things, the one (...), which always is
and never is made, to wit, God the other, (...), which always is made, but
never is: to wit Time, whose parts past are not; that which is to come is not
yet; but that which is present is not time but a fleeting moment. Whereupon
Numenius a Pythagerean discourses many things excellently in the same
Eusebius. Lib. 11. Cap. 10.

III. In the Porch of the Temple at Delphos, was inscribed in capital letters
of Gold this word El which with us is thou art, with this title of praise would
some wise man have God to be illustrated, as if he alone had existence. Upon
which word Plutarch has written a Book, where amongst many other admirable
things of Gods eternal immutability, he has these words most remarkable and
divine* God (says he) (...). Being one does in one instant make complete his
Eternity Which words being drawn out of the secrets of more sublime Divinity,
Plurarch being a man most ignorant in divine things did not understand, buthad
culled some where else and inserted in his work.

IV. The name of Adonai is also very frequent in the Scripture, and it
signifies Lord, which name I see to be used also by Greek Authors; for Father
Liber, the Son of Jupiter Belus who reigned very far in the East is by
Poets called Edoneus. Hor. Carm. Lib. ^. Non ego sanius bacchabor Edonis. And
in Euschius his 14. Book of Evangelicall Preparat. Cap. 14. We have Verses of
Empedocles a most ancient Poet, in which Edoneus is rela^ed to be one of the
prime principles, (...) etc. lupiter, life bringing Juno, and Edoneus.

And the Paramou^ of Venus of Syria who is called Astarte was named Adonis,
that is Lord.

v. The Scripture says, that the Devil being precipitated and excluded from
heaven brought discord into the Earth. This has Homer described in most
elegant verses, which was first observed by Iustine Martyr, in his exhortation
to the Greeks. There Homer relates that Jupiter caught Ate, that is the
Goddess of revenge and discord by the hair, and cast her down from Heaven,
withal swearing, that it should be for ever interdicted for her to come
thither again. Forthwith he adds

(...), etc.
This said, he her from the bright Heaven did throw,
And she soon came into men's works below.
VI. Iustine Martyr in his Exhortation to the Greeks, and Eusebius in the 9.
Book of Preparation do speak of an Oracle of Apollos who being demanded what
men are truly wise, made answer.

(...), etc.
The Hebrews and Chaldeans are
The men true wisdom does adorn
Who for their God does serve and sear
A King that of himself was borne.
VII. But we will run over the most principal Chapters of the Mosaical
History, for we shall find some evident footsteps thereof in the Books of the
Heathen. In the beginning (says Moses) God made the Heaven and the Earth, and
the Earth was without form and void. The Ceptuagint translate it (...) and
(...), that is invisible and without order. This is that Chaos of Hefied. of
which Ovid speaks much in the beginning of his Metamorphosis, where he calls
it a rude and indisposed mass, etc.

VIII. Moses goes forward and darkness were upon the face of the deep, and
God said; Let there be light. This is the very selfsame which Hesiod says
in his Theogonia. The first of all was Chaos, and a little after?

(...), etc.
Of Chaos Erebus, and night were borne;
Of Night fair Ether, and the beauteous morn.
He could not more plainly say, that darkness did over spread the earth, and
that darkness was before light, and that light was brought forth of darkness.

IX. The Creation of Man out of the clay, or dust tempered with water, was not
unknown to Heathens. Hor. Carm. 1. b^oke. 3 Ode. Calls the first man Lutum
princeps, that is, the first Clay. Iuvenall in his 6 Satyr of the first men,
says; that being composed of Clay they had no Parents from whence homo a man
is ab humo from the Ground. And the first men being borne of the Earth, and
transported no whether else, were called (...) and aborigines, that is ^hen
borne and bred in the same Earth; Hesiod in his works says, that Jupiter bade
Vulcane: (...), temper earth with water, and give them a humane voice.

X. But the Creation of the woman, out of a portion cut off from the body of
the man, Plato describes about the end of his Banquet. H^e relates that at
the first a man had four feet, and so many arms: but when by reason of his
strength he grew insolent toward God, he cut him into two parts, and of one
man made two, who had but two feet.

XI. As for the Garden of the Hesperides, so much famed in the Verses of Poets,
and the golden Apples therein, and the Serpent keeper of the Apples, they are
plainly an imitation of the History of the Garden of Heden, where the Apples
were forbidden to man, and the Serpent came unto Eve.

XII. But that the Heathens had heard somewhat of the Sanctification of the
Seventh day, is made manifest out of Hesiod. Who says:

(...), etc.

The first new Moon and the fourth and seventh day were holy, etc.

XIII. And what was the estate, and happiness of man before the fall, Plato
does copiously recite in his Polit. Then (says he) there were no ravenous
Creatures, God was then the pastor and keeper of men, they lived by the fruits
which the Earth brought forth of its own accord, naked and without houses did
they live in the open Air, and had conference with Beasts. For Plato had heard
spoken of the talk between Eve and the Serpent. Neither is it doubtful but
that from thence were AEsops Fables derived, where are brought in Beasts
discoursing with men.

xiv. That men fell from his estate of happiness because he gave trust unto
the woman, is expressed by Hesiod. Relating that to the first man whom he
calls Epimetheus were given all good things in custody, shut up in one great
Vess^ll, but that God gave to Epimetheus a Woman, whom he called Pandora, who
by opening the vessel, was the cause that all those blessings flew away unto
Heaven: Notwithstanding Hope remained in the mouth of the Vessel; which hope,
what else is it, but that promise which was made unto Adam, concerning the
seed, which should bruise the head of the Serpent?

xv. But when the tentation, whereby Satan in the shape of a Serpent assailed
Eve, succeeded with him according to his intention, the cursed Devil
applauding himself for this mischief, would be adored in the shape of a
Serpent-In this figure was he worshipped at Epidaurum, from whence the same
Religion was transported to Rome. Read Aristophanes his Plutus, Lucians
Pseudomantis, and Valerius Maximus, Lib. 1. Cap. 8,. 2. O vid Metamorph. Lib.
15. Fab. 50.

xvi. Poets do feign that the age of Jupiter succeeded the golden age which
past away under Saturn. That this Jove was Cain whose dominions stretched
far upon the face of the earth, and who was the first that built a City, is
gathered by many manifest tokens, For this Cain brought trouble upon his
Father, and took his Sister to wife, which is reported, of Jupiter, etc. Virg.
AEneid. 1. Ast ego que divum.

But I who walk Queen of the Gods above,
And am both wife, and Sister unto Jove.
And whereas Poets say, that Vulcane the inventer of Iron-workes was descended
from Jupiter. Moses affirms that Tuval-Cain was a Grandchild unto Cain (the
name not much difsering) and the inventour of the Black-Smiths craft. Which
Vulcane they say made Thunderbolts for his Father Jupiter, because Tuval-Cain
made weapons for his father Cain, whereby he became terrible to his enemies.

xvii. Of the Flood there are wonderful things reported among the Heathens,
not contrary to those things which are related in the sacred Scripture: But
that the Grecians do confound that inundation in the time of King Deucalian
which overflowed no parts but Thessaly, with universal inundation which is
called the Ogygian deluge. Josephus in the 1. Book of Originals. cap. 4.
says, that the place where the Arc settled is called by the Armenians (...),
(the Mount) and that in his time their could be shown some relics of the
Arc. In the same place he cites one Berosus a Chaldean, avouching that some
portions of this Vessel may be seen on the Mountain of the Cordyi in
Armenia, and that Travelers do scrape from them a clammy bituminous substance
(...) (to divert from evils which may betide them.) In the same place he also
cites Jerome an Egyptian who writ Commentaries of the Antiquities of Phoenicia
and Mnaseas, and Nicholas Damascen who writ of the Deluge almost consonantly to
the holy Scripture. This Nicholas relates in the ninety fixed book of his
Histories, that there is above Minias, a high Mountain of Armenia which is
called Baris, into which many fled for fear of the flood, and that one carried
in an Arc arrived to the very top of the Mountain, and that some relics of
the wood of the Arc are there still reserved: and lastly that it is likely
that this is the same man whom Moses the Lawgiver of the Hebrews does speak
of. It is a thing remarkable that an Heathen man seateth Minias in Armenia, for
Jeremy also. Cap. 51.5.7. Joins Minu and Ararat as near borderers.

xviii. Yea and Abydenus, who writ Medicinal treatises in Arabic, makes
mention of Birds which Seisitris (so does he call Noah) sent out of his Ark,
and received them again, with hope of good success, when he observed the feet
of one of them to be dirty. You have the place entire in Eusebius his 9. Book
of Evangelicall Preperation.

xix. The same Author in the same Book does since Josephus allege many
Testimonies of Heathens, who have affirmed, that men before the Deluge did live
for the space of a thousand years.

xx. And that two faced Ianus was none other but Noah, is made evident by his
name. For Ianus is derived from Iaijn, which among the Hebrews does signify
wine, because he was the inventor of Wine. And he is painted with a double
face, one before and another behind, because he saw both Ages, the one before
and the other after the Flood.

xxi. This Noah had a Son named Cham or Ham, who obtained Egypt by lot, and
Africa; where he was worshipped for a God, and he is that God Hammon, whose
Temple and Oracle were in Lybia, and he is painted with horns by the same
error that Moses is commonly painted with an horned forehead, that is to say,
by reason of the ignorance of the Hebrew and Syriack idiom, wherein the Beams
of the Sun are called horns. Exodus 34.29. Abac. 3, 4. For the Africanes
attributed unto him a head shooting forth rays.

xxii. And the same ignorance gave occasion of the fable of Bacchus drawn out
of the thigh of Jupiter. For the Oriental people say that children come forth
of the thigh of their father, as Exodus Cap. 1. ver. 5. Seventy souls are said
to have come out of the thigh of Jacob. But Liber pater King of the Assyrians,
who extended his victories far in the East, from whence also were Tigers
adjoined to his Chariot. But the Grecians whatsoever they heard of that
Oriencall Liber transferred it to their Bacchus of Thebes a very drunken person.

xxiii. But if Grammarians and Geographers had any taste of the Hebrew tongue,
they needed not so sollicitously to have searched from whence the Erythrean
Sea, that is the red Sea is so called, whether from King Erytheus or from the
red Sands, which are but dreams of sick men: whereas it is manifest that the
Erythrean, that is the red Sea, was so called, because it runs coasting upon
Idumea, which word amongst the Hebrews and Idumeans does signify Red.

xxiv. Neither is it doubtful, but that Iapetus, whom the Grecians report to
be the most ancient of men, was Iaphet the Son of Noah, from whom the
Grecians had their Original, and all the inhabitants of Europe, which is
betokened by the names of the Children of Iaphet, from whom the Nations of
Europe were named, from Iavan the Ionians, from Mesech Moschi, from Tiras the
Thracians, from Gomer the Cymnierians, from Ascenas the Ascanians, from Elisca
Hellones the Grecians, from Riphat the Ripheans, from Tarsus the Cilicians,
whose Metropolitan City is Tarsis, from Dodanim the Dodoneans, from Cittim the
Macedonians and Thessalians: for that these are Cittim is apparent in the
Maccab. Cap. 1. ver. 1. Where Alexander is said to have come from the Country
of Cittim, and passed unto Asia.

xxv. And also the Giants wars, and the setting of Mountain upon Mountain,
which Jupiter cast down with his lightnings, what other are they but the
building of Babell, which mad structure God overthrew by sending a confusion of
Tongues amongst them?

xxvi. It is great delight to observe the manifest impressions of sacred
History in Herodotus his Enterpe. He says that the Egyptians were circumcised
in his time, and also the Phaenicians, AEthopians, and Cholchians. To which
Nations, how circumcision was derived, it is an easy thing to know. For Ismael
was circumcised and Esau, whose offspring peopled all Arabia and Idumea: by
whom circumcision was brought into Egypt, when the Arabians overran Egypt
which oftentimes they did. Now the Jews are reckoned among the Syrians. But
how circumcision was deduced unto the people of Colchos, is gathered by no
obscure arguments, out of the fifth Chap. of the first book of the Chronieles:
For there Teglat Pilhesar, King of the Assyrians is said to have carried the
Rubenites, and Gadites, and the half Tribe of Manasses unto Galach, and Habor;
which are the Colchians, and Iberians, amongst whom Herodotus admired that he
found circumcision:

xxvii. In the same book also we have the name of Phero-King of Egypt, and of
King Neco who is mentioned. 2 Chronicles. 35. ver. 20. and of King Aprias who by
Jeremy is called Ophra. Ier. cap. 44. ver. 30 and of Senacharib King of the
Assyrians and Arabians, who with a great power invaded Egypt, whose Army was
put to flight by the Mice of the field by eating off their bow-strings, and the
leathers of their shields.

XXVIII. In the 2. of Chronicles Chap. 35. It is storied, that King Josias
raised a terrible Army against Necho, King of Egypt, who overcame Josias, and
slew him in the Plain of Megiddo. And this is the selfsame which is related
by Herodotus in his second book, where he says: (...). etc. Necos with an Army
of foot en countring with the Syrians overthrew them in Magdolo.

XXIX. But whereas Circumcision amongst the Hebrews was done with a knife of
stone, that is with a very sharp flint, as we may see. Exodus 4. ver. 5. the
Curetes who are also called Corybantes imitating this custom, did with a very
sharp flint cut off their Genitals. Ovid Fast. 4. Ille etiam saxo, etc. He
mangled his body with a sharp Stone.

It is a very remarkable thing, that Numenius Pythagoricus in his book De bono
makes mention of Iannes and Iambres Magitians, who as St. Paul testifies. 2 Timothy 3. ver. 8. resisted Moses. These (as says Numenius) did withstand Muscus
(so calls he Moses) and by their wisdom removed those plagues which Moses
brought upon the Egyptians, Eusebius citing it in the 9. of his Prepar. This is
that Numenius whose Apothegme is reported abroad, What else is Plato but Moses
speaking Greek? The Author Clemens Alexandrinus in his first book of Tapistry.

xxxi. The prophecy of Nahum. Cap. 2. does foretell the destruction of Nineve,
which was the City where their Kings kept their abode, and the Metropolis of
Assyria. But amongst other things ver. 6. he prophesies, that the Gates of the
City should be opened by the breaking in of the River. This is the very thing,
which Dioderus Siculus in the 2. book of his Histor. Library does more fully
express. As that it was foretold to Sardanapalus who then reigned in Nineve,
and was narrowly besieged, that Ninive should then be overthrown when the River
Tigris did wage war against the City, and that not long after it happened,
that the Gates and Walls thereof were broken down, by the inundation of
Tigris: which when Sardanapalus heard, he burned himself with his Palace.
Where notwithstanding Diodorus confounds Tigris with Euphrates using Babylon
instead of Ninive, as if Ninive were situated upon the River Euphrates.

xxxii. What need J to mention the prophecies of Sybilla Cumana, out of whose
Verses Virgill professes that he took his fourth Eclogue? There the Poet
fore-telleth the coming of a Virgin, and the nativity of a Child, that should
be the Son of God, who should put away our offenses, kill the Serpent, reduce
the golden age, and should have a large dominion: which things indeed were
written by him in the same time that Christ was borne.

XXXIII. About fifty years before the Nativity of Christ, Cicero writ his
books of divination, where he speaks of a Prophecy that a King should come
whom we must obey, if we would be saved.

XXXIV. Cornelius Tacitus in the 5. book of his History, utters many things
vainly concerning the Jews, and their original, and misbecomming so great a
man, reports things of hearsay for certain: Nor does Instino do better in
the 36. book. But in Tacitus this is memorable: He says there was a
persuasion in many, that it was contained in the ancient writings of the
Priests, that in that time it should come to pass, that the East should
prevail, and that those that came from Judea should have the sway and
dominion, which Ambages foretold Vespatian and Titus. For the profane man
applied prophecies of Christ unto Vespatian.

XXXV. But whence was that drawn but out of the true and ancient Theology
which Plato does inculcate in so many places of the punishment of the soul,
and of the judgment of God? And that which Ovid sings of the last burning of
the World. Metamorph. 1. Esse quoque in fatis, etc.

He call^ to mind, it doomed in fate does stand,
That time shall come, wherein the Sea and Land,
And Heavens bright palaces shall shake, and burn;
And all this stately frame to ruin turn.
It were a tedious thing to insist on all particulars. He that would know more
of this kind, let him read Iustine Martyr his Parenesis to the Greeks and
Clemens Alexandrinus his Protrept. and his Stromata; and Josephus his books
against Appio, but especially Eusebius of Evangelicall Preparation.

These things are sufficient for the praise of Theology; for the time will not
permit any more but especially is these times wherein we see prostrated as it
were the Carcasses of so many Churches and Universities, and fires overwhelmed
with ruins. So that now Theology it self if it could speak without the
help of men, would require lamentations rather then praises. Virtue is
commended butis cold and unregarded. Adulterous Theology flowing in wealth,
environed with arms, and greedy of blood, does most horribly rage for the
chair, and insults upon the ruins of the Sanctuary. Whilst in the mean while
true Theology whispereth her Doctrine into a few ears, and has not where to
lay her head. From whence it arises that few do apply themselves to these
Arts, and his profession is better reputed who swaggers with a feather in his
Cap, and walks with a sword by his side, then his who weildeth the spiritual
sword of the divine word: and it is a greater glory ^o break a horse into the
Ring, then to compel men's minds into the compass of true Piety, and Fathers
had rather place their Sons in a way of Merchandise, or to make them common
Lawyers, then addict the^ to this sacred discipline. Let my Son (say they) be
an Atourny in Court, let him be a Solliciter of causes, let him be a Steward,
or a Factour, that gets money, rather then a Pastor of the Church, that with
an empty purse speaks of great things, and thundereth out heavenly matters.

But as for our parts, if we have true wisdom, or if we contemn earthly
things in respect of heavenly, neither the perverse judgments of men, nor
these rigorous times in which studies grow cold, and nothing is fervent but
cruelty, nor the deceitful luster of riches, nor the very ruin of the
tottering World shall ever remove us from our sacred purpose. Divine wisdom is
a sufficient reward unto it self, and whom it admits into its discipline it
carries the whole race: without dependence of the judgments of men it raises
our minds unto God. For whose sake to suffer contumely is an honorable rebuke,
and a reproach more illustrious then all humane glory.

Wherefore casting all our cares upon GOD, whose counsels cannot be kept back
by the Devil, nor moved forward by our sorrow, let us absolve our task and
finish our intended work, with what fidelity, and industry we may.

The Inauguration of ALEXANDER COLVINUS.
IT remains therefore that we now come unto that, which has been the cause
of this frequent Congregation.

With Gods good will we are about to elect unto the profession of Divinity, and
the degree of a Doctor, Alexander Colvinus, a man by descent noble, endued with
much learning and commendable for his disposition and ma^ners whose knowledge
above his years, elegant and piercing wit, acute judgment, tenacious memory,
happy flowing speech, and style lofty with natural decency, lastly whose great
and constant labor do not need our commendation.

He has with much praise performed the office of Philosophy and Hebrew
reader, for some years already. But revolving greater things in his mind he
applied himself to the studies of Divinity. Wherein having very much profitted
he is by his own, just desert and the will of our most illustrious Duchess
called unto the profession of Theology. To wit, that this profession which by
the death of Professors, or by other casualties may suffer hurt and damage,
might be confirmed by the more props and defenses.

In your sight he has given testimonies of his wit and learning both in
disputing and teaching. Not as if we desired trial of his wit, nor that we
have the lest doubt of his learning; but that we might satisfy custom.

Let therefore the university Register stand up and read unto thee Alexander
Colvinus the usual form of Oath, whereunto thou shall swear, that thou
may know to what Offices thou do tie thy self, and what are the duties
of thy profession.

Here is read the form of of the Oath.
NOw then, thou most worthy man, that shall be a member of our College, ascend
this Chair where thou shall be graced with the dignity of a Doctor, as is due
unto thy virtue.

The Doctor to be admitted ascends the Chair and the Promotor speaks thus
unto him.
FIrst of all I warn thee, and will again and again admonish thee, that thou
prove all thy doctrine according to the rule of Gods word which is contained in
the Canonical books of the new and the old Testament, and that thou entangle
not men's minds in false opinons, and corrupt the use of the pulpit which is
consecrated to truth; That thou applaud not thy self in a vain subtilty of
wit, or give thy self to curiosity. That thou tire not thine auditour with
multiplicity of speech, raising questions out of questions, and being too
busily diligent in unnecessaries: but forth with invade the maine force of the
controversy, and strike at the heart of false Doctrine. That thou intermit not
thy Lectures with too long neglect, and be thou more careful of the benefit
of thy Scholars then thine own fame. And as thou would have thine Auditors
attentive and earnest, so let thine care be open to the questions of thy
Scholars when they ask thee. Let thy manners be blameless, thy life honest,
thy correction perpetual, be thou courteous to thy Scholars, peaceful with
those of thy society, and upright before all men.

I know that I admonish one that is mindful, and add spurs to one that
freely runs. But it is better to advise what is superfluous, then to be
deficient in what is necessary. Whatsoever thou shall judge to be needless in
our exhortation, impute it partly to the custom, and partly to our love.

The Form of Inaugration.
THerefore in the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, the
Individual Trinity J create, and declare thee Alexander Coluinus to be Doctor
of Divinity. And with the consent, and allowance of our worthy fellows, I
admit thee into the body and College of Professors, that thou may teach out
of this Chair; And that from henceforth thou enjoy all the privileges, and
immunities, which are granted to this sacred order by the Illustrious Dukes of
Bulloigne.

I propose unto thee the book of the sacred Scripture open, that thou may
learn wisdom from thence, and continually cast thine eyes on it. I propose
the same unto thee shut, that without the help of books, thou may as often
as shall be needful, answer unto men's demands Extempore.

I give thee mine hand as to a fellow Collegian, for a pledge of our brotherly
society.

And with this brotherly embrace I salute thee.

With the good prospering and the guidance of one good and great God, take on
thy self this office, that it may be an honor (...) ^hee, delight to our most
illustrious Duchess, profit to this University, and (...) safeguard to Truth.
To the glory of Gods name, and the edifying of his Church, through JESUS CHRIST
our Lord, Amen.

FJNJS.
Imprimatur. T. WYKES. January. 28. 1639.


