THE PAINTING OF THE ANCIENTS, in three Books: Declaring by Historical
Observations and Examples, THE BEGINNING, PROGRESS, AND CONSVMMATION of that
most Noble ART.

And how those ancient ARTIFICERS attained to their still so much admired
Excellency.

Written first in Latin by FRANCISCUS JUNIUS, F. F. And now by Him Englished,
with some Additions and Alterations.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Hodgkinsonne; and are to be sold by Daniel Friar,
at the sign of the Bull in Little-Britain. 1638.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE COUNTESS of ARUNDELL and SURREY, my singular
good Lady and Mistress.
MADAME;
AS the sweet and glorious harmony of your heroical virtues, in so high a
birth, most happily conjoined and matched with the most illustrious Lord your
husband, the very pattern of true Nobility, enforces the world far and
near with honor and admiration to behold and renown you: so does my
condition require, that I within this little Britain world, in which we live,
should unto your public glory add my particular testimony of your bounty and
munificence, whereby I am engaged, above any other of your servants, to seek
any means both to intimate my humble duty, and to profess my thankful mind
to your noble family. Neither needed I go far to find my occasion and
subject; but even to make use of that, which in your service, and within the
walls of your own house, I had produced: I mean my observations of the manner
of painting in use among the ancients. For seeing your Ladyship upon the first
sight of my Latin copy, was pleased to express your desire of having it
Englished; there seemed a way to be opened unto me, of effecting that my
serviceable intent: and the rather, because some things having passed therein,
which (as one day teaches another) in the review and more mature cogitation I
wished might be altered, I thought best to begin that correction in this
present Edition. Nor do I so much over-ween, but that I see and confess, that
this translation befitteth rather the native fluency of one inbred, than the
forced style of a forrainer; and therefore unto severe eyes it might seem an
unpardonable presumption, to have taken upon me a burden so unfit for my
shoulders to bear, and therewith to interrupt your higher conceits; yet
feeling my self inspired with courage by the signification of your noble
desire (which wrought in my heart, what an absolute command uses to work in
others) I stoutly fell to my task. Wherein I doubt not, but that, if your
Honor by a favorable construction shall judge me not altogether undutifull,
though not precisely officious; others also will think that this my
forwardness in accomplishing your desire, may make all pardonable, if not in
some degree acceptable. Howsoever these rude and imperfect attempts of your
dutiful servant, shall find their chiefest protection and perfection in
wearing the fair and glorious livery of your most noble and worthy name. And
thus humbly laying both my self and my endeavors at the feet of your
Ladyship, to whom I wish all increase of honor and happiness, I ever remain

Your Honors humbly devoted servant, FRANCISCUS JUNIUS F. F.
From Arundell-house, Anno 1638. Mart. 28.
PEr legi hunc Tractatum, cui titulus est, [The Painting of the Ancients etc.]
in quo nihil reperio, quo minus cum utilitate publica imprimatur: it a tamen ut
si non intra tres menses proxime sequentes typis mandetur, haec Licentia sit
omnino irrita.

Rmo in Christo Patri, ac Dro D. Arch. Cant. Sacellanus Domesticus.

Ex Aedibus Lambethanis, Mart. 28. 1638. GUIL. BARY.

ERRATA.
PAge 12, line 31. read hafte. p. 79, l. 7. r. Himerius. p. 94, l. 25. r.
checker-worke-like. p. 107, l. 6. r. Euphorion. p. 107, l. 7. r. scholiast. p.
138. l. 1. r. Oppianus. p. 177. l. 17. paroemiographers. p. 202, l. 12. r.
Agatharchus. p. 214, l. 17. r. exposed. p. 217, l. 19. r. Cities. p. 286. l. 5.
r. too. p. 286, l. 13. r. ingenuous. p. 287, l. 12. add can. p. 311, l. 8. r.
accompting. p. 322, l. 20. r. fair. p. 324. l. 6. r. fitteth. p. 329, l. 12.
add an.

Whereas there be some few faults escaped in the marginall and other
quotations, the Latin copy may give direction for amendme^^ of the same.

THE FIRST BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
MY purpose is, by Gods assistance, to set forth the Art of painting, as in old
times it has begun, as it was promoted, as it came to that wonderful
perfection mentioned in ancient Authors. The first book touches the first
beginnings of Picture. The second book propounds diverse means tending to
the advancement of this Art. The third book speaks of the maine grounds of
Art, the which being well observed by the old Artificers, made them come nearer
to the height of perfection. As concerning the First book, after a general
observation of the inbred delight men take in the imitation of the works of
Nature, we do therein urge somewhat further, that this delight stirred up by
our imagination emboldeneth it self, and still does by little and little
undertake greater matters, shunning only that same immoderate study of such
foolish and giddyheaded fancies, as young beginners often are carried away
withal. Seeing also that many Artificers seem to have drawn that same love
of newfangled conceits from Poets, I did not think it amiss to show what
affinity there is between Poefie and Picture; adding upon the same occasion,
how they are to prepare themselves that would willingly attain to some skill
in judging the works of excellent Masters.

LIB. I. CHAP. I.
THe good and great maker of this Universe, created the world after so glorious
and beautiful a manner, that the Greeks together with the Romans, a consent
also of the Nations persuading them thereunto Plin. lib. II. not. hist. ca. 4.
, have called it by the name of an Ornament. Moreover, Man, whom many ancient
Authors Manil. lib. IV. Astron. Galenus lib. III. de usu partium corporis
humani. Nemesius ca. I. de Natura hominis. Jul. Firmicus in praefat. libri
Tertii Mathes.
call the little world, is not made after the image of God to resemble the
wild beasts in following of their lusts, but that the memory of his original
should lift up his noble soul to the love of a virtuous desire of glory. This
opinion was of old grafted in the hearts of good men; neither do the learned
only, but the vulgar sort also esteem the way of virtue to be the true way by
which our mortal and transitory condition attaineth to an everlasting fame.
But among such a number of virtuous courses as may serve to get a great and
durable renown, every one does most commonly deliberate with his own natural
inclination. The one by a praiseworthy boldness undertaketh to compass with
his understanding the unmeasurable measures of heaven, leaving unto the
following ages a full account of the innumerable number of heavenly lights, as
a most certain and sure inheritance, says Pliny Lib. II. not. bist. cap. 26.
, if peradventure afterward any one would take upon him to be heir thereof.
Another does not stick to pry into the most profound mysteries of Nature;
neither will he give his mind any rest till he has in some measure conceived
the nature of the floting clouds, the cause of thunder, lightning, and of all
those things that above or about the earth do terrify the heart of man. He
goes about the search of those things with a very great confidence, as knowing
himself to be placed in this stately theater, to view and to consider all such
wonders of God. Anaxagoras being asked to what end he was brought forth,
answered; To behold the Sun, Moon, and Heavens; see Diogenes Laertius, lib.
II, in the life of Anaxagoras. Yea what is man, I pray you, but a creature
approaching nearest unto God, as Quintilian Declamat. CCLX.
speaks, and ordained to the contemplation of the things contained in the
world; see also Arriani Epict. lib. 1. cap. 6. Dionys. Longinus de sublimi
orat. 31. I amblichus in Protrept. cap. 3. Although now Quintilian and all the
other Authors speak very well to the purpose; Tullie for all that comes a
great deal nearer to the point we have in hand; man himself, says he Lib. II.
de Natura Dcorum.
, is borne to contemplate and to imitate the world; not being any manner of way
perfect, but only a small parcel of what is perfect.

2. As many then as are taken up with this kind of meditations, might seem to
go far beyond the ordinary sort of men, if they likewise were not left
behind by them that do not only view but also imitate the wonders of Nature.
The painters, says S. Chrysostom Homilia in Psalmum L.
, after the mixing of their colors, endeavor to set forth a lively similitude
of diverse visible things: thus do they paint reasonable and unreasonable
creatures, trees, wars, battles, streams of blood, pikes, Kings, ordinary
men; they make also a royal throne, the King sitting, a barbarous enemy
thrown down under his feet, the points of spears, running rivers, goodly
meadows: to be short, they prepare unto the spectators a very pleasant sight,
whilst they study by the force of their Art to express all manner of visible
things. The words of Isidorus Pelusiota are likewise worth noting; the
Painters, says he Lib. III. epist. 161.
, when they make bodily shapes of things without body, use sometimes to paint
a lone hand which sets a crown upon the head of the Princes of this world;
signifying, that this sovereign power is given them from heaven. Socrates
touches also the large extent of this Art, when he says Apud Xenophontem lib.
III. Apomnem.
, the Painters study with their colors to express, hollow and swelling,
dark and lightsome, hard and soft, rough and smooth, new and old bodies.
Flowers, among all other visible things, show the greatest variety of colors;
yet have the Painters attempted to express the same, as appears in the
famous painter Pausias, who being in love with his Country-woman Glycera, was
the first that assayed to bring the Art to such a wonderful variety of
colors as there is to be seen in flowers: for beholding sometimes how neatly
she did make garlands, and being no less ravished with that dexterity ofhers
then with her beauty, he could not but take the pencill in his hand to strive
with Nature it self; see Pliny xxxv, 10. Apelles likewise painted things that
can not be painted; Thunder and Lightning: see Pliny in the same place. It may
seem then that Theophylactus Simocatus did cast his eye upon some such like
relation, when he Epist. 37.
maintains that Painters undertake to express such things as Nature is not
able to do.

3. It remains howsoever, that among so many Art as do procure us
everlasting glory, this Art is none of the meanest. And as it is a very great
matter to carry in our mind the true images both of living and lifelesse
creatures, so is it a greater matter to work out a true and lively similitude
of those inward images; especially if the Artificer does not tie his imitation
to some particular, though never so fair a body; but follows rather the
perfection of an inward image made up in his mind by a most earnest and
assiduous observation of all such bodies as in their own kind are most
excelling. Such as carve images, says Maximus Tyrius Dissert. VII
, having gathered all that in several bodies is reputed to be fair, bring it
by the means of their art in one singular imitation of a convenient, pure, and
well-proportioned beauty to pass; neither shall you find in haste a body so
accurately exact, as to compare it with the beauty of a statue: For the Arts
do ever seek what is fairest. Ovid seems to point at this, when he does
describe Cyllarus, the fairest of all the Centaures, he had a pleasing
liveliness in his countenance, says he XII Metam.
, and for as much as he was like a man, so came his neck, his shoulders, his
hands, his breast, nearest of all to the praiseworthy images of the Artists. We
are likewise to observe, that Philostratus does very often compare the beauty
of the ancient heroical Worthies with the beauty of artificial Statues, as
you may see in his description of Protesilaus, Euphorbus, Neoptolemus, and
elsewhere. If you do take a man brought forth by Nature, says Proclus Lib.
II. in Timaeum Platonis.
, and another made by the art of carving; yet shall not he that is made by
Nature wholly seem statelier: For Art does many things more exactly. Ovid
expresses the same, when he witnesses Metam.
, that Pigmalion did carve the snow-white ivorie image with such a luckie
dexterity, that it was altogether impossible such a woman should be borne.
Such Artificers therefore as carry in their mind an incorrupt image of perfect
beauty, do most commonly power forth into their works some certain
glimmering sparkles of the inward beauty contained in their minds: neither may
we think this to be very easy; for, according to Apollonius Tyaneus Epist. 19.
his opinion, that which is best, is always hard to be found out, hard to be
judged. It is also well observed by an ancient Orator In Panegyr. Maxim. and
Constable. dicto.
, that the imitation of a most absolute beauty is ever most hard and
difficult; and as it is an easy matter to set forth a true similitude of
deformity by her own marks, so on the contrary the similitude of a perfect
beauty is as rarely: seen as the beauty it self. It was not unknown unto
Zeuxis, says Tullie In ipso statim initio lib. II. de Invent.
, that Nature would never bestow upon one particular body all the perfections
of beauty, seeing that nothing is so neatly shaped by Nature, but there will
always in one or other part thereof some notable disproportion be found; as if
nothing more should be left her to distribute unto others, if she had once
conferred upon one all what is truly beautiful. Wherefore, when this noble
Artificer intended to leave unto the inhabitants of Crotona a choice pattern
of a most beautiful woman, he did not think it good to seek the perfection
of a faultlesse formositie in one particular body; but he picked out of the
whole City five of the well-favouredst virgins, to the end he might find in
them that perfect beauty, which, as Lucian speaks In Hermotimo.
, of necessity must be but one. So does Zenophon very fitly to this purpose
bring in Socrates his discourse held with the Painter Parrhasius, seeing it is
not so easy, says Socrates Apud Xenophontem lib. III. Apomnem.
, to meet with anyone that does altogether consist of irreprehensible parts, so
is it, that you having chosen out of every part of several bodies what is
fittest for your turn, bring to pass that the whole figures made by your Art
seem to be most comely and beautiful.

4. Out of this most absolute fort of imitation there does bud forth the Art of
designing, the Art of painting, the Art of casting, and all other Arts of that
kind. So does Philostratus In prooemio Iconum.
also call this same Imitation an ancient invention, and altogether agreeing
with Nature. The proof of which point could here most readily be drawn out of
that busy eagerness we do see in almost all young children, that follow the
tender imaginations of their rude and unexercised conceits in making of babies
and other images out of clay or wax, but that we think it better not to
trouble our selves too much with the proof of a thing which is clear enough
in it self, seeing every one may sufficiently inform himself concerning this
point, who will but cast an eye upon the daily pastimes used among little ones.
Let us only observe out of Quintilian Orat. Instit. lib. II. cap. 17.
, that all such things as are accomplished by Art, do ever draw their first
beginnings out of Nature: as also, that the greater part of Arts, to use the
words of the same Author Lib. X. c. 2.
, does consist in Imitation: so is it likewise an usual thing in the whole
course of our life, that we our selves study always to do what we like in
others: children follow the copies which are set them, until they get a
perfect habit of writing: Musicians express the voice of their teachers:
Painters imitate the works of their predecessors: husbandmen do frame
themselves after the prosperous experience of them that tilled their ground
with good success: and we do always in the first entrance of all kind of
learning, order our labors after an example propounded unto us.

5. Neither may the great multitude of natural things that our Imitation
busieth it self withal, put us in such a fright as to hinder our good
endeavors; seeing it is no more requisite in this Art then in many other Arts,
that we should after a most troublesome manner go over every little thing; as
if it were not possible to attain to perfection, unless we did learn to
imitate all things that are in Nature. Certainly, the large diffused nature of
things cannot abide that a teacher should weary his scholars with such an
infinite number of figures; and whosoever does undertake any such thing, shall
undergo these two inconveniences, says Quintilian Lib. V. cap. 10.
, as to say always too much, and yet never to say all. Thus may we very well be
satisfied with the Imitation of the chiefest things, assuring our selves that
lesser things will follow of themselves. Polycletus, having made Hercules, did
not find it a difficult matter to make the Lions skin, or the many-headed
water-snake. Phidias likewise, having made the image of Minerva, did not think
it much to make up her shield. No body does so excel in greater matters, says
Quintilian Lib. II. cap. 3.
, as to fail in lesser: unless Phidias by chance made Jupiter best of all,
but that some body else should have been better at the making of such things as
the work was to be garnished withal. The words of the incomparable Orator are
remarkable; as in other Arts, says Tullie Lib. II. de Oratore.
, when the hardest things are propounded, there is no need that the rest should
be delivered after a laborious and toilesome manner, as being now easy and
resembling the things taught before; so in the Art of Painting, if any one has
thoroughly learned how to paint a man, the same shall likewise know how to paint
a man of what shape and age he himself lists, although it may be he never
learned to make any such figures apart by themselves: neither is it to be
feared, that he who can paint a Lion or a Bull passing well, should not be able
to do the same in many other beasts that walk upon four feet. This point is
also confirmed in the following words of the most learned Quintilian; a Master
must every day, says he Lib. VII. cap. 10.
, by several examples show the order and connection of things; to the end that
by a continual practice, we should still pass on to things of the like
nature: for it is impossible to propound all what may be imitated by Art:
neither is there any Painter that has learned to imitate all natural things;
but having once perceived the true manner of imitating, he shall easily hit the
similitude of such things as shall be offered him.

6. The first principles then of these Arts of imitation, do not demand an
endless labor, but rather contenting themselves with a few very moderate and
easy documents of meet proportions, do forthwith present us an open and ready
access unto the most inward secrets of Art. And verily, the whole Art of
painting, may wondrous well be comprised in a small number of precepts, which
as they are in any wise necessary, so are they for all that to be delivered
after a short and plain way. When there is on the contrary a great stir kept
about the first rudiments of these Arts, it is very often seen, that young
beginners are alienated from the Art, by reason of so diffused and intricate a
manner of institution: their wits also, that had more need at the first to be
cherished and encouraged, grow dull and sottish, being overwhelmed with a dry
and barren multitude of far fetched instructions: they do sometimes also, to
the great hindrance of their good proceedings, foolishly persuade themselves,
that they are already as good Artificers as the best of them, though they have
done no more but slenderly learned by heart, and practiced but grossly, some
disorderly precepts, that are boasted to contain the very pith and marrow of
the whole Art: Many lively spirits at length are most pitifully turned away
from their forward course, after they have enthralled themselves into such a
mis-leading labyrinth of confused and intricate precepts, and having once lost
that freeness of spirit, by which the Art is most of all advanced, they give
over all good endeavors, they do stagger at every little occasion, not daring
to depart one inch from the much admired and highly esteemed rules of Art. It
is then expedient that we should not wander, but rather follow a settled short
way, easy both for learners and teachers. Neither is it amiss, a beginner
should strongly be possessed with this opinion, that there is a certain good
way, in which Nature must do many things of her own accord without any
teaching; so that the grounds of Art may seem not so much to have been found
out by teachers, as to have been observed only by them, when excellent
Artificers that followed the unpremeditated and unrestrained motions of Nature
practiced them. To what we have hither to propounded out of Quintilian Ex
prooemio libri octavi.
, the words of Aquila Romanus may very well be applied, all things almost,
says he De Figuris sententiaru^.
, that are contained in the first precepts, are put in practice by quick-witted
men, not so much out of knowledge as by chance. It is left only that we bring
to their works some kind of learning, and a great deal of attention, to the
end that we might not only perceive such virtues as unawares they have
imparted to us, but that we also might have them afterward at command as
often as occasion shall require. It is then a very poor and silly shift, to
lay the fault of our own sluggishnesse upon the difficulty of the first
principles: this pretense can avail us nothing at all: seeing these Arts do
indifferently without any regard of persons, invite all studious hearts to take
their fill of that sweetness they do afford. It is likewise a very unnoble
and faint-hearted lithernesse, to suffer the heat of our most fervent desire to
be cooled, by reason that some have to very small purpose taken a great deal
of pains about these Arts; seeing the knowledge of all such kind of Arts, says
Sidonius Apollinaris Lib. 11. Epist. 10.
, is by nature more gorgeously precious, how less common.

7. Besides all this, there is yet another maine reason why some are so loath
to meddle with these Arts; for they can never see them brought to such a
perfection, but that there is always something left, which requires, if not
mending, at least trimming and polishing. The faculty of Painters, says Plato
Lib. VI. de Legib.
, knows no end in painting, but finds still something to change or to add;
and it is altogether impossible that beauty and similitude should receive such
an absolute consummation, as not to admit any further increase. Thus do they
decline the supposed toilesomnesse of this Art before the least experiment; and
they will not resolve to do any thing, because they do forsooth despair to
do all. Neither is there any possibility to cure this overthwart humor of
theirs, unless they do first learn out of Vegetius Lib. II. de Re militari,
cap. 18.
, that all kind of work seems to be hard before we do try it. They must
secondly, consider what a vehement efficacy there is in man's wit; wheresoever
you do bend your wit, says Salust, it will prevail. Maximus Tyrius likewise,
what is there, says he Dissert. XVIII.
, which the all-daring soul of a man cannot cunningly find out, when she has
but a mind to it? They are thirdly, to mark how great a matter they go about.
The reward of their labor, if they do not shrink and play the cowards, shall
be an Art of Arts, an Art no less profitable then glorious. It is a most
shameful thing, says Tullie Circa initium libri primi de Finibus.
, to grow weary, when the thing we study to obtain is of great worth. The which
if we do rightly conceive, we shall also more readily entertain this
opinion, that the way is not unpassable nor difficult. For the first and
greatest aid comes from our will: and if we can but bring an unfainedly
willing mind to these Arts, the worst will be past; seeing the things we are to
learn, may be had by a few years study. The only reason that makes the way
to seem long and tedious, is, because we do nothing but haste and draw back at
the least shadow of difficulties, suffering our courages to be daunted with the
imagination of a wrongly conceived hardness. Let us but think the institution
short and easy, and we shall find it easy enough. And if we do perhaps by
the way light upon some hard and difficult matter, it may quickly be made
easier by an orderly and discreet way of teaching. But now is the first and
greatest fault in the teachers, that do most willingly detain their disciples
about the first principles: partly out of covetousness, that by so doing they
might the longer enjoy their gains: partly out of ambition, that so it might
seem the harder what they themselves profess: sometimes also out of mere
ignorance and negligence. The next fault is in the scholars themselves, that
had rather stay and dwell upon those things they do know already, then to
proceed further to what they are as yet ignorant of. We do moreover shorten
our own time, fooling the greatest part of our best hours away among a company
of prattling visiters; besides that stageplayes, banquets, cards and dice,
unnecessary journeys, the immoderate care of our pampered carcasses, rob us
also of a good deal of time that might be better husbanded: not to speak of
wanton lusts, drunkenness, and other such like beastly vices, by the which our
distempered bodies wax altogether unfit to make good use of so small a remnant
of our time. This then being our daily practice, yet are we for all this
wastfull lavishnesse of our youthful days not ashamed to complain that the
Art is long, the time short, the experience hard and difficult; three lives, in
our opinion, are too little that we should in them attain to a perfect
knowledge of these most copious Arts: whereas on the contrary, if we would make
good use of our good leisure, we should rather thankfully confess that we are
not in want of time; and if we do lack any, that it is long of the idle
pastimes and brutish lusts we are given to; seeing not the days only do
afford us time enough, but the nights also; whose length is abundantly able
both to quench our desire of sleeping, and also to stir up our fantasy by a
silent quietness. Even as in traveling such men as go their way readily
without any delay, come to their Innes as soon again as others that setting
forth at the same minute do by the way wander up and down to meet somewhere
with a refreshing shade, or a delectable water-spring; so is there in matter of
Art an unspeakable difference between lazy lingerers and active spirits. Let
us then take heed of so gross an error, as to judge of the difficulty of
these Arts by the time of our life, and not by the time of our study: for if we
do but order the time of our youth wisely, if we do not turn aside unto any
idle and time-wasting sports, we shall find time enough: neither may we
pretend any want of means, that should help us to attain to the perfection
of these Arts, for if we do consider it right, we shall be forced to
acknowledge with Quintilian Lib. XII. cap. 11.
, that antiquity has furnished us with such a number of Masters and examples,
that no age may seem happier in condition of birth, then this our present age;
seeing all the former ages did not think it much to sweat for our instruction.

8. For as much then as it is most evident that the principles of these Arts
are not too hard, and likewise that we are not in want of time, some do for all
that play the modest men, alleging for an excuse the perfection of these Arts
to be such, that they may not without a great presumption hope to atchieve
them, yea that it is wholly impossible to be perfect in them; Serves for
answer: that it is not repugnant with the nature of things that somewhat should
be done now, which in former times as yet was never done; seeing all such
things as now are great and notable, have had also a time they were not.
Neither is there any reason why we should slack our endeavors, having besides
the help of a reasonably good wit the advantage of a healthful body, as also
the guiding of a trusty teacher: and though we cannot mount up to the highest
top of perfection, yet it is something for all that to stick out above the
rest in the second and third place. It no is small glory, says Columella Lib.
XI. de Re rust. c. 1.
, to be made partaker of a great and worthy matter, how soever it be but a
little you do possess. It does then appear how weakly and preposterously they
do argue, that esteem it idleness in a man to bestow great pains, where he
knows aforehand that it is impossible to attain to the highest perfection.
This is a poor and slender argument, I say, seeing that such as heretofore in
the opinion of all the world, have been the best and most renowned Artificers,
should never have obtained the glory of that name, if taking courage they had
not hoped still to do better then the best of their predecessors; and though
by chance it were not in their power to overtake and to outrun the best
Artists, yet did they always strive to come so near as to tread upon their
heels: besides that we may daily see how an indifferently good practice of
these Arts is very near as profitable as the most perfect Art it self. Though
now it were an easy matter for us to show that these Arts almost in all ages
have carried the chiefest sway in the favor of great Kings and Potentates,
that likewise by this means besides the due reward of glory, they have got
themselves an infinite mass of wealth; yet do we esteem the mention of such
rewards to come far short of the worthiness of these Arts, and of the sufficient
contentment they do find in themselves. But of this we shall speak elsewhere
at large. It is left only that all such as think well of these Arts, should
aspire unto the excellency of the inestimable Arts themselves without any
by-respects: which doing, they shall undoubtedly reach the highest step of
perfection, or atleast be lifted up to such a height as to see a great many
left underneath their feet.

9. It is an ordinary practice among Poets to call in the first entrance of
their works upon the Muses, craving of them such a readiness of invention and
utterance, that their Poems gushing forth as out of a plentiful water-spring,
might with a gentle stream refresh and charm the hearts and ears of
astonished men. The Artificers may likewise, before they do go about this
work, very fitly salute the sweet company of the nine learned Sisters; not so
much to ask of them a good and prosperous success of what they take in hand,
as well to observe out of the proper signification of their names the several
steps that lead a Novice into the right way of perfection. The first of the
Muses, says Fulgentius Lib. I. Mythol.
, is named Clio, which name she has out of a Greek word, signifying fame: and
by this name there is infinuated unto us the first and greatest motive that
stirs in us a desire of learning: seeing the knowledge of good Arts and
Sciences does extend our fame to the memory of late posterities. The second is
Euterpe, that is, full of delight; for as we do first seek knowledge, so do
we afterward delight in seeking. The third is Melpomene, that is, settling of
meditation; for as there follows upon our first resolution a desire to effect
what we have resolved upon, so does there upon this resolution follow an
attentive earnestness to obtain our longing. The fourth is Thalia, that is,
apprehension; for it is ever seen that the apprehension, in a mind not
altogether incapable, does follow upon the earnestness of attention. The fifth
is Polymnia, that is, the remembrance of many things; for it is most of all
required after the apprehension, that we should perfectly remember the things
rightly apprehended. The sixth is Erato, that is, finding something like; for it
may justly be exspected, that the Artificer after a well-remembred knowledge,
should invent something of his own, not unlike the things apprehended and
remembered by him. The seventh is Terpsichore, that is, delighting in the
instruction; for it does follow upon the invention of new matters, that we
should judge of them and discern them cheerfully. The eight is Urania, that
is, heavenly; for we do after this care of judging make choice of such things
as are fit to be further wrought upon, leaving the rest; which is the work of
a high and heavenly wit. The ninth is Calliope, that is, of a good utterance.
The whole connection is thus linked together. The first degree is, that we
desire knowledge: the second, that we delight in this desire: the third, that
we do eagerly follow the thing we thus delight in: the fourth, that we do
apprehend the thing followed: the fifth, that we remember what we once
apprehended: the sixth, that we do invent something like unto the remembered
apprehensions: the seventh, that we examine and discern our inventions: the
eight, that we choose the best of those things we have judged and discerned:
the ninth, that we do well express the things well chosen.

CHAP. II.
BEsides this newly-mentioned imitation of natural things, by whose means
Artificers do express all kinds of visible things after the life, we are also
to mark another sort of imitation, by which namely the Artificer emboldeneth
himself to meddle also with such things as do not offer themselves to the
eyes of men: and although the chiefest force of this Imitation does consist in
the Fantasy, so must we for all this thank our eyes for the first
beginnings as well of the Fantasy as of the Imitation it self. For the
inward Imaginations that do continually stir and play in our minds, cannot
be conceived and fashioned therein, unless our eyes some manner of way are
made acquainted with the true shape of the things imagined, or at least that
we have felt them with some of our senses. Our mind, says Strabo Lib. 11.
Geogr.
makes up the conceivable or intelligible things out of the sensible: for as
our senses do certify us of the figure, color, bigness, smell, softness,
and taste of an apple; so does our mind out of these things bring together the
true apprehension of an apple: so falls it likewise out with great figures,
that our sense sees the parts of them, but our mind puts them hole figure
out of those visible parts together. The mistius does wonderful well express
all this: the fantasy, says he Paraphr. in lib. III. Arist. de Anima, vide
quoque ejusdem Themistii parap. in Arist. de Memoria and reminiscentia Maxim
tamen Alexandrum Aphrodisiensem lib. 1. de Anima.
, is like a print or footstep of sense: for as a leaver moved by the hand
mooveth a stone, and as the sea stirred by the wind stirs a ship, so is it
no wonder at all that our sense should be subject to the same: for our sense
being stirred by outward sensible things, and receiving the shape of such
things as do stir it, stirs also in perfect creatures another power of
the soul, commonly called fantasy: whose nature is to lay up the prints
delivered her by sense, and to seal them up after so sure a manner, as to
keep still the footsteps of the same, after that now the visible things are
gone out of our sight.

2. So does then this same most fertile power of our soul, according to Plato
his opinion, yield two sorts of Imitation; the first modleth only with things
seen, whilst they are set before our eyes; the other on the contrary studieth
also to express things prefigured only and represented by the fantasy. Some
Artificers, says Proclus Lib. II. in Timaeum Platonis.
, can imitate the works of others most accurately; where as other workmen have
rather an inventive quality, to devise wonderful works for the use of man:
so has he that first made a ship, phantastically conceived a platform of what
be meant to make. The same Author goes yet further; whatsoever is made after a
conceived or intelligible thing, says he Ibidem.
, is fair whatsoever on the contrary is made after a thing generated, is not
fair. For he that makes any thing after intelligible things, must needs make
it like the conceived things, or else unlike: if he does make it like by
imitation, so is it that the imitation of necessity shall be fair; seeing
there is in the conceived things a principal beauty: but if the Imitation be
unlike, then does he not make it after the conceived things; seeing he does
more and more swarve aside from the similitude of what is truly fair.
Likewise he that makes any thing after the example of things generated, shall
never, as long namely as he does fix his eyes upon them, attain to what is
perfectly beautiful; seeing the things generated are full of deformed
disproportions, and far remoted from the principal true beauty. Hence it is
that Phidias, when he made Jupiter, did not cast his eyes upon any thing
generated, but he fetched the pattern of his work out of a Jupiter conceived
after Homers description. Other famous Writers, besides Proclus, do also very
much harp upon this string, urging always Phidias his example as an infallible
rule of Art: and it seems by their words, that they held Phidias to be so
excellent an Artificer, because he had a singular ability to imagine things
invisible after a most majesticall manner. Nothing is in my opinion so
beautiful, says Tullie De perfecto oratore.
, but we must always conceive that to be fairer from whence the former, even
as an image was wont to be made after a face, is expressed; which cannot be
perceived by our eyes, nor ears, nor any of our senses, since we do apprehend
it only by thought and mind. Hence it is that we can imagine something fairer
yet then Phidias his images, although our eyes cannot behold any thing fairer
in that kind. Neither did that same Artificer, when he made the images of
Jupiter and Minerva, fix his eyes upon one after whom he should draw such a
similitude; but there did abide in his mind an exquisite form of beauty,
upon the which he staring, directed both his Art and his hand to the similitude
of the same. There is then in the form and shape of things a certain
perfection and excellency, unto whose conceived figure such things by
imitation are referred as cannot be seen. Plato, a most grave Author and
teacher, not of knowing only, but also of speaking, does call these figures
Ideas. To this place of Tullie, we must by all means add the words of Seneca
the Rhetorician; Phidias saw not Jupiter, says he Lib. X. Controver. 5.
, yet has he made him as thundering. Minerva stood not before the eyes of the
Artificer; his mind for all that, worthy of such an Art, has rightly conceived
the Gods, and exhibited them. We may learn also out of the same Author how
great a difference there is between the Artificers that do work after this
manner, and the others that do but imitate things present. This same majesty
can then only be expressed, says he Lib. VIII. Contro. 2.
, when our mind fore-seeth and fore-casteth the whole work. Philostratus
propounds all this more at large in that same most learned discourse,
between Apollonius Tyaneus and Thespesion, the chiefest of the Gymnosophists.
The words of Philostratus Lib. VI. de vita Apollonii, cap. 9.
are worth rehearsing. It is so, says Thespesion, that Phydias and Praxiteles
climbing up to heaven, and there expressing the several shapes of the Gods,
have afterward applied them to the Art, or is there something else that has
taught these Artificers to counterfeit. Something else, replied Apollonius, and
that full of wisdom. What is that? says Thespesion again; seeing you can,
besides the Imitation, name nothing. Fantasy, answered Apollonius, has
accomplished these things; an Artificer far exceeding Imitation in wisdom:
for Imitation does work out nothing but what she has seen: Fantasy on the
contrary does take in hand also what she has not seen; for she propounds
unto her self unknown things with a relation to such things as are. A
certain kind of astonishment does also often hinder our Imitation; whereas
nothing can disturb the Fantasy, being once resolved to follow undauntedly
what she undertaketh. As for an Artificer that means to conceive in his
mind an image not unworthy of Jupiter, the same must see him accompanied with
the four seasons of the year, with the constellations, with the whole heaven:
for such a one did Phidias then imagine. He likewise that does intend to make
an image wherein there might be perceived some resemblance of Pallas, must see
her with the look she has at the marshalling of great Armies, or when she
busieth her self about devices of counsel and inventions of Art, yea he must
propound her unto himself as she came gallantly leaping forth out of Jupiter
his brain.

3. We do see then plainly that the Artificers stand very much in need of the
mentioned Imaginative faculty: and although we must ingenuously confess that
they do not so much want it, who content themselves with the Imitation of
visible things, following stroke after stroke; for the exercise of this same
faculty does more properly belong unto such Artificers as labor to be perfect,
studying always by a continual practice to enrich their Fantasy with all
kind of perfect Images, and desiring to have them in such a readiness, that
by them they might represent and resemble things absent, with the same
facility others do express things present: yet shall we more strongly be
convicted of the necessity of this same exercise, if we take this into our
consideration, that Artificers are often to express such things as can but
seldom, and that only for a little while be seen; as namely, the burning of
a City, of a village, or else of a company of scattered cottages; the
miserable confusion of them that run their ship against a rock; the bloody
skirmish of a drunken merciless crew, dying in a most horrid hurly burly on
heaps. It is most certain that we do but seldom meet with such spectacles,
neither do they stay our leisure to let us take a full view of them; all is
but a flurt, and away. It is left therefore that our Imagination should lay up
carefully what she has seen, still increasing her store with Images of things
unseene, as far forth as it is possible to conceive them by a relation of
what we sometimes beheld. What shall we do, says Seneca the rhetorician Lib.
X. Controvers. 5.
, if we are to paint a battle? shall we arm two several parties, to see
them discomfit one another? must we needs see how a sad and dejected multitude
of captives comes drouping after the lascivious shouting, though all
beblouded conquerours? as if the greatest part of mankind had better perish,
then the Painter fail.

4. It is then not only profitable but also necessary, that an Artificer
should by a daily practice carefully provide himself of such kind of Images,
as might be ready at his call when he is to imitate things absent, and such
things as never came before his eyes: and we shall with much ease attain to
this, says Quintilian Orat. instit. lib. VI. c. 3.
, if we are but willing: for as among the manifold remissions of our mind
among our idle hopes and wakefull dreams, these Images do follow us so close,
that we seem to travel, to sail, to bestirre our selves mightily in a hot
fight, to make a speech in the midst of great assemblies, yea we do
solively propound all these things unto our minds, as if the doing of them kept
us so busy, and not the thinking: shall we then not turn this same vice of
our mind to a more profitable employment? Furthermore, says the same Author
in another place Orat. instit. lib. I. ca. 1.
, as birds do delight in flying, horses in running, wild beasts in
fierceness, so is the quick stirring of our mind most proper unto us: whence
it arises also that our soul is believed to draw her original from heaven.
As for blunt and indocible wits, it is certain that they are as little brought
forth after the nature of man, as prodigious and monstrous bodies; but these
are very few. It serves for proof, that there is most commonly in children a
sweet-promising hope of many things perceived; the which in process of time
decaying and perishing, does manifestly show that there was no defect of nature
in them, but only want of care. It is then very well agreeing with nature,
that we should cherish and turn to the best that same aptness which is in us
to imagine strange things: and we shall better be able to follow this exercise,
if we do now and then, having first banished our ordinary cares, affect
retired and solitary places; because Fantasy bestirreth it self most, when
round about us there is no other stir to hinder our Imaginations: but seeing
it is not always in our power to meet with such a retiredness as is most of
all, besides the quietness of our mind, to be wished; yet are we not upon the
least disturbance instantly to give over the exercising of our Imaginations:
for how shall we be able publicly in a crowd of many spectators, and among the
noise of many forward censurers to maintain the sincerity and cleerenesse of
our judgment, if any little thing puts us out? Wherefore we shall do well
at the first to strive against all such inconveniences, as Quintilian speaks
Orat. Instit. lib. X. ca. 3.
, accustoming our mind to such a steadfast constancy of conceiving, as to
overcome all other impediments by the earnestness of our intention: for if we
do altogether bend this same intention upon the things conceived, our mind
shall never take notice of any thing the eyes do see, the ears do hear. Do
not casual and ordinary deep thoughts bring many times to pass that we cannot
see them that run full but upon us, and that we do sometimes stray from the
way we are very well acquainted with? So is it then more likely that a purposed
resolution may do the same. Neither are we to give way to all such occasions
as may serve for an excuse of slothfulness: for if we begin once to think
that there is no time of studying, but when we are sufficiently refreshed,
merrily disposed, and free from all other cares, we shall ever find some
pretenses of laziness. Let our Imagination therefore among multitudes of
people, in journeys, in banquets withdraw it self to some secrecy.

5. As many then as will not spend their labor and time in vain, must not
think it much to take some care and pains about the furnishing of their
minds with all manner of profitable Images. Our wardrobes, when they are once
filled up, can take no more, says Cassiodorus De Anima. cap. 12.
, this treasury of our mind is not overloaden in haste; but the more it has
put up, the more it craveth: so is it also, that all such as have filled this
same storehouse of theirs, find upon any sudden occasion all kind of Images
ready at hand; whereas others, that have not made provision of them, are then
first with an unseasonable and most unprofitable study to seek them when it is
time to use them; being most like unto those unprovident unthrifts, that are
feign to shift for themselves from time to time with scraping and raking,
because they never took any care how to attain betimes to a sure and settled
patrimony to live by. Philopaemen, a very famous and wise General of the
Achaeans, being esteemed a most experienced Captain in martial affairs, has
by his own daily practice propounded unto the Students of any liberal Arts
whatsoever a most forcible example of this same provident care. Philopaemen had
singular skill in leading of an Army and choosing a fit place where to pitch
the camp, says Livie Lib. xxxv, ac. c.
, neither had he in times of war only exercised his mind to it, but also in
times of peace. If he among his travells did chance to meet with a forest
wherein he saw some difficulty, having viewed on all sides the nature of the
place, he would forecast within himself if he went alone, or enquire of others
if he had any company about him, what if the enemy should appear in that same
place assailing his forces at the forefront, at either side, or from behind,
what course were then best for him to take? He did likewise bethink himself
that his enemies might come upon him in a battle array ready to fight, or else
meet him after a confused and disorderly manner; so did he then consider or
enquire what place was fittest for him; how many armed men, and what kind of
Armor (holding that point also considerable) there might be required for
present use, where he should bestow the baggage, together with the unwarlike
multitude, as also with what and how great a troop he might guard them.
Furthermore, did he look about whether he had better march on in his way, or
else go back the same way he came; where he should lodge his Army; how much
ground his rampires should ask; not neglecting in the mean time to spy out a
convenience for watering, as also where his forces might have good store of
fodder and wood; which way and in what order he should remove his camp the
next day. With these cares and imaginations had he from his youth so exercised
his mind, that nothing in such a case could be new unto him. There is no need
of many words about the application of so notable an example, seeing it may
serve very well for a most pure and perfect looking-glass, wherein all those
are to behold themselves that desire to be excellent in any Art. We are then
by all means to bring a due and convenable preparation, as to all other Arts
and Sciences, so likewise to these Arts of Imitation; and although we cannot at
all times and in all places draw and paint, our mind for all that can prepare
it self always and every where. Thanks be to God, says Ovid Lib. III. de
Ponto, Eleg. 5.
, our mind has leave to go any where. Our mind compriseth in the space of
few hours most large and very wide diffused matters. Our mind cannot rest,
but it finds in the midst of our most earnest occupations some spare time
for the nurturing of Imagination. Our mind finds in this same most profitable
exercise no small help by the darkness of night it self, then chiefly
awaking our speculations when sleep begins to fail us; neither does she
then only digest the conceived things in some kind of order, but brings the
whole Invention so far, that nothing more but the hand of the Artificer
seems to be required to the perfection of the work.

6. Although now it be manifest enough, that it is no hard matter to stir up
our Imagination, yet may we not hope to get this same rare quality in one
instant; seeing it does require at the first some labor to settle our wild
scattered thoughts, and to bring them to a custom of insisting upon any one
intended Imagination, till we have met with some right well conceived and
steadfastly abiding Images: then are we by little and little to increase this
store, studying always to work out a lively similitude of what we have
conceived: for without this same ability of expressing the conceived Images,
is all the former exercise of our fantasy worth nothing; and it were a great
deal better to follow sudden and unpremeditated conceits, says Quintilian
Orat. Instit. lib. X. ca. 6.
, then to be troubled with such Imaginations as do not hang handsomely
together. Forasmuch then as it has been sufficiently proved in this present
Chapter, how great reason we have daily to augment and to cherish the strength
of our fantasy, so may the necessity of this same practice as yet more be
enforced upon us, if we do consider that our Imitation is most commonly better
or worse, according as our Imaginations are more subtle or gross: and as it
does not agree with a refined and well conceived fantasy to express the
things imagined after a homely fashion, so is it ever seen that generous and
lofty conceits do lead our Imitation to a most hopeful boldness. But of
this more at large in the next Chapter.

CHAP. III.
THe Art of Painting has been about the time of her infancy so rough and
poor, that Aelianus, speaking of the first beginners of this Art, does not
stick to say Var. histor. lib. X. c. 10.
, that they were forced by reason of their unskilfulnesse in painting, to write
by the several figures expressed in their Pictures, this is an ox, this is a
horse, this is a tree. The great interpreter of the mysteries of Nature
witnesses also Plin. not. hist. li. xxxv. cap. 3.
, that the first Picture has been nothing else but the shadow of a man drawn
about with lines. It is likewise related by the greatest part of ancient
Writers, that all the statues before Daedalus his time, have had a most
unpleasant stiffness, standing in a lifelesse posture with their eyes closed
up, their hands hanging straight down, their feet joined close together; and
because Daedalus was the first that gave his works some life and action, by
making them after such a manner as that they did seem to stir their hands
and feet, hence it has been reported of his works, that of their own accord
they would go from one place to another. Athenaeus Circa initium libri xiv
Deipnosoph.
tells us at length a pretty tale of one Parmeniscus, who after he came out
of the hole of Trophonius could never laugh, looking always with a sad
unmovable countenance. Wherefore thinking it a most irksome thing to be
bereft of that same common joy of other men, to the Oracle he goes, where
Apollo makes him an answer, that by mothers gift he should be filled with
laughter. Thus made he as much haste home as possibly could be made,
confidently believing that upon the first sight of his own mother he should
obtain his desire: but all in vain; for the presence of his mother changed
him never a whit, and he was still the same. He makes afterward upon one or
other occasion a journey toward the Island Delus, viewing round about all what
was worth seeing in so famous a place; and having met with a world of rare and
memorable sights, it came in his mind that among such a number of rich and
artificial monuments confecrated unto Apollo, the statue of his mother was
like to be a singular good one. But being entered into the Temple of Latona, and
finding there contrary to his expectation, an old wooden and very much
misshapen image of the Goddess; he also contrary to his hope burst out into a
loud laughing. It would be wonderful easy for us to prove here with more
examples how pitifully poor and ridiculous the first works of Art have been,
if reason it self did not teach us that it could not be otherwise, seeing
there is nothing, as Tullie speaks De Claris oratoribus.
, both invented and finished at a time. Arnohius urges the same after a more
ample manner, the Arts, says he Lib. 11. adversus Gentes.
, are not together with our minds sent forth out of the heavenly places, but
all of them are found out here in earth, and are in process of time soft and
fair forged by a continual meditation. Our poor and needy life perceiving
some casual things to fall out prosperously, whilst it does imitate, attempt,
and try, whilst it does slip, reform, and change, has out of this same
assiduous reprehension, made up small sciences of Arts, the which it has
afterward by study brought to some perfection.

2. Seeing then it cannot be denied, but that the first beginnings of Art have
been very poor and imperfect, it appears likewise that they could not much
be advanced by a bare Imitation: for although Imitation was able to bring a
studious Novice to such grounds of Art as had been put in practice by them that
were before him; yet for all that never could any Student, that did profess
himself a mere Imitator, go further then his predecessors had gone already.
And sure it is that these Arts would always have been at a stay, or rather
grown worse and worse, if Fantasy had not supplied what Imitation could not
perform. Wherefore it cannot be amiss to consider here a little how
unprofitable and hurtful it is that we should tie our endeavors to a kind of
servile Imitation, without raising our thoughts to a more free and generous
confidence. Such as never endeavor to stand upon their own legs, says
Seneca Epist. 33.
, follow their predecessors, first in such things as were never called in
question, afterward in such things as do require further search. It is in the
mean time certain that we shall find nothing, if we do content our selves
with what was found already. He likewise that follows the steps of any
other man, does even as much as if he did follow nothing at all; neither does
he find any thing, because he does not so much as seek any thing. Mark also
with us the following words of Quintilian; Nothing, says he Orat. instit. lib.
X. ca. 2.
, does receive any increase by Imitation alone; and, if it had been altogether
unlawful to add anything to the former, there should be as yet no other
Picture but such a one as did at the first express the uttermost lines of the
shadows which bodies make in the Sun. If you do run over all the Arts, you
shall find that no Art has contained her within the narrow bounds of her
beginnings; neither have we any reason to think that these our times only
should be so unfortunate, as that nothing now can wax better: it is then
requisite, that such also as do not covet to be the first, should for all that
rather study to outgoe then to follow: for he that striveth to go before, may
by chance keep an even pace with the foremost, although he cannot outrun him;
whereas on the contrary, he can never keep an even pace with any one whose
steps he means most carefully to follow; seeing he that follows, must
needs be the last. So is it for the most part easier to do more, then even
just the same: for there is such a difficulty in similitude, that Nature it
self has never been able to bring to pass that things most like one unto
another should not be discerned by one or other difference: besides that
whatsoever bears the similitude of any other thing, must of necessity come
short of the thing it does resemble; seeing the things we take for examples of
our Imitation, do contain in themselves the true strength and liveliness of
Nature; the Imitation on the contrary, is ever fained and sometimes also
corrupted by some kind of forced affectation.

3. Having but now learned out of Quintilian, how small profit the Novices of
these Arts receive by mere Imitation, it follows that we should likewise
observe out of the same judicious Writer, how great hurt new beginners receive
by such a slavish custom of imitating: a great many, says he Lib. V. c. 10.
, being entangled in those inevitable snares, have lost also the best
endeavors their wit could suggest them; and looking back after I know not
what Master, they have forsaken the surest and best leader, Nature it self.
Seeing then Quintilian does not without great reason forwarne us to take good
heed that we should not too much accustom our selves to a strict course of
Imitation, least we might by this means loose and put clean away the ready
suggestions of our own natural wit; it can do no harm to propound here, for
confirmation of this point, a few other places collected out of approved
Authors; if perchance by the consideration of them some good motions could be
infused into our hearts. It is impossible to excel in any thing, says Dio
Chrysostomus Orat. Lxiv.
, unless we do strive with them that are most excellent. Continual labor
would be good for nothing, says Quintilian Lib. III. cap. 3.
, if it were unlawful to find out better things then are found already.
Whosoever means to learn any thing, says another Author Rh. ad Herennium,
lib. IV.
, must not think it impossible that one man should go thorough all. It is most
shameful, says Quintilian Lib. I, c. 10.
, to despair of such things as may be effected. We do see that Arts and all
other Sciences are gone forward, says Isocrates, not by their means that
contain themselves within the compass of things once settled, but by the means
of such as go about to mend some thing, stirring always what in their opinion
is not yet right. Time has found out and mended many necessary things, says
Synesius Epist. 57.
. All things are not made after a pattern; nay all things that are made, have
had their beginning; and before they were made, they were not at all:
whatsoever is more profitable, must always be preferred before the things
accustomed.

4. Others perhaps may more be taken with some other of these alleged places,
the words of Synesius run most of all in my mind, where he urges that things
done by course of custom must always give place when there are found out
things more profitable. Neither can I forbear upon this occasion to follow a
little the steps of the most wise and discreet Quintilian, seeing he
disputes in sundry passages very much to our purpose. Some do always creep
near the ground, for fear of falling; they do shun and loath all
delightfulness in painting, allowing of nothing but what is plain, mean, and
without any endeavor. Neither can these weak and miserable Artificers give the
least reason why such dainties do not agree with their palate; for what crime
is there, I pray you, in a good Picture? does it not advance the Art? does it
not commend the Artificer? does it not move the spectator? All this cannot be
denied: and therefore do they not plead any thing for themselves, but that it
is a way of painting not used by the Ancients. Whatsoever is not done after the
example of Antiquity, goes against their stomachs. This pretense might seem
plausible enough, if they did express what Antiquity it is they appeal to:
for it is not to be believed that they mean the first times of the newly
invented Art: it being most certain that Phydias and Apelles have brought many
things to light, their predecessors knew nothing of: neither can any man think
well of Praxiteles and Protogenes his works, that would have us follow the Art
of Calamis and Polygnotus without varying from them in the least stroke. And
although some of the ancient Masters that came nearer the first times have
followed a commendable kind of plain and sure work, yet have the following
added unto this plainness of theirs diverse ornaments that did stick out in
their works, even as clear shining eyes use to do in a fair face: but as
bodies that are every where decked with eyes, obscure the beauty of the other
members; so do many Artificers now adays drown the pure brightness of their
Pictures with too much braverie: if then we must needs follow either of both,
it is fit that we should prefer the dryness of the Ancients before that same
new license our times have made choice of. But now need we not come to this, as
to tie our Imitation to either of those; seeing there is a certain middle way
to be followed; even as to the first simplicity of food and apparel there
has been added an unreproveable kind of neatness. The first for all that we
are to observe, is, that we study to avoid gross faults; least in stead of
being better then the Ancients, we should only be found unlike. Quintil. lib.
VIII, cap. 5.

5. As many then as desire to express the principal virtues of the best and
most approoved Artificers, must not content themselves with a slender and
superficial viewing of the works they mean to imitate, but they are to take
them in their hands again and again, never leaving till they have perfectly
apprehended the force of Art that is in them, and also thoroughly acquainted
themselves with that spirit the Artificers felt whilst they were busy about
these works, it is not possible that out of a rash and raw observation, there
should ever arise a good and lively Imitation: even as we never use to swallow
down our meat, before it be sufficiently chewed and almost melted in our
mouths, seeing this is the way to help our digestion, and to have it quickly
turn into most wholesome blood. We must also for a great while imitate only
the best, and such other Artificers as are like least of all to deceive our
trust reposed in them: but we are to do it most advisedly and carefully;
because it is often seen that the best Masters do purposely hide and conceal
their own virtues: neither may we presently think that all we do find in
great Masters is perfect: for they slip sometimes unawares, they yield and
stoop under the burden, they cocker their forward wits too much, they are not
always attentive, otherwhile they grow weary also: they are the greatest
Artificers, but yet men: and it falls out very often that such as rely too
much upon them, imitate for the most part what is worst in their works;
thinking themselves to be like enough, when they have only expressed the vices
of their much admired Masters. Many things might be added to this point,
neither should we leave it so, if we did not esteem it more needful to repeat
a little what we have touched before; to wit, that such things as do deserve
to be most highly esteemed in an Artificer, are almost inimitable; his wit,
namely, his Invention, his unstrained facility of working, and whatsoever
cannot be taught us by the rules of Art Quintil. x. 2
: so do we also receive no small benefit out of the hardness of this matter,
seeing the consideration of this same difficulty does advise us to look
somewhat nearer into the works of excellent Artificers; neither can we resolve
to run any more with a quick eye carelessly over them after we have once
perfectly understood the great force of their virtues by the pains we are to
take before we can either understand or imitate them aright. Quintil. X. 5.

6. We are then to observe here two things: the first is that we make a good
choice of the Artificers we mean to imitate; seeing many do propound
themselves the examples of the worst: the second is that we do likewise
consider what we are most of all to imitate in the chosen Artificers; seeing we
do meet also with some blameworthy things even in the best Artificers: and it
were to be wished, that we did as well hit their virtues better, as we use to
express their vices a great deal worse. As for them that want no judgment to
discern and to shun the faults of great Masters, it is not enough they should
express a vain and forcelesse shadow of such virtues as are most of all
admired in others; for our Imitation is then only to be commended, when it
does after a most lively manner set forth in every particular the true force of
the work imitated: whereas rash and inconsiderate beginners fall to work upon
the first sight, before ever they have sounded the deep and hidden mysteries of
Art, pleasing themselves wonderfully with the good success of their Imitation,
when they seem only for the outward lines and colors to come somewhat near
their pattern: and therefore do they never attain to that power of Art the
originalls have, but they do rather decline to the worst; embracing not the
virtues themselves, but their neighbor vices: they are puffed up, not stately;
starved, not delicate; temerary, not confident; wanton, not delectable;
negligent, not plain: the practice of them that go about to imitate the most
ancient pieces by a dry and hard manner of painting, may serve us here for an
instance; seeing they do only express the outward show of simplicity, never
regarding what treasures of Art there lie hidden under this same sober and
temperat way, used by the ancient Masters. Quintil. X, 2. To be short; a good
Imitator stands in need of learned and well exercised eyes; not only,
because hidden things cannot be seen unless they are first searched out; but
also, because the things apparent are very often so cunningly contrived and
joined, that none but quick-sighted Artificers and teachers can perceive them.
And this is the true reason why these Arts do always at the first require the
help of a faithful Master, who may sincerely acquaint us with such things as
deserve to be imitated, who may teach us, who may mend what is done amiss, who
may direct us, who may inform us by what show of dissimilitude the similitude
of things nearly resembling is to be concealed: for a good Imitator must by
all means be a concealer of his Art, and it is somewhat too childish to follow
the same strokes and lineaments in all things. Though now in the opinion of
some it may be held a praiseworthy thing to express Apelles his Venus,
Anadyomene or Protogenes his Satyr, and though in their judgment it deserves
no blame to fit our works so accurately with the same colors and shadows,
that they may seem to come nearest unto the similitude of such absolutely
accomplished patterns; it is for all that a greater matter to express in
Achilles his picture the very same Art which was by Apelles represented in the
picture of Alexander. We must therefore endeavor first of all that there
seem not to be any similitude; and if there appears any, our second care
must be that it may seem to be done purposely: which is the work only of
learned and well-experienced Artificers: and is then chiefly to be done, when
by a most laudable contention they do hunt after a certain grace of hidden
similitude in such things as should be like in nothing but in the manner of
handling.

7. It is then required here that we should not only bend our natural desire
of Imitation toward the best things, but that we should likewise study to
understand wherein the excellency of the same things does consist: the which
having diligently performed, we shall by the same means perceive how necessary
it is that we should duly examine our own ability and strength, before we
undertake the Imitation of such works as do excel in all kind of rare and
curious perfections. There offer themselves almost in every good Picture many
things hard to be expressed, not only because they are beyond our power, but
sometimes also because there is in us a certain unablenesse of imitating such
things as do not very well agree with our natural disposition: for every one
has within his own breast a certain law of nature, the which he may not
neglect; so are also the most ill-favored and graceless Pictures most
commonly wrought by them that venture upon any thing without considering to
what their natural inclination does lead them most of all: neither can it be
otherwise but notorious gross errors shall be committed by him that having
but an ordinary wit, means to busy himself about the imitation of things
only commendable for the strength of wit contained in them: contrariwise such
as have an untamed force of wit, and consequently a bold and audacious
readiness of hand, are like to spoil both themselves and their work, if they
endeavor to imitate pieces done by them that bring a soft and gentle hand to
the inventions proceeding out of a mild nature: soft things are so warily to
be mingled with things that have a certain kind of hardness, that we do not
overthrow both the virtues by an unadvised confusion: and it has ever been
esteemed an unseeming and foul mistake, to express tender and delicate things
after a harsh and rough manner. Out of all this are we moreover to observe that
it is an unadvised thing to tie our Imitation to one Master alone, though never
so great: seeing there is not one among a thousand whose conceits and manner of
work do altogether agree with our inclination and temper. Apelles was
questionless the most complete among all the other Artificers, yet have some
of the old ones excelled him in one or other particular quality: and although
in his works is to be found what is most laudable, nevertheless did not the
ancients judge that he who most of all was to be followed, was also to be
followed (...) and in all things. What then? is it not enough to do all things
as Apelles did? certainly, there is good reason why we should think it
sufficient if we knew how to attain to it: but seeing it is not possible that
any one man should come so near him as to express all such virtues as by a
peculiar instinct were proper unto him, so can it do no hurt to add to that
same highly esteemed grace of his the successful audacitie of Zeuxis, the
infatigable diligence of Protogenes, the witty subtlety of Timanthes, the
stately magnificence of Nicophanes. For as it is the part of a wise man to
borrow of every one what he knows best to agree with his own natural
inclination, so is it seldom or never seen that the works of one man should
fit our humor in all things; seeing also that it is not permitted us to
express one Master in every particular, it seems to be a very good course
that we should fix our attentiveness upon the virtues of several great
Masters, to the end that something out of the one and something out of the
other might stick to us. Quintil. X. 2.

8. What we have propunded already is of such importance, as that it deserves
to be repeated again and again: neither do we care what others think on it,
seeing we are upon good grounds persuaded that the true following of a rare
Masters Art, does not consist in an apish Imitation of the outward ornaments,
but rather in the expressing of the inward force. It concerns us therefore
not a little to mark narrowly what a singular Grace the old Artificers have
expressed in their works, what has been their intent, what cunning and
circumspect discretion they do show in their disposition, how likewise the
very same things that might seem to be only for recreation, prepare them a
ready way to an everlasting fame: till we have rightly searched and understood
every one of these things, it is to very small purpose that we should go about
any such thing as to imitate the old deservedly renowned masters. If any one on
the contrary can ad so much to these observations, as to make up what lacks
in the ancient Artificers, and likewise to detract what is superfluous in them,
him shall we esteem to be that same long looked for, and perfect Artist, the
which besides a great many other commendations, shall not only be said to have
deprived the former ages of the enjoying of such a glory, but he shall seem
also to have snatched away from the following ages the very hope of so glorious
a title. Quintil. X, 2.
Seeing then that this is a main point of Art, we have also stood a little
longer upon it, not doubting but all reasonable and judicious Readers will not
dislike the same digression drawn out of several passages we find in
Quintilian.

. 9. Having therefore understood out of the former words of Quintilian, that a
perfect Artist is to join to this care of Imitation all the virtues he has
of his own, we are by this warning, as by a hand brought back again to that
point from which we did somewhat digress, finding our selves in a manner
compelled to approve of the most learned Varro his judgment. Apelles,
Protogenes, and other excellent Artificers deserve no blame, says he, Lib.
VIII. de LL.
for refusing to follow the steps of Mycon, Diores, Arymnas, and some other of
their predecessors; Lysippus also has not so much followed the errors of the
former masters, as the Art it self: neither is this to be marvelled at; seeing
their Fantasy conceived without any example did fill them with more accurate
Images of things, then ever had been invented by all the masters before them;
so would all the world also have judged it in them a renouncing and forswearing
of wit and discretion, if the prime spirits of the world had preferred the
love of a blame-worthie consuetude before better inventions. It is clear then,
what singular benefit we do receive, and how much these Arts are advanced by
a well-ordered Imagination; for it is brought to pass by her means that the
most lively and forward among the Artificers, leaving the barren and fruitless
labor of an ordinary Imitation, give their minds to a more courageous
boldness; and scorning themselves any more to be tied to such a slavish kind
of Imitation, they stir up their freed spirits to go further then others
have done before them: every Art, says Epictetus, Arriani Epict. lib. II,
cap. 13.
has a certain kind of steadfastness and hardiness in such things as do
concern her.

. 10. There is then questionless some Perfection of Art to be attained unto;
neither may we think it unpossible but that we as well as any body else can
attain to it; and although the highest step of perfection were denied us, yet
are they likelyer to lift themselves up higher who resolve to strive and to
take pains, then such as at the first beginning are driven back by a
faint-hearted despair: an open field is fitter for Art, says Quintilian,
Orat. instit. Lib. V, cap. 14.
then a straight foot-path: she should not be collected out of narrow pipes,
as fountains usually are; but rather over-flowe whole valleys, after the
manner of broad rivers, making her self a way where she finds none: for what
is there more miserable then to be always tied to a set kind of imitation,
even as children do follow the prescribed Letters? a right Artificer must
therefore banish all unseasonable fear, and go on stoutly in his work: a
sure way, deserves to be commended only; says Plutarch, De Educat. liberorum.
what on the contrary runs hazard, is moreover admired: the younger Plinius
speaks of this point more at large: a great many Arts, says he, Lib. IX,
epist. 26.
are most of all commended for things dangerous: so do we daily see what great
shouting rope-dauncers put spectatours to, when they handsomely recover
themselves after a perilous staggering and reeling: whatsoever is subject to
many dangers, and yet scapeth beyond expectation, seems always to deserve
admiration: so has not the virtue of a pilot an equal esteem, when he
saileth in a calm, and in a boisterous sea: then, being admired by no body,
he puts into the haven without praise or glory: but when the wind-shaken
ropes rumble and rustle, when the mast bends, when the stern groaneth, then
is he extolled and judged to come near the Gods of the sea.

. 11. Although now in the former exhortations we have studied to bring the
Artificers to a forward and generous boldness, it is for all that required
here, that great wits should moderate something the hot fury of their fiery
spirits; seeing young beginners very often are so taken up with the love of
their Imaginations, that they entertain them with greater delight then
judgment: the wits now a days, says Dyonysius Longinus, De sublimi
oratione,. 4.
run corybant-like mad after all kind of newfangled conceits: for of whom
we have the best things, the worst also love most commonly to be brought forth
by them: and this is doubtless the true reason why mean and ordinary wits
do very often follow their intended purposes with a great deal of constancy;
seeing they are not so easily drawn aside by the sweet tickling of any sudden
and unexpected Imagination: thus falls it out, says Seneca, Lib. II. trov. 1.
that hard-favoured, illcountenanced damsels are very often chaste and
undefiled; not so much for lack of will, as for want of a corrupter: it is
likewise a good observation the same author makes elsewhere, In prooemio
Secundi Controv.
that namely it is an infallible mark of an excellent wit, not to be carried
away so much by the goodness of it, as to use it amiss.

. 12. An Artificer therefore is to take good heed that he do not by a malepart
wantonness of his vainly conceited wit devise all kind of monstrous and
prodigious Images of things not known in nature; for it fitteth him better to
have his mind, as Lucian speaks, De conscrib. historia.
like unto a pure, bright looking-glass, the which also being of an accurat
center, shows the true images of things even as it receives them, not
admitting any distorted, false-coloured, otherwise shaped figures: whatsoever
then has been spoken in the former, and also in this present chapter, about
the raising of our thoughts and conceits, may not be understood of all sorts of
idle and giddie-headed Imaginations, but only of such Phantafies as are
grounded upon the true nature of things: the Art of Painting, says Socrates,
Apud Xen. lib. III. Appomnem.
is a resembling of visible things: neither does our Imitation at any time
fasten upon things invisible, but (as it has been said before) with a relation
to what is really existing and visible: the ancients, says Vitruvius, Lib.
IV, cap. 2.
did judge that such things could not be resembled with anyshew of truth, which
were disagreeing from the true nature of things: for they were wont to draw
every thing to the perfection of their works out of one or other undeniable
property of Nature; approving only of such Images as after a ripe debate were
found to admit an explication consenting with Nature: the same Author has
pressed this very point in another place with a great deal more earnestness.
Let the Picture be an image, says he, Lib. VII, cap. 5.
of a thing that is, or at least can be; of a man namely, of a house, of a
ship, and such like things, out of whose limited shapes our Imitation
propounds it self an example: the ancients therefore were wont to adorn
such parlours as were for the spring and harvest time, such porches also and
long entries as were for Summer, with all kind of Pictures drawn out of the
certain truth of things natural. But those examples taken by the Ancients out
of true things, are now by reason of our corrupt manners utterly disliked:
seeing in our plaisterings there are rather monsters painted, then any certain
images of limited things: and yet do not men, when they see such false things,
rebuke them, but they do much more take delight in them: neither do they
mark whether any such thing can be, or not: the weakness of their judgment
has so darkened their wits, that they cannot examine what the authority and
reason of decency demands: for such Pictures are not to be liked, as do not
resemble the truth: and if they are made neat and fine by Art, yet must we not
instantly approve of them, unless we do find in them some certain kind of
arguments free from all offense. Now as the Artificer may not abuse the
liberty of his Imaginations, by turning it unto a licentious boldness of
fancying things abhorring from Nature; so must also a right lover of Art
prefer a plain and honest work agreeing with Nature before any other
phantastically capricious devices. Plutarch has very well observed this; There
are many at Rome, says he De Curiositate.
, which do nothing at all care for good Pictures and Statues, but a man may
find them always upon the monster-market, where they stand and stare upon
such maimed creatures as want either legs or arms, as have three eyes or
heads of Ostriches, and if there be any other hideous detestable deformity:
but although at the first they seem very much to be taken with such kind of
spectacles, yet will they soon have their fill on them, yea they will loath
them, if you bring them often before their eyes.

13. It is then a very gross error to deem with the vulgar sort that
Painters as well as Poets have an unlimited, liberty of devising; for if we
do but mark what Horace tells us in the first entrance of his book written
about the Poetical Art, we shall confess that neither Poets nor Painters may
take such a liberty as to stuff up their works with all kind of frivolous
and lying conceits. Lactantius also has observed this point very well; men do
not know, says he Divin. instit. lib. I. cap. 11.
, which be the measures of poetical license, and how far we may give way to
our fancies; seeing a true Poets part does consist chiefly in this, that by
some crooked and wandering kind of conceit he do decently turn the deeds of
Gods and men into a fabulous tale: for to devise the whole related matter, is
the work of an idle brain, and it becomes alyar better then a Poet. The
mention we made here of Poets and Painters, seems now to lead us to consider
a little wherein they do chiefly agree; the more, because it is sufficiently
known that the Imaginative quality, of the which we have handled, is alike
necessary to them both. Thus do we then in the next Chapter go about this
point: once for all admonishing, that under the name of Painters, all such
Artificers are comprised, as do any manner of way practice any of the other
Arts of that nature.

CHAP. IV.
ALL Arts, says Tullie Pro Archia poeta.
, that do belong to humanity, have a common band, and are allied one to
another, as by a kind of parentage. Tertullian speaks to the same effect,
when he says De Idololatria.
; there is no Art, but she is the mother of another Art, or at least of a nigh
kindred: seeing then that the connection of the work in hand enticeth us to
prove the truth of these sayings by a mutual relation there is between Poesy
and Picture, it follows also that we should propound some properties of them
both, out of which it might be perceived that they are very near of the self
same nature. Both do follow a secret instinct of Nature: for we do daily see,
that not Poets only, but Painters also are possessed with the love of those
Arts, not so much by a fore-determined advise, as by a blind fit of a most
violent and irresistible fury. As for Poets, there is a God in us, says Ovid
Circa initium libri Sexti Fastorum.
, by whose tossing of us we are enflamed: this same forwardness has in it
self the seeds of a sacred mind. As for Painters, Nicophanes had a most
forward mind, says Pliny Lib. xxxv, not. hist. cap. 10.
, and there are but a few that may be compared with him in this. The same
Author speaking of Protogenes, says again in the same place, the forwardnes
of his mind, and a certain inclination or pronenesse to the Art, have carried
Protogenes to these things. And it is very aptly put in here, that a certain
forward pronenesse to the Art made Protogenes so excellent an Artificer; seeing
they do always with the greatest ease and best success exercise an Art, who
out of a free desire give themselves so readily to it, that they cannot so much
as give an account of this same most forward desire. The Peripatetike
Philosophers seem to have understood this perfectly when they do maintain,
that no body can do any thing neatly and finely, unless he has a very good
mind to it, says Tullie Lib. IV. Tuscul. quaest.
. It is required therefore, that all such as would willingly attain to these
Arts, do find in themselves some swift motions of their wits and minds, both
quick to invent, and copious to express what is found: neither may we think
that the first beginnings of these Arts proceed from Art, seeing it is a gift
of Nature that any man finds this same aptness in himself; and our case
stands well enough, if Art can help such tender seeds to a full growth; for
that Art should infuse them into us, is altogether unpossible. Out of this
observation there does arise a question propounded and answered by Horace: it
has been very much questioned, says he De Art poetica.
, whether Nature or Art does accomplish a Poem. I cannot see what help there
is in study without a rich vein, or else in a rude wit; so does one of these
two always require the others help, and they do both very lovingly conspire.
Quintilian does both propound and answer the same question more at large; I do
know well enough, says he Orat. instit. lib. II. c. 19.
, that many use to ask here whether Art receives more help of Nature or of
Doctrine: the which although it be not much appertaining to our purpose, seeing
a complete Artificer cannot be made without both; yet do I take it to be a
great matter how the question is propounded: for if you divide the one from
either of both parts, Nature can do much without Doctrine, where Doctrine on
the contrary cannot be without Nature: but if there be an equal meeting of
them both, so shall I think that, both being but reasonable, Nature is yet of
greater moment; and that accurate Artificers notwithstanding owe more unto
Doctrine then unto Nature: the best husbandman can do no good upon a dry and
barren ground; out of a rank ground will something grow up, though no body
does till it; but in a fertile ground shall the laborious husbandman prevail a
great deal more then the goodness of the ground it self: and if Praxiteles
had endeavored to carve an image out of a millstone, I had rather have a good
piece of rough Parian Marble, then such an halfe-finished work: but if the
Artificer had accomplished it, I should more esteem in that same work the Art
of his hands, then the costlinesse of the Marble. Compare therefore Nature with
the material, and Art with Doctrine: the one does work, the other is wrought
upon: Art can do nothing without the material; whereas the material without
Art has her own worthiness. So is then the highest Art together with the best
material to be desired. These words of Quintilian should content us here, if
the same judicious Writer did not urge in another place a point more to be
marked; for seeing that in the works of excellent Artificers, their decent
Grace is most of all to be had in admiration, so are we moreover in this same
Grace to admire a great difference of Natures: There is in this point some
hidden and unspeakable reason, says Quintilian Sub finem libri undecimi orat.
institut.
, and as it is truly said, that it is the principal point in Art to be comely
in what we do; so can this comeliness for all that not be had without Art,
neither can it altogether be procured by Art: in some Artificers virtues are
not pleasing; in some on the contrary vices themselves are graceful. We have
seen Demetrius and Stratocles, great actors of Comedies, how they were liked
for several virtues. But this was not so wonderful, that the one knew better
how to act Gods, modest young men, good fathers, sober servants, grave matrones
and old women: the other got greater commendations by acting sharp old men,
shrewd servants, insinuating parasites, wily bawdes, and all such parts as did
require some noise and stir: this then was not so strange I say, seeing
Demetrius had also a sweeter voice, whereas Stratocles his voice was more
vehement. Such properties are more to be noted in them, as could not be
transferred from the one to the other. It became Demetrius exceeding well to
throw his hands, to prolong sweet exclamations in the behalf of the theater,
to fill up his garment with the wind gathered by his stirring, to make some
gestures with his right side; for he had in all this the advantage of his
stature, and of a wonderful feature: but Stratocles was admired for his
running, for his nimblenes; for the pulling in of his neck, for laughing
sometimes more then occasions of the part he played did require; seeing he did
this also to gratify the people, as knowing well enough how the vulgar sort
was taken with it; and if Demetrius had gone about any such thing, it would
have made a most ill-favored show. Wherefore let every one know himself; and
let him then deliberate about the framing of his work, not only with the
common precepts of Art, but also with his own nature: neither is it for all
that impossible, but that a man may do all things or at least the greatest
part of them after a decent manner. As it is then manifest that every Artificer
has a peculiar Grace in his works, agreeing with the constitution of his
nature; so may we further out of Quintilians words draw this conclusion, that
we are not instantly to condemn every Artificer that seems to follow another
way then such an one we do delight in; for it may very well be, that several
Masters in the several ways their own nature leads them to, should not
miss for all that the Grace they do aim at. In my opinion, says Tullie Lib.
III. de Oratore.
there is no kind of nature, but we shall observe many things in the same,
the which though they differ very much, yet are they alike praiseworthy. There
is but one Art of casting in Brass, in the which Myro, Polycletus, Lysippus
have been excellent; and although the one did very much differ from the other,
yet would you not have wished that any one of them should have differed from
himself. There is but one Art and way of Painting, in the which although
Zeuxis, Aglaophon, Apelles, differ very much, yet is there none among them all
that seems to lack any Art. As for the particular nature of the Artificers,
it has ever been so, that the liveliness of great spirits cannot contain it
self within the compass of an ordinary practice, but it will always issue
forth, whilst every one does most readily express in his works the inward
motions of his most forward mind: so do we also find that the bravest
Artists have spent their labor most prosperously about such things as they did
much delight in by a violent driving of their passion, or else by a quiet
guiding of their Nature. Pausias, being exceedingly in love with his
countrey-woman Glycera, left a most famous Picture, known every where by the
name of Stephanoplocos, that is, a woman Garland-maker; and this has ever been
esteemed his best work, because he was enforced thereunto by the extremity
of his Passion. Plin. lib. xxi. not. hist. cap. 2. Androcydes got a great deal
of credit by the livelie similitude of the fishes painted round about Scylla;
but seeing he was a great devourer of fish, it has been also the judgment of
these times in the which he lived, that his unsatiable and greedy longing
after fish did help him no less then any great Art he had. Plutarch Sympos.
lib. iv, quaest. 2. as Parrhasius did profess by the whole course of his life,
that he was mightily given to sumptuous clothes and lustful pleasures, so
were there also in his works evident marks of such a wanton luxurious mind to
be seen: witnesses that same base piece of work mentioned by Suetonius in
the life of Tiberius Cap. 44.
. We could relate here many more examples of excellent workmanship, in the
which lust might seem to have had a hand as well as skill; if we did not
hasten to the consideration of such properties in several artificers, as arose
out of a well-ordered inclination of their minds to one o other special way
and manner of Art: leaving therefore the manifold effects of inordinate lusts,
we shall insist only upon the following examples.

Although Callicles was renowned for little Pictures that did not exceed the
bigness of 4. fingers, yet could he never reach the height of Euphranor. Varro
de vita populi Romani.

Lysippus is most of all to be commended for fine and queint workmanship;
seeing he observed in the least things a certain kind of subtlety. Plinius
not. hist. lib. xxxiv, cap. 8.

Polycletus had this property, that his statues most commonly did stand upon
one leg. Plin. xxxiv, 8.

Apelles had a certain grace of Art proper unto himself alone, to the which
never any other Artificer attained. Plin. xxxv, 10.

Theo Samius did excel in the conceiving of visions, the which are called
fantasies. Quintil. orat. instit. lib. xii, cap. 10.

Dionysius painted nothing else but men; and for this reason he was called
Anthropographus. Plin. xxxv, 10.

Zeuxis did surpass all other Artificers when it came to the picture of bodies
of women. Cicero lib. ii. de Inventione.

Polygnotus has most rarely expressed the affections and passions of man.
Aristot. de Art. poetica.

Antimachus and Athenodorus made Noble women. Apelles made women devoutly
praying. Plin. xxxiv, 8.

Nicias has most diligently painted women: all creatures that walk upon four
feet are attributed unto him; yet has he most prosperously expressed dogs.
Plin. xxxv, 11.

Calamis made chariots drawn with four or two horses; the horses were done so
exactly, that there was no place left for emulation. Propertius lib. iii, Eleg.
8. Plin. xxxiv, 8.

Euphranor seems first of all to have expressed the dignities and marks of
Heroical persons, says Pliny, xxxv, 11. observe here in the mean time, that
these Worthies or Heroical persons were wont to wear skins of wild beasts;
see the old Scholiast upon Apollonius Rhodius: Ad versum 324. lib. I, Argonaut.
Statius Papinius does attribute a Lions skin unto Tydeus, and a wild Boares
skin unto Polynices; see him lib. I. Thebaid. verse. 397. yet because Hercules
among all the other Worthies was most frequently made in a Lions skin, hence it
is, that Tertullian De Pallio.
calls him Scytalosagittipelliger not only for bearing a club and arrows,
but also for wearing of the skin. Hercules is made in a Lions skin, says
Festus, that men might be put in mind of the ancient habit: observe moreover
that the ancient Worthies were most commonly painted barefooted: pantofles,
slippers, patens; says Philostratus, In epistola ad excalceatum adolescentulum.
are for sick and old folks. Philoctetes therefore is painted in them, as
being lame and sick: whereas Diogenes and Crates, Ajax likewise and Achilles
are painted unshod: Jason his one foot is shod, the other bare: seeing he left
one of his shoes in the mud, when he meant to pass over the river Anauros,
etc. see Higynus in his twelfth fable: it proceeds also from the same
custom, when Valor. Maximus relates it as a strange thing that there was
erected upon the Capitol a cloaked and shod statue of L. Scipio surnamed the
Asiatick, who would have his image made in that habit, says Valerius, Lib.
III, cap. 6.
because he had sometimes used it.

Apollodorus, Androbulus, Asclepiodorus, Alevas have painted Philosophers.
Plin. xxxiv, 8. and in their Pictures they took always special care that
every one of these Philosophers might be discerned by his proper mark: in the
Areopagetick schools, and in the Councell-house, says Sidonius Apollinaris,
Lib. IX, epist. 9.
there are painted Zeusippus with a crooked neck, Aratus with a neck bowed
downward, Zeno with a wrinckled forhead, Epicurus with a smooth skin,
Diogenes with a hairie rough beard, Socrates with whitish bright hair,
Aristotle with a stretched out arm, Xenocrates with a leg somewhat gathered up,
Heraclitus with his eyes shut for crying, Democritus with his lips opened for
laughing, Chrysippus with his fingers pressed close together, for the
signification of numbers, Euclides with his fingers put assunder for the space
of measures, Cleanthes with his fingers for both reasons gnawne about.

Arestodemus made wrestlers. Plin. xxxiv, 8.

Serapion painted Scenes best of all. Plin. xxxv, 10.

Calaces got himself a great name by making little of comicall pictures. Plin.
xxxv, 10.

Pyreicus, although he was in his Art inferior to none, yet has he painted
nothing but barbours and cobblers shops. Plin. xxxv, 10.

Ludio did in the time of Augustus first of all insttute the most pleasant
painting of walls with farme-houses, galleries, arbors, consecrated groves,
forests, hillocks, fishponds, inlets of waters, rivers, and uppn their banks
he was wont to paint such things as heart could wish; as namely, diverse
companies of them that did walk at the river side, or go in boats, or else
did ride to their countrie-houses with little asses or with carts: some spent
their time in fishing, fowling, hunting, gathering of grapes for the press:
there were also in his Pictures farme-houses notable for a moorish coming to,
and men ready to slip whilst they carried upon their shoulders fearfully
shrieking women; with many more witty and merry conceits of that nature. This
same Ludio has also first of all devised to paint sea-Cities in open
galleries, making a very fine and uncostly show. Plin. xxxv, 10.

. 2. Both busy themselves about the imitation of all sorts of things and
actions: we see it daily how Poets and Painters do with a bold hand describe
not only the shapes of their devised Gods, demigods, Worthies, other ordinary
men, but they strive also by a mutual emulation to set forth the manifold
actions of men: they do represent the lascivious mirth of banquets, the
toilesome pleasure of hunting, the bloody outragiousnesse of fighting, the
unevitable horror of shipwreck, the lamentable and rufull sluttishnes of them
that lie chained up in the deep night of a deadly dungeon. As for the Poets
alone, Poesy, says Lib. II de Idais, c. 10.
Hermogenes, is an imitation of all kind of things: and he is the best Poet,
that can with a ready and full utterance of words imitate speaking Orators,
singing Musicians, with all other persons and things. Of Poets and Painters
both together are the following words of Philostratus In prooemio Iconum.
, Whosoever does not embrace Picture, says he, wrongeth the truth, he wrongeth
also the wisdom of the Poets; seeing both are alike busy about the shapes
and deeds of the Worthies. Dio Chrysostomus speaks likewise of both together;
Painters and Carvers, says he Orat. XII.
, when they were to resemble the Gods, departed not one inch from the Poets:
not only to shun the punishment offenders in such a kind undergo; but also
because they saw themselves prevented by the Poets, and that now the manner of
Images made after their conceit went current, as being upholden by antiquity:
neither would they seem to be troublesome and unpleasant by lying novelties,
but they have for the most part made their Images after the example of Poets:
Sometimes for all that have they added one or other thing of their own,
professing themselves to have an emulation with Poets about the same Art of
imitation, endeavoring likewise to lay open before the eyes of more and poorer
spectators, what Poets have plainly rehearsed to the ears of men. Although now
the words of Philostratus and Dio Chrysostomus may serve us for a sufficient
proof of that same great affinity there is betwixt Painting and Poesy, yet
has Simonides expounded this point somewhat neatlier when he affirms that
Picture is a silent Poesy, as Poesy is a speaking Picture: and upon occasion
of these words says Plutarch Bellone an pace clariores fuerint Athenienses.
, the things represented by Painters as if they were as yet adoing before our
eyes, are propounded by Orators as done already: seeing also that Painters do
express with colors what Writers do describe with words; so is it that they
do but differ in the matter and manner of Imitation, having both the same end:
and he is the best Historian that can adorn his Narration with such forcible
figures and lively colors of Rhetorike, as to make it like unto a Picture.

3. Both do wind themselves by an unsensible delight of admiration so closely
into our hearts, that they make us in such an astonishment of wonder to stare
upon the Imitation of things natural, as if we saw the true things themselves;
in so much that we do not love, though we find our selves misled, to have
this our joy interrupted, but we do rather entertain it with all possible
care and study. It would be an easy matter to show this in all kind of
Poets, if Comicall and Tragical poesy did not yield us a sufficient proof of
the certainty of this point: for what are Comedies else, says one Comment.
vet us in Horat de Art.
, but an Image of the life of man? of Tragedies does Gorgias also say very
properly Apud Plutarchum de Poetis and.
, that they are a kind of deceit, by which the deceiver is more just then he
that does not use such deceit; and the deceived likewise is wiser then he that
is not deceived. Of the sweet allurements of Picture, and how we suffer our
hearts wittingly and willingly to be seduced and beguiled by the same, many
examples might be alleged here, if it were not generally known that a good
Picture is nothing else in it self but a delusion of our eyes. This deceit,
says Philostratus Philostr. junior in prooemio Iconum.
, as it is pleasant, so does it not deserve the least reproach: for to be so
possessed with things that are not, as if they were; and to be so led with
them, as that we (without suffering any hurt by them) should think them to
be; cannot but be proper for the reviving of our mind, and withal free from
all manner of blame. The reason, why we do so much delight in the false
similitude of natural things, is set down by Diogenes Laertius: The Cyrenaike
Philosophers affirm, says he Lib. II. in Aristippo.
, that pleasures are not engendered in our hearts by the bare seeing and hearing
of things: and that we love therefore to hear the outcries and doleful
howlings done in Imitation of a most heavy grief; where on the contrary we
do detest the true groans of a mournful heart. If any one desires further
opening in this point, let him read in Plutarch a very fair passage concerning
this matter, as it is set down by that learned Author, Sympos. lib. v,
problem. 1.

4. Both do hold the raines of our hearts, leading and guiding our Passions by
that beguiling power they have, whithersoever they list. Of the Poets says
Horace Lib. II. Epist. 1.
, it seems to me that such a Poet is most like to walk upon a stretched out
rope, the which does torment and vex my thoughts about matters of nothing;
inchaunterlike angring, appeasing, and terrifying me with idle fears;
conveying and at his pleasure transporting me sometimes to Thebes, sometimes to
Athens. Saint Basil speaks of both, Eloquent Writers and Painters, says he
Homil. 40. martyr.
, do very often express the warlike deeds of valiant men; and both do stir
up a great many to courage; whilst the one studieth to set forth in lively
colors, what the other goes about to adorn with eloquence: both then have a
hidden force to move and compel our minds to several Passions, but Picture
for all that seems to do it more effectually; seeing things that sink into
our hearts by the means of our ears, says Nazarius In Panegyrico.
, do more faintly stir our mind, then such things as are drunk in by the
eyes. Polybius does likewise affirm Lib. XII.
, that our eyes are more accurate witnesses then our ears: and it may be very
well that Quintilian out of such a consideration has drawn this same
conclusion; Picture, says he Lib. XI. orat. institut. cap. 3.
, a silent work, and constantly keeping the same form, does so insinnate it
self into our most inward affections, that it seems now and then to be of
greater force then Eloquence it self. Such as had suffered shipwreck
understood this very well; for they did use to carry about the Picture of their
sad misfortune, assuring themselves that the spectators could better be moved
to compassion by seeing the image of the miseries they had endured, then by
hearing a most pitiful relation of the same. Such also as went to law about
some great wrong offered them, were likewise wont to bring along the Picture of
that same injury, against which they meant to incense the Judge. Quint. orat.
instit. VI, 1.

We may note a great ingenuitie in Latinus Pacatus, for after a full
description of the miserable end of that same mutinous Maximus, he does call
upon all the Poets and Painters to assist him, even as if the whole strength of
Rhetorike he had used would come to nothing, unless they did bring their
helping hands to it. Bring hither, bring hither, you pious Poets, says he
Panegyr. Theodo sio Aug. dicto.
, the whole care and study of your learned nights; ye Artificers also despise
the vulgar arguments of ancient fables; these, these things deserve better to
be drawn by your cunning hands; let the marketplaces and the temples be graced
with such sights; work them out in ivorie, let them live in colors, let them
stir in brass, let them augment the price of precious stones. It does
concern the security of all ages that such a thing might seem to have been
done; if by chance any one filled with unlawful hopes might drink in
innocence by his eyes, when he shall see the monuments of these our times. It
is well said of Pacatus, that by looking upon such a picture ambitious men
might through their eyes drink in innocence; for Seneca does most truly
affirm Lib. II. de Ira, cap. 2.
, that a horrible picture of the sad event of just punishments does very much
move and trouble our minds: neither does the picture of a just revenge only
touch our hearts, but many other kinds of pictures will also search them after
a most sudden and unexpected manner: witness that perplexity Alexander the
Great was in Photius in excerptis ex Ptolemaei Hephaestionis historia.
when at Ephesus he met by chance with a picture of the falsely accused and
wrongfully executed Palamedes: for upon the sight of such a picture it was not
in his power to resist, but Aristonicus would run into his troubled mind, as
being likewise falsely and unjustly put to death. Saint Gregory Nyssen after an
ample and most patheticall relation of Isaac his sacrifice, has added these
words; I saw often in a picture, says he In oratione de Deitate Filii and Sp.
sancti.
, the image of this fact, neither could I look upon it without tears, so
lively did Art put the history before my eyes. Valerius Maximus having spoke
of the piety of Pero toward her old decrepit father, whom she entering into
prison suckled with her own breast, adds these words Lib. V. c. 4. ex. ext. 1.
, men are driven into a dump, when their eyes do behold the painted image of
this fact, renewing the condition of the old adventure by an admiration of this
present spectacle, and believing that in these silent lineaments of members
they do see living and breathing bodies.

There was at Athens an unthrifty and riotous young man, named Polemo, says
the same Valerius Lib. VI. c. 9 ex. ext. 1.
, who did not only take his delight in the flickering enticements of lust, but
he did glory also in the infamy that followed such a luxurious and wanton
course of life: this same Polemo, as he went homeward coming from a
drink-feast, and that not at the setting, but at the rising of the Sun, saw
Xenocrates the Philosopher his door open: and though he was deep in drink,
besmeared with ointments, having his head beset with garlands, clad in a thin
and soft garment, yet did not he stick to enter into the Philosophers school,
that was filled with a multitude of learned men: neither contenting himself
with such a foul entrance, he sat down also, to the end that he might mock
that same rare eloquence and the most wise Precepts, with the sottish fopperies
of drunkenness. Wherefore when there arose, as it was meet there should, a
great chasing and fuming of all them that were present, Xenocrates changed his
countenance nothing at all, but leaving the things in hand, he began to make
his discourse of modesty and temperance; so that Polemo, forced by the
weightinesse of his speech, could not but recall himself by little and little;
for he first threw the garlands away having pulled them from his head, he
afterward drew his hand within his mantle, and in process of time he quite
left the cheerfulnes of a banqueting countenance, till at length having put
away all his luxury, and being cured by the wholesome physic of one discourse,
he became a very great philosopher out of a shamefully deboist ruffian. In this
relation Valerius makes of the changed Polemo, it might seem wonderful that
he could so quickly leave the cheerfulness of his banqueting countenance, if
it had not been noted in this change of his by Nazianzene that there did
always afterward appear in his face such a reverent show of gravitie, that a
naughty-packe by the sight of his picture only has been touched to the
quick, giving over her lewd and wanton pleasures. A dissolute young man, says
Nazianzene Carm. jamb XVIII, quod est de virtute.
, had appointed a queen to come to his house; but she coming near the porch,
and casting by chance her eyes upon the venerable picture of Polemo, drew
instantly back, reverencing the image of so grave a philosopher a great deal
more then she would have done the philosopher himself.

5. Both do show their strength in great and eminent men, deifying or at least
eternising all them whose names and shapes they do vouchsafe to bequeathe unto
posterity. Of the Poets says Synesius. Epist. 49.
, God has given unto Poesy the distributing of a glorious renown. Ovid
likewise speaking of the same, clothes do wear out, says he Amoru^ lib. I
Eleg. 10.
, jewels do break; but the fame Poesy gives us, shall be of a perpetual
durance. And again, virtue is proragated by Poesy, says he Lib. IV. de
Ponto, Eleg. 8.
, neither needs it fear the sepulcher, having once deserved the memory of
late posterities. Gods also, if we might say it, are made by Poesy, and such a
majesty stands in need of a singer. Of the Painters says Latinus Pacatus In
Panegyrico.
, the Artifioers are next unto the Poets allotted to give an everlasting fame.
Pliny does speak in the like manner of the Art of Painting, it is to be
wondered in this Art, says he Lib. xxxiv. not. hist. cap. 8.
that she has made famous men more famous. Ovid goes somewhat further, if
Apelles had not painted Venus for the Inhabitants of Coos, says he Lib. III.
de Art.
, she should as yet lie drowned under the Seawater. The Emperor Augustus
fastened into the wall of the Councell-house at Rome a picture done by
Philochares; the admiration of that same piece did chiefly consist in that
wonderful similitude which was between a young stripling and his old Father;
for they were so like one another, the difference of their age for all that
remaining, as it could not be possible to imagine a nearer similitude between
father and son. So is then the power of this same Art exceeding great, says
Pliny Lib. xxxv. not. hist. cap. 4.
, though we do but cast our eyes upon this one piece only: for by
Philochares his means does both the Senate and the people of Rome look so many
ages upon Glaucio and his son Aristippus, the which else would have been a
most ignoble and obscure couple.

6. Both are most of all advanced by the ready help of a strong and
well-exercised Imagination: the Art of Painting, says the younger Philostratus
In prooemio Iconum.
, is found to be a kin to Poesy; seeing both do therein agree, that as well
the one as the other requires a forward Fantasy. The Poets bring the
presence of the Gods upon a stage, and all what is pompous, grave, and
delightful. The Painters likewise do design as many things upon a board, as
the Poets possibly can utter. So does then the Art of Painting as well as
Poesy rely upon a generous and bold strength of Imagination, so that they
will no more creep and crawle to feel and to follow the steps of them that
are gone before, but they take upon themselves to try it somewhat further, if
by chance they might be esteemed worthy to lead others the way. The Poets
impelled by the sudden heat of a thoroughly stirred Fantasy, or rather
transported as by a prophetical trance, do clearly behold the round rings
of prettily dancing Nymphs, together with the ambushes of lurking lecherous
Satyrs: they see all kind of armor and unbridled horses with their tossed and
tottered wagons; the shape of one or other God does sometimes run in their
mind, yea they do very often epsy the snaky-headed Furies tearing their own
heads and thrusting a hand-full of hissing serpents into the faces of
ill-minded bloud-thirstie men. The Poetical fantasies, says one in Plutarch
In Erotico.
, in regard of their perspicuitie, are like dreams of them that are awake.
With Poets howsoever so it is, that their minds being once in agitation cannot
contain themselves any longer, but out it must whatsoever they have conceived;
it is not possible for them to rest, until they have eased their free spirit
of such a burden, pouring out the fullness of their jolly conceits by strange
fetches of bywayes, by the unexpected ministry of a favorable God, and a
thousand other fabulous inventions. When Ovid does describe that same temerary
ladde that foolishly longed to tread upon his Fathers fiery chariot, would you
not think then that the Poet stepping with Phaeton upon the wagon has noted
from the beginning to the endievely particular accident which could fall out
insuch a horrible confusion? neither could he ever have conceived the least
shadow of this dangerous enterprise, if he had not been as if it were present
with the unfortunate youth: he beholds first the impatient horses standing as
yet within the bars, how by treading and trampling they do spend before the
race thousand and thousand steps to no purpose: afterward does he see the
vain stripling skip upon the wagon, and with a brave undaunted look drive
on, till the fierce winged beasts perceiving the impotency of their new Master
throw the unexperienced waggoner headlong down with wagon and all. But seeing
it would be a very hard task for me, yea and too much arrogance in me that I
should strive to express any part of the abundance of conceit the ancient
Poets had, I must needs remit the studious Reader to Ovid himself, for
whosoever does but mark how Ovid goes about the fable of Phaeton; and how
other Poets likewise do handle other matters in that kind, he shall
questionless both with pleasure and profit understand what vehement and
sensible Imaginations they have followed; and that without such a force of
fantasy the whole labor of their brains will be but a heavy, dull, and
life-lesse piece of work. Painters in like manner do fall to their work
invited and drawn on by the tickling pleasure of their nimble Imaginations;
for lighting upon some Poetical or Historical argument, sometimes also upon
an invention wrought out by their own Fantasy, they do first of all pass
over every circumstance of the matter in hand, considering it seriously, as if
they were present at the doing, or saw it acted before their eyes: whereupon
feeling themselves well filled with a quick and lively imagination of the whole
work, they make haste to ease their overcharged brains by a speedy
pourtraying of the conceit. It is then in vain an Artificer should hope to be
both powerful and perspicuous, unless he do always propound unto himself
the work in hand as if all were present, and that principally when he is to
express any thing wherein he meets with some notable Affections and Passions
of the mind: for seeing that these are sometimes true, sometimes fuinell and
imitated, says Quintilian, Orat. institut. lib. XI, cap. 3.
so falls it out that the true ones do break forth naturally, as we see in
the Passions of them that conceive any grief, or anger; or indignation; but
they want Art; and therefore are they to befashioned and directed by
discipline: contrariwise the Passions imitated have Art, but want nature; and
therefore is it here a maine point, to have a true feeling of them, rightly to
conceive the true images of things, and to be moved with them, as if they were
rather true then imagined: so are then these commotions of our mind by all
means to be drawn out of the truth of nature: and it stands an Artificer
upon it, rather to try all what may be tried, then to mar the vigorous force
of a fresh and warm Imagination by a slow and cool manner of Imitation: the
player Polus practiced this in another occasion very fitly, for being to act at
Athens atragedie of Sophocles, in the which he should represent the distressed
Electra, as she was carrying in anurne the dead bones of her brother Orestes,
whom she supposed to be departed; he devised how to fill the theater, not with
an affectation of weeping and wailing, but with true and natural tears; for
having dug up the bones of a dear son of his that was lately dead, and
bringing them upon the stage in stead of Orestes his bones, he found himself
forced to play the mourner after a most complete and lively manner. Agell.
noct. Attir. lib. vii. cap. 5. Yet must not the Artificers here give too much
scope to their own wits, but make with Dionysius Longinus De sublimi
oratione,. 2.
so me difference between the Imaginations of Poets that do intend only an
astonished admiration, and of Painters that have no other end but Perspicuitie.
Wherefore says the same author in another place,. 13.
what the Poets conceive, has most commonly a more fabulous excellency and
altogether surpassing the truth; but in the fantasies of Painters, nothing is
so commendable as that there is both possibility and truth in them. Seeing
then it has been proved in our former discourse, that not Poets only, but
Painters also receive great benefit by a continual exercise of their
Fantasy, it may likewise be gathered from thence what need both have to
cherish such a good and trusty nourse of profitable conceits: for although it
be a very hard thing, says Dio Chrysostomus Orat. XII.
, yet is it very often required that the same image should remain in the mind
of an Artificer, and that sometimes for many years, until the whole work be
finished so may we also gather from thence the true reason why Dionys.
Longinus affirming. 13.
that Perspicuitie is the chiefest thing ^^r Fantasy aims at, does
furthermore add, that (...) the help of that same Perspicuitie does seem to
obtain easily of a man what she forces him to, and though she does ravish
the minds and hearts of them that view her works; yet do they not feel
themselves violently carried away, but think themselves gently led to the
liking of what they see: neither can it be otherwise: for as the Artificers
that do go about their works filled with an imagination of the presence of
things, leave in their works a certain spirit drawn and derived out of the
contemplation of things present; so is it not possible but that same spirit
transfused into their works, should likewise prevail with the spectatours,
working in them the same impression of the presence of things that was in the
Artificers themselves. And this is questionless that same Perspicuitie, the
brood and only daughter of Fantasy, so highly commended by Longinus, for
whosoever meets with an evident and clear sight of things present, must needs
be moved as with the presence of things.

Having now spoken at large of the manifold fruits the Artificers reap out of
the continual exercise of their Imaginative faculty; it remains that we
should show how they have need to stir up all the powers of fancy that are in
them, that would view the works of excellent masters with the contentment of a
sound and well-grounded judgment.

CHAP. V.
NO man has ever been able to conceive the miracles of these Arts that do
meddle with the imitation of all things, unless he enjoying his hearts ease,
has likewise now and then helped this same delicate study of a most busy
contemplation by the secrecy of a retired and more solitary place. None are
more curious then such as are at leisure, says the younger Plinius Lib, IX.
epist. 32.
. Poesy does require retiredness of the writer and leisure, says Ovid Lib.
I. Trist. Eleg. 1.
: we may add very well, that not Poets only, but such also as mean to read
Poets with good attention, and such likewise as desire to look upon choice
Pictures, and excellent Statues with a sound judgment (to add this same
property also to the comparing of Poets and Painters handled immediately
before) have great need of retiredness: the multitudes of necessary duties and
affairs do withdraw and turn all men from the contemplation of such things,
says Pliny Lib. xxxvi. not. histor. cap. 5.
, because such an admiration is only agreeable with leisure and a great
stillness of place: the reason is at hand, and may be drawn out of our former
discourse, where we do show that solitary and silent places do mightily help
and nourish our Fantasy, the only means Artificers do work, and lovers of
Art do judge by: seeing also that a perfect and accurate admirer of Art is
first to conceive the true Images of things in his mind, and afterward to
apply the conceived Images to the examination of things imitated, it is clear
that neither of these can be performed without the Imaginative faculty, that
likewise the framing and fashioning of Images advances very little when it is
every day interrupted by ordinary businesses and the noise of them that do
run up and down: we see therefore that many grave and serious well-willers
of Art, when they can obtain some days free from importunate visits, do never
leave to employ their spare-times about the conceiving and gathering of most
absolute Images of things natural. Fantasy, says Michael Ephesius, In
Aristot. de Memoria and reminiscentia.
is like a register unto our mind: meeting then with one or other master piece
that seems to deserve their care and consideration, they find always in this
register of theirs a true Image of the thing imitated: such as do contemplate
the works of the Art of painting, says Apollonius, Apud Philost. lib. II.
cap. 10.
have great need of the imaginative faculty; for no body can with any good
reason praise a painted horse or bull, unless he do conceive that same
creature in his mind, whose similitude the Picture does express. Although now
the alleged reason does abundantly commend retiredness unto them that would
willingly fit themselves to this exercise, yet is there another reason alike
important that does persuade us to the same: for as Physicians are not only to
mark apparent infirmities, but they are also to find our secret distempers,
the nature of the diseased being so that they do sometimes study to hide
them; so must he that is to judge of Pictures epsy and search into many things
that do not show themselves at the first view: now it is most certain that
retiredness does most of all help our judgment, and that our judgment in a
multitude of lookers on is very often shaken and weakened by the favorable
acclamations of them that praise and extol every indifferent work; seeing we
are sometimes ashamed to disagree with them that very confidently pretend to
know it better; whereas in the mean time faulty things are most liked;
besides that flatterers praise also what they do not like at all; perverse
judgments at last will not commend what deserves commendation.

. 2. As many therefore as resolve to follow this same contemplation earnestly,
do sometimes purposely take certain Images of things conceived, and turn
them many ways, even as one lump of wax uses to be wrought and altered into
a hundred several fashions and shapes: but principally do they labor to store
up in their Fantasy the most complete Images of beauty. Such Artificers as
work in brass and colors receive out of the natural things themselves those
notions by the which they do imitate the outward lineaments, light, shadows,
risings, fallings; they pick out of every particular body the most excellent
marks of true beauty, and bestow them upon some one body: so that they seem
not to have learned of Nature, but to have strived with her, or rather to have
set her a law. For who is there, I pray you, that can show us such a complete
beauty of any woman, but a quick-sighted Judge will easily find in her
something wherein she may be esteemed to come short of true perfection? For
although the whole absoluteness of perfection does consist in the rules and
dimensions of Nature; yet does the commixtion of both parents, the constitution
of the place, air, and season very often detract something from the natural
form: seeing then that Artificers themselves do not borrow the Image or
pattern of a most excellent beauty from one particular work of Nature; so is
it likewise requisite, that Lovers and Well-willers of Art should not content
themselves with the contemplation of any one particular body, but that they
should rather cast their eyes upon several bodies more exactly made by Nature,
observing in them the differences of age, sex, condition: and you shall
seldom see them rest here, but they will fix their eyes also upon many other
natural bodies, studying always to enrich their Fantasy with lively
impressions of all manner of things. They do mark the wide heaven beset with
an endless number of bright and glorious stars; the watery clouds of
several colors, together with the miraculously painted rainbow; how the
great Lamp of light up-rearing his flaming head above the earth, causes the
dawning day to spread a faint and trembling light upon the flichering gilded
waves; how the fiery glimmering of that same glorious eye of the world, being
lessened about noontide, lesneth the shadows of all things; how darksome
night begins to display her coal-black curtain over the brightest sky,
dimming the spacious reach of heaven with a shady dampe: they observe likewise
the unaccessable height of the mountains, with their ridge sometimes extended a
good way, sometimes cut off suddenly by a craggie and steep abruptness;
pleasant arbors and long rows of lofty trees, clad with summers pride, and
spreading their clasping arms in wanton intricate wreathings; thick woods,
graced between the stumpes with a pure and grasse-greene soil, the beams of
the Sun here and there breaking thorough the thickest boughs, and diversely
enlightening the shadie ground: gently swelling hillocks; plain fields; rich
meadows; diverse flowers shining as earthly stars; fountains gushing forth
out of a main rock, sweet brooks running with a soft murmuring noise, holding
our eyes open with their azure streams, and yet seeking to close our eyes with
the purling noise made among the pebblestones; low and smoakie villages;
stately cities, taking pride in the turrets of their walls, and threatening the
clouds with the pinnacles of their spear-like steeples. They do consider in
Lions, horses, eagles, snakes, and all other creatures, wherein the absolute
perfection of their shapes does consist: propounding unto themselves likewise
parliaments, sacrifices, festival meetings and dauncings, husbandrie-worke,
smiths forges, footmen running a race, fishers, sailers putting off from the
shore, or else landing, fair and foul weather, the sea calm and boisterous,
great armies of men, depopulations of the country, surprisings of cities, and
whatsoever uses to fall out in an expugnation of a great and populous town:
whole troops of armed men, having broake up the city gates, and thrown down
a good part of the walls, run through the town after a most tumultuous manner,
and cause every where a trepidation like unto a ruin, whilst with sword and
fire they do promiscuously destroy things sacred and profane: the crackling
noise in the mean time of the houses that are a pulling down does increase
the fear: the cry also out of the several voices of them that do fright and
are frighted, the noise of rumbling drums and shrill trumpets, the shouting
of them that do overcome, the wailing of them that are overcome, together with
the weeping of women and children, one sound being made up out of diverse
clamours, does confound all: and yet seems all this lamentable noise to be
deafned by the shrieking and howling of such mothers as are in danger to have
their tender infants snatched out of their arms, as also by the flocking
together of great companies of distressed women, that running sometimes after
one sometimes after another do nothing but ask their husbands, brothers,
sons, what destinies they do mean to leave them to, there being every where
nothing else to be seen but cruel desolation, grief, fear, and a certain
image of present death and destruction: the sight of the public calamity is
of several sorts, uncertain, foul, horid: the conquerers show themselves to
be conquered by several lusts, every one thinking it lawful whatsoever he
has a mind to, and none of them all holding any thing unlawful: no dignity,
no age can hinder them but that they will add rapes to murders, and murders to
rapes: the armed men, and all such as be of age to bear arms, are cut in
pieces: brothers and sisters are pulled asunder whilst they do rush to take
their leaves by a mutual and never more looked for embracement: aged men unto
whom it had been happier to have met with a timely death, old decayed women
also in whom there is left nothing a greedy and lustful enemy should prey
upon, are haled and pulled for mere sport: and if there falls by chance a
ripe virgin into the hands of the insolent conquerours, she is in danger to be
torn in pieces by them, till they among themselves by the eagernes of striving
fall together by the ears, not so much as perceiving that another company of
ravishers comes upon them ready both to dispatch them and to carry the maid
violently away: some despising the things that are already in their power, go
about to find out by wounding and tormenting the owners what they suppose to
be concealed; they search every dark hole and secret corner, with burning
torches in their hands; least, having carried out all the spoil, they should
want ready means to set the emptied houses a-fire. You cannot cast your eyes
any where, but you shall meet with whole droves of chained captives: the
streets are every where strawed over with packes contemned by avarice in
comparison of some better things it met withal by the way: armed, unarmed,
boys, horses, weapons, men, women, household stuff, enemies, citizens, all are
mixed together: nothing is done by advice and counsel. Fortune carries the
greatest sway: the sad aspect of the fatal hour cannot but moove the hearts
of some angry conquerors to compassion; whilst others wearied with slaughters
set themselves down, the occasions to exercise their anger upon, and not their
anger, failing them; for they do still look about with a stern countenance,
if they could epsy any frighted souls come near them by an unprovident
flight: but the greater part of them being grown senseless by the horrible
fight of fire and murders, can neither see, nor hear, nor forecast any thing;
their private agonies also being stupefied by the public calamities, they
exspect the enemy in their own houses, being obstinately resolved to die in
the midst of the dearest delights of their life: the most valiant in the mean
time having confirmed their courage with a generous desperation do provoke the
thickest throngs of the incensed enemies by showing and offering their own
naked throats unto them; and being once thoroughly enraged with the last
madness of dying men, wheresoever the fight takes them, there they do resist,
content yea desirous to die in the revenge of their ruinated Country: some that
mean to escape, run into their own death and destruction: others that would
feign renew the fight, are against their wills carried away by the violence of
a flying multitude. Thus leaving their sweet home where they were borne and
bred, they cannot but sometimes stay a little and look about, very loath to
part; neither should they have any power to stir one foot from the place,
unless fear of having their throats cut did make them understand that they
had best, the public miseries being past redress, steal away and follow
their own advice, their private hopes, without looking after any guide or any
consent of desolate multitudes: they meet at length in the gates, where they
are heaped one upon another, a great number of them being thrown down not
only by slaughter and a faint weariness of fighting and running, but also by
crowding and striving to get out first: men and horses, wounded and unwounded,
living and dead, swords and pikes, bundles also of precious things make all but
one heap stopping up the gates: neither do the others that follow, bear so
much respect either to the living or dead, but that they tread and trample upon
them to make themselves away: without the gates there is a sad and miserable
company of them that are escaped to be seen, filling the ways with a
dolefullamentation, as if but now they had got some leisure to be wail their
own misfortunes, the sight of so many afflicted ones provoking tears by a
mutual miseration. But here also presents it self in the open fields a
great and fearful spectacle: some fierce conquerours, not abiding any should
escape, are instantly at their heels, persecuting, wounding, taking and killing
them they took when others were offered: there lie every where scattered upon
the bloody ground all manner of weapons, dead bodies, whole joints cut off: and
wheresoever valor and anger reentring into the minds of some of the conquered,
cause them to disdain that a few by so hot a pursuit should drive them like
sheep, there is for a short while a desperate fight manfully maintained; till
they see more and stronger bands of enemies approaching: for then do they begin
to leave their anger, and remembering their present fortunes they do take their
flight, running with one breath unto remote and unaccessible places; not in
great troops, as before, but every one by himself alone, yea purposely
shunning one another, least their flocking and running together should still
draw the enemies after them.

3. It appears now what care the well-willers of Art use to take about the
exercising and preparing of their fantasy, seeing they do by a most accurat
Imagination design and make up in their minds the complete pictures of all
kind of natural things; and being thus provided, they do very often examine
the works of great Artificers with better success then the Artists themselves,
the severitie and integrity of whose judgments is often weakened by the love
of their own and the dislike of other men's works. As for the common sort of
people, of them says a certain Painter very well in Plutarch In ipso statim
initio libelli de Socratis genio.
, that rude spectators and such as are nothing at all acquainted with matters
of Art, are like them that salute a great multitude at once; but that neat
spectators on the contrary, and such as are studious of good Arts, may be
compared with them that salute one by one: the first namely do not exactly
look into the works of the Artificers, but conceive only a gross and
unshapen image of the works; where the others going judiciously over every
part of the work; look upon all and observe all what is done well or ill. De
Optimo genere oratorum.
Tullie does call this same faculty of our mind intelligens judicinm, that is,
an intelligent judgment. We learn likewise out of the same Author Lib. IV. in
Verrem.
that Lovers and well-willers of Art were named elegantes, that is, neat and
polished men; and that they on the contrary were called idiotae, that is,
idiots, the which had no skill at all and did not care for the delicacy of rare
works: how many things do Painters see in the shadows and eminences, says
Tullie Lib. IV. Academ. quaest.
, the which we cannot see? Wherefore, as that kind of hearing that does only
discern the sound, says Epictetus Arriani Epictetus lib. III. cap. 6.
, may very well be called the common hearing; and the hearing that does
discern the tunes, is now no more a common but an artificial hearing; so is
there also great difference of seeing: the sight of one man is better by
nature, says Plutarch De Amore, apud Stobaeu^ Sermon. de Venere and amore.
, then the sight of another: so are likewise the minds of Painters by Art
exercised to discern beauty in all kind of shapes and figures. Nicomachus
therefore has very fitly answered an idiot, that could see no beauty in that
same famous Helena painted by Zeuxis, Take my eyes, said Nicomachus, and you
shall think her to be a goddess. Aelianus Var. histor. lib. XIV. cap. 47.
does attribute this same apophthegme to Nicostratus: it does then appear that
it is not enough we should have eyes in our head as other men have, but it is
also required here that we should bring to these curiosities eruditos oculos,
that is, learned eyes, as Tullie terms them, Parad. 5.

. 4. Although now a man does not at the first bring to these Arts sufficiently
exercised eyes, yet is he not instantly to be excluded from the most delicate
contemplation of Art; seeing a man altogether unskilful in such curiosities,
may very well feel the delight of them, though he cannot give an exact account
of his liking. The virtue and grace shining in all the work, says Dionysius
Halicarnassensis In Lysia.
, is a most wonderful thing, and surpassing the power of speaking. What is
best, is easy to be seen, and lies open as well to the Artist as to the
idiot: but to show the reason thereof is very hard, and uneasy also to them
that are very eloquent. If therefore any one desire to be taught by words
wherein this same power of the work does consist, does not he go about to ask
a reason of many other fair things that are hard to be uttereds as namely, in
the beauty of bodies, what it is we call cometinesse: in the turning and
winding of a melodious voice, what it is we call a perfect harmonte: in the
symmetrie or just commensuration of time, what it is we call an orderly concent
of voices: and generally in every work, and in every thing, what it is we call
a well-moderated and seasonable opportunity of time: for every one of these
things is apprehended by sense, and not by talk. Quintilian propounds the
sum of all this in fewer words; the learned, says he Orat. instit. lib. IX.
c. 4.
, understand the reason of Art, the unlearned feel the pleasure: hence it is
that both are alike affected with copiousnesse and defects; both are alike
offended with abruptness; softness does take them both, and forciblenesse
does stir them both alike; both approve of steadiness, find out lamenesse,
and loathe all manner of excessivenesse. It is strange, says Tullie Lib. III.
de Oratore.
, there being so great a difference of working between the skillful and
unskilful, that there should be so small a difference of Judging. The same
Author says again in the same place; All do by a silent feeling without any
art or reason discern what there is well or amiss in the Arts: they do the
same also in Pictures and Statues, and other works, to the which by nature
they are not sufficiently instructed.

. 5. It is then most clear and evident that such men also as are altogether
unskilful in these Arts, may admire the works of rare Artificers, although
they cannot exactly judge of them. As for the first; every one, says Symmachus
Lib. I. Epist. 23.
, may consider the virtues of other men: for Phydias his Olympian Jupiter, and
Myron his heyfer, and Polycletus his canephorae, have been admired by them that
were ignorant in this Art: the nature of understanding goes a great deal
further: and rare things should not have that same general approbation they
do deserve, if the feeling of good things did not touch them also that are
inferiors. So says the same Author again in another place Lib. VIII. Epist.
22.
, the fame of great men should want celebritie, if she did not content her
self also with ordinary witnesses: the words of Dionysius Halicarnassensis
are worth noting; I have learned, says he De Composit. nominum.
, in most populous Theaters filled with great multitudes of them that had no
skill in Music, how all have a natural prouenesse and aptness to that same
proportionable concent we find in a melodious harmony, the people crying out
upon avery renowned Musician when he did spoil his song by stirring but one
string that was not well tuned; a most skillful piper also suffering the same,
when piping untunably, or pressing his mouth carelessly, he did seem to fall
into an unpleasant kind of play: for if any one should bid an idiot take the
instruments and mend what he blames in the Artificers, he should never be able
to do it; seeing that is the work of skill, which all have not; where as the
other is the work of passion or feeling, and Nature has denied that to none.
As for the second; Anacharsis had good cause to wonder, as Laertius reports
Lib. I. de Vitis Philos
, how the Artificers in Greece did strive, and such as were no Artificers did
judge. It is true that he did speak this about their gymnike exercises,
nevertheless, it has place also in these Arts of Imitation; seeing there is
very often in the same something of deeper consideration. Mechopanes was liked
for a certain kind of diligenc, that none could understand, but the Artificers
alone, says Pliny Lib. xxxv. not. hist. c. 1.
. To make up a statue as is fit, says Epictetus Arriani Epictetus li. II. cap.
24.
, whose work do you take it to be? it is the work of a statuarie: but to
look skilfully upon such a work, do you think it requires no skill at all?
certainly it requires skill also. Hermogenes does urge the same, to know how
to judge of other men's works, says he Lib. I. de Formis orationum.
, so far forth as they are neat and accurat or not, whether likewise they are
an ancient or a modern work, cannot be done without some experience in such
matters. The younger Pliny says also expressly Lib. I, Epist. 10.
, none but an Artificer can judge of a Painter, Carver, Caster in brass, or
worker in clay. Observe in the mean time, that in these words of Pliny we
must understand by the name Artificer, not such a workman only as does really
paint and carve, but such a Lover and well-willer of Art as by a rare and
well-exercised Imaginative faculty, is able to confer his conceived Images
with the Pictures and Statues that come nearest unto Nature, and is likewise
able to discern by a cunning and infallible conjecture the several hands of
diverse great Masters out of their manner of working. To the trial of Picture,
says Tullie De Optimo genere oratorum.
, there is also use made of them that have some skill in judging, though they
are altogether ignorant in doing. The same Orator says again in another place
De Oratore
, if I were to speak of a player, and did maintain that he cannot give
satisfaction in his gestures without some skill of well-behaving himself and
dancing; there is no need that I my self, for saying so, should be a player;
but it is enough that I do show my self a discreet censurer of another man's
work. Plutarch does attribute unto the great and good Aratus of Sicyon a
learned judgment in Pictures. Vindex likewise, a most noble Roman, is highly
commended by Statius Papinius or his rare judgment in all kind of Art, who
dares ever strive with Vindex, says he Lib. IV. Sylv.
, to discern the old drawings of the Artificers, and to restore his Author
unto such statues as have no inscription? he shall show you what brass Myron
be labored with a watchful diligence: what marble got life by the
carving-iron of the laborious Praxiteles: what ivorie was smoothed by Phydias:
what statues do as yet retain the breathing infused into them by Polycletus
his furnaces: what line does a far off confess the ancient Apelles: for
Vindex does follow this pastime, as often as he lays down his Lute: the love
of such things does call him sometimes a little aside from the habitation of
the Muses.

6. There are every where in our age also a great many of noble descent and
eminent places, who having made an end of their urgent affairs, do after the
example of this same Vindex recreate themselves in the contemplation of the
divine works of excellent Artificers, not only weighing and examining by a
secret estimation what treasures of delight and contentment there are hidden in
them, but sometimes also viewing and examining therein every little moment of
Art with such infatigable though scrupulous care that ^o is easy to be
perceived they do not acknowledge any greater pleasure. I do not count him
free, that does not sometimes do nothing; and the true fruit of leisure is not
a continual bending of the mind, but a relaxation, says Tullie Lib. II. de
Oratore.
; yet are the wits worn out by a daily toil about civil affairs, most of
all repaired by the sweetness of such like things, says Quintilian Orat.
Instit. lib. X. cap. 1.
. Even as men that are used to a daily course of labor, when they are hindered
from following their work by reason of tempestuous weather, do pass their
time with a ball, cockall, dice, or else devise themselves at their own
leisure some other game; so do they that are excluded from the work of
public affairs, either by the iniquity of times, or else by granting unto
themselves some holy days, follow altogether the delight of Poesy, Geometry,
Music, sometimes also finding out some new study and play, says Tullie Lib.
III. de Oratore.
: for as grounds are much the better for the change of sever all feeds, says
the younger Pliny Lib. VII. Epist. 9.
, so are our wits refreshed sometimes with one, sometimes with another
meditation.

. 7. That the lively spirits of eminent men are most of all drawn by the
sweetness of this delight, does deserve no admiration. Whatsoever is fair, is
able also to stir a stone, says Epictetus Arriani Epict. lib. III. cap. 23.
. The beauty of the body moves our eyes by a decent composition of the
limbs, says Tullie Lib. I. de Officiis. vide quoque Isocratem in Helenae
encomio.
, affoording us the greatest delight, because all parts do agree among
themselves with a pleasant comeliness. Aristotle being asked wherefore men do
love fair things, answered, This is a blind man's question Laert. lib. V. and
Stobaeus Sermon. de Laud pulchritudinis.
. Although now fairness of beautiful bodies does very much take our minds,
yet are we more ravished by an accurat Imitation of this same beauty: for our
thoughts cheered up and elevated by the contemplation of an absolute Imitation
of perfect beauty, cannot contain themselves any longer, they do leap as it
were for joy, being extolled with the gallant bravery of what the eye
beholds; not otherwise rejoicing in the good success of Art, then if all we
do see were the work of our own hands. Whosoever wrastleth with brass or
iron, taming Nature by Art, does bestow the discipline upon the lovers of Art,
teaching them by what methods brass is made obnoxious to our wills, says
Saint Basil Basilius Seleuciae episcopus, orat. xiv.
. Such as do view the beauty of statues, feel their eyes held by what they
saw first: but otherwhile turning their sight upon some other parts, they
begin to doubt what they had best consider first, says Hiemerius Apud
Photium.
. Our sight viewing cast works, pictures, carved works, and such like things
made by the hand of men, when it finds the sweetness, and beauty that is in
them, contenteth it self and desires nothing more, says Dionys.
Halicarnassensis De Compos. nominum.
. Seeing then that in the contemplation of the rare works of Art, we are not
so much taken with the beauty it self, as with the succesfull boldness of
Art provoking Nature to a strife, it falls out that not only the Imitation
of fair but of foul things also does recreate our minds, We love to see a
painted Lizard, says Plutarch De Poetis audiendis.
, or an Ape, or the face of Thersites; not for any beauty there is in them,
but in regard of the similitude: for though every foul thing by nature is
hindered from seeming fair; yet is the Imitation always commended, whether
she does express the similitude of things foul or fair. See also the same
Plut. lib. v. Sympos. probl. 1. where he does instance more upon this point.

. 8. Idiots then and such as never felt the power of these Arts, may very well
cease to wonder what makes great and vigorous wits stick so close to the
contemplation of Pictures and Statues; seeing it is most certain, that the
satietie of good things is not so easily attained unto, says Symmachus Lib.
IV. Epist. 16.
, and things delightful do then most of all solicit our mind when they
seem to fill it. Teastie and ambitiously severe censurers also have but small
reason to find fault with such great and wealthy men as with an excessive cost
do buy for strife all manner of Art, valuing the rare works of great Masters
according to the delight and contentment they find in them. I am of opinion,
says Tullie Lib. IV. in Verrem.
, where he speaks of the works of Art, that we are to consider those things
as they are esteemed in their judgments that are studious of such things.
Neither is it unlikely that brave and generous men sometimes might resolve of
their own accord to raise the price of Pictures and Statues, because they
could not endure that such honest and innoxious delights should be generally
condemned and contemned; it seems therefore that they have followed the
praiseworthy course taken by Apelles, when it did grieve him to see how little
the rare works of Protogenes were regarded at Rhodes. The Rhodians, says
Pliny Not. hist. lib. xxxv. cap. 10.
, made very small account of Protogenes, as domestical things use always to
be slighted. Wherefore when Apelles asked him the price of his works, he set
them upon a very poor price; but Apelles offered him fifty talents, noising
abroad that he bought them to sell them for his own works. This same fact
made the Rhodians to understand their own Artificer. Neither would Apelles
yield unto them, till they had raised the price.

9. Whosoever therefore had rather lay out his moneys upon honest and harmless
occasions, then to waste his patrimony with the mad sport of dicing and all
other kind of luxury, does not deserve any blame. The great Captain Marcellus,
as it is reported by Plutarch in his life, having conquered Syracuse, filled
the City of Rome first of all with the knowledge of Greek delicacies: and
when others did reprehend him for doing so, he thought it better to slight
their reprehensions and reproaches, glorying in what he had done. Every one is
drawn by a peculiar delight, says Virgil Ecloga 2.
: they commit therefore a gross error, which measure the inclinations of other
men by the recreations they themselves have made choice of by a particular
instinct of nature: for all things do not seem fair unto all men; neither
do all men judge all things to be worth their pains, says Aelian In
praefatione libri primi de animalibus.
. Let us therefore bear with the recreations of other men, says the younger
Pliny Lib. IX. Epist. 17.
, that they likewise may bear with ours. The following words of Seneca do
contain a very grave and sober admonition; What can you allege, says he
Cap. 9. de Tranquil, animi.
, why that man is not as well to be pardoned that seeks a great name by
marble and ivorie, as any other that gathers up the works of unknown yea
sometimes also disallowed Authors, whilst he himself sits gaping among so
many thousand Books, delighting in nothing so much as in the outside and bare
titles of his Volumes? But by chance shall any one grant me now that men of
great means and of a greater mind may please themselves in the fruition of
these honest recreations, and yet shall they not cease to blame other men of
meaner sort and condition, who not considering their own poor estate, run
most greedily after such barren and unprofitable delights as cannot be
maintained without an excessive expense of money and time. To answer them
therefore that can spare so much leisure from their own affairs, as to meddle
with the doings of other men; let them first understand, that they mistake the
whole matter grossly; seeing men of ordinary estates need not spend themselves
that way as to undergo the charges of buying, since great and generous
spirits, furnish their houses with such things not only for their own private
contemplation, but also for the free use of such as do profess themselves to
be Lovers and well-willers of Art, thinking their cost well bestowed when many
do daily resort to their galleries. Let them secondly know, that they are not
well advised when they go about to brand these most commendable recreations
with the nickname of barren and unprofitable delights: for how can that same
contemplation deserve the opinion of an unfruitful and idle exercise, by whose
means we do understand the true beauty of created bodies, a ready way to
the consideration of our glorious Creator? besides that this same exercise,
like a most sweet Music to the eye, does clear up all heaviness and sullen
drowsinesse of the mind: it works in us also, by the examples of things past,
a perfect love of innocence: it does bridle the most violent passions of love
and anger. So is it that Lib. III. Eleg. 20.
Propertius propounding diverse ways how to be rid of love, makes mention
also of this same delight. Plutarch likewise teaches us that malice and
revenge cannot settle their seat in such hearts as do delight in these
delicate elegancies. I know well enough that there may be some who making a
show of following such harmless pastimes, do in the mean time under that
pretense entertain all manner of harmfull and most dangerous plottes: of them
I do not speak: my discourse means them only that do not feign. Look
well into them, and you shall take them to be some remnant of the golden age:
for who is there whose heart has been once rightly possessed with the sweet
humanity of such liberal delights, that does slavishly stoop under the
tyrant love, or that suffers himself to be driven whither soever desperate
Ambition pusheth him? They envy no body, they despise no body, they do not
lend their ears to backbiting and slanderous tales, they do but imagine
well-hung chambers and well-furnished galleries: this do they make the height
of their cares, the height of their wishes, propounding themselves hereafter an
innoxious and a happy life: and if perchance they fall out with some body,
yet is there nothing so easy as to bring them instantly to a true and hearty
reconciliation, chiefly if they can but learn that he against whom they have a
quarrel, does not altogether abhor from the love of those things they
themselves do like. Polemon observed this very well: for when a certain man
that spent a great deal in buying of neat seals, as Plutarch reports De Ira
cohibenda.
, fell out with him in very foul terms, he answering him never a word, but
fixing his eyes and mind earnestly upon one of his sealing rings, began to
consider it most diligently. Whereupon the man filled with joy, left his
railing, and Not so Polemon, said he, but view it in a good light, and you
shall find it a great deal fairer. Forsooth the wit of man is softened by
gentle Arts, and our manners are suitable to our studies, says Ovid Lib. III.
de Art.
. Snow does continue longer in rough and untilled grounds, says Petronius
Arbiter In Satyrico.
, but wheresoever the ground is tilled, there does the slender frost vanish
away whilst you are yet speaking: even so does anger fix her seat in our
breasts, occupying rude and fierce minds, but passing by the learned and gentle
ones. Virgil, when he does describe how Aeneas, after a world of miseries
endured by tempest, landing in Afrike came to the new City of Karthage, has a
notable place and worth our consideration: Here has a new occasion lessened
his fear, giving him some hope of safety, says Virgil Lib. I. Aeneid.
; for whilst he staying for the Queen vieweth every thing in a great Temple;
whilst he does also wonder at the fortune of the new Town, at the labor of
the work, as also at the emulation of the workmen; he sees the whole
description of the most famous Trojan war painted in a very good order.
Agamemnon, Priamus, and A chilles terrible to them both were not wanting in
that same picture. Standing still therefore, and weeping, What place is there
now, O Achates, says he, what Country is there that is not filled with the
fame of our labors? Look, here is Priamus, here is the reward for praise, and
tears also for the miseries of mortal men: put away all fear: this fame
shall bring us some safety. Having thus spoke, he fed his eyes with the
represented picture, fetching many a deep groan, and watering his cheeks with
a large river of tears. Out of these words of Virgil does the ancient
Commentator Servius infer this lesson, All Aeneas his care was about the
manners of the Africans; but now does he quiet himself upon sight of this
Picture: for as many as do paint such kind of wars, cannot but love virtues
and be touched with a most lively commiseration of the grievous misfortunes of
other men.

10. As many then as have courages equal unto their vast estate, may think
their good name well enough secured, and need not fear any just reproach when
they take their fill of these no less profitable then delectable
contemplations; remembering only to moderate this same incredible delight with
so much discretion, as not to suffer the memory of their own greatness to be
abolished by the vehemency of their too fond affection; seeing the greatest
that are cannot maintain the authority of a great and glorious name, as long
as they go about to uphold the worthiness of these Arts by the loss of their
own dignity. How dreadful was the Majesty of the Roman Emperors in the
whole world? annd yet could not Adrian the Emperor escape the bitter censures
of Apollodorus the Architect, as Xiphilinus reports, because he did applaud
himself too much for his skill in painting of Gourds. The King Antiochus,
surnamed Epiphanes, as Polybius witnesses Apud Athenaeum lib. V. Deipnosoph.
, did likewise bear the blame and receive the contempt of his immoderate love
toward these Arts. Plutarch his good advice seems therefore to deserve
golden Letters. When we do wonder at any thing done, says he In Periclis vita
circa initium.
, it does not instantly follow that we should desire to do the same. When
Philip the King heard his son in a banquet play very sweetly and artificially
upon a musical Instrument, Are not you ashamed, said he, to play so finely?
for it suffices if a King does show himself now and then at leisure to hear
Musicians, and he honors the Muses enough when he is content sometimes to be a
spectator of them that play for strife: but the self-practising of such mean
Arts brings to pass that our earnest endeavor about unprofitable things
serves for a witness of our sloathfulnesse in greater matters. Neither is there
any generous young man the which having seen the Jupiter consecrated at Pisa,
desires to be Phydias; so does no body also desire to be Polycletus, how ever
the image of Juno consecrated at Argos pleases him. A generous young man may
very well be taken with an honest love of Poesy, and yet shall he not
instantly wish himself to be Anacreon, Philemon, or Archilochus: for it is not
necessary that when the work delights us as being pleasant, that we should
therefore think the workmen worth our imitation. We have as yet considered
the Art of Painting in her first beginnings, or rather in her swaddling clouts
and cradle; it follows now that we should consider in the next Book the
progress of this same Art, and what has set her on foot. ()

THE SECOND BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe natural pronenesse which is in us of imitating all manner of things
created, as it has ever been furthered and advanced by the ready help of our
Fantasy, so are there many other causes which have strangely cherished up
this most forward inclination of our all-attempting natures: but among such a
great number of several causes as are known to have promoted these Arts of
Imitation, we must needs prefer God the only fountain of good things above
all the rest; whose infinite goodness was forthwith seconded by the diligent
benevolence of loving Parents, seeing they could not think their children well
provided for, until they had found out for them a good and careful Master;
the young men therefore being once by the help of their trusty Masters
admitted to the secrets of art, and being afterward left to work out the rest
by their own industry, if they meant to depart from the wholesome precepts of
their Teachers, were kept in awe by the fear of most severe and strict laws
made against the corrupters of art; but if they had on the contrary so much
good nature as not to forsake the sincerity of their first institution, then
did the Emulation of others that took a good course keep them also in the
right way; and because the Ancients in a prodigious plainness of art did not
so much study to have their works commended for the choice exquisitnesse of
costly colors, as for the power and force of art it self, these emulators
also could not but be mindful of that same simplicity of art; their hearts
were in the mean time filled with a wonderful sweetness of art delighting it
self in this same plain and prosperous way of emulation; and gathering
strength out of the manifold and every where obvious use of these arts; as also
out of the Honorable estimation these arts are held in with all men;
whereupon, having once felt the tickling pleasure of the much desired glory,
they did merrily resolve on a most confident boldness of art; remembering
always and above all things the Care due unto such grave and serious arts;
expressing likewise this solicitude of theirs by a praiseworthy Ingenuitie,
in calling both artificers and idiots to assist them; but as the heat of
emulation, the desire of glory, and other causes here alleged, were much
helped by the public felicity of peaceable and flourishing times; so did the
private fortune of the Artificers, by I know not what hidden means, bring them
to a good and joyful end.

LIB. II. CHAP. I.
GOD Almighty and Nature have questionless been a maine cause of the
wonderful increase of these Arts of Imitation. Certainly, says Philostratus
In Prooemio Iconum.
, if any man will speak after the manner of Sophists, Picture is an invention
of the Gods, as well for that same painting which the several seasons of the
year do paint the meads withal, as for those things that do appear in the
sky. Would not you think the Sophists to be quickwitted and wonderful
eloquent men, seeing they clear such a great point in a few words? The meadows
forsooth garnished with flowers, and the heaven distinguished with several
figures made up of stars and clouds are a sufficient proof of what they say;
though it be very certain, that the most pleasant tapestries of the fields do
not so much help the Art as they do delight the spectator; that the wit of
man has set forth the constellations after the image of living and lifelesse
things; that the uncertain shapes of clouds most commonly are likened unto any
thing our wandering mind conceives. The image of Pallas also, known by the
name of Palladium, and all other Statues celebrated by antiquity, as if they
were fallen down from heaven, are no warrantable argument to refer these
Arts to the Gods: none but vain men, tell such tales; none but fools,
entertain them: since it is evident that mighty Kings have taken a singular
delight in preparing such false miracles to deceive their miserable posterities
withal. How odiously tedious was the City of Ephesus in vaunting her self to
be the keeper of the great goddess Diana, and of the Image which fell down
from Jupiter; Act. xix, 35.
and yet was she for all her crackling and boasting, abused by a statue
brought from Alexandria: for Ptolemaeus the King having sent every where for
the most famous carvers to make secretly an accurat image of Diana, when it was
finished, he prepared a royal banquet for the Artificers, the
banqueting house being first undermined; wherefore none of them could escape,
but all were in the midst of that fatal feast swallowed up by the ruin of the
place; and so, the true authors of the noble worke-manship being taken away, it
was easy enough for the King to make any one believe that such a complete
work was sent down from heaven: see Suidas, or rather Isidorus Pelusiota Lib.
IV. epist. 207.
, for Suidas, has borrowed this story from him.

. 2. Seeing then that both the Sophistical and Historical proofs come to
nothing, it may seem best that we should return to the first men, the which,
as Censorinus speaks De die natali, cap. 4.
, were created out of Prometheus his soft clay: for so did Democritus Abderita
first of all hold, that men are made out of water and slime: this is
questionless our safest way: seeing no wise man does acknowledge any other
Prometheus, besides that power of Divine Providence expressed by Moses in the
history of the creation: see Genes. II, 7. compared with Lactantius divin.
instit. lib. II, cap. 11. see also Tertullian. de Resurr. carnis. Fulgentius
lib. II. Mythol. Basilius Seleuciae episcopus orat. II. Gregorius Nyssenus de
Hominis opificio, cap. 22. whence it is that the same Gregorius in another
place Orat. I. de Beatitudinibus.
calls man an earthen statue: and Suidas speaking of Adam, says, this same
was the first statue, the image named by God, after the which all the Art of
carving used by men receives her directions: so was then Adam the first statue
made by God, as Lots wife was the second, see Genes. xix, 26. Remember Lots
wife, says our Savior, Luke xvii., 32. least therefore we should quickly
forget her, she seems to have been turned into a durable material, for
Pliny Not. hist. lib. xxxi, cap. 7. vide quoque Solinum, cap. 31.
does mention some kind of salt which after the manner of stone quarreys
withstandeth iron: although the miraculous preservation of that statue does not
seem to require that we should conceive any such durablenesse of I know not
what material: she waxed stiff, says Aur. Prudentius Hamartigenia.
being consolidated into a kind of brittle metal; and the woman stands
turned into a stone apt to be melted, keeping still her old posture in the same
saltstone image; her comeliness, her ornaments, her forehead, her eyes, her
hair, her face also looking backward, with her chinne gently turned do retain
the unchangeable monuments of the ancient offense: and although she melts
continually away in salt sweat, yet does the compleatnesse of her shape suffer
no loss by this same fluidnesse; neither can whole droves of beasts impair
the savory stone so much, but there is for all that liquour enough left to
lick, and the wasted skin is ever renewed by the loss: the pattern of the
Tabernacle showed unto Moses upon mount Sinai may also be referred to this
place, see Exodus xxv, 40. the brazen serpent made by Moses according to Gods
express command, see Numb. xxi, 9. the pattern of the Temple of Jerusalem
delivered unto Solomon by his father David after the prescript God had made
with his own hand, see 1. Chron. xxviii, 19. the Prophet Ezechiel, to the end
he might propound more lively unto the inhabitants of Jerusalem what dangers
there did hang over their heads, received a command from God to pourtray the
city of Jerusalem upon a tile, and lay siege against it, and build a fort
against it, etc, see Ezechiel IV, 1. but most of all are Bezaleel and Aholiab
to be mentioned here, of whom God himself witnesses, Exodus xxxi. and xxxv,
that he called them by name to make the Tabernacle, and that he had not only
filled them with the spirit of God to devise curious works to work in gold,
and in silver, and in brass, but that besides all this skill he put in their
hearts to teach others: the picture also of our Lord and God Christ Jesus, made
without hands, may be alleged here in this place as it is related by
Damascenus, Cedrenus, and other writers of Ecclesiastical history.

Abgarus the King of Edessa having wrastled many years with a very grievous
and most troublesome disease, heard something of the divine miracles of our
Blessed Savior: he took therefore a resolution to invite him friendly by
letters to come to his City; and having sent Ananias, one of his footmen, that
had some skill also in painting, he charged him that, if he could not bring
along Christ himself, he should at least bring back his picture drawn after
the life. Ananias having delivered the letter, began tofixe his eyes upon
Christ, that he might observe and put up in mind the true lineaments of his
face and body; but being hindered by the importunatenesse of a crowding
multitude, he betook himself to a stony place of a reasonable height, to
note from thence, and to draw quietly the true similitude of him, whom the King
his master was so desirous to see: yet all to no purpose: seeing our Savior
did change his countenance as often as Ananias, having begun to draw, meant
to observe him further: howbeit our Blessed Lord at length granted him his
desire: for having called for water to wash his face, and having wiped his face
with a four double linen cloth, he sent unto Abgarus by the hands of
Ananias his own image expressed in the towell, together with an answer to the
letter. Asterius bishop of Amasa, and the other writers which wrote Church
histories besides him, make mention of our Saviors brazen statue erected by
the woman he had healed of abloody issue. See Photius.

. 3. For as much then as Almighty God has vouchsafed us so many examples of
the Art of painting and casting, commending these Arts not only by his own
example and command unto us, but enabling also the Artificers thereunto by his
Spirit, we may very well affirm with Theodoretus Sermon. IV. de Providentia.
, that God is the author and supporter of these Arts: neither were the heathen
men ignorant of the truth of this point: the seeds of all Arts are deeply
graffed in us, and God by a secret mastership does bring the wits to light,
says Seneca Lib. IV. de Benef. cap. 6.
: there is an humane reason, says Epicharmus Republica.
, there is also a divine: the humane reason busieth her self about our life
and necessary provision: the divine on the contrary accompanies us when we
do go about the practicing of Arts, teaching us always what is fit to be
done: for man has not found Arts, but God brings them forth: and humane
reason it self proceeds from divine reason: Julianus the Emperor speaks
also very neately to this purpose, even as birds being made to fly, fishes to
swim, and hearts to run says he Orat. VII.
, need not be taught any of these things; for though a man should go about to
tie them, and to pin them up, yet will they for all that strive to use those
parts which they know themselves to prevail in: so is mankind likewise (whose
soul seems to be nothing else but a restrained reason and science, or rather
faculty, as wise men term it) desirous to learn, to seek, and curiously to
dive into all things, esteeming such an employment to be most proper unto his
nature: and unto whomsoever a favorable God does speedily release these bonds,
bringing the faculty to some operation, the same does instantly attain to the
science: see also Maximus Tyrius, Dissertat. XL.

. 4. Nature in the mean time, a most fertile Artificer of good and bad, has not
been idle; but she exercises the right of her most powerful government after
so licentious a manner, as if she would have us know that it fitteth her best
to delight herself somewhat in the variety of things, seeing the labor of
bringing forth all things is chiefly hers: although, what is Nature else, says
Seneca De Benef. lib. iv, cap. 7. quemadm. and Naturalium quaest. lib. II. cap.
45.
, but God and adivine power infused into the whole world and every part of the
world: to speak then something about the miracles of all-atchieving Nature, I
shall not study to express in words the unspeakable subtlety of flowers, as
Pliny speaks Lib. XXI, not. hist. cap. 1.
, seeing no man is so well able to speak, but Nature is still a great deal
better able to paint, especially when she means to make her self some sport
in the midst of her jolly fertility. I shall likewise forbear to relate the
checkerworke, like Oyster-shells of Pergamus, mentioned by Apuleius In Apologia.
, as also the Peacockes, together with the spots of Tigers, Leopards, and so
many more painted creatures, as Pliny Not. hist. l. VII. cap. 1.
speaks: for though such things do sufficiently delight the lookers on, yet
do they not instruct the Artificers. Leaving therefore all such kind of
things, I shall but mention here the manifold picture of gemmes, the
partie-coloured spots of precious stones, as Pliny Lib. II. not. hist. cap. 93.
does speak: and among all these I cannot but remember the royal fame of a gem
that same Pyrrhus had which made war against the Romans: for it is reported
of him that he had an Agathe wherein the nine Muses and Apollo holding of a
Lute were discerned; the spots, not by Art, but by Nature so being spread over
the stone, that every one of the Muses had her peculiar mark. Plin. not. hist.
lib. xxxvii, cap. 1. see also Solinus, cap. 12. Lovers of all kind of curious
rarities use to call such a casual painting of Nature, as comes near unto
Art by the name of Gamahe; and because of late some have undertaken to gather
up diverse examples of these wonders of Nature, I would have him, that is
desirous to know something more concerning them, read the first chapter of
Gafarellus his book, published in French with the title of Curiosities unheard.

. 5. Although now these miracles of Nature may seem to fall out by mere
chance, yet can we not think it to be a casual kind of picture, when many
generations issuing forth out of one man, who had a certain mark, do
constantly retain the same mark in some part of their bodies, receiving it as
by the succession of a most sure and perpetual inheritance.

What chance, I pray you, could it be, that Seleucus the King having had upon
his thigh a complete figure of an anchor, his offspring also should keep the
same long after him? and yet is this credibly reported in Appianus his Syriack
History: see also the xv. book of Justine, and Ausonius in the second of his
famous cities. The progeny of Pelops had such another mark; and Iphigenia
should never have known her brother Orestes, if she had not spied an Olive
tree upon his right shoulder, the mark of the Pelopeian race: see Cedrenus.
Those that were at Thebes called Sparti, carried also the image of a spear in
their bodies, as a sure mark of their lineage; and as many as had not that
mark, were esteemed to be none of them, says Dio Chrysostomus Orat. IV. de
Regno.
: the Sparti are discerned by their spear, the Pelopeians by their shoulders,
the great Themistius by his eloquence, says Gregory Nazianzene In epistola ad
Themistium.
. see also Julianus the Emperor orat. II. de rebus gest is Constantii imp. and
Zetzes upon Lycophron his Cassandra: but above all the rest, do the words of
Plutarch deserve to be remembered here; the warts, moles, and blemishes in the
eye of parents, says he De iis quos divina vindicta tarde assequitur.
, not appearing in the children, do sometimes break out again in the Nephews:
and a Grecian woman being accused of adultery, because had brought forth a
black child, was found to be the fourth generation of an Ethiopian. Python
being one of the Sparti, who died but a little while ago, had a son that
brought forth in his body the figure of a spear; the similitude of this same
generation after an intermission of so many years starting up a fresh in him,
as out of a deep gulf.

. 6. These pictures of busy Nature might seem wonderful, if she had rested
here, and not proceeded further to amore admited attempt of making statues:
thus is it that many high mountains and promontories draw their name and fame
from the resemblance of living and lifelesse creatures: see Eustathius upon the
89. and 157. verses of Dionysius his description or circuit of the world: many
plants also are known by the name of those things whose similitude Nature
represented in them; as is clearly to be perceived in that same never enough
admired Mandrake: see Theophrastus, Dioscorides, Pliny, Columella: yea Nature
has sometimes brought forth out of her rich bosom perfect patterns of Art, if
it be true what Carneades Apud Ciceronem lib. I. de Divinat.
reports, that namely in the stone-quarreys of Chios, a stone being cleft in
sunder, there was found in it the head of a little Pan. Pliny does also relate
Lib. xxxvi. not. hist. ca. 5.
how in the Parian stone-quarreyes, a great stone being split by the wedges of
the worke-men, there did appear within an image of Silenus. Tzetzes Chiliad.
VII, Hist. 144. and Chil. VIII, Hist. 213. speaks of the dracontian stones.

CHAP. II
THe earnest care of good and loving Parents did follow upon the said
introduction afforded by God and Nature; seeing Parents could never give any
satisfaction to the tenderness of their affection, until they saw the comfort
of their life and the hope of their decaying years settled into a good course
of breeding: so was this same duty of Parents much urged by the most grave and
continent Philosopher Crates, who was often wont to say, as Plutarch De Liber.
institutione.
reports, that a man should do very well to climb up to the top of the most
eminent places of the town, and to cry out continually unto the ears of all,
Foolish men, what aile you, that you take so much pains to possess riches,
and care so little for your children, unto whom you mean to leave them?
Diogenes therefore, according to Aelian Var. hist. xii, 56. Laertius, lib. VI.
Plut. de Amore divitiarum,
his relation, when he saw that the Megarians took more care for their cattle
then for their children, said, that he had rather be a Megarian his ram
then his son. The greatest part of the most polished Grecians in the mean
time did mightily detest that gross error of the Megarians, and would not
only have their children thoroughly skilled in all kind of necessary sciences,
but would have them taste also these more curious Arts: the Grecians for the
most part, says Aristotle Lib. VIII, Polit. cap. 3.
, did teach their children the Art of painting; least they might be deceived in
the buying and selling of vessels and household stuff: or rather, that they
might improve themselves in the true knowledge of perfect beauty: Varro
likewise in his treatise of the education of children speaks even to the same
purpose: she that has not learned to draw, says he Apud Nonium in Plumarium.
, cannot be able to judge what is well painted by the embroderers or weavers in
the counter points of bolsters: it does then appear by these words of Varro
that not the Grecians only, but the Romans also would have their children bred
after this manner: and Plutarch teaches us in the life of Paulus Aemilius,
that this Noble Captain had as well sculpters and painters among the masters of
his children, as Sophists and Rhetoricians: yet can we not deny but that this
same custom of breeding has been more frequent in Greece, seeing it was
brought to pass by the authority of Pamphilus, says Pliny Lib. xxxv, not.
hist. cap. 10.
, first at Sicyon, and afterward in all Greece, that freeborn youths should
be taught before all things a certain kind of painting in box-wood, and that
this same Art should be received into the first rank of liberal sciences:
although it has ever been so honored, that none but freeborn might exercise
the said Art, and such afterward as were at least of an honest condition: with
a perpetual prohibition, that none of the servile sort of men should be
trained up to the knowledge of this Art: so was there also in this Art, and in
the Art of graving never any one famous that was of a slavish condition. Galen
therefore gives us a very good and wholesome advice, expressing withal the
true reason why these Arts are to be rancked with the liberal sciences; We
are to exercise an Art, says he In exhortaetione ad perdiscendas arts.
, that may stay with us all our life time: and as some Arts are rational and
reverent, some on the contrary contemptible and exercised only by the labor
of the body; so is it always better a man should addict himself to the first
sort of Arts; for the second sort uses to forsake and to disappoint the
Artificers when they wax old: of the first sort are Physic, Rhetoric,
Music, Geometry, Arithmetic, Logic, Astronomy, Grammar, the knowledge of
civil laws. Join unto these, if you will, the Arts of Carving and Painting;
for though their work does demand the help of our hands, yet does it not
require youthful strength.

2. Seeing then that Grecian children by an usual custom of the Country did
first of all begin with the rudiments of these Arts, it shall not seem
strange to any one that weighs the forementioned words of Pliny, why Sicyon
is called by the same Author Not. hist. lib. xxxv. cap. 5.
patria picturae, that is, the native Country of picture. So says Strabo Lib.
VIII. Geograph.
likewise, that the Arts of Painting and Carving, with all such kind of
workmanship, were most of all augmented at Corinth and Sicyon. Of Corinth says
Orosius Lib. V. hist. cap. 3.
, that for the space of many generations it has been a shop of all Arts and
Artists, yea a common Mart-towne of Asia and Europe. Of Sicyon, see Plutarch in
the life of Aratus. Sidonius Apollinaris Lib. VI. Epist. 12.
says that Greece was famous for Painters and Carvers. And Pliny In
prafatione ardui operis.
terms the Grecians pingendi fingendique conditores, that is, founders of
painting and casting. Neither could it be otherwise, but that the Grecians
should carry this praise above other Nations: for their lads making in their
tender years the first trial of their wits about the rudiments of these Arts,
were kept to the prosperously attempted Arts, if they fell to them with a
natural dexterity, and were on the contrary put to other Arts if they did not
prove so apt as the nice exactness of these Arts seemed to require. Lucian
Vide Lucianum in Somnio.
testifies of himself that his father consulting with his kinsfolks about
the trade he should put his son to, thought it best to make him a statuarie,
because he had observed that the boy returning out of the school did delight
in nothing so much as to make oxen, horses, and men likewise, and that he did
it not unhandsomly. It is verily a great matter to exercise an Art to the which
our natural inclination leads us; as before has been showed: and yet is it
of no less moment to begin that same selfe-chosen Art betimes. This is true in
my opinion, says Tullie Lib. III. de Oratore.
, that a man is never able to learn any thing thoroughly, unles he have been
able to learn it quickly. Quintilian likewise says very well to the purpose,
if you begin to teach one that is now settled in years, says he Orat. instit.
lib. I, c. 12.
, you shall better perceive that such as do any thing in their own art
excellently, are upon good ground said to have learned that art from their
childhood.

3. So did then the Parents provide betimes unto their children choice Masters,
which should show them the true face of Art, says Quintilian Dialogo de causis
corr. eloqu. c. 34.
, and not a vain image only. Which also, as the same Author speaks Orat.
instit. lib. II. c. 2.
, should take the scholars in hand with a fatherly mind, esteeming themselves
to succeed in their place that committed the children unto them: and having
once met with such Masters, they took no further care, but left all to them:
as the waggoner is you do set over the horses, says Libanius Legatione ad
Julianum Imp.
, so may you hope that the wagon shall go: yet were the Parents wont to take
heed that the hope of a more speedy and sudden gain should not cause them to
publish the green studies of their children before the time of their
apprentiship came to an end. Corn does also exspect the times determined for
maturitie, says Q. Curtius Lib. VI. de Rebus gestis Alexandri, cap. 3.
, and things void of all sense receive a good temper by a certain law
appointed unto them. This wary circumspectnesse being afterward neglected by
Parents, made Arbiter break out into a just complaint; and we now a days for
the like carelessness of our times, have great cause to renew the same
complaint, pressing his words as near as may be. Parents deserve to be
rebuked, says he In Satyrico.
, that will not suffer their children to profit by a severe way of teaching:
for they do first frustrate their hopes as well as other things by ambition:
and afterward, making too much haste to obtain their desires, they do
publish the raw and unperfect endeavors of their children, putting them before
their full growth to the practice of such an Art as by their own confession is
the greatest of all other Arts. Whereas, if they would be content that the
endeavors of their children should go on by degrees, that the studious lads
should be kept in by a strict course of exercitation, that they should prepare
their minds by the precepts of wisdom, that they should not stick now and
then with a cruel pencill to deface pleasing lineaments, that they should view
and consider a great while what may be worthy their imitation, if they did not
instantly think all magnificent whatsoever they see liked by their children,
this same mighty Art could never want the weight of her majesty. Now on the
contrary, as boys do but trifle and play in the schools, so are they nothing
but laughed at, when they step forth unto the public: and, which is worse then
both, whatsoever any one being young has learned amiss, he is loathe to
confess it when he grows older.

CHAP. III.
GOod and vigilant Masters did never deceive the trust reposed in them,
studying always to answer the expectation of timorous Parents with a most
careful diligence in teaching. Pliny notes two things in Pamphilus, out of
whose school Apelles and many other famous Painters came forth, he taught no
body, says Pliny Lib. xxxv, not. hist. cap. 10.
, under a talent, and that ten years. He would not teach any scholar under a
talent, to maintain the Authority of the Art the better, if the same should
not be frankly bestowed upon any one. Protagoras was the first that made
speeches for a reward, says Philostratus Lib. I. de vitis Sophistarum.
, he brought in among the Grecians an irreprehensible custom; for we do
always more esteem and embrace things wrought out with no small cost of our
own, then things had for nothing. He taught them afterward ten years, to
keep the credit of his school by exercising his scholars sufficiently in the
necessary rudiments and continual practice of designing before he would suffer
them unadvisedly and presumptuously to work in colors. It would have been
superfluous to touch this point, if many Masters now adays did not confound
all, beginning by an ambitious have with those things that should go last,
says Quintilian Orat. instit. lib. I. cap. 4.
, and whilst they mean to make a boast of their scholars about things specious
and fair in show, they do nothing else but stop their progress by such a
perverse and unseasonable compendiousnesse. Seeing then that this course of
teaching makes young men selfe-conceited and proud, we shall do better to
give ear to the words of Lycon, a most eloquent man and an excellent breeder
of children, for he was wont to say, as Lib. V.
Laertius reports, that it is fit we should endue children with shamefulnesse
and desire of glory, even as we do use about our horses the spur and the
bridle.

2. Seeing then that the presumptuous forwardness of some is often to be
stayed as with a bridle, and the bashful backwardness of others is now and
then to be stirred up as with a spur, it has been ever seen, that good and
trusty Masters have handled their scholars differently, according as they found
the temper of their wits to require. We do see, says Tullie Lib. III. de
Oratore.
, that out of the schools of such Masters and Artificers as were most
excellent in their kind, there are come forth disciples, the which although
they were alike praiseworthy, yet did they differ very much among themselves:
because the institution of the teacher was accommodated unto every one his
nature. We have, not to speak of other Arts, a very notable example in
Isocrates, a singular good teacher; who said, that he was wont to apply the
spur to Ephorus, but on the contrary the bridle to Theopompus: for he did
repress the one, that was apt to run out unto a most wanton boldness of
words; and he did prick on the other, that would ever stay behind by reason of
a bashful slownesse there was in him: yet did he not make them like, but he
added only something to the one, and took away something from the other, to
confirm in both what their natures could bear. It is then very well said of
Quintilian Orat. instit. lib. XII. c. 2.
, though virtue borrows some forward fits of Nature, yet must she attain to
perfection by Doctrine.

3. Although now in some regard they took special notice of the difference of
wits, yet did they propound every day promiscuously unto all their scholars
manifold examples of a true and incorrupt way of Art: It is not enough Painters
and Statuaries should say that the colors must be such, and the lines such;
but the greatest profit comes from thence, if any one sees them go about
their work, says Dio Chrysostomus Orat. xviii. quae est de Exercitat. dicendi.
: nothing is rightly taught nor learned without examples, says Columella Lib.
xi. de ^^er^stica, cap. 1.
: we are easier taught by example what we are to follow, and what we are to
shun, says Seneca the rhetorician Lib. IX. Controv. 2.
: there is never any labor lost, when experiments are found to agree with
precepts, says Quintilian. Orat. instit. lib. 12. cap. 6.
Examples stand for testimonies; says the author of the rhetoric inscribed
unto Herennius Circa initium libri Quarti.
, and whatsoever Art and reason do advertise and propound unto us but
slightly, is made good by the testimony of examples: and again a little after,
Chares learned not of Lysippus to make statues by Lysippus his showing him the
head of Myron, the arms of Praxiteles, the breast of Polycle us; but he saw his
Master do all these things before his eyes; and as for the works of other
Masters, he could consider them well enough by himself. Gallen Lib. V. de
Hippocratis and Platonis dogmatibus.
mentions that Polycletus has not only set down in writing the precepts of a
most accurat pattern of Art, but that he also made a statue after the rules of
Art contained in the said precepts. Polycletus made a piece of work, says
Pliny Lib. xxxiv. not. hist. cap. 8.
, named Canon among the Artificers, because they do fetch the lineaments of
Art from thence, as from a certain law; and no man but he is judged to have
perfected the Art by a work of Art.

. 4. Yet may not all this be so understood, as if these ancient and famous
Artificers did ever detain their scholars about the imitation of their works,
without giving them leave to try their own wits at any time; for Quintilian
tells us otherwise: it is fit, says he Orat. instit. lib. II. cap. 6.
, that disciples should sometimes be set upon their own legs; lest by an
evil custom of always following the labors of other men, they should never
learn to endeavor and to find out any thing of themselves: it is likewise
known that Lysippus being at the first but a Copper-smith, took a more bold
and confident resolution by an answer of the painter Eupompus; who being asked
which of the former Artificers a man had best to follow, answered pointing at a
multitude of men, that Nature it self was rather to be followed then any
Artificer. Plin. xxxiv, 8. as therefore they did most carefully put their hands
under the chinne of fearful beginners, so did they leave them to themselves,
when it was time for them to swim without the help of supporting hands, or
childish rushes: although they never did give quite over the labor of the
institution once undertaken, but they were still mindful of their scholars
after they were gone, and thinking the perfection of a scholar to be the
greatest glory of the Master, they provided most commonly for them they had
taught some Precepts of Art in writing, which might ever accompany them
whithersoever they went: hence it was, that Apelles, not being content with the
teaching he had bestowed upon his disciple Perseus, wrote also unto him
concerning the Art. Plin. xxxv, 10. we do likewise find that besides
Polycletus and Apelles, many other Artificers and famous men have studied to
illustrate these Arts and Artificial works, by their writings and
disputations: not to name therefore Callistratus his description of statues,
the Images of the old and young Philostratus, the xxxiv. and xxxv. books of
Pliny, and other authors extant, I shall reckon up only such authors whose
records of Art and Artificial things are lost and gone.

Adaeus Mitylenaeus, his books of Statuaries are quoted by Athenaeus, lib.
xiii, Deipnosoph. cap. 8.

Alcetas has written of the donaries or gifts offered unto Apollo in his
Delphik temple. Athenaeus lib. xiii. cap. 6.

Alexis the Poet made a Comoedie entitled Picture: and the argument of that
Poem seems to agree with the argument of the writers here named, if we may
make conjecture of the whole Poem by the place alleged out of it in Athenaeus
his Deipnosophists, lib. xiii. cap. 8. we may judge the same of Pherecrates
his Painters, quoted by the same Athenaeus, lib. ix, cap. 11. as also of
Diphilus his Painters, mentioned by the same author, lib. vi, cap. 4.
Alexandrides his Painters are quoted in Pollux his onomast. lib. x, cap. 14.
Nonius Marcellus brings forth many places out of Pomponius his Painters.

Anastmenes has written of the ancient Pictures: See Fulgentius Placiades,
lib III. Mytholog. in Actaeone.

Antigonus the statuarie made books of his Art, says Pliny, lib. xxxiv, cap.
8. and there seems also to have been another Antigonus, whom the same Pliny,
lib. xxxv, cap. 10. reports to have written a treatise of Picture.

Aristodemus Carius has perticularly set down the endeavors of all them that
have advanced the Art of Painting, reckoning up also what Kings and Republikes
have been well affected toward the said Arts: see Philostratus in prooemio
Iconum.

Artemon his book of Painters, is quoted by Harpocration, where he speaks of
Polignotus.

Callixenus has written a Catalogue of Painters and Statuaries, and Photius
tells us, that the twelth book of Sopater his choice histories was collected
out of Callixenus his work.

Christodorus his description of the Statues that were at Constantinople, in a
public place named Zeuxippus, is mentioned by Suidas.

Democritus Ephesius has described the Temple of Diana of Ephesus: see Laert.
lib. ix, in Democritus: and Athenaeus, lib. xii, cap. 5.

Duris of the Art of Painting, is quoted by Laert. lib. I, in Thales.

Eupherion his Comedy entitled Graver of cups, is alleged by Theocritus his
scholast.

Euphranor Isthmius, a most famous Painter, has written of Symmetrie and
colors: see Pliny, lib. xxxv, cap. 11.

Hegesander Delphicus his commentary of Images and Statues is quoted by
Athenaeus, lib. v, cap. 13.

Hippias Eleus, a famous Sophist, disputed about Picture and Statuarie: see
Philost. lib. I, de vitis Sophistarum.

Hypsicrates has written of Picture. Laert. lib. vii. in Chrysippus.

Jamblichus his work of Statues has been confuted by Joannes Philoponus.
Photius speaks of them both.

Juba the King of Mauritania (of whom see what Pliny says, not. hist. lib. v,
cap. 1.) has written of Painters, and the eighth book of that same work of
his, is quoted by Harpocration in Parrhasius: the said King wrote also of the
Art of painting, as we learn out of the same Harpacration in Polygnotus.
Photius likewise in the choice histories of Sopater, quoteth Juba his second
book of the Art of painting.

Malchus Byzantius has written about the firing of the public library at
Constantinople, and about the Statues that were in a place known by the name
of Augustaeum. See Suidas.

Melanthius, a very renowned Painter, has written about the Art of Painting.
See Laert. lib. iv. in Polemon.

Menaechmus the Statuarie has written about his own Art, says Pliny, lib.
xxxiv, cap. 8. Athenaeus also lib. ii, cap. 24. and lib. xiv, cap. 4. quoteth
Menaechmus his treatise of Artificers.

Menetor of Donaries, is mentioned by Athenaeus, lib. XIII, cap. 7.

Menodotus Samius has written of the things consecrated in the temple of Juno
at Samos: see Athenaeus lib. xiv, cap. 20.

Pamphilus has written of the Art of painting, and of Famous Painters. See
Suidas.

Polemon has written a treatise of Painters to Antigonus, quoted by Athenaeus,
lib. xi, cap. 6. Polemon of Pictures is mentioned by Laertius, lib, vii, in
Chrysippo: he has also written five books of the Donaries offered in the
Castle at Athens; see Strabo, lib. ix. Geogr. as likewise another treatise of
the Pictures that were at Athens, in the porch of the temple of Minerva; see
Harpocration: furthermore has he written a treatise of the Pictures that were
at Sicyon; see Athenaeus, lib. xiii, cap. 2. and this Polemon does seem to be
the same that is so often mentioned by Clemens Alexandrinus in Protrept: and by
Laertius, lib. ii. in Aristippus.

Porphyrius has written of Statues, and Stobaeus does quote something out of
him, cap. xxv. Eclogarum physicarum: but it is thought that this Porphyrius is
the same with Malchus named above.

Prasiteles has written five volumes of the noble works that were in the whole
world. Plin. lib. xxxvi, cap. 5.

Protogenes the Painter left two books of the Art of painting and of Figures:
see Suidas.

Theophanes of the Art of painting is mentioned by Laert. in Aristippus.

Xenocrates the Statuarie made books of his Art, says Pliny, lib. xxxiv,
cap. 8. and again, lib. xxxv, cap. 10. Antigonus and Xenocrates, says he,
have written of Picture.

CHAP. IV.
WE have seen how God and Nature by their example stir our inclinations to
these Arts of imitation; how likewise careful Parents cherishing that
pronenesse perceived in some of their children, put them betimes to good and
trusty Masters: but seeing many forward wits were wont after a sufficient
time of apprentiship, to shake off that respect they did owe unto their
masters, there was also by wise and provident antiquity a very good course
taken to withold such presumptuous perverters of discipline from this
unadvised temeritie by the fear of most severe and strict laws made against
the corrupters of Arts and Sciences: neither was there only such care taken
about needful Sciences, but also about the Arts that were more for recreation
then necessary use. As it cannot be denied that the Arts of tilling the
ground, and building of houses are most useful for our poor and needy life,
so do we find that the true knowledge, and sincere practice of these Arts has
been upholden by most severe laws. Agellius teaches us concerning husbandry,
that the Romans were very careful to maintain it; if any one by
slothfulness, says he Lib. IV. noct. Attic. cap. 12.
, suffered his ground to grow foul and full of weeds, never plowing nor weeding
it; if any one likewise did neglect his vine or tree, he was punishable and
obnoxious unto the censures of such controllers or masters of discipline, as at
Rome were called Censores, who did disfranchise such a careless man, putting
him from his freedom: as for Architecture, it was likewise upholden by the
rigor of Law: in the Noble and great city of Ephesus there was an ancient law
in force, says Vitruvius. In praefatione libri Decimi.
which though it might seem somewhat harsh, yet was it not to be esteemed
unjust: for an Architect, when he undertaketh a publikeworke, agrees upon the
price thereof, and his rate given up, all his goods are engaged to the
Magistrates till the work be finished; that ended, if the whole charge agree
with the rate set down, he is honored with public decrees and dignities; if
it exceed but by one fourth part only, so much is to be added to the former
rate, and to be answered by the public treasury, and the architect is free
from tax or punishment; but if more then one fourth part, above the price
agreed for, be spent in the work, it is exacted and paid out of the goods of
the undertaker.

We do see by these examples how peremptory the ancients were about such
neeedfull Sciences; and yet were they as resolute to preserve the Arts chiefly
intended for the recreation of man. A Musician was put to a fine at Argos,
says Plutarch De Musica.
, for augmenting the number of strings, whereas others before him did content
themselves with seven. The Lacedaemonians also thought it good to banish
Timotheus Milesius out of their City, when he went about to corrupt the Art by
innovation; and as for the very words of a most vehement decree made by the
Lacedaemonians against this same Timotheus, they are very remarkable as
Boethius sets them down lib. I. Musicae, cap. 1. Alexander the Great having
made choice of the poet Choerilus to write his deeds, made withal a contract
with him, that for every good verse he should have a piece of Byzantian golden
coin, and for every bad one he should have a box on the ear: but writing more
bad then good verses, he was at length buffeted to death, as it is reported by
the old Commentator upon Horace his Art. There was at Thebes a law, by the
which Artificers and Painters were bidden to express the forms of images after
the best manner they could: and all such as made them worse, were put to a
fine: see Aelianus var. hist. lib. IV. cap. 4.

2. As it was then a very brave enterprise, and relishing the severity of such
an incorrupt age to secure the Arts by punishing the transgressors; so was it
for all that a greater matter and more suitable to the humanity of the same
times, to prevent all depravations so carefully by good and wholesome laws,
that there should be no need of any punishment. Sloathfull and languishing
idleness, says Valerius Maximus Lib. II. cap. 6. exemplo 3. and 4.
, is at Athens drawn forth out of her lurking holes unto the publik view and
is judged guilty of an ungracious and shameful offense. The same City has
also a most sacred counsel, called Arcopagus, where a very diligent search was
wont to be made what every Athenion did, and how he got his living: thus men
were forced to live honestly, knowing that they were to give a strict account
of their life. See also Aelianus var. hist. lib. IV. cap. 1. and Laeert. lib.
1. in Solon. There was yet another excellent law at Athens, that youths being
now thirteen or fourteen years of age should be brought unto the Arts, and
that after this manner: the instruments of every kind of Art being propounded
publicly, the youths were brought near; and as they did run to one or other
of these instruments with an eager delight, so were they taught that Art whose
instruments they had snatched up: because such things most commonly do succeed
well, to the which our nature leads us; and such things on the contrary do
deceive our hopes, that are undertaken with an unwilling mind, says Gregory
Nazianzene Epistola 63. Alexis commends the Athenians, says Vitruvius In
praefatione libri sexti.
, because where the laws of all other Grecians go about to constrain child
en that they should maintain their old parents, the Athenian laws command
such parents only to be maintained by their children, which had taught their
children good Arts: seeing all things Fortune bestows upon us, are easily
taken away by the same Fortune; but disciplines, being once sunk deep into our
minds, do never fail us to the last gasp. See also Galen in his Exhortation
to the Arts: but Plutarch most of all in the life of Solon, where he teaches
us what moved Solon to make this law. When Solon perceived, says Plutarch,
that the City was more and more filled with a multitude of men that flocked to
the Attike Country by reason of the liberty they enjoyed there, and saw that
the greatest part of the Country was naught and barren, that the seafaring
men also brought nothing in, as having nothing in their Country to give for the
commodities of other Countries, he turned the Athenians to all manner of Arts;
making a law withal, that a son should not be bound to maintain his father
that had not taught him any good Art to live by. Upon this consideration
therefore may we very well conclude, that the Athenians by the force of these
laws have deserved such a commendation as Plutarch gives them; the City of
Athens, says he Bellone an pace clariores fuerint Athenienses.
, has been a bountiful mother and nurce of a great many Arts; for she first
invented some of them, and upon some she bestowed honor, force, and increase:
so is also the Art of Painting very much advanced by this same City. Aristides
In Orat. Panathenaica.
also calls Athens the natural Country or birth place of all good things,
and a schoolmistresse of all Sciences and Arts: and therefore does she not
only excel in Statues, but also in Statuaries.

3. Having now already mentioned the laws established at Argos, Ephesus,
Thebes, and at Athens for the preservation of Arts, we may not forget here an
Egyptian law made to the same purpose; the Egyptians, says Diod. Siculus
Lib. I. Biblioth.
, have most of all polished all manner of workmanship, bringing it to some
perfection: for a workman among them is fearfully punished, if he undertake
any charge in the Commonwealth, or else if he meddle with any trade but his
own; seeing no Artificer may usurp any public office in Egypt, nor profess
any trade that is not appointed him by the law and delivered by his Parents;
least by chance a malicious envy of Masters, the occupation of civil
affairs, or any other occasion should hinder him in the Art he is to exercise.
Dicaearchus Apud scholiastem Apollonii Rhodii, ad versu^ 272 libri IV. Argonaut.
teaches us that Sesonchosis King of Egypt made this law, that no body
should forsake his Fathers art; as if that were a beginning of an unsatiable
covetousness. See Isocrates his praise of Busiris, for he speaks there
somewhat more at large of this same Egyptian law.

Herodotus Lib. VI. hist.
says that the Lacedaemonians also have approved of this law, following in
this point the custom of the Egyptians. Strabo Lib. XV. Geograph.
likewise does attribute this same custom unto the Indians: and again in
another place Lib. XVI. Geograph.
to the Arabians. As for the Egyptians, we may very well judge with Diodorus,
that by the means of this law they have attained to such a perfection of Art
as shall be related in the third Chapter of our Third Book. Neither is it
possible but such Artificers must needs excel, that do not admit any care but
one. Hence is it that Plato Lib. IX. de Legib.
sends away out of his City all such Artificers as busy themselves with two
several Arts. It is better to do one thing excellently, says the younger
Pliny Lib. IX. Epist. 29.
, then do many things meanly. Aesopus said, as it is reported by Stobaeus
Sermon de Republica.
, that it is then like to go ill with all, when all men shall study all
things. Neither is it possible, says Quintilian Orat. instit. lib. x. cap. 3.
, that our whole mind should busy it self with many things at once; for
whenever it does but look back, it cease to mark what it beheld before.

CHAP. V.
AS now the fear of severe laws kept them in awe, that went rashly about to
leave the wholesome precepts of their good Masters; so on the contrary, good
natures that would not swerve presumptuously aside from the received
instructions, were mightily incensed by emulation to follow them constantly
that sped well in this same way. The love of emulation is stronger then the
fear of punishment threatened by laws, says Tacitus Lib. III. Annal. c. 55.
. Virtue does naturally affect glory, and studieth ever to out-goe his
forerunners, says Seneca Lib. III. de Benef. c. 36.
. A horse does then best of all run his race, says Ovid Lib. III. de Art.
, when he is in the company of other horses which he may leave behind him or
follow. It was bravely said of Scipio Africanus, I am sure, says he Apud
Livium li. xxviii. ab v. c.
, that every magnanimous spirit does not compare himself only with them that
are now at this present alive, but also with the famous men of all ages. It
being therefore manifest enough that the greatest wits are ever by the pricks
of emulation driven forward to greater matters, it appears likewise that it
is always a certain mark of a most base and dull spirit not to be stirred up
to emulation by the earnestness of so many competitors as do strive to
attain to the same perfection of Art: so is it also most commonly seen, that
such as do strive with no body, deceive themselves with too much love of their
own works; and whilst they compare themselves only with themselves, it is
unpossible but they must needs fall into a foolish liking and a most vain
admiration of what they have done. He must needs attribute too much unto
himself, says Quintilian Lib. I. orat. instit. cap. 2.
, that does compare himself with no body. We stand therefore in need of
Emulation, and that not a vulgar one; Do thou desire the glory of
swiftness? says Martial Lib. XII. Epigram. 36.
, study to go beyond the tiger and the light Ostrich. It is no glory at all
to outrun asses.

2. Tullie gives us a very good lesson; it is meet, says he Circa initium
libri de Perfecto oratore.
, that all such as do long with a fervent desire after great matters, should
try all: and if any one has not the ready help of his own nature, if he lack
the force of a piercing wit, if he think himself but slenderly furnished with
the disciplines of great Arts, let him for all that hold the best course he
may; seeing it is honorable enough that they which do strive for the first
place, should be seen in the second or third: neither have workmen instantly
withdrawn themselves from the Arts they did profess, because they could not
imitate the beauty of that Venus at Coos, or of that Jalysus we saw sometimes
at Rhodes; neither has the image of Jupiter Olympius, or the statue of
Doryphorus amazed them so much, as that they should not try what they could
perform, and how far they might go: yea there has rather been such a
multitude of them, and every one has deserved so much praise in his kind,
that the best of their works causing admiration, the meaner nevertheless have
obtained approbation. See Columella in the preface of his first Book of
Husbandry, where he makes a large discourse upon these very words of Cicero.
But most of all do the words of Velleius Paterculus demand our attention: for
after he has expressed his admiration, that so many brave wits and Artificers
within a small compass of time should at once rise and fall, he staggereth at
it, not knowing what reason to give of so sudden an increase and decrease of
Arts, till at length he contenteth himself with this conjecture: Emulation,
says he Sub finem libri primi hist.
, is a nource of wits: and whilst our imitation is provoked sometimes by
envy, sometimes by admiration, it falls out that the thing earnestly sought
after, is quickly brought to some height of perfection: but then is it a very
hard matter that any thing should continue long in that perfection; seeing
naturally, what cannot go forward, goes backward: and as at the first we are
very well disposed, to overtake them that run before us; so, when we do
despair to go beyond them or else to keep an even pace with them, our
earnestness together with our hope grows cold, and cease to follow what it
cannot overtake: leaving therefore the whole matter, as being aforehand seized
upon by others, we seek a new one; and passing by that, wherein we cannot
excel, we do look about for something to work upon: whereupon it follows
that a frequent and wavering change turns to be the greatest hindrance of
perfection.

3. Although now the ancient Artificers were questionless by the heat of
Imitation and by the unsufferable prickings of Emulation forcibly driven to a
more earnest and accurat study of Art, yet do we not think that these Arts
have been only advanced by the mutual Emulation there was betwixt the
Artificers themselves, but we do hold that the great fame of many most eloquent
men in those times has also stirred up the lively spirits of the Artificers,
not suffering them to rest till they had wrought something that might deserve
the like fame. This may be gathered out of the words of Plutarch alleged
before Lib. I. c. 4. 2.
: so has it also been observed in latter times that the ages excelling in
eloquence, have also excelled in these Arts. All manner of sciences and
eloquence have been revived in Germany, says Felix Faber Lib. I. historiae
Suevoru^, cap. 8.
, and consequently all kind of witty Arts, as Painting and Carving: for these
Arts do love one another wonderful well: Picture does require wit, Eloquence
also does demand wit; not an ordinary one, but a high and profound wit. It is a
wonderful thing, that picture has ever flourished when eloquence did bear a
great sway; as the times of Demosthenes and Cicero teach us: but eloquence
falling, picture also could not stand any longer.

CHAP. VI.
GOod natures then that were loath to shame their good Masters, did with all
care and diligence emulate the best works of old renowned Artificers, taking
special notice of that same simplicity of Art so much commended in ancient
works. Arts are advanced, not so much by them that dare make a great show of
Art, but rather by them that know how to find out what there is in every Art,
says Isocrates Contra Sophist as.
. Adorn any thing purely and soberly, says Agellius Noct. Attic. lib. VII.
cap. 14,
, and it shall grow better and better; daube it over on the contrary with the
painting color of women, and it shall resemble a jugglers delusion: neither
does any thing mar and falsify the integrity of Art so much, as the
astonished persuasion of them that conceive nothing to be fair and
praiseworthy, but what is costly and far remote from the simplicity of the
Ancients. Such is always the condition of our minds, that the works begun
with necessary things, end most commonly with superfluous, says Pliny Not.
hist. lib. xxvi. cap. 4.
. Apelles, Echion, Melanthius, Nicomachus, most famous Painters, says the same
Pliny Lib. xxxv. cap. 7.
, have made these immortal works with four colors only; and yet was every
one of their works sold by it self for the wealth of whole Cities. Now on the
contrary is there never a noble picture made, though purple settleth it self
upon our walls, though India brings in the mud of her rivers, as also the
corrupt blood of Dragons and Elephants: see Pliny himself, for the sets
down in the same place the particular names of these four colors used by
them. It will not be amiss to expound, says Vitruvius Lib. VII. cap. 1.
, why the integrity of workmanship is now adays put down by false and
adulterate ways; for what laborious and industrious antiquity did study to
have commended for the Art, the same do our Artificers obtain by the fine
show of rare colors; and the cost bestowed upon the work by the patron of the
work, brings to pass, that the authority ancient works drew out of the
subtlety of the Artificer, is not so much as desired. Who was there among the
ancients but he did use vermilian sparingly, and even after the manner of a
medicament? but now are there every where whole walls daubed over with it, as
also with Chrysocolle, Ostrum, Armenium: which things, when they are used in
painting, draw the eyes by their glistering brightness, though they be never
placed by any art: and because they are very chargeable and costly, the law
has excepted them, that namely the patron of the work should exhibit and
provide them, not the Artificer. There was also another wanton device of
chargeable Art, tending to the undoing of this same simplicity we speak of,
yea causing the uttermost ruin of the whole Art it self. Picture, an Art
noble in times past, says Pliny Lib. xxxv. not. hist. cap. 1.
, is now altogether thrust out by marble and gold: not only that whole walls
are covered with it, but that marble also is scraped and filed for to make
party-colored crusts representing several things and beasts: the lower
squares of pillars have lost their estimation they were in; no more are whole
spaces of hills that lie hid in our privy chambers liked of: we have begun to
paint stones also: this was found out in the times of Claudius his government:
as it was first instituted in Nero his times to vary the unity of a stone by
inserting such spots into the crust as were not by nature: that namely the
Numidian stone might be filled with ovalls, and the Synnadian should seem to
be distinguished with purple; even as waiward delicacies would have them grow.

2. The ancient Painters of better sort, did constantly follow this same study
of simplicity; neither did they spare those that durst show themselves
addicted to an effeminately remiss and a most corrupt kind of sumptuous
workmanship: so was it that Apelles, as Lib. II. Paedagog. cap. 12.
Clemens Alexandrinus reports, seeing one of his scholars busy with the
picture of Helen, the which was afterward named the golden Helen, said unto
the youth, Because you knew not how to paint her fair, you have made her rich.
Although great Masters in old times did labor mightily to recall such
depraving of Art to the uncorruptnesse of severe judgments, yet could they not
prevail so much, but that the sophisticated Art, abounding with many sweet
vices, drew still the eyes and minds of unadvised spectators; and so were
afterward the greatest part of the Artificers by a heartlesse luskishnesse
persuaded to soften such things as else would have been full of strength, yea
they did not stick to change the manly countenance of Art by an affectation of
a seeming grace; little regarding what strength there was in their works, if
they were but smoothly trim and well liked of by the vulgar sort. There is a
wonderful great difference between pure neatness and curious affectation,
says Plutarch Lib. VI. Sympos. problem. 7.
. Things more honest are also more specious in a body that does not fit it
self for luxury and lust, says Quintilian Lib. XII. cap. 10.
. So says also the same Author in another place Lib. V. cap. 12.
, When I look upon Nature it self, any man is fairer, in my opinion, then an
Bunuch: so cannot Providence disdain her own work so much, as to suffer
debilitie to be reckoned among the best inventions; neither can I think that
any thing is made fairer by cutting, which if it were brought forth so, should
be counted a monster. Let lust therefore glory in the counterfeit
effeminatenesse of the maimed sex; yet shall not evil customs get so much
mastership, as to make it good also, what they have made precious.

CHAP. VII.
COnstant Emulators in the mean time, expressing prosperously the said
simplicity of the ancient Art, felt their minds withal filled with the sweet
contentment of what they did: wondering therefore at the strange effects of
such plain workmanship, they could not choose but chearefully pursue the same
way of Art. It is more delightful to an Artificer, says Seneca Epistola 9.
, to paint, then to have done painting: our solicitude, as long as she
busieth her self about the work, takes a singular great pleasure in the
occupation it self: he is nothing near so much delighted, that has already
accomplished the work: for he does now enjoy the fruit of his Art; whereas
before, whilst he did paint, he enjoyed the Art it self. The youthful years
of our children are more beneficial and profitable, but their infancy for all
that is a great deal sweeter. Plutarch gives us a lively example of the
pleasure a working Artificer enjoys; as many as love to paint, says he
Inlibello cui titulus, Non p^sse suaviter vivi secu^dum Epicurum.
, are so taken with the goodly show of their works in hand, that Nicias, when
he made a picture famous by the name Necya, did often ask his servants whether
he had dined? His mind forsooth fed upon the study of his work, finding
greater dainties in that contemplation, then in any other banquet whatsoever. I
have seen Painters do their work, says Libanius Declamat. VI.
, singing. Neither does it deserve any admiration that they should work with
so much ease, seeing the workman is still refreshed and encouraged by the
spirit infused into him by an unexpected success, bestirring himself as if
the things themselves and not the images were a-doing: there is every where
nothing but life and motion; so are also these new upgrowing things entertained
with a great deal of favor and solicitude, says Quintilian Lib. X. c. 1.
. This same favor also together with the conceived hope conducing to the
fertility of our wit, says Lucan. carm. ad Pisonem.

2. As many then as do wonder at and deride the indefatigable and vehement
fervencie great wits do use about the works of art, have never loved any
thing worth study and care; neither have they so much as understood that our
better and more divine part, if it be not altogether base and degenerate, is
nourished or rather feasted with honest and delectable labors, even from our
tender childhood. We do see therefore how little children themselves cannot
rest, says Tullie Lib. V. de Finibus bon. and malorum.
, and as they grow more in years, they love so well to be always in action,
that they can hardly be beaten from laborious and toilesome plays: so does
also this desire of doing always something, still increase with their ages. It
is then evident that we are borne to do always something: see also Seneca,
epist. 39.

3. And in good truth, what shall we say to this? can there be any so great
contentment in the possession of a vast and endless estate, in the enjoying of
all kind of pleasures and delights, as to see men of great places and
authority, that live in great abundance and plenty, and do not want the good
will of the world, assemble themselves together and make a ring about the
astonished Artificer? who being thus graced by most eminent persons, how do all
other men upon any occasion accompany him? What show does he make in public
places? what veneration does he find in the assemblies of men of good note?
how sensible is he of the joys that do tickle his heart when he sees the
eyes of all men with a silent admiration fixed upon him alone? when he
perceives that his name is one of the first names parents acquaint their
children with? when he finds that the unlearned and careless multitude has
got his name, and tells it one to another at his going by? country people
also and strangers having heard of him in the places of their abode, as soon
as they come to Town, enquire for him first of all, desirous to see the face
of him they heard so much of: any wit almost may be enflamed, says Ovid Lib.
III. de Ponto, Eleg. 4.
, by the applause and cheerful favor of the people.

4. But why should I reckon up these ordinary joys, that lie open also to the
eyes of ignorant men, seeing there are secret delights of greater moment, felt
and known by none but the Artificer himself? for when he publishes an
accurat and well be labored work, the sound and solid joy conceived out of
the absoluteness of the work has as well a certain weight and durable
constancy, as the work it self; when he brings on the contrary a sudden and
half polished work to the view of the world, the anguish and perplexity of
his timorous mind does commend the good success the more unto him, so that he
does most heartily embrace the pleasure of his fortunate boldness. And how is
it possible, I pray you, that such an Artificer should not think himself a
most happy man, which upon a just affiance of his virtues knows himself to
be lifted up above the reach of envy, where he stands secure of his fame;
enjoying in this life, as if he were now already consecrated unto eternity,
the veneration that is like to follow him after his death: it is a most
comfortable thing to have a fore-feeling of what we hope to attain unto, says
the younger Pliny Lib. IV. ep. 15.
: so says also Latinus Pacatus, the flitting pleasure of sudden successes,
says he Panegyr. Theodosio Aug. dicto.
, as it takes us, so does it leave us: it is a longer felicity when we are
secure of what we expect: neither have some great Masters in old times
dedicated their best works at Delphis in the temple of Apollo with any other
intent, but that they should in their life time preoccupie a lively feeling of
an everlasting name. Those that have hung up unto the Gods great donaries,
says Libanius In Antiochico.
, pass the rest of their time with a great deal of pleasantness, as having
now in their daily conversation some fine thing of their own to relate: yea if
they had many other things to say that might make them famous, yet would they
go by all the rest, and boast most confidently that they do not fear to be
buried in oblivion, seeing their work remains in the finest place under the
Sun: neither does this confidence deceive them; for whosoever does show the
study of his mind in places of great resort, procures unto himself an
everlasting glory: such is, in my opinion, the case of those Painters, who
have consecrated the wisdom of their hands at Delphis.

CHAP. VIII.
AS then the sweetness they felt in a happy expressing of that ancient
simplicity made them still to advance these Arts with an undefatigable study,
so was likewise the manifold and every where obvious use of these Arts a great
cause of their augmentation; seeing men love always to take the greatest
pains about such Arts and Sciences, as are in greatest request: the
provocations of vices have also augmented the Art: it has been pleasing to
engrave wanton lusts upon the cups, and to drink in ribauldrie abominations,
says Pliny In prooemio libri xxxiii.
. Daedalus made a wooden Cow, to accomplish the shameful desire of Pasiphae
withal; see Higynus Fabuia 40.
. But we are resolved to insist only upon more honest causes: and certainly,
all mankind has been very much wronged by them, that would go and fetch
these prodigious ministeries of base lust from so noble Arts; even as we have
good reason to detest their importunate wits, that have turned the humanity of
such gentle Arts to the instruments of cruelty. Medea went about to overthrow
Pelias by a hollow image of Diana; see Diadorus Siculus lib. IV. Biblioth.
Perilaus his brazen bull is known by the Epistle Phalaris wrote to the
Athenians concerning Perilaus his execution. Agathocles his litter is mentioned
by Diod. Siculus lib. xx. Nabis the tyrant, his Apega is described by Polybius
lib. xviii. Ovid In Ibin, verse. 569.
remembers a horse made of maple tree, wherein the throat of miserable men was
broke. The Carthaginians had a brazen statue of Saturn, stretching forth his
hands toward the ground after such a manner, that the babe offered him for
sacrifice might role down into the flaming fire that was underneath; see Diod.
Siculus lib. xx. Some of the French have huge images, whose great limbs made
of twigges they do fill with men that are to be burned alive; see Caesar lib.
VI. de bello Gall. cap. 16. as also Tullie pro Manio Fonteio, and Strabo lib.
IV. Geogr. There was in a cave at Rome a wonderful great dragon made by
mechanical art, carrying a sword in his mouth, with eyes of precious stones
fearfully glistering: unto this dragon there was yearly offered a sacrifice of
devoted Virgins handsomely trimmed up with flowers: and when these Virgins,
being ignorant of the danger, meant to go down to offer their gifts, as soon
as they did but touch that step of the ladder at which the dragon by a
diabolical art did hang, their innocent blood was instantly shed by the sword
they met withal. A certain monk at length, which for his merits was well
known unto Stilico, destroyed him after this manner: trying every step at his
going down, he found out the divelish deceit; and warily shunning that same
false step, he came so near as to cut the dragon in pieces; showing here also
that they are no Gods which are made by the hand of man: see D. Prosper. part
III. de Promiss. and praedictionib. Dei, promiss. 38. Ungodly Kings and Princes
also were wont to try the minds of the true worshippers of God, by exposing
their own statues and the statues of other false Gods publicly to be adored;
and that with no other intent, but that the servants of the living God might be
found out and destroyed: so we read that Nabuchodonosor, puffed up by
prosperity, made an exceeding great golden statue, to be adored of all them
that had their minds depraved by flattery, none but Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego were found to have abstained from that profane office, wherefore they
were by the Kings command immediately bound and cast into the fiery furnace:
see the prophecy of Daniel cap. 3. see Plinius junior lib. x. epist. 97. and
98. Licinnius has even after the same manner gone about to exercise cruelty
upon Auxentius: see Suidas where he speaks of Auxentius. Let us now leave the
examples of such a beastly fierceness, seeing they do not deserve to be
related among the causes of the increase of Art; as on the contrary we may very
well judge that they have deserved a great deal better of the whole world, who
studied to advance these Arts by transferring them unto all kind of things
honest or at least not dishonest.

2. But here seems the greatest increase of Art at the first to have been
occasioned by necessity; seeing it is granted that inventions to supply our
wants, are more ancient, then those that serve only to satisfy our pleasure,
says Tullie De Perf. oratore.
. Whatsoever is useful, has his turn before any other thing only
delightful, says Varro Lib. I. de Re rust. cap. 4.
. Man, a sociable creature, not knowing how to speak to men of another
language, nor to them that were absent, or should live a good while after him,
was forced (before the invention of letters and writing) to make use of
certain figures taken from the similitude of diverse beasts, plants, and other
artificial things: and so do we find that the industry of the most ancient
times expressed the inward and secret conceits of any man's mind by the help
of such marks. Diod. Siculus speaking of the Aethiopians, the most ancient of
all Nations in his opinion, their letters, says he, resemble diverse living
creatures, as also extremities of men, and most of all artificers instruments:
for their words are not expressed by the composition of syllables and letters,
but they are under the form and signification of images printed into the
memory of men by use. Corn. Tacitus also speaking of the Egyptians, the
Egyptians did first of all, says he A^^^^. lib, XI, cap. 14.
, set forth the meaning of their mind by figures of living creatures: and the
most ancient monuments of humane memory are as yet seen printed in stones
after such a manner. Necessity did also drive Philomela to express by a woven
picture the grievous case she was in; see Ovid lib. VI. Metam. as also
Ausonius epist. 23. but most of all Achilles Tatius, Philomela, says he Lib.
V. de amorib. Clitophontis and Leucippes.
, found out a silent voice; for she weaveth a long vesture, describing therein
the tragical fact; her hand performs the office of her tongue, and she does
discover unto the eyes of Progne things belonging to her ears, telling her by
the means of a shittle what she has suffered; Progne from the vesture
understands the rape. It seems also that principal men at Rome, upon
consideration of this necessity, persuaded Q. Pedius to practice the Art of
painting. Q. Pedius, says Pliny Lib. xxxv. nature. hist. cap. 4.
, nephew to that consular and triumphall Q. Pedius, who by Caesar the Dictator
was made co-heire with August, being dumb by nature; Messalla the Orator, out
of whose family the boy's grandmother was, did think it fit to have him taught
the Art of painting, August himself being also of that opinion: he died a boy,
having profited very well in the Art. Although spoken, it seems but a slight
matter; yet, being well considered, it is a mighty thing, that Picture
speaks the language of all men; whereas among several Nations there is such
a wonderful diversity of speaking, that a forrainer does hardly seem a man
unto them that are of another Country.

3. The usual way of Sciences gives us also an evident proof of the
necessity of these Arts; seeing it is practiced almost in all Arts and
Sciences, that the cleerest grounds an Artist is able to propound, are yet
illustrated and cleared by Picture: how often chances it in the natural
science that, when words come short, a little picture brings us to the
knowledge of beasts, birds, fishes, and all sorts of vermin we never saw
before? this is very often confessed by Aelian Lib. XV. de Animalib. and alibi.
in his History of beasts: neither may we doubt but that all mankind should
be overwhelmed with a thicker mist of ignorance then it is now, if this
generous Art did not sometimes step in and set forth in a small image what many
words cannot describe: so do likewise all Arts of war and peace lack the
aid of Picture. A Tactike shall never know how to set his men in array, unless
he do first try the case by design or delineation: so do we read that
Penelope Apud Ovidium, in epist. Heroid.
does attribute this same skill to the ancient Worthies, saying that they being
returned home from the Trojan war, did paint in their feasts the whole
besieged City and all the manner of war with a little wine upon the board.
Likewise does the same Author elsewhere Lib. II. de Art.
mention that Aeneas at the request of Calypso did paint the siege of Troy with
all the circumstances that might be observed in such a siege. Vegetius Lib. II.
de Re militari, cap. 11.
at length when he reckons up all such kind of workmen as are of necessity
to be added to every legion, places Painters among the rest of these
Artificers that might not be spared in an Army. An Architect also had need to
have some skill in drawing, that he may the easier pourtray in his painted
platformes any fashion of work his mind puts him upon, says Vitruvius,
lib. I. Architect. cap. 1. Although a cunning Architect must not only know how
to delineate the work he takes in hand, but he must know also, if need be,
how to work out the pattern of his intended work in wax or clay. Do ye not
see the Architects, says Greg. Nyssenus Orat. III. in Resurr. Christi.
, how they do work out the patterns of huge and mighty buildings in a little
wax, and how the proportion of so small an example keeps the same force in a
greater structure? In many other Arts we do find the selfsame necessity.
Geometry and Astrology go far beyond Apelles and Polycletus; for they do
counterfeit every thing so lively, as if the Labyrinth-maker Daedalus had
contrived them, says Martianus Capella Lib. VI. de Philol. and Mercurii
nuptiis.
. Archimedes Siculus did cunningly make the similitude and figure of the world
in hollow brass, painting also the celestial signs on that same brass,
says Lactantius De origin erroris, ca. 5.
. The Greek Authors of Physic, Cratevas, Dionysius, Metrodorus, have after a
most pleasant way painted the shapes of herbs, writing their effects
underneath, says Pliny Lib. xxv. cap. 2.
. Many sorts of birds were painted in the Hetrurian discipline, says the same
Pliny Lib. X. cap. 15.
. Such as wrote the lives of great and famous men, were wont also to join
their painted images unto the relation made of them; that posterity might as
well view the picture of their bodies as of their minds. T. Pomponius Atticus
expressed in verse who they were among the Romans that did excel in honor
and great deeds, so that their deeds and honors are described under every one
his image with no more but four or five verses, says Corn. Nepos In vita
Attici.
. Varro likewise studied to extend the fame of illustrious men after the same
manner. Pliny speaks of them both at once; that the love of images has been
much in request, says he Lib. xxxv, cap. 2.
, is witnessed by Atticus, that friend of Cicero, seeing he published a volume
of images: it is witnessed also by M. Varro, who by a most bountiful invention
inserted into the fertility of his volumes not the names only, but in some
manner the images also of seven hundred illustrious Worthies; not suffering
their shapes to perish, nor age to prevail against men; deserving the envy of
the Gods themselves by the invention of such a gift; since he did not only
bestow immortality upon them, but sent them also abroad into all Countries,
that they might be present every where and carried about. The interpreters also
of sacred histories are likewise now and then forced to make use of these Arts;
the picture of the tabernacle, of the temple of God, made after the likeness
of heaven, says Cassiodorus De Divinis lectionib. c. 5.
, as it was cunningly drawn in his proper lineaments, has been fitted by me
in the Latin pandects after a most competent manner. The same Author speaks
also of painted patterns for Book-binders; I have expressed for the
Book-binders, says he Ibidem, cap. 30.
, several ways of bindings, painted all in one volume; to the end a scholar
might choose such a fashion of covering as he shall like best. The most useful
study of Geographie at length, without some help of Picture, will be nothing
else but a temerarie error of our wandering mind; and every one of us must say
with Propertius Lib. IV. Eleg. 3.
, I am compelled to learn the painted worlds out of a map. The poet says
very well, I am compelled, seeing the most industrious study of perusing all
the laborious commentaries of Geographers can give us but a confused and
obscure view of what one painted sheet of paper propounds unto our eyes most
clearly. And as the study of Geography is found to be upholden by Picture, so
must travelers also that would have their travels known, not be altogether
ignorant in this Art; such as have traveled by sea and by land, says
Macrobius Saturnal. lib. VII, cap. 2.
, rejoice when they are asked about the situation of an unknown Country, or
about one or other bay of the sea; they do answer therefore most willingly,
describing the places sometimes with words, sometimes with a stick; esteeming
it no small glory to represent to the eyes of others what they themselves have
seen. It would be an easy matter to show here the like use of Picture in many
other Sciences, if we did not hasten to greater benefits famous Generals have
enjoyed by the means of these Arts both in war and peace.

4. Michal meaning to save her husband David from the persecution of her father
Saul, fained him to be sick, having muffled up in the bed an image in stead of
her husband David, who had leisure enough to get away whilst the Kings
messengers were so deceived: see 1 Samuel xix. 13. The corpse of Alexander the
Great did lie a great while unburied, the Princes quarrelling most eagerly
about the succession to the crown; neither would they in haste have minded any
such thing, if Aristander had not foretold them as by a prophetical
inspiration, that the Country which should receive the body of so fortunate a
King, should have no need to fear any invasion; whereupon every one strove to
enterre the Royal corpse in the Country where his government chanced to be.
But when Perdiccas perceived that Ptolmaeus having prevented him made all
possible haste to bring the Kings dead body into Egypt, he made likewise
after him with an armed force, and a great deal of blood would have been
spilled that day between them two, if Ptolemaeus had not abused Perdiccas
cunningly, by letting him snatch away an image of Alexander his body for the
body it self: see Aelianus var. hist. lib. XII, cap. ultimo. The stratagem of
the Troian-horse needs not be related; Virgil and other authors being full of
it. Ctesias Cnidius reports in his Persian histories Apud Photium.
that Cyrus assaulting the city Sardis, by the advice of Oehares filled the
ground round about with wooden images of Persians, and that the townsmen
frighted with such a multitude of enemies, yielded the city: see also Theon
sophista progymn. cap. XI. Jul. Frontinus lib. III. Stratag. cap. 8. Tzetzes
Chiliad. I, hist. 1. Such another stratagem has been used by Semiramis: see
Diod. Siculus lib. II. as also Tzetzes Chil. XII, hist. 452. Spartaous did
likewise by the same means escape his enemies that had beset him on every side:
see Frontinus lib. I. Stratag. cap. 5. The Lacedaemonians together with their
confederates having gathered an Army of forty thousand men, made an invasion
into the Country of the Thebanes. Epaminondas perceiving that the Thebanes were
much frighted with such a multitude, would not lead them forth to meet the
enemy before he had lessened their fear and filled them with a most resolute
courage. There was at Thebes an image of Pallas holding a pike in the right
hand, and a shield down at the knees: this image he caused to be altered in
the night time, and opened in the morning about the time of his setting forth
all the churches that were in the City, wishing his Countrymen to pray to the
Gods for good success: but they, having found the Goddess her posture quite
altered from what it was before, were much amazed, as if the Goddess did
stretch forth her weapons against the enemies; whereupon Epaminondas bid them
be of good cheer, since the Goddess showed herself ready to meet the
enemies. This plot of his did prevail so much with the Thebanes, that they had
the better of the day. Polyaenus lib. II. Stratagematum. L. Sylla plotting how
to make his Soldiers more forward to fight, made a show as if the Gods did
foretell him things to come; and at length in the sight of his Army, that was
now ready for the battle, he brought forth a little image which he had taken
away from Delphis, beseeching it to hasten the promised victory: see Frontinus
Stratag. lib. I, cap. 145. Valor. Maximus lib. I, cap. 2. exemplo 3. Plutarch
In Sylla.
adds that this image used by Sylla was a golden image of Apollo. Theagenes
also intending to go any whither, was wont to consult an image of Hecate,
which he had ever about him: see Suidas. Jupiter recalled Juno from an intended
divorcement by the means of a statue: see Pausanias lib. IX. Amasis abolished
the unnatural custom of humane sacrifices, used at Heliopolis, a city of
Egypt; commanding there should be made three images of wax, in the place of
three men that were to be offered unto Juno: see Porphyrius lib. II. de
Abstinentia: so does Servius say very well to this purpose: We must know, says
he Ad versum 116. Secundi Aeneid.
, that things fained in sacrifices are taken for true things: wherefore, when a
sacrifice is to be made of such creatures as are hard to come by, they are made
of paste or wax, and are taken for true ones. The Egyptians did contemn
their King Amasis at the first beginnings of his government, because he was but
of an ignoble and mean parentage; till he made them by a fine way remember the
veneration due to that height of glory he was come to. There was among the
royal housholdstuffe a golden basen wherein the King his feet were daily
washed, as also the feet of them that sat with him at meat: breaking therefore
this basen, he turned it into an image, and set it up to be adored publicly:
and when he was afterward informed that the Egyptians did worship it most
religiously, he told them that image was made out of the basen in which they
were wont to wash their feet, to vomit, and to make water in; wishing them
withal, to esteem of him accordingly; saying that it was true, he had been
one of the common sort, nothing differing from the sordid multitude, but that
he had now very good reason to look for that dreadful veneration Kings have
in the hearts of all them that are touched with a lively feeling of their power
and might: see Herodotus in Euterpe. The Priest of Canopus confuted with a
pretty device the great boastings the Chaldeans made of their much honored
God: for when they went braggingly about to try the strength of other Gods
with the force of the all-devouring fire worshipped by them, there met them
among the rest a Priest of Canopus, who having taken an earthen water-pot full
of holes, filled it with water, the holes being first stopped up with wax;
having afterward fitted this deceitful water-pot with a head and other limbs
taken from another statue, and having colored all alike, he quickly made an
end of their vauntings; for in this conflict of Gods, whereas the Chaldeans did
think that this statue should be consumed by the fire as others had been, it
fell out otherwise; for the wax melting, let out the water; and so was the
Chaldean God most ridiculously put out: see Cedrenus, and Suidas, where he
speaks of Canopus. Annibal, after that the Romans had vanquished Antiochus,
fled to the Gortinians in Crete, to consider there which way he might best
secure himself: but the most wary man perceived instantly that he was there in
very great danger, by reason of the Cretensians avarice, unless he could find
out some sudden shift; knowing full well that it was noised abroad how he had a
great sum of money about him. He filled therefore a great many pots with
lead, laying so much gold on the top as might cover the lead: then did he put
these pots in the temple of Diana, the Gortynians being by, making a show as if
he did put them in trust with all he had. After he had thus gulled the
Gortynians, he filled the brazen statues he had about him with his money,
throwing them carelessly down in public rooms of his lodging: the Gortynians
in the mean time do watch the temple with very great care; not so much for
fear of others, as of Annibal himself, least he should privily convay away
something: but Annibal having deceived the Gortynians, and saved all his wealth
by such a crafty subtlety, got from thence to King Prusias in Pontus: see
Corn. Nepos in Hannibal his life. When Alcibiades meant to take great matters
in hand, and saw that many things could not be effected without the help of a
trusty friend that should be privy to all his plots, he tried his friends out
of whom hemeant to make his choice after this manner. Having laid a statue made
after the likeness of a dead man in the darkness of an obscure corner, he
brought in his friends one by one, showing them, with a great deal of horror
and fear the man whom he pretended to have been murdered by himself, craving
also silence and help: but when every one drew back, fearing to meddle with so
dangerous a matter, Callias alone readily and faithfully undertook the
society of the danger his friend would put him to; and hence was it that
Alcibiades afterward made most use of Callias, as of a most trusty inward
friend: see Polyaenus lib. I. Stratagem. There is good cause also why among the
manifold use of Statues the wooden horses Vegetius speaks of should be
mentioned here: not the freshwater soldiers only, says he Lib. I. de Re
militari, cap. 18.
, but the stipendiarie also were strictly enjoined to practice the vaulting
art: which custom, although now with some dissimulation, is come down to this
present age. Wooden horses were put under the roof, when it was winter; in
the open field, when it was summer: and young men were compelled to get upon
them, first unarmed, till they were used to it; and afterward, in their full
armor: yea they went about it so carefully, that they did get up and down
indifferently at the right or left side, holding also drawn swords or long
spears in their hands: no wonder then that they should do it in the tumult of
a battle so readily, who did practice it in the quietness of peace so
studiously. The Persians did not only use their horses to the tingling sound
of glattering armor, and to the hoarse humming noise of an armed multitude;
but they threw also at the feet of their gallopping horses the images of dead
men stuffed with chafe, least they should lose the use of their horses, if in
the heat of the fight they should start aside, afrighted at those that lie
slain upon the ground: see Aelianus de Animalib. lib. XVI, cap. 25. The
Macedonian King Perseus preparing himself against the Romans, was informed
that both Libya and their late victory over Antiochus had furnished them with
elephants: least therefore such a huge beast should fright the horses at the
first sight, he gave order that some cunning workmen should make wooden images
resembling elephants in shape and color, that likewise a man should get upon
this wooden frame and sound the trumpet thorough his snout, in imitation of
their loud and dreadful braying: the horses therefore having often seen the
sight and heard the noise, were taught by this means to contemn the Elephants.
Polyaenus lib. IV. Stratag. But among so many several uses of Statues, the
inaugurated Statues may not be forgotten; which being set up by skillful
enchaunters in some unaccessible chauncell of the temple, or else secretly
dug in the ground, were thought to appease the wrath of the Gods, and to
protect the Country from hostile invasions: see Photius in Excerptis ex hist.
Olympiodori. Such a one seems that same Talus to have been, mentioned by
Apollonius Rhodius Lib. IV. Argonant. ^. 1638.
, and many other Authors. Asius the Philosopher also made an image of Pallas by
a certain observation of Astronomicall influences, tying the destinies of Troy
to the preservation or loss of that Palladium: see Tzetzes in Lycophronis
Cassandram. But of this, God willing, shall we speak more at large in our
Catalogue of Artificers. If any one in the mean time desire to know something
more concerning the inaugurated statues, which now adays by them that are
curious of such things are called Talisman, let him read the sixth Chapter of
Gafarellus his Curiosities unheard.

5. What an endless labor it would be, to reckon up the several sorts of
statues and Images made both for use and ornament, not to allege many authors,
may be known out of Cassiodorus alone. The Tuscanes are said to have first
found out statues in Italy, says he, Variarum, lib. VII. 15.
and Posterity having embraced this invention of theirs, has very near filled
up the city with a number of people equal unto them that were begotten by
Nature. As therefore it might seem a most temerarie unadvisednesse, if I
should undertake to mention all that ancient authors relate of the works of
statuary and picture; so is it more agreeable with our mean wit, and otherwise
employed industry, to promise but a little more than we have said already: not
mentioning the majestical ornaments of Churches, of market places, and public
galleries, seeing it is better to say nothing at all of them, than to lessen
their deserved admiration, by a dry and homely expression. Insisting therefore
only upon some other examples of the usefulness of these arts, it may not
seem amiss to think, that many of the ancients perchance have studied to
fill public and private places with all kind of rare pictures and statues,
for the same reason for which the Lacedaemonians (otherwise a blunt and course
people) made much of them. For being a warrelike Nation, and knowing
well-shaped proper bodies to be most fit for war, they were also most desirous
to beget handsome children, representing unto their great bellied wives, the
images of Apollo and Bacchus, the fairest among the gods; as also the pictures
of Castor and Pollux, Nireus, Narcissus, Hiacynthus, young men of perfect
beauty. Appianus in his first book of Hunting describes this custom of
theirs: adding withal, That such as bred horse-colts and pigeons, did most
commonly use some such like means to have their horse-colts and Pigeons
speckled and painted after their own fantasy. The practice of the Patriarch
Jacob agrees very well with this. See Genes. xxx. and B. Hieronymus his
Questions upon Genesis. The shapes of bodies brought forth, says Pliny, Lib.
VII. Not. hist. cap. 12.
are reputed to be suitable to the minds of the Parents, in which many casual
things bear a great sway; things seen, heard, remembered, fantasies also
running in the mind at the very instant of conception: a thought likewise
running in the mind of either of both the Parents, is conceived either to give
the whole shape to the child, or else to mix it. Whence it is that more
differences are in man, than in any other creature whatsoever; seeing the
nimblenesse of his thoughts, the swiftness of his mind, and the variety of
his wit, do imprint in him images of many and several fashions: whereas all
other creatures have unmovable minds, and in their own kind alike.

Heliodorus groundeth the whole argument of his Aethiopicall history upon such
an accident, as is to be seen in his fourth and tenth book. Saint Austen
Retractat. Lib. II. cap. 62.
likewise relates out of Soranus, That a certain deformed King of Cyprus was
wont to set before his wife when he meant to know her, a most fair picture;
hoping to effect by this means, that she should bring him forth fair
children. Galen also in his treatise de There. ad Pis. alleges such another
example. But seeing this contemplation does more properly belong to Hippocrates
his scholars, it is time forus to leave it, and to mention other uses that
have bin made of these Arts.

6. Apelles being carried by tempest into Egypt, during the reign of that
Ptolome that could never abide him in Alexanders Court, was brought into danger
of his life, but for the help of this Art. For coming to supper to the King,
deceived by one suborned by some spightfull enemy, who had invited him
disguised in the habit of those to whom that office belonged, the King was much
insenced against him; and calling for all those officers to know who had done
it, Apelles not seeing the man amongst the company, took up a cole from the
hearth, and drew his picture upon the walso lively, that upon the first draught
the king knew the man. Pliny xxxv. 10. Julius Caesar's Image expressed in wax,
and hideous to look on for the three and twenty wide gaping wounds he had
received, did mightily stir up the Romans to revenge his death. Appianus Lib.
II, de Bello civili. The Emperor Antoninus, to accustom the people by little
and little to that effoeminate habit of the Phoenicians, he himself did so
much like, sent his picture before him to Rome; and thereby brought to pass,
that the Romans did heartily congratulate him at his coming, it being no new
thing to see their Sovereign in such attire. Herodian. lib. V. Hist. Some
Kings did cause a picture to be drawn after their own fancy, sending it abroad
in the world, if by chance any one maid coming somewhat near the conceived
beauty, might be esteemed worthy of such a match. See Claudianus, de Honorii
and Mariae nuptiis. Neither did these Arts serve only in Love-Embassages, but
sometimes also most peremptory Embassages of peace and war have been
performed by the means of these Arts. Q. Fabius a General of the Romans sent a
letter to the Carthaginians, in which was written, that the people of Rome had
sent the^ a little white rod used by messengers of peace, and a Pike, to the
end they should choose either of these signs of peace or war, and think that
alone to be sent which they should make choice of. The Carthaginians answered,
That they would choose neither of both, seeing it was in the power of those that
brought them, to leave which they themselves would; and what was left, the same
should be unto them as chosen. Marcus Varro reports, That there was not sent
a rod of peace and a Pike, but two small Tyles, with such a rod engraven in the
one, and a pike in the other. See Agellius, noct. Attic. lib. x. cap. 27.
Eubata Cyrenaeus to maintain the faith of Wedlock, disappointed that famous
Strumpet Lais in her lust, by carrying the picture of Lais along with him to
Cyrena in stead of the woman her self: wherefore his wife also at his return
erected him a statue. See Aelian lib. x. Var. hist. ca. 2. We do love the
images of our Beloved, says Dionysius the Antiochian Sophist, Epist. I.
when we cannot see them present with us. See also Aeneas the Sophist, Epist.
12. Ovid. lib. 11. de Ponto, Eleg. 8. And Heroidum, Epistola xiii. verse. 151.
The younger Pliny does express the same; I have loved the most complete young
man as fervently, says he, Lib. II. Epist. 7.
as now I do require him impatiently. So will it be unto me a most acceptable
thing to see sometimes this same image of his, and to look back upon it; to
stand now and then near it, and to go by it. For if the images we have in our
private houses of them that are dead, do very much assuage our grief; how much
more shall those images bring that to pass, which in a place of great resort
do not only show their shape and countenance, but their honor and glory also?
Yea, the first beginnings of these Arts seem to have proceeded out of a desire
of prolonging the memory of the deceased, or else of them whose absence would
be most grievous unto us without such a remembrance. See what Fulgentius Lib.
I. Myth l. unde idolum dicatur.
reports of the Egyptian Syrophanes. A Corinthian Maid also, taught by Love,
ventured to put her unskilful hand to the first beginnings of art, drawing
lines about the shadow of her Lover that was to go a great journey. Whereupon
(as it is the custom of men to prosecute small beginnings with a steadfast
study) her father Dibutades, a Potter by his trade, cut out the space comprised
within the lines, and filling it with clay, he made a pattern and hardened it in
the fire, profering to Greece the first rudiments of picture and Statuary.

7. So was it then a praiseworthy custom observed among the Ancients, That
they did show themselves forward to consecrate the memories of such men as had
deserved well of the world: and because they could not endure that vehement
longing they had after the virtues of the deceased Worthies, they did at once
seek to remedy their sorrow, and to stir up other noble spirits to the love
of virtue. See Lactant. cap. 15. de Falsa Religione: Every one thinks that
honor bestowed upon himself, says Symmachus, Lib. IX. Epist. 102.
which he finds deservedly to be conferred upon others. And again in another
place, Lib. I. Epist. 37.
When worthy men receive the fruit of their doings, all they that follow their
stepeps are likewise filled with hope. The Emperor Tiberius restored many
cities of Asia that were thrown down in his time by a fearful earthquake.
The Asiatique Cities therefore studying to be thankful, erected a Colosse unto
Tiberius upon the Roman market, at the back side of the Temple of Venus;
adding likewise the statues of every one of the Cities repaired. Phlegon cap.
13. de Rebus mirabilibus. The Athenians have erected unto Aesope a most goodly
statue, says Phaedrus, Sub finem libri secundi fabularum.
and have set a contemptible slave upon an everlasting Base: that all might
understand, how the way of Honor lies open to every one, and that glory
likewise does not so much follow the condition of our birth, as the virtues of
our life.

Berosus did excel in Astrology, wherefore the Athenians for his divine
prognostications erected him a Statue with a golden tongue, set up in their
public Schools. See Pliny, Not. hist. lib. vii. cap. 37. Josephus, that
famous writer of the Jewish antiquities, being brought to Rome among other
Captives, offered unto the Emperors Vespasian and Titus, seven books he had
written about the taking of Jerusalem. Which books being carefully put up in
the public Library, there was moreover a statue erected him for the fame of
that Work of his. See Suidas.

The noble Captain Chabrias was the first that taught the Athenians, how to
break the furious assault of a forward Enemy by holding up their shields, and
with a bent knee levelling their pikes. This invention of his was so much
celebrated in all Greece, that Chabrias would have his statue made in such a
posture; and the Athenians erected him such a one publicly in the market
place. So did also champions afterward, and all other Artificers, when they
had obtained the victory, make their statues in this very posture. Corn. Nepos
in Chabria. The statues of the Ambassadors slain at Fidena, says Livy, Lib.
IV. ab v. c.
were set up at Rome in a most frequented place, known by the name Rostra.
Florus adds, Because they died for the Republique. The Athenians also erected
a Statue to Anthemocritus, who upon the like occasion was pulled in pieces by
the Megarians. See Harpocration in Anthemocritus. Velleius Paterculus Lib. I.
hist. cap. 11.
reports, that Alexander the Great requested Lysippus a singular workman in
such things, to make the statues of the horsemen of his troop that were slain
at Granicum, as like them as could be, and that he should set his statue among
them. See also Arrianus, lib. 1. de Exped. Alexandri. When King Porsena was
come to Janiculum, he was hindered by the virtue of Cocles Horatius to march
over the Tyber: for Horatius sustained the whole host of the Hetrurians,
whilst others in the mean time did break down the timber bridge: which being
done, he leapt with his full armor into the Tyber, swimming over to his other
countrymen safe, in spite of a world of arrows shot upon him; attempting a
thing of greater fame with posterity, than credit, says Livy, Lib. II. ab v.
c.
and the city thankefully acknowledged such a virtue, erecting him a statue in
a place of great resort, known by the name Comitium.

Virtue therefore being thus honored in men, women also were stirred up to
great attempts for the public glory of the Roman state: So when Cloelia was
given in hostage to Porsenna, with many other noble Virgins, she made her
self Captain of the rest, and having deceived their Keepers, got on
horseback and swam over the river Tyber. The Romans rewarded so new a virtue
in a woman, with a new kind of honor, says Livy in the same place, for in
memory of her, in the most eminent part of Via sacra they set up a statue of a
maid on horseback. We find also, that unto Caja or Suffetia, a Vestal Virgin,
a statue was decreed, to be set up in the place she her self should make
choice of: which addition was no less honorable, than that it was decreed
unto a woman. Her desert was, That she had freely given unto the people that
ground which was afterward called Campus Tiberinus. See Pliny, lib. xxxiv. Not
hist. ca. 6. The Soothsayer Accius Navius his statue, who cut a whetstone with
a Raisor in the presence of Tarquinius, to show unto the King an effect of his
profession, was placed on the left side of the Counsel-house, upon the steps
where the thing was done: the whetstone also was to be seen in the same place,
to be a monument unto posterity, of that miracle, says Livy, lib. 1. ab v. c.
So were there also very often statues erected to preserve the memory of some
miracuous accidents. Such was the statue of Arion; of the which see Agellius,
lib. xvi. Noct. Attic. cap. ultimo. And the Anthologie of Greek Epigrams, lib.
iv. cap. 14. where you may find also the statue of the Musician Eunomus
mentioned. The Aspendian Harpe-players statue is mentioned by Tully, lib. iv.
in Verrem, where see what Asconius Pedianus says concerning that matter.
Antonius the Triumvir mixed iron amongst the coin called at Rome Denarius: it
was therefore made an art to essay that kind of money; and this law of trying
the coin was so well liked by the people, that street by street they did erect
whole statues unto Gratidianus. See Pliny, lib. xxxiii. Not. hist. cap. 9.
Actions proceeding out of the sudden commotion of a forward mind, have been
sometimes also esteemed worthy of the honor of a statue: for when the message
that Babylon had revolted, was brought unto Semiramis, whilst she was
dressing her head, she did instantly run to recover the city, one side of her
hair hanging as yet down: neither would she suffer her hair to be meddled
withal, as long as the city did hold out against her. And there was upon this
occasion a statue erected her at Babylon, in the same habit she did hastily run
in to revenge her self of the Rebels. See Valerius Maximus, lib. ix. cap. 3.
ex ext. 6.

Bupalus and Anthermus, to sport themselves and the spectators, made the statue
of Hipponactes the Poet, who was half a Dwarf, and of an hard favored
countenance. But when they had most contumeliously published this work of
theirs in great companies of scoffing and busy mockers; Hipponactes, as some
do report, fell upon them with such bitter invectives of Iambicke verses, that
they made rather choice of an halter, than to endure his revenge any longer.
Suidas in Hipponax. Acron. in vi Epod. See also Pliny, xxxvi. 5.

The Queen Artemisia having conquered Rhodes, erected a monument of her
victory in the city, making two brazen statues, whereof the one represented
the city, the other represented her self; branding the city with reproachful
marks. Religion afterward hindering the Rhodians to deface this monument,
because dedicated tropaees might not be removed, they built a house about it,
covering it with a Grecian roof, to hide it from the view of all men;
commanding the place to be called Abaton, that is, an unaccessible place.
Vitruvius lib. II. architect. cap. 8. There have been very often statues
erected unto those that by the favor of Kings and Emperors were lifted up
above other men. So does Suetonius In Tiberio, cap. 65.
report, that Sejanus his golden images were set up every where. And Juvenal
teaches us again, by the example of the same Sejanus, That there was most
commonly the same earnestness used in pulling them down, that had been used
in erecting them, when the Emperor did but begin to frown a little upon the
much admired and flattered Favourit. See Juvenal, Satyr. x. verse. 56. Claudius
the Emperor erected a statue unto Simon Magus, adding this title, SIMONI DEO
SANCTO. See Tertullian his Apolog. advers. Gentes, cap. 13. The importunate
curiosity of some men at Rome brought to pass, that former ages have seen the
statues of Annibal within the walls of the city. See Pliny, lib. xxxiv. Not.
hist. cap. 6. King Ptolome in memory of an incestuous affection, commanded
Dinochares to hang up his sister Arsinoe in the air: he therefore placed a
Loadstone in the Vault of the Pharian Temple, which drew up the miserable woman
by her iron hair. See Ausonius in Mosella. Pliny, lib. xxxiv. Not. hist. cap.
14. Suidas in Magnetis. Cedrenus, ad annum undecimum Theodosii Imp. Although it
appears now in all these alleged examples, That statues were erected upon
several occasions, yet was this always the chiefest motive, That generous
spirits seeing Virtue so much honored, should likewise be provoked unto
virtuous actions. There is good reason, why the memory of great virtues should
be reputed a sacred thing; seeing a great many do delight more in virtuous
courses, if the favorable estimation of good men do not perish with them,
says Seneca, lib. iv. de Benef. cap. 30. The rewards of good and bad men make
men good or bad. Few have so much goodness by nature, as not to choose or
shun honest or dishonest things, as they see other men speedwell or ill by
them. The rest, when they see that the reward of labor, vigilance, and
frugality is bestowed upon laziness, drowsinesse, and luxury, study also to
obtain the same rewards by the same means others have obtained them: they do
therefore desire to be and to seem such as those were; and whilst they do so
much desire to be like them; they are quickly made like them, says Pliny in
his Panegyric Oration. Because by the ornaments bestowed upon good men, we are
stirred up to imitate them, and an emulating virtue is led by the honors
conferred upon others. Hence it was, that in the rudest times of antiquity,
those that excelled in virtue, being expressed by the hand of Art, were
transmitted to the memory of posterity. And it were to be wished, that the
base remissness of flatterers had not afterward any thing derogated from that
glory; although those honors are not to be esteemed of equal value, that are
obtained by uneqall means. Symmachus lib. x. Epist. 25.

Images of men were seldom expressed, says Pliny, Lib. xxxiv. Not. hist. cap.
4.
but of such only as for some noble act had deserved perpetuity. First, for
victory in one or other of the sacred Games, but most of all of the Olympian
games, where it was the custom to consecrate the statues of all them that had
overcome: and if any had overcome thrice in the said Games, their similitude
was expressed out of their very limbs; which kind of statues were called
Iconicae statuae. This custom has afterward been received in the whole
world by a most courteous ambition; for statues have now begun to be an
ornament of the market places in all municipall towns: so is it also an
ordinary thing to prorogate the memory of men, and to write upon the bases such
titles of honors, that all Ages might read them there, lest they should be
read only upon sepulchers. Private houses likewise and their halls afterward
became like market places: the respect Clients bore their patrons, first
instituted to worship them after this manner. The public libraries were also
furnished with the golden, silver, and brass Images of those whose immortal
souls did speak in these places. This was at Rome the invention of Asinius
Pollio, says Pliny, Lib. xxxv, Not. hist. cap. 2.
who when he did dedicate a Library, made a commonwealth of wits. Yet is it not
easy for me to say, whether the Kings of Alexandria and Pergamus, who erected
libraries for strife, did it before him or not. See the younger Pliny, lib. IV.
cap. 28. And although the Images of the deceased were only dedicated in
public Libraries, yet has the veneration of learning prevailed so much, that
the image of M. Varro alone before his death, should find a place in the
Library published by Asinius Pollio. See Pliny, lib. vii. Not. hist. cap. 30.
As for private Libraries, Martial In ipso stat. initio Libri noni.
teaches us, That in them the Images of such Writers as were as yet surviving,
might be admitted. Our forefathers had images in their halls, that deserved to
be looked upon, says Pliny, Lib. xxxv. Not. hist. cap. 2.
not the works of foreign Artificers, notable for the brass or the marble.
Faces expressed in wax were orderly placed in every hollownesse fitted for
such use, that there might not want Images to accompany the funerals of every
family; and always when any one was dead, the whole people of that family, as
many as ever had been famous, were present there. The degrees also of Kindred
set forth in garlands, did reach unto the painted Images: and the rooms near
the Courtyard, where their records and evidences were kept, did abound with
books and monuments of noble deeds performed when they were in authority.
Without doors about the haunse or frontier there did appear other Images of
great spirits, the spoils taken from their enemies being fastened there, that
the buyer might not break them off. The houses themselves did triumph, though
their masters were changed: so was this also a great pricking of their minds,
the houses daily upbraiding them, that an unwarlike master did step into
another man's triumph. We must needs bring in here the words of Sallustius; I
have often heard, says he, De Bello Jugurth.
that Q. Maxumus, P. Scipio, and other great men of our city, were wont to say,
That they felt their minds mightily inflamed to virtue, when they did but
look upon the Images of their Ancestors: not that there was any such force in
that wax and figure, but that the memory of their famous acts did kindle this
flame in the breasts of brave men, which could not be quenched, until by a
virtuous course they had attained to their fame and glory. See also Valor.
Maximus lib. v. cap. 8. Exemplo 3.

Julius Caesar, as it is reported by Dio Cassius, Lib. xxxvii
seeing a statue of the Great Alexander in Hercules his Temple at Gades,
fetched many a deep sigh, pitifully bemoaning his own condition, That he had
not yet by any noble act consecrated his memory unto eternity.

As they had now the images of their noble ancestors in their halls, so did
they very often carry them about in their rings. Lentulus a most desperate
companion of Cateline, had his grandfathers image engraven in the ring he did
wear, and sealed his Letters with it. I have showed the Letters unto Lentulus,
says Tully, Orat. 3. in L. Catilinam
asking him whether he knew the seal: which being confessed by him, It is
truly, said I, a seal very well known, being the image of your most famous
grandfather, who loved his country and countrymen dearly; and this
speechless image might very well have recalled you from such wicked attempts.
Lest therefore any such reproaches should light upon any noble branch of an
ancient stock, all such as were allied to great houses, did by a just severity
refuse to acknowledge such noble monsters as began to darken the brightness of
their ancestors. The son of Scipio Africanus was set upon by the whole
kindred, when shamefully degenerating, he did nothing but disgrace the images of
his glorious father and famous Uncle. His kinsfolks pulled the ring from his
hand, says Valerius Maximus, Lib. iii. c. 5. Exemplo 1.
in which Scipio Africanus his head was engraven.

8. Picture in my opinion was most of all brought in request at Rome, by M.
Valerius Maximus Messala, who being then General, placed at a side of Curia
Hostilia the picture of that battle wherein he overcame the Carthaginians and
Hieron in Sicily, the four hundred four score and tenth year of the founding
of the city. Pliny xxxv. 4. The glory of the Scene made the Art more famous at
Rome. For the Scene of Claudius Pulcher his Plays was very much wondered at
for the excellency of picture; seeing Crows deceived by the image, came
flying to the similitude of the painted Tiles. Pliny, Lib. xxxv. cap. 4.

There is in the mention of Picture a pretty tale divulged of Lepidus, who in
the time of his Triumvirat being lodged by the Magistrates of a certain town
in a thick woodded place, he expostulated the next day with them after a
threatening manner, because his sleep had been broke by the singing of birds:
but they having hung round about the place a dragon painted upon a long role of
parchment, made the birds hold their peace: and so was it afterward known
that this was the way to restrain them. Plin. xxxv, 11. The two following
examples, although they do not directly appertain to this place, where we do
reckon up the manifold use of Picture, yet may we rehearse them here by the
way, since by them we are taught that unreasonable creatures are sometimes as
well moved by their own image represented in the water or in a
looking-glass, as these birds were frighted by the likeness of a painted
dragon. A horse knowing what a singular ornament his mane is unto him, uses to
be proud of it: those therefore that go about to have their mares covered by
he-asses, when they find them after a fierce manner scorn such an unequal
match, use to clip their manes and so to drive them to the water: whereupon is
it an usual thing that the mare seeing the pride of her neck gone, grows
more tractable and admits the ass: see Aelian. lib. XII, de Animalib. cap.
10. as also Jul. Pollux, onomast. lib. I, cap. 11. A parret is by cozenage
taught to imitate: for they that will teach her, do hide themselves behind a
great looking-glass, speaking there what they would have her learn: the
parret therefore weening to see another prating parret in the glass, makes
haste to speak the language of a bird of her own feathers: see Photius in
Excerptis ex lib. V. Theodori episcopi Tarsi contra Fatum. What we have as yet
spoken concerning the manifold use of these Arts of imitation, might very well
suffice, if we had not met in diverse good Authors with many more passages of
this nature. Wherefore I cannot forbear, but I must needs add some examples;
being fully persuaded, that as all of them do not want the delight of
variety, so will some of them afford the profit of instruction.

9. Acu pingere, to paint with a needle was the invention of the Phrygians, and
for that reason were the embroderers called Phrygians, says Pliny lib. viij,
not. hist. lib. viii, ca. 48. Although Lucanus Lib. X. verse. 142.
seems to attribute this same glory unto the Egyptians also. But of this,
God willing, elsewhere.

Textilis pictura, tapestry-worke is mentioned by name in the beginning of
Tullie his fourth book against Verres: so does Val. Maximus Lib. IX, cap. 1.
ex. ext. 4.
relate that the army of Antiochus King of Syria set up pavilions adorned with
woven images. Lucretius at length, burning fevers shall leave you never a whit
sooner, says he Lib. II, verse. 34.
, if you toss in woven imagerie and rich scarlet, then if you lie under mean
and ordinary coverings.

Among many several sorts of this kind of workmanship there have been
anciently renowned Attalicae vestes, Babylonica texta, Chlamydes militares,
Diademata regu^ Aegyptiorum, Judaica vela, Peplum Palladis, Toga picta.

Attalicae vestes, Attalian clothes got their name of Attalus, a most wealthy
King of Pergamus, who first of all made gold to be woven in clothes, says
Pliny lib. viii, not. hist. cap. 48. When Silius Sub fine^ lib. XIV. de bello
Punico.
therefore speaks of Attalian hangings wrought with a needle, we must
understand nothing else by the name of Attalian hangings, but rich and
sumptuous hangings; seeing the ancient Authors every where do call magnificent
household stuff by the name of Attalian household stuff, because the said King
was exceeding stately and sumptuous in all manner of things.

Babylonica texta, Babylonian weavings have their name from Babylon; seeing it
has been the practice of this City chiefly to weave diverse colors in the
painted hangings, says Pliny lib. viii, not. hist. cap. 48.

Chlamydes militares, the painted cassockes of soldiers and the riding coats
of horsemen were very much used among the Achaeans by Philopoemen his advice,
who meant to bring his Countrymen from the love of frivolous elegancies to a
more necessary and honest liking of brave armor; persuading himself that
their magnanimity and courage would be mightily enflamed by the very sight of
such ornaments: even as Homer brings in Achilles longing, when new and costly
armor was brought before his eyes, that he might try his valor in them: see
Plutarch in the life of Philopoemen.

Diademata regum Aegyptiorum, the diademes of the Egyptian Kings were round
about beset with the figures of aspes, wrought in several colors; the
invincible force of a provoked sovereign being insinuated by the deadly bite
of an aspe: for it was never known that any one escaped death, after he had
been stung by that kind of serpent: see Aelian. lib. VI. de Animalib. cap. 38.

Judaica vela, Jewish vailes were most commonly notable for all such kind of
monsters as men conceive when they do imagine the wonders of strange Indian
countries: see Claudianus lib. I. in Eutropium, verse. 355.

Peplum Palladis, the flag of Pallas adorned with the overthrow of the
foolhardy giants that fought against heaven, was carried about by the
Athenians every fifth year in the pageants of their Panathenaike solemnity:
see Suidas, as also Virgil in Ciris.

Toga palmata was a gown so called of the branches of palme-trees that were
wrought in it: the gown deserved by them, says Isidorus Hispal. Originum lib.
xix. that had overcome their enemies, was called Toga palmata: it was called
also Toga picta, a painted gown, for the victories and palmetrees

that were woven in it. And as it has been showed above that the Toscanes made
the first statues in Italy, so must we likewise observe here that this kind
of ornament has also been derived from the said Toscanes. Our ancestors,
says Sallustius De bello Catilin.
, have taken the greater part of the ensigns of Magistrates from the Toscanes.
Macrobius does confirm the same, Tullus Hostilius, the son of Hostus, and
third King of the Romans, says he Lib. II. Saturnal. c. 6.
, did first of all institute at Rome the use of the Chariot of state, called
Curulis sella; the Sergeants, called Lictores; the Gowns, called Toga picta,
and Toga praetexta; which were all ornaments used by the Etrurian Magistrates:
see also Silius Italicus lib. VIII. de bello Punico.

10. The City gates and the doors of private houses were in ancient times
notable for the picture of Minerva that was painted upon them; so was Mars also
painted at the first entrance of the suburbs: to insinuate, that within the
City walls, as also within the walls of private houses all things must be
performed by the counsel of Minerva; but that the out-streets lying out of the
town, are to be protected by Mars. Schol. vet. in Aeschylum. Tzetzes in
Lycophronis Cassandram. Some for all that did not so much pourtray Minerva upon
the doors of their houses, as any other God or man they would themselves. We
do see this in Ausonius his Epigrammes, where Epigr. 25.
he does most pleasantly mock an obscure fellow, which for his great wealth
would seem to be some body; but having no pedigree to show for himself, he
did vilify the noble names of most flourishing times, and embrace Mars,
Romulus, and Remus, calling them the first parents, painting them upon his
doors, and setting them up in his hall, as if his nobility had been derived
from these founders of the City. A great dog tied in a chain was painted
upon the wall near the Porters lodge; and above him there was written, CAVE.
CAVE. CANEM. Arbiter Satyrico.

On many little shed-shops the battle between weesills and mice was most
commonly pourtrayed. Phaedrus Fabula LXIV. And as by the means of this picture
they did draw and entertain their customers, so on the contrary, did they put
boys, and other idle fellows far from their stalls, by painting two snakes
upon the outside of them; forbidding every one to make water in the corners of
their stalls, by showing unto them the religion of the place. There is no place
without his peculiar Genius, says Servius Ad versum 85. libri V Aeneid.
, and this same Genius is for the most part expressed by the image of a snake.
See also Cornutus upon the 113 verse of Persius his first Satyr, where he does
speak of this custom used by the shopkeepers. To all the City gates in the
mean time, to private houses, baths, stables also, and to be short, to every
place and corner of the City there did belong many a thousand Geniusses, as
Aurel. Prudentius reports lib. II. contra Symmachum. Epona also and some such
like faces were painted near the rank-sented mangers: see Juvenal. Satyra
VIII. Theudelinda Queen of the Longobards built her palace in Modicia, and
caused therein something to be painted of the deeds of the Longobards: it is
clearly perceived in this picture how the Longobards in those times did cut
the hair of their heads, what manner of clothes and habit they went in: for
shaving themselves, they did make their neck bare to the hinder part of the
head; whereas their other hair did hang down as low as their mouth, being on
both sides divided by the parting of the forehead: they had loose and for the
most part linen garments, such as the Anglo-Saxons do wear, adorned with
broad lace woven of diverse colors: they had shoes open almost to the
upperpart of their great toes, stretched with latchets from the one side to the
other: they afterward begun to use hose, drawing over them some thicker kind
of stock-hose, when they were to ride; but in this have they followed the
custom of the Romans: see Paulus Diaconus de gestis Longobardorum, lib. IV,
cap. 23.

The monuments of Martyrs were adorned with paintings, setting forth all the
circumstances of the butcherlike cruelty used against the Saints of God: see
Prudentius in the passion of Cassianus the Schoolmaster, who was by his own
school-boyes, the tyrant forcing them thereunto, pricked to death with the
sharp points of their writing bodkins: see the same Prud. also in the passion
of Hippolytus: and Paulus Diaconus lib. IV. de gestis Longobard. cap. 17.

Such as had escaped a dangerous sickness, were wont to have Aesculapius
painted in the rooms they did most frequent; professing their thankfulness by
a continual worshipping of so favorable a God: see Libanius Declam. xxxix.

The pictures of them that had suffered ship-wracke, or were egregiously
injured by other men, have been mentioned already, lib. I, cap. IV, 4.

The ships-castle behind was most commonly adorned with the picture of one or
other God, unto whose protection and patronage the whole ship was committed;
and this Patron of the ship was for the most part set forth in gold and
glorious colors: see Virgil. lib. X. Aeneid. and Valor. Flaccus lib. VIII,
verse. 292.

When Painters did imitate in their pictures such things as those that had an
intercourse of mutual hospitality were wont to send one to another, they did
call such pictures Xenia, says Vitruvius, lib. VI. Architect. cap. 10.
Philostratus at the end of his first book of Images describes such a picture.

Maeandrum is a kind of painting named after the similitude of the manifold
turnings and windings made by the river Maeander: see Pompeius Festus.

When Muraena and Varro were Aediles, they cut at Lacedaemon out of brick walls
a certain kind of plaistering work for the excellency of painting, and brought
it to Rome in wooden frames, to adorn the place called Comitium withal: see
Pliny lib. xxxv. not. hist. cap. 14. and Vitruvius lib. II. Archit. cap. 8. M.
Agrippa set up in the hottest part of the Baths little pictures, fitting them
in the marble. Plin. lib. xxxv. not. hist. cap. 4.

Pavements of checkerwork had their original in Greece by an art much labored
after the way of picture, till they have been put out by another kind of
workmanship called Lithostrota, that is, strowed over with stones: and this
seems to have been that work we call Musaike-worke. Sosus was most famous in
this kind of work, says Pliny Lib. xxxvi, Not. hist. cap. 25.
, who paved at Pergamus the house they did call Asaroton oecon, that is, the
unswept house: because he had counterfeited out of little and diversely colored
stones the scraps of broken meat that use to be swept away, even as if
carelessly they had been left upon the ground: the drinking pigeon is there most
admirable, darkening the water with the shadow of her head, whilst another
snatcheth away the meat: you may see other pigeons play upon the brimme of the
pots mouth: others sit a sunning, and do nothing but claw and pick their own
feathers. The cipresse tree also is drawn into paintings in historical work,
overshadowing huntings, navies, and other images of things with a thin,
short, and green leaf. Plin. lib. xvi. not. hist. cap. 33.

Among the principal soldiers they were called imaginarii or imaginiferi,
which carried the images of the Emperors: see Vegetius lib. II. de Re
militari, cap. 7.

Egypt dies silver also, that it may behold its Anub is upon
drinking-vessels; and does not grave silver, but paint it. That silver
afterward is applied to the making of triumphall statues; and, which is a
wonder, that dim brightness is highly esteemed: see Pliny lib. XXXIII. not.
hist. cap. 9.

Glass is most proper for picture, says Pliny, lib. xxxvi, cap. 26.

Tortoise shells, though they were never so full of spots, yet did they
sometimes paint them. Seneca de Benef. lib. vii, cap. 9.

Buskins painted, are mentioned by Ovid. Amorum lib. ii. Eleg. 18. as also
Amorum, lib. iii. Eleg. 1.

Calendars painted, Ovid. circa initium libri primi Fastorum.

Belts painted, Apuleius lib. X. Metamorph.

Painted bridles, Ovid. IV. Metam.

Painted quivers, Ovid II. Metam. and passim alibi.

Painted tents, Claudianus lib. I. de Stiliconis laudib. verse. 157.

Painted shields were at the first proper only to valiant men: in the times of
our ancestors, says Servius In lib. vii. Aeneid.
, the shields of valiant men were painted; the shields of fresh water soldiers
on the contrary and of unmanly cowards, were unpainted. But it seems that all
had afterward promiscuously some kind of painting: least the soldiers should
at any time in the tumult of a battle wander from their fellow soldiers,
says Vegetius Lib. II. de Re milit. cap. 18.
, several cohorts had several marks painted on their shields, called digmata;
and this custom does as yet hold: the name of the soldier was likewise
written on the inside of every one his shield, as also to what cohort and
centurie the owner did belong. As for the primitive times under the first
Christian Emperors, Prudentius teaches us, that shields were then marked
otherwise; Christ being woven in glistering gold, says he Lib. I. contra
Symmachum.
, did adorn the purple Church-flagges, Christ was drawn for an ensign upon
the shields, and a cross added to the highest crests, did shine after the
manner of flaming fire. Mark here by the way, that as the crests of their
head-pieces were adorned with the cross, so says Saint Hierome Lib. II.
Epist. famil. 15.
that the picture of the cross did add a great deal of grace to the purple
robes of Kings, and to the brightest gemmes of their diademes.

Statues were sometimes also painted over: not after that manner Pline speaks
of, when he says Lib. xxxiii, Not. hist. cap. 7.
that they were painted with vermilion; but they were now and then painted with
all such colors as are used about pictures: so does Pausanlas Lib. IX.
witness, that there was at Creusis an image of Bacchus made of
plaister-stuffe, and all over adorned with picture. The Egyptians also in
their banquets use to carry about a dead body made of wood, but so well
wrought and painted over, that it can hardly be discerned from a true dead
body: see Herodotus lib. II. hist. The same Author mentions such another
statue in the same book, where he speaks of a wonderful custom of burying
the dead, anciently used among the Egyptians: and in his third book he does
relate the like of the Aethiopians. Although Statues might sometimes be painted
over after the manner of Pictures, yet were unpainted Statues most in use;
because they were more fit to endure the open air, and the neatness of
workmanship could be a great deal better perceived in bare Statues then in the
painted ones, seeing the true stroke of Art was blotted out or at least dulled
in them by the deceitfulness of gallant colors. Wherefore I now proceed to
the use of such kind of Statues, and all sorts of workmanship appertaining
unto them.

11. I know very well how great a matter I undertake, and that it is not very
easy to set down in a few leaves the infinite variety of the ancient
Statues, together with the manifold use of them, I shall therefore contract my
discourse, not describing every one of these things accuratly, but contenting
my self to mention some of them only.

Aegis, was the breast plate of Pallas, made by the Cyclopes: see Virgil lib.
viii. Aeneid: so says Servius upon that place, Aegis is properly a breast plate
of brass, having the head of Gorgo in the midst: and when this cuirase or
breast plate is upon the breast of a God, it is then called Aegis; when it is
upon the breast of a man, as we see in the ancient statues of Emperors, it
goes by the name of Lorica. Minerva is conceived to have that head upon her
breast, because that is the seat of her wisdom, by which she confounds her
adversaries, making them sottish and no less senseless then any cold stone.

Agoraius Hermes, was a brazen statue of Mercury, erected upon the
Marketplace, near the porch commonly known by the name Poecile; this statue
was round about written with letters: see Lucian in Jove tragoedo: see also
Pausanias and Aristophanes.

Agyieus or Agylleus, was the name of that country -Apollo whose statues were
erected in villages. Comment. vet. in Horat. lib. IV. Carm. Ode 6. Macrob lib.
I. Saturnal. cap. 9. Stephanus de Urbibus. Hesychius. Harpocration. Suidas.

Antefixa, were artificial things made of clay and fastened under the eaves of
houses: see Festus Pompeius in Antefixa, with Jos. Scaliger his observations
upon that place.

Antelii dii were the Gods set up abroad without the doors. Hesychius, Aries,
testudo, musculus, and other engines of war made and named after the
similitude of several beasts, are every where mentioned and described in
ancient Authors.

Bascania were called the ridiculous figures smiths used to hang before their
furnaces, to divert envy: see Pollux lib. VII, onomast. cap. 24. So does
Eustathius Ad versum 455. Odyss. P.
also teach us that there were in old times near all chimneys almost some
earthen Vulcans set up, seeing that God was the president of these Arts wrought
by fire.

Bulla aurea, was a childish ornament none might wear but such as were
ingenui, that is, such as were freeborn. As for the libertini, or such as
came from a race that had sometimes been bondmen, scortea bulla, such an
ornament of leather was their wear Vide Asconium Pedianum in orat. III. contra
Verrem.
. It seems moreover to have been a privilege of the ingenuous or free borne
lads only, that they had in this ornament the figure of a heart hanging upon
their breast. Some do believe, says Macrobius Lib. I. Saturnal. cap. 6.
, that it has been appointed unto the ingenuous children to hang the figure of
a heart in the golden ornament that hung upon their breast, that looking upon
these ornaments they should think themselves then only to be men, when they
did excel in things arising out of a wise and understanding heart: they do
believe also that there has been given them a gown guarded about with purple
silk, that by this ornament of a purple stitch they should be put in mind how
well a modest bashfulnesse does become them.

Caduceus. Servius his words are worth nothing; The rods of ambassadors or
heralds were not without cause tied about with two serpents, says he Ad versum
138. Octavi Aeneid.
, seeing they are sent to dispose two hostile armies to a mutual
reconciliation, by making them forget the ranckour of their inveterate malice
and to become one; even as two venomous serpents, notwithstanding the deadly
poison which is in them, couple themselves most lovingly together. Some
interpret it otherwise; the ambassadors rod, says another Scholiastes in lib.
I. Thucydidis.
, is a straight stick with two snakes winding themselves from two contrary
sides one about another, and holding their heads opposite one against another:
the messengers of peace use to carry such a rod; and it is held unlawful to
hurt them whether soever they go: the straight stick, signifies the force of
an ingenuously free speech: the image of the snakes at either side, signifies
the contrary parties: for so does an upright and resolute speech go thorough
both the armies: see also Polybius lib. III, hist. and Suidas. Fulgentius
gives us a peculiar reason why such a rod was most commonly attributed unto
Mercury: a rod tied about with serpents, says he Lib. I. Mythol.
, is attributed unto Mercury; because he gives the Merchants sometimes an
extraordinary huge power, which is signified by the scepter; sometimes a sore
hurt, which is insinuated by the serpents.

Canes aurei atque argentei, Alcinous his palace had at both sides of the
entance golden and silver dogs, that seemed to keep the watch there: see
Homer Odyss. H, verse. 91.

Charila, a childish image mentioned by Plutarch in Quaestionibus Grecis, 12.

Cicadae aureae, the Athenians did anciently wear golden grasse-hoppers in the
curled locks of their hair, says Thueidides lib. I. hist. and the old
Scholiast observes there, that they did so, because the grasse-hopper is a
musical creature; or else, because they would seem to be Autochtones,
boasting themselves not to be brought into that country from any other place,
but that the place of their abode was also the place of their breeding, even as
grasse-hoppers come of the earth. The Ionians also, as being but a colonie of
the Athenians, kept this custom a good while: see Thucid. in the said place.
The inhabitants of Samos did the like: see Asius his verses alleged by
Athenaeus lib. xii. Deipnosoph.

Citeria; this was the name of a fine and prattling image carried about in the
pomp of great solemnities, to make folks laugh: see Festus Pompeius.

Cubicula salutatoria; the chambers where they did wait, which after the old
Roman fashion would salute great noblemen in the morning, were filled with
all manner of images: see Pliny lib. xv. not. hist. cap. 11. Suetonius In
Augusto, cap. 7.
seems to call these images Cubiculares imagines: see Casaubonus his
observations upon these words.

Currus-Dariiregis; King Darius his chariot was adorned on both sides with
images wrought of silver and gold: the yoke, as it was distinguished with
precious stones, so did it support two golden images a cubite high, whereof the
one offered to fight with the other: there was also between these an Eagle,
that did stretch forth her wings, consecrated: see Q. Curtius lib. iii, cap. 3.

Delphines; some artificial drinking-vessels made after the manner of a
dolphin, were called delphines: and so says Pliny Lib. xxxiii. cap. 11.
that C. Gracchus had delphines that cost him five thousand sestertios a pound.
Vitruvius Lib. X, Architect. c. 12
does mention brazen dolphines among the parcels that make up waterworkes.
Ships of war carried also engines of iron, made after the similitude of
dolphins: see Thucydides lib. vii. hist. and his Scholiast.

Dracones militares; Military banners made after the likeness of dragons, are
mentioned by S. Austin; the standards and military dragons, says he Lib. II,
de doctr. Christ. cap. 2.
, insinuate unto us the Generals will by the means of our eyes. See also
Nazianzene orat. 3. As for the ensigns used in war, several Nations had
several sorts of them; yea one and the same Nation did often alter banners:
the Boeotians made the image of Sphinx their standard, as it is reported by
Lactant. upon Stat. Papinius Ad versum 252 libri septimi Thebaidos.
. The Indian troops of horsemen carry upon long spears golden and silver
heads of gaping dragons, with a thin silk streamer doubled and cut in length
after the shape of a dragons body; so that the wind entering at the mouth,
fills the silk and makes it stir, and wind, and hiss as living and
raging dragons use to do: see Suidas, where he speaks of the Indians.

So does the same Suidas also attribute such ensigns unto the Scythians. The
ancient Romans have had several ensigns at several times; as namely the
image of a hog, the image of Minotaurus, of an eagle, of dragons: of the
hog, see Festus Pompeius in Porci effigies: and Pliny lib. x. not. hist.
cap. 4. The Minotaurus is mentioned by Vegetius, it has ever been esteemed a
most safe thing in war, says he Lib. III. de Re milit. cap. 6.
, that none should know what is to be done: and therefore have the ancients
used the image of Minotaurus for an ensign of their legions; to signify, that
the counsel of a General must be kept secret, even as this Minotaurus was
privily shut up in the most inward and reti ed parts of the labyrinth: see also
Festus Pompeius in Minotaurus. Of the eagles, see Dio Cassius lib. X L. of the
dragons, see Ammianus Marcellinus lib. XVI. hist. where he does describe the
triumphant pomp of Constantius the Emperor entering into the City: see also
Claudianus lib. II. in Rufinum, verse. 365. and in his Panegyrike de III.
Consulatu Honorii, verse. 138.

Epitrapezii dii: great feasts and banquets were in old time solemnized by
placing the image of one or other God upon the table; not only to put their
guests in mind, that the religion of the board, by reason of this same
Epitrapezian God, was to be respected and reverenced; but also, that all should
as well feed their mind and eyes with this most pleasing spectacle, as their
body with exquisit dainties, avoiding importunate and troublesome talk by
drawing some good discourses from thence to-season the meat withal. Arnobius
points at this same custom, when he says Lib. II. adversus gentes.
, you do consecrate your tables, by setting salt-sellers and images of Gods
upon the board. We have also an excellent example of this old custom in
Statius Papinius, where he does relate how he was feasted by the most noble
Vindex, and seeing all his house filled with rare monuments of antiquity, was
taken with nothing so much as with a little Hercules standing upon the table.
Among so many things, says Statius Lib. IV. Sylv.
, Hercules, the Genius and protector of the pure table, possessed my heart with
a great deal of love, and has not been able to satisfy mine eyes by looking
never so much upon him: such dignity is there in the work, and such a
majesty is there included in his limbs: he is a God, a very God; and he
indulged unto you, O Lysippe, to conceive him great, though he be but little in
show: the whole measure of this wonderful image does not exceed a foot, and
yet within so little a space, if you do view it well, there is so great a
deceitfulness of the form, that you shall be disposed to cry out, The waster
of the Nemaean forest was pressed to death by this breast; these arms did
carry the deadly club, and brake the oars of Argo. What a strange power was
there in this hand, and with how great an experience was the care of that
learned Artificer accompanied, to make at once an image fit for the table, and
to conceive huge Colosses in his mind? Read the words of Statius himself, and
he will tell you that Alexander the great, Hannibal, and Sylla, three great
Captains, made so much of this Hercules, that they carried him every where
along as an indivisible companion, both in the hazard of battles, and in the
security of feasting: see Martial also lib. IX, Epigr. 44. where he confirms
the same.

Eumnostos. This was the name of a little and slight statue erected in the
mills, to see how the millers went to work. See Hesychius.

Galeae Bellatorum. The helmets of great Warriors had most commonly heads of
gaping wild beasts upon the top; as well for terror of the enemies, as for
ornament. The examples are so frequent in all authors, that we have no need to
bring any instances. It is pretty only what Festus In Retiario pugnanti.
observes in the Armor of the Mirmillones, That they had the image of a fish
upon their headpiece; and therefore when the Retiarius was to fight with a
Mirmilio, this was wont to be sung, Non te peto, piscem peto: quid me fugls
Galle?

Geron was the name of a distaffe made with hands, after the manner of
Mercurius quadratus, but most of all for the old man's head it had, whereof it
drew this name. Pollux Onomast. lib. vii. cap. 16.

Gymnasiorum praesides dii. Places appointed for all sorts of bodily exercises
were called Gymnasia, and in them the statues of Mercury, Hercules, and Theseus
were seldom wanting, as having been excellent Wrestlers, and consequently fit
patrons for such a place and exercise. See Pausan. li. iv.

Hecataea were certain images of Hecate consecrated without the doors, or
else in places where three sundry ways do meet. See Hesychius. These statues
of Diana or Hecate, set up at the meeting of three several ways, had most
commonly three heads. See Ovid. lib. 1. Fast. verse. 141. Pausanias lib. 11. The
reason why she was made with three heads is set down by Cleomedes, lib. II.
cap. 5.

Hermae were stone statues of Mercury. Arnobius speaks of them when he says,
Lib. vi. advers. Gentes.
Who is there that does not know the Athenian Hermae were made after the
similitude of Alcibiades his body?

Hermes strophaeus was a statue of Mercury set up near the door, to free the
house from Thieves. See Etymol. magnum, and alios.

Hermines were called the beds feet, because in them there were most commonly
carved the images of Hermes or Mercury, who was esteemed to rule both our
sleep and our dreams. See Etymol. magnum, Hesychius, and Didymus ad versum
198. Odyss. PS.

Ipsullices were plates of gold and silver, or any other metal, resembling
men and women. See Festus Pompeius.

Irminsul was an image in complete Armor, honored by the ancient Saxons with
divine worship. See Conr. Abbas Vesperg. ad annum DCCCCXIV. Vide quoque
Bataviam Hadr. Junii, cap. xvi.

Jupiter Ctesius his image was most commonly erected in the Treasure-houses, or
in the Exchequers, as being the patron and giver of riches. See Harpocration
and Suidas.

Kanathra are wooden images of Gryphons and Goatharts, wherein they do carry
little Girls when there is any pomp. See Plutarch in the life of Alcibiades.

Kinnabus is an image upon the which Painters and such like Artificers use to
cast their eye when they do work. See Suidas.

Lampades in Juvenilem speciem formatae. Golden or silver images of young men
stood in several rooms of kings palaces and other great houses, with torches
in their hands, for the use of the night. See Lucretius, lib. II. verse. 24.
Homer. Odyss. n. verse. 100. and Athenaeus lib. 4. Deipnos. c. 2.

Leones lapidel. Upon the tombs of dead men there were very often set up images
of Lions in stone. Hercules lost one of his fingers when he fought with the
Nemaean Lion. Wherefore at Lacedaemon, over the place where his finger was
buried, a Lion of stone was set for a testimony of Hercules his strength. And
it grew afterward a custom, to set such lions also upon the graves of other
men. See Photius In excerptis ex lib. ii. Ptolemaei Hephae stionis novae ad
variam eruditionem historiae.
. As it may then very well be, that this has been for a while the practice of
old times, so do we more often find, That the Ancients most commonly erected
such images upon the monuments of dead men, by which their manner of life, and
course of studies might be understood.

Upon Sardanapalus his grave there was erected the statue of Sardanapalus
himself, clapping his hands together after their manner that take great joy in
any thing. The inscription was, Sardanapalus the son of Anacyndaraxa, built
Anchialus and Tarsus in one day. But thou my friend, eat, drink, play, seeing
all other humane things are not so much worth. Signifying the rejoicing noise
made by such a clapping of hands. See Arrianus, lib. II. de Expedit. Alexandri
magni.

The Corinthians set upon Diogenes Cynicus his grave a Dog of Parian marble.
See Laertius, lib. vii. The first Africanus appointed, that the statue of Q.
Ennius should be put upon his monument; desirous to join his so much renowned
name with the name of the Poet. See Pliny, li. vii. Not. hist. cap. 30. The
Syracusians set upon Archimedes his tomb a Sphere with a Cylinder. See Tully
lib. v. Tusc. Quest. The Longobards in later ages had this custom; if any one
died in the wars, or any other manner of death, his kinsemen did stick among
the sepulchers a perch in the ground, putting upon it a wooden pigeon, the
which was turned toward their beloved friend, that by this means it might be
known where he did rest. See Paulus Diaconus lib. v. degestis Longobard. cap
34.

Locorum sacrorum profanatio. The Gentiles were wont to set up some of their
statues in holy places, to make the Christians leave the veneration of such
places, as being now profaned by their idols: this was practiced by Antiochus:
see Machab. lib. II, cap. 6. Caligula did the same: see Orosius lib. vij, cap.
5. From the time of Hadrian the Emperor, to the times of Constantin, says S.
Jerome Lib. II. Epist. famil. 14.
very near one hundred and fourscore years, there has been an image of
Jupiter set up and worshipped by the Heathens in the place of the Resurrection,
and another marble statue of Venus upon the rock of the cross: the authors of
persecution weening that they should lessen in us the faith of the Cross and
Resurrection, if they had defiled the holy places by their idols.

Manducus was an image that went anciently in the solemnity of a pompous show
among other ridiculous and terrible images; it had huge jaws, and it did gape
fearfully, making a foul noise with his teeth: see Festus Pompeius.

Manes, a little image mentioned by Suidas, where he does describe the manner
of playing at Cottabus.

Marsyas, a minister of Liber pater, is a sign of the liberty of such Cities
as have his statue in their marketplaces; he shows by his hand lifted up,
that the City does want nothing, says Servius upon IV Aen. verse. 58. So says
he again upon III Aen. verse. 20, all Cities in the times of our ancestors
were stipendiarie, or confederate, or free: the free cities had a statue of
Marsyas publicly set up, who was in the protection of Liber pater, unto whom
they did sacrifice for their liberty.

Neurospasta, were puppets that by the means of some hidden strings could move
every joint with a handsome and graceful comeliness. See Aristoteles de
mundo, as it is interpreted by Apuleius. As also Herodotus in Euterpe, Xenophon
in Symposio.

Oppidorum caeptorum imagines. The images of conquered cities were carried
about in the shows made by them that did triumph: these images were sometimes
of silver. See Ovid. lib. II de Ponto, Eleg. 1. Sometimes of ivory. See the
same Ovid. lib. III. de Ponto, Eleg. 4. Sometimes also of wood. See Quintil.
lib. vi. Orat. Instit. cap. 3. where it is reported, That Chrysippus, when he
had seen silver cities carried about in Caesar his triumph, and saw some few
days after wooden ones carried about in Fabius Maximus his triumph, affirmed
these wooden cities to be nothing else but the cases of Caesar his silver ones.

Oraculum quercuum Dodonaearum. The Oracle of the Dodonaean Oaks is famous for
the harmonicall ringing of brass, stirred by a statue. See Suidas, where he
speaks of Dodona.

Oscilla, were little bables to play withal; containing some fourteen
Geometrical figures at the most, says Ausonius In Epistola praefixa Centoni
nuptiali.
; and by the couching of these joints together, thousand several sorts of
shapes are resembled: an Elephant, a wild Boore, a flying Goose, a Mirmillo
sinking down in his armor, a Huntsman, a barking Dog, a Tower also, a
Tankard, and an infinite number of other figures, more cunningly varied by one
than another: so that the slight used by the skillful is miraculous; and the
best endeavor of the unskilful is ridiculous. See what Jos. Scaliger has
observed upon Ausonius.

Palaestrae. The wrestling places were adorned with the statues of great
champions. See Pliny, lib. xxxv cap 2.

Paladia were woode^ images on the forpart of the ship consecrated to Pallas.
They made very much of these images when they meant to go to sea. See Suidas;
as also Schol. ret. in Acharnenses Aristophanis.

Pataici were likewise little images like Pygmaees. These were also by the
Phoenicians set upon the forepart of their ships. Herodotus, lib. III. hist.
Hesychius, Suidas.

Penates were a certain kind of household gods. See Servius, ad verse 12 and
148. libri 3. Aeneid. The household gods, says Cornutus, In Persii, Sat. 5.
were made in the habit of Cinctus Gabinus, their gown being thrown over
their left shoulder, with their right shoulder bare.

Portis urbium adstabant statuae. There were most commonly some statues erected
near the city gates. Ambracia erected two brazen statues of men before the
city gates, says Varro, lib. iv. de L. L. Cedrenus does also witness, That
before the public gate of Edessa there was a statue consecrated, standing
somewhat high, which was to be adored by all them that went in or out. In the
time of Apollonius Tyaneus also, a golden statue of the king was exposed unto
them that meant to come in at the gates of Babylon: neither might any one enter
the city, unless he had first adored it after the Persian manner. See
Philostr. lib. I, de vita Apollonii, cap. 19.

Prosopoutta in the Attick language was called a brazen vessel, having about
the mouth several faces of Lions and Oxen; from whence it drew the name:
Hesychius. Jul. Pollux Onomast. lib. II. So does the same Pollux also teach us
in the same place, that anciently a maker of these kind of vessels was called
Prosopopoios, a face-maker.

Satyrica signa. The images of Satyrs were as well set up in gardens, to keep
them from Thieves, as the image of Priapus. See Pliny, lib. xix. Not. hist.
cap. 4. As for the Lampsacene god Priapus, it needs no long relation what use
they made of him, seeing all ancient Authors are too full of it.

Sceletus. In the Egyptian feasts there was most commonly carried about the
image of a dead man, high one cubit or sometimes two cubits. See Herodotus,
lib. II. hist. Plutarch in Symposio septem sap. Tzetes Chiliad. III. hist. 92.
Although Lucian de Luctu.
says, That he has seen true dead bodies brought in the banquet, after they
had bin seasoned a good while and dried up.

Sceptrum Babyloniorum. Every one of the Babylonians carried a Scepter, having
upon the top an apple, a Rose, a Lilly an Aegle, or any such like thing: for
they might not carry a scepter, but that it was to have such a mark. See
Herodotus, lib. I. histor.

The Ivory Scepter of the Roman Consuls had also an Aegle upon the top of it.
See Juvenal, Satyra X. v. 43. as also Aurel. Prudentius, in Romano Martyr.

Sella curulis had images of ivory engraven in it. See Ovid lib. iv, de Ponto,
Eleg. 9, verse. 22.

Sistrum was an instrument used by the Egyptians in the sacrifices of Isis,
having upon the top a cat with the head of a man, and underneath the face of
Isis or Nephtys. See Plutarch, de Iside and O siride. Strabo, lib. xvii,
Geograph.

Stabula: Stables were adorned with the image of Epona: See Apuleius, lib. III,
Metamorph.

Tabernaculum Alexandri magni. The tent of Alexander the Great was supported by
some statues. See Pliny, lib. xxxiv, cap. 8.

Termini, or bound-stones, signified diverse things, according to the several
figures engraven upon them. The bound stone when it has the claw of a Wolf
engraved, signifies a strange tree. The bound-stone when it has a Bears claw
engraved, signifies a Grove. The bound-stone when it has a cloven footed
figure ingraved, signifies that there is a water spring issuing forth from
underneath the stone. The bound-stone when it has a Calves head engraven,
signifies that the waters come forth out of two mountains; as also that the
plough-men of the next villages were wont to sacrifice upon that stone. The
bound-stone when it has an horses hoof engraved, signifies a race-marke, and
sends us to a fountain. Vide auctores vett. de Limitib. agrorum.

Tritones aerei. Anciently on the tops of their highest towers they set Tritons
made of brass, as now thin plates of Latten or Copper framed in the shape of
a Cock, and placed on the tops of steeples, do show the winds. Some were
pleased to confine the winds within the number of four, says Vitruvius; Lib.
1. ca. 6
from the Sunrising in the Aequinoctial, the East: from the midday, the
South: from the Sunsetting in the Aequinoctiall, the West: from the North, the
North wind. But those that have made more diligent search, have delivered them
to be eight. Andronicus Cyrrhestes most especially, who for example and proof
thereof, raised at Athens a Tower of marble eight square; and he made in each
flat side of the same the image of each wind directly opposite to the point from
whence it blew, and on the top of the said marble tower he made a short Pike,
and set thereon a Triton of brass, with the right hand holding forth a three
toothed rod, so framed, that it was carried about by the wind, and ever stood
directly against the blast, and held out the rod pointing at the wind that
blew, over the Image of the same. There are therefore placed between the East
and South, at the Sun rising in the winter season, the South-East wind:
between the South and West at the sun setting, in the Winter season, the
South-West wind: between the West and North, the North-West wind: between the
North and East, the North-East wind.

Vellus aureum. That honorable badge of the golden fleece, first instituted by
Philip Duke of Burgondie, second of that name, is wont with much earnestness
to be desired and sought by the noblest Peers of a most flourishing kingdom:
even as long since the Flower of Greece with Jason their leader, underwent
great labors and dangers, in hope to possess that Fleece: although, as it
evidently appears, this later fleece cast or graven by Goldsmiths art, is far
different from the former, which that daring Youth carried away from Colchos:
for that golden fleece is thought to have been nothing else but a book written
in parchment, teaching how by the help of Chymicall art gold is to be made.
See Suidas in several places. Eustathius also ad verse. 689 Dionysii de situ
orbis, where Charax a most ancient Author of this opinion is alleged. It
seems therefore that the Ancients not without reason derived the descent of
Aeet as from the Sun, the only nourisher and fountain of mettal-breeding
heat. Diogenes also in Stobaeus Sermon. de Assiduitate.
witnesses Medea to have been not a sorceresse, but a woman of known
wisdom, who with laborious exercises hardened soft and effoeminate men, and as
it were with boiling restored them to the vigor of their former youth.
Palaephatus adds, That she had singular skill in coloring of hair, and that
by a certain decoction found out by her, she was wont to cure the infirmities
of many by the benefit of this hot bath. See Palaephatus de Fabulosis
narrationibus.

Vertumnus was a god that did turn himself into all shapes. See Propertius,
lib. iv, Eleg. 2. His statues were erected in many several places of the city
of Rome, and almost in every municipall town of Italy: his countenance was
made uncertain, and he turned himself into the shape of diverse gods,
according to the diversity of the habit that was put upon him. See Acron in
Horat. lib. II. Sat. 7.

Veritatis simulachrum. The Egyptian priests had the image of Truth cut in a
precious stone, hanging about their neck. See Aelian lib. xiv, var. hist. cap.
34. and Diodorus Siculus lib. I. Compare these places with the sacred history.
But observe here in the mean time, that Aelian and Diodorus, in stead of what
we have translated, an Image of Truth, use a word signifying a statue of Truth.
So does Pliny likewise speak after the same manner when he says, Lib. xxxiii
not. hist. ca. 3.
Men also begin to carry Harpocrates, and the statues of other Egyptian gods
on their fingers. Seeing then it could not be, that statues should hang about
their necks, and that they should wear statues on their fingers, we do
perceive by this confusion of names, that there was but small difference made
between the art of graving and statuary; and we may upon this occasion very
well digress a little to the consideration of such things as were engraven.

12. Things engraven were of several sorts:

Baltheus caelatus, an engraved Belt. Ovid. IX. Metam. verse. 189.

Capuli militum. The hilts of soldiers swords are engraved with silver, ivory
being set light by: says Pliny, lib. xxxiii, cap. 12. Theseus escaped present
death by his engraved ivorv hilt. See Ovid, lib. vii Metam. verse. 423.
Pausanias his sword, famous for the wagon with four horses it had engraved in
the hilt, was fatal unto Philip the King of Macedonia. See Aelian, lib. III,
var. hist. cap. 45. and Valor. Max. lib. I, cap. 8, ex ext. 9.

Carrucae, Carts engraved. See Pliny, lib. xxxiii, cap. 11. Crystalla. Some
Crystal has a flaw in it like unto a breach; which is hid by the artificers
when they do engrave something upon the Crystal. See Pliny, lib. XXXVII, Cap.
2.

Cunae segmentatae; a cradle inlayd with wood of several colors, graved and
carved in diverse shapes. Juvenal, Satyra vi, verse. 89.

Esseda Britanna, an engraved chariot used by the ancient Brittons in their
wars. Propert. lib. II, Eleg. 1.

Figulina vasa caelata, earthen vessels with some engravings upon it. See
Martial, lib. iv, Epigr. 46. Cotys the king being by nature choleric, and
very much given to chastise them severely, that did commit some offenses in
their ordinary kind of service: when a stranger brought unto him thin and
brittle earthen vessels, but neatly wrought with some carved and turned works,
he rewarded the stranger, and brake all the vesiels, Lest, said he, I should in
an angry fume punish them too severely, that might break them unawares. See
Plutarch, Apopht. Regum and Imperatorum.

Galeae caelatae, brazen head-pieces engraved with Corinthian work, are
mentioned by Tully, lib. iv. in Verrem. So does Juvenal also speak of an
engraved helmet, Satyra xi, verse. 103.

Hydriae caelatae, great water-pots engraved with Corinthian work, are
mentioned by Tully, lib. iv, in Verrem.

Lesbium was a kind of engraved vessel invented by the Lesbians. See Festus
Pomp.

Panis caelaturae, the engravings of bread. See Pliny, lib. xix, cap. 4.

Scuta caelata, engraved shields. It was an ordinary thing in the times of the
Trojan war, says Pliny, Lib. xxxi. not. hist. ca. 3.
that the shields should contain images. The original of this custom did
proceed out of a virtuous occasion, that namely the owners image should be
expressed in every one his shield. The Carthaginians made both the shields and
the images of gold, bringing them into their camp. So that their camp being
taken, Q. Martius the revenger of the Scipio's in Spain, found such a one: and
that shield was fastened over the gate of the Capitoline Temple, till the first
burning of the Capitol. Achilles his shield is described by Homer, lliad S.
verse. 474 and sequ. See also the younger Philostratus, in Pyrrho. Aeneas his
shield is described by Virgil, lib. viii, Aeneid. Stesichorus and Euphorion
relate, that Ulysses carried the image of a dolphin in his shield. See Tzetzes
in Lycophronis Cassandram. Alcibiades did ever study to seem fair, but most
of all when he led an Army: so was he then wont to have a shield made of ivory
and gold, and he had in it the ensign of Cupid embracing the Lightning. See
Plutarch, in Alcibiade: and Athenaeus, lib. xii, Deipnosophist. cap. 9. The
shield of Crenaeus, engraved with a most wonderful art, is described by
Statius Papinius, lib. ix, Thebaid verse. 333. Nileus vainly boasting himself
to issue forth from the Nile, had the seven mouths of that noble river engraven
upon his shield, partly of gold, partly of silver. See Ovid, lib. v, Metamorph.
verse. 187. Scaevola, mentioned by Silius Italicus, lib. viii, had the image of
his resolute fore-father Mutius Scaevola engraved upon his shield. The same
Silius, lib. xvii, relates, that the shield of Scipio Africanus had the images
of his father and his uncle engraved upon it.

Vehicula caelata, so says Q. Curtius, lib. III, cap. 3. that there did follow
the camp of Darius, ten wagons engraved with a great deal of gold and silver.

Vitrum caelatum. Of the engraving of glass are these words of Pli. lib.
xxxvi, c. 26. some glass is fashioned by blowing, some is turned, some is
ingraved after the manner of silver.

13. After a sufficient relation of many works of Art, we may not forget here
the several coins of money, a thing most needful for the commerce of
Nations. And what is money, I pray you, but silver cut in small faces and
titles, as Juvenal speaks Satyra xiv, verse. 291. Those that know how to
discern the several sorts of coins judiciously, find a wonderful
difference between the moneys coined in the times when these Arts of imitation
did flourish, and when they were neglected: and they do esteem it a most
easy thing to know by the money, what forwardness or backwardness of Art
there was in the times that money was coined. But among many most accurat sorts
of coin anciently famous, the Cyziceni stateres were most of all renowned, as
being well stamped: they had a woman's face on the one side, and the forepart
of a Lion on the other side: see Hesychius and Suidas; as also Zenobius and
Diogenianus parmiographers.

14. That the most ancient Hebrews have had the use of sealing-rings, is
prooved by the ring Juda gave unto Thamar for a pledge till he should perform
his promise: see Genes. xxxviii. So do we likewise read Exodus xxxix, 6. that
among other ornaments of the Priest, they wrought onyx stones enclosed in
ouches of gold, graven as signets are graven, with the names of the children of
Israel. The Grecians seem to have attained a great deal later to the
knowledge of sealing-rings: and that, either for ignorance, as not knowing how
to grave stones; or else, because they did respect gemmes more then to mangle
them with cutting. Their ignorance is detected by Hesychius, Theophrast. hist.
plant. lib. v, cap. I. Tzetzes adversum 508 Lycophronis Cassandrae; for these
authors do teach us, that the most ancient among them, for want of other
means, were wont to seal with worm-eaten pieces of wood: so does Pliny Lib.
xxxiii, cap. 1.
also witness that the greatest part of the Nations that were under the Roman
Empire had not yet in his age the use of rings; and the Eastern Countries or
Egypt do not yet sign, says he, being contented with bare letters. Their
veneration is mentioned by the same Pliny in the preface of his 37 book,
where he says that they did think it unlawful to violate gemmes: and
afterward in the fifth chapter of the said book, where he does speak of
Smaradgs, they are for the most part hollow, says he, as to gather the sight;
wherefore they are spared by the decree of men, it being for bidden that they
should be cut. Herodotus Lib. III. hist.
for all this relates that the famous sealing-ring of Polycrates was a
Smaradge graven by Theodorus Samius, quite contrary to the opinion of Pliny
lib. xxxvij, cap. 1. But of this, God willing, more at large in our Catalogue
of Artificers.

CHAP. IX.
THe use of these Arts therefore extending it self generally to all
employments both in war and peace, it may not seem strange that all sorts of
men did honor them very much, and that the spirits of the Artificers likewise
finding themselves so much honored for their Art, did still endeavor to
increase this enjoyed favor by daily advancing these highly esteemed Arts.
Industry is fed by glory, says Salust. orat. 2. de Rep. ordinanda: as many
as are led by the hope of glory and fame, are wonderfully taken with the praise
and approbation proceeding from the inferior sort of men also, says the
younger Pliny lib. IV, epist. 12. Honor does nourish Arts, says Tullie Circa
initium libri Primi Tuscul. quaest.
, and we are all drawn by glory to take pains; so are also such things ever
neglected, as are little regarded in the opinion of men. All things certainly
do so much stand upon this reward, that Picture also (though she does
possess a great deal of pleasure and contentment in her own self) is very
much encouraged by the present fruit of praise and opinion: for what else meant
C. Fabius a most noble Roman? says Val. Maxim Lib. VIII. cap. 14. ex. 6.
. who when he had painted the walls of the temple of Salus, before dedicated by
C. Junius Bubulcus, he set his own name to it: as if a consular, sacerdotall,
and triumphall family stood yet in want of this ornament: following herein the
example of Phydias, who so placed his own image in the shield of Minerva, that
it could not be taken away, without dissolving the whole jointure of the work.
Quintilian therefore says very well Lib. IV. orat. instit. cap. 2.
, we do all depend upon praise, thinking it to be the uttermost end of our
labor. Sauros and Batrachos may serve for an example, who being Lacedaemonians
by nation, made temples within the porches of Octavia, says Pliny Lib. xxxvi,
not. hist. cap. 5.
, some hold also that being very wealthy they built them on their own charges,
hoping for the honor of an inscription; which being denied them, they found
means to steal it another way; for on the lower squares of the pillars are
yet engraved a lizard and a frogge, by which their names are signified. The
same Pliny also had good reason to say in another place Lib. xxxv, cap. 1.
, Picture was a noble Art in ancient times, when it was sought for by Kings and
Nations. And Plutarch does show at the First beginning of his Second book of
Alexander his virtue or fortune, that in the times of this great King there was
so great an increase of Arts and Artificers, because the rare wits of
excellent Artificers foresaw that they could not want the favorable estimation
of such a Judge, if they did any thing worth his sight.

2. That great and eminent men in ancient times were very skillful in these
Arts, may be gathered out of that love and respect the Artificers enjoyed. It
is by a natural vice grafted and rooted in the breasts of men, that such as do
not understand the Arts, do not admire the Artificers, says Sidonius
Apollinaris lib. v, epist. 10. Virtues are obscured by reason of the ignorance
of Art, says Vitruvius in prooemio libri Tertii. Seeing then that excellent
Artificers think themselves to be placed upon a Theater, where nothing heateth
their forward spirits so much as the astonished acclamations and applauses of
all sorts of men, it was no wonder that many did excel in those times when
Kings with their Peers resorted to the shops of Painters, kindling in the
hearts of the Artificers an unspeakable desire to have this glory still
continued and increased. Demetrius surnamed Poliorcetes, whilst he was at the
siege of Rhodes, did not stick to come to Protogenes, who was then busy with
the picture of Jalysus, and leaving the hope of his victory, he beheld the
Artificer in the midst of hostill weapons and batterings of the wall, as Pliny
speaks, lib. xxxv, cap. 10. see that copious Author himself. The great
monarch Alexander came likewise to Apelles his shop, very often accompanied
with a good many Princes: and although it was the greatest honor man's heart
could wish, that the monarch of the world, whose judgment was esteemed to be
the judgment of the world, should express his favor after so loving and
familiar a manner; yet has this magnanimous King found another way, to grace
the Artificer a great deal more: for when he had commanded, says Pliny Lib.
xxxv, cap. 10.
, that Campaspe, one of his most beloved Concubines, in regard of her
wonderful beauty, should be painted naked by Apelles; he gave her unto
Apelles, when he perceived him to be as deep entangled in the love of the
woman as he found himself to be: great was his mind, and yet was the
conquering of his own lust greater: wherefore has he likewise been as much
esteemed for this deed, as for any other victory; seeing he overcame himself
in this. Neither did he give his bed only to the Artificer, but his affection
also: not so much as suffering himself to be moved with the respect of his
beloved, but rather giving way that she who had been a Kings concubine,
should now be the concubine of a Painter. Out of the like respect of Art came
it to pass, that the same King, to leave a truer image unto posterity, would
not have his image by many Artificers promiscuously defiled; making a
proclamation thorough all his Dominions, that no body should unadvisedly
undertake to express his image in brass, in colors, or in any engraved
work; but that Polycletus alone should cast him in brass, Apelles alone
should paint him in colors, Pyrgoteles alone should engrave him: besides these
three, who were most famous for their workmanship, if any one was found any
where to meddle with the sacred image of the King, he should be severely
punished for his sacrilegious attempt. The fear therefore of this edict
brought to pass, that Alexander his image was every where the prime image; and
that in all statues, pictures, and engravings there was to be seen the same
vigor of a most vehement warrier, the same marks of the greatest dignity,
the same liveliness of his fresh youth, the same grace of his high forehead.
Apuleius in Floridis. Observe here by the way, that Horace names Lysippus in
stead of Polycletus: see him lib. II, Epist. 1.

3. As we see in the former relation how much Artificers were countenanced in
old times, so do we likewise understand the great esteem they were in by the
high rates their works were prised at. It is known that a picture of
Bularchus the Painter was valued at the weight of it in gold by Candaules King
of Lydia: so much was the Art even in those times esteemed, Plin. lib. xxxv,
cap. 8. Aristides the Thebane painted a battle fought with the Persians,
wherein were an hundred figures, and he agreed with Mnason the tyrant of the
Eleatenses to receive ten minas for every figure. He was so powerful in his
Art, that King Attalus is reported to have bought one of his pictures for an
hundred talents; Pliny xxxv, 10. Polycletus made Diadumenon tenderly
youthful, which was famous for the price of an hundred talents; Pliny xxxiv,
8. When L. Mummius saw that Attalus the King bought out of the prey of Corinth
one piece done by Aristides for six thousand sesterces, he could not but wonder
at the price; wherefore suspecting that there was some unknown virtue in that
picture, he called it back, not without great complaints of Attalus, Pliny
xxxv, 4. Apelles having painted Alexander the great in the temple of Diana
Ephesia, holding a thunderbolt in his hand, at the price of twenty talents of
gold, the reward of his workmanship was given him in golden coin by measure not
by number; Pliny xxxv, 10. Lucullus agreed with Arcesilaus a worker in clay to
make him an image of Felicity for xliiii sesterces: the death of both hindered
the work. And when Octavius a Roman knight would make a fine drinking-cup,
Arcesilaus had a talent of him for making a pattern of plaister-worke. Pliny
xxxv, 12. Mnason the tyrant gave unto Asclepiodorus for the images of twelve
Gods three hundred minas a piece: the same Mnason gave also unto Theomnestus an
hundred minas for the picture of every one of the Worthies painted by him
Pliny xxxv, 10. Hortensius the orator bought Cydias his Argonaurs for xliiij
sesterces, and made a chapel for this picture in his Tusculan country house;
Pliny xxxv, 11. Timomachus Byzantius in the times of Caesar dictator made for
him the pictures of Ajax and Medea; Caesar paid fourscore talents for them,
setting them up in the temple of Venus genetrix. Plin. xxxv, 11. In the mention
of Statues there is one near the Rostra that may not be forgotten, although
the author of it be not known; the Statue of Hercules clothed in an Elean
habit: he has a lowering countenance, and seems to feel his last agony in
his coat. That this Statue was judged to be worth a great deal of strife, may
be gathered out of the three titles it shows: the first is, that it was L.
Lucullus the general his booty taken from the enemies: the second is, that
Lucullus his son a pupil did dedicate it by the decree of the Senate: the
third is, that T. Septimius Sabinus, when he was Aedilis curulis, restored it
to the public out of a private possession; Plin. xxxiv, 8. M. Agrippa, though
he was a man that might seem to be more given to rusticitie then to such kind
of delicacies, yet did he buy from the inhabitants of Cyzicus two pictures of
Ajax and Venus for twelve thousand sesterces. Plin. xxxv, 4. Tiberius the
Emperor was taken very much with Parrhasius his Archigallus, and kept this
picture, valued LX sesterces, in his bedchamber. Plin. xxxv, 10. It is
reported that hundred talents of the tribute enjoined were abated to the
inhabitants of Coos, to make them willing to part with the picture of Venus
anadyomene. Strabo lib. XIV. Geogr. Nicomedes the King would have bought
Praxiteles his Venus of the Gnidians, offering for it to pay all their debts,
which did amount to a great sum of money: but they chose rather to endure any
extremity, then to part with such a rare piece of work: neither was it
without cause that the Gnidians did show themselves so resolute, seeing
Praxiteles made Gnidus renowned by this piece of work. Pliny xxxvi, 5.
Lysippus made the statue of one rubbing of himself, which Marcus Agrippa
dedicated and set up before the entrance into his bathes. Tiberius the Emperor
was so much taken with this statue, that, although in the beginning of his
reign he had his affections in his power, he could not long command himself
in this, but took it away and set it up in his bedchamber, placing another in
the room of it, which the people of Rome took so hainously, that in the
public theaters with one voice they often and with much importunity required
it might be restored; never ceasing till the Emperor, though much against his
will, caused it to be set up in the former plate again. Pliny xxxiv, 8. Our
age saw in the chancell of June in the Capitol a dog of brass licking the
hinder parts of swine: the singular miracle and near resemblance unto truth of
which statue is not only understood in that it was dedicated there, but by a
new kind of suretiship taken for it also; for it being valued at so high a
rate, that no sum of money was thought sufficiently answerable for the loss
of it, it was resolved by public advice, that those which undertook the
custody of it, should bind their own bodies for the performance of their
undertakings. Plin. xxxiv, 7. It is much questioned who were the makers of
Olympus, Pan, Chiron, and Achilles, which are set up in a place known by the
name of Septa; much the more, because fame has delivered them worthy to be
answered with the lives of them that undertook their keeping. Pliny xxxvi, 5.
The example of Clesis made famous by the injury done to Queen Stratonice is
very remarkable: for much disdaining the slender entertainment he received from
her, he painted her in the wanton embracements of a fisherman the Queen was
said to be in love withal; and leaving this picture exposed to the public
view in the haven of Ephesus, he took shipping and escaped away: the Queen,
for the excellency of the Art and rare expression of the persons, would not
suffer the picture to be removed; so bestowing upon the art, though in a
subject most contumelious and spightfull, the honor she had denied to the
Artificer, Pliny xxxv, 11.

4. It appears by all these examples what care great Kings and mighty
Commonwealths took to cherish the brave spirits of excellent Artificers; and
there was good cause for it; seeing it most of all concerns those that are
virtuous, for the upholding of Arts invented, to make some difference between
deserving and undeserving men. Whosoever performs deeds worthy of verses,
says In praefat. libri Tertii de laudib. Stiliconis.
Claudian, is also a lover of verses: even so must they needs love Statues, who
know themselves worthy of that honor. The Artificers themselves did likewise
reap great profit out of this respect the flower of the world gave them;
neither was it possible they should think meanly of themselves, seeing they
could not but judge their Arts worth so much as they saw them valued at by the
matchless moderators of earthly things: having therefore once drunk in this
persuasion, they were instantly possessed with the love of a strange
magnanimity. Nicias refused to sell his picture called Necyia to King Attalus,
who offered for it LX talents: but being himself very rich, chose rather to
bestow it as a present upon his Country. Pliny xxxv, 11. Zeuxis first began to
make presents of his works, saying that no price could be answerable to their
worth; so he bestowed Alomena upon the inhabitants of Agrigentum, Pan upon
Archelaus; Pliny xxxv, 9. Polygnotus painted at Athens the porch called
Poecile freely; whereas Mycon did paint a part of it for a reward: no wonder
then that Polygnotus was of more esteem and authority: and the Amphictyones,
a public council of Greece, bestowed upon him lodgings rent-free; Pliny
xxxv, 9. It was then discreetly done of these Artificers, that they would not
lessen the authority of their Art: seeing many things lose their worth for
nothing so much, says Quintilian Lib. XII, cap. 7.
, as that they may be prised at a certain rate.

5. By the consideration of the honor given to these Arts, the Artificers
themselves were admonished to use them with more respect, and being ashamed to
confine Arts of so large extent within a narrow compass, they would not employ
them in adorning the walls of private houses for the delight of particular
landlords only, nor of such places as could not be defended from the danger
of casual fires. Protogenes was contented with a little cottage in his garden.
In the plaisterings of Apelles his house there was never any picture to be
seen: no body as yet took a pleasure in painting whole walls over: all their
art was for Cities, and the Painter was a public thing for the benefit of all
Countries, says Pliny xxxv, 10. There is extant a most magnificent and worthy
oration of M. Agrippa, says the same Author Lib. xxxv, cap. 4.
, concerning the publishing of all Pictures and Statues; which were better it
had been done, then that they should be banished and confined to some private
country-houses. The old Artificers therefore as they would not have their
works smoothered up in some private corners, so were they very careful in
publishing them; and it proceeded out of this same veneration of the Art, that
the founders of painting and casting, says Pliny In praefatione ardui operis.
, inscribed their accomplished works, and such as can never satisfy our
admiration, with an uncertain title, saying, Apelles faciebat aut Polycletus,
Apelles or Polycletus made it: to make the world think that the Art was but
begun and left unperfect; that the Artificer likewise by this means might look
for pardon, even as if he should have mended all, unless he had been
intercepted by an untimely death. So was it then a custom full of modesty, and
it did show in them a wonderful veneration of these Arts, that they would have
posterity look upon all their works as if they were their last works, and
that the fatal hour had taken them away before they could make a full end. It
is reported that there have been but three pictures which were absolutely
inscribed, Apelles fecit, Apelles has made it: whereby it did appear that the
author would have the Art above all things secured: and for this reason were
all such works subject to a great deal of envy. That now they sped well with
that tender care they had of the credit of these Arts, is manifest out of the
following words of Pliny, It is a very rare and most memorable thing, says he
Lib. xxxv, cap. 11.
, that the last works of Artificers and their unperfect pictures have been in
greater admiration then the perfect; as namely, Aristides his Iris, Nicomachus
his Tyndarides, Timomachus his Medea, Apelles his Venus; seeing there are in
such kind of Pictures to be seen the remaining lineaments and the very
thoughts of the Artificers: so does our grief also commend the work unto us,
whilst we cannot but love and desire the hands which perished in the midst of
such a work. But here must we needs note by the way, that when the ancient
Artificers are said to have been spurred on by the hope of glory, it is meant
of the true and solid glory, and not of a false and momentany shadow of the
same. Many that mountebank-like only brag of their Art, mistake themselves
herein very much; for whilst they do by a preposterous ambition make haste to
attain to the much desired glory and praise, they do think themselves very
well if they can but make their pictures fair to the eye of unskilful
spectators, setting forth as in a shop whatsoever may trim and garnish their
work: it is their own credit they seek, and not the credit of the Art. But
Art on the other side does laugh them to scorn that are so contumelious against
her, says Quintilian lib. X, cap. 7. And whilst they would feign bring to
pass that the unskilful should think them skillful, the skillful do in the
mean time find them to be altogether unskilful: to please the vulgar sort of
people only, says Plutarch De Educ. lib.
, is to displease the wiser sort: but of this care proceeding out of a
venerable respect of Art shall we speak at large by and by in the eleventh
Chapter.

6. This generous love of an everlasting renown continued in the Artificers as
long as these Arts were had in esteem by Kings and Nations: but after that the
love of money began to thrust this veneration of Art out of the hearts of men,
Artificers also grew thinner and thinner, till none at length were left: this
was the observation of Arbiter a good while since: I did ask, says he In
Satyrico.
, a most skillful man concerning the different ages and times of diverse
pictures, as also concerning some other arguments obscure unto me, examining
withal the causes of our present sloathfulnes, by the which so many brave Arts
are utterly lost, and how it came to pass that the art of painting among such
a number of decayed Arts had not retained so much as the least shadow of her
ancient beauty. His answer was, that the love of money made this change. For
in old time, when naked virtue was yet in esteem, said he, all kind of
ingenuous arts did flourish; and the greatest strife amongst men was, that
nothing might be long hid what might be for the profit of posterity. To speak
then something of Statuaries, poverty has undone Lysippus whilst he did hang
about the lineaments of one statue; and Myron, who did in a manner enclose the
souls of men and wild beasts in brass, could find no heir. But we now,
lying deeply plunged in drunkenness and lechery, dare not so much as try any
arts: and taking upon us to be accusers, rather than followers of antiquity, we
teach and learn nothing else but vices. Do not wonder therefore that picture
is lost, seeing all the gods and men think a lump of gold better than all that
Apelles and Phydias a couple of doting Grecians have made. See also Theocr.
Idyl. xvi. Plin. in prooemio lib. xiv. Dionys. Longinus de sublimi Orat. ultima.

7. When such great and eminent men therefore as should have been the
supporters of art, grew slack, esteeming their chiefest felicity to consist
in the possession of gold and silver; those arts also which from their greatest
good were called Liberal, became servile. For the Artificers finding but small
comfort in the exercise of their own arts, did most readily and heartily
embrace the most offensive solace of luxurious pastime, studying only how to
supply the expenses of luxury by avarice; and so quenching the small remnant of
generous thoughts, by these two most pestilent and pernicious vices, it could
not then be otherwise, but that both Arts and artificers should mis-carry and
go to wrack. Of luxury says Seneca the Rhetorician, In prooem. lib. I.
controvers.
There is nothing so deadly to the wit of man as luxury. Of Avarice, says
Epictetus, Arriani Epict. li. iv. c. 4.
The desire of riches makes men base minded. See Horace in his Art of Poesy.
Gold and silver was in old time mixed with brass, says Pliny, Li. xxxiv. Not.
hist. c. 4.
and yet was the art more costly than the material. Now on the contrary, it is
uncertain whether the art or the material be worse: And which is very
strange, though the value of rare works is infinitely increased, yet is the
authority of the art quite gone: seeing all is now done for gain, what was
wont to be done for glory. Mark here only by the way, that these words of
Pliny do not disallow of all gain, neither can there be any juster kind of
gain, than out of the honest industry of a laborious Art; principally if the
said Art take up so much of a man's time, that he cannot think of any other
way to gain by. Pliny his meaning is, That the ancient artificers did first and
most of all aim at glory, knowing that they should have gain enough, having
once obtained the credit of a good workman. These two things may therefore very
well stand together, That an artificer should chiefly intend the glory of his
name, and yet in the second place look after some reasonable gain; seeing an
honest desire of gain, free from the baseness of a mind that gapeth for
nothing but money, does greatly increase our endeavors in all manner of Arts. It
is known well enough, says Cassiodorus, Variar. 7. 15.
that the studies of Arts are to be nourished and maintained with reasonable
rewards. Theophylactus Simocatus expresses the same more copiously: The hunger
and thirst of gold in mankind, says he, Epist. 10.
is very profitable; for thereby our life is furnished with good arts, cities
are inhabited, and mutual contracts are performed with a great deal of ease.
To be brief, the inhabited world should be deprived of all decency of order,
if for the intercourse of gold men stood not in need of one the other. A
mariner would not put to sea, a traveller would not undertake a journey,
husbandmen would not be troubled with the keeping of plow-oxen, the sovereignty
of Royal scepters should want respect, the subjects could not be honored with
dignities and revenues, it should not be in the power of a General to lead an
Army. And if you will learn a great secret, Gold is put in trust with the
reins of virtue and vice; the appetite of our soul is tried by it, seeing it
may very well be compared with the Celtick River, in that it yields an
unfallible proof of counterfeit virtue.

CHAP. X.
UPon the enjoying of glory follows a confident boldness of art. The Art
has been incredibly advanced, says Pliny, Lib. xxxiv. cap. 7.
by success first, and afterward by boldness. Understand here by Success
nothing else, but that same veneration Art enjoyed as long as Kings and Nations
made much of it. Afterward by boldness, says he, to insinuate unto us, that
this success made the artificers more prompt and ready to venture upon greater
matters. The huge Colosses of the Ancients may serve here for an example; and
Pliny in the said place brings in some of them for a testimony of their most
confident boldness. Zeuxis has bin above all the rest admired for this
boldness, seeing he did first enter into the gates opened by Apollodorus,
says Pliny Lib. xxxiiii cap. 7.
, and brought the pencill, after it durst now do something, to a great glory.
Of the boldness of this excellent Artificer, see Lucian in his little treatise
entitled Zeuxis. Dinocrates has also given us a notable example of
confidence, which, God willing, shall be related in our Catalogue. It was then
very well avouched by Melanthius the Painter, in his books written of the Art
of painting, that it is not amiss there should be perceived some kind of
selfe-liking and hardness in the works of excellent Artificers. See Laert.
lib. iv, in Polemone. There is a Theseus done by Euphranor, of whom he said,
that Parrhasius his Theseus was fed with roses, but that his Theseus was fed
with flesh. See Pliny, lib. xxxv. cap. 11. So did then the Ancients boldly
follow the motions of their stirred spirit; where as we on the contrary, as if
now all were perfect dare not bring forth any thing, says Quintilian, Li.
viii. Orat. Instit. cap. 6.
yea we suffer also many things invented by the Ancients to decay.

2. Much then does that excellency of spirit avail, that will not suffer it
self to be daunted by the authority of them that are like to censure our
work. For as the contrary vice of a temerarie and arrogant confidence is
very much to be detested; so is it not possible that art, study, yea
advancement it self, should help any thing, without a discreet and constant
confidence; even as an unwarlike coward shall not be much the better, though
you furnish him with all manner of exquisit armor. We are therefore above all
things to avoid this preposterous shamefastness, which is nothing else but a
certain kind of fear, says Quintilian, Li. xii. orat. Instit. ca. 5.
drawing back our mind from those things that are to be done; whereupon
follows most commonly confusion, and loathing of what we have already begun:
so that no body doubts to refer that passion among the number of vices,
that makes us ashamed of doing well. I am almost loath to say it, because it
may be mistaken, that shame fastness is a vice, but a lovely one, yea such a
one as does most easily engender virtues: she does in the mean time great
hurt, causing all that is good in our wits and studies, for want of publishing,
to be consumed by the rust of too much secrecy. Howsoever, confidence is the
best way to amend this shamefastness: and though a man be nevr so shamefaced,
yet may he support himself by the help of a good conscience, if he be but
privy unto himself that he wants no art. Although a forward boldness be
all in all, yet may not the Artificer be so secure as not to understand the
danger, provided that it be an understanding of the work, and no fear; he
may be moved with it, though he must not yield and fall down under it. For
how great danger is there in this work, wherein we are very often deceived by
a show of goodness? Whosoever does affect smooth things, says Horace De Art
Poet.
, wants sinews and spirit for the most part. He that professes great
things is very often puffed up. He that will be too secure, and stands
always in fear of a storm, uses to creep along the shore. The very
shunning of vice, when it wants art, leads us unto vice.

We are also lead into error by the great multitude of them that judge amiss,
seeing unskilful artificers do always in their opinion paint with more
force. And it is ever seen, that the unlearned do believe those things to be
of greater force, which want art: even as they use to think it a matter of
greater strength to break up, than to open; to tear asunder, than to unty; to
draw, than to lead. They do most frequently judge also, that there is more
greatness in rude things, than in such things as are polished: yea, that there
is more copiousnesse in things wildely scattered, than in things well and
orderly digested. As many then as are best experienced in thse arts, do most
of all fear the difficulty of the work, the several events of the Art, the
doubtful and uncertain expectation of men. It is not safe to do any thing
foolishly before the face of the world, when we begin to try the hope of a
durable name: neither is it a small matter to undergo the censure of the whole
world: so does an invited guest also expect a great deal better
entertainment, than one that comes of his own motion suddenly upon us. Such
as are provoked, judge more nicely: neither will they be satisfied with mere
allurements, and a kind of pleasing noveltie, where they do look for the true
force of Art. It falls out very often also, that we spy the vices sooner in
the works of others, than their virtues: and whatsoever does justly offend the
spectator, uses also to extinguish the glory of praiseworthy things: in these
arts chiefly, which are not so much for necessary use, as a free recreation
of the mind, how nicely do men censure. As in a most pleasing banquet, a
confused harmony, gross ointments, and Poppy with honey of Sardus do offend
us, says Horace De art Poetica.
, because the feast might be very well without them; so is it with Poemes,
which being invented to delight and recreate the mind, are esteemed most base
if they do but swarve a little aside from that height of grace they should
have. What Horace says here of Poets, may also be applied to painters and
statuaries, seeing their industry does intend nothing else but the recreation
of our eyes, as Max. Tyrius speaks, Dissertat. 5.

3. An artificer therefore is to take care, that he do not only give them
content, who must of necessity content themselves with his work: but that he
may also seem admirable unto them, which may judge freely of what he does. It
is not enough an artificer should paint well after his own liking, but after
the liking of accurate and judicious spectators; neither may he think
himself to have painted well, unless skillful men think him to have done so.
Whatsoever is to be dedicated unto posterity, and to remain for an example
unto others, had need be neat, polished, and made according to the true rule
and law of art; because it is likely to come into the hands of skillful
censurers, and such as are artificers shall judge of his art. Whosoever
therefore is not able to make works worthy of the eyes of men, nor to deserve
the name of an Artificer, and yet is not touched with that reverend respect due
to the art he defiles, though he study never so much to decline infamy, may
justly be esteemed impudent: seeing we are to shun the name of impudence,
says Tully Li. i. de oratore.
, not by showing our selves to he ashamed, but by not doing those things we may
be justly ashamed of. We are therefore to use here so much moderation, as not
to lay over-hastily aside all shame, and to publish our raw and unripe studies,
says Quintilian Li. xii. orat. Instit. cap. 6.
; for by thus doing, there is engendered in us a contempt of the work, we do
lay the grounds of impudence, and (which is every where most pernicious) a
foole-hardy confidence preventeth our strength. Neither ought we to delay our
first trial till we wax old, for fear increases daily, and what we are to
attempt seems still to grow harder and more difficult, and it grows too late
to begin, whilst we lose time in deliberating when to begin. It behooveth us
therefore to bring forth the green and sweet-fruit of our studies, whilst
pardon, hope, and favor readily attend us: neither does it mis-become us to
attempt something boldly, seeing age may supply what there is wanting in the
work; and if any thing seems to be painted somewhat youthfully, it is esteemed
to proceed out of a promising forwardness of our natural inclination. A youth
therefore in my opinion, that does as yet rely upon his tender strength, is to
begin with an easy and pleasing argument, even as dog-whelps are fleshed with
a more gentle prey of wild beasts: neither is he from this beginning to
continue his labor and to harden his wit, which is rather to be cherished. So
shall be best overcome the fear of beginning, whilst it is easier for him to
adventure; and yet shall this facility of daring not bring him to a contempt
of the work. Let him for all that, at the first follow the steps of a wary
leader, till he find it safe to resolve with Lysippus, unto a further boldness
upon occasion of Eupompus his answer, as we have related the same in the third
chapter of this book, 3.

CHAP. XI.
ALthough Artificers might justly seem to be emboldened by the success of
Art, yet did they never run on with such a confident rashness, as to forget
the care due unto these Arts. It is a good saying of Fabius Maximus Apud Livium
lib. xxii ab v. c.
, All things shall be sure and clear unto him that does not make too much
haste: rashness is improvident and blind. An artificer therefore cannot be
without diligence, a great help of a mean wit also, says Seneca the
Rhetorician In prooemio libri Tertii Controvers.
. Metrocles was wont to say, That houses and such like things were to be bought
with silver, but that learning could not be had without the expense of time
and care Apud Laertium lib. vi.
. Pamphilus his school, as we have showed before out of Pliny, did not
dismiss the disciples, unless they had passed their ten years in an orderly
course of learning. This was a most laudable custom, seeing advancement does
most of all consist in diligence, says Quintilian Li. II. orat. Instit. cap. 7.
. Neither did the Ancients when they came forth out of the shadow of the
schools to the public light, instantly forsake that diligence used about the
first beginnings of Art; but they did rather resolve to follow with a constant
perseverance, what they had begun with a studious industry. Nicias his
diligence has been mentioned before out of Plutarch. Protogenes when he was
about the picture of Jalysus, is said to have lived by moistened lupines, as
being able to satisfy hunger and thirst both at once; lest he should dull his
senses too much with the sweetness of meat. He laid his colors four times
over this picture, for a defense against all injuries and age; that the
lowermost color might succeed when the uppermost should fail. Pliny xxxv. 10.
Apelles had this custom, says Pliny in the same place, that he never would
suffer himself to be so much employed a whole day, but that he remembered ever
to exercise the art by drawing of a line: and this custom of his became a
common proverb. Yea, we may learn out of the following words also, that
Apelles by the means of this diligence put down Protogenes in that most
famous strife of drawing subtle lines. It is pretty, what fell out between
Protogenes and Apelles, says Pliny. Protogenes did live at Rhodes; whither
when Apelles was come, desirous to know the works of him whom he knew only by
fame, he made haste to go to his shop. Protogenes himself was absent, but an
old woman kept a large board, already fitted upon the Ass or scaffold, to
have something drawn upon it. The old woman having answered, that Protogenes
was gone forth, asked withal, whom she should say had looked for him. Tell
him, said Apelles, that this is the man that sought him: and taking a pencill,
he drew an exceeding thin line with one or other color upon the board. The
old woman at Protogenes his return showed him instantly what was done. And it
is reported that the artificer, having considered the finenesse of the line,
did forthwith profess himself to know that Apelles was come; seeing he held
it impossible that such an absolute work should be done by any body else. It is
added also, that Protogenes drew a thinner line with another color over the
said line, bidding the old woman at his going forth, that she should show this
unto him that had asked for him and tell him that this was the man he did look
for. It fellout so. Apelles returns: but being ashamed to be overcome, he
divided the lines with a third color, not leaving an further place for
subtlety. Whereupon Protogenes confessing himself overcome, did hastily run
to the haven, seeking the stranger: this same board was left unto the following
ages without any change, to the astonishment of all men, but of Artificers
chiefly. We have greedily viewed it before the first firing of Caesar his
house in the palace, where it perished, containing in a more spacious
wideness nothing else, but such lines as could hardly be discerned by the eye:
so that this board among the brave works of many Artificers did seem to be
empty, alluring the spectators therefore and being indeed more noble then any
other work. I know well enough that many will not understand these words of
Pliny after that plain meaning the alleged place urges; yet do they not
persuade us to take these words otherwise, then of the strife of lines most
subtly drawn with a light and gentle hand. But of this, God willing, some
where else: seeing it is better we should pursue our intent, by comparing that
careful diligence of the ancients with the careless negligence of these our
times.

2. And first we think good not to hinder the persuasion of them who esteem
our inbred abilities to be alone sufficient to make us Artificers: let them
only give way to our labors, seeing nothing in our opinion can be perfect,
but when Nature is helped by care Quint. orat. instit. xi, 3.
. Neither can we conceive it otherwise; because we do find that among so many
rare wits none have anciently obtained the highest fame of Art, but such as not
contenting themselves to salute the schools of Painters afar off, and to
spend a very small time of apprentiship in them, thought it rather needful to
be a great while a learning what they would afterward teach others, least they
should be forced to learn any thing at the time of teaching: so do we likewise
perceive that the majesty of these Arts was trodden under foot, as soon as the
love of too much ease made men neglect the care due unto the first principles
of Art. Such things as do grow up without any foundation, says Seneca Lib. I.
de Ira, cap. ultimo.
, are subject unto ruin: it is therefore a gross error, when many by a false
persuasion of their teachers go about to sever this Art from the elegancy of a
more grave and severe kind of learning; as if the whole exercise of Art did
chiefly consist in an easy and ready practice without any further care: Such
as make great haste, says Quintilian Lib. IV. orat. instit. cap. 5.
, must needs think slightly of every thing that is to be done before they come
to what is last. Hence it is that they forsake things indeed necessary for the
love of things seeming more specious; yea they neglect and loath such great
helps of Art, as cannot be wanted; not looking for any commendation of their
wit from things far remote from ostentation, seeing the tops of high
buildings are noted, the foundations are hid, says Quintilian In prooemio
libri Primi.
. Besides these there are others of a more lazy arrogance, despising all
precepts of Art after they have spent but a little time in the schools of
Painters, and seeking to gain authority by the contempt of them that study
to bring to these Arts not their hand only, but all such things also as may
conduce to Art. These are they that do small things with a great deal of
ease, says Quintilian Lib. I. orat. instit. cap. 3.
, and being thus emboldened, they show instantly whatsoever they know
themselves able to do; though they can do nothing, but what is near at hand:
they do not much, but quickly: there wants true force in their work, seeing
it has not taken a deep root; even as seeds cast upon the upper most ground
do spring up more readily, and like blasted ears of corn make a show of
ripeness before harvest. These things compared with their years, are pleasing
at the first; but the advancement afterward being at a stay, the admiration
also does decrease.

3. Whosoever therefore desires a more complete and absolute knowledge of
these Arts, must by all means believe that all such things do belong unto his
care, which are able to perfect an Artificer; and that it is not possible to
attain to the height of any thing, but by the means of some forerunning
beginnings; yea that he may not look for greater matters, unless he first
stoop down to the lesser. Studies have also their infancy, says Quintilian
Lib. I. orat. instit. cap. 1.
: and as the education of such bodies, as at any time shall be the strongest,
begins with milk and cradle; even so does he which may in time be a most
consummat Artificer, hang a great while about the first lines, standing in need
of a hand to lead his hand, until he use himself a little to the right
stroke: as it is impossible to attain to the height of any thing, but by some
beginnings; so do the first things, when the work goes on, seem to be the
least, says Quintilian Lib. X. orat. instit. cap. 1.
: the height of all Arts, as of trees, delights us very much; so do not the
roots: and yet can there be no height without the roots, says Tullie De
Perfecto oratore.
: unexperienced children do first apprehend the figure and name of letters,
says Manilius Lib. II. Astron.
, their use is afterward taught them by the making up of syllables; words
follow; the force of things and the use of Art does lastly arise out of them:
it makes much for our maine end to have learned the first rudiments in order:
yea the preposterous labor of over-hastened precepts shall come to nothing,
unless learning be grounded upon his proper elements. The ancients therefore
not despising such small things (although in studies nothing may be counted
small, that does advance our principal intent) have made these Arts great;
rather contenting themselves with a slow then with an uncertain event.

4. How much do the customs of our young men at this time differ from the
said practice of the ancients? for who is there among many thousands that
confessing himself inferior gives place to the age or authority of a better
Master? says the younger Pliny Lib. viii. Epist. 23.
, they are wise at one instant; they are forthwith filled with all knowledge;
they stand in awe of no body; they imitate no body; they need not take
example by any body, seeing they are an example unto themselves. These Arts
were in times past studied with much respect; but now, after that we have made
the greatest point of Art our first entrance into the Art, all go to it
without any reason or modesty; wholesome counsel is generally rejected; we
do not suffer our selves to be led orderly into the Art, but we do rush in,
having once broke the bars of shame and reverence: you can hardly meet with
any one that aspireth to the consummation of this most magnificent Art by
tracing the beaten path of necessary precepts held by the ancients, neither
will any one fit himself to greater things by giving a document of himself in
lesser matters, but all do by an overthwart consent forsake the most
profitable diligence in smaller things; and whilst they mean to step from the
lowest to the highest, neglecting whatsoever is in the midst, the hope of
their labor is lost for want of care: there was never any brave thing brought
to pass by negligence, says Max. Tyrius Dissert. xxxiv.
: as Nature will not have us sweat for small things, says Libanius In Progym.
, so does she not reward our sloathfulnesse with great matters. Seeing then
that almost all are in this error, yet should we conceive a better hope of
the Art, if we thought that any Students could be recalled; whereas now the
case seems rather to be desperate, their senses being so much possessed with
the present joy, that they are loath to admit any thing unto their eyes or
ears whereby this unprovident joy of theirs might be lessened: they do like
very well of the course already taken, says Quintilian Lib. iii. orat.
Instit. ca. 1.
, neither is it easy to divert them from the persuasions drunk in whilst they
were children; because every one thinks it better to have learned already,
then to learn. To let them therefore alone, we do esteem that he is most
likely to come nearest unto perfection, who takes at the first greater care
how to paint well, then fast: whosoever on the contrary studieth more to have
done painting, then to paint, shall come far short of his hope; neither shall
he receive any other fruit of his mountebank-like braverie, but an idle praise
of blockish spectators, a presumptuous persuasion of his own ability, the
contempt of so venerable an Art, a shameless boldness, and a custom of doing
amiss. When Agatharcuus the Painter did vaunt himself in the presence of
Zeuxis, says Plutarch In Pericle.
, for making all manner of pictures most speedily and easily; But I, answered
Zeuxis, am a good while about it: for as this nimblenesse and quickness of
hand does not leave in the work any durable weight of Art or accuratnesse of
beauty; so does the time bestowed upon the making render a certain force
tending to the preservation of the work. Themistius likewise speaking of
Phidias, although Phidias, says he Orat. adeum qui postulaverat ut ex tempore
sermonem haberet.
, was skillful enough to make in gold and in ivorie the true shape of God or
man, yet did he require sufficient time and leisure to the work: so is he also
reported to have spent much time about the pantoffle of the Goddess Minerva.
Apelles was of the same mind: for when a foolish Painter showed him a picture
which he did boast to have made up suddenly; I see it well enough, said
Appelles, and wonder very much why you did paint no more such pictures in that
space of time: see Plutarch de Educandis liberis.

5. Seeing then that great Masters themselves would not be too quick in their
works, it follows much more that our first rudiments may not be too hastily
passed over: a painful industry is all in all, when we first begin: let us
ripely consider what Artificers deserve most to be imitated and expressed;
least, having made an ill choice, we should at the first get an ill habit: but
of this have we handled at large lib. I, cap. 3. Our studious endeavors must
afterward by little and little venture abroad, and we are to assure our
selves of the good success of our labors by a public trial. All Arts gain
very much by a continual practice and daily exercise, says Vegetius De Re
milit. lib. III. cap. 10.
; for it is impossible that any one should apprehend so many different and
profound things, says Quintilian, unless upon knowledge there follow
meditation, upon meditation ability, upon ability force: and it is gathered
out of these things that there is but one and the same way of conceiving what
we are to express, and expressing what we have conceived. The want of this
practice brings very often to pass that many a one is frighted, when he
comes to a public trial; he looks still back after the shade of his
private exercises, finding his eyes dazeled at the unwonted light: severe
censurers trouble him with their suspended silence; enviers with their
importunate noise; favorers with their immoderate applauses; and when he
perceives that no faults can be hid, his confident boldness being turned to a
pensive solicitude disquieteth him very much. Even as in all other disciplines
bare precepts profit very little, not being seconded by assiduitie of exercise;
so does doctrine effect very little in these Arts of imitation, unless we do
seriously practice and seasonably publish the much studied Arts: neither can
private studies advance us so much, but that there is ever some peculiar profit
of publishing: and use without doctrine (if you do part them) is likely to do
more, then doctrine without use, says Quintilian lib. xij, orat. instit. cap.
6.

6. All helps being outwardly applied, we shall find that a frequent and
continual exercise, as it is most laborious, so is it most profitable: seeing
nature does begin, utilitie does advance, exercise does accomplish these
Arts. Protagoras says Apud Stobaeum Sermon. de Disciplina and eruditione.
, that Art is nothing without exercise, neither that exercise is any thing
without Art. What use is there of Phidias his Art, if he do not apply it to
ivorie and gold? says Max. Tyrius Dissert. V.
. It profits very little, says Theosophista Progymn. cap. 1.
, that such as mean to paint should consider the works of Protogenes,
Apelles, Antiphilus, unless they themselves also fall to work. Nature
certainly would never give way, that any thing should grow great upon a sudden,
yea she does observe it in the common course of generation, that the greatest
creatures should be longest of all abreeding; and as the ground thoroughly
stirred is most apt to bear and to augment herbs, so does a well grounded
advancement bring forth the fruit of studies after a more plenteous, and keep
them after a more trusty manner Quintil. lib. x, cap. 3.
. Art is able to show the way to all them, who of their own accord are given
to it; and yet does she enough, when she propounds her store; we must know
what use to make of the things propounded Quint. lib. vii, cap. ultimo.
. Diligent exercise howsoever will procure us so much strength, as may be able
to maintain the dignity of Art; provided only that our exercise be not too
rash and forward at the first: seeing in our beginnings we must once for all
resolve of this, yea we may not rest till we have obtained it, that we do
well; assuring our selves that the custom of doing well, shall bring us to a
ready quickness: assiduitie of practice brings by little and little to
pass, that every thing does both show and offer it self with more ease; yea
that all things, as in a well ordered family, are at command. To be short: By
doing quickly, we shall never learn to do well; but by doing well, it is
more likely we shall learn to do quickly. Quintil. lib. x, cap. 3.

7. We have said enough concerning them who by a temerarie rashness banish
all care: it is left we should also speak something of those, whose
overcurious care bears the blame of slownesse. For when I undertook to stop
the Students of these Arts in their temerarie forwardness, my meaning was not
to tie them to the unfortunate toil of finding fault with every thing done
already; seeing it is impossible that they should ever bring this great and
mighty Art to an end, who do continually stay and stagger about every little
experiment. Artificers therefore must take great care, least their care be
perceived; principally aiming at this, that an excellent argument may be
expressed excellently; for he does questionless paint well enough, whose work
answers the weightinesse of the matter. Whatsoever is perfect in his own
kind, says Quintilian Lib. VIII, cap. 3.
, is well enough. It is in the mean time not only tolerable but commendable
also, and it adds a singular grace to the work, that there should sometimes
appear a certain kind of neglect in most excellent Pictures: a little
soreness is otherwhiles pleasing in exquisite meats; and it does not
misbecome great wealth, to see something in it here and there carelessly
scattered and neglected. Some for all this do never cease troubling of
themselves; they suspect every invention; they dwell upon every line; and
having met with what is best, yet do they seek something better: whereas they
have more reason to consider, that it is a naughty kind of affectation to
desire any thing better then what is sufficiently good, when our wit wants
judgment, and suffers it self to be carried away by a mere show of
goodness: there is in the whole Art no vice more dangerous; seeing other
vices, as Quintilian speaks Lib. VIII. cap. 3.
, are loathed, but this desired. So says the same grave another again Lib. X.
cap. 3.
, There are some that never do content themselves, they will change every
thing, and make it otherwise than it was conceived at the first. Others are
mistrustfull, and do deserve very ill of their own wits; esteeming it
diligence, to make the work harder unto themselves. Neither is it easy to
say, whether those off end more that love all they do, or that love nothing.
For generous Youths also do very often spend their spirits with too much
labor, and fall into acertaine kind of dullness by too great a desire of doing
well. The case stands thus: We must do our best, and yet according to our
ability, seeing it is study, and not indignation that does advance us.
Wherefore if the wind ferveth, we are to make sail, and we are sometimes also
to follow our stirred passions, in which heat does for the most part more than
diligence. Provided only, That this indulgence do not deceive us: For it is
most natural unto us, to love every thing we do, whilst it is a doing.

8. Wherefore besides that same slownesse urged a little before, and besides
that stay our hand gives us, not being able in the most forward exercise of
designing, to overtake the quickness of our mind, we shall do well to breath
our selves now and then purposely, and to review our suspected forwardness, by
unbending the intention of our thoughts. For as we shall by this means be
more able to make a handsome connection of things, so shall we likewise avoid
that weariness that might hinder our further diligence: for the weariness of
our mind, though it be not so apparent at the first, is no less tiresome than
the weariness of our body, weakening our mind not for the present only, but
also for the time to come. The first heat also brought to the work, when it
waxes cooler, receives new strength, and is revived by such a delay; even as
we see, that they who leap for strife use to go back a great way, and fetch a
run, to lift and throw themselves with more force over the intended space: by
putting back our arm we throw the further forward, and the more we draw the
shaft back, we shoot farther and with greater strength Quin. lib. x, cap. 3.
. They err also, but in a different kind, who following their first heat,
do with a full speed run through the whole matter, pleasing themselves in an
extemporal delineation. These are forced to go over again, what they have
hastily brought forth; but whilst they mend the errors of some parts, the
first levitie remains in the things unadvisedly heaped up; the whole
composition is never a whit the better for it. It were then much better,
according to Quintilian his opinion Lib. X, cap. 3.
, sooner to have taken care, and so to frame the work at the first beginning,
that it need trimming only, without altering the design of the whole work.

9. Next unto this relaxation shall follow the profitable care of a most strict
emendation; seeing the weightinesle of our work is by this means maintained,
and the forward facility of our first conceits is made to take deeper root.
Even as husbandmen prune the roots that lie shallowest, that the lowermost
might fasten deeper. The first designs of art, says Plutarch Sympos. problem.
II, 3.
, are gross and imperfect; but every part receives afterward a more
particular perfection. Which caused Polycletus to say, That the work is then
hardest when it comes to the nail. I may not omit the words of Favorinus the
Philosopher, who said Apud. Agel. lib. XVII. noct. A tic. cap. 10.
, Virgils friends reported that he was wont to say of himself, that he brought
forth his verses after the manner of Bears, which bring forth their young ones
without shape or beauty, and afterward by licking, fashion what they have
brought forth; that such were the new births of his wit, rude and imperfect to
look on, until he by handling and polishing gave them perfect lineaments.
Emendation therefore being the only way to perfection, it has bin said upon
very good ground that the pencil does sometimes help the art, as well by
rubbing out what was painted, as by painting. There belongs to this work,
says Quintilian Lib. x, ca. 4.
, To add, to detract, to change. To add or detract, requires less labor
and judgment; but to allay those things that swell, to raise those things that
sink, to tie close those things that flow luxuriously, to digest things that
are without order, to compose things that are loosed, to restrain things that
are insolent, requires double pains: for those things are to be condemned
which did please, and what we thought not of is to be invented. Now it is no
doubt, but that the best way for emendation is to lay by the design for a
time, till it may seem unto us a new or another man's invention: lest our own,
like new births, please us too much. Certainly so it is, our minds being
carried away by the current stream of a ready invention, use to judge then more
readily and warily, when our running thoughts being staid, give us time to
consider what we have to do. Hence it is that Painters, who after a reasonable
pause, return to their discontinued works as mere spectators, do more
advance the art, than others that do not care what haste they make to finish
the work. Those painters do very well, says Plutarch De cohibenda ira.
, who look upon their works before they accomplish them, after some delay;
seeing they do renew their judgments, by turning their eyes now and then off
from the work. It is only requred here, this respite be not too long; because
it is most certain, that nothing is easily resumed after a great
discontinuance. For who does not know, that all arts and artificers receive the
greatest benefit by use, says Sidonius Lib. IX, Epist. 12.
, and that upon the neglect of usual employments our arms wax heavy in our
bodies, and our wits grow dull in the Arts? From whence it arises also, that a
bow does withstand our hand, an Ox does withstand the yoke, and a horse does
withstand the bridle, when they are late or very seldom taken in hand.

10. Though we have as yet somewhat diffusedly commended a slow and wary care
unto the diligent Students of art, yet may every one follow a shorter way to
put himself in mind of this duty; if Augustus the Emperor his motto Festina
lent sound daily in his ears: and as we have already spoken of diverse
things whereby the wary care of a leisurely haste is quite over-throwne, so
may we not forget to mention what hurt the art receives by them who not
contenting themselves with an ordinary haste, have studied to find out
compendious ways of painting. When Arbiter does reckon up the Arts lost by the
carelessness of a most lazy age, a magnificent and (to speak so) a chaste
style, says he In Satyrico.
, is neither stained nor puffed up, but it waxes greater by a natural
beauty: that windy and unmeasurable babbling was not long since brought to
Athens out of Asia, and having blasted the hopeful spirits of young men as
with a pestilent star, the rule of eloquence being once corrupted was struck
dumb; yea there did not so much as one Poem appear of a wholesome color;
nothing could attain to maturitie of age, seeing all Arts were fed as it were
with the same meat. Picture also had no better end, after the boldness of the
Egyptians found out a compendious way to so great an Art. We see then how
much these, excellent Arts have been wronged by them that studied
compendiousnesse, although it be hard to explain what manner of
compendiousnesse Petronius speaks of: seeing it cannot be understood of that
manner of writing used by the ancient Egyptians, and mentioned in this Second
book cap. viii. 2. Neither can it be understood of another way of painting or
rather staining clothes, used by the Egyptians. Clothes are also painted in
Egypt, says Pliny Lib. xxxv, Sub finem copitis undecimi.
, after a rare and strange way: they take white vailes, and having rubbed and
chafed them very much, they besmeare them, not with colors, but with some
juyces apt to drink colors: which appears not in the vailes after it is
done: but being dipped in a vatte of seething dye, they are after a little
while taken forth all painted. The wonder is, that though there is but one
color in the cauldron, there are diverse made out of it in the cloathe, the
color altering according to the quality of the juice that receives it:
neither can it be washed out afterward: so the cauldron, which should
questionless confound the colors, if it did receive them painted, does digest
them out of one color, and painteth the veil whilst it is a boiling: and the
singed clothes are stronger, then if they were not boiled at all But I rather
think that the Egyptians had some other abridgement of painting, unknown to
us: for nothing could hinder them to find out a short way of painting as well
as Philoxenus Eretrius a scholar of the most swift painter Nicomachus: seeing
this Philoxenus, as Pliny reports Lib. xxxv, cap. 10.
, having followed the swiftness of his Master, did invent certain shorter and
more compendious ways of painting.

CHAP. XII.
THe former care did not as yet show it self more in the ancient Artificers,
when by a praiseworthy Ingenuitie they called both upon Artists and Idiots,
desirous that all men should examine and censure the work in hand. Hesiodus
his observation is well expressed by Minucius: I have often heard, says
Minucius Apud Livium lib. xxii, ab v. c.
, that he is the best man, that can advise himself what is fit to be done; and
that he is in the next rank of goodness, that is content to receive good
advice; but that on the contrary side, whosoever can neither advise himself,
nor will be directed by the advice of others, is of a very ill nature. The
naturalist Heraclitus presses this point somewhat nearer, and applies it to
the liberal sciences, when he says Apud Maximum Ser. xxxiv.
that it is a great hinderance of our advancement if a man begin to have a good
conceit of himself. I am of opinion, says Seneca De Tranquanimi, cap. 1.
, that many should have attained unto wisdom, if they had not conceived
themselves to be wise already: see also Arriani Epict. lib. II, cap. 17. No
man is able to pass through the secrets of Art, says Fulgentius De Virgiliana
continentia.
, unless he first overcome the pomp of vain glory: seeing the appetite of
an idle praise does never search out the truth, but takes all to it self
whatsoever is offered by way of flattery. Contrition extinguisheth all manner
of presumption: and for this reason is the Goddess of wisdom called
Tritonia: because all contrition breeds wisdom: and verily, none can be
worse than those who tickle themselves with a false persuasion of Art, though
they are not very much past the first lines: for scorning to give way to them
that are more skillful, they betray their own foolishness by the security of
a wrongfully usurped authority. The ancients were quite of another mind, they
followed another way. Painters, and such as make statues, yea Poets also; says
Tullie Lib. I, de Off.
, will have their work considered of the multitude; to the end it might he
mended, in what they see reprehended by many: they search therefore most
diligently by themselves and with others what faults there are committed in the
work. The younger Pliny urges the same upon another occasion, nothing can
satisfy my care, says he Lib. VII, Epist. 17.
, I think still how great a matter it is to publish any thing: neither can I
persuade my self otherwise, but that we are to peruse often and with many,
what we wish might please all men and always.

2. Besides those there is another sort of men, who, though they do not out of
a presumptuous arrogance reject this Ingenuous care of mending their works,
yet do they decline it out of a timorous bashfulnesse; they want courage and
constancy to provoke and to exspect the judgment of the world. A naughty
shame, says Horace Lib. I, epist. 16.
, does conceal the unhealed soars of fools: neither is it without reason
that the Poet brandeth them, that do so, with the name of fools; seeing every
vice is nurtured and quickened by hiding of it, says Virgil Lib. III. Georg.
. As many therefore as by smoothering of their imperfections will not increase
their faults and shame both at once, must first study to find out and to
amend of themselves what is amiss: which if they despire to do, let them
remember at least that there is exceeding great wisdom in a confessed
ignorance, as Minutius Felix speaks In Octavis.
: and that ordinarily, according to M. Porcius Cato his saying Apud. Livium li.
xxxiv ab v. c.
, Such as are ashamed without cause, shall not be ashamed when there is cause.
But of this same preposterous shame something is said already, cap. x, 2. of
this second Book.

3. All of us naturally are too much in love with our own works, and
self-love makes that seem gorgeous unto us wherein we our selves be Actors.
I know not how every man makes very much of his own doings. So it is: you
love your own, and I love mine, says Tullie lib. v. Tusc. quaest. We look
upon domesticke things after a familiar manner, says Seneca De Tranquanimi,
cap. 1.
, and favor does then most of all hinder our judgment: neither may you think
otherwise, but that we are sooner overthrown by our own flattery, then by
the flattery of others. This was understood by those that were to dedicate the
statues of Amazons in the temple of Diana at Ephesus; for when they were to
dedicate them there, they resolved to choose that piece of work that should be
accounted the best by the judgment of all the chief workmen there, which
appeared to them to be that, that every one commended to be the best next his
own. Plin. xxxiv, 8. Seeing then it is natural to all men to be too much in
love with what is their own, there is great cause why we should shake off
this importunate presumption that will not give us leave to look impartially
upon our own works. The ancient Artificers therefore, that have been and are
as yet most famous, did rely more upon the judgment of other Artists, then
upon their own liking. So does Synesius Epist. prima
report that Lysippus made use of Apelles, and Apelles likewise made use of
Lysippus. Praxiteles also being asked which of his marble-workes he did like
best, answered, Those that Nicias has put his hand to: see Pliny xxxv, 11.

4. Nether did they content themselves with Artificers alone, but they did
moreover desire a confluxe of envious and favorable spectators, yea of all
sorts of men, suffering their works indifferently to be censured by them all:
see the younger Pliny lib. VII, epist. 17. It is reported, says Lucian Pro
Imaginib.
, that Phidias, when he made Jupiter for the Eleans, and showed it the first
time, stood behind the door listening what was commended and discommended in
his work: one found fault with the grossness of the nose: another with the
length of the face: a third had something else to say: and when all the
spectators were gone, he retired himself again to mend the work according to
what was liked by the greater part: for he did not think the advice of such a
multitude to be a small matter, esteeming that so many saw many things better
then he alone; though he could not but remember himself to be Phidias. Observe
here in the mean while, that, when they gave unto abject and contemptible men
such power over their works, it was not because they hoped to learn something
by them that might advance the perfection of Art, seeing it is a most idle
thing, says Tullie Lib. V. Tuscul. quaest. vide quoque Aelianum lib. ii, var.
hist. cap. 1 and 6.
, to exspect great matters from an assembly of those, whom we contemn one by
one as handy-crafts-men and barbarians. Polycletus, as we read in Aelian,
took a fine course to make vulgar wits understand themselves, showing unto
them by a lively example that they were more likely to spoil then to help the
Art, if an Artificer should follow their judgment in all things: see Aelianus
var. hist. lib. xiv, cap. 8. The Artificers therefore did not admit their
directions generally in every thing, but they followed their motions only in
such things as did belong to their profession. When Apelles had made any
works, says Pliny Lib. xxxv, cap. 10.
, he exposes them in a place, where all that passed by might see them: hiding
himself in the mean time behind the picture, to hearken what faults were
noted in his work; preferring the common people, a most diligent Judge, before
his own judgment: and he is reported to have mended his work upon the
censure of a Shoo-maker, who blamed the Artificer for having made fewer
latchets in the inside of one of the pantoffles then of the other. The
Shoo-maker finding the work the next day mended according to his
advertisement, grew proud and began to find fault with the leg also.
Whereupon Apelles could not contain himself any longer, but looking forth
from behind the picture, bid the Shoo-maker not meddle beyond the pantoffle:
which saying of his became afterward a Proverb.

CHAP. XIII.
THe public felicity of times must needs be put in among the causes of the
advancement of these Arts, seeing it cannot be conceived how the heat of
Emulation, the desire of glory, the diligent care, and a great many more of the
causes alleged could do any good without this Felicity of times: neither do
we hold that the blissefulnesse of the ancient times did principally consist
in that, that the wits of men in those times were more quick and fertile
then now they are; though some would have it so: it is not to be doubted, says
Seneca Epistola 90.
, but that the world not yet decayed brought forth better things, and that men
were then high-spirited, as being a fresh offspring of the Gods. Sidonius
Apollinaris urges the same after a more peremptory manner; the governor of
times, says he Lib. VIII, ep. 6.
, seems to have bestowed the virtues of Arts most of all upon the ancient
generations; which now having spent their pith and marrow by the age of a
decaying world, bring forth very little that may be esteemed admirable and
memorable, and that in some few only. These words of Seneca and Sidonius are,
in our opinion, somewhat too harsh and able to kill the generous hope of
emulating the ancients. The words of the Rhodian Ambassador are less partial
and more comfortable; we make bold, says he Apud Liviumli. xxxvii ab v. c.
, to maintain a pious strife with our ancestors about every good Art and
virtue. The younger Pliny is also very resolute in this point; I am one of
them, says he Lib. VI, ep. 21.
, that do admire the ancients, and yet can I not find in my heart to despise
the wits of our age, as some use to do: for Nature is not so much wearied and
worn out, that she should now bring forth no praiseworthy thing. See also
Tacitus lib. iii. Annal. cap. 55. Lactantius de Orig. erroris, cap. 8. Galenus
in his Treatise, That a good Phisician must be a Philosopher also. Other
Authors go some what further, and study to give a reason why some are so apt to
embrace that unprofitable opinion of the barrenness of our age. There is a
malicious humor in mankind, says one Author dialogi de causis cor.
eloquentiae, cap. 18.
, by which we do always praise things past, and loath things present.
Paterculus comes nearer, when he says Lib. II, histor.
, Naturally we had rather praise things heard of, then seen. We entertain
things present, with envy; things absent, with veneration: seeing we do
think our selves overwhelmed by the one, and instructed by the other. As we
may therefore upon good ground deny the wits of men to have been better in old
times, so must we for all this confess that it was a great happiness of the
said ancient times that virtues did more abound in them then in the latter: for
virtues being then more frequent, these Arts were then also more frequently
used for the rewarding of virtues. Surely, so it is, says Pliny Lib. xxxv,
cap. 2.
, Arts were overthrown by idleness: and because there are no images of our
minds, the images of our bodies are also neglected.

2. But to let this complaint alone, though never so just, we do understand
here by the Public felicity of times nothing else but that stable
tranquillity of an unshaken peace the ancient Artificers enjoyed. Peace is a
graceful mother of good Arts, says Cassiodorus Variarum, lib. 1.
. Solinus speaking of the peaceable times of the Emperor Augustus; these times
were most not able, says he Cap. I, Polyhist.
, seeing weapons ceased, and wits flourished in them: least all manner of
virtuous works should languish, the exercise of war being intermitted. The
fatal stirs of Kingdoms and Republikes do mightily dash that constancy of
our minds, whereby Arts are brought to perfection. And how is it possible that
any mortal man should follow any intended work quietly, when besides the
present calamities that afflict us already, there seem to hang more grievous
misfortunes over our heads. Believe me, says Ovid Lib. IV, de Ponto, Eleg. 12.
, Providence does first of all for sake wretched men; and their means failing
them, they remain without any feeling or counsel. The secure pleasantness of
flourishing times does on the contrary feed and increase heat of Emulation, and
desire of Glory: the strife of a virtuous contention, and the earnest desire of
glory, says Tacitus Lib. XV, Annal. cap. 16.
, are passions incident only to such men as live in prosperity. Diodorus
Siculus confirms this point with a notable example; Xerxes his expedition
into Greece, says he Lib. XII.
, by reason of the wonderful greatness of his forces, did mightily terrify
the Grecians, who did think themselves of nothing so sure as of an utter ruin
and a most miserable slaverie. But when, beyond the exspectation of all men,
there was made a fortunate end of the war, the Greek Nation being freed
from such a danger, obtained great glory: yea every one of their City, grew
so wealthy and rich, that all the world did wonder at such a sudden change of
fortune: for Greece did for some fifty years after that time prosper so much,
that in those times all good Arts were very much advanced by reason of such
plenty of riches; and many most famous Artificers; among whom Phidias was one,
did augment the glorious esteem of those times. It appertains also to the
Public felicity of the times when whole Countries are the better for the
misfortune of some of their neighbor countries. All manner of disciplines,
says Athenaeus Sub finem libri Quarti Deipnosoph.
, were renewed under Ptolemaeus the seventh King of Egypt, who was by the
inhabitants of Alexandria truly and aptly called Cacergetes: for he, having
cut the throats of many inhabitants of Alexandria, and having banished a number
of them that were bred with his brother, filled all the Cities and Isles with
Grammarians, Philosophers, Geometricians, Musicians, Painters, Schoolmasters,
Physicians, and all other kind of Artificers. These, to supply their wants,
taught what they knew, and made many famous and excellent men.

CHAP. XIV.
THe private fortune of the Artificers themselves worthily challenges the last
place, seeing the divine gift of a prone and capable nature, the diligent care
of parents and Masters, the fear of wholesome laws, the earnestness of
emulating, the simplicity and sweetness of these Arts, with all what
follows, do as yet require the private fortune of the Artificer: not such a
fortune as aided Protogenes, when he was about the picture of his dog; and
Nealces, when he was about the picture of his horse; but a Fortune which makes
the Artificer her only dearling, by putting him forth and bringing him
acquainted with Kings and Princes, that by their means he may obtain the good
opinion of the world. The time wherein every man's virtue shows it self, is
very material, says the elder Pliny Lib. VII, not. hist. cap. 28.
. For no man has so excellent a wit as to make himself immediately known,
unless he meets with matter, occasion, and afvourable commender, says the
younger Plin. lib. vi, epist. 23. Although the particular and private fortune
of Artificers carry here a great sway, yet do we not think that their whole
fame depends merely upon Fortune; seeing it is needful that an Artificer
should first open the door of fame unto himself, before he may look for any
preferment. We do not judge of Statuaries, says Socrates Apud Xenophontem
lib. III Apomnem.
, making a conjecture of them by their own words; but we believe that he shall
make the rest well, who formerly has showed his skill in some other works of
that nature. Corn. Celsus urges the same; No body will have his Picture
drawn, says he In Epistola ad C. Julium Callistum.
, but by an Artificer that is approoved of by good experiments.

2. In those Artificers that were commended for an equal force of Art, there
did very often appear an unequal power of Fortune, as Vitruvius prooveth by
many instances. Though Artificers, says he In praefatione libri Tertii.
, make promise and vaunt of their skill, if they have not store of money, if
they be not known by the ancient renown of their shoppes, if they want popular
favor and eloquence, the industry of their studies cannot gain them so much
authority as to make them be believed to know what they profess to know. We
find this most of all in ancient Statuaries and Painters; seeing the memory of
none of them could be durable, but of such as were graced by commendation, and
showed some outward marks of dignity. This was the case of Myron, Polycletus,
Phydias, Lysippus, and of others that gained a noble fame by means of their
Art; seeing they got this credit by working for Kings, great Cities, and noble
Citizens. Others on the contrary which had no less industry, wit, and
subtlety, got no name at all, because they wrought for ignoble and mean
Citizens; and it was rather want of Fortune, then want of skill that did
suppress and obscure their fame: such were Hellas Atheniensis, Chiron
Corinthius, Myagrus Phocaeus, Pharax Ephesius, Bedas Byzantius, and many more.
Some Painters also wanted Fortune, as Aristomenes Thasius, Polycles
Atramitenus, Nicomachus, and others, in whom there wanted neither industry,
study, nor cunning; but their own poverty, and their bad fortune, that made
them yield unto their competitors in a partially censured concertation, did
hinder their dignity. Pliny reports Lib. xxxiv cap. 8.
that Telephanes Phocaeus was less known by reason of the obscurity of his
ignoble dwelling place. The same Author does also witness elsewhere Lib. xxxvi
cap. 5.
that such excellent works of Scopas as might have made any other place
famous, were hardly known at Rome, seeing a multitude of artificial things
did drown there the glory of his works. The fame of diverse Artificers is
somewhat obscure, says Pliny again Lib. xxxvi cap. 5.
, and the great number of so many rare workmen does very often hinder the
renown of the most excellent works of some; seeing one alone cannot engrosse
all the glory, and so many cannot be named all at once.

3. Seeing then that many Artificers were not so much unlike one unto another
in their Art as in their Fortune, it may seem that there was a certain kind
of ill-conceived opinion which did keep down some excellent Artificers, and
that others on the contrary got credit and authority by reason of a loving and
favorable opinion. The vulgar sort of men, says Tullie Pro Roscio comoedo.
, does most commonly judge many things according to a fore-conceived opinion,
and not according to truth: see also Aelianus var. hist. lib. I, cap. 24. The
works of Zeuxis, Polycletus, and Phidias were much helped by the fore-conceived
opinion of the great skill these Artificers had: see Maximus Tyrius Dissertat.
xxxix. The selfsame passion of our sense, says Plutarch Sympos. probl. lib.
v, quaest. 1.
, does not alike moove our mind, when it is not accompanied with an opinion
that the work is well and studiously performed. See Plutarch himself in the
said place, where, among many other things belonging to this present discourse,
he brings in a merry tale of Parmeno his pigge.

THE THIRD BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
HAving considered already how Fantasy did help and stir up our first
desire of imitating all manner of things, and how many other causes did
mightily cherish and advance the said eagerness of our forward natures, it
follows that we should last of all propound how this same inclination
rightly inflamed and ordered did attain to the height of a perfect and
accomplished Art. The ancients observed in Picture these five principal
points. Invention, or Historical argument. Proportion, or Symmetrie. Color,
and therein Light and Shadow, as also Brightness and Darkness. Motion or
Life, and therein Action and Passion. Disposition, or an Oeconomicall placing
and ordering of the whole work. The four first were carefully observed in all
sorts of Pictures, whether they did consist of one figure, or of many.
Disposition alone was observed in Pictures that had many figures: seeing a
piece wherein there do meet many and several figures shall be nothing else
but a kind of mingle-mangle or a darksome and dead confusion of disagreeing
things, unless they receive light and life by a convenient and orderly
disposition. Yet did not the ancients think that the perfection of Art
consisted in a meet observing of these five points, except the whole work did
breath forth a certain kind of Grace proceeding out of a decent comeliness
of every point by itself, and out of a mutual accord of all five. Wherefore
we could not but enter a little into the consideration of this same Grace: the
rather because without a full understanding of this Grace, it is impossible
that any man should examine the true force and value of these most fertile Arts
aright.

LIB. III. CHAP. I.
INvention does justly challenge the first and principal place, seeing no man,
though he has all his colors at hand, says Seneca Epist. 71.
, can make a similitude, unless he be resolved what to paint. And whatsoever
an Artificer works, must, according to the opinion of Zeno, be dyed with the
dye of sense, Quintil. IV, 2. The picture of complete harness, says Socrates
Apud Stobaeum Sermon. de Adulatione.
, though it be delightful, yet is it altogether unprofitable. Ausonius
speaks to the same purpose, a painted fogge, says he Epist. 17.
, delights us no longer then it is seen. Except it be such a painted mist as
is described by the same Ausonius in another place Edyllio 6.
, where the Painter does represent the dim shade of hellish blackness by a
painted mist, and designeth in it how the ancient Ladies torment the crucified
Cupid in hell for having dishonored them in the times of the Worthies. An
Artificer therefore must propound unto himself what he means to imitate: the
which in such an infinite variety of things cannot be hard to a man that has a
ready Fantasy: yea we have good cause to fear that he shall rather loose
himself, not knowing what to choose among so many most worthy things. The
thoughts of our mind can conceive the images of any thing, says Tullie Lib.
I, de Not. Deorum.
. Our thought can conceive any Country, says another Auctor Rhet. ad
Herentium, lib. III.
, and fashion in it such a situation of place as may best agree with our
liking. Maximus Tyrius presses this same point somewhat nearer, when he
maintains that Invention is proper and natural unto the mind of man: see
Max. Tyrius Dissert. xxviii. Although then a man, for as much as he is a man,
cannot but be full of Invention; yet such men as have studied do excel in
their Inventions. Nothing is so fertile, says Tullie In Bruto.
, as those wits that are furnished with all manner of disciplines.

2. An Artificer for all that shall not follow the facility of a pleasing
Invention so much, as to forget a judicious trial of his own ability: he is
not only to invent what he would paint, but he is also to consider his own
strength, whether he be able to compass his Invention with his Art. Whosoever
weighs his burden, says Martial Lib. XII, Epigramm. 100.
, can carry it. Pliny gives us an instance in Pausias, who repaired the walls
sometimes painted by Polygnotus, and was esteemed to come far short of
Polygnotus, because he would prove masteries in another kind of picture then
his own, Pliny xxxv, II. Besides this same wariness, there is another
general rule for our Invention propounded by Tullie. We are to choose such
things, says he In Bruto.
, as are most excellent for their greatness, chiefest for their noveltie,
singular in their own kind: seeing small, usual, and vulgar things, do not
deserve any admiration or praise. Things passing great are placed first, seeing
it is certain that virtue tempereth her courage according to the measure of
the business in hand: she is in small things so remiss and slack, that she
does hardly avoid the opinion of security: she straineth her self somewhat
more in things indifferently great: but when there are offered things that are
great indeed, she raises her self to the height of the work in hand, says
Nazarius Panegyr. Constantino Aug. dicto. It goes with Art, says another
Auctor dialogi de causis Corr. eloquentiae.
, as with the flame; which is maintained with good store of fuel, it is
increased with stirring, and it waxes cleerer with burning. The greatness of
things adds force to our wit, neither can any man make a famous and excellent
work, except he do find stuff answerable to the work intended. Aristoteles
the Philosopher therefore wished Protogenes to paint the deeds of Alexander the
Great, by reason of the eternity of things, says Pliny xxxv, 10. Lysippus
also made Alexander the great in many works; beginning from his childhood,
Pliny xxxiv, 8. Things unusual and commendable for their strangeness were
set up in the Theater of Pompeius; and it is remarkable what the same Pliny
says of them; Pompey the great, says he Nature. hist. lib. VII. cap. 3.
, erected among the ornaments of his Theater such images as were of an
admirable fame, and for this reason have the wits of great Artificers bestowed
more labor upon them: see Pliny. Things most exquisite in their kind were
represented in the seven and twenty Pictures Verres took out of the temple of
Minerva; the images of the Kings and tyrants of Sicilie were represented in
them, says Tullie Lib. IV, in Verrem.
, neither did they delight the spectators only for the Art of painting that
was in them, but also for the commemoration of the men, and the remembrance of
their countenance. And here it falls out very often that some doings or
sayings of great men suggest unto us in this Picture a ready way of Invention.
So did Galaton paint the whole company of Poets round about Homer, as if they
were most greedily sucking up the pure waters that flowed out of his streaming
mouth: see Aelian. var. hist. XIII, 22. Timotheus, a most noble General of the
Athenians, having done great deeds with very good success, would not suffer
any man to attribute the glory of such acts unto him, but he was wont to say
that Fortune had a hand in it: the busy wits therefore of some scoffing
Painters made him sleeping in his pavillion, whilst Fortune standing at his
head drew Cities to the net: see Aelian. var. hist. xiii, 43. Suidas. Schol.
vet. in Plutum Aristophanis.

3. But as there is always some piece of history in the Pictures of this
nature, which makes up the Invention, so does a continued history afford our
Invention sufficient matter to work upon: provided only that our Invention be
not dry and barren, but rather abundant, overflowing, and more diffused then
the present occasion seems to require: to the end our cheerful mind having
attempted something more licentiously, might range about, and offend rather in
too much plenteousnesse, than languish and pine away for lack of good matter.
For what avails, I pray you, Invention without matter? where shall it begin?
whither shall it turn it self? the lively spirits of the Artificers disdain
to be so straightened: it is worse than death unto them to spend the strength
of their wits about a spare and unprofitable argument. I do not study to
induce any man to such an unadvised and temerary licentiousness, as uses to
solicit and to corrupt many brave and lively wits; but I do hold that free
and forward spirits are not to be restrained within the compass of a narrow
cariere, but that we must rather give our Invention the full raines: for as
mettled horses are best known by a spacious race; so must Artificers have an
open field, as it were, to run in, with a loose and unrestrained liberty,
seeing the forwardness of this same most generous Art is weakened and broke
when a man goes about to contain it within the limits and bounds of a straight
running-place. You that mean to imitate, says Horace De Art.
, must not leap down into a narrow and straight place, from whence shame or
else the condition of the work will not suffer you to come forth again.
Whatsoever does superabound, issues out of a full breast. But as there is an
easy remedy for rankness, so is there no labor can overcome barrenness.
What may be cured by detraction, says Seneca Lib. IX. Controv. 2.
, is ever nearer unto health. Reason shall make some waste of the immoderatly
excessive Invention, care shall file away something, and the working it self
will wear away something: it is required only, that there be something which
might be cut out and taken away; the which will be, if at the first we do not
make our plate so thin as to break it and to cut it quite thorough with
engraving somewhat deep. It seems also that youthful years for this very
same reason are not instantly to be recalled to a sober and severe law of Art,
when by the luxury of an unexperienced wit they delight themselves in the
plentifulnesse of a rich and superfluous Invention: there is more discretion,
to use them with some indulgence. Accius a Tragike-Poet speaks very well to
this purpose; What falls out in apples, says he Apud Agell. noct. Attic.
XIII, 2.
, the same is also to be perceived in wits, which being brought forth hard
and sharp, grow afterward ripe and pleasing: but such on the contrary as
instantly wax mellow and soft, having at the first some moistness of savoury
juice, the same afterward do not grow ripe but rotten: there is therefore
something to be left in our wits, which time and age must mitigate: see also
Seneca Hippolyto, Actu II, Sce. 2.

4. As for the things an Artificer shall judge to be worth his pains, he shall
not only invent them after the best way, but also after the easiest way;
seeing the highest force of inventing deserves no admiration, if an unluckie
pensiveness does trouble and disquiet the Artificer from the beginning to the
end of his work. A neat, and lofty, and copious Artificer has ever round
about him great store of Invention; he needs not beat his brains with
irksome studies; all stands ready at his command. Whosoever climbeth,
labors most of all about the nether part of the hill; in the mean time the
ground he goes on, grows more rich and fertile: fruits unlaboured do
afterward offer themselves, and all things spring up of their own accord; the
which for all that do wither away, if they are not gathered every day. Plenty
for all that must have a mean, seeing nothing can be praiseworthy and
wholesome without mediocritie; neatness likewise must have a manfull attire;
and a high-stately Invention may not want judgment: so shall the invented
things be great, and not overgreat; haughty, not abrupt; full of force, not
temerarie; severe, not sad; grave, not slow; lively, not luxurious; delectable,
not dissolute; full, not puffed up; and so forth. It is ever the safest way to
keep in the midst, because the uttermost on either side is vicious. Quintil.
xii, 10. The words of the younger Pliny are worth noting, as being most proper
for this place; a mean indeed is best, says he Lib. I, Epist. 20.
, neither does any man doubt of that: but he who does less then the matter
requires, keeps the mean as little as another who does more. The one may be
said to have exceeded the matter, the other on the contrary may be said not to
have answered it to the full: both are too blame; but the one offends of
weakness, the other of too much strength: which though it be no sign of a
more polished, yet is it a mark of a greater wit. As many therefore as do
lack that same confidence of a great spirit, grow instantly faint-hearted; they
dare not raise their thoughts, but creep along the ground; and, which is worst
of all, they do not so much as endeavor any thing, whilst they are afraid of
every thing: they embrace leanness in stead of health; infirmity steppeth in
the place of judgment, says Lib. II, cap. 4.
Quintilian, and whilst they think it enough to be without vice, they fall
into that same maine vice to lack virtues.

The same Author says in another place Li. xii. cap. 10.
, Those that are dry, raw boned, and bloudlesse, use to cloak their
imbecilitie by the most contrary appellation of soundness: and because they
cannot endure the clear beams of a quick light, as of a bright Sunshine,
they lie lurking under the shade of a great name. Health procured by fasting
and abstinence was never esteemed true and sound. No more do Physicians
approove of such a health, says one Auctor dial. de Causis corr. eloqu. cap.
23.
, as proceeds out of the anxietie of our mind. It is not enough that a man
be not sick; he must be strong, and lively, and lusty. Yea, that man draws
nearest unto infirmity, who has no other commendation but of his health.

5. Seeing then that our invention must flow easily, and that nothing marreth
the life and spirit of the invented things so much, as to force and strain them
to a fore-determined purpose, it can never or very seldom make any invention
good and commodious, when we do very much and a great while perfist in
forging and fitting the invention to what we have propounded unto our selves.
Much handling soileth things, and makes them lose their brightness. The edge
of our piercing wits is likewise turned and made blunt, by a superfluous and
unnecessary toil of paring and mincing the matter in hand. Besides that, The
subtlety it self, as Quintilian speaks Li. xii. c. 2.
, does consume and bring to naught every thing which is cut too thin. It
chances therefore very often, that an extemporall and temerary boldness
brings along with it a singular delight, says another Auctor. dial. de
causis corr. eloqu. c. 6
, for in our wits, as well as in our fields, though many things are carefully
planted and labored, yet use those things to be more acceptable unto us which
do grow of their own accord. Philostratus gives a fine reason, When a man
studieth to bring forth every thing by speculation, says he Lib. 11. de vit is
Soph. in Aristide.
, his mind is kept too much busy, and turned aside from the readiness of
inventing. Since then too much study hinders and quaileth that same ready
forwardness of our minds, we hold them to be best advised who content
themselves with an invention when it is brought to the height of conceit, never
tarrying so long about the work till the heat of their spirits be cooled and
gone. For, whatsoever does not add something to the former, says Quintilian
Li. vi. ca. 1.
, seems also to detract. It is in the mean while a sign of small courage, to
be troubled with every light occasion. And this same fear must needs stop the
forwardness of our mind, by withdrawing our thoughts from such things as are
more considerable, says the same Author Li. 9. ca. 4.
. He wondereth therefore at it in another place, that many do hang such a while
about every particular, whilst they invent, whilst they weigh and consider
the invented things, The which though it were done with this intent, says he
Lib. viii, in prooem.
, that they might ever make use of what is best, yet were this same infelicity
very much to be detested, by whose means the speedy course of our mind is
pulled back, and the heat of our thoughts is quenched with lingering and
mistrustfulnesse. So that sometimes it were better to entertain extemporall
thoughts, and to follow the first heat of our forward mind. Do you not
observe how brooks do most swiftly run from a fountain* whereas they do but
slowly creep from a standing water? Whatsoever is in agitation is lively and
quick, says Symmachus Lib. vii, Epist. 60.
, whosoever means to direct the course of running horses, lesseneth it; and whosoever
studieth to make equal paces hinders his own speed, says Quintilian Li.
ix. ca. 4.
. Even as Torches keep fire by a continual shaking, and having let it go out,
can hardly recover it; so is the heat of our invention preserved by
continuance, and it languisheth by intermission. For all manner of rightly
conceived passions, as also the fresh images of things, run on still without
any stay, and do very often not so much as expect our hand, neither do they
offer themselves in haste again, being once delayed. But most of all, when that
same infortunat finding of fault begins to interrupt our work, it is
impossible that the force of our hurled invention should keep her course,
there will always appear in it a certain kind of inequality: and though
every part were chosen never so well, yet shall the whole invention rather seem
to be compounded than continued. Quint. x. 7. Many a man has often bin able to
accomplish the undertaken work, when he fell to it with his whole mind. The
greatest part of invention consists in the force of our mind; seeing our
mind must first of all be moved, our mind must conceive the images of things,
our mind must in a manner be transformed unto the nature of the conceived
things, and how much the more generous and haughty our mind is, says
Quintilian Li. i. ca. 2.
, it is stirred by so much the greater instruments: praise makes it grow,
forward endeavors add an increase to it, and it loves ever to busy it self
about some great matter.

6. It isth en clear, That a good Artist may justly be esteemed a wise man, not
in such a sense only as every tradesman was anciently called wise Vide Didymum
and Eustath. ad verse. 392. Iliad. 9.
, but in regard of his invention, seeing therein is something more than is
conceived at the first. All arts and studies must concur to make up that same
general well grounded knowledge, whereby we are fitted and prepared to produce
a good invention: neither is it well possible that any man whosoever he be,
should invent any thing worth our consideration, unless he have drunk in from
his childehood all manner of good arts and sciences. It is a sign of a dull
wit, says Tully Li. ii. de Orat.
, to run after little brooks, and not to visit the main fountains of things,
from whence all is derived.

A perfect and exactly handled invention must bud forth out of a great and well
rooted fullness of learning: we must be conversant in all sorts of studies, all
antiquity must be familiar unto us, but most of all the innumerable multitude
of historical and poetical narrations: we must likewise be very well
acquainted with all such commotions of the mind as by nature are incident unto
men: seeing the whole force of painting does principally consist in them, and
nothing bears a greater sway in such a manifold variety of pictures and
statues.

Thus do we see how the ancients did after a more peculiar manner ascribe
wisdom unto the better sort of Artificers, seeing none among all other
liberal arts do require so many and so great helps of more inward and profound
doctrine. I do not speak here but of an absolutely perfect art; For when
there is any question made about any art or faculty, says Tully De Orat.
, the most absolute and perfect art is then ever meant. It made Euphranor
admirable, that he did excel in all other kind of good studies, having
withal wonderful skill in painting and carving. Quint. xii. 10. Pamphilus,
Apelles his master urged this point very much; for being not only a most
excellent painter, but also thoroughly instructed in all kind of Sciences, and
chiefly in Arithmeticke and Geometry, he was wont to avouch that the Art
could not well be perfected without any of these. Pli. 35. 10.

7. That Artificers have need of Geometry and the Optics is proved by the
following example. the Athenians intending to consecrate an excellent image of
Minerva upon a high pillar, set Phidias and Alcamenes to work, meaning to choose
the better of the two. Alcamenes being nothing at all skilled in Geometry and
in the Optickes, made the goddess wonderful fair to the eye of them that saw
her hard by. Phidias on the contrary, as being sufficiently instructed with all
manner of arts, and especially with Optic and Geometrical knowledges, did
consider that the whole shape of his image should change according to the
height of the appointed place, and therefore made her lips wide open, her nose
somewhat out of order, and all the rest accordingly, by a certain kind of
resupination. When these two images were afterward brought to light and
compared, Phidias was in great danger to have been stoned by the whole
multitude, until the statues were at length set on high. For Alcamenes his
sweet and diligent strokes being drowned, and Phidias his dis-figured and
distorted hardness being vanished by the height of the place, made Alcamenes
to be laughed at, and Phidias to be much more esteemed. See Tzetzes Chiliad.
xi, hist. 381. and Chil. viii, hist. 193.

Amulius his Minerva seems also to have been made by the help of these Arts,
and chiefly of the Optickes, for from what side soever a man looks upon her,
she does likewise look upon him. Pliny xxxv, 10. There was in the Syrian
goddess her temple an image of Juno, which looks upon you, if you stand ^ull
against it: if you go from thence, it follows you with her eyes: and if any
other man looks upon it from another place, he finds the same: see Lucian
de Syria dea. The head of Diana is set up on high at Chios: Bupalus and
Anthermus have made her after such a manner, as to make them that enter into
the temple think that she frowneth, whereas they that go out of the temple
think by her looks that she is now appeased. Pliny xxxvi, 5. That same
Hercules, who in the temple of Antonia turns his back toward us, is thought
to be of Apelles his hand: the picture (which is very difficult) does rather
show his face, then promise it. Pliny xxxv, 10.

8. Artificers are likewise taught by the example of Nicon not to contemn the
knowledge of such things as may seem to be but of small account in Nature: for
when he had made in the porch at Athens called Poecile a most rare and
excellent picture of a horse, yet was the whole work disgraced and laughed at,
because he had made the lower eyelids hairie, contrary to the nature of that
creature: see Aelian. lib. IV de Animalib. cap. 50. Pollux Onomast. lib. II.
Tzetzes Chiliad. XII, hist. 427. And as we perceive here that all such kind of
ignorance turns to the discredit of the Artificer, so may we learn out of
Philostratus Iconum lib. I, in Poludib.
what a ready way of Invention the perfect knowledge of natural things
suggesteth unto us: for the Painter being loath to spoil the natural beauty
of a most pleasant place with an Artificial bridge, fetches a sudden
Invention out of the nature of Palme-trees: see Philostratus his description of
that and other Pictures. An Artificer therefore must be well acquainted with
the nature of all things, but principally with the nature of man. Whosoever
means to do any good with Painting, says the younger Philostratus In
prooemio Iconum.
, must understand the nature of man thoroughly, and know how to express the
marks of every one, his manner, guise, behavior, in them also that say and
do nothing: he must discern what force there is in the constitution of his
cheeks, in the temperature of his eyes, in the casting of his eyebrows. To
be short, he must observe all such things as do help a man's judgment.
Whosoever is well furnished with such kind of skill, shall questionless
excel and have good success in all manner of works: he shall not stick, if
need be, to paint a mad man, an angry man, a pensive man, a man that skippeth
for joy, a man that goes earnestly about any thing, a man deeply in love: in a
word, he shall resemble all what is most fashionable and most proper for every
one.

9. No question then but an Artist must know all manner of natural things
perfectly: not that he is for a great while of time to buckle himself wholly
to his study, and to examine there in private the several opinions of
natural and moral Philosophers about these affections and passions of man;
nor yet that he is to trouble his brain with every curious Geometrical
demonstration: for it suffices that he do but learn by a daily observation
how several passions and affections of the mind do alter the countenance of
man. Every commotion of the mind, says Tullie Lib. III, de Oratore.
, has a certain countenance of his own by nature. To a learned and wise
imitator every man is a book: he converseth with all sorts of men, and when he
observes in any of them some notable commotions of the mind, he seems then
to have watched such an opportunity for his study, that he might read in
their eyes and countenance the several faces of anger, love, fear, hope,
scorn, joy, confidence, and other perturbations of our mind. Yet shall he for
all this, as his leisure serves him, take in hand the writings of moral and
natural Philosophers, of Poets, of Historians, of Mathematicians: for although
moral and natural Philosophy, Poesy, History, Geometry, cannot make him a
Painter, yet will these Sciences make him a more absolute Painter.
Counterpoison and other remedies appointed for the cure of wounds and diseases,
are compounded of many and very often contrary effects, and there is made out
of several things but one mixture, the which though it be not like unto any of
the ingredients, yet is there in it some peculiar force drawn out of every one
of them. Bees likewise do suck out of the juice of several flowers such a
sweet and pleasing savor of honey, that all the wit of man is not able to
imitate any such thing: and why do we then wonder that Picture should lack
the help of many Arts; which not being sensibly perceived in the work, are
for all that secretly felt, by trans-fusing into the Picture a hidden force
derived out of many Sciences? It may be objected here that many Painters have
attained to a tolerable skill of Art, though they never meddled with any of
these Studies: it is most likely to be so; and it matters very little if we
do grant it: seeing our discourse is not about ordinary workmen, but we do
rather speak of such men as are Painters indeed, that is, men of excellent
wits and great learning, to the perfiting of whom Nature and Study seem to
have most lovingly conspired.

10. The ancient Artificers therefore as they had an excellent way of working,
so had they by continual observation a more excellent gift of conceiving the
lively images of all manner of passions and affections: neither could their
works ever have been graced with such a rare expression of passions, unless
they had wisely observed the several effects of these natural commotions that
do transport our mind, and alter the ordinary looks of our countenance.
Zeuxis painted Penelope, expressing in her picture the much commended modesty
of her chaste behavior, Pliny xxxv, 9. Timomachus painted Ajax, as he was
full of rage in the midst of his mad fit. Philostr. lib. II, devita
Apollonii, cap. 10. Silanion made Apollodorus, who was a most choleric man;
neither was it the man only he made of brass, but his frowardness also.
Pliny xxxiv, 8. Protogenes made Philiscus, as he was in a deep and pensive
study. Pliny xxxv, 10. Praxiteles made Phryne rejoicing, Plin. xxxiv, 8.
Parrhasius made a boy running for strife in his armor. Pliny xxxv, 10.
Aristides his Anapauomenos dies for the love of his brother. Plin. xxxv, 10.
That same Bacchus also in Philostratus his first book of Images In Ariadne.
, is known by the picture of love expressed in his face. These examples do
show unto us what experience the ancient Artificers had in the properties of
natural passions and affections: the following do furthermore prove that
their Inventions did abound in all manner of wit and learning.

11. Painters and Poets, as two natural brothers, have agreed very well in
their device, says Latinus Pacatus Panegyrice Theod. Aug. dicto.
, when they do make Victory with wings; seeing such men as do follow the
successful course of prosperous Fortune, seem rather to fly, then to run.
And it is very proper that Pacatus does ascribe a brotherly neerenesse and
agreement unto them both; seeing what Theophylactus Simocatus Epist. 82.
says of Poets, that the play of Poets is full of all manner of wisdom; the
same is averred also of Painters and Carvers. I do not use to view the statues
and images made by Art sleepingly and slenderly, says Aelian Lib. XIV. var.
bist. cap. 37.
: Let this one among many examples serve for proof: that never any Painter or
Carver would attribute unto the Muses, the daughters of Jupiter, unmeet and
falsified shapes: neither was there ever any Artificer so void of sense and
reason, as to make them armed: insinuating that the life of them who addict
themselves unto the Muses, must be accompanied with quietness, ease, and
tranquillity. We have further proof of this same wisdom in the picture of
the life of man, as it was invented by Cebes: the image of Prodicus his
Hercules is of the same nature: and Themistius In orat. de Amicilia.
having followed the steps of that same Sophist, propounds unto us such
another image of true and fained friendship: see also in Agellius Noct. Attic.
lib. XIV, cap. 4.
a most lively image of Justice, set forth by Chrysippus with very severe and
venerable colors of words. Apelles followed the directions of this wisdom in
his admirable picture of slandrous Calumny. Lysippus could never have made
Occasion as passing by, if his Invention had wanted the ready help of this
same wisdom. Do not you know, says Heliodorus Lib. IV, Aethiop.
, that Painters make a winged God of Cupid, to signify the inconstant
fickleness of them that are overcome by him: see also Xenophon lib. I,
Apomnem. Theophyl. Simocatus epist. 54. Tzetzes Chiliad. V, hist. 11.
Propertius lib. II, Eleg. 10. Thousand and thousand exemples of this wisdom
might be drawn out of ancient Authors; unless we did think that these few
did sufficiently show, how the rarest works of Art have ever been derived out
of the abundant fountain of this same wisdom, and that Apollonius therefore
had good reason to call Fantasy, which is the mother of Invention, a thing
full of wisdom: see Philostr. lib. VI, de vita Apollonii, cap. 9.

12. But if any man lists for all this to consider the nature of this same
wisdom somewhat nearer, he shall find that, besides what is said already,
four things are to be observed in the Invention: namely, Truth; Opportunity;
Discretion; and, which arises out of these three, Magnificence. What
concerns the first, Picture is ever most careful of the truth, says
Philostratus Iconum lib. I, in Narcisso.
: and as in history he does not less seem to deceive, says Amm. Marcellinus
Lib. xxix.
, who willingly and wittingly passes by things done, then he who inventeth
things that never were done, so does Picture in the expressing of the Truth
observe these two rules: she refuses to express what is not in nature, and
loves not to omit what is in nature. The first is urged by Vitruvius, Let
picture be an image, says he, of a thing that is, or at least can be, etc. see
the continuation of these words, together with the confirmation of this point,
lib. I, cap. 3. 12. The second rule is set down by Philostratus, those that
do not paint things as they fall out, says he Iconum lib. II, in Venere.
, are not true in their pictures. We are here likewise to observe that the
most famous ancient Painters did make greater account of truth, then of the
pulcritude of their figures: and when the truth of the story should be in
danger by studying neatness too much, they had rather lose all then lose the
truth of the argument. Philostratus when he speaks of Amphiaraus his horses,
the sweating horses being all overlaid with a thin kind of dust, says he
Iconum lib. I, in Amphiarao.
, did seem less fair, but yet truer: passing well: for it was not possible
to conceive these horses otherwise, seeing the hottest brunt of a most
desperate conflict did require overheated and fiercely enraged horses. But
when there was no necessity that forced them to observe in every small thing
an accurate resemblance of truth, they did sometimes wisely neglect or
slightly pass over such properties of the true similitude as were not so
material, and were likely to overthrow the pulchritude. Such as do paint
fair and comely countenances, wherein there is some small blemish, says
Plutarch In vita Cimonis.
, we wish them not to leave it quite, nor accurately to express it: seeing
the one makes the image hard-favoured, the other unlike. In things howsoever
of greater consequence Truth was ever esteemed a maine commendation of Picture;
and that upon very good ground. For as it is granted by all that Picture
studieth to profit no less then to delight, it must needs follow that Truth is
above all other things to be observed in Picture; seeing, as Lucian De Conscrib
historia.
speaks, nothing can be profitable, but what proceeds from truth.

13. Opportunity follows: for as that stage player is judged impertinent,
who brings a tipsie dancer upon the Theater in the robes of a grave Senator;
so is it ever expected that an Artificer should wisely observe in his works a
convenient decency agreeing with the circumstances of the present occasion:
neither is it without reason that Philostratus Iconum lib. I, in Paludibus.
speaking of wisdom and occasion, names them the chiefest points of Art. The
enamoured Bacchus, as he is described in the same Author, serves for an
example, Bacchus his picture is known by the passion of love expressed in his
face, says he Iconum lib. I, in Ariadne.
, as for the bravery of his sumptuous apparel wrought all over with flowers,
as for the skins of fallow dear, as for the javelins wrapped about with ivy,
all these things are thrown away, as being now out of season. The younger
Philostratus likewise when he describes the picture of Hesione, that was to be
devoured by a Sea Monster, the occasion does not permit, says he, to make an
accurate expression of her beauty, seeing the fear of her life, and the agony
of those things she saw before her eyes, as it did corrupt the flower of
nature, so did it for all that leave unto the beholders sufficient marks to
conjecture her perfection by the things present. Such another most sweet and
graceful fear is noted in the picture of the distressed Andromeda, that stood
now likewise ready to be torn a pieces: see Achilles Tatius lib. IV de
Clitophontis and Leucippes amorib. Neither did the ancients only observe what
circumstances were most proper for the present occasion of their works, but
they did consider also what place was fittest for them. No pictures do deserve
commendation, says Vitruvius Lib. VII, cap. 5.
, but such as resemble the truth; and though they are trimmed up by Art, yet
may we not instantly judge well of them, unless we do find that the things
therein contained are not offensive when they come to be tried by reasoning.
Apaturius Alabandeus made at Tralleis a scene with a neat hand, wherein he had
made images instead of columns, centaures also to uphold the chapiters of the
pillars, etc. He made moreover an upper-scene, wherein the seelings, the
porches, the halfehouse-tops were diversely adorned by the Painter. Wherefore
when the strange show of this same scene drew the eyes of all men, and when all
were ready to allow of it by a general approbation; there did step forth a
certain Mathematician, named Licinius; who said, that the Alabandeans had the
reputation of wise men in all manner of civil affairs, but that now they were
judged unwise for a small fault of undecency: seeing all the Statues in places
of public exercise, were Orators pleading; and those in the marketplace did
hurl a great stone, run, or play at ball. The whole City therefore did bear
the reproach of the unseemly gesture which their Statues had contrary to the
property of the places wherein they were erected: neither did Apaturius offer
to answer for himself, but having taken away the scene, he corrected and
altered it according to truth. Although now it may seem easy to observe the
decency of a convenient place, and that a reasonable wit upon the least warning
may do therein well enough; yet does not the occasion of the circumstances,
which are to be observed in painting, admit such unchangeable rules and
precepts of Art, as to tie all Masters to them: but as in many other things, so
most of all in the consideration of this same occasion, it falls out very
often that circumstances are changed according to the place and time
represented. Counsel is a maine thing in the Artificer, says Quintilian Lib.
II, cap. 13.
, seeing it is turned and altered diversely according to the occasions of
things. The same Author says again in another place to the same purpose; It
suffices me to affirm, says he Lib. VI, cap. ult.
, that counsel is the chiefest thing in our whole life; and that it is in
vain to teach other Arts without it; yea that providence without doctrine is
able to effect more, then doctrine without providence. Counsel also, in my
opinion, does not much differ from judgment; but that judgment busieth it
self, about things that show themselves; counsel, about things that lie hid
and are not yet found out, or at least are doubtful and uncertain. The Art of
painting requires studious endeavors, assiduous exercitations, great
experience, deep wisdom, and a most ready counsel. Precepts in the mean
while help the Art very much, if they do propound unto us the right way, and
not one usually beaten track only: but when precepts do fail, our wits must
supply the rest, and we must warily consider what is decent and expedient.
Nealces was very witty and subtle in the Art, says Pliny Lib. xxxv, cap. 12.
, for when he painted a sea fight between the Persians and the Egyptians, and
would express that this fight was fought in the river Nile, whose water
resembles the sea, he declared by an historical argument what he could not
show by Art: for he made an ass drinking upon the shore, and a crocodile
lying in wait to entrap him. Timanthes also perceived that he was to cover
something in his picture with the which he overcame Colotes, judging that some
circumstances might not be showed, or else that they could not be expressed as
the matter did require: for when in the sacrificing of Iphigenia, says
Quintilian Lib. II, cap. 13.
, he had painted Calchas sad, Ulysses sadder, and had attributed unto Menelaus
the greatest sorrow Art could effect; having spent all his passions, and not
finding how to express her fathers countenance worthily, he thought it good to
cover his head, and to leave the apprehension of the fathers heaviness to the
consideration of the beholders. Pliny does mention the same picture, Timanthes
did abound in wit, says he Lib. xxxv, cap. 10.
, that same Iphigenia, so much extolled by the Orators, as she stood near the
altar ready to die, was his work: for having painted all them that stood by
full of grief, especially her uncle, when he had now consumed the whole image
of sadness, he covered her fathers face, not knowing how to show it as it was
fit. There are also other proofs of his wit: as namely a sleeping Cyclops in
little: whose greatness when he studied to express, he painted some Satyrs
hard by measuring his thumb with the stalk of some kind of herbs. There is
ever much more understood in his works, then there is painted; and though the
Art be great, yet does his wit go beyond the Art.

14. Discretion is here also a great point, but very often neglected by them
that observe Truth and occasion too much: for as in Tragedies, so likewise in
Pictures, all things are not to be laid open before the eyes of the spectator.
Let not Medea, says Horace De Art.
, murder her own children in the presence of the whole people: let not the
villainous Atreus boil the flesh of man openly. There are doubtless many
things misbecoming them that do profess a severe integrity of incorrupt
manners; so that an Artificer had better leave them out with the loss of some
part of the story, then with the loss of modesty. Lucian calls the picture
of Pylades and Orestes, who slew Clytemnestra and Aegisthus, a most just or
discreet picture, adding withal the reason of such a new and unused
denomination: The Painter, says he De Domo.
, devised a grave course, for having but showed the impious undertaking a far
off, and running over it as if it were already done, he made the young men
busy with the slaughter of the adulterer: see also the description of
Timomachus his Medea, as we find it in the Anthologie of Greek Epigrammes,
lib. IV, cap. 9. They do likewise wrong this same Discretion very much, who by
the wantonness of their works throw the spectators headlong down into all
manner of unlawful and filthy concupiscences: and an Artificer is here also to
take good heed that he do not lose the authority of a good and discreet man,
whilst he studieth to gain the vain and shameful title of wit and waggerie:
see Propertius lib. II, Eleg. 5. as also Sidon. Apollinaris lib. II, Epist. 2.
Though a man do never so much put himself in mind of continence, says A
chilles Tatius Lib. I, de Clitophontis and Leucippes amorib.
, yet is he most commonly provoked by example to imitate the contrary,
especially if he meets with the example of one whom he esteems to be better
then he thinks himself to be: the authority of a better, turns the shame
of the offense into a most confident boldness. Petronius Arbiter affoordeth us
an evident proof of what we have said already, when he brings in a
lustful youth set all a fire upon the sight of some pictures containing the
rape of Ganymedes, the repulse of an importunate Nais, soliciting Hylas,
Apollo his grief for Hyacinthus, Does Love then enter into the heart of the
Gods also? says he, and upon this ground he runs on in his way. Love and
Solitariness, two bad and most forward counselors, had brought Chaerea far
enough, though the picture of Danae had not inflamed him more: see Terence Eun.
Act. III, Sce. 5.
: and Donatus makes this observation upon it, Terence shows here
philosophically, says he, what hurt the life of man receives by the fabulous
tales forged by Poets, when they do suggest examples of naughtiness unto them
that are ready to offend See Clemens Alexandrinus in Protreptico
. We may very well add to these lascivious pictures all such kind of
drinking-cups as are esteemed precious for the engravings of some infamous
adulteries, even as if drunkenness were little able to kindle lust, says
Pliny Lib. XIV, cap. 22.
, unless wine should be drunk in bawdie conceits, and drunkenness should be
invited by the price of such unlawful contentments. But of this abuse of Art
we have spoken already lib. II, cap. 8. in the beginning of that Chapter.

15. Magnificence does show it self in a well-conceived invention, and there
is added a wonderful great authority unto the work, when Truth, Occasion and
Discretion are duly observed in it: for as the whole Art of painting is not
much worth, unless it be accompanied with much gravitie and do contain all
such kind of things as are full of grace and dignity, so must she make but a
small show of elegancie, pleasantness, and too much labored gayness; seeing
these things do leave in the spectators a strong suspicion of affectation,
which does rather lessen then augment the authority of an Artificer: whosoever
on the contrary is unskilful and unexperienced in this most accurate Art, the
same does nothing else but build castles in the air for fear of stooping to
the ground. Such likewise as do mistrust their own wits, strive always to
blow and to lift themselves up, even as weak and feeble persons use to be
extreme in their threatenings, and low men love to stand on tiptoes: though now
a man upon this same overstraining and forcing of his wit may seem sometimes to
obtain the credit of a strong Invention, even as an unbroken or untilled
ground does now and then bring forth goodly herbs, yet does he not avoid the
greatest danger there is in the Invention; seeing he is desperate in his
attempts: from whence it arises, says Quintilian Lib. II, cap. 12.
, that he, who does nothing but seek what is excessive, may by chance light
upon one or other lofty conceit, but that falls out very seldom, and it
cannot make amends for many other faults: the things therefore proceeding from
such a vain mind seem rather to arise out of a tumultuous distemper of
troubled and turbulent fantasies, says Longinus De sub lim oratione, 2.
, then to be handled after a magnificent way: and if you examine every one of
these things in a true light, what even now was terrible, shall by little and
little grow contemptible: so is it then much better forthwith to look for a
remedy, and not to suffer that our mind aspiring to greater matters should
entertain frivolous and ridiculously swelling conceits, in stead of a serious
and haughty Invention; and every Artificer must know, that as our cattle
being too full of grass is cured by letting blood, says Quintilian Li. II. c.
10
, and so returns to such fodder as may be most proper for the preservation of
their strength; that he likewise must lose some grease and part with his gross
humors if ever he means to be healthful and strong: otherwise that same
vain swelling will betray it self upon the first attempt of any true work:
to the end then that we should not mistake, it is worth our labor to observe
out of Longinus an infallible mark of true magnificence. That is great indeed,
says he De sublimi orat. 5.
, which does still return into our thoughts, which we can hardly or rather not
at all put out of our mind, but the memory of it sticks close in us and
will not be rubbed out: esteem that also to be a most excellent and true
magnificence, which is liked always and by all men: for when all such men as
differ in their studies, course of life, purposes, and ages, do all agree in
their opinion about one and the same thing, the judgment and approbation of so
many diversely minded folks, must needs gain a constant and certain estimation
of the thing so much admired. The younger Pliny was likewise persuaded to hope
well of the durablenesse of his works, when he found that all men generally in
all places did speak well of his writings. It pleases me well, says he Li.
ix. ep. 11.
, that my books keep the same favor far from home, which they have gotten in
the city; and I begin to think them complete enough, seeing several judgments
in such diversity of countries judge alike of them.

The reason now why Artificers are more or less addicted to follow this same
magnificent way of art, proceeds either out of their own natural
inclination, or else out of a purposed resolution agreeing with their nature.
Magnificent thoughts come by nature, and cannot be taught, says Longinus de.
Sublimi orat. 2.
, yea, the only art to attain unto the same, is that Nature should fit us to
high conceited and lofty things. And again 7, Great minded men are most of all
given to entertain stately conceits. It is then required here, That an
artificer be of a magnanimous nature: if not, that he do at least with a
purposed resolution follow after grave and mavelous things, says Dionys.
Halicarnass. In Isocr.
. It seems that Nature did dispose Nicophanes to a high strain of invention:
Nicophanes was gallant and neat, says Pliny Li. xxxv. cap. 10.
, so that he did paint ancient works for the eternity of things: he had a most
forward mind; and there are very few like him: he was most commended for the
gorgeousness and gravitie of his art. Pyreicus might likewise have gone a
great deal higher, if his intent had not been bent another way. Pyreicus was
in his art inferior to none, says Pliny Li. xxxv. cap. 10.
, but I do not know whether he spoiled himself by a purposed resolution: and
though he did delight in mean things, yet did he deserve in them the greatest
praise: he painted Barbers and Cobblers shops, asses, all manner of victuals, and
such like things, wherefore he was called Rhyparographus. These works of his
being wonderful pleasant, sold better than the bravest pieces of other
masters.

Such artificers therefore as long to gain an everlasting fame must needs be
of an exceeding great spirit, or at least upon all occasions entertain great
thoughts, and stately imaginations. But seeing our mind cannot well give it
self to this practice, unless it be thoroughly freed from all manner of sorbid
and abject cares, it is altogether requisite that we should banish the ordinary
and most cumbersome troubles about the necessities of our wretched life. A
cheerful mind pours forth a witty invention, says Cassiodorus in praefat.
libri undecimi Variarum. It is impossible that those, says Longinus De sublimi
orat. 7.
, who busy the thoughts and studies of their whole life about vile and servile
matters, should bring forth any thing that might deserve the admiration of all
ages. See Juvenal, Sat. 6. and T. Calphurnius Siculus, Eclog. iv.

Protogenes was feign to wrestle a great while with want and poverty, ere that
he could put himself forth and undertake greater matters. He was very poor at
the beginning (says Pliny Lib. xxxv, cap. 10.
) and followed his art with great earnestness: which was the reason that he
was less fertile. Some do think that he painted ships till he was fifty
years of age. Whosoever therefore would willingly meet with excellent and
notable inventions, must not only fill his unoccupied mind with all kind of
great and haughty conceits, but he is likewise to cherish these restless
motions of his generous resolution, by emulating the better sort of ancient
writers. When we do imitate the best authors, says the younger Pliny Li. vii.
ep. 9
, we do enable our selves to find the like. Attentive reading and studying
furnishes us with a rich store of many and great matters, and teaches us not
only to use them as they chance to meet us, but as it is fit. Pericles the
great supporter of Art, and the only patron of the incomparable Phidias, made
wonderful much of Anaxagoras Clazomenius, who having fully instructed him in
the knowledge of natural things, but of those especially that were above in
the air and firmament, put in him the majesty and gravitie he showed in all
his sayings and doings: so that he grew by Anaxagoras his conversation, not
only to have a great mind and an eloquent tongue, without any affectation or
gross country terms; but he accustomed himself likewise to a certain
modest countenance that scantly smiled; being very sober in his gate, modest in
his apparel, having a kind of sound in his voice that he never lost or altered,
and was of very honest behavior, never troubled in his talk for any thing
that crossed him; and many other such like things, as all that saw and
considered them in him, could but wonder at him. See Plutarch in Pericles his
life. Seeing then that natural philosophy could effect so much in a studious
Prince, how shall not history and Poesy do the same in an Artificer? History,
the witness of times, the light of truth, the life of memory, the
schoole-mistresse of our actions, as Tully De Orat.
terms her, cannot but inspire magnanimous thoughts into our breasts, when
she places us upon her Theater, that we might see from thence the most
profitable examples of so many sage and valiant Captains, that we might step
in the midst of the consultations which great men held about great matters,
and choose out of al ages the most virtuous times and persons to be acquainted
with. Poesy likewise, being haughty and of a lofty style, as Lucian De
conscrib. hist.
speaks, is able to enlarge our conceits. Neither do we find among the
Ancients any artificers more renowned, than those that drew their inventions
out of excellent Poets. The spirit and weightinesse of the matter, says
Quintilian Lib. x, c. 1.
, the whole gesture of the affections, the decent comelines of persons is
drawn out of Poets. Demetrius Phalereus, Dionys. Halicarnass. and Pliny,
ascribe unto Phidias a certain kind of accurate greatness and worthy
magnificence: and our conjecture shall not be vain if we affirm, That he
fetched the chiefest strength of his invention out of poets: seeing he
himself was not ashamed to confess, that his much admired Elean Jupiter was
made after the image of Jupiter described in Homer. See Valor. Maximus, lib.
III. cap. 7. ex. ext. 4. Apelles also when he painted Diana among the
sacrificing virgins, took his pattern out of the same Homer. See Pliny, lib.
xxxv. ca. 10.

It is likewise evident that Timanthes, whose wit all ancient authors do so
highly extol, for that pretty shift he made in the picture of Iphigenia, did
owe his invention unto Euripides; seeing this same wise Tragaedian In Iphigen.
Anlidensi.
brings in Agamemnon with a veil before his eyes. Praxiteles when he made
the statue of Bacchus, as it is reported in Callistratus, took his invention
out of Euripides. The same Callistratus affirms likewise, That Euripides his
description of the miserable Medea, was followed by all the artificers which
meant to express the streits Medea's wavering mind was in when she found her
self distracted between compassion and revenge, standing now ready to save or
to destroy. Longinus his words are worth noting: Many are carried away by
another man's spirit as by a divine inspiration, says he De sublimi orat. 2.
, even as the report goes, that Pythia the Priest of Apollo is suddenly
surprised when she approaches unto the trivet: where they say there is an
abrupt hole in the ground, breathing forth a divine exhalation; and that the
priest filled with this divine power, does instantly prophecy by inspiration.
Even so do we see, that from the loftiness of the Ancients there do flow some
little streams into the minds of their imitators, so that they find
themselves compelled to follow their greatness for company, though else of
their own accord they are very little given to these enthusiasticall fits.
Neither may this be called a theft, seeing it is but an expression of the
bravest manners, devices, and works of the Ancients. So is this same strife and
contention for glory most worthy of praise and victory; yea it is glorious
enough to be therein overcome by our predecessors. Although now reading and
study can do much, yet shall that Artificer bring greater spirits to his work,
who beside the most profitable endeavors of an emulating virtue, associateth
himself with Apelles, Protogenes, Polycletus, Phidias; not only considering
with himself, what these noble souls if they were present, should do or else
advise him to do in the works he takes in hand; but propounding also unto
himself, how they should censure his work brought to an end. The fear of
being disgraced, and the hope of an everlasting same, increase this same care
in him, whilst an earnest desire to please does still augment his prosperous
endeauours. Martial felt some such thing when he says In Epist. ad Priscum
praefixa lib. 12. Epigr.
, If there is any thing in my books that deserves approbation, the auditor
has suggested it unto me. Hence it is that every artificer, though he loves
privacie and retyrednesse never so much whilst he is a doing, yet looks he
for a great conflux of eager and applauding spectators when the work is done:
he scorneth to approve his laborious art to one spectator only. A thing
appertaining to all, says Symmachus Li. 1. ep. 49
, is never content with one witness. And as we see, that a frequent auditorie
was wont to inflame the Poets; so shall an Artificer likewise receive great
benefit by it, if he admits every day such men as do deserve his respect.
For it is a rare thing, says Quintilian Lib. x. c. 7.
, that any man should reverence his own self.

This conceived presence of ancient, and the true presence of modern masters
will do us more good, if we do constantly believe, that the estimation of
these present and following times depends on the judgment of those whom we
make choice of for the reforming of our works. It is impossible that he should
entertain any abject and mean thoughts, who knows that all ages will speak
of him, says Mamertinus, Paneg. Juliano Imp. dicto. Verily so it is, says
Quintilian Lib. xii, c. 2.
, they do enforce their minds to great things, who account not only the
present age, but the memory of all posterity, to be the space of an honest
life, and the race of their glory. Whosoever therefore does with an heroical
mind conceive the true image of the glory that is to come, and looks for a
perpetual and unchangeable fruit arising not out of a poor reward, but out of
the contentment of his mind, delighting it self in the contemplation of Art,
the same shall easily be persuaded to spend that time in framing magnificent
Images and inventions, which others bestow upon idle spectacles, uncertain
wanderings, wastefull dice, unprofitable discourses, a sleepy drowsinesse, and
unseasonable banquets. It is a singular gift of providence, says Quintilian
Li. I. c. 12.
, that honest things should take us most of all.

16 We may therefore very well cease to wonder, why there are now adays so few
good artificers, seeing these arts consist of all such things as it is a great
matter to excel in any one of them. So was it then a received custom among
the Ancients that meant to obtain the credit of absolute Artists, not to make
profession of the Art, unless they found themselves well prepared and
sufficiently furnished with all kind of learning: whereas now every new
beginner, that knows but how to fill his picture with several figures, and
to trim up his lame invention with fine and glorious colors, thinks himself
instantly to be admitted into the deepest mysteries of such a retired and
venerable art. Yet is this always certain, that a generous mind hates
vanity, and that never any man was able to conceive or to bring forth any
worthy thing, but such as had great variety of learning. The others on the
contrary, for all their boasting, never knew the true way to art, or at least
had not the courage to tread the known way. There is another sort of men
between the learned and unlearned, who being reasonably well acquainted with all
the grounds of common learning, make for all that a show as if they did not
care for it, hoping by this means to procure unto themselves a greater opinion
of industry and wit, if they should be thought to do something without the
help of other Arts and Sciences; but it is an easy matter to find them out;
true learning disdaineth to be hid; neither can they dissemble so cunningly,
but that here and there in their works diverse glorious marks of reverend
antiquity will peep out. To let them therefore alone, we do rather wonder
at their impudence who presume to meddle with these grave and serious Arts,
before they have tasted natural and moral Philosophy, History, Poesy; not
to speak of the Mathematickes; for our modern wits are so deeply plunged and
drowned in their secure confidence, that they mean to do well enough without
the Mathematickes; yea the best of them are content with a superficial
knowledge of such useful Arts, not considering that a slight and careless
manner of studying helps very little. What we would have take deep root in
our heart and become our own, requires assiduitie of study: there is also
very great difference whether we bring forth things of our own, or make use
of things borrowed; for as the things of our own come forth with great ease,
so does the knowledge of many Arts and Sciences wonderfully adorn our works,
though we did never intend any such thing; neither do the more learned only
perceive it, but the ruder sort does also very often feel it, when they do
commend the exquisite labors of great Masters upon the first sight, as being
forced to confess that they are filled with all kinds of rare and profound
learning. For as much then as a true Artificer must be thoroughly skilled in
many Arts and Sciences, we may see what our times are come to: profitable
learning is despised: necessary Arts are neglected: every one deemeth himself
more witty and judicious then the ancients: hence it is that the ordinary
works of our Artificers lack nothing so much as Magnificence, being stuffed
with the dross of silly and trivial Inventions.

The noble Art which was anciently waited upon by many and most worthy
Sciences, is cut short, and having lost her ancient dignity, is thrust out of
doors without any attendance or any respect; yea she is taught penuriously,
and learned basely, being forced to seek her bread without any ingenuitie,
after the manner of other sordide, mechanike, and mercenarie Arts. But why
should indignation thus transport me? it is better to laugh them out; least
they might think themselves to have obtained great matters, who by all their
busy toil and labors foolishly misspent are come to such a height of
felicity as to make themselves to be laughed at. I rather congratulate those
happy wits, who thus become Masters without pains or care: yet am I well
assured that those who bring minds incapable of great things, or not well
prepared by study, shall with their best endeavors effect nothing in this Art
answerable to their fair hopes: but finding their souls barren both by nature
and ill culture, must content themselves with the Inventions of other men, and
employ their whole life in copying their works, aiming at no other
sufficiency but to be able to draw after them by lines and rulings. In a
manner courting the maid when they cannot obtain the Mistress, like
Penelopes unhappie suitors. That which Cicero Pro Muraena.
speaks of the Greek Musicians, that those should blow a pipe which could
not touch the lute, may fitly character these unworthy Painters, if these may
be worthy of the name of Painters, or if this may be called painting, which
high title properly belongs to them, and to them only, who are able to
express whatsoever theminde of man can conceive, and dare exhibit it to
public judgment. The former without this perfection is of small worth or use,
like a good sword rusted in the scabberd: to this all our instructions chiefly
tend; to attain this, no means but Art; all study is to be applied to this;
all practice must aim at this; this is the bond and but of Imitation; in this
a man must spend his whole life; by this one Master out-goeth another; for this
only one Piece and way of painting is more excellent than another. But the
near coherence of this with the following discourse does lead me too far
into the matter of Design or Proportion, which is the subject of the next
Chapter.

CHAP. II.
THe Argument being found, it follows that an Artificer should observe in his
Design the rules of true Proportion: seeing no man beats his brains to
invent any thing, but that he means to make some use of the matter invented.
As for the Proportion that is to be observed here, several Authors name it
severally. Philostratus and other Authors call it by the names of Symmetrie,
Analogy, Harmony: the younger Philostratus therefore joyneth these three
denominations together; the wise men of old, says he In prooemio Iconum.
, do seem to me to have written many things about Symmetrie to be observed in
Picture; setting in a manner laws concerning the Analogy of every member and
limb; as though it were not enough excellently to express a motion conceived
in their mind, if they did not also keep their Harmony within a measure
agreeable to Nature, (for whatsoever is exorbitant from his kind and without
measure, Nature admits not) I say, to Nature rightly acting her motion. It
appears then that the Greek names of Symmetrie, Analogy, and Harmony
signify the same thing; and yet is it not so evident what name the Latins
have for it. Symmetrie has no Latin name, says the elder Pliny lib. xxxiv,
cap. 8. the younger Pliny for all that seems to express the force of this
Greek word by the names of congruence and equality. If you did see a head or
any member parted from his statue, says he Lib. II, epist. 5.
, it may be you should not be able to find out by that the whole congruence
and equality, yet should you be able to judge whether it be elegant and neat
in it self. Suetonius likewise when he speaks of the Emperor Augustus, he
was of a low stature, says he Cap. 79.
, but that his lowness was hid by the fitness and equality of his members,
and it could not be perceived but when he was compared with a taller man that
stood near him. And again, when he speaks of Tiberius, as he was broad in
the breast and shoulders, says he Cap. 68.
, so was there also in all his other members to the sole of his feet a certain
equality and congruence. Tullie calls it an agreement of parts and an apt
composition of the members; for when he does speak of the great dignity of
man, of all these things that are perceived by seeing, says he Lib. I, de
Officiis.
, there is no other creature that is sensible of pulchritude, comeliness, and
convenience of parts. And again, in the same place, the pulchritude of the
body draws our eyes by an apt composition of the members, and delights us
with nothing so much, as that all the parts agree among themselves with a
certain kind of pleasantness. Vitruvius names it almost every where a
commensuration or commodulation, and sometimes also by another name. Agellius
Lib. I. Noct. Attic. cap. 1.
calls it a natural competence of all the members among themselves. The same
writer says in another place Lib. II, Noct. Attic. cap. 24.
, Analogy is called in Latin by some Proportion. Quintilian seems also to
approve of the word Proportion; Those that go nearest to translate the word
Analogy into Latin, says he Lib. I, cap. 6.
, call it Proportion. Seneca thinks it best to keep the word Analogy,
Seeing the Latin Grammarians have enfranchized the word Analogy, says he
Epist. 120.
, I am not of opinion that it is to be condemned and to be sent back to its
own City.

2. Truly it is likely that Artificers have borrowed the words Analogy and
Harmony from that Proportion which is found in Arithmeticall numbers or in
Musical concords: for Proportion is nothing else but a certain law or rule of
numbers which Artificers follow. Artificers, whose trade is to fashion and to
produce bodily figures, says S. Augustine Lib. II, de Libero arbitrio, cap. 16.
, have in their Art certain numbers and ideall perfections, by which they fit
and square their works; and withdraw not their hands and tools from the
fabricating thereof, until that which is outwardly fashioned, compared to that
internal light of number and perfection, be found as absolute as is possible;
and through the presentation of the sense without, please the judge within,
seeing it conformable to his exemplarie and supernall numbers. Plutarch also
delivers the very same in express words, saying De Auditime.
, that which is beautiful is perfited by many as it were numbers disposed
together in one apt manner under a certain Symmetrie and Harmony: but that
which is ill-favored, quickly takes his beginning from any one thing either
wanting or unfitly redounding. The Musician Mintanor also, being induced by the
near band that is between Music and Picture, seems to have entitled a
book of the art of Music set out by him, Chromatopoeum, or the composing of
Music called Chroma, or color, as Fulgentius Lib. I, Mytholog.
witnesses. Damascius also in Photius, where he speaks of Jacob the
Physician, calls some kind of Music Chromaticum, that is, soft and
elegant, and as it were decked with colors. It appears lastly out of Pliny
Lib. xxxv, cap. 5.
, that Painters have taken from Musicians the words tonus and harmoge, and have
transferred them into their own Art. We see therefore, that not only
Musicians from Painters, but also contrariwise Painters from Musicians have
borrowed terms of Art; and that for no other cause, but only to show that in
both those Arts the same respect of that manifold Proportion, which consists
in numbers, is had; as if one of them did stand in need of the other.

3. Wherefore seeing it is agreed upon of all that even every light
consideration of numbers requires a quick and ready use of reason (for
nothing sooner bewrays a weak and crazed understanding, then to labor, and
hacke, and mistake in continuing and comparing numbers together) it is evident
that this Analogy, we speak of, needs a judgment much more exact and
sharp; as having this scope, to work out in one or other material the ideall
perfection of the numbers conceived in our mind, and as near as may be to
express the ways of artificial and ingenious Nature. By Symmetrie Art
draws near unto Reason, says Philostratus in prooem. Iconum. And by this
affinity between Symmetrie and right reason we may likewise see the truth of
that which is written Wisdom XI, 21. that God almighty, the only fountain
of true and incorrupt reason, has disposed all things in measure, number, and
weight: so does Plutarch De animae procreatione quae in Timaeo Platonis
describitur sub finem libri.
say, that the ancient Theologers, which were the first Philosophers, made the
statues of their Gods with musical instruments in their hands; not as they
were a harping or piping, but for that they judged no work to be so agreeable
unto the Gods as Harmony and concent. Indeed God the maker and framer of the
Universe has in all his creatures imprinted plain and evident footsteps of
this most beautiful Harmony, which all Artificers endeavor to follow;
neither has any Artificer without the careful observing of this Symmetrie
attained to any show or shadow of that beauty, which by a due composition and
agreement of all the parts among themselves draws and delights the eyes:
and this is that concinnitie of the body and due connection of all the parts
Heroic. in Protesilao.
Philostratus speaks of: for one of the members being cut away from the rest
and alone by it self, has nothing that any man should esteem; but all of
them mutually together do accomplish a perfect systeme, being by their
communion made into a body, and thereto enclosed all about with the band of
Harmony, as Dionys. Longinus speaks de sublimi orat. 35. The beauty of the
body, says Stobaeus Eclog. Ethic. cap. 5.
, is a Symmetrie of the parts referred one to another, and all to the whole.
Wherefore as the true pulchritude of natural bodies is no where found, without
this concinnitie of Harmony; so the right imitation of them consists in the
due observation of the same Proportion. All the parts of a statue ought to be
beautiful, says Socrates in Stobaeus Sermon. 1.
. In colossie works we require not so much the beauty of every particular,
but we do rather consider the whole, whether it be well or no, says Strabo
lib. I, Geogr. We count those imitations most of all ridiculous, says Galen
Lib. I, de usu partium corporis humani.
, which keeping a likeness in most of the parts, fail much in those which are
the principal. The first and most exact observers of Symmetrie were
Parrhasius, Polycletus, and Asclepiodorus. Parrhasius did first of all give
Symmetrie unto picture. Plin. xxxv, 10. Polycletus was a most diligent observer
of Symmetrie, Plin. xxxiv, 8. Apelles was an admirer of Asclepiodorus for the
Symmetrie observed in his works, Plin. xxx, 10.

4. An Artificer therefore shall study most of all to attain to an exact
knowledge of the proportion of man, as it is in some kind set down by
Vitruvius, lib. III. Architect. cap. 1. And out of a continual observation of
the most absolute bodies he shall likewise propound unto himself certain
general and profitable notions, especially such as he finds confirmed in
ancient good authors. Seeing there are two sorts of pulchritude, says Tully
Lib. I de Off.
, the one consisting in sweetness, the other in dignity. We are to know, that
sweetness becomes a woman; dignity on the contrary is more proper for a
man. This dignity is maintained by the goodness of color, and color is
maintained by the exercise of our bodies. And in this same consideration of
sound and well complexioned bodies of lusty men, as on the one side he
remembers with an ancient Writer Auctor Rhetor. ad Herennium.
, That a certain kind of swelling does very often imitate a good constitution
of the body: so can he not but avoid on the other side such a kind of
raw-boned hardness as dis-figureth the bodies that otherwise might be
esteemed proportionable enough; As there must be bones in the body, and as they
must be tied together by their sinews, so are they for all that to be covered
with flesh, says Quintilian, in prooemio libri primi. That body of a man is
only fair, says another Auctor dialogi de causis corruptae eloquentiae.
, wherein the veins do not appear, and the bones cannot be counted: but
temperate and good blood fills up the members, and raises the muscles,
covering also the sinews with redness, and commending them with comeliness.
In fair women he considers the beauty of their face above all the rest. That
woman is not instantly counted fair, says Seneca Epist. 33.
, whose leg or arm deserves to be praised: but whose whole face leaves
nothing in the other members that may seem admirable: unless he will esteem
that woman fairer, whose beautiful face is the least part of the handsomeness
that shows it self in all the parts of her most absolute body. My Limone,
says Aristaenetus Lib. I, Epist. 3.
, though she has a face fair beyond Nature, yet putting off her clothes she
seems not to have any fair face at all, in regard of the other excellencies
that were concealed. Statius Papinius describes the fair Parth nopaeus,
Atlanta's son, even just after the same manner; his limbs showed themselves,
says he Lib. VI, Thebaid. v. 570.
when he unbuckled his riding coat, the whole cheerfulness of his members did
lie open: his brave shoulders, his breasts that might very well be compared with
his bare cheeks, yea the beautiful countenance of his visage was drowned by
the beauty of his body. In other women, and chiefly in Virgins, he observes
with Vitruvius Lib. IV, cap. 1.
, That Virgins in regard of their tender age being made more tender limbed,
receive handsomer effects in every thing that may be for their ornament.
Unless he likes better of the course taken by Zeuxis, who did indulge
something more unto the members of the body, thinking it more stately and more
majesticall. Some also are of opinion, that this same artificer followed Homer
in this point, seeing he would have woman it self be of a stout and able
shape, Quintil. xii. 10. Zeuxis is found greater in heads and joints. Pliny
xxxv. 9. Euphranor seems first to have made use of Symmetry: but he made the
whole bodies smaller, the heads and joints bigger. Pliny xxxv. 11. Statues,
images, pictures, says the younger Pliny Lib. I, ep. 20.
, the figures of men, of dumb creatures, trees also, being but comely, may be
esteemed much better for being great.

5. Go over the Chronicles of all ages, observe every one of them that have
made profession of these arts with good succes, and whithersoever your mind
and thoughts turn themselves, you shall ever find that such artificers only
have attained to a great and durable name, who bent their natural curiosity to
understand the true Symmetry of the body of man: for being once by the
assiduitie of this same study made thoroughly acquainted with the compleatest
beauties, they endeavored to imitate and to express them with their art.
Neither could it be otherwise, but that this exercise having engendered in
their minds an Idaea of perfect beauty, their works likewise should show forth
an accurate resemblance of that proportion there is in nature. They drew
therefore the first grounds of art out of the imitation of the fairest bodies.
It is a most foolish thing in my opinion, that a man should not study to
imitate the best things, says the younger Pliny, lib. I. epist. 5. The most
famous statuaries and painters, says Quintilian Lib. V, cap. 12.
, when they would cast or paint well favored bodies, did never err so
grossly, as to take one or other Bagoas, or Megabyzus, for a pattern of their
work: but rather that same Doryphorus, fit for war and wrestling, or else
the bodies of such warlike champions as they took to be truly handsome. It
seems that the inhabitants of Abdera had something notable in their faces,
for Stephanus de Urbibus In Abdera.
, witnesses, that the ancient Painters were wont to draw a multitude of them.
Many noble and renowned Painters did in great troops resort to Lais, drawing
for strife the breasts and paps of her most beautiful body: yea Apelles made
for this very reason wonderful much of her, when she was not yet grown to her
full age. The same Apelles made also that same famous picture called Venus
Anadyomene, after the example of Phryne, as she, to celebrate Neptunes feast,
went stark naked into the sea, with her hair hanging loose down. See
Athenaeus. lib. xiii, Deipnosoph. Although Pliny Lib. xxxv, cap. 10.
affirms, that the said Venus was made after Campaspe, a Concubine of
Alexander the Great.

Clemens Alexandrinus In Protreptico.
does likewise relate, that the ancient painters ordinarily drew Venus in the
likeness of Phryne: and that the ancient Carvers also made the images of Mercury
after the similitude of the goodly and handsome shape of Alcibiades. Arnobius
Lib. VI. adversus gentes.
teaches us, That Praxiteles his Cnydian Venus was made after Cratina the
whore. Other artificers did run to the strumpet Theodota. See Xenophon, lib.
iii. Apomnem. See also Aristaenetus, lib. I. Epist. 1. As it is then clear,
that the Ancients for their imitation made choice of the rarest bodies, so did
they for all that principally mark the face in them. For though in our face
etcountenance there are not much more but ten parts, says Pliny Lib. VII, not.
hist. cap. 1.
, yet can we hardly among so many thousand men meet with two countenances like
in all things. And seeing that almost all the other parts of our bodies are
most commonly smooth and plain, the countenance alone has great variety in
it, by reason of the inequality of diverse parts in the face, as they do either
rise or fall. Our face is rough, says Ammonius In Arist. december Categrias.
, because it is made up of unlike and unequal parts; the mouth, the nose, the
eyes, and the rest, whereof some stick out by their situation, and some have
a kind of hollownesse. Although this was not the only reason why they spent
their labor chiefly about the face, but also because they knew, that there is
ever in the outward lineaments of our face an evident proof of our inward
inclinations. Painters making very small account of the other parts, says
Plutarch In Alexandro, circa initium.
, take their main similitude from the countenance and such favor of the eyes
wherein there are some marks of our manners and dispositions. It is likewise to
be observed here that they were at the first so nice in this same way of
counterfeiting, that they would not so much as suffer the Painter to err for
the best, as the younger Pliny speaks lib. IV, epist. 28. Their fear was
that they should never hit the true similitude, if once they should begin to
flatter them they would resemble. Such as paint fair bodies, says Eunapius In
Iamblicho.
, when they will gratify them they paint too much, overthrow and spoil the
whole similitude: swarving aside as well from the pattern it self, as from
the beauty.

6. After the most accurate Imitation of singular bodies, whereunto the ancient
Artificers did accustom themselves for a great while, they did not continue
still in the same way, but they went on to express by a more difficult
workmanship such an Idea of accomplished beauty as their former exercise had
given them to conceive: neither did they trouble themselves any more to set
forth a lively similitude of one or other particular though never so fair a
body, but they studied rather to produce a perfect pulchritude according to
the true law and rule of Symmetrie; aspiring ever to that same grace of
comeliness and beauty, which as it cannot be found in any one particular
body, so may it be gathered out of many bodies. Painters, Carvers, and
Statuaries, says Galen Lib. I, de Temperam.
, do paint, carve, and cast the fairest of every sort: they express the
fairest man, horse, ox, lion, considering always what is most proportionable:
this was the commendation of the statue called Polycletus his canon, so named,
because all parts did therein agree one with another by an accurate Symmetrie:
see our first book, cap. I, 3, where we do speak more at large of this
point.

7. Though now this course seems to have been taken by the ancient Artificers
when they mean to show the height and excellency of their Art, yet did they
not in these excellent and in other ordinary works neglect Similitude: it is
exspected that Statues resemble a man, says Longinus De sublimi orat. 32.
. Neither may we justly call it an image, says Arnobius Lib. VI, adversus
gentes.
, that does not draw equal lines from his principal: see also Nazianzene
orat. IV de Theologia: the resemblance of Socrates set forth in a picture,
says Ammonius In Aristot. de Interpret.
, if it does not express his bald head, his flat nose, the standing out of his
eyes, may not be called a true image of Socrates. We do read of Apelles that
he made his pictures so like, that a physiognomer could as well by them as by
the life foretell the hour of death: see Pliny xxxv, 10. And Philoponus
affirms that a good Painter cannot but hit the similitude of what he goes
about to express. Monsters are very seldom engendered in mankind, says he In
Lib. IV. Aristotelis de Generatione animalium.
, because man brings forth perfect creatures: for whatsoever can bring forth
perfect creatures, does seldom err: even as the best Painters do very
seldom mistake themselves about the similitude of the things imitated.

8. The ancients therefore as they did not neglect Similitude, so did they for
all that make more work of Symmetrie: esteeming Similitude to be the work of
Art, whereas Symmetrie proceeded out of some perfection in the Artificer
surpassing Art: see Maximus Tyrius Dissertat. XVI, where he does most
accurately distinguish these two things. It is reported also that Zeuxis
painted a boy holding a cluster of grapes; and when the grapes were so like
that the birds came flying to them, it happened that one of them who were
present said that the birds did not think well of the picture; for that they
never would have ventured to come so near, if the boy had been like: yet do
they say that Zeuxis did put out the grapes, keeping what was better in the
picture, and not what was more like: see Seneca the Rhetorician lib. X,
Controv. 5. Lysippus and Praxiteles are esteemed to come nearest unto truth;
says Quintilian Lib. XII, cap. 10.
, for Demetrius is blamed as being too curious in this point, and loves
Similitude more then pulchritude. As for Lysippus, Pliny gives him this
testimony, that he advanced the Art of casting very much, by expressing the
hair, by making the heads lesser then the ancients, the bodies also slenderer
and drier, that the Statues might seem taller. He was a most diligent observer
of Symmetrie, changing the square Statues of the ancients by a new and unusual
way: and he was wont to say, that the ancients made men as they are, but that
he made them as they seem to be: see Pliny xxxiv, 8.

9. As it is then clear that Symmetrie was anciently esteemed to be the
highest point of Art, so cannot we think it strange that the ancients did most
of all delight in naked bodies, which do not hide what is faulty, and do not
sparingly set forth what is praise-worthie, as the younger Pliny speaks lib.
III, epist. 6. Nakedness it self, says Lactantius De opificio Dei, cap. 7.
, does wonderfully help pulchritude: see Aristaenetus lib. I, epist. 1. Yet
among all others the Grecians did chiefly love naked and undisguised bodies,
being loathe to hide Symmetrie, the chiefest commendation of their Art, with
the ornaments of a less artificial attire: it is a Grecian custom, to
apparel nothing; but the Roman and military way is to add brest-plates, says
Pliny xxxiv, 5. Apelles painted one of the Worthies naked, provoking Nature it
self with this picture, Pliny xxxv, 10. Praxiteles found a ready way to
teach us what a maine difference there is between clothed and uncloathed
figures; he made two statues of Venus and set them to sale both at one time and
at one price, says Pliny Lib. xxxvi, cap. 5.
, the one being clad, was preferred by the inhabitants of Cous that had the
first choosing, because they thought it more grave and honest to take the
attired image: the Gnidians bought her that was left, there being a huge
difference of fame: for Praxiteles made Gnidus famous with that same image. The
whole case is opened, that the Goddess might be seen from all parts; she her
self, as it is believed, liking the fact well enough; seeing the same
admiration remains from what side soever you do look upon her. If therefore
there was any thing in the ancient Statues and Pictures that did deserve
commendation, it was questionless that same plainness and simplicity of
Nature observed by the ancients in their works, and whosoever will but cast
his eyes upon the ancient works that are as yet remaining, he shall see better
things then ever he could meet withal in his reading, says Cassiodorus Var.
vii, 15.
, he shall behold fairer things then ever he could conceive; namely, Statues
that do keep the marks of their authors; he shall view the veins expressed
in brass; the muscles swelling with a certain kind of straining; and a man
so cast in several similitudes, that he may rather seem to be such by a
natural generation: he shall wonder that there is such a mettled fervencie in
horses, as to make him believe by their wrinkled and round nostrills, by their
shaking joints, and their ears laid in their neck, that they would feign
run, though he knows well enough that it is against the nature of brass to
stir at all.

10. Besides that same accuratnesse of Symmetry observed by the ancients in all
their works, we do find also that they were wont to proportion the base to
their works, and their works to the place they should be erected in. Of the
first says Plutarch De Alexandri fortuna aut virtute, lib. II.
, poor Artificers when they do put little Statues upon great bases, argue the
smalnesse of their works the more. Of the second are these words of Vitruvius
Lib. III, Archit. cap. 1.
, Temples must have in every one of their members and parts a convenient
proportion answerable to the whole magnitude. That now by the name of members
we must understand here as well the consecrated Images and Statues as other
parts of the sacred buildings, may be gathered out of Arrianus In ipso statim
initio periplus ponti Euxini.
, where he certifieth Adrian the Emperor that the statues of Mercury and
Philesius consecrated in the Trapezuntian temple were too little for that same
Church. Apollodorus the Architect, as it is reported in Xiphilinus In Adriano.
, did like wise find fault with the Images set up in the temple of Venus built
by Trajanus, affirming that they were bigger then the proportion of such a
building could suffer. Strabo does in like manner observe that Phidias took
good notice of this same Proportion, when he made Jupiter Olympius his statue
sitting; for though the temple was large enough, yet did the image for all that
in this posture almost touch the roof of the building: so that it would have
pierced the roof and all, if he had made it standing upright: see Strabo lib.
VIII Geogr. As it is then clear that the ancients did fit their Statues and
Images to the Churches wherein they were to set them up, so is it that the most
accurate Masters did furthermore regard the altitude of the place ordained for
their Statues: for as their standing place was appointed to be higher or lower,
so made they them accordingly: whereof although we have set down a notable
example in the eight Section of our former Chapter, yet will it not be amiss
to allege here out of Vitruvius a sufficient reason of this practice of
theirs. By how much our sight climbeth higher, says Vitruvius Lib. III, cap. 3.
, with so much the more difficulty does it cut the thickness of the air: and
finding it self lost and weakened by the altitude, it does report unto our
senses an uncertain quantity of measures. The parts of Symmetries therefore
stand continually in need of a proportionable supply, that the works being set
up in higher places, or else being of a colossie bigness, might have a
certain proportion of magnitude.

11. As many as are well skilled in the perfect rules of Symmetrie, do very
often effect strange things by the virtue of this same skill. Phidias, as it is
reported in Lucian In Hermotimo.
, could tell upon the first sight of a Lions claw, how big a Lion he was to
make to the proportion of that same claw. Phlegon Trallianus tells us of such
another artificial conjecture, happily performed by Pulcher, a most excellent
Geometrician, who lived in Tiberius the Emperor his times: see Phlegon
himself cap. 13 and 14, de Rebus mirabilibus. The Egyptian priests make
likewise a relation out of their sacred Records, says Diodorus Siculus Sub
finem libri primi.
, that the most famous Statuaries Telecles and Theodorus, sons of Rhoecus,
lived a great while with them, and that these two made the image of Apollo
Pythius for the inhabitants of Samos: they report likewise that Telecles made
one half of that statue in Samos, whilst Theodorus his brother made the other
half at Ephesus, and that those halfes being brought together did agree so
well as if the whole statue had been the workmanship of one and the same hand:
they do moreover affirm that this manner of working was never practiced among
the Grecians, but that it was most frequently used of the Egyptians; seeing
they do not esteem the fashioning of a statue by the eye, as the Greeks use
to do, but when they go in hand with the stones that are cut out and
distributed in equal parts, they do then take an exact Proportion from the
highest to the lowest, and they do express the whole Symmetrie by dividing
the whole structure of the body of man into one and twenty parts. Wherefore
when the Artificers are once agreed about the bigness, and are now gone to
several places, yet do they make their works agree so well in magnitude,
that the unusual workmanship strikes the hearts of the beholders with an
astonished admiration.

12. Lineall picture in the mean time not yet being trimmed up with the
variety of pleasing colors, makes us after a most plain way sensible of the
great force there is in a meet and convenable Proportion. I do stretch out my
hams, says Horace Lib. II, Satyra 7.
, to see battles so painted with red chaulke or with a coal; even as if men
did fight indeed and stir their weapons, sometimes bringing blows, and
sometimes shunning them. Philostratus comes nearer, and opens the nature and
power of Lineall picture somewhat further; Line aments consisting in light and
shadow without any color, says he De vita Apollonii, lib. II, cap. 10.
, deserve the name of Picture: for we may not only see in them the shape of
the parties designed, but their intent also, whether it be shame or boldness
that possesses them; and although these lines, being put together after a most
simple manner, do not represent any mixture of blood, nor express the flower
of bright hair, and of a newly up-growing beard, yet do they resemble the
similitude of a tanie or a white man: yea if we do design any one of the
Indians in white lines, he shall for all that seem to be black: seeing his
flat nose, his standing hair, his plumpe cheeks, and a certain kind of
dullness about his eyes makes all black and shows him to be an Indian to
every one that does view him not foolishly. Lineall picture therefore as it is
the ground of all Imitation, so does it represent unto us the first draught
only of what is further to be garnished with pleasant and lively colors.
Whence it is that many who have a deeper insight in these Arts, delight
themselves as much in the contemplation of the first, second, and third
draughts which great Masters made of their works, as in the works themselves:
neither is it any marvel that they should be so much ravished with this
contemplation, seeing they do not only perceive in these naked and undisguised
lineaments what beauty and force there is in a good and proportionable
design, but they do likewise see in them the very thoughts of the studious
Artificer, and how he did bestirre his judgment before he could resolve what to
like and what to dislike. Those in the mean time who have sufficiently
practiced designing, may not content themselves with this exercise; seeing the
practice of designing, though it be a great matter in it self, is nothing else
but an entrance to some thing that is greater. The matchless collection of
designs made by my Lord of Arundell serves here for a sufficient proof:
seeing our Honorable Lord out of his noble and art-cherishing mind, does at
this present expose these jewels of art to the public view in the Academie at
Arundell house. Our sight, says Plutarch In Pericle.
, is very much revived and fed with the most pleasant and flourishing colors.
And as it does appear by our former proof that Lineall picture being done
after the true rules of Proportion, may very well represent a lively
resemblance of the thing delineated; yet can that same similitude not be
compared with the perfections of a colored picture. Thus after the
consideration of Design and Proportion, it follows that we should proceed to
Color.

CHAP. III.
AN Artificer handles his instruments with ease, says Seneca Epist. 121.
, the Master of a ship knows how to turn the stern: the Painter does
nimbly mark many and several colors that are set before him to make a
similitude, bestirring himself with a ready look and a quick hand between
his wax and work: for as all the letters do not concur to the writing of
every name, but such only as are proper for it; so does not the whole
multitude of all colors meet to the making of a picture, but some part of
them only, and these not wildly scattered upon a board, but well and orderly
digested by a most accurate and judicious Art: He is the best Painter, says
Greg. Nazianzene Carm. X.
, who expresses in his picture true and breathing shapes; and not he, who
vainly mixing many fair colors represents nothing else in his work but a
painted tempest. Artificers therefore must thoroughly understand the nature and
force of all colors: it is impossible, says Hermogenes Lib. I. de Formis orot.
, to know or to practice the mixing of any thing rightly, unless a man does
first understand every one of the things that are to be mixed: so must we
understand the nature of black and white, if we do ever mean to mix a good
brown color aright.

2. The Greek Painters called this same mixing of colors with the name of
corruption, as Porphyrius Lib. IV, de Abstinentia.
witnesses. Plutarch likewise in his treatise wherein he disputes whether the
Athenians were more famous in war or peace, Apollodorus, says he, who first
of all found the corruption and the way of expressing the shadow in colors,
was an Athenian. The same Plutarch does in another place Sympos. problem. VIII.
5.
set down the reason of this denomination. And this is that same comixtion or
variegation mentioned in Lucian In Imagine.
, whereby the Art of Painting makes images resembling them she does imitate,
having first by a moderate confusion tempered discordant colors of painting,
black, white, yellow, red, as Apuleius De Mundo.
speaks. Picture does consist in coloring, says Philostratus In prooemio
Iconum.
, neither does she rest here, but undertaketh to perform greater matters with
one color, then any other Art is able to effect with diverse means: she does
show the shadows, she observes the diversity which is in the look of a mad
man, in a sad or cheerful countenance also. Those that cast in brass cannot
attain to the least part of that vigorous force which is in the eye: but
picture knows how to imitate a brown, gray, or black eye: she knows how to
express the several colors of golden, of ruddy and of bright flaxen hair,
the color of clothes also and of armor. She knows how to represent
Bed-chambers, houses, forests, mountains, fountains, the air at length,
which incloseth all these things.

3. It is then requisite that a Painter know how to mix his colors
accurately, as Lucian speaks In Zeuxide
, how to apply them seasonably, and how to shadow the work conveniently. Which
cannot be performed, unles there be prepared a good board, or else a fit linen
cloth for his work. Of what wood the boords used by the ancient painters were
made, is set down in Pliny, lib. xvi. Not. hist. cap. 39. about the beginning
of that chapter. Theophrast. likewise, hist. plant. lib. 3. cap. 10. and lib.
v. cap. 8. reckons up what sorts of wood did serve them for that use. But as
they made always choice of the wood they knew most proper for their work: so
does Joannes Grammaticus likewise teach us, That an artificer is to make good
choice of the cloth he means to paint on. A writer purposing to write well,
says he In Aristot. lib. II. not. auscult.
, does sometimes come short of his intent, if he meets with sinking and
blotting paper, or else with bad ink. This is also a Painters case, when the
colors or the cloth hepainteth on are unfit for his work.

4. After that there are good colors, and a fit board or cloth prepared for
the work, it follows that an artificer, as the occasion shall require,
observe these four things, Light, Shadow, Obscurity, Brightness, as Plutarch
joyneth them all four very fitly together. Painters cause lightsome and bright
things seem more light some and bright, says he de Discrim. adulator. and
Amici.
, when they do place shadie and darkesome things near them. This practice of
theirs is a great help for the eye: Our eye delights most in the brightest
color, says Maximus Tyrius Dissertat. xxxv.
, yet shall this pleasure be lessened very much, if you do not put some brown
color near it. Yea, it does help the beauty of the picture: The most contrary
colors agree very well about the composition of an excellent beauty, says
Philostratus Icon. li. II. in Centaur.
. For this reason also is a black picture made upon a white ground, says
Joannes Grammaticus In li. I. Meteor. Arist.
, as a white or golden picture on the contrary, is made upon a black ground.
It is ever so, that contrary things are more apparent, being placed near their
contraries; whereas it is hard to discern things like, placed among things of
the same likeness. Even as if you did paint white upon a white, and black upon
a black ground. Whence it is that such as wear black clothes cannot so well
be discerned in the night time, as others that wear white clothes. Those
likewise who do wear white clothes in the day time, but especially in a
clear Sunshine, cannot be known so distinctly.

5. Light is altogether requisite in picture, seeing there can be no shadow
without it. Tertullian Advers. Hermog.
therefore makes it an assured mark of a poor and blockish painter, to
color the shadow altogether without any light. At the first, before the Art
was raised to that height we do now admire in the Ancients, there were none but
single colored pictures, called Monochromata; till the art at length
distinguishing her self, says Pliny Lib. xxxv. cap. 5.
, found out Light and Shadow; the difference of colors by a mutual course
setting forth each others light somenesse.

6. Shadow and Light hold so close together, that the one cannot subsist
without the other. Light is most of all commended in a picture by the shadow,
says the younger Pliny Lib. iii. epist. 13.
. Hence it is also, That those who painted with single colors, made always
some things rise, and some fall: else they could never have given unto every
member his proper lines, says Quintilian, lib. 11. Orat. instit. cap. 3.
Artificers therefore use always to add unto their works some shadows and
deepnings, that those things which are enlightened in their pictures might seem
to stick out the more, and to meet the eyes of the beholder. Let upon the same
superficial breadth of any flat board two parallel lines be drawn, says
Dionys. Longinus De sublini orat. 15.
, with the colors of shadow and Light, yet shall the ardent flagrancie of
light soonest of all meet with our eyes, and seem a great deal nearer. Nicias
the Athenian did most accurately observe Light and Shadows, taking always
special care that his pictures should bear outward from the board, Pliny xxxv.
11. Zeuxis, Polygnotus, and Euphranor studied very much to have their pictures
commended for shadowing and breathing, as also for rising and falling.
Philostr. lib. II, de vita Apollonii, cap. 9. Apelles painted Alexander as he
held lightning in his hand: his fingers seem to bear outward, and the
lightening seems to stand off from the board. Pliny xxxv. 10. Philostratus
observes the same in the picture of an ivory Venus: The goddess will not
seem to be painted, says he Icon. li. II.
, she sticks out so much as to make one think that it were an easy matter
to take hold of her. Pausias was the first who found out a picture which many
afterward imitated, none could attain unto. First, when he would show the
length of an Ox, he painted him standing full opposite against us, says Pliny
Lib. xxxv. cap. 11.
, and not sidelong, making his length nevertheless to be sufficiently
understood. Afterward, where all others do heighten the parts which are to
rise, with white, tempering the color with some mixture of black; he made the
whole Ox of a black color, and gave the shadow a body out of it self:
showing by a most wonderful Art, risings in smoothness, and continuitie in
abruptness. As this was questionless an excellent piece of rare workmanship;
so are we for all that to observe here, that an artificer shows his greatest
skill in the picture of fitting figures. Those that do sit, says Philostratus
Icon, li. II. in Palaest.
, have many shadows; and it does bewray singular great wisdom in the
Painter, that he made the maid sitting. The same Author expresses this very
same point more at large in another place: It is easy to hit the shadows of
them that lie down, says he Ibid. in Antlante.
, or stand upright: and it requires small wisdom to do it accurately. But the
shadows of Atlas go beyond all art: for the shadows of him that stoopeth after
this manner, though they fall one into another, yet do they not darken any of
these things that should rise, but cause some light about the hollownesse of
his belly.

7. Obscurity or darkness seems to be nothing else but the duskishnes of a
deeper shadow; even as Brightness may be said to be nothing else but an
intention of light. For if you do put white and black upon the same
superficial breadth, says Jo. Grammaticus In Lib. I. Meteor. Aristot.
, the white shall always seem to be nearer, and the black further off. The
painters therefore knowing this, when they will make any thing seem hollow, as
a Well, a Cisterne, a Ditch, a cave, or any such like thing, they color it
with black or brown; and how much more they black them, their depth seems
to be the greater: for whatsoever is extreme black, the same works in us an
apprehension of a bottomless deepnesse. When on the contrary they will make
any thing rise, as the breasts of a maid, a stretched out hand, the feet of a
horse, they lay on at both sides so much black or brown as will make those
parts seem to stick out by reason of the hollownesse which is so near. The
younger Philostratus gives us an example in the picture of Pyrrhus, The
brownenesse of the ditch, says he, is cunningly wrought by the Artificer, who
intended by this means to signify what deepenesse it had.

8. Brightness is sometimes adhibited in a picture for necessary use, but always
for ornament. Necessity does require it in the picture of angels, precious
stones, armor, flame, flowers, gold, and other things of that nature. Greg.
Naz. speaking of Angels, The wearing of bright and glistering clothes is
proper unto the Angels when they appear in bodily shapes, says he Orat. xxiii.
, to make that as I do think, a true mark of their pure and undefiled
nature. Such a description of Angels do we find, Matthew. xxviii. 3. and in
many other places of the holy Scriptures. As for the picture of precious
stones, it may not be held true without the representation of a bright burning
and glistering luster. The art of the painter, says Philostratus Icon. li. II.
in Venere.
, is much to be commended, for having round about applied all manner of most
esteemed precious stones, he does not imitate them by their colors, but by
their brightness: putting in them a certain kind of thorow-shining light
somenesse, which might serve for a prick to stir up our sight, and to draw
our eye. Varro Hecatombe apud Non. in Margarit.
does likewise speak of horse-trappings and armor all over bright and
glistering with pearls. Although this brightness has not only place in such
armor as is in-layd with pearls, but also in all other kind of armor which
is kept neat, and duly cleansed. Take good care that the brightness of my
shield be clearer, says Pyrgopolinices a vainglorious soldier in Plautus
Mil. glor. Act. 1. scen. 1.
, than the beams of the Sun in fair weather use to be; that the eyes of our
enemies might be dazeled at the first encounter. Yea this same brightness of
cleare-shining armor does sometimes wonderfully change his colors, after the
manner of a Rainbow, the rising parts glistering with the repercussion of a
full and copious light; the falling parts on the contrary by little and little
vanishing away unto the duskishnesse of a deeper shadow. See Philostr. Iconum
lib. I. in Amphione. and lib. II, in Palladis ortu. See also Cassiod. Variarum
V. 1. Fire and flowers have likewise a certain kind of brightness. Flowers
and flame have not a dull color, says Ovid Li. v. Fast.
, but the brightness of them both is able to carry away our eyes. Philostratus
also speaking of the picture of gold, seems to require in it some such kind
of cheerful clearenesse as makes gold it self pleasant to the heart and eye
of the beholders: The painter deserves to be admired for the painting of gold,
says he Icon. lib. 2. in The mist.
, having wrought in it a certain force to cheer up the heart, and withal to
keep the lively figures it had been constrained to receive. Observe here
only by the way, that Philostratus seems to speak of a piece done after
that same ancient simplicity of art mentioned lib. II. cap. 6. so that in the
picture of gold, the gold it self was not made by gilding over that part of
the picture wherein some golden things were to be represented, but by the most
exact art of imitating gold it self in lively colors. Brightness then, as it
is necessarily required in the picture of such like things, so is there in
every kind of picture some brightness intermingled for ornament. And though a
picture be never so much filled with all manner of choice and flourishing
colors, yet can it hardly please the eye, unless there appear in it some
bright spots tempting and rowsing our sight with their sudden, quick, and
flickering light. These shinings show themselves ceasing swiftly even as a
flash of lightning, says Philostratus, lib. I. de vitis Sophist. in Lolliano.
For it is impossible that these lights being frequent and continual, should
not hinder one another, says Quintil. Orat. Instit. lib. xii. cap. 10. You may
perceive an unequality where those things that stick out are notable. The
height of one Tree is never wondered at, where the whole wood is grown up to
the same height, says Seneca, Epist. xxxiii. These lights therefore must not
be like unto a flame, as Quintil. Orat. Inst. li. viii, cap. 5.
speaks, but unto sparks shining forth out of the smoke. Neither do they
appear where the whole picture shines, even as stars cannot be discerned in a
Sunshine. Such lights likewise as show themselves often and faintly, can never
please the eye, as being only unequal and harsh, not attaining to that
admiration heightened things do deserve, and losing the grace plain things are
commended for. Seeing then that not only the changeable variety of these
ornaments, but their raritie also is a good and ready means to avoid that
loathsome sacietie an uniforme picture cloyeth us withal, it behooveth an
artificer here to admit the wholesome counsel of Dionysius Milesius: We ought
to taste of honey, says he Apud Philostr. lib. I. de vitis Soph.
, With our fingers end: and not with the whole hand. Corinna likewise, when she
perceived that Pindarus was immoderate in the ornaments of his poesy, We are
to sow with one hand only, said she Apud Plut. Bellone an pace clariores
fuerint Athenienses.
, and not with the whole Sack.

9. We learn then distinctly out of the former consideration, That nothing can
be bright, as Seneca speaks Epist. 31.
, without the mixture of light. And that a good while after the invention of
Light and Shadow, there was added unto Picture a certain kind of brightness,
says Pliny Lib. xxxv, cap. 5.
, being an other thing than Light. This brightness was named Tonus, because it
was something between light and shadow. As for the commissures and transitions
of colors, they were known by the name of Harmoge. The word Tonus therefore
seems to signify an intention of light; namely, when one or other enlightened
part of the picture becomes more vigorously bright, by making that which
before was esteemed lightsome enough, serve for a shadow to what we would have
stick off more than the enlightened part it self. As for the word Harmoge, it
seems to signify nothing else but an unperceivable way of art, by which an
artificer stealingly passes over from one color into another, with an
insensible distinction. And here will it not be amiss to observe an example
or two of this same Harmoge as it is in nature. For when we behold how the sea
and sky do meet in one thin and misty Horizontal stroke, both are most
strangely lost and confounded in our eyes, neither are we able to discern
where the one or other does begin or end: water and air, several and sundry
colored elements, seem to be all one at their meeting. See Statius Papinius,
li. 5. Thebaid. verse. 493. Yet does the Rainbow minister to us a clearer proof
of this same Harmoge, when she beguileth our sight with the scarce
distinguished shadows of melting, languishing, and leisurely vanishing colors.
For although there do shine a thousand several colors in the Rainbow, says
Ovid Lib. vi. Metam.
, their transition for all that deceives the eyes of the spectators; seeing
her colors are all one where they touch, though farther off they are much
different.

Boethius expresses the same. When the Rainbow appears in the clouds, says
he Lib. v. art. music. cap. 4.
, such is the neighborhood of colors, that there is no certain end which
distinguishes the one from the other: but we see that the red falls away to
a certain kind of palenesse, and turns it self by a continual changing,
into the next color, there being no other color in the midst to distinguish
them both. The very same falls out in musical concents, etc. Whosoever
looks upon the rainbow as consisting of one color, says Marcus Byzantius
Lib. I. de vitis Soph.
, does not know how to admire her enough; but whosoever considers her as
consisting of colors, wondreth much more. Read Tul. l. 3. de not. deor. and
Plut lib. III. ca. 5, de placitis philos. Let me now apply this same
observation of Natures admirable skill unto my present purpose, by showing a
few examples of Arts no less admirable imitation: the proof is obvious in
every good picture. So does Ovid in the place alleged above commend Arachne
most of all for observing this virtue. Philostratus Iconum lib. II, Chiron is
painted, says he In Achillis educatione.
, after the manner of a Centaure: though it be no great wonder to join a horse
with a man; but to join and to unite them so cunningly as to impart unto them
both the same beginning and ending, yea to beguile the eyes which go about to
know where the man parts with the horse, is in my opinion the work of an
excellent Painter. Lucian likewise speaks very much to the same purpose: The
mixture and harmoge of the bodies, says he In Zeuxide.
, for as much as the horse is joined and bound up with the woman, is not done
all at once; but gently; and turns from the one into the other as by a quiet
and insensible induction, deceiving the eye with a strange stealth of change.

10. Besides this same Harmoge, which draws different colors into one by an
orderly and pleasant confusion, it is furthermore requisite that an Artist
should take special care about the extreme or uttermost lines; seeing it was
ever held one of the greatest excellencies in these Arts that the unrestrained
extremities of the figures resembled in the work should be drawn so lightly
and so sweetly as to represent unto us things we do not see: neither can it be
otherwise but our eye will always believe that behind the figures there is
something more to be seen then it sees, when the lineaments that do
circumscribe, compass, or include the images are so thin and fine as to
vanish by little and little, and to conveigh themselves quite away out of our
sight. All Masters do confess, says Pliny Lib. xxxv, cap. 10.
, that Parrhasius his chief glory was in the uttermost lines, and that indeed
is the highest subtlety in Picture: for although it require great skill to
paint the body and middlemost parts of figures, yet are there many that got
credit by it. To make the extremities of bodies and handsomely to shut up the
measure of an ending picture, is seldom found in the greatest success of Art;
seeing the extremity ought to compass her self about, ending with a promise
of other things behind, and setting forth also what she concealeth.
Parrhasius for all that being compared with himself seems to comeshort in
the expression of the middlemost bodies. The following words of Petronius urge
the same, I came into agallery, says he In Satyrico.
, much to bewondered at for several sorts of pictures. I saw there Zeuxis his
hand, which as yet had escaped the injuries of age: as for Apelles his picture,
which was known among the Grecians by the name Monocnemos, I did not stick to
adore it: for the extremities of the images were with such a wonderful
subtlety cut off after the similitude, that you could not but think it to be
a picture of the spirits and souls it self. Seeing then that Petronius and
Pliny do urge such a singular subtlety in the uttermost lines of an exact
and absolute picture, we may very well suspect that they did anciently in
these extremities of images require certain lines approaching near to the
subtlety of the imaginary Geometrical lines; which are nothing else but a
length without breadth. That it is not an idle fancy of our brain, says
Ammonius In Aristotelis praedicam.
, that there should be a longitude without latitude, but that such a thing is
in Nature, the partings between enlightened and shadowed places do manifestly
show: for when it chances that the Sun casting his beams upon a wall
enlighteneth but some part of the same, the partition between the enlightened
and shadowed place must needs be a longitude without latitude: for if it has
any latitude, it must needs be either enlightened or else shadowed with the
rest; seeing nothing can be conceived between these two: and if it be
enlightened, it is to be put to the enlightened part: if on the contrary it be
shadowed, it is to be added to the shadowed part: but now there is a line
manifestly to be seen in the midst, which by her length does only
distinguish the enlightened part from the shadowed: and if these parts are
distinguished one from another, there must of necessity be something besides
them that distinguishes, which as it shall not be enlightened nor shadowed, so
shall it consequently be without any breadth. Whosoever therefore does but
slenderly understand how much a neat and delicate picture abhors all manner
of gross and course lines, the same shall easily be persuaded to conceive well
of those extreme lines that come something near the Geometrical: neither
shall he be very much deceived who guesseth that this was the maine reason why
the ancients studied with such an industrious care to draw all manner of lines
in colors with a light and easy hand. We showed above, lib. II, cap. XI, 1,
that this was Apelles his daily practice, and that afterward it grew to be the
highest point wherein Apelles and Protogenes made trial of their art.

11. We have seen how good pictures by a due observation of Light and Shadow
must have convenient risings and fallings, and how precise an Artificer ought
to be in drawing the uttermost lines of his figures with an incomprehensible
subtlety: it is left only that the true and natural color of
well-complexioned bodies do show it self every where in his picture, seeing
without it there cannot be any beauty. Beauty is a Symmetrie of the limbs
and other parts, says Hermogenes Lib. I. de Formis orationis. Clemens
Alexandr. lib. III. Paedag. cap. 11.
, accompanied with the goodness of color. All bodies both of men and women
shall seem comelier if they do not show their rawboned joints destitute of
flesh, but if all the limbs moderatly swelling are graced with the true and
lively color of pure and wholesome blood: The dignity belonging to a man must
be stout and uncorrupted; it cannot abide an effeminate smoothness, nor such a
color as is procured by choice painting; seeing blood and strength must make
it goodly and fair, says Quintilian VIII, 3. It is a singular help to the
perfection of beauty, says Lucian In Imagine.
, that color be applied according to the occasion of every limb. What is to
be black, let it be exquisitly black; and wheresoever whiteness is required,
let there be a pure white: yet so, that the flower of redness be always
intermingled. And again in the same place, the body must not be too white, but
somewhat overspred with blood: for such a color does the Master-painter Homer
attribute unto Menelaus his thighs, when he fetches his resemblance from
ivorie which is gently dyed in purple: such be the whole body. Give me then a
piece of work wherein this virtue is added to the former, and I shall be bold
to say of that picture what Tullie says of Apelles his Venus: in the Venus at
Coos, says he Lib. I, de natura deorum.
, it is not a body you see, but something in the likeness of a body: neither
is that same red which spreads it self and mixeth it self among the white,
blood, but a certain similitude of blood. The Poets do every where abound
with several expressions of this mixture of blood, and it were an endless
work to relate them all. Ausonius his description of Bissula may serve in
stead of many others, as being able to work in us the impression of an
excellently tempered complexion. Bissula cannot be imitated with any color of
painting, says he Idyllio vii.
, her natural gracefulness will not yield unto an art which does but
counterfeite. Arsenicke and Ceruse may peradventure resemble other maids: no
hand knows the temper of such a countenance. Go to then, Painter, confound
red roses with good store of lillies, and what reflection the air takes of
them, let that be the color of her face.

12. These are the most observable things in color, and it is no great marvel
that pictures graced with these perfections should take our eyes after a
strange and unusual manner. Color mooveth us more in pictures, says Plutarch
De Poetis audiendis.
, then a simple delineation; and that because of the near resemblance of man
it has together with a certain aptness to deceive: for although there be
sometimes in lineall pictures, according to our former discourse, a deceitful
similitude of Life and Motion, and that statues very often may seem to live
and breath; colored pictures for all that, as they show a more lively force in
the several effects and properties of life and spirit, so do they most
commonly ravish our sight with the bewitching pleasure of delightsome and
stately ornaments. A discreet and wary moderation therefore, as it has place
in all other things, may not be forgotten here; seeing the condition of an
ornament consists not in it self, but in the things adorned; to which if it
be not accommodate, it shall be so far from illustrating them, that it shall
rather destroy them and turn the whole force of things to the contrary.
Quintil. XI, 1. Long garments are odious in a little body, says Symmachus
Lib. III, epist. 10.
, that garment is decently put on, which does not sweep the dust, and is not
trampled upon for hanging too much upon the ground. Apelles, who was wont to be
very moderate in all things that concerned the Art, because he would not offend
the eyes of the spectators with too much cheerfulness of gay and flourishing
colors, did by an inimitable invention anoint his finished works with such a
thin kind of ink or vernish, that it did not only break and darken the
clearenesse of the glaring colors, but it did likewise preserve them from dust
and filth, neither could it be perceived but hard by. He had great reason to
do so, says Pliny Li. xxxv. cap. 10.
, least the clearenesse of colors might offend their eyes that should look
upon them afar off, as through an Arabian glass stone: studying also by the
same means secretly to add a certain kind of austerity unto the two bright
and flourishing colors.

Though I do then yield unto these our nice and choice times so much, as to
persuade Artificers to bestow great care about colors, yet would I not wish
them to busy themselves only about colors, seeing it may not be expected
that all things should always be done to the good liking of capricious and
ignorantly supercilious spectators. Neither will any man who has but a drop of
ingenious blood in his breast, trifle away both his art and time, and that to
no other end but to pleasure such men as he shall get small credit by to have
pleasured them. I would most willingly forbear to touch this almost incurable
sore, if we did not meet every where with them, who neglecting those things
which are the sinews of art, wax old about the idle study of colors:
Decency in the mean time and graceful ornaments are pretended by them.
Neither can it be denied, but that a decent grace of colors commends a
picture very much; but when it follows the nature of things of it self, and
not when it is drawn in by an importunately odious affectation.

13. Those therefore are mightily deceived, who esteem a corrupt and defective
kind of painting more popular and plausible, if it take pleasure in a childish
licentiousness, if it be puffed up with an immoderat swelling, if it keep a
great stir about idle and unprofitable undertakings, if it love to pranke
with lightly fading flowers of vain ornaments, if it entertain abrupt and
dangerous endeavors in stead of sublime and magnificent matters, if it runs
mad with a loose kind of dissolute liberty. For though it be too true, that
works of this kind prevail most of all with the Vulgars, as being more
agreeable unto their gross and unexcised capacities, with a favorable show of
obvious and ready pleasure; such unadvised delights for all that, though never
so natural unto them, are very seldom constant. Neither was it ever seen,
that any artist got by such works a durable admiration in the hearts of men,
but an uncertain approbation only, accompanied with idle acclamations, and
with a flying joy; seeing all that praise, as being blasted in the herb or in
the flower, not attain to any ripe or fruitful maturitie; chiefly if those
admirers chance in the mean time to meet with any other more perfect and truly
absolute piece of work, which makes their former admiration presently vanish
and come to nothing, by an admiration of better things. Those who are taken
with an outward show of things, says Quintilian Lib. II, cap. 5.
, judge sometimes that there is more beauty in them which are polled, shaved,
smoothed, curled, and painted, than incorrupt Nature can give unto them: even
as if pulchritude did proceed out of the corruption of manners. But as
adulterated wool may happily please, as long as it comes not near any
purple; whereas if you compare it with a purple coat which is somewhat worn
out, yet shall it be overcome by the neerenesse of what is better, and that
which before did deceive us, shall instantly be deprived of his counterfeit
color, growing pale with an unspeakeable filthiness: even so may poor and
naughty pictures shine alone by themselves out of the Sun, like unto those
little creatures which make a glimmering and fiery show in dark and close
places, but when they come once to be tried in open and lightsom places, when
they are brought in the view of better works, all their blazing glorious show
is presently eclipsed and gone. Many may perchance like of what is bad, but no
body disliketh of what is good says Quintil. Lib. xii. cap. 10.
Healthfullbodies, and such bodies as by a continual exercitation are filled
with good and pure blood, says the same Author In Prooem. lib. 8.
, receive their favor out of the same things out of the which they receive
their strength: seeing this makes them well-colored, compact, and closed up
in muscles. But if any man study to trim the very self same bodies with an
effoeminate kind of polling and painting, the very labor and affectation of
such a forced beauty shall make them most ill-favored and ugly. Lawful and
stately ornaments ad a certain kind of authority to the bodies of men:
whereas a womanish and luxurious trimming does not so much deck the body, as
it discovers the mind. This is the true case of that same gay and sundry
colored way of painting, so much esteemed by many; it lesseneth and impaireth
the force of the things that are set forth with such a far fetched and
licentious braverie. If any man should offer to adorn a lusty and stout
wrestler, says Lucian de conscrib. hist.
, with purple clothes and other whorish ornaments, disguising likewise and
painting his face; would he not seem to be very ridiculous, for shaming the
man after this manner? Even so is it for the most part better to deck his
work in a rug gown, than to adorn it with strumpet-like ornaments. All
comes in the end to this, that though the colors may justly require care,
the things themselves for all that demand solicitude. Nevertheless we must
not always think that best which is most hidden; for the best things are ever
at hand, inherent in the things themselves, and most easily discerned by their
own light, being the first things our eyes meet with if we wink not: but we
still seek them, as if they did continually hide and withdraw themselves from
our eyes; we never think them to be near and about the matters in hand: but
we seek them in bright colors, and some such like superficial ornaments,
weakening the whole strength of our invention and design, with the
unseasonable care of garnishing the work too much.

Certainly, we are to fall to these arts with a more resolute courage: for
whosoever can but assure himself that he hitteth the maine and weightiest
points of art aright, in making of an entire body, the same needs not trouble
himself much about the neatness of some little hairs, and of the uttermost
ends of the nails. A mean Artificer near the Aemilian School, says Horace De
Art.
, does imitate the nails and the soft hair most accuratly in brass: he makes
this the unfortunate height of his workmanship, because he does not know how to
express the whole man as it is fit. As for mine own self, if I were to make
any thing, I would as little desire to be like unto him, as to have an ill
nose, being otherwise graced with black eyes and black hair. The old
Commentator makes this gloss upon these words of the Poet: the Aemilian
school was a place not far from the Circus, so called because one Aemilius had
his gladiators there. About this same school there did live a Statuarie who
did express the nails and hair passing well, leaving all the rest imperfect;
wherefore he was very much laughed at.

I perceive that the earnest care of admonishing draws me too far: although
my purpose was not to strip picture of all manner of ornament, and quite to
banish it, but to forewarne some unadvised Artists only, that they should not
bewray their care of trimming too much, remembering always the praiseworthy
severitie of Athenion the Maronite, who was compared with Nicias, yea and
somewhat preferred before him, says Pliny Lib. xxxv. cap. 11.
. He was more austere in his colors, and yet more pleasant in his austeritie:
so that in his pictures it self there did appear some kind of learning.

Thus much may suffice of Color. It is time now still to prosecute our
intended order. And because a good invention well designed and seasonably
colored, cannot but represent some action and passion, it remains that we
should further consider, what that is which here we do call Action and Passion,
as also wherein Life and Motion resulting out of these two does consist.

CHAP. IV.
AN image though it expresses all the lines of truth, yet does it lack force,
as being destitute of motion, says Tertullian Lib. II. advers. Maro.
. Clay wants vigor, says Apuleius In Apolog.
, stones want color, pictures want stiffenesse, and every one of these want
motion, the only thing which represents a similitude most faithfully. This is
ever true in the real motion, and it was sometimes true in the resembled
motion also; there being anciently in the works of the first founders of Art, a
very dull, stupid, and unmooveable rigor, void of all life and motion. But of
this same unpleasant kind of workmanship we brought some proof already, lib.
I. cap. III. 1. Cimon Cleonaeus was the first that found out Catagrapha, that
is, oblique or travers images, varying the countenances of men, by making them
not only to look back, but up and down also. See Pliny, lib. xxxv. cap. 8.
From thence forth it grew an ordinary practice to alter the shapes,
countenances, postures, and to fit the whole work to a certain kind of
action. There is but small grace in an upright body, says Quintilian Lib. II,
orat. instit. cap. 13.
, all comes to this, that the face befull opposite against us, the arms
hanging down, the feet joined close together, and that the whole work from
the highest to the lowest be unmooveable and stiff: that same winding and
mooving adds a certain kind of gesture to the things expressed: the hands
therefore are not always made after the same manner, and the countenance is
changed a thousand several ways: some bodies represent a violent force in
running; some do either sit or lie down; some are naked; some are apparelled;
some are half naked and half apparelled. What is there, I pray you, so
crookedly distorted and painfully belabored as that same Discobolus made by
Myron? yet if any man dispraiseth the work because it seems not to be
straight enough, shall not that man instantly betray his unskilfulnesse in
matters of Art, seeing that same noveltie and difficulty is therein most of
all praise-worthie? Motion therefore is a great point of Art: neither is it
hard, in my opinion, to find the beaten way which leads us to this
perfection. It behooveth us only to cast our eyes upon Nature, and to insist
in her steps; seeing the whole study of these Arts is principally bent to
imitate the several actions of our mind with a decent and comely grace;
neither will the minds of judicious spectators admit any thing, unless they
do find by an accurate collation that there is an indiscernible similitude
between the represented figures and the truth of Nature.

2. All manner of decency arises out of a comely gesture appearing in the
motion of our bodies; and as the head in our bodies themselves is accounted to
be the principal member, so is it likewise the maine instrument whereby we do
express such affections and passions of our mind as are most decent and
suitable for the present occasions. The head being cast down, signifies
humbleness; being cast back, arrogance; being hung on either side,
languishing; being stiff and sturdie, it signifies a churlish barbarousnesse
of the mind. We have also certain ways of granting, refusing, and
avouching with our head: besides that therein are seated the passions of
bashfulnesse, doubtfulnesse, admiration, and indignation, incident unto all
sorts of men. The countenance therefore bears here the greatest sway; since
we do sue, threaten, and fawn by the gesture of our countenance: we are
known by our countenance to be sad, merry, full of courage, or else dejected
and abased: our countenance draws the eyes of men to it self, before we do
either stir or speak: it is easy to read love or hatred in our
countenances; seeing we are better understood by them, then by all the words
in the world: nay, the motions of the countenance do best express the state
of the mind; as when we see the blood sometimes overflow a tender
countenance, discovering the souls modesty by a blush; sometimes again
betraying her cold fears, by an over-pale ebb; witnessing likewise the minds
calm, by an equal temper of the countenance. Now of all parts of the
countenance the eyes are most powerful, being as the souls window; for in
them, even when they moove not, either our cheerfulness shines forth, or a
cloud of sadness overshadoweth them. Nature also for the same purpose has
furnished them with tears, which either in grief burst forth, or melt with
joy. But their motion does more especially express our earnest intention, our
neglect, pride, spitefulness, meekness, sharpness; all which are to be
imitated as the nature of the represented action shall require: sometimes also
they must be staring and piercing, closed and hidden, languishing and dull,
wanton and stirring or loosly swimming in pleasure, glancing and (to speak so,
venereall, asking or promising something; which to express, the eyelids and
ball of the cheek do wonderfully assist. The eyebrows have also many
actions; for they do in some sort fashion the eyes, and principally command
the forehead, sometimes contracting, sometimes raising, and sometimes letting
it fall: wrinkled brows, declare sadness: freely displayed, show
cheerfulness: shame appears in a hanging brow: we do likewise consent or
dissent by the elation or depression of our brows. The nose and lips signify
mocking, scorning, loathing: even in common speech we must take care that the
motion of our lips be moderate; seeing our discourse is rather a work of the
whole mouth, then of the lips alone, and therefore it is unseemely to put out
the lips, to stretch them in length, to press them together, to discover the
teeth by opening them too wide, to draw them awry to either ear, to turn them
out for scorn. The neck ought to be carried straight, but not stiff, or cast
back: so is it alike ill-becoming, either to contract or to stretch out the
neck. The shrinking up of the shoulders is seldom decent, for by that the
neck is shortened, besides that it is a gesture belonging to a base, servile,
and crafty knave, when with the shoulders he does feign flattery, admiration,
or fear. In familiar speech it is very graceful gently to cast forth the
arm, slacking the shoulders a little, and spreading the fingers of the hand
put forth: but when we do represent one speaking of a more notable and
copious matter, we spread his arm forth toward one side, that the discourse
might seem to flow according to that motion. As for the hands, without which
all action is maimed and impotent, it is hard to set down how many motions
they have: for whereas other parts do assist us while we speak, the hands
themselves, if a man may say so, do speak. For, I pray, do not the hands
demand, promise, call, dismiss, threaten, request, abhor, fear, ask, deny?
do not the hands express joy, sadness, doubt, confession, repentance,
measure, plenty, number, time? do not the same hands encourage, beseech,
hinder, approve, admire, and witness shame? so that in this great diversity
of tongues among all Nations, this seems to be the common language of all
men. The hand has also some short motions; for sometimes it is moved and
gently let fall by turns, with some help of the shoulders, as their manner is
that make vows; which motion is most proper for them who speak sparingly and
as it were fearfully. In admiration we hold the hand up, bent somewhat
backward, with all the fingers closed, which in the return we do both spread
and turn in one motion. When we do ask, we do always frame our gesture after
one and the same manner, but for the most part we change our hand, in what
posture soever it is. When we approove or relate, we join the top of the
forefinger to the thumb nail next to it, leaving out the other fingers. A
slow motion of the hand does promise and soothe: a more quick motion does
exhort sometimes commending. The hand hollow and spread, and lifted up above
the shoulder with some kind of motion, does also encourage. We close the
fingers ends, and gently put them at our mouth, when we wonder and deprecate,
fearing some sudden indignity. In penitence and anger we lay our closed hand
to the breast. Such as are skilful and curious in these matters, give caution
not to lift the hand above the eyes, or not to let it fall below the breast:
accounting it a great fault to fetch it from the head, or bring it down so low
as the belly. Toward the left side it moves as far as the left shoulder, but
not beyond; only in aversation, thrusting out the hand toward the left side,
we bring the left shoulder forward, that it may agree with the head bearing
toward the right hand. The left hand never makes any motion alone, but often
applies it self to the right hand: whether we set our reasons in order upon
our fingers, or detest, by turning both palms toward the left side; or resist,
or spread them out on either side, endeavoring to give satisfaction, or else
making an humble request. The hands express also some further affection; so
that their motions in small, sorrowful, temperate things be short; but more
extended in all manner of great, joyful, and cruel or tragical things. The
motion of the whole body is also of some moment, wherein the chiefest
observation ought to be, that the breast and belly be not so put forth as to
bow the back, seeing all supinitie is odious. Let the sides accord with the
other motions. In the feet observe either their posture or their motion. It
were endless to pursue all the particulars. These things alleged out of
Quintilian Li. xi. orat. instit. cap. 3.
, may very well suffice; in whom whosoever desires it may receive further
satisfaction.

3. These things being well observed, there will instantly in the very eyes
appear that which Philostratus Icon. li. II. in Panth.
calls the meaning and intention of the eyes. Yea, the history of manners,
mentioned in Callistratus In descript. stat. Naercissi.
, will show it self every where in the work. For it is not enough that carved
and painted images resemble the proportion and color of the life, unless
there do likewise discover it self in the demeanor of the whole body, but
especially in the cast of the eyes, some kind of vigor answerable unto the
several occasions and circumstances of the represented history. Imitation
busieth it self most of all about the expressing of manners, says Proclus In
Platon. Polit.
. See Horace in his Art of Poesy. Hector his statue erected in a most
conspicuous place of the City Troy, resembles a demy-god, says Philostratus
In Heroic.
, and expresses many motions of his mind, if a man does rightly view him. For
he seems lofty, stern, cheerful, and of an able body for all the delicacie
which shows it self in his limbs: he is likewise completely beautiful
without any hair; and he is filled with such a lively breath, as to invite
the spectators to touch him. Callistratus In descript. stat. Aescul.
therefore had good reason to call Statuarie an Art of counterfeiting manners,
seeing it is not her only work to express the true lineaments of the bodies
imitated, but to represent also their several demeanours, according to the
difference of the resembled persons. Observe the same in Picture. Ulysses is
manifestly discerned by his austeritie and vigilancie, says Philostratus Icon.
li. II. in pict. Antil.
; Menelaus by his gentle mildness; Agamemnon by a certain kind of divine
Majesty; in Diomedes you may see the picture of a free and bold spirit; Ajax
Telamonius is known by his grim look; Locrus by his ready forwardness. Hence
it is that great masters did ever change their hand as it were when they are to
express gods, Kings, priests, Senators, orators, musicians, giving unto every
one of them what is fit and proper for them. The Image of Jupiter is discerned
from the images of the other gods, by a royal look, as Ovid Li. vi. Metam.
speaks in the description of Arachnes work. The picture of King Agamemnon,
as we may see in Philostratus his words alleged a little before, was known
by a certain kind of Divine majesty. Amphiaraus the Prophet, as the same
Philostratus Li. I. Icon.
observes in his picture, had a sacred and reverend look, being like unto one
that was ready to breathe forth some Oracles. The younger Pliny Li. I. ep. 14.
commends Minutius A cilianus, for a certain kind of grace that might very
well become a Senator. Cermanicus Caesar being about to make a speech, had the
true countenance and posture of an eloquent man, as Ovid II. de Pont. Eleg. 5.
speaks. So does the same Ovid describe Apollo fitting of himself to play
for strife with Pan; his very posture, says he xi Metam.
, was the posture of an artificer. We have in Apuleius a very neat description
of Bathyllus his statue made in this posture. Before the Altar stood the statue
of Bathyllus, says he In Floridis.
, dedicated by Polycrates the Tyrant; one of the most accomplished, in my
judgment, that ever I knew. It is a young man beautiful even to admiration:
his hair being put beside the forehead, hung equally divided by either cheek.
Behind, the hair in a more free length, even down to the shoulders, did hide
his fair neck; yet so, that in many places it did shine between the locks.
His neck full, his cheek plumpe and smoothe, his face of a mean proportion.
His posture was in all things like a Musician; he looked upon the goddess as
if he sang, having on an embroidered coat which hung down to his very feet,
with a Grecian girdle. Both his arms were covered with a cloak to the wrists.
All other accoutrements were gracefully suited to the person. He had his
instrument close fitted to an embossed belt. His pliant hands attended their
several charge: the left being somewhat advanced, did with divided fingers
warble the strings: the right did in a playing gesture apply the stick to the
instrument, as ready to strike; and at every rest in the hymn, the song seemed
most sweetly to melt from his round mouth, his lips half opening with the
endeavor. The pictures of Amphion playing upon the harp, and of Olympus
piping, are described in Philostratus, Iconum lib. I. Callistratus makes
likewise a most lively description of a piping satyr. Whosoever will take so
much pains as to turn to these Authors, the same shall questionless think
his labor well bestowed. As for my self, I cannot find in my heart to
transcribe all such expressions, for fear of being too tedious. I will only for
further proof of their accuratenesse in this point, add a few examples more.

Zeuxis made Penelope, in whom he seems to have painted her manners. Plin.
xxxv. 9.

Echion made a new married and notably shame-faced woman. Plin. xxxv. 10.

Aristides Thebanus painted a running chariot drawn with four horses: he made
also a Suppliant, in a manner expressing his voice it self. Plin. xxxv. 10.

Antiphilus is commended for a boy blowing the fire, and a fair house
beginning to glitter, but especially for the lads mouth. He is likewise
commended for a picture of spindle work, wherein the threads of every spinning
woman seem to make very great haste. Plin. xxxv. 11.

Boethus his Babe does wonderfully strangle a goose. Pliny xxxiv. 8.

Philoxenus Eretrius made the picture of Wantonness; wherein three Silenusses
do most riotously banquet. Pliny, xxxv. 10.

Parrhasius made two very famous pictures, known by the name Hoplitides,
pictures of armed men: the one does so run his race, as that he seems to
sweat; the other putting off his armor, may be perceived to draw his breath
with much difficulty. Plin. xxxv. 10.

Praxiteles made two figures expressing several effects: the one represents
a weeping matron, the other resembles a rejoicing whore. It is thought that it
is Phryne, and many do perceive in her the love she bore the Artificer, and a
reward withal in the countenance of the whore, Plin. xxxiv. 8.

Euphranor made Alexander Paris: and it is wonderful in this picture, That
Paris may be understood at once, to be a Judge of the goddesses, a wooer of
Helena, and yet a killer of Achilles. Plin. xxxiv. 8.

4. This was a great point, and mightily studied of the Ancients; seeing the
whole labor of art, wanting this life of manners, is but a dry, barren, and
unpleasant toil, without either soul or spirit. Neither is there any thing
which can add a more lively and forcible grace to the work, than the
likeness of an outward motion, proceeding from the inward commotions of the
mind. Socrates therefore does urge this very much, in his most excellent
discourse held with Parrhasius the Painter, and with Clito the Statuarie. See
Xenophon, lib. III Apomnem. When I say that this point was much studied of the
Ancients, my meaning is not that an Artificer should keep himself too busy
about these affections and passions of the mind. The heat of our stirred
thoughts, says Quintilian Lib. X, orat. instit. cap. 3.
, does most commonly do more in these things than diligence. And whosoever
presumes to beat out the true images of all manner of affections and passions,
by an immoderate eagerness of thinking, the same shall questionless find
himself deceived. Study and diligence will never furnish us with such images
as must readily flow out of the nature and constitution of the matter in hand.
An Artificer therefore who desires to moove the spectator with his work after
it is finished, had need first to be moved himself when he goes about to
conceive and to express his intended work. A mind rightly affected and
passionated is the only fountain whereout there do issue forth such violent
streams of passions, that the spectator, not being able to resist, is carried
away against his will, whithersoever the force of such an Imperious Art lists
to drive him. See Hor. in art. poet Afflicted folks, their grief being as yet
fresh, says Quintilian Li. vi. orat. Instit. ca. 2.
, seem to cry out some things most eloquently. So does anger sometimes make
unlearned men well spoken; and that for no other reason, but because the force
of their thoroughly stirred mind works in them the truth of such passions. If
therefore we do desire to come near the truth, it is requisite that we should
find our selves even so affected as they are who suffer indeed. Nothing can be
inflamed without fire; nothing can wet us without moisture; neither is there
ought which gives unto another thing the color it has not. Whatsoever
therefore we would have prevail with others, must first prevail with us: and
we shall endeavor in vain to moove others, unless we do find our selves
first moved. But how shall this come to pass that we should be moved, seeing
these commotions are not in our power? Fantasy does so represent unto our
mind the images of things absent, as if we had them at hand, and saw them
before our eyes. Whosoever therefore conceives these images aright,
propounding unto himself the truth of things and actions, the same is likely
to be most powerful in all manner of affections: seeing his endeavors shall
be waited upon by a virtue known by the Greek name Energia. Tully calls it
Evidence and Perspicuitie. This virtue seems to show the whole matter; and it
brings to pass, that the affections follow us with such a lively
representation, as if we were by at the doing of the things imagined.

Philostratus, Iconum lib. II. in the pictures of Ajax, Locrus, and Thessalia,
gives us examples of this Energia. See the younger Philostratus also in the
picture of Pyrrhus.

Aristides Thebanus was the first who painted the mind, expressing all the
affections and perturbations. One of his pieces contained the picture of an
infant, which in a surprised city crept to the breast of his mother that was a
dying of a wound. The mother may be understood to have some feeling of it, and
she seems to fear lest the child finding no milk, should suck up the
blood. Plin. xxxv. 10.

Parrhasius painted two boys, in whom you may see the security and
simplicity of those years. Plin. xxxv. 10.

Nicearchus painted Hercules sad for shame of his frenzy. Pliny xxxv, 11.

Antiphilus painted Hippolytus frighted with the seamonster, Pliny xxxv, 10.

Ctesilas made a wounded man fainting, so that one may understand by him how
much life there is as yet left in him, Pliny xxxiv, 8. There are also among
Apelles his works diverse images of men that are a dying, Pliny xxxv, 10.

Leocras made an eagle which felt in Ganymedes what he ravished, and unto whom
he was to carry it; withholding his claws so carefully, as not to pierce his
garment by grappling, Pliny xxxiv, 8.

Myron made a Satyr admiring the pipes, Pline xxxiv, 8.

Naucerus made a Wrastler fetching of his wind, Pliny xxxiv, 8.

Alcamenes his Vulcan is very much commended at Athens: for though he stands
still and is apparelled, yet does there gently appear in him a certain kind
of well-favoured lamenesse, Cicero lib. I, de Not. Deorum: see likewise Valor.
Maximus lib. VIII, cap. 11, ex. ext. 3.

Ctesilochus made himself known by a wanton picture, having painted Jupiter
as he was in labor of Bacchus among diverse Goddesses that played the
mid-wives; he groneth most pitifully after the manner of women in travel,
and his head is wrapped about in a coife used by sick folks, Pliny xxxv, 11.

Theodorus painted Leontium, Epicurus his sweetheart, meditating, Pliny xxxv,
11.

Lysippus is famous for a drunken woman playing upon a Fluit, Pliny xxxiv, 8.
Myron, who was much commended for working in brass, made at Smyrna a very
famous old drunken woman, Pliny xxxvi, 5. The ancient carvers made Hercules
sometimes with a drinking pot, reeling and staggering after the fashion of a
drunken man; not only because he is reported to have been a great drinker,
but also etc. see Macrob. lib. V. Saturnal. cap. 21. Stratonicus is more truly
said to have gently laid down in a cup a Satyr overcome with sleep, then to
have engraved him, Pliny xxxiii, 12. Diodorus did lay the Satyr a sleep, and
not engrave him, says Plato Lib. IV. cap. 12. Anthol. Graec. Epigramm.
, you shall waken him, if you stir him never so little. Philostratus in the
picture of the sleeping Ariadne, behold Ariadne, says he Lib. I, Iconum.
, or rather sleep it self. And again in Midas his picture, the Satyr
sleeps, says he Ibidem.
, let us speak softly, least he do awake out of his sleep, and spoil the
whole sight.

5. It were an easy matter to allege many other examples of that same
success the ancient Masters had in their passionate expressing of all manner
of passions, but that we know they should not be believed: if therefore any one
in his reading of good authors meets with some such like relations that may
seem incredible, let him observe here by the way that these great Artificers
have had many helps of Art unknown unto us. When Aristonidas would express the
quailing of Athamas his mad fit, together with his repentance, says Pliny
Lib. xxxiv, cap. 14.
, for having thrown down his own son Learchus; he mixed iron and brass,
that the rustinesse of the iron shining thorough the clearenesse of brass
might represent a shamefaced redness. Plutarch does report that a certain
Artificer who made the statue of Jocasta, found a way to mix in her face some
silver with the brass, knowing that the brass would draw from the languishing
silver such a color as might serve the present occasion: see Plutarch lib. V
Sympos. quaest. 1. Egypt dies silver also, that it might behold his Anubis in
the vessels: silver is stained there, not engraven: the material is turned
from thence to the triumphall statues, and it is wonderful that the price of a
darkened brightness should be so much heightened. Antonius the Triumvir his
pennies were mixed with iron; and it is admirable that we desire nothing so
much in this Art as to learn the way of corrupting Art: these adulterated and
corrupted pennies are most greedily sought after; so that men stick not to buy
one falsified penny with many good ones. Pliny xxxiii, 9. If some lead be
added to the brass of Cyprus, there is made a purple color in the borders of
such statues as have that kind of gown which was called Toga praetexta,
Pliny xxxiv, 9. Brass being confounded with gold and silver, received in
times past a good mixture, says the same Pliny Lib. xxxiv, cap. 2.
, and yet was the Art more precious: whereas now it may be questioned whether
the Art or the material be worse: it is very strange that the Art should be so
much decayed, seeing the price of all manner of rare workmanship is infinitely
raised. It was most of all discovered in the times of Nero the Emperor that
the ancient Art of casting in brass was utterly lost: for Zenodorus the
Statuarie, who in that age was held never a whit inferior to any of the
ancients, making a Colosse of C X feet after the image of Nero, could not reach
the art of tempering the metalls as it was used by the ancients, though the
Emperor showed himself ready enough to bestow so much gold and silver upon
the work as might be required: see Pliny lib. xxxiv, sub finem capitis
Septimi.

6. As it is then clear, that the ancients by this rare skill of tempering the
metalls did sometimes infuse a more notable force of life in their works; so
did they more frequently, without any such mixing of the materials, express
both in statues and pictures the liveliness mentioned by Callistratus in his
description of Bacchus his statue cast by Praxiteles. So says the same author
in his description of the dissolutely running and revelling Baccha made by
Scopas in marble, The stone having no life in it self, has liveliness, etc.
And again in the description of Orpheus his statue, his hair is so gallant
and makes such a jollie show of life and spirit, that it deceives the sense,
etc It will be worth your pains to see in Callistratus how he makes these
descriptions at large; and you shall learn that it is a singular perfection of
Art, when there is in the work such a lively expression of passion, when there
is in the whole body such a sweet swelling softness, and such a near
resemblance of the truth that the image cannot well be discerned from the thing
it self whose image it bears. Damagetus Lib. IV, Anthol. Epigr. Graec. cap. 8.
calls Hercules his fight with Antaeus wrought in brass, a living
workmanship. There was at Pergamus a famous image of Cephissodorus,
representing two boys clipping and kissing one another; the very bodies
themselves, says Pliny Lib. xxxvi cap. 5.
, and not the marble receive the true prints of the fingers: the ivorie image
carved by Pygmalion gives us another example of this softness; for Pygmalion
standing well affected to the fabric of his own hands, says Ovid Lib. X.
Metamorph.
, was apt to persuade himself that nothing but a modest shame withheld her
from mooving: he believed that his fingers did sink into the touched parts;
fearing least her body might grow black and blew where it should be pressed
somewhat too hard. The same Ovid Lib. VI, Metam.
, when he describes the rape of Europa woven by Arachne adds among the rest,
you would think the Bull to be a true Bull, and the Sea to be the true Sea. So
says Petronius Arbiter In Satyrico
, I was surprised with a certain kind of horror when I took in hand Protogenes
his rudiments, which did strive with the truth of Nature it self. Art
therefore is never better, but when she is likest unto Nature: Art is then
perfect, says Dionisius Longinus Desubilim orat. 19.
, when she seems to be Nature. This was the reason why Apelles mistrusting
the judgment of partial censurers, did appeal from them to the very beasts:
for having perceived, says Pliny Lib. xxxv, cap. 10.
, that his emulators were like to prevail by some favor prepared with great
suit, he showed every one his work unto some horses that were brought into the
room: but the horses did only neighe to Apelles his horse: and this was ever
after held to be a trial of Art: see Aelian. var. hist. lib. II, cap. 3. and
Valor. Maximus lib. VIII, cap. 11. exemplo externo 4. Such Painters on the the
contrary as did mistrust their own skill, and found themselves to come far
short of Nature, could never abide that their pictures should be compared with
that truth of life which is in things natural. A certain Painter therefore, as
Plutarch De discradul. and amici.
reports, who painted cocks most unluckily, gave his boy great charge, to
chase the true cocks away from his picture.

7. Though our present discourse has busied it self sufficiently with this
point of Life and Motion, yet may we not leave it so, unless we do first
touch their error a little who cannot be persuaded that there is any life and
spirit in their works, unles they fill them with a show of I know not what
laborious and painful endeavors of several actions: for seeking the Art where
it is not to be fought, and so missing the true way of Art, they fall into a
youthful and lightheaded kind of trifling, proceeding from an unexperienced
unskilfulnesse of what is good and decent Plutarch Ad principem ineruditum.
therefore does justly reproove those unadvised carvers, who think that their
colossie works shall seem greater and lustier, if they make them stretching of
themselves immoderately, striding furiously, and gaping fearfully. This
imperfection is well and properly called parenthyrsus: and it is nothing else
but an unseasonable and vain passion, says Longinus De sublimi orat. 2.
, where there needs no passion; or else an immoderate passion, where a moderate
might serve the turn: for some, as if they were besotted with drink, use many
passions of their own, or else brought out of the schools, never regarding
whether they be proper for the matter in hand.

CHAP. V.
DEMOCRITUS was of opinion, that Colors are nothing in their own nature; but
that the mixtures made of them do then only stir our fantasies, when upon a
meet and proportionable application there appears in them order, figure, and
disposition Stobaeus Eclog. physic. cap. 19.
. It is certain therefore that colors being laid on after a seasonable and
good order, do sometimes make up whole figures which never shall be able to
affect our mind, merely for lack of a good Disposition. This same Disposition
must be observed as well in a picture consisting of one figure, as in a picture
containing many figures. What an unseemely and odious sight would it be, to see
the picture of a man in grave and stately robes standing with his head upon the
ground? it is true that Pauson, as Plutarch Cur Pythia nune non reddat oracula
carmine.
reports, being desired to make a tumbling and wallowing horse, made it
running; and when he that bespoke the work did expostulate with him for not
having performed his promise, Turn the picture, said Pauson, and you shall
have your desire: but this was a mere trick of the Painter, who having
painted the bare horse without either ground or sky, made it an indifferent
thing to represent the horse running or wallowing, seeing the turning of the
pictures upside down did alter the whole Disposition. A picture containing
many figures refuses to be so dallied with: every scheme or figure must have
his proper posture and place according to the present occasion: so is there
also a singular delight in such a variety; whereas on the contrary things
never altering their show, as Theodoretus speaks Sermon. II, de Providentia.
, do quickly weary us. No wonder then if we are most taken with pictures of
a full and copious argument, seeing such kind of pictures does as it were put
on a new face almost in every figure, suggesting still unto our greedy eye
some fresh matter to feed on; especially, if so many and several schemes are
well and orderly digested. The nature of man cannot name any other thing so
useful and fair as order, says Xenophon In Oeconomico.
: a tumultuous and casually confused piece of work does never deserve any
admiration: that picture is likely to ravish us, wherein every part is not
only perfect in it self, but agrees with the whole also by a natural and
well-disposed collocation and connection: every good thing is best in his own
place, says Cassiodorus Variarum v. 22.
, and whatsoever is praise-worthie, loses the glory it has, unless it do
meet with his right place.

2. This is a mighty point, and requires the care of a quick and clear
brain: it is not enough that a man intending to build, should bring lime,
stones, and other materials together, unless he take further care that all the
congested stuff might be well and orderly digested by a skillful hand: even so
in picture, the plentiful copiousnesse of a most rich and fertile argument
shall be nothing else but an unpleasant heap of wildly scattered figures,
unless Disposition tie them together by a good and decent order. Let all the
joints and members of a brazen figure be ready cast, yet shall they never
make up a statue, not being fitted to their peculiar places; and if then any
one part chance to be misplaced, if an ear stands in place of the nose, if a
leg be put where the arm should be, the whole figure will presently seem
monstrous and prodigious: all the parts of our body, being but lightly put
out of joint, do instantly lose the use they had before: so do disordered
Armies most commonly feel the want of order. Nature it self seems to be
upholden by order: and as it is certain that nothing, which wants this
support, can subsist; so must Picture needs run at random, roving and wandering
without any guide, after the fashion of those who straying in unknown and dark
places cannot tell where to begin and where to end their journey, suffering
themselves rather to be guided by chance then counsel: whosoever on the
contrary has but once framed in his mind a disposition of the conceived
matter, the same, if he be but a tolerable Artificer, shall dispatch the rest
with a wonderful ease: The matter being considered of aforehand, says Horace
De Art Poetica.
, words use to follow with an unconstrained facility. The ancient Commentator
instancing upon these words of the Poet, Menander, says he, having made the
disposition of a fable, though he had not yet trimmed it up with verses, was
wont to say that he had already accomplished it.

3. Seeing then that the very framing and ordering of a conceived Disposition
does in a manner accomplish the work, it behooveth us to go earnestly about
it and diligently to consider what helps there are affoorded us to the
furthering of this point But here we are first to distinguish the Disposition
as it is annexed to the Invention, from the Disposition as it is the work of
an accurate Proportion. Disposition as it is an exed to the Invention, does
express a lively image of that order which the nature of the invented things
imprinteth in our mind: this is a work of great consequence, and it requires
singular care: for if the ancients had known a certain way of Disposition
which might have fitted all matters, a good many should have excelled in it:
Apelles especially, that same bright lode-starre of Art, should have attained
this praise above all the rest: who now, not daring to ascribe this glory unto
himself, was compelled to yield unto Amphion: see Pliny lib. xxxv, cap. 10.
For as much then as there has always been and ever shall be an infinite sort
of images, seeing also that never any man as yet could meet with an argument
which in all things was like unto another argument; it is evident that an
Artificer, who is loath to mistake, must be circumspect, vigilant, judicious,
full of invention, and apt to advise himself according as the several
occasions of the matter in hand shall require. I cannot deny in the mean time
but that there are some observations which in such a tickle point may stand for
Rules, and these I will not omit.

4. The chiefest help of Disposition consists therein, that we acquaint our
thoughts with the very presence, as it were, of the conceived matter: for if
the history does but once begin to plant her image in our imagination, the
very handling of the matter and the reentring into the presence of things will
instantly suggest into us a ready and sure way how to order and place every
figure: but we must suffer our understanding to be directed to the wellhead of
the history it self, that from thence gathering the full intention of the
conceit, we might at one view, rightly apprehend the whole argument: for if
we do but understand it by half and confusedly, the Disposition must needs
be lame and imperfect: We must fix our mind, not upon one thing only, says
Quintilian Lib. X. orat. instit. cap. 7.
, but upon many continued things at once: even as when we cast our eyes
thorough a straight way, we see all at once what is in it and about it: we
do not only see the end, but to the end. There is most commonly in every
copious and historical argument a first, second, and third sense: neither is
it enough that we labor to settle them in order, but we must moreover
endeavor to join and to connect them so cunningly, that it might not be
perceived where and how they are joined, as being now no more parts and
members, but an entire body: which will be performed most prosperously, if we
having ripely considered the natural agreement of things, do not join
repugnant figures, but such only as hold together: for by this means shall
diverse things out of sundry places, though never so unacquainted, meet after a
friendly manner; they shall not dashe one against another, but rather unite and
consociate themselves with what goes before and follows after; even as if
they were made one, not so much by an artificial composition, as by a natural
continuation, Quintil. VII, 10.

5. It is then in any wise necessary that we should fit and frame the whole
structure of our Disposition to the order which was kept in the things
themselves when they were adoing. Himerius urges this point in that most
excellent picture conceived and disposed by himself, wherein he would have the
Painter express the tragical history of a rich man murdering a poor man's
son whom he had adopted, and found him afterward committing of adultery with
his mother. Get a Painter, says Himerius Apud Photium.
, of a tragical hand, but of a more tragical mind: bid him keep that order
in his picture, which was the order of my misfortunes, etc. vide locum.
Observe only that the method of a painted history must not always betyed to
the laws of a penned history: an historiographer discourses of affairs
orderly as they were done, according as well the times as the actions: but a
Painter thrusts himself into the very midst, even where it most concerns
him: and recoursing from thence to the things fore-past, preventing likewise
the things to come, he makes his Art all at once represent things already
done, things that are adoing, and things which are as yet to be done. Picture
pourtrayeth what is already done, what is adoing, and what as yet is to be
done; says Philostratus Iconum lib. I, in Bospore.
, not by their multitude slightly passing over the truth, but perfiting in
every one of these things what is most proper for them, as if she busied her
self but about that same one thing.

6. Every picture consisting of many figures must needs have some historical
part in it, seeing it is but a dull and unprofitable thing when many schemes
are heaped up together without either sense or learning: it is ever requisite
that the very figures which are represented in the work, should teach us by a
speechless discourse what connection there is in them: but because in every
historical relation the things that are a doing are ever most remarkable, so
is it that an understanding and wary Artificer does ever assign the
principal place unto the principal figures which have the chiefest hand in
the represented action. We are eever to begin with what is chief, says
Quintilian Orat. instit. lib. III, cap. 9.
, neither does any man, that is to make a picture or statue, take his beginning
at the feet. As for the other circumstances, he fitteth them afterward unto
several places, representing them a far off in smaller figures, and
sometimes also involving them and shutting them up as it were in a certain
kind of mist: The Painter has shed a mist about the other things, says
Philostratus Iconum lib. II, in Insulis.
, that they might rather resemble things already done, then things that are a
doing. We need not insist any longer upon this point, seeing it is clear
enough. Thus much only do we think it good to advertise the Artificer, that
it is always his safest course to make an end of the principal figures
whilst his mind is ready and fresh; seeing Euphranor his mis-hap may teach
him how dangerous it is to delay any of the principal figures till the heat of
his first spirit be consumed and spent upon other figures: though Nature does
very often suffer Art to emulate her strength, says Valor. Maximus Lib. VIII.
cap. 11. ex. ext. 5.
, yet sometimes does she frustrate and shame the Art tired with an
unprofitable toil. Euphranor his hand felt this: for when he did paint the
twelve Gods at Athens, he did bestow the most excellent colors of majesty
upon Neptunes image, intending to make Jupiter his picture somewhat more
majesticall; but having spent the wholforce of his thoughts about the former
work, he could never raise his latter endeavors to the intended height.

7. Although we do hold that a full and copious argument is most capable of a
neat and praiseworthy Disposition, yet can we not think that those make good
use of the plenteousnesse of the conceived matter, who finding great variety
of persons, places, and actions, pick out one or other thing wherein their
imperfect skill might chiefly exercise and hide it self, studying always upon
every occasion to patch up their defective Disposition with something they are
best used to: A poor and ridiculous Painter, who kn^w almost nothing else but
how to paint a Cypress tree, says Acron In Hor. de Art.
, being desired by one that had suffered shipwreck, to draw him, and the whole
resemblance of his most miserable misfortune, asked instantly, whether he
would not have a Cypress tree painted among the rest. But this is not the way
of Art; a sound and incorrupt way of art is best allowed of, when it uses all
the strength it has, when it leaves nothing unattempted, but goes boldly in
hand with the whole matter. It is therefore an infallible sign of a confessed
weakness, when a painter meeting with an abundant and pleasant history,
finds himself so much frighted and overcharged with the very weight of the
matter, as that he dares not undertake to beautify every part of that order
which flows out of the nature of things, but bestows all his skill and care
upon the shield of some famous Captain offered in the story, or else upon a
cave delicately overshadowed with Ivy, Laurel, Myrtle. These shifts and
by-ways, says Quintil. Orat. instit. li. i^, cap. 2.
are mere refuges to shelter our infirmity: even as they who cannot make their
course good by running outright, are put to it to help themselves by turning
and winding. Others though they do not intend to abuse the spectators, and to
divert their eyes by such gay and glorious toys, from spying the defaults of
their disposition, yet does their gross ignorance drive them unto the same
inconveniences; Being like unto a servingman newly enriched with an
inheritance lately left him by his Master, says Lucian De conscrib. hist.
, that knows not how to put on a goodly coat handsomely, and transgresses the
laws of banqueting upon every occasion, falling hastily to his victuals, as if
he meant to burst his belly with some plain household pottage and course salt
meats: whereas he might very well feed upon pullets, pork, hare.

8. A true Artist makes choice of a full and copious argument, because he
finds it more agreeable with his vast and unstayed understanding, to
entertain the freenes of his fancy, and to exercise the excellency of his
Art in every part of the conceived matter. He shrinketh at nothing, but loves
to go boldly and confidently over the whole history. He cannot abide to have
his fancy pinned up within the narrow compass of a poor and needy invention;
assuring himself, that in such an abundance of things his wit and skill shall
show themselves more abundantly. So does Philostratus Icon. li. II. in Rhodog.
teach us, That this variety of schemes and actions adds unto the picture a
most pleasant gracefulness. Those painters likewise were ever held in greatest
admiration, which adventured to add the grace of a judicious and orderly
disposition, to the most graceful and commendable variety of matter. Whereas
others, though never so excellent in small pieces, are always to seek when one
or other occasion puts them upon a more copious argument. They are not able
to save their former credit, when they do meet with any more grave and serious
matter. Being like unto some small creatures, says Quintilian Orat. in stit.
li. xii. cap. 2.
, which are exceeding quick and nimble in narrow places, but are caught in an
open field. Demetrius Phalereus his words are very remarkable: Nicias the
painter maintained, says he De elocut. 76.
, That it is no small part of the art of painting, to take a matter
sufficiently great, and so to paint, without mincing the art into small
parcels, as little birds or flowers. He held therefore that a rare workman had
better busy his skill about some famous horse-battels or sea fights, wherein
many several postures of horses might be expressed, some running, some
standing upright, some falling down upon their knees; some horsemen also
shooting, some falling down to the ground. For he was of opinion, that the
argument it self is as well a part of Picture, as Fables are granted to be a
part of Poesy.

9. It is then certain, that an extraordinary force of Art shows it self
most in an extraordinary argument, so loves the best skill always to busy it
self about the best matter. But seeing the Artificers intend nothing so much
with the whole labor of their art, as to leave unto the following Ages an
opinion of wit and art; it is likewise evident, that the work requires a
round, and not interrupted continuance: all the parts of it must be connected,
easily rolling on, and gently flowing or rather following one another, after
the manner of them that go hand in hand to strengthen their pace; they hold
and are held. For a Workman shall never be esteemed judicious and witty, so
long as there appear in his work some broken and abruptly dismembered passages.
Even as they are deservedly laughed at, who going about to tell a tale do
nothing but stutte and stammer, belching out some abrupt and pitifully chopped
speeches. Where naked joints are propounded, says Seneca Lib. I. controv. in
prooemio.
, it is instantly manifest, if either the number or the order have not their
due. What in other works uses to be rude, loose, and scattered, is ever in a
good and perfect work, well grounded, finely framed, and strongly trussed up
together. The whole period and compass of the represented history is so
delightsome for the equable roundnesse of composition, and so grave for the
seemly simplicity of handling and framing the matter, that it may be
perceived even of the least, liked of the most, understood and judged only of
the Learned. Which default, when as some endeavor to salve and recure in their
works; they patch up the holes with pieces and rags borrowed of other men's
inventions, corrupting the whole frame of their work, and making it like unto
an ill relished gallamaufrey or hodge-podge, of several and very much
disagreeing things.

Yet can these men find in their hearts to boast, as if some instinct of an
elevated spirit had newly ravished them above the meannesse of common
capacities. But sometimes, being in the midst of their bravery, suddenly
either for want of matter, or skill in ordering the matter, sometimes also for
having lost their former conceit loosely hanging together, they are very much
pained and traveled in their remembrance, not knowing which way to turn
themselves. To let these ragged and raking painters alone, I will content my
self to say thus much only, That a picture is so much the worse, how much the
better the sense and art of the scattered parts might be if they were well
ordered; seeing the neglects committed in the disposition, are discovered by
the lightsomenesse of the things themselves; and whatsoever does not hang well
together, bewrays it self as well by an inequality of color, as by the
clefts and gaps appearing in a mis-joyned work. Quintil. xii. 9.

10. Moreover, when we recommend a most copious argument unto the laborious
care of an ingenious and industrious artificer, we do not commend their
arrogance, who disdain to meddle with any mean matters, seeing a man may very
well show his wit in small matters also, says Paulus Silentarius, lib. IV,
Graec. Epigrammatum, cap. 32.

Neither do we think well of them, which meeting with a thin and spare
argument, use to besmeare it round about with many fine by-workes, set forth in
glorious and glaring colors; sometimes also piecing and enlarging it in the
midst with a great number of far fetched additions, altogether disagreeing
from the matter in hand: for all such things spoil the whole frame of the
work, and make it totter, though they seem to strengthen and augment it. See
Horace in his Art Poetical. And Dionysius Longinus de sublimi Oratione,. 8.

Great masters use sometimes to blaze and to pourtray in most excellent
pictures, not only the dainty lineaments of beauty, but they use also to
shadow round about it rude thickets and craggy rocks, that by the horridness
of such parts there might accrue a more excellent grace to the principal: even
as a discord in music makes now and then a comely concordance: and it
falls out very often, that the most curious spectators find themselves, I
know not how, singularly delighted with such a disorderly order of a
counterfeited rudeness. If therefore any one loves to follow the example of
that same Pamphilus, who, as Tully Lib. III, de Orat.
reports, was wont to paint greatmatters in the midst of some garlands and
labels, even as if they had been some childish recreations and pastimes, let
him see how he speedeth with it. Great and exquisite masters choose rather to
unfold great matters of argument covertly, than professing it, not to be able
to perform it accordingly. They do not study to produce smoke out of light,
but light out of smoke, says Horace De Art Poet.
, to the end that they might effect specious miracles. And again in the same
treatise; I shall take ordinary matters in hand, that every one may hope to do
the same. And yet is he likely to sweat much, and to lose all his labor,
whosoever dares attempt it: so much grace do mean and ordinary things receive
from a good and orderly cannexion.

11 The chiefest benefit Picture receives by a good and orderly collocation of
the figures, is Perspicuitie: and sure it is, that a neat and convenient
disposition does no less advance the evidence and perspicuitie of the Work,
than Life and Motion is able to do. Let perspicuitie show it self every where
in the work, says Lucian De Conscrib. hist.
, procured by the mutual connection of things: for it will make every thing
complete and perfect. The first being wrought, brings in the second which
follows: and this second is so linked together with the first: that there is
no interruption between them both; no more are they several narrations joined
together, seeing the first does keep such good neighborhood and correspondence
with the second, that their extremities communicate and mix themselves one with
another. Plutarch having related how Aratus freed the Pellenenses from the
invasion of the Thessalians, This was accounted a very famous deed, says he
In Arato.
, and Timanthes the painter made the battle most apparently to be seen, for
the good disposition used in the work. The younger Philostratus also in his
picture of the Huntsmen, commends that piece principally for the perspicuous
disposition it had. Good gods, says he In Venat.
, how wonderful and how sweet is the perspicuitie of the picture! it is easy
to see therein every one his fortune. The seat suddenly made of nets cast in
heaps, receives the chiefest masters of the sport, which are five. You cannot
but mark the middlemost, how he row sing himself turns to his fellows, as
if he meant to acquaint them with what he had done, and how he had first thrown
down one of the Dear, etc. Who lists, may see in the elder and younger
Philostratus many most accurat expressions of pictures commendable for their
elegancie of disposition.

12. Disposition, as it is the work of an accurate proportion, observes more
particularly the distance of the figures, and of the several parts of figures.
The neerenesse that is between this kind of disposition and proportion,
moved Pliny to call it by the name of Symmetry. Apelles, says he Lib. xxxv.
cap. 10.
, was mightily taken with Asclepiodorus his Symmetry. For in saying so, he
does insinuate nothing else, but that Apelles could not come near
Asclepiodorus for measures, that is, what distance there ought to be between
figure and figure, as the same Pliny speaks a little before. What concerns
this Disposition, we have no rule for it, our eye must teach us here what to do
When the Artificers put many figures together upon one board, says Quintil.
Li. viii. c. 5.
they distinguish them by their several places, lest the shadows should fall
upon the bodies. But these places, faith the same Author elsewhere Lib. ix, c.
4.
, being here of great force, do not admit any other judgment but the
judgment of our eyes. Having therefore already set down some rules for that
same general disposition, which flows out of the nature of the invented
matter, we should now likewise add something concerning this particular
Disposition, but that we find it wholly to be the work of a most curiously
diligent and judicious eye. So does the neatness and handsomnesse of this
disposition chiefly discover the Artificers judicious industry, or rather his
laborious pain, as Philostratus speaks: Let us consider the laborious pain
of the painter, says he Icon. lib. 1. in Pelope.
, for it is no small trouble, in my opinion, to gear four horses together,
and not so much as to confound any of their legs, howsoever their gentleness
be not without fierceness. The one stands still, showing himself loath to
stand: the other goes about to carvet. In the third you may see a ready
willingness to obey. The fourth rejoices in Pelops his beauty, enlarging his
nosthrils as if he were a neighing, etc.

You may observe in the picture of Menaecus a world of schemes rightly placed.
The walls for all that of the City Thebes yield us a most notable example of
this particular Disposition. The painters device is very sweet and pleasant,
says the elder Philostratus Icon. lib. 1. in Menaec.
, for having filled the city walls with armed men, he makes it so, that some
are seen at their full length, the legs of some are hidden, others do but show
their half bodies, their breasts, their heads, their head-pieces, their
spear-heads. These things are nothing else but a certain kind of Proportion,
seeing the eye must be beguiled after this manner whilst it passes on through
and with a convenient distance of such circles. Though all the figures
represented in the picture of Hesione kept their just distance, yet was there a
more peculiar way of art observed in the disposition of the several parts of
the sea monster: The sea monster winding it self, says the younger
Philostratus In Hesio.
, not in one round, but with many and several turnings, some parts of it were
seen in the water, refusing to be accurately discerned by reason of their
deepnesse; some again did rise to such a height, that any one who is
unexperienced in sea matters, would have taken them for little Islands, etc.
The properties belonging to the disposition of things seen in the water, are
more fully expressed in the following words: The colors of the fishes appear
in the azure-coloured sea, says the elder Philostratus Icon. lib. I. in
Piscator.
: the uppermost seem to be black: the next to them come somewhat short of that
blacknes: the rest deceives our fight, being first shadowy, then waterish, and
at length conceivable only. For our sight descending deep into the water,
grows dim, and will not suffer us to discern accuratly what is underneath.
The same Philostratus in the description of Olympus his picture does also teach
us, That it is no small piece of workmanship to hit the true posture of such
figures as do represent their own image in the water. Of the inversion of the
figures represented in the water or in a looking glass, see Ausonius, in
Mosella. And Agell. lib. xvi. noct. Attic. cap. 18.

CHAP. VI.
SOme things, though they are very pleasing in their several parts, says
Quintilian Orat. instit. lib. IV, cap. 2.
, yet does not the whole accord with the parts. A picture therefore may very
well be commended for the excellency of invention, Proportion, Color, Life,
Disposition, and yet want that comely gracefulness, which is the life and
soul of Art. These five heads, handled immediately before, do not suffer
themselves to be severed; one alone will not serve; no more will two, or three,
or four of them; they must go all jointly hand in hand: if there be but one
wanting, it is to small purpose that we should busy our selves overmuch
about the rest. The consummation of a picture consists chiefly therein, that
these five heads concurring, and lovingly conspiring, should breath forth a
certain kind of grace, most commonly called the air of the picture: which in
it self is nothing else but a sweet consent of all manner of perfections
heaped up in one piece: the best collection of the best things.

Like diverse flours, whose diverse beauties serve
To deck the earth with his well-colored weed,
Though each of them his private form preserve,
Yet joining forms, one sight of beauty breed:
says a noble and famous Poet Sir Philip Sidney in the third Book of his
Arcadia.
. Seeing then that a witty invention does gently allure our mind, a neat
proportion does readily draw our eyes, a convenient color does pleasingly
beguile our fancy, a lively motion does forcibly stir our soul, an orderly
disposition does wonderfully charm all our senses; how shall not that picture
have great power over our mind and spirits, in the which all these perfections
are most sweetly united into one? The body of a man is not instantly esteemed
graceful and comely, when as every part of it seems to be of a goodly
feature; but when the perfection of every part produces a perfectly well
favored comeliness in his whole shape and posture. A body therefore may very
well be fair, and yet want this graceful comeliness, which ravisheth the eye
of the beholders, by beautifying beauty it self. So does Ovid Lib. II, de Art.
say, That there was in the beauty of Venus a sufficient mixture of grace. And
Suetonius In Nerone, cap. 51.
reports of Nero, That his body was rather fair than comely. Beauty does not
always beget liking; it is only Grace which makes fair ones fairer than
fair, by the lovely and delicate sweetness of a winning favor. In beautiful
bodies grace is the life of beauty. Catullus observes this difference in a
comparison he makes between Quintia and Lesbia. Many, says he Carm. 87.
, hold Quintia to be fairer: she is in my opinion, white, tall, and straight.
These particulars I do confess; as for the whole, that she should be
beautiful, I deny that; seeing in such a great body of hers there is no
comeliness at all, no not one crum of pleasantness. Lesbia is beautiful
indeed; for as she is perfectly fair, so has she likewise stolen away all
manner of graces from them that are most beautiful. Tibullus Lib. iv. Eleg. 2.
does also commend the beauty of Sulpitia, for the most comely demeanor it
had; seeing she could do nothing, she could stir no where, but that her beauty
was still waited upon by a certain kind of lovely grace, which did stealingly
accompany her in all her actions, adding a most sweet and pleasing life to her
native perfections. Claudia Rufina an English Lady endued with many
extraordinary gifts of nature, is likewise commended by Martial Lib. xi. Epigr.
54.
, for having added to these good parts all the Graces which either Greece or
Rome were able to afford. The case stands even thus with picture: unless
there be in the work that same air and comely Grace, which is made up by the
concord and agreement of several accomplished parts, it cannot please the
beholder. Even as a lute cannot delight the hearer, unless all the strings
from the highest to the lowest being well tuned, strike the ear with the sweet
harmony of a disagreeing agreement. Apelles was excellent at this: for though
that age wherein he lived was very well stored with all manner of rare
workmen, yet did he attribute this glory especially unto himself: having
therefore commended the other Artificers sufficiently, he did not stick to
say, that they did lack this Grace, though they had all other good qualities
belonging to that art. See Pliny, xxxv. 10. Where the peerless artificer
understands by this Grace, nothing else but a peculiar perfection of the
Invention, Proportion, Color, Motion, Disposition, so diffused through the
whole work, that the picture we see does not so much ravish our senses with the
Invention, Proportion, Color, Motion, Disposition, as they are complete and
perfect in themselves, but rather as they bring all their peculiar perfections
together, to atchieve the highest perfection of an universal Grace
indifferently, showing it self in the whole work, and in every part of it.

2. This is questionless that grace, which readily and freely proceeding out
of the Artificers spirit, cannot be taught by any rules of art: no more can
assiduity of importunate studies help us to it. Whatsoever is excessive is
faulty, says Quintilian Orat. instit. li. viii. cap. 3.
. Too much care therefore is rather like to spoil the comely sweetness of
this Grace, than to advance it; and whenever we do but begin to streighten
the freeness of it by an unseasonable and over curious niceness of studying,
the decent comeliness of the work is instantly gone and lost. Whatsoever does
not become the matter, cannot please, says Quintilian Orat. instit. lib. I, c.
11.
. Every thing therefore which fills the nature of the matter well enough,
says the same Author elsewhere Orat. instit. lib. XI, cap. 1.
, loses the grace it has, unless it be tempered with a certain kind of
moderation: and a man may sooner feel the observation of this point in his own
private judgment, than learn it by precepts. What is sufficient, and how much
the present argument may receive, cannot be prescribed by measure and weight;
seeing it is here as it is with meats, the one fills us more than another.
Hence it is that many, upon whom Nature has somewhat niggardly bestowed her
best gifts, make good shift to use them soberly and wisely, so at least that
they might not mis-become them, says Tully Lib. I, de Oratore.
; for this is most of all to be avoided, and it is not easy to give precepts
of this one thing. Roscius says often in my hearing, that to become is the
principal point of art, and this is the only thing which cannot be procured by
Art. It is true, that art cannot procure this, yet does it ever proceed and
flow out of the force of a hidden and warily concealed art: seeing, Nothing can
be effected without art, and decency does always accompany Art. Do we not see
how those darts fly most handsomely, which are hurled out most cunningly? Such
archers likewise as have the surest hand, use withal to loose their arrows in
a more comely manner, says Quintilian Orat. instit. lib. IX, cap. 4.
. It remains then that we hold this grace to be the work of a wisely
dissembled art. But if any man will needs believe, that such a high perfection
is the fruit of a fertile and forward nature, the same must for all that grant
us, that in this nature it self there shall be some kind of art, as the same
Quintilian speaks Ibidem.
. For these two, I mean Nature and Art, are so close coupled together, that the
one may not be separated from the other, if we do intend to save the
comeliness of the work: and whosoever means to express the nature of this
mighty and most characteristicall virtue, the same must call it with Dionysius
Halicarnassensis In Lysia.
, either a certain felicity of Nature, or a work of labor and Art, or else
a habit and faculty arising out of the mixture of them both: even as Dionysius
Longinus De sublimi orat. 32.
maintains that the perfection consists in a mutual coherence of these
two: see the fourth Chapter of our First book, where we do speak something
more of Nature and Art concurring to the constitution and accomplishment of the
Art.

3. It is then most evident what a hard task they undertake, which go about to
recommend their memories to the following age by one or other absolute piece of
workmanship: seeing that this graceful comeliness is not sufficient to the
work, unless there do moreover appear in it some succesfull effects of a
bold and confident Facility. After that Pliny, as it is quoted in the first
section of this present chapter, has related how Apelles did challenge unto
himself the chiefest praise in this point of Grace above all other Artificers,
he goes further on to something else; Apelles did also take on him another
praise, says he, when he did admire Protogenes his work done with excessive
pains and too much care: for he said that Protogenes in all other things was
equal with him, or rather better then he thought himself to be: but that
Protogenes in one thing was far inferior to him, because he knew not when to
hold his hand: insinuating by this memorable precept, that too much diligence
is oftentimes hurtful. Plutarch does likewise make a distinction between the
forementioned Grace and this same bold Facility: the verses of Antimachus,
says he In Timoleonte.
, and the pictures of Dionysius, who both were Colophonians, having vehemency
and intension, seem to be forcibly expressed and too much belabored: but
Nicomachus his pictures and Homer his verses have this also besides all the
other efficacy and grace which is in them, that you would think them made out
of hand with much ease. Soth does then this excellent perfection of Grace wax
more graceful, when it is accompanied with an unconstrained Facility
proceeding out of the unstayed motions which use to stir and to impell the
free spirit of a most resolute Artificer; whereas an unresolved and timorous
lingerer does on the contrary deface and utterly overthrow all the hope of
Grace. We are to consider in every thing, How far forth it is to be
followed, says Tullie In Oratore.
, for although every thing ought to consist within its own measure; what is
too much uses for all that to offend us more, than what is too little. Apelles
therefore was wont to say, that those Painters mistake themselves in this
point, who know not what is enough. Apollodorus the clay-worker being most
diligent in his art, had such an ill opinion of himself, that he did
oftentimes break finished images, not being able to satisfy his desire of
Art: he was therefore surnamed Apollodorus the mad, Pliny xxxiv, 8.
Callimachus was ever wont to find fault with his works, and knew no end of
diligence; he was therefore called Cacozitechnus; leaving us a memorable
example of moderating our care. He made the dancing Lacedaemonian women; a most
accomplished work, says Pliny in the same place, but that diligence defaceth
in it the whole Grace of the workmanship. Picture therefore must follow a bold
and careless way of art, or it must at least make a show of carelessness in
many things. Philostratus propounds unto us a lively example of this same
secure and unlaboured Facility, when he describes the picture of many little
Cupids wantonly hunting a hare, and carelessly tumbling on heaps for the
eagerness of their sportfull chase; the Cupids do laugh and fall down, says
he Iconum lib. I, in Amoribus.
, one on his side, another on his face, some on their backs, and all of them
in postures showing how they missed their prey. It cannot be conceived
otherwise, but that the Grace of this picture was infinitely graced with the
confused falls of the lascivious and pampered little ones, as they were
negligently represented in the work by such another seeming error of a
temerary and confidently careless Art.

4. A heavy and difficult diligence does then mar and quite kill the grace
of the work; whereas a light and nimble Facility of working adds life to
the work: and it concerns an Artificer very much that he should resolve to
do with ease whatsoever he does: see our second book, cap. XI, 7, where we
touch this point a little. I must needs add thus much only, that never any
Painter was ranked with the better sort of Artists, except learning, study,
and exercitation had first enabled him with this Facility, says Quintilian
Orat. instit. lib. XII, cap. 9.
. A plain and unaffected simplicity, says the same Author Lib. VIII, cap. 3.
, is commendable for a certain kind of pure ornament it has, and for a
certain kind of neatness which seems to proceed out of a slender diligence,
and is lovely even in women. The Assyrian Semiramis, as Aelianus Var. hist.
lib. VII, cap. 1.
reports, was the fairest of all women living, though she did very much
neglect her beauty: there is a certain kind of negligent diligence, says
Tullie In Oratore.
, so does want of ornament make many women more comely. Beauty when it is set
forth too carefully, is no beauty. We are therefore above all things to take
good heed that there do not appear in our works a laborious gayness and an
overcurious affectation of grace; since it is most certain that such a poor
and silly affectation of finenesse does but weaken and break the generous
endeavors of a thoroughly heated spirit; besides that too much diligence uses
to make the work worse. Things not far fetched are always best; because
they do best agree with the simplicity and truth of Nature. Whatsoever does
on the contrary bewray an excessive care and study, can never be graceful and
comely; because it dazeleth our senses with the resplendent beams of
gay-seeming things, not suffering them to see what is in the work; even as
rank grass does sometimes overspread a whole field in such abundance, that
all the good corn being choked up cannot so much as peep out. Amending it
self, says Quintilian Orat. instit. lib. X, ca. 4.
, must have an end: there are some which return to every part of their work,
as if all were faulty; they think better of every thing which is not the
same, even as if it were unlawful that the first conceits should ever be good:
they do altogether follow the practice of those Physicians which seek work
by slashing and cutting what was sound and whole: it falls out therefore that
their works are full of skars, void of blood, and never a whit the better for
all the care bestowed upon them. It is then fit that there should be something
at length which might please us, or at least content us; that all our filing
might be found rather to polish the work then to wear it out: see the younger
Pliny lib. IX, epist. 35. To be short; as in many other Arts the maine
strength of Art does principally consist in the wary concealment of Art; so
does the chiefest force and power of the Art of painting especially consist
therein, that it may seem no Art. But we cannot endure this, says Orat.
instit. lib. IV, cap. 2.
Quintilian, and we think the Art lost, unless it do appear; whereas it
does rather cease to be an Art, when it is too apparent. Ovid does well and
properly express this point in the fable of Pygmalion x. Metam.
, attributing the cause of the heart-ravishing force which was in that image to
Pygmalion his skill of concealing the Art in such a notable piece of Art.

5. It is now evident enough that the chiefest comeliness of this Grace
consists in a ready and unconstrained Facility of Art: and if we do but
mark it, there are in this graceful facility such hidden treasures of all
manner of contentment, that even the better sort of men love to feed their
greedy eyes with such a goodly sight. A picture therefore which stirs no
admiration in the heart of the beholders, does hardly deserve the name of a
picture; even as men of understanding hold him only to be Artificer, who is
able to express abundantly, accuratly, pleasantly, lively, and distinctly,
whatsoever his learned Invention has suggested unto him. This is that virtue
which gathers great rings of amazed spectators together; which carries them
into an astonished ecstasy, their sense of seeing bereaving them of all other
senses; which by a secret veneration makes them stand tongue-tyed, the
greatness of admiration leaving no place for many applauses, says Symmachus
Lib. 10. Epist. 22.
. Incredible things find no voice; says Quintilian Decl. xix.
, somethings are greater, then that any man's discourse should be able to
compass them. Mark Damascius, I pray you, and learn of him what strange
effects the sight of Venus dedicated by Herodes wrought in him. I fell into a
sweat, says he Ap. Photiu^.
, for the very horror and perplexity of my mind: I felt my soul so much
touched with the lively sense of delightsomnesse, that it was not in my power
to go home; and when I went, I found my self forced to cast back mine eyes
now and then to the sight. It chances therefore very often that the truest
Lovers of art, meeting with some rare piece of workmanship, stand for a while
speechless: see Callistratus in his second description of Praxiteles his
Cupid: yet afterward, having now by little and little recovered their straying
senses, they break violently forth in exclaming praises, and speak with the
most abund nt expressions an eye-ravished spectator can possibly devise. When
they observe in the picture of Pasiphae how the little Cupids busy themselves
with sawing the timber; the Cupids that are a sawing, say they, surpass all
apprehension and art which may be performed by the hands of men and by colors:
mark well, I pray you, the saw goes into the wood, and is now already
drawn thorough it: these Cupids draw it; and one of them stands on the
ground, the other upon a frame, etc. see Philostratus, Iconum lib. I, in
Pasiphae. Having considered in the picture of Pindarus his nativitie the
several effects of a most exquisite art, they cannot forbear to give unto the
standers by a little smack of that sweetness which does so much affect their
senses; you cannot but wonder at the bees, say they, so delicatly painted, etc.
see Philostratus, Iconum lib. II, in Pindaro. The picture of Penelope likewise
does not only take them with the sight of that famous web, but they fall also
upon a little spider which shows it self hard by; to represent the spider so
delicatly after the life, say they, and to paint her laborious net, is the
work of a good Artificer, and of such a one as is well acquainted with the
truth of things etc. see Philostratus Iconum lib. II, in Telis. They do in the
picture of the dying Panthia amazedly observe, how her nails are sweeter than
any picture. Philostratus Iconum lib. II, in Panthia: and Philostra. junior in
Venatoribus. They show in the picture representing an ivory Venus, how the
dancing Nymphs are most divinely expressed. Philostratus Iconum lib. II, in
Venere. When they see the golden garment of Venus, they find themselves most
of all ravished with the seame of her coats, which may sooner be conceived
than seen. Philostr. junior in Ludibundis. They perceive in the marble image
of the revelling Baccha all the properties of a distracted mind; there did
shine in her such notable signs of the passion, tempered by an unspeakable way
of art. Callistratus in Bacchae statua. Narcissus his marble image makes them
Narcissus-like astonished; it cannot be expressed with words, say they, how a
stone should be so loosened as to represent the good plight of youthful
vigor, exhibiting a body contrary to its own substance: for being of a more
solid nature, it engenders in our mind the sense of a soft and delicate
tenderness, being gently diffused and made to rise after the manner of a
swelling body. Callistratus in Narcissi statua. When they behold the brazen
statue of Cupid; do not you see, say they, how the brass admits a tender
fluidnesse, unfeisably foregoing the hardness of his nature and suffering it
self to be softened to the likeness of a full-fleshed body? Callistratus in
prima descriptione Cupidinis Praxitelici.

6. Pictures which are judged sweeter then any picture, pictures surpassing the
apprehension and Art of man, works that are said to be done by an unspeakable
way of Art, delicatly, divinely, unfeisably, etc. insinuate nothing else but
that there is something in them which does not proceed from the laborious
curiosity prescribed by the rules of Art, and that the free spirit of the
Artificer marking how Nature sporteth her self in such an infinite variety of
things, undertook to do the same. The hand of Myron, says Statius Papinius
Lib. I, Sylv in Tiburtito Manli Vepisci.
, played in brass. Myron therefore, when he wrought, seemed but to play: no
more did his works profess a laborious and painful way of Art, but a man
might perceive in them such a sweet Grace of an unaffected Facility, as if the
Artificer youthfully playing had made them. The younger Philostratus uses the
same manner of speaking; the Painter, says he In Orphco.
, plays youthfully: see Callistratus also in his description of the statue of
Memnon: for Philostratus and Callistratus use both one word; which signifies,
to do a thing with such courage, pleasantness and ease, that the work may be
perceived to proceed out of a lusty and vigorous youthfulness: and certainly,
the chiefest and most lively force of Art consists herein, that there appear
in the work that same prosperously prompt and fertile Facility which uses to
accompany our first endeavors: this is the very life and spirit of Art; which
if it be extinguished with too much care of trimming, the whole work will be but
a dead and lifelesse thing We did speak hitherto, says Pliny Li. ^xxv. cap. 5.
, of the dignity of the dying Art: he speaks well and properly, when he calls
the Art as it was a decaying, a dying Art: seeing we have showed above, lib.
II. cap 6. that these Arts being anciently perfited by the study and care of
many and most consummate artificers, came so low about the times of August,
that they were ready to give their last gasp: for in that very time, the vices
prevailing, the Art perished; and when the Artificers, leaving the simplicity
of the ancients, began to spend themselves in garnishing of their works, the
art grew still worse and worse, til it was at last overthrown by a childishly
frivolous affectation of gayness.

7. Having now seen already wherein the chief comeliness of Grace does
consist, and how by a glorious conquest it does sweetly enthrall and captivate
the hearts of men with the lovely chains of due admiration and amazement;
having likewise considered by the way that this Grace has no greater enemy
than affectation; it is left only that we should examine, by what means it may
be obtained: although we dare not presume to give any precepts of it; which in
the opinion of Tully and Quintilian is altogether impossible: since it is
certain, that this grace is not a perfection of art proceeding meerley from
art, but rather a perfection proceeding from a consummate art, as it busieth it
self about things that are suitable to our nature. So must then art and nature
concur to the constitution of this Grace. A perfect art must be wisely applied
to what we are most given to by nature. Whosoever has perfect skill in these
Arts loves always to be doing: and though a good artificer be likely to do
well, or at least tolerably, in every thing he takes in hand; yet is it
certain, that he shall do better, and come nearest to this comeliness of
Grace, when the excellency of his art busieth it self, not with such things
as he loatheth, nor with such things as he is indifferently affected unto; but
with such things as are most agreeable with his nature and inward disposition.
We are to follow our own nature, says Tul. Li. I. de Offic.
and we are to measure our studies by the rule of our nature: for it is to no
purpose, that we should strive against nature, and follow a thing we cannot
attain to. This makes it also more appear, what manner of comeliness this is,
seeing nothing can be decent and comely in spite (as the common saying is) of
Minerva, that is, our nature not giving way to it. Upon this contemplation we
had need to examine what every one has of his own, and to make use of that,
without trying any further how the things which are peculiar to other men might
become us: for that becoms every man best, what is most his own. Let every man
therefore know his own nature, and be a severe judge of what is good and bad
in himself; lest the Scenicall artificers peradventure might seem warier than
we: seeing they do not always choose the best fables, but such as are fittest
for them. They that do rely upon their voice, choose Epigonos and Medea. They
that do rely upon their gesture, choose Menalippa, Clytemnestra. Rupilius did
always act Antiopa. Aesopus did seldom act Ajax. We shall therefore chiefly
bestow our labor about these things, to the which we do find our selves
aptest. If in the mean time one or other necessary occasion drives us to those
things which are somewhat abhorring from our nature, we are then to bend all
our care, meditation, diligence, that we might do these things, if not
decently, yet with as little undecency as possibly can be; studying always more
to shun faults, than to hunt after such virtues as are not affoorded us by
nature. See the fourth chapter of our first book, where we do insist more
generally upon this point.

CHAP. VII.
WE have seen that the height of Art does chiefly consist in the
forementioned Grace; and that this Grace must proceed from the perfections of
an accurate invention, Proportion, Color, Life, Disposition, not only as each
of them is perfect in it self severally, but as generally out of the mutual
agreement of them all, there does appear in the whole work, and in every part
of it, a certain kind of graceful pleasantnesle: We have seen likewise,
that this Grace is not the work of a troublesome and scrupulous study, but
that it is rather perfected by the unaffected facility of an excellent art and
forward nature equally concurring to the work; so is it most certain, that
never any artificer could attain the least shadow of this grace, without the
mutual support of Art and Nature: nature is to follow the directions of art,
even as art is to follow the prompt readiness of our forward nature. Seeing
then that this grace can never be accomplished, unless all these things do
meet in the work; so is it likewise evident, that even the self same things
are requisite to the discovering of the Grace. The way of begetting is the
only way of judging. Whatsoever is not sought in his own way, says
Cassiodorus De divin. lection. ca. 28
, can never be traced perfectly. They therefore do exceedingly mistake, who
think it an easy matter to find out and to discern such a high point of
these profound arts. This inimitable grace, equally diffused and dispersed
through the whole work, as it is not had so easily, cannot be discerned so
easily. Whether a picture be copious, learned, magnificent, admirable,
sufficiently polished, sweet, whether the affections and passions are therein
seasonably represented, cannot be perceived in any one part; the whole work
must show it. Dionys. Longinus speaks well to the purpose when he says De
subl. Orat. 1.
, We see the skill of invention, the order and disposition of things, as it
shows it self, not in one or two parts only, but in the whole composition of
the work, and that hardly too.

2. A way then with all those, who think it enough if they can but confidently
usurp the authority belonging only to them that are well skilled in these
arts: it will not serve their turn, that they do sometimes with a censorious
brow reject, and sometimes with an affected gravity commend the works of great
masters: the neat and polished age wherein we live will quickly find them out.
So did the selfe-conceited Megabyzus, when he was sitting in Zeuxis his shop,
presume to prattle something about matters of art, even as if his big looks
and purple coat should have made his unadvised discourses good; but he found
himself very much deceived: seeing Zeuxis did not stick to tell him to his
face, that he was both admired and reverenced of all that saw him, as long as
he held his peace: whereas now having begun to speak senselesly, he was
laughed at even of the boys that did grind colors. See Aelian. Var. hist.
lib. II. cap. 2. This is then no jeasting matter, we must examine with a
circumspect and judicious earnestness, whether the knitting together of
several things represented within the compass of one table, be round without
roughness, and learned without hardness: besides that, we are to consider
more distinctly, how the perspicuous disposition flowing out of a grave and
profitable invention, instructs our judgments: how a proportionable design
trimmed up with pleasing colors delights our senses; how a lively
resemblance of action and passion ravisheth our soul, altering and
transforming with a sweet violence the present state of our mind to what we see
represented in the picture. For it goes here with painters, as it goes with
orators and Poets, they must all teach, delight, and moove: It is their duty,
says Tully De opt. genesis Orat.
, that they should teach; it is for their own credit that they should delight;
it is altogether requisite that they should moove and stir our mind. Witty
things teach us: curious things delight us: grave things moove us: and he is
the best Artist, who is best provided of all these things. Whosoever on the
contrary is meanly provided of them, he is but a mean one; even as he is the
worst who has small store of them: for naughty painters are in this sense as
well called Painters, as the best. If any one in the mean time studying to be
grave, loses the opinion of wit: or if on the contrary, he had rather seem
witty than gorgeous; the same, though he may be reckoned among them that are
tolerable, yet is he none of the better sort; seeing that is best only, what
has all manner of praises.

3. I would not have a man so severe and peremptory in his judgment, as to
examine every thing nicely according to the most exact course and apprehension
of art: something must be indulged unto the wits of great Masters: provided
only that we do excuse small mistakes in them, and not such faults as may
seem gross and monstrous. He forgets his own condition, and does not
remember himself a man, who will not bear with other men's errors. The good
Homer does sometimes slumber and oversee himself, says Horace in his Poetical
Art. Let the nature of man be never so perfect, says Diod. Siculus Lib. xxvi.
, yet can she not please in all things: For neither Phidias, though he was
wonderful in his ivory works; nor Praxiteles, though he did most skilfully mix
the passions of the soul with his works of stone; nor Apelles and Parrhasius,
though they did raise the Art of painting to the greatest height by their
cunningly tempered colors; could attain to this, that they should show an
unblameable pattern of their skill. They were men, and mistook themselves
often, by reason of that weakness which uses to be in man: besides that,
they were sometimes overcome with the height and excellency of the matters they
ventured upon. Horace therefore gives us good advice, when he does so highly
commend this discreet moderation. Whosoever mixeth profit with pleasure, says
he De Art.
, the same does hit the principal point of art. Yet are there some oversights
that deserve our pardon. Lute strings, do not always sound as our hand and
mind would have them, but they yield us very often a sharp note, when we
look for a flat one. A bow does not always hit what we aim at. Even so where
there are many things that do excel in the work and make it shine. I shall
never be offended at a few spots, caused either by heedlesnesse, or else by
that weakness which is incident to the nature of man. The younger Pliny
studieth to induce us to the same moderation by another similitude. Though
every one of us uses in the ordinary course of banquets to forbear many
dishes, says he Lib. II, Epist. 5.
, yet do we all commend the whole feast: neither do the meats our stomach
refuses, lessen the pleasure of what we like. We are then to judge, and that
rigorously enough, seeing it is expected here, that every man should give a
ready account of his own liking and disliking, without suffering himself to
be hurried about by the wavering opinions of other men: but nevertheless must
the severitie of our forward judgment be brideled by a circumspect and wary
moderation, lest our unadvised rashness in judging make us like them that are
esteemed prodigal and lavish of their judgments: they reject some things in
the exquisite works of the rarest workmen, as being puffed up; which in the
opinion of more understanding spectators, are full of stateliness and
magnificence: they reprehend some things as being wanton, which in more sober
minds are held commendable for their confident boldness: they condemn some
things as being superfluous and immoderate, which in sound judgments do but
abound in a temperate plenteousnesse. We ought to take heed of this, seeing
there is a great difference, as the younger Pliny speaks Lib. IX, Epist. 26.
, Whether we do note blameworthy or excellent things. All men perceive what
shows it self above other; but it is to be discerned by a most earnest
intention of the mind, whether that be excessive or lofty, whether it be high
or enormous and altogether out of square.

4. But because our judgment is likely to be seduced by the most uncertain
sense of seeing, unless we do look about for all the succor that may be had;
we must before all things take care that nothing be wanting which might help
our deceitful sense. Our sight, that it may plainly discern what it sees,
says Nemesius De Natura hominis, cap. 8.
, stands in need of four things; it requires a sound instrument of seeing,
some stirring or changing of place, answerable to the proportion of the things
which are to be seen; a just distance, a pure and clear light. See Themistius
also, and Alex. Aphrodisiensis, upon Arist. li. II, de Anima. As for the first,
Every one is not able to judge well of every thing, says the same Nemesius
Cap. 18.
, but such a one as is skillful, and well disposed to it by nature. It is to
very small purpose, that a man should invite bleare-eyed folks to a fine
picture; none but quick sighted people are fit for it. Aphlegmaticke eye is
well pleased with shady and dull colors, says Plutarch In Phocione.
, but it abhors all manner of bright and glaring colors. Tully joyneth the
second with the first and third: We may then trust our senses best, says he
Lib. IV, Academ. quaest.
, when we find them to be sound and healthy, and when all those things are
remooved that may hinder them. We do therefore change the light often, we change
the situation also of the things we mean to see; we do deduct and contract the
distances, leaving nothing unattempted that may assure unto us the judgment of
our eyes. The fourth consists in this, that we do set well painted pieces,
as the same Tully speaks elsewhere de Claris oratoribus.
, in a good light. And this is the reason why Vitruvius maintains, that
galleries for pictures and such parts of the house as require a constant
immutability of light, must take their light from the North, because that part
of the air is never enlightened nor darkened too much, says he Lib. I, ca. 2.
, but it remains always certain and unchangeable at all hours of the day.
And in another place, Galleries for pictures, embroidering houses, and painters
shops, must look toward the North, says he Lib. VI, cap. 7.
, that the colors in their work, in regard of the constant light, might seem
to keep the same quality. Philostratus In prooemio Iconum.
for all that, speaks of a Callery in the suburbs of Naples, looking toward
the West, which was richly furnished with many good pieces. But to let this
point alone, we had better pursue what we have begun; seeing we cannot but add
Horace his observation unto our former discourse. Some pictures take us most,
says he De Art.
, when we stand nearer, others when we stand further off: some love duskie
places, others will be seen in a full light, nothing at all fearing the sharp
censures of a peremptory judge: some please us if we do but once view them,
others if we take them ten times in hand. See the old commentator upon these
words.

5. Having outwardly provided what may be good for our eyes, it is next that
we should seriously weigh and consider every part of the work, returning to it
again and again, even ten and ten times if need be. For our sense does seldom
at the first judge right of these curiosities, it is an unwary Arbitrator, and
mistaketh many things: all the soundness and truth of our judgment must
proceed only from reason.

Although the several circumstances of all arts, and almost of our whole life,
are occasioned by the ministry of our senses, says Boethius Li. I. Music.
cap. 9.
, yet is there no certainty of judgment, nor apprehension of truth in our
senses, if they are not accompanied with reason. For our sense is alike
corrupted with what is too great and too small; seeing it cannot perceive the
least things by reason of their smalnesse, and it is often confounded with the
greatest. And again in another place; Harmonica is a faculty, says he Li. v.
ca. 1.
, by the which we do weigh with our sense and with reason, the differences
between high and low tunes. Sense does confusedly mark what comes nearest
unto the thing perceived; but Reason discerns the sincerity thereof, and
busieth it self about the several differences. Sense therefore as it finds
confused things, and things approaching unto the truth, so does it receive his
integrity from reason: but reason, as it finds the integrity, so does it
receive from sense a confused similitude and a similitude approaching unto the
truth: for sense conceives no integrity, but comes as near as can be:
reason on the contrary does discern and determine: see Macrobius also lib.
VII, Saturnal. cap. 14. This ought therefore to be our chiefest care, that we
should not only go with our eyes over the several figures represented in the
work, but that we should likewise suffer our mind to enter into a lively
consideration of what we see expressed; not otherwise then if we were
present, and saw not the counterfeited image but the real performance of the
thing: which having well observed, the very picture it self will instantly
lead us to the principal figures. Philostratus in the picture of Amphiaraus
seems to insinuate thus much: for having related many and strange adventures
that befell unto several warriers as they were a fighting under the walls and
at the gates of the City Thebes; But these, says he Icon. lib. I.
, belong to another discourse, seeing the picture bids us look upon
Amphiaraus alone, as he flies under the earth with his very garlands, and with
his very laurel, etc. And again in the picture of Panthia; as for the City
walls, says he Icon. li. II.
, and the fired houses, and the fair Lydian women, the Persians may carry and
take what can be taken. Abradates and Panthia dying for his sake, seeing the
picture does intend that, are left to our consideration as being the chiefest
argument in hand.

6. By this it may be inferred that the most earnest intension of our curious
mind ought chiefly to employ it self about the chiefest and most remarkable
things. Philostratus in the picture of the Fishermen gives us an evident
example; not to go over every little thing, says he Icon. li. I. in Piscat.
, it will be best to speak of such matters as may deserve our discourse, etc.
see the description of that picture it self. The chiefest things therefore
require our chiefest attention; and whosoever contenteth himself with some
small things he fell upon first, the same does little remember that stately
magnificence the Lovers of Art must as well accustom themselves unto in
judging, as the workmen in working: if any man does not see the whole beauty of
the Olympian Jupiter, which is so great and so wonderful, says Lucian De
Conscribenda historia.
, if he does not commend it, nor report it to others that are ignorant of it,
but stumbleth upon the handsome workmanship of his well-carved footstool and
upon his well-proportioned pantofle, rehearsing these things very carefully;
would not you think him like unto a man that does not see the rose it self,
but fixes his whole contemplation upon the thorns and prickles which grow
near the root? The true way how to consider pictures and statues, is most
plainly set down in the books of Images made by the elder and younger
Philostratus, as also in Callistratus his Description of statues: whosoever
reads their works with attention, shall questionless find his desire fully
satisfied. There are likewise in many other ancient Authors diverse curious and
neat expressions to be found, able both to delight the reader and to inform
his judgment in the right manner of examining works of Art: but among a
thousand examples that might be alleged here, we shall insist only upon
Claudians description of Amphinomus and Anapus their statues. Behold how the
brothers sweat under a venerable burden, says he Epigr. 25.
, and how mount Aetna it self, wondering at such an attempt, keeps his
wandering flames from them. Though they support their parents with their
necks, yet do they uphold them with their hands, confidently lifting up their
heads and hastening their pace. The old couple is mounted up on high and
carried by two sons, entangling them with a sweet and lovely let. Do not you
see how the old man points to the fire? how the frighted mother calls upon
the Gods? Fear sets their hair on end, the metal it self growing pale
in their amazed countenances. You may see in the young men a most courageous
horror, being fearelesse for themselves, though fearful for their burden:
their cloakes are borne back by the wind: one of them lifteh up his right
hand, being content to hold his father with the left: the other foldeth both
his hands in a knot, remembering how the weaker sex was to be saved by a more
wary toil. It must not go unobserved, what the hands of the Artificer
brought quietly to pass in the work: for though their consanguinitie makes
them very like one another; the one for all that comes nearest unto the
mother, the other unto the father: their unlike years receive such a
temperature by the skill of Art, that the parents are represented in each of
their countenances: and the workman making a new difference between two nearly
resembling brothers, has distinguished their countenances by the effects of
their piety. It is apparent in this example how a skillful and understanding
spectator goes over all that is remarkable in the work: and as he cannot
abide that his curiosity should spend it self about matters of small
importance, so does he very seriously observe the most strange miracles of the
noble Art, as they do display themselves in such a noble argument.

7. As it is then evident that our curiosity may not busy it self too much
about poor and frivolous matters, so must we on the contrary endeavor to
conceive the whole show of the represented matters with a large and freely
diffused apprehension; to the end that we might compare the chiefest
circumstances of the Argument with our premeditated and fore-conceived images:
neither is it a hard and difficult work to recollect our memory and to renew
the remembrance of things upon the least sight of a represented image; it is
done in an instant: our remembrance is a quick and easy thing, says Maximus
Tyrius Dissert. xxviii.
, for as bodies that are easily moved must first be stirred by a hand or any
thing which sets them a going, and having once received such a beginning of
their motion, they keep it for a good while: even so the mind, having received
of sense a small beginning of remembrance, runs on infinitely, remembering all
what is to be remembered. Our senses therefore, which stand as it were at the
entry of the mind, having received the beginning of any thing, and having
proffered it to the mind; the mind likewise receives this beginning, and goes
over all what follows: the lower part of a long and slender pike being but
lightly shaken, the motion runs thorough the whole length of the pike, even
to the speares-head; and whosoever shakes the beginning of a long stretched
out rope, sends the motion to the ropes end; so does our mind need but a
small beginning to the remembrance of the whole matter.

When a table of huntings is represented to the sense, the mind also will
suddenly enter into a most serious consideration of hunting affairs, and by a
lively and active Imagination represent to it self all the painful pleasures
of that manly pastime: the first thoughts will exhibit a frequent assembly of
youthful gallants enflamed with exceeding love of that sport, preventing the
light, even while every foot they set does leave its print in the dewie
grass, some uncoupling the most assured finders, the dogs themselves with
silent gestures craving freedom, some rounding and beating the shadie woods,
while the hounds with full liberty ranging the coverts do by the diligent
suite of quick-sented noses catch a selfe-betraying sent. Others drive the
roused and affrighted dear with astonishing hallowings into the toils which
they had before spread wide for him: and now having obtained the chase, the
victor calls for a knife to take essay, and all having embrued their hands in
the blood in token of victory and the hounds diligence rewarded, some with
ceremonious triumph bear home the weighty quarry, while the weary dogs mutely
follow at the heels of the sport-ravished hunters: see Libanius orat. xxxiii,
where he does describe most accuratly all the circumstances of hunting.

8. We have showed already in the fifth chapter of our first Book, that Lovers
of art ought to store up in their mind the perfect Images of all manner of
things; to the end that they might have them always at hand, when any works
of Art are to be conferred with them. Here it is furthermore required, that all
those who mean to enter into a judicious consideration of matters of art, must
by the means of these Images accustom their mind to such a lively
representation of what they see expressed in the picture, as if they saw the
things themselves and not their resemblance only. Theon, a most famous
Painter, having made the picture of an armed man who seemed to run most
furiously on his enemies that depopulated the country round about, he did
think it good not to propound the picture before he had provided a trumpetter
to sound an alarm somewhere hard by; the trumpet therefore being heard, the
picture was likewise brought forth suddenly at the same instant. The sound of
the trumpet, says Aelian Li. II. var. hist. cap. ult.
, possessed the fantasies of the spectators with a more lively impression of a
man desperately sallying out to aid his Country. The most excellent Artificer
conceived very well that the fantasy of the beholders would fasten soonest
upon such a representation, if it were first moved by this dreadful noise to
exspect nothing else but an invasion of armed and desperately resolved men.
Philostratus commends unto us this way of considering pictures: for when he
goes about to teach a young lad how to look upon pictures, he wishes him to
take this course: Will you, good youth, says he Iconum lib. II, in Insulis.
, that we discourse about these Islands as out of a ship, even as if we did
sail round about them in the springtime, when Zephyrus refreshes the Sea,
gently stirring it with a cool blast of his own? To the end therefore that
you might willingly forget the shore, and that you might take all this to be
the sea; not a swelling and boisterous one; neither altogether quiet and calm;
but a navigable sea and filled with a good gale of wind; behold, we are
embarked already, etc.

Mark here, I pray, how Philostratus, a man exceeding well skilled in these
things, takes the spectator along with himself a ship board, wills him
forget the shore and view every one of the represented circumstances as out of
a ship; esteeming that his mind could not apprehend the several parts of the
picture rightly, unless with an imaginary presence it should first sail
about, conferring the fresh and newly conceived Images with the picture it
self. So may it likewise be inferred out of this, that they are likely to
judge best of the resemblance of many things, who have sometimes had the
opportunity to acquaint their eyes with the things themselves. It is pretty
indeed and much conducing to this purpose, what Athenaeus Lib. XIII,
Deipnosoph. in ipso statim initio.
relates; the comicall Poet Antiphanes reading one of his comedies to
Alexander, found that he took but small liking in the work; wherefore, when
Alexander showed by his slender attention that he did not greatly affect his
Poem, It is altogether needful, O King, said Antiphanes, that a man whom
these lines should take, be well acquainted with the things, having often made
his collation in the night-meetings of young roarers, sometimes giving and
sometimes receiving good store of blows for a wench.

9. This frequent and attentive viewing of pictures engenders in our mind an
undeceivable Facility of judging; the last brood of great experience, as
Dionys. Longinus De sublimi orat. 4.
calls it. The best mark of a graceful elegancie consists in a certain
kind of feeling we can give no account of, says Dionys. Halicarnassensis De
Demosthenis acumine ac vi.
, so does this same unexpressible feeling require great exercitation, and a
continual instruction familiarly given by word of mouth: neither can Carvers
and Painters, unless perchance they have gotten great experience by exercising
their sight a good while about the works of ancient Masters, discern them
easily: no more can they assuredly say, unless perchance they have received it
by fame, this is Polycletus, this is Phidias, this is Alcamenes his work: and
again, this is Polygnotus, this is Timanthes, this is Parrhasius his hand.
Seeing then that it is not for every man to understand the true property of
that accurate Grace, which we do find imprinted in every Artificers work,
as an infallible Character of his peculiar vein and spirit; it is likewise
requisite that we should study to attain to this skill of discerning every
one his manner of Art. Let twins be never so like one unto another, says
Tullie Lib. IV, Academ. quaest.
, the mother for all that discerns them by a mere consuetude or accustomance
of her eyes; and you shall in like manner be able to know the one from the
other, if you do but enure and accustom your eyes to it. Eggs have such a
near resemblance one with another, that their similitude is turned into a
proverb; yet do we hear it reported that many at Delos, before it was
ruined, feeding a multitude of hens for gain, were so well skilled in their
trade as to know every egg upon sight, distinctly telling what hen had laid
it. Even as Musicians therefore charge them that would be skilled in harmony,
to accustom their ears not so much as to go by the least division in the
tunes, and to seek no other more accurate mark of harmony; so must all they
that desire to understand wherein the Grace of these works does consist,
study to exercise their unexpressible feeling to this exactness with the
expense of much time, with a continual practice, and by the means of a secret
passion no body can give any account of, says Dionys. Halicarnassensis In
Lysia.
. As it is not enough to take a singular delight in musical songs, says
Boethius Li. I. Mus. cap. I.
, unless we do likewise learn the proportionable joining of many voices into
one; so cannot skillful men content themselves with a bare contemplation of
colors and figures, unless they do furthermore conceive their peculiar
properties.

10. As many then as by a studious and daily exercise have accustomed their
eyes to such a sure Facility in judging, use always to show their chiefest
skill therein, that they do most readily discern original pictures from the
other that are copied; finding a perfect and natural force of grace in the
originalls, whereas in the copies they can see nothing but an unperfect and
borrowed comeliness. Originals have in themselves a natural grace and vigor,
says Dionys. Halicarnassensis In Dinarc.
, but Copies, though they attain to the height of imitation, have always
something, which being studied, does not proceed out of nature: and
Rhetoricians do not only discern Rhetoricians by this precept, but painters
do alsi by this rule distinguish Apelles his works from their works that
imitate him. This is likewise the way for Statuaries, to find out Polycletus
his statues: and for Carvers to know Phidias his images. It is most wonderful,
how quickly those that have exercised their eyes, can know an original from a
copy; whereas others that are unexperienced in these things cannot perceive any
difference. A copy does always differ from the original, says Diog. Laert.
in Onesicrito. It may not be doubted, but truth has always the better of
imitation, says Tully Li. III. de Orat.
: An imitator does never come near the first author. This is the nature of
things: a similitude comes ever far short of that truth which is in the
things themselves, says Seneca the Rhetorician Li. I. Controv. in prooemio.
. Whatsoever is like unto another thing, says Quintilian Li, x. ca. 2.
, is nothing near so good as the thing it does imitate. What we take for a
pattern, contains in it self the nature and true force of the things
themselves; the imitation on the contrary is but counterfeit, and forced to
accommodate it self to another man's intent. Libanius therefore speaking of
those Artificers that do succesfully express ancient statues, does not stick
to affirm In Antio^.
, That the gods have bestowed something more upon them, than the nature of man
is capable of. Painters represent a fair and absolute face most commonly to
the worst, says the younger Pliny Li. v. ep. 10
. Those likewise that copy the most consummate pieces of excellent Masters, can
seldom do it so well, but that perpetually they fall away from the original.
For as it is hard to hit a similitude after the life, says the same Pliny
elsewhere Li. 5. ep. 28.
, so is the imitation of an imitation much more hard and difficult.

II. This facility of judging, as it teaches their accustomed eyes to
discern between originals and copies; so does it likewise enable them to see
the difference which is between ancient and modern works. Nothing commends
pictures so much, says Quintilian Li. viii, c. 3
, as that authority given them by age, which no art can imitate. All are not
of L. Mummius his mind, who was so ignorant in these businesses, that he made
no difference between old and new works. For when he at the taking of
Corinth, agreed with some men to bring a world of rare and ancient pictures and
statues into Italy; he foretold them that undertook the matter, That they
should take heed of losing any, which if they did, that they were then to
restore new ones in stead of the^. See Vell. Paterc. lib. II. hist. cap. 13.
But this was his grosnesse. As for the other more refined and elegant men of
that and the following ages, they knew well enough what difference there was
between old and new workmanship, and how much the pleasantness of great and
nimble wits is revived by these delightsome antiquities. They held them
therefore in a reverend admiration, even as men use to adore groves consecrated
for their antiquity, says Quintil. Li. x. cap. 1.
in which the great and ancient stumps do not so much draw our eyes with their
pleasant show, as with a religious horror that strikes the heart of the
beholders. Tully declares himself to have been of that mind. Antiquity is
in great estimation with me, says he De perfecto Orat.
, neither do I so much require what she wants, as I do commend what she
has; seeing I hold the things she has, far better than the things she
wants. And again in another place Lib. III. de Orat.
, It is no easy thing to tell the cause why we are soonest of all by a certain
kind of loathing and sacietie, abalienated from such things as do at the first
sight very much delight and vehemently stir our senses. How much more flour
shing are all things for their gayness and variety in new pictures than in old
ones? These things for all that, though we are at the first very much taken
with them, do never delight us long. Whereas on the contrary in old pictures,
we are most of all affected with their decaying horridness. Observe here in
the mean time, that other Authors, though Tully thinks it an hard matter,
allege a double reason of this respect we bear the ancient works. Dionys.
Halycarnassensis gives us one reason, when he maintains In Isaeo.
, That the ancient pictures in a wonderful simplicity of colors drew their
chiefest commendation from a more accurate and graceful design. The new
pictures on the contrary being but carelessly designed, stood most of all upon
the manifold mixture of their colors, and upon an affectation of light and
shadows. See Themistius also, Orat. de Amic. where he touches the very same
point. The other reason seems to flow out of the former: for as the first
reason prefers the ancient works before the new, in regard of their
gracefulnes, so does the second attribute unto the old works a certain kind
of majesty, yet so, that it was their simplicity made them majestical. Porph.
says Lib. II. de abstinentia.
, That the new images of the gods are admired for the dignity of the work, but
the ancient are reverenced for the simplicity of the work, as being more
suitable to the majesty of the gods. Pausanias likewise In Corinth.
speaking of Daedalus, says that his works were not very handsome to look on,
but that there was in them a certain kind of divine majesty which did become
them very much. Silius Italicus Sub finem lib. xiv.
does also note this peculiar property in the ancient images of gods, That they
kept as yet the godhead bestowed upon the^ by art. As many therefore as had used
their eyes to such sights, did easily discern the old works from the new: so
was there good reason they should labor to attain to this faculty of judging,
because the Impostors and Cheaters were wonderful busy in those times, and it
was an ordinary practice of many to cousen the unskilful buyers with a
counterfeit show of antiquity. See Phaedr. l. v. Fab. in prol. See Martial
likewise, lib. viii. Epigr. 6 and 34.

12. Seeing therefore that the said consuetude or accustomance of our eyes does
so much enable us, as that we can upon the first view readily discern
original pictures from Copies, and ancient works from modern; we might be
very well satisfied, esteeming the daily practice of a curious eye to be the
chiefest means whereby we do attain to such a facility of judging: but that
the king Theodericus propounds unto us another means, which being added to
the former exercise, is likely to quicken our judgment much more, and to endue
it with a most ready and unfallible facility of judging. Theodericus his words
are taken out of a Writ directed to the President of Rome, about the choosing of
a sufficient Surveyor or Architect: The reputation of the Roman fabric, says
he Apud Cass. Var. lib. vii. sorm. 15.
, ought to have an expert Architect: that this wonderful collection which is
within the walls might be succored by diligence, and that the modern face of
the work might be well contrived and ordered. For our largess does not fail
in this study, but that we resolve to renew ancient works, by supplying their
defects, and to attire new works with the glory of antiquity. These things
therefore do require a most skillful man, lest among so many most ingenious
ancient things, he himself seem like unto the metal they are made of, and
show himself incapable of what cunning Antiquity made palpable in them. Let
him therefore read the books of the Ancients, and take some leisure to improve
himself, lest he be found to know less than those in whose place he is
substituted.

It was a most worthy care this King took, to see the ornaments of the city
every where renewed, and yet is it more, that he would not neglect to give his
advice, how a skillful overseer of antiquities should fit himself better to
the charge he was to undergo. Let him read the Books of the Ancients, says
he, and draw further instruction out of them. It is right it should be so: for
as we showed in the first chapter of this our third Book, that no Artificer
may ever hope to attain to the perfection of these arts, unless he be
thoroughly instructed with all manner of arts and sciences; even so must we say
here the same of lovers of Art, that they must be filled with great variety of
learning. It may be very well, that an unlearned lover of art should apprehend
and discerhe the Artificers skill, out of his design, colors, and such like
things, delighting himself especially in these parts of picture: but much
further he cannot go; it belongs only to them that are learned indeed, to
judge moreover of the invention, to consider whether every figure has his due
place, and be inspired with such lively passions as the present occasion of
the represented history requires. Without this purifying of our wit,
enriching of our memory, enabling of our judgment, enlarging of our conceit,
which is commonly called by the name of learning, we shall never be able to
understand the drift of an historical invention aright, and it may be we shall
approve of many impertinencies committed against the nature of the Argument.
The Ancients besides all this, as we have showed before in the 6 Section of
this present Chapter, inform and direct our judgments in the true way of
judging; and which is more yet, there are scattered here and there in their
works such complete descriptions of beauty as may serve to work after and to
judge by. But of this point, which perchance may seem somewhat paradoxicall,
we have studied elsewhere to give sufficient proof.

13. What we have said already, may serve for an introduction into a settled way
of judging, and we would willingly end with this, if we had not something to
say about the by-workes, commonly called Parerga in the ancient Greek and
Latin Authors. Parerga are called such things, says Quintilian Lib. II. cap.
3.
, as are added to the work for to adorn it. Pliny does likewise express the
same: Protogenes, says he Lib. xxxv, cap. 10.
, when he painted at Athens in the porch of Minerva's Temple that famous ship
called Paralus, with another ship called Hemionis, he added also many other
little Galleys among the things which painters call Parerga. Galen has a more
large expression: Good workmen, says he Lib. XI, de usu partium corporis
humani.
, use to make some Parergon or by work for a document of their Art, upon the
bolts and shields: oftentimes also do they make upon the sword hilts and
drinking pots, some little images over and above the use of the work,
expressing Ivy branches, Cypress trees, tendrels of a Vine, and other such
like devices. Philostratus Iconum lib. I, in Piscatorib.
seems to call these additions, Sweet seasonings of picture. But because the
Artificers go over these works slightly and with a light hand, so is it that
we do likewise for the most part examine them more negligently. We consider
the by-works of workmen but slenderly, says Plutarch Cur Pythia nunc non
reddat oracula carmine.
, for they study only to be pleasant in many of them; neither do they always
avoid in them what is to small purpose and superfluous. If we do find in the
mean while, That the Artificers hit the true force and facility of grace
better in these sudden things than in the work it self, yet must we never be
so inconsiderate in our judgment, as to prefer the by-work before the work:
Protogenes his example may teach us, how much the indiscretion of such
spectators discourageth the Artificer. Among many excellent Donaries that did
adorn the city Rhodes, the picture of Jalysus was much renowned; a painted
Satyr also standing near a pillar, whereupon the picture of a Partridge was to
be seen. The picture of the partridge being newly hung there, drew the eyes of
all sorts of men so much, that the most excellent picture of Jalysus grew
contemptible, and no body did any more regard it. Protogenes therefore finding
himself much vexed, that the by-worke should be preferred before the work it
self, having asked leave of the Churchwardens, did put out the bird. See
Strabo, lib. XIV, Geograph. Such another company of unadvisedly and
impertinently judging Spectators made Zeuxis likewise cry out, These men
commend the mud of our Art. See Lucian in Zeuxide.

FINIS.

