TRVE DISCOVRSE OF THE DISCOVERY OF THE Plot of Monsieur du TERRAIL, and his
Confederates for the Surprising of Geneua.

AND OF THEIR APPREHENSION, CONFESSIONS, AND EXECVTIONS done in the same, The
19. of April. 1609.

LONDON Printed for R. Bonian and H. Walley, and are to be sold at the Sign of
the Spread-Eagle, right over against the great North-doore of S. Paul's. 1609.

A TRVE DISCOVRSE Of the Plot of Monsieur du TERRAIL, against Geneua, the 19.
of April, 1609.
IT is now about three years since, advice was given from some of good place,
that Monsier du Terrail being much discontented, that he was not seconded in
his undertakings in the Low Countries, whereby he foresaw that in the end all
would be lost, had resolved to serve the Duke of Sauoy, and also had openly
given out, that he had in his Forge a notable enterprise upon Geneua. In
pursuit of which, he was seen shortly after to come to Paris, with pretense of
reconciling himself to the Kings favor. But good advertisement was given,
that he was to come for Sauoy. These his dissignes were then interrupted by a
Murder, he committed in the Louure in presence of the King. Whereupon to fly
the great displeasure of the King, he soon turned head to the Archdukes, from
whence after some six Months stay, he undertook a Pilgrimage to our Lady of
Loretto, with one Bastide an Inginer, whom he took to him for Counsel and
aid of his executions: They went a foot, and in their return had private
conference with the D. of Sauoy. Notwithstanding, the Count Fuentes advised
this Terrail otherwise, giving him to understand that the Duke would embrace
his Service against Geneua, but it would be his overthrow. The Duke
communicated to him and his man his dissignes for Geneua, as shall followingly
appear by Letters, and Confessions; and from that time they rested in Sauoy,
making two Voyages to Turin for the same affair. They of Geneua had presently
great distrust, receiving aduertisements one in the neck of another, from all
parts, of a notable, and in a manner unavoidable enterprise against them,
carried by Monsieur du Terrail. All the Governors either of Provinces or
Places adjoining from the French King, gave diverse very pregnant intelligences,
but without any way discovering the means.

The Sauoyards, already sang the Triumph, causing to be inserted in an
Almanacke of one of their Astrologers, the certainty of the Act about the
Month of May (which was the time destined to the Execution) in the end of his
predictions. Which Almanacke Printed at Lions, was in exceeding request for
this particularitie. The French King also advertised the State of Geneua, that
they should do him a good service, if they could seize him, and gave them this
means, assuring them that he was about Geneua, or the Country of Berne, and
if they could dispacth him, the Act would be to him most acceptable.

While they were in this doubtful mist, God sent them a small light, was
greater then all, which since served them as a Keye to open to the depth of the
Plot, and to convince first the servant of Terrail, and afterward himself.
Terrail, having on a day plaide at Tennise at Chamberi, and retiring in his
heat to rub and refresh himself, went into a bed; where, while a servant of
the Tennise Court warmed him a shirt, there came into him Bastide, and some
other, well marked by this youth, and presented him a Paper, which was the Plot
of Geneua, and discourst softly among themselves, as of some matter of
importance: Insomuch as the fellow over hearing them, name some places of the
Fortress of Geneua, leant his ear with more attention; and gathered for
certain, that their discourse was about some Enterprise, they had against that
place; and heard that Terrail after long conference, made no difficulty save
of the means to raise sufficient Force to carry the affair. In which point
being satisfied by the assistants, he brake out alowde in these terms. They
are ours, they cannot escape us. Which words being well marked by the youth of
the Tennise Court, who had a Brother in the Garrison of Geneua, and whom he
was willing to save from this mischief, he went presently and discovered it to
a Townesman of Geneua, who was then in Chamberi about some business. This
Townsman made faithful report thereof to the Magistrate of Geneua, and the
brother of the youth.

After this time, they of Geneua used all deligence by spies, to know his
coming and going, and had him followed wheresoever he went. In the end they
had certain notice of his passing the Mountains some six or seven weeks
before, and that he was come back by the way of the Lake Leman, whereupon they
gave present advertisement to all the Bayliffes of the Country under the Lord
of Berne. With the particular notes, and marks of the person of the said
Terrail; praying them to have an eye on him, and possess themselves of his
person, in case he pass by their Territories: for which the Magistrates of
Berne being so assured of the practices of the Duke of Sauoy, against those of
Geneua their confederates and against themselves also, gave express
commandment. To this came a remarkable accident; a Deacon of Iuerdun, a Town
of the Bernoys near the frontire of the county of Burgoigne, being at Geneua
came to salute the chief Syndicke of the Town, and brought him Letters; He,
after other discourse, told him of the manifold advertisement they had, of the
enemies disseignes against Geneua, and the country of Berne, but especially the
Town of Iuerdun, a place of greatest importance, being the key of the whole
country, strong by situation, though ill fortified, and bounding utmost on
Burgoigne; He gave him also the marks of Terrail, of whom they had got a
Picture at Geneua, because he was to come in Person to take a view of the
Town. It happened certain days after, that Terrail returning from Turin passed
the Lake, and arrived in the Country of Berne, but not at the known and
ordinary port, went through the Country, and visiting the places of most
importance, never lodging in Towns or known places, but villages and peasants
houses til he came to Iuerdun: neither staide he there, but having some day
left, passed on further. Passing over the Bridge of the Town he met the
Bayliffe with others, whom he saluted, but they observed him not. Being past
the Bridge, making show of stay for some other cause, he turned back toward
Iuerdun, taking a diligent view of the Site, defenses, and state thereof,
which was noted by them that were yet upon the bridge, who thought he did it
only for the mark of his way in travel. But as he was gone a little further,
the foresaid Deacon (being in a Garden) espied him coming a far of: and
observing his countenance began to suspect it might be Terrail; and to assure
himself better, knowing that he was bald, made him a low congee to draw him to
the putting of his hat, which he did; and the Deacon being now confirmed, ran
presently to the Bayliffe, telling him what he thought.

All they which were by, having marked the countenance of Terrail, how he
returned, and took suruay of the place, wished the Bailife to send after him.
He immediately dispatched two, and gave them in charge to observe which way he
took. If he went from Burgoigne, they should return without farther
pursuit; If toward, they should follow him to his lodging, without making any
show to know him, but only to be confirmed in the marks of his person. There
happened also, (as is assured for truth) another notable act, sign or argument
of Gods providence. Terrail having past the village of Villeboeuf, which is not
above half a league from the way of Burgoigne, to lodge in the said county
that night, passing over a slough, his horse stuck, so that he was feign to
turn back, and go over a planke, upon which his horse stumbling, so that he
halted, he was feign to resolve of lodging that night in Villeboeuf. He had
no guide with him, that knew the Country, which was a great cause of his
surprise; For a Guide might easily have set him in the Country between Berne,
and Friburge, which in some places was not above two Harguebusse shot from him,
and there he had been in fafety, through the intermixture of their
jurisdiction. But at Friburg, he had found all favor, where his enterprises,
had made them houer for advantage against the Bernoys, upon the great
difference, which they have had long for their land possessed in common, and
which the Friburgers would divide to the detriment of those of the reformed
religion, which is only exercised in almost al those places. After his taking
he was very sorry, and more when he knew how easily he might have been saved by
this means. Being come to the foresaid Village of Villeboeuf, the two that
were sent from Iuerdun, having housed him carefully, one of them returned with
all speed to the Bayliffe, to give him the notice, who sent presently four
hors-men, co^ducted by the Captain of the Castle of Iuerdun, to force him
back to the Bayliffe, and bad them strengthen themselves with the force of the
Country. They at their arrival in the morning found Monsieur du Terrail
booted, and ready to take horse; to whom the Host, and other advertised of the
business, declared that he could not pass the Mountains, for two great Corpse
du guard, that would let no man go until he had given account of his Voyage
to the Bayliffe of Iuerdun. This was strengthened by the Horse that came that
morning, at which Bastide began to show a cursing dislike of the action,
Terrail disposed of himself very peaceably, to return to Iuerdun with these
five or six Horsemen, whom with his people he might easily have slain, or
made to quit him by flight, if he had foreseen his calamity. After his taking
he repented himself much, that he had not shown his great courage at this
instant. But God blinded him, neither since has been noted in him any spark
of valor, and dexterity, whereby he might have saved himself diverse times, as
shall appear in the sequel; Being returned to Iuerdun, and demanded by the
Bayliffe (a subtle and experienced man) what he was? He said he was a
Gentleman of Dauphine, and called Paul de Constans, and going to Lorraine to
follow a suit, which concerned him nearely, and therefore desired the Bayliffe
for present dispatch: which answers so slightly grounded, made the Bayliffe
more suspicious, so that he resolved to seize him till he were better
informed, and demanded his sword, which he rendered him willingly, and was
lodged in an Inn in Iuerdun, with a guard set upon him of four Men, day and
night. Among other causes of suspicion, being at Villeboeuf, and seeing that he
must return, having no means to escape, his people being taken by the
multitude, he called for a Candle, with which he burnt a long Letter writ of
all sides; This being seen and demanded what it was, he assured them that it
was a Letter writ to Madam de Criqui his Kinswoman, to intercede for him to the
King, and has ever since to his end maintained it, and that he burnt it, least
his name and quality should be known. The Bayliffe to assure himself, sent
presently to Geneua, to have some that knew Terrail. They immediately sent one
of the chief of the Town, and a Soldier borne in Geneua, who had served
under Terrail in the Low Countries, and had given diverse aduises of this
enterprise, which he had heard from Terrails own mouth and sundry of his
followers.

When these two arrived at Iuerdun, it was thought good, that the Soldier
should come in upon the sudden, where Terrail was at Supper; which he did,
and sat down rudely; making no show to see him, Terrail seeing him, was much
troubled and changed color, as if his heart failed him, fayning he was not
well, and required to have his bed warmed, and withdrew (being much out of
temper) with his ordinary Guard to his Chamber, whither he caused the Soldier
to be called, and entertained him with very courteous discourse, to enduce him
to confess, if he were not sent thither to discover him: which the Soldier
affirming, he began to talk strangely to him: That he knew not what they of
Geneua had to do with him? that he had had diverse aduertisements in Chamberi,
that they laid wait for him at Geneua, and that they would make use of this
soldier to discover him: that he would die a brave Knight as he was, and
innocent. That he had never had to do with them of Sauoy. Then he began to
practice with the soldier to help him to escape promising him 1000. crowns,
Bastide offered him presently 100. crowns down, which he refused. Terraill prayed
him to come, and visit him early in the morning: for he had some great thing
to tell him. In the mean time the Bailiffe advertised of the truth, and
finding it not good he should discourse any longer with the soldier, sent to
have him brought to the Castle with his servant, where they were severally
lodged, and well guarded. After they knew at Geneua of his taking, they
purposed to send to demand him of the Lords of Berne, judging that in their
hands, they should hardly draw the truth of the enterprise from him, and that
mighty intercessions, and other means might easily save him. They sent
therefore to Berne, one of the Syndicks of Geneua, who being first heard by the
Council of 25. at Berne, he showed them the great and just grounds, that they
of Geneua had to desire, to have Terrail in their hands, that they had proofs
and certainties of his practices, that the witnesses which they had at Geneua
could not without danger be sent over, that it was the common cause of both
the enleagued States, that the enterprises threatened an inseparable blow, that
those of Geneua in the like cases had deliuerd prisoners to the Seigniory of
Berne, that very lately the Kings Garrison had accorded a prisoner enterprising
the like action, and that it would be of great consequence to divert all
enterprisers, if they saw, they could not with safety come about Geneua, nor
the territories of the King, or their Lordships of Berne. In the end the lesser
Council of Berne, finding themselves much perplexed, assembled the great
Council of 200. and the same things being proposed to them, it was with great
clemency concluded by general assent, that Terrail should be given into the
hands of them of Geneua with his servant.

The Ambassador of the King, resident at Solurre, much approved this
resolution, fearing that he could not be enough assured in the hands of those
of Berne. The news of this grant being arrived at Geneua, they used the
extremest diligence and dexterity, to persuade the Brother of the servant of
the Tennise-court keeper of Chamberi above named, to go to Chamberi and win
his brother to come with fair promises, and pretexts, which he executed
faithfully and readily; so that within three days he was at Geneua, and served
infinitely to the Discovery. They also sudenly sent the Soldier which had
known Terrail to Monlori hard by Lions, where they knew there was a Soldier,
who had been sometimes, Terrail his Horse-keeper, and had heard the discourse
touching the Enterprise of Geneua, and had oftentimes told it Beleine. (So was
the name of the Soldier of Geneua.) But the Horse-keeper was not there, yet at
Lions the foresaid Baleine found a Soldier his Camerado, who assured him, that
at diverse times the said Horse-keeper had told him all his business, whereof
Baleine took an ample and express Copy by the hand of a public Notarie.
Monsieur du Terrail was delivered to the Syndicke of Geneua, and conducted by a
strong Guard of Iuerdun to Morges, a little Town situate upon the Lake Leman,
eight Leagues from Geneua, and there was put to the Guard of the Bailiffe of
Morges, till he should be sent for to Geneua by water, which stay of him was
made by the two hundred, till they received a public Act under the Seal of
Geneua, that this was done without consequence, or prejudice of their
jurisdiction, of their proper grace and courtesy to their confederates.

Terrail was carried alone from Iuerdum, his Seruitour was left there, for fear
they should Parlee, and practice together. By the way he entertained the
Syndicke with diverse desperate discourses; saying from time to time, what Death
will you put me to at Geneua? He showed that he was much afraid, they would
deliver him to the King; and for that had changd his Name and fashion; and that
his fear was the King having him would keep him in the Bastile. That if he
were far from him, he could make his peace to his great advantage and
liberty, but now he must stand at the devotion of the King: Yet since, he has
affirmed, that his greatest desire was, he might not fall into the hands of
those of Geneua but might be sent to the King, hoping by his great Alliance
easily to make his peace. And since his coming hither has used greater
cunning, giving out that he dissuaded the Duke of Sauoy in the Enterprise of
Geneua, but with so frivolous reasons that we easily knew, they were Discourses
built but to deceive. He lulled the Bayliffe of Morges so asleep with fair
words and promises, that they with Signeur D'esdiguieres sent to intercede for
him to Berne, had free passage thorough Morges; and the Bailiffe of Morges
refused to yield him to them, which should next Morning have carried him by
water to Geneua, and gave Terrail good means to save himself, if God had not
left him destitute of his great courage and spirit. He had there also a very
slender Guard, liberty to walk about all the Castle, means of Conference with
whom he would, and to write to his friends.

He got the favor of the people there, by his good behavior, justification,
and bounty: So that if but twenty resolute men had presented themselves, he
might have been rescued, and the easier, in respect the Passage over, was but
three small French Leagues; and the other Bank was wholly the Dukes. Nay, if he
had had advertisement but to come out of the Castle, he had been safe by them
of Morges, they were so much at his devotion.

They of Geneua sent presently to Berne to complain, and re-enforce their
request to have him, which was confirmed with great indignation, and
threatenings against the Bailiffe of Morges. The intercession of Monsier
D'esdiguieres, was very faint, and conditional, as that if he had not
enterprised any thing against the King, or the Lords of Berne, or Geneua: which
made those of Berne the less harkening. The Bailiffe of Morges before the
answer to those of Geneua, received peremptory command to deliver Terrail
presently, which he was constrained to do. Since, the Bailiffe was severely
cited by a day to appear in person at Berne; and it is held, that he is put
already from his charge, and shall be from his honors, there being many
presumptions, and some confessions of Terrail, that he was promised ten
thousand Crowns, if he so wrought, that he might not be carried to Geneua, or
at least that his man might not come there: which the foresaid Bailiffe had
promised him, hoping by the means of his great credit, and kindred to make it
good. The Papists Cantons and the kindred of Terrail traveled earnestly at
Berne to save him. Some of them arrived too late. The Lords of Berne have
carried themselves very affectionately and zealously, in this business, moved
thereto chiefly by the braues of those of Friburge, who with the wind of this
enterprise had blown up their valors, but since are become slack and supple.
Terrail was carried by water in a Frigate, armed, and by the way, one of the
Seigniors of the city which accompanied him, made him very gracious, and
honorable offer; that if he would declare what might appertain to the present
assurance of their city, he would promise him in the name of the Seigniorie,
pardon, liberty, courteous usage, and intercession for him to the King. But he
still denied all, though much troubled, and perplexed; saying, that he was no
man to be tortured, that they ought not to offer him the rack; that he should
then speak as well what was not; as what was. Being arrived at Geneua, the
fourteenth of April, about midnight, they lodgd him in the Town house well
guarded. The next morning being sent for to the Council, they again bespake
him very honorably, and opened unto him, the power which they had to save him,
and recover him to France; that he should quit them of the pains of producing
such things, as they had in their hands to convince him, and should be aiding
to himself; promising him all courteous entertainment, freedom, and mediation
to the King. This was repeated more then six times. But still he persisted to
deny with great execrations, renouncing his part in Paradise, and in such
manner, etc. So that in the end, it was told him, since he would not be good
to himself, there was no more grace for him: and after that, made him answer
as a Criminal, speaking to him rough, and harshly, which much amated him.
Being confronted with the soldier La Baleine, he denied all even to the least
things, and where al appearance made against him. Three days after his
arrival, His man was brought to Geneua, and presently led to the prison:
whether Terrail was already removed; In the morning the 15. of April, Bastide
was shown to the young fellow of the Tennis Court of Chamberi, from whom came
the surest intelligence: who marking with good view his countenance, pronounced
assuredly, that this was he that presented the foresaid paper to Terrail: and
had held with him the discourse above mentioned: The young man being asked apart
what apparel Bastide had then on, told them, and Bastide confessed it to be
true, but denied the fact of the paper, or any such communication, as also did
Terrail. In the end, they perceiving the young man constant to what he had said;
it was resolved, that Bastide should be put to the torture, which was done. He
bare two great ierkes of the strappado, at the third he confessed all. This
resolution of putting Bastide to the torture, was also founded upon this
reason. A Citizen of Geneua having by chance seen Bastide in the prison yard,
affirmed that he had supped one night with the said Bastide in a village hard
by, and that in the morning the host of the place told him, that this Bastide
had drawn several cards and plots of Fortification, before his departure;
whereby he was known by the host for an Enginer: of which being then asked,
he confessed it, and yet afterward in prison denied all stiffely. But now
having confessed all, he was confronted with Terrail, who began to discover it.
But Bastide perseuered in his affirmation, and Terrail was presented to the
torture, where, with tears in his eyes, he confessed the whole fact
voluntarily, and received no touch. His confessions concerned Geneua, Berne,
the French King, and the States of the Low Country; but those concerning Berne
and Geneua, were only made public: The King and the States were presently
advertised of that concerned them. First, the said Bastide confessed that he
was an Enginer, and had long served the Archduke; since, he had given himself
to Terrail, to execute his undertaking. He had bin bred a Scholar, a brave
fellow of his person, very subtle, and experienced in matter of fortification,
and a cunning viewer of their weaknesses. He returned from his pilgrimage
about four or five months since, with his master. Passing by Turin, the Duke
of Sauoy had conference with them both about the town of Geneua, to the
surprise whereof they offered him their service, and for the following of this
design resolved to visit, and take view of the gates, the guardes, the water
port, and whole state of the town: whereupon Bastide undertook the going into
the town, and having viewed it all; reported the whole Plot of the Town, what
was reformed in the fortification since the last Escalada: Following which,
Terrails old Plot was altered; nor could Terrail and Bastide agree on the
means of the Enterprise.

Terrail inclining to the surprise of some port by Petard, or otherwise.
Bastide urged again, that it was a matter of infinite hazard, for the great
number of defenses which are at the Gates, and the diligence which they use,
and after some contest, the devise of Bastide, was approved to take the way of
the water port, which was not so well Guarded, and which being possessed by a
competent number, they might easily come up to the heart of the Town, without
danger, and the Entry well executed, Bastide made no difficulty in the
carrying of the enterprise, being an easy thing to Sease on the water port, by
reason of the nearenesse, and he did advise to cast themselves into certain
narrow Lanes vnchayned and covered over, which hereafter the Town has
purposed to close up for prevention of the like.

Terrail having heard all, yielded himself to this advise; and parted with
Bastide, to pass himself over, to the other side of the Lake above at Euian,
and staid there eight days; informing himself particularly of all the water
men, which used to Geneua in great numbers, about the disposition, the Guides,
and defenses of the water port, their searching of Boats, and other things
pertaining to the Navigations of the Lake, and learned many defaults in the
Guard, and to be more assured sent Bastide to Morges to the end, that taking
passage in one of the Barques of Geneua, that on certain days go thither to
Market, he might without suspicion at their return observe the whole state of
the water port, and the landing place: which he so readily, and ably executed,
that no man suspected him. Such a like spy was taken about two years ago, who
had grossly took a view of the chains; and being skared, and taken faltering
in his answers, confessed (by Torture) that he was sent to view the place,
without knowing any other thing belonging to the enterprise, or so much as the
man that sent him: for which he was taken to be one of Terrails party, and was
hanged: since they have re-enforced the port, with a rank of double chains,
fifty paces from the first, but this would not serve to warrant against an
enterprise like that of Sluice.

Terrail then, and Bastide, who returned to him by Land, having a new, viewed
the water port by which he past, assured themselves of the certainty and
facility of the business, and took upon them, that they two would be the
chief and leaders in the execution. The Project was this, Geneua has on the
North side the Lake Leman which stretches it self in length at least fifty
French Leagues; on the West side the Country of Berne; on the East side that of
Sauoy; In the height of which there are great Mountains, where grows great
store of Wood, which the watermen of Geneua usually bring home for fuel to
their Town, in great Flat Boats, and chiefly intend this work about the
Month of May, in great troops, the Wood being then dry which was felled the
Autumn before. The design of Terrail was to Sease four or five of these
great Boats, and to lodge covertly under the wood piled for the nonce, in each
Boat, a hundred, or two hundred of those men, which might come in without any
suspicion, the counterfeit watermen, being clothed in the habit of ours: As
for the search should be made at their entry, they cared not for it, being
determined to leap out all at once, and kill. For the Muster of those troops
it should be in the Valleys of those Mountains, removed from the commerce of
the people of Geneua, and at the appointed time charge those Boats, with the
rising and favor of the Moon, which uses to shine certain days of that
Month. Terrail was appointed to be in the first Boat, after the first onset
was given, other troops should be ready of Knights and Gentlemen, which they
might easily raise, under the pretext of the Marriage of Mounsieur Denemours,
which was to be celebrated at Aneci in Sauoy, six Leagues from Geneua, and
though the deferring and stop of this Marriage might cause some difficulty,
yet they had such good incountry and opportunity elsewhere, that they held the
Action forinfallible. The easiness was this, that they might imbarque secretly
having the wind favorable to carry them in a quarter of the time, that was
required by Land, the search was used to be made very negligently, and within
the Town they had nothing to care for, the said search being made a good while
after the Boats were arrived, five hundred men or more brought suddenly into
the Town, might easily give work to all the people, if they were possessed but
of a Canon at a Gate, and the water port, by which the Landforces might enter
in gross and a flote. It was also designed in a season, when the Town was
unfurnished of men by reason of the Hay harvest, and other business of the
field, and in a time of the day very fitting, to wit, when they were all at
Dinner, and the Town very solitary. They have also confessed since their
condemnation, that their voyage through the Country of Berne, was to Spy the
Country, to pursue their victory after their surprise of Geneua.

Terrail went into the Low-Counrries to take his leave of the Archduke, and
bring away the rest of his goods, which he had there, and draw along with him a
number of the best executioners, and watermen that he could get.

Terrail and Bastide agreed, especially in their confessions, whereby it
appeared that the chief ground of their enterprise proceeded from them;
against which they have since given very good preuentions for our safty
hereafter, and also Terrail drew, on a paper with his own hand, a devise to
warrant any Gates against a Petard.

Terrail requested that they would keep him alive between four Walls, and
that they would not cast away the Soul of Bastide by an extraordinary death.
Bastide disposed himself to death with an incredible magnanimity, having very
Christianly quitted all superstition, and lively embracing whatsoever was
propounded to him of the pure Doctrine of the Gospel. Terrail was condemned to
be beheaded, which was executed the ninth of April, Bastide to be hanged,
which was done on the Friday following being the 21. both executions were done
within the City, in the place of Molard. Terrail dyed very stoutly, without
changing any whit his color or countenance, and without any gesture unworthy
his life past; he desired that he might have had his hands free: but the
custom and fear of his courage denied it, and gained him great pity. He
showed before his execution great piety, little mingled with superstition, the
apprehension of which things he put off, by the holy exhortations the
Ministers made him, which he received with a peaceable and gentle Spirit,
thanking God, who had given him time at his death to be converted to him, and
means to obtain pardon for his faults; in cogitation of which he spent many
tears, sighs, and prayers, dispising the rest, as death, the shame of his
punishment, and the world, while they proposed to him comfort with all gravity,
honor and comiseration possible, his tears made the standers by weep, and
forget all sinister desire of revenge, He made his will, and bequeathed twenty
Crowns to the poor of Geneua. The day before his execution they received
Letters from his mother adrest to him, in which she comforted him, and assured
him of the means they made for him in the Court of France, speaking still of
his innocence. Bastide edified more by his death, yet was exceeding sorry,
that Torture had made him Terrails accuser, of whose death he knew and wished
he had been rather torn to pieces by four Horses. There was no intercession
made for Terrail in Geneua, but by D'esdiguieres, who was allied to him by his
wife deceased, he sent his Secretary Mounsieur Tonard, who used all means
possible to have changed the Sentence of death into perpetual imprisonment, but
many urgent reasons would not permit it, which they labored to make the said
Mounsieur du Tonard, and the Lord D'esdiguieres understand by ample and
honorable Letters. We understood that the Mother of Terrail was coming,
accompanied with diverse of the Nobility of Dauphine to mediate the same; But
Mounsieur du Tonard meeting them at Remilli, told them he was already
dispatched, whereupon they returned, sending only to entreat his body, which
was in like manner denied for great reasons being already buried in the
Bullwarke, where the heads of those were interred that were slain at the
Escalada. He might have made use of the grace they presented him in the
beginning, but he though that they could not convince him, relying on the
promises that the Bayliffe of Morges made him, that his man should not be
delivered into their hands, as indeed he was staid at the instance of that
Bayliffe, till they made a second voyage for him. After they had proceeded
against him with that exact severity, he had no more means to save his life,
or bend them with importunity.

Solemn thanksgiving was rendered for this deliverance throughout all the
Churches, the Sunday following being the 23. of April. The Sauoyardes are much
confounded; Some of Dauphyne, skouring about Geneua, have used great threats;
but it is hoped, that when the King shall declare his will, it will stifle all
these braues. There is good provision had, against all future means of this
enterprise, keeping full Guardes upon the first, and second chains; of them
that search all the Boats, which from hence forth shall come in single, and
half an hour one after the other, and the wood so piled, as one may go in,
and see all that is in the boat. In sum, it is hoped that this Mine is
utterly blown up. Geneua has recovered great courage; and got no less
reputation with the king, the Estates, and all the Churches of France, having
made a notable essay of the ready, and entire affection of their Confederates
the Lords of Berne.

FINIS.

