A PREPARATION TO SVFFER FOR the GOSPEL of JESUS CHRIST.

OR, A most Christian Exercise full of Comfort and consolation for these
present times.

Written in French by the Learned, and zealous, PETER DV MOVLIN, Professor of
Divinity, in the University of Sedan.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Robert Mylbourne, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the great South door of Paul's. 1623.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, TRVLY NOBLE, AND MOST EXCELLENT LORDS. ^ODOWICK, Duke
of RICHEMOND, and of LENOX, etc. ^AMES, Lord Marquis of HAMLETON, etc. ^ILLIAM,
Earl of PEMBROOKE, etc. ^ENRIE, Earl of SOVTHAMTON, etc. ^OBERT, Earl of
LEICESTER, etc. ^OHN, Earl of HOLDERNESSE, etc. ^AMES, Earl of CARLISLE, etc.
^r OLIVER St. JOHN, Viscount Grandison. ^VDLEY Lord NORTH, Baron of Catelage.
^RTHVR Lord CHICHESTER, Ba: Belfast. ^eligious Peers of ENGLAND Mirror of
Honor and Virtue, Noble Patrons, and Paternes of good Endeauours, True
Pillars, and vpholders of Christ's true Doctrine, and the comfort of the Church
of God. BRAHAM DARCIE heartily wishes to their Illustrious Persons all
Jnternall, External, and Eternal Happiness and Prosperity in the holy
TRINITY.
ILLUSTRIOUS LORD
IF in this vicious age it a rare thing to see an E^ample of Virtue, that your
Noble Persons m^ needs be much more ra^ seeing it comprehende^ with great
Excellency and Perfection all t^ Virtues in one, which the corruption of the
present age renders most remarkable; b^ the Eminency of your High Callings,
a^ the Nobility of your Illustrious Discen^ makes it more admirable. For if an
inund^tion of vices, (the dangerous contagions Courts) where many seducing
objects of evils ^re often presented rather to Great, then In^eriour Persons,
have not been able to de^raue or viciate the unspotted Sincerity (...) your
Noble and Constant hearts. This is (...) Example almost without Example:
ap^auded of those that know your Names, more ^dmired of those that know your
Persons; ^a, Commended and Extolled even by your ^ery Enemies. Amongst your
many Rare ^ertues, PIETY, (which is and ought to ^ee the chiefest, as that
which disswadeth us ^om all worldly and transitory Pleasures and ^ffectations,
makes us approach near to ^OD, to be partakers of that incompre^ensible Joy,
Comfort, and everlasting Hap^nesse, allotted only to Christ's Elect) shines ^ith
an excellent splendour through your whole Noble Conuersations. GOD, who is the
only Giver, and true Rewarder of Virtue has so adorned and enlightened you,
with the Clear and Radiant Beams of his Gospel that no waves of Idolatrous
temptations sha^ be able to shake the Foundation of your tru^ grounded Faith;
built, not upon the Sand o^ humane Tradition, and Invention, that the least
wind remooues; but on the firm Rock of Divine Perseverance, and Constancy
which no superstitious storm can ouerwhelme^ That holy Providence which keeps
you sti^ pure and immaculate, has blessed and preserved you from time to time,
from all perill^ and dangers, and has endued you with hi^ heavenly Favors and
Graces, which are evident demonstrations of greater Blessings to come
hereafter, Making the people of GOD hope, you are thus preserved, to be true
friends of his Church, and the terror of her Enemies: Over which you will be
tryumphant, CHRIST making your enterprises pro^perous, and your Noble designs
victorious: ^or which I am ever ready to send up my zea^ous Prayers to GOD for
all happy suc^esse. In testimony whereof, I humbly tender and prostrate to
your Honors this Excel^ent and healthful Preparation, Dedicated ^ikewise to
the most Noble, Sincere, and Reli^ious Princes, and Lords of FRANCE, True and
Zealous Warriors for CHRIST'S cause.

Your Graces and Honors most humbly Devoted. ABRAHAM DARCIE.

To the most Illustrious, H. and B. of Roan, Princes of Leon. FRED. Prince of
Sedan. H. of Trimouille, Prince of Talmont. N. Duke of Seuilly. AMORI. Marquis
of La Moussay Mon. Le Vidame de Chartres. N. Marq. of La Force. ST. Marq. of
Duras. CL. Earl of Montgomery. LE. E. of La Suze. GASP. E. of Chastillion.
Most Illustrious Lords,
IN these tottering and uncertain times, when the love and respect of the
world, and the terror of persecutions, and tribulations, makes many look back,
that have laid fast hold on the Plough of true Religion. I thought it most
expedient to salute you with this Treatise of a secure and safe Preparation
against the assaults of malicious hearts, and attempting hands, that by the
heroical virtues of Christian patience, and constancy, you may be able to
resist whatsoever impious force or violence, which would feign make a breach in
your Noble, Religious, and Zealous hearts. This I have done, not out of any
doubt or fear of your firm and settled resolutions; but only to give you to
understand how far your Illustrious persons are interressed in the daily and
continual prayers of the whole Church, for your happy and victorious success;
and that whenever you vouchsafe but to read this divine Discourse, your
Lordships may be put in mind of the zealous and affectionate prayers of Gods
people, who having made my unworthy self their general mouth, and voice, I
do not a little rejoice of the fit opportunity I have herein, to manifest unto
your Lordships mine own particular humble love and affection, which being
grounded upon the many noble and apparent virtues of your Lordships, and
innumerable favors and benefits imparted to me without desert, desires yet in
so small and slender a testimony as this, to make known the large extent of my
wishes and desires, that God may accumulate upon your Lordships in so holy and
just a cause, all auspicious and wished success, as he, whom all your
Lordships jointly, and each of you in particular, will ever rest

Your Lordships most bounden and devoted, P. DV MOVLIN.

A PREPARATION to Sufferings, for the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST. A Christian
Exercise full of comfort and consolation, for these present Times.
SVrely he spoke not ill, that said, how Christian Exercise consisted in two
things; To do well, and to suffer much: For God will be glorified, not only
by our actions, but also by our Sufferings; by which we manifest our virtue and
zeal, as much, or more then by our Actions. And so the holy Scriptures
persuade us, the rather to acknowledge the importance of these duties, in that
they so often exhort us both to the one, and to the other. Our Savior Christ
also was not content to give unto his Disciples necessary Instructions for
well living, but further he premonifies and forewarnes them with a careful
Advertisement, against the diverse assaults and combats they were to suffer,
through the hatred of the world, encouraging them to the fast-hold of
Constancy, under the assured hope of eternal salvation, the which he does
expressly by these words here; You shall be hated of all men for my Names
sake; but he that holds out to the end, the same shall be saved.

In these words, he does not apply himself only to the Apostles, but in their
persons to all the faithful, the which he notifies, by declaring, that the
subject of this hatred, shall be the profession of his Name: as we are in
like manner advertised in other places; That by many afflictions we must
attain to the kingdom of heaven, Acts 14. and that all those which will in
piety, according to Jesus Christ, must suffer persecution, 2. Tim. 3. the
which the faithful have so clearly proved to be true by experience, that
we need not co^firm it by examples. Christ says not simply, You shall be
exposed, but which is more, hated: for there were many sects of Philosophers
which contradicted, but not hated them. And in all Faculties and Sciences, we
see Doctors dispute one against another with much passion and zeal, both in
speech and writing, and yet without violence: but as for the faithful, Christ
says unto them, You shall be hated.

And as hatred is the source and spring of the wickedest affections, and
actions (of envy, choler, detraction, injury, exprobation, persecution and
cruelty) so in affirming that we shall be hated, it intimates unto us, that
the combats and assaults which shall be urged upon us by the world, are of no
small difficulty. For what pernicious design is there, which hatred does not
nurse? what outrage does not that enter into? what is it fed and sustained
withal, but with ruin, blood, and slaughter? Her throat is an open sepulcher,
Romans 3. She uses her tongue fraudulently: under her lips there is the venom
of the Aspe, her mouth is full of cursing and bitterness, her feet are swift
to shed blood, destruction and misery is in her ways, she knows not the way
of peace.

And questionless, to the end we might not suppose, how this hatred of the
world against us, is but slight and triuiall, Jesus Christ describes it unto
us, to be so cruel and implacable, that getting the masterie of the Senses,
and changing reason into rage, it will violate all humanity, all respects and
bands of nature, and with more horrible and tragical barbarism, embrew her
hands in the blood of her nearest Allies: For the brother shall deliver up his
brother to death, the father the child; the children shall rise up against
their fathers and mothers, and cause them to be put to death: and in respect of
others, what will she not attempt? She is so furious, that she will destroy
Provinces, put Cities to the sack, and whole Estates to ashes, under a passion
to set therein on a flaming fire, the Church of God: she will make the fields
and rivers look red with the blood of the poor and faithful Saints, and
fill the world with cruel inflictions, with prodigious massacres, with
horrible murders of an infinite number of innocent persons, without any
detection of just crime, without regard to sex, age, or condition: she will
omit no fraud, malice, perfidiousnesse, nor perjury; she will hold for a
maxim of conscience, to make conscience of nothing, esteem it for an article
of faith, to keep no faith at all; under pretext of Religion, to manifest
nothing but irreligion; she peruerts not only the will, but the understanding,
and makes frantic and mad. For, as when a great fire is kindled, it sends up
on high a gross thick vapor: In like manner when this hatred is inflamed in
the heart, it sends up into the intellector understanding, an obscure and
duskish fume, which does obfuscate reason; and taking away the true use thereof,
makes a man degenerate into a savage and cruel beast.

And though we see not this hatred always to break forth in bloody effects,
it is, because God, (who by the invisible chains of his omnipotent power,
hampers and shackles the malignant) depresseth them. So that when the enemies
of the Church permit her to live in some quiet and repose, and do not openly
persecute her, it grows not through the defect of will, but of power. This
hatred is then no more extinguished, then the heat of the coal under ashes,
or the venom of a Serpent, congealed and mortified by frigiditie. She is
always living in the world; and when she openly discouers not her self, she
sets and couers, causing matters to hatch upon all occasions, whereof these
present seasons yields us a lively proof and testimony.

And which moreover may seem more strange, Christ says not unto us, you shall
be hated of some special men, but of all; that is to say, of all such as do
not receive the verity and purity of the Gospel; this signifying, that we
should not have a part, but the whole world exasperated together against us.
And though it be divided into different Affections, Factions, and Religions,
and that one Nation is an enemy to another; and that there are likewise some,
which magnify themselves in the Title of Christians, yet they will ever
appear in this point to hate us; they will unite to dissipate us, and
assemble, to work our extirpation. So the Pharisees, and Sadduces accorded to
oppose themselves jointly to Jesus Christ; Herod and Pilate, who were enemies,
grew reconciled to crucify him. And even so the Kings of the earth, (though in
their Estates they have contrary designs) yet will they take the same counsel,
the same resolution, and the same correspondencie, to favor Antichrist, and to
persecute the children of God. So as the accord of the world, is nothing but a
conspiracy against the Church, and peace amongst the wicked, nothing but war
against God and his Saints.

The occasion of this hatred against the faithful, is the mere profession of
the Name of Christ, although oftentimes the pretext be otherwise. For they
which live out of this holy profession, are so far from being hated of the
world, that on the contrary, they are beloved and cherished, the world
permitting them to live in all licentiousness and excess: For if the
faithful would imitate them in the error of belief, and perverseness of
life, the world would change the hatred they bear toward them, to all favor
and love,

It is a very strange thing, that this name of Christ, so sweet and amiable,
should be so odious: this Name more odoriferous, then spread perfumes; this
Name, which is not only a good odor in the nostrills of God, in himself, but
also for us; making all acceptable to God which we present unto him, our
Prayers or Affections, our works, and our persons. But as we say, that the
Tigers enter into rage, upon the sent of any Aromaticke druggs; so in like
manner the world becomes stark mad, upon the very odor of the Name of Christ.
By this Name, Diseases have been cured, the deaf have heard, the blind have
seen, the dead men have been raised up. By this Name, wicked spirits have been
expelled, Hell has trembled thereat, Death was destroyed, God appeased,
Paradise laid open, and all Believers saved. This Name is venerable among the
Angels, adored of the Blessed, exalted above any other name that can be
nominated in this world, or in the world to come. To this Name every knee must
bow, both of those above in heaven, of those on the earth, and of those under
the earth; and every tongue shall confess, that JESUS is the Lord, sitting in
glory with God the Father. This is the glorious name, by which, and for which
all things were, all creatures subsist, have their being, their life, their
operations, and their good: and yet nevertheless it is hated of men, after the
custom of many barbarous Nations, who at the rising of the Sun, shoot their
Arrows against it with a thousand maledictions, because they do but feel the
ardour and heat of it at high noone day; not considering, that without the
benefit of his beams and virtue they could not live. And even so the world
shoot the darts of their hatred and madness against Christ, who is the Son
of Righteousness, when they apprehend but the ardour of persecution, or else
supposing that Christ brings with him some Inconvenience; whereas indeed he is
the true sun of all happiness, and that without his light and special grace,
there is nothing but darkness, misery, the shadows of death, and death
eternal.

Persons empoysoned with this hatred against the name of Christ, are of two
sorts: some be those which make no profession at all of him, but openly detest
him, as Paynims, Jews, Turks, and miscreants. The other have some knowledge
of him; but yet they are erroneous Christians, mingling the word of God with
false Doctrines, Superstitions, Inventions, and humane Traditions, such as be
the Heretics, and adherents to Antichrist. And though this latter sort, and
their believers, avouch not publikly any hatred to the name of Christ; yet they
show it by plain and evident effects: as Saul before his conversion,
persecuted the Church of God, though his intention and meaning was no ways
such: And which is much to be lamented, deluded, and abused Christians, show
oftentimes more rancorous and implacable hatred against the true faithful, then
those people themselves, which hold the Gospel in abomination, and suppose they
bear a great zeal to Jesus Christ, when they persecute him in his members;
and that they offer an acceptable sacrifi^e unto God, when they put his
children to death.

If it be wonderful therefore, that this name of Christ, is hated of men, is it
not likewise a very strange thing, that true Christians should be hated one of
another? For though they have the most principal rights in the city of this
world, yet are they entreated as strangers: they love all the world, and all
the world hates them; they seek after peace, and every one makes war against
them; they are detested of their enemies, and yet they pray for them. They are
the honestest men of all others, and yet are persecuted, then the most wicked
sort; they live in the flesh, and yet not according to the flesh; they converse
on earth, and are citizens of heaven; they submit themselves to Laws in their
obedience, and by their holy life, surmount and excel them; others curse them,
and they bless; they are punished, and tormented as malefactors, and men would
not have them confess and acknowledge who they are: their good names are
slandered, and depraved, and yet we are enforced to commend their integrity:
mortal enmity is put in practice against them, and no just reason can be
rendered thereof: men are ignorant of their Profession, and notwithstanding
condemn it. In a word, look what the soul is to the body, the same are the
faithful to the world; the soul is dispersed over all the members of the
body, and the faithful over the several parts of the earth: the soul
dwells in the body, yet is not of the body: and so the faithful dwell in the
world, yet are not of the world: the soul loves the body, though the body
war and contest with it; and the faithful love all the world, though all the
world be opposite to them: the soul is enclosed within the body, as within a
jail or prison, and yet she preserues the body; and the faithful are
imprisoned, and shut up in this world, as within a prison, and yet they
preserve and support the world, by reason that for their sakes, God forbeares
to destroy it; and when the number of the faithful is accomplished, then the
world shall end and finish. The soul is incomparably more excellent then the
body, and the faithful of infinite more value, then the world: The soul is of
heaven, and the body of the earth; so are all the faithful heavenly, whereas
the body is wholly earthly, and terrestrial: The immortal soul dwells as a
stranger within our mortal tabernacle; and so the faithful have but a
travailing life in this corruptible world, attending most blessed and happy
immortality: The soul being deprived of bodily delights, is made the better
and more perfect: and so the faithful rudely entreated by the world, do profit
the more in the exercise of virtue.

From whence proceeds it then, that they are so hated of the world? why from
this that they are not of the world: for if they were of the world, the world
would love them, because every thing loves it is like. But in that they are
distinguished, and separated from the world, by the profession of the Gospel,
which a doctrine so sweet, amiable, and healthful, comprehending, and exposing
the promises of the grace of God, and of life eternal, propounding such
sacred, and admirable mysteries, such perfect, and divine Instructions, how
comes it to be thus hated? First, in that the world is ignorant of it: for
those that truly know it, cannot but love, and embrace it, and so of violent
presecutors, they many times become ardent and zealous Professors. The reason
of this ignorance is, because it is altogether spiritual and celestial, and
the world earthly and carnal, which cannot believe, nor apprehend it, by
reason of the sublimitie and excellency thereof, no more then the beasts can be
capable of the discourse of Reason. To which purpose, the Apostle affirms in
the first to the Corinthians, the second chapter: We propound wisdom to the
perfect, a wisdom no ways of this world, neither of the princes of this
world, which come to nothing: but we propound the wisdom of God, which
consists in mystery; that is to say, hidden, which God had ordained before all
ages for our glory, which none of the Princes of this world have known; for
had they known it, they would never have crucified the Lord of Glory. But as
it is written, these be things which the eye never saw, the ear heard, nor
that never has entered into the heart of man; but God has revealed them unto
us by his Spirit: for the spirit sounds all things, yea, even the profoundest
matters of God. For who is he amongst men, that knows the very things of man,
but the spirit of man which is in him. No man in like manner knows the things
of God, but the Spirit of God. Now we have received, not the spirit of this
world, but the Spirit which is of God, to the end that we might know the things
that are of God: for these things to it seem follies, and it cannot conceive
them, because they must be discerned spiritually, but the spiritual man
discernes all things. And in deed man being extremely vain in all his
cogitations, in his opinions erroneous, and in his understanding and will clean
perverted in matters of Religion; he takes darkness for light, falsehood for
truth, and evil for good; no otherwise, but even like to those, whose taste is
depraved, or stomach alienated, that delight more in gross and bad, then in
good and wholesome meats; or those who having some bitterness lying on their
tongue, find the very honey it self to be bitter in their mouths.

Moreover, the Gospel manifesting unto man his misery, his sin, his
infirmity, and his impotencie, he puffed up with a conceit, and presumption of
himself, abhors such a Doctrine.

And which further grieves the same also, this condemns sensual, and carnal
affections, together with worldly reason, commanding a renunciation of ones
self, and of the world, and man is loath to leave the love of these things.

It summons also to the endurance of persecution, and diverse things that are
odious to the flesh: so that affecting to live at his ease, he expels and
drives away such a Gospel, which disturbes his worldly repose, and the
enioyance of his delights. Now, though the Lord has absolute power over all
creatures, yet did he not abolish this hatred of the world against the
faithful, from whence he works many benefits for our good: for it is like a
bar or rail, which separates us from the world, and the vices thereof. For
if the world did not hate us, but rather loved us, what would come of it, but
an adherence and confirmation of our selves to it, and so to be infected with
the contagion thereof? whereas hating us, we are thereby constrained to
withdraw our hearts, and to alter our affections from it, that we may be
preserved from the corruptions thereof, and aspire to a better estate, then
that of the world. While Jacob beheld the affable visage of Laban, he took
delight in it: but when Laban changed his Countenance, then he spoke of
returning into his Country of Canaan. While the children of Israel were not
hated of the Egyptians, they dwelt willingly in Egypt: but after they came to
be hated, and ill entreated, they had a desire to depart, to possess the land
of Promise. While the world smiles upon us, we return reciprocal contentment
to it: but when it sets countenance against us, and makes us feel the sensible
effects of her hatred, then we call to mind, and desire our celestial
Canaan, whereof God has promised to us a full possession.

Furthermore, God makes use of the worlds hatred, as of a whip wherewith to
scourge us, when we fly out too far, and abandon our selves to the
corruptions of the world. For then God loses the reins to this hatred, and
permits them the execution of their malicious designs, as in this troublesome
time we have had experience, through the wonderful excess of our sins and
transgressions.

Besides, this hatred is a proper means whereby to exercise our virtue and
constancy in the trial of our Faith, Patience, Charity, Perseverance, and
Benignity. It is also a proper subject to us of spiritual victory; for where
can any victory be without combat, any combat without opposition, any
opposition without an adversary, or any adversary without hatred? The hatred of
the world must erect unto us spiritual trophies and tryumphs: and the purple
of our glory must be of a more lustrous and resplendant die, by the effusion of
our own blood.

For if the Church were not hated of the world, what wonder were it, though it
subsisted, and persisted in the world, surmounting and trampling it under? and
how should we come to acknowledge the miraculous aid and succor of God, the
depth of his providence, power, and protection? Should we ascribe that to our
selves, which proceeds merely from him? and take that to our own happiness,
which is derived immediately from his grace? But when God works a subsiste^ce
to his church in the very mids of all the worlds hatred, it is no less to be
wondered at, then when it was preserved in the midst of Egypt and Babylon, among
the most truculent and bloody adversaries she had: and as when she was retired
within the arc, she was secured amidst the waves, winds, tempests, and
storms, within a floting and frail residence. And if it be an admirable
thing, that this Universe should be maintained, being environed with such a
contrariety of elements, surely it yields no less cause of astonishment, that
God still preserues his Church in the midst of hatred, contradictions and
worldly assaults.

Yea, the words of our Savior enjoin us to this observation, that we should
be so far from flattering the world, or seeking the approbation thereof in
any point that touches and concerns religion, that clean contrary we ought to
have it in continual jealousy and suspicion. And besides this, it is not
proper to the church to be applauded or exalted of the world, but rather to be
molested and persecuted; and the peculiar property of the children of the
world, as the Devil their father, is to hate; whereas the property of the
children of God is to love; the whole law of God being comprehended in this one
word, which is, To love God, and our Neighbor. From whence you may clearly
discern how far remote those of the Roman church are from Christianity,
being stuffed with passion in all their censures, and with hatred in their
designs against us, reputing themselves the more zealous Catholics, in that
they hate us, and their charities likewise toward us, being extremely cruel
and hard hearted: for out of the love they bear us, they put us to death, they
persecute and burn us, out of a love to our salvation: whereas we on the
contrary, seek peace and concord with them, so far as the duties of religion,
or ciuility in conversation may permit. But if Christ, though he were glorious
and omnipotent, suffered himself to be hated of the world, and of the enemies to
his Gospel, let us learn to admire, and imitate his patience and clemency.
And when the world crowned him with thorns, can we look to be crowned with
flowers? If they crucified him, will they glorify us? we affect conformity
with him in his beatitude, shall we disdain to follow him in his persecutions?
And whereas the name of Christ is so holy, his cause so just, and our
profession so authentic, what greater honor can be conferred upon us, then to
suffer for so worthy a cause? Like unto the Apostles, we must rejoice that we
are found worthy to suffer for the name of Christ, and that with S. Paul, we
may vaunt and glory in our tribulations.

For besides the honor we receive in suffering for the name of Christ, the
reward we expect therefrom is incomparable: For he that perseuers to the end,
shall be saved. It is not said, he that hates, that returns like for like,
that seeks revenge, but he that endures: which is as much as to say, that
perseuers, that suffers, that undergoes; for if there were no further question,
but of just repelling of an injury, many wicked men might have as great a part
in salvation, as the honestest men that are. Moreover, Christ will have his
Gospel auerred, not only by the voice, but even by the crosses and
afflictions of the faithful: for then only we manifest our firm belief, when
the torments of the world cannot shake our credulity, nor the profession
thereof which we make. What more infallible testimony can we yield to the word
of Christ, then by our indurances? what more authenticke subscription, then our
blood? what more sure seal the^ our death? what more solemn satisfaction,
then the sacrifice of our bodies? In this warfare, he performs most of a man,
that vtters the least part of a man; and thereunto we are summoned, rather to
suffer, then to act or execute.

The very words of the text are herein more remarkable, in that they properly
infer the sustaining of a heavy burden, or else some assault or hot combat:
all which implies, how such endurances for the name of Christ, are both hard
and heavy. They are intimated to be no less in the word of the cross, which
was a marvelous painful torment; and by the burning furnace, wherein we are
tried and purified, as gold and silver is in the fire: so that if we mean to
make profession of the name of Christ, we must be prepared and resolved not
only for light and easy temptations, but for those most extreme and terrible.

And because Jesus Christ says, He that perseuers, or endures, he gives us
herein to understand, how it is not enough for us to sustain one kind of
affliction; but generally and without exception, al those wherewith it pleases
God to examine and try us: for some would willingly pass over a little contempt
and scorn, but not an open ignomie: others, the loss of goods, but not of
their lives; but without reservation or exception of any trialls, we must
persevere and suffer to the end.

This word also signifies to suffer with courage and magnimity: for many
endure, which can not be said to suffer, being vanquished and overcome, yea,
even overwhelmed with the burden, being overcome with the violence of the
temptation, or of the contrary shocke, and force. He therefore is properly said
to sustain or suffer, that supports and endures, without abatement of his
courage. And therefore patience is here recommended unto us, one of the most
necessary virtues for a Christian, for it helps to preserve all the others,
which without this would fail, and prove defective. It is patience that
bridleth our affections, appeaseth our passions, moderates our violences,
swaies over our temptations, reduces errant reason into the right way,
establishes the soul in her proper seat and residence, and confirms her in
her offices. There is not a greater misery in the world, then not to have
patience in time of misery: without patience the least inconveniences are
insupportable, and with patience, those most extreme made light and easy. And
as the pearl in dirt, causes it is beauty to appear; so a patient man in
adversity, makes his virtue to shine and appear.

But in that excellent beginnings are altogether unprofitable with out a final
prosecution, Christ says not simply, He that endures, but he adds, even to the
end. For to what purpose is it to have begun a work well, and then to give it
over? to have run well, and then lie down in the midst of the race? to have
fought at first valiantly, and cowardly at last to yield? to have passed the
danger of the waves, of the tempests, of gulfes, of rocks, and of Pirates, if
we perish hard by our Port, and sink within the channel? wherefore we must add
perseverance unto patience, which is the end and the accomplishment, both of
patience, and all other virtues. For what comes of patience without
perseverance, but a shameful revolt? and what honor shall the other virtues
have, except perseverance crown them, which conducting them to their last
period, makes them victorious and triumphant: wherefore let us sustain, even
to the end.

This end is chiefly that of afflictions, and not such an end as the sense or
feeling of our flesh, and our own proper affections could desire; but such as
it pleases God to give us. For it is not lawful for us to shake off our
cross, nor to shrink from under the burden which God lays on us, but
resolved, undergoing the same, we must attend, while God discharge us thereof.

Secondly, by this end is understood the period of our temporal life; for it is
not enough to have sustained for a long time, we must support even to the
hour of death, which is the coronation of our life. And certainly, in that the
end of this life is short, and the number of our days cut off; would it not be
a wonderful cowardice, if we should not persevere, and endure to the end?

But how can we do this, when our infirmities are so great, and our indurances
so difficult? In the first place this must be done by a serious renunciation of
our selves, and of all other earthly things, which will be of no power nor force
to shake us, if we contemn them, and be absolutely dead to the world. Next of
al, by a constant faith in God and in his word, which assures us, that his
spirit will ease in his behalf our debilities, and his power will take place
in our infirmities, and he will not suffer us to be tempted above our
strength, but he will renew our force, and gives us a good and happy issue of
our temptations. Finally, by zealous and continual prayers unto God, of who^
they shall be heard, as he in his wisdom shall find it most expedient for his
glory, and our salvation: for prayer does fortify faith, it supports hope,
inflames charity, confirms patience, increases al other virtues; it expels
sadness, banisheth fear, comforts afflictions, eases vexations, mollifies
torments, renews forces, makes the courage invincible, it surmounts
temptations, gives victory to al opposite assaults, and remedy to al
inconveniences. Why should we then doubt, or what need we fear, relying upon
such puissant ayds, and being further encouraged by so fair a recompense, as
that of salvation. For, whosoever perseuers to the end, shall be saved. This
promise is not like to those which men make one to another, or captains to
soldiers, which oftentimes prove frustrat without any effect, or by the death
of soldiers, and captains, or else for want of power and good will. None of
these things can make void or frustrat the promises of Christ, to them that
persevere and endure to the end: not death in our own persons; for it leads us
to life; not death in the person of Christ, for it is immortal; not want of
power, for he is almighty; nor of good affection, for he has suffered death
for us, testifying therein an infinite love toward us. In a word we must not
call in question the verity of his word; for that is infallible.

Furthermore, this promise is not of weak or slight importance; for it
intimates unto us a deliverance from an extreme misery, which is, from
eternal death and damnation; to the horror whereof we are naturally subject, and
from which it has pleased the Lord to redeem us, out of his wonderful goodness
and mercy: for if men rejoice so much for escaping some eminent or great peril,
or for being preserved a little while from death, which nevertheless is
inevitable, what a joy should possess us for our liberty, and escape from
eternal death and perdition, and to be preserved from the same for ever,
considring the small number of those that shall be saved, in respect of them
that shall perish.

Whereas unto this benefit, there is also annexed an assured possession of
eternal Beatitude, the which Christ also inferrs, saying, Whosoever perseuers
to the end, shall be saved. If he promised a life of many hundreds or thousands
of years in this world, men would make great esteem of it, especially when it
were exempted from all molestations, sadness, grief, infirmities, and all
encombrances; but accompanied with joy, contentment, health, power, and
security of estate and condition. But much more also, were it magnificent and
glorious, for the inioyance of great wealth and many dominions of a flourishing
kingdom, and famous empire, replenished with whatsoever the eye, the ear, or
the heart could wish. And Jesus Christ promises much more unto us the^ all
this, saying, He that continues to the end, shall be saved. For what can be
comparable to this salvation, which in all circumstances, is most absolute and
perfect? the place thereof, is heaven; the continuance thereof, is eternal; the
constancy thereof, is subject to no mutation; the possession secure and certain,
the nature of its benefits are incorruptible, incomprehensible, and divine;
their number, infinite; their degrees, eminent and supreme; their measure,
immeasurable; and their purity, without taint of evil or corruption: for they
are all absolutely perfect, holy, and blessed of God; the peace thereof is
without molestation, the glory thereof, is the glory of the Lord God almighty.
How different then is this salvation, from a frail and transitory life, which
is nothing but a shadow, devoured and swallowed up in miseries, and mortality?
A life, which humors, griefs, and inflammations consume and extenuat, which the
air makes sick, which meats surcharge, which abstinence weakneth, which
sorrows waste, which passions disturb, which cares do wrinkle, which poverty
abaseth, which old age bends and makes crooked, which torments ouerwhelm; and
which a lamentable death does finish; a life assailed with a deluge of evils,
wherein there is no firm station, where we can scarcely see one poor branch of
the flourishing Olive, whereupon the fearful Dove may for a moment fasten the
foot. A life affording the same residence allotted to unclean beasts, and the
same light, which the very worms of the earth enjoy. How far, I say, more
excellent is the state of salvation, then this present momentary life where no
necessities press, no annoyances disturb, no apprehensions molest, no
miseries approach or draw near unto, but replenished with happiness and
beatitude; where life is without death, joy without sadness, youth without old
age, peace without trouble, light without darkness, abundance without defect,
good without evil, security without danger, and felicity without end.

This salvation is so much the more to be desired, in that it co^pleatly
comprehends the happy estate of our whole persons; that is to say, both of ^^e
soul and body, the which Christ signifies in saying, He that continues to the
end shall be saved. For otherwise, how can we be said to be saved, if we might
also be said to be lost? and Christ coming to save that which was lost; and
absolute and entire man being lost, must he not likewise in his entire and
absolute estate be saved? For what a defect were this, when Christ having
assumed our entire person, he should have redeemed but the moity thereof? If he
were but our half Savior, and that by him we were but saved in part? And who
does not see, that the Justice of God requires the presentation of whole man;
and as in the one or other part he has participated of good or evil, he has
his share in the retribution, both in the one, and other part?

But how should this come to pass, that this very body dissolved to ashes,
atoms, and elements, should return to it is former frame and composition? O
man, he that reuiueth the dead, and that calls things which are not, as if
they were, cannot he give life after death, and repeal it from ruin and
destruction? If he created it when it was not, can he not repair it when it
has once bin? especially when creation is a greater work then reparation, and
to make, more then to restore. If he has made of earth flesh, and of flesh,
earth; can he not of earth, reduce it to be flesh again? for to him whose will
was to create, can any thing be difficult or impossible? though this work
exceed beyond measure the order and power of Nature, yet do not think that it
surmou^ts the power of the Author of nature, who by a virtue and power
supernatural, gave being to Nature; and who can when he pleases, exceed the
bounds of nature, through the infinity of his power, which is comprehended
within no bonds nor limits. And if thou do but contemplate Nature her self,
and the several parts of this world, high and low, may thou not discern
examples of the great power of God, which may be unto thee as Images and
figures of thy restoration? For, but lift up thy eyes to heaven, may thou
not see the Sun, who after he has run his course, and is spent after the manner
of a death in the west (no otherwise then as if it were extinguished) he
returns again to appear, and seems raised up in the East, with the
resplendencie of his former luster, the orname^t of his beams, and the
brightness of his light? and by his alternatiue absence and presence, do thou
not see the day dye in the night, being buried in all parts in darkness, and
then again to renew and revive, with clarity, beauty, grace, luster, and
ornament, causing his death to die, which is the night, and opening its
sepulcher, which is the darkness, living till night by a continual and
indifatigable vicissitude, succeeds it, and brings it change, giving an end to
it, as before it received light from the same. And do ye not behold the
innumerable company of lights celestial relightned, which before seemed quite
put out, the twinkling of Stars revived, the light of the Planets renewed, and
the wanes and increases of the Moon reestablished? Moreover, by the remotion
or approach of the Sun, who does not perceive al seasons to return with their
qualities, forces, and virtues? Winter with his colds, humidities, and raines;
the Spring with its beauty, sweetness, and flowers; Summer with its heat,
siccitie, and drought? who likewise discern not the leafeles trees to reassume
their verdure and ornament, dead plants to resprout, withered herbs to
reflorish, and corrupt seeds to revive: for that which thou sowest cannot
quicken before it first die. Cor. 15
A most wonderful thing! that Nature should destroy to preserve; take away, to
restore; ruinate, to maintain; corrupt, to revive; and consume, to augment; and
that things by her defeated, should be restored, made more beautiful and
abundant: the which thou may evidently see in the wheat, which being laid in
the parts of the earth, as in sepulchers or graves, after it has putrified, it
coms up again much more rich and plentiful then before. And to say truth, the
condition of all things in this Universe, is renewed by their loss, and suffer a
falling away for their further reparation: so that all these ordinary
reuolutions, these mutable and rolling orders of things, are nothing but
testimonies, and intimations unto us, and as it were a delineation, and draught
of the Resurrection of the dead; the wonder whereof God has rather expressed in
his works, then declared by his Ministers, by his power, rather then by his
word; and by Nature, rather then by Prophecy; that so thou might be made
more fit for the doctrine of Faith, being instructed by the experience of this
world, and so thereupon they should resolve and firmly believe, that he will
likewise reestablish thy person* for as thou see, he reestablisheth all
things.

Wherefore then, should we fear, either the destruction, or endurances of this
body, seeing it must be restored, yea into a glorious estate, conformable to
the body of Jesus Christ? why should we fear the hatred of the world, which
cannot exceed the respects of this world? nor be any obstacle to the
accomplishment of our salvation? Let us persevere unto the end: for he that
suffers to the end, shall be saved. So as there is no temptation that can
shake our constancy, neither the cruelties of oppression, nor the perplexities
of pain and anguish, nor the rigor of persecution, nor the hardness of famine,
neither the ignominy of nakedness, or the horror of peril, neither the fury of
the sword, nor the miseries of life, neither the violence of death, nor the
force of all the creatures joined in one.

But by reason that in this general hatred of all men against the Church, we
perceive the wrath of God kindled against us, because of the extremity of our
sins, let us acknowledge them in their horror, with a detestation, and
renunciation of them: let us lament with a profound contrition, in sighs, and
tears, imploring Gods mercy, to the end that his indignation ceasing, he may
stay the power and fury of such as hate us. And let us be comforted, in that if
we are hated of the world, we are beloved of God; and that as we cannot love
God and the world together, so both God and the world cannot jointly love us.

If we ought to endure for the name of Christ, it is freely given us, not only
to believe in him, but also to suffer for him: though men make war upon us, yet
can they not take from us the peace of God, nor the peace of our consciences.
If we be deprived of our earthly commodities, yet shall we not be exempted from
the treasures of heaven: we may take joyfully the being stripped of our goods,
and choose rather to be afflicted with the people of God, then to enjoy for a
time, the delights of sin, esteeming opprobries for Christ, greater riches,
the^ the treasures of Egypt, in respect of their renumeration. If we suffer any
loss of the body, we shall find gain of the soul, and that is a good return,
when we lose for to gain: for in these losses, the spirit profits and
purchases incomparably more then the flesh loses. If we be put to trial by
banishment, why all the earth is the Lords, and though we should be dispearsed
into the most savage Deserts, yet should we not be separated from God, nor lose
the privilege of being Citizens in heaven. If most violent adversities assail
us, the indurances of the time present are not comparable to the glory to come.
Our light afflictions, which do but even pass over head, produce in us an
eternal joy of a glory superexcellent. For if in this transitory world we see a
number of men expose themselves to the extremest hazards and perils, be it out
of a thirst after glory, desire of riches, be it for ambitions, quarrels, or
the wars of their Princes, should we refuse to suffer for Gods cause, such
things as others suffer for mere worldly respects? If we be urged to
imprisonment, the Spirit of God will enter in with us, to give us consolation,
and to reside with us, and in us. And though the prison were like the devils
house, yet by the spirit of our God, and by the efficacy of our prayers, we may
be able to assault and subdue him in his own house: we shall put him to flight,
to the greatest profundities of his depths, as an Adder, or Snake, who being
pursued, betakes himself to his hole and concauity, keeps himself in, folds
himself up in his twists, hides himself, and dares not appear: we shall send
him from the prison to his hell, from the jail to his place of torments. And
it need not be hard for us, to be sequestered from the things of this world,
seeing we are but strangers to the world, and in that the world is worse then a
prison; for the prison has no such darkness in it, as that of the world, which
blindes men's understandings; neither are there any such strong bonds, as those
of the world, which do so hamper the soul; nor so evil sents as the odors of
the world, which are stinking affections, and infected corruptions, that defile
both heaven and earth. It holds not so many wicked ones within the precincts of
it, as the world, which comprehends them all, neither expects such terrible
Judgment as the world, which shall hear the sentence of eternal condemnation.
To conclude, if the prison has darkness, our selves be light in God; if
bonds, we are free in the Lord; if odious stinches, we are a good odor to God,
through Jesus Christ; if we are found guilty, we are justified before God; if
the Judge be there ready to give judgment, we shall one day judge as
assistants with Christ, and Judges of all the world in like manner. For if a
Christian out of prison renounceth the world, how much being in prison, ought
he to do the like? And what matters it, what he is in this world, seeing he
is out of the world? And though his be enclosed within a prison, for are not all
things open and at liberty to the Spirit? who will not forbear to break through
roofes, or vaults, when in spirit he may take his free carriere, glide up to
heaven, and make his happy sallies even into Paradise? That even as they that
descend into a deep and dark well, they see there at all times the stars of
heaven; so likewise the faithful, in the deepest obscurity of the dungeon,
fail not with the eyes of faith, to behold the glory of the heavens, and the
radiant light of Gods countenance, which brings replenishment of joy: and then
questionles, may a man be said to have lost his earthly condition, when the
spirit is ravished up into heaven: for the body then hardly feels any misery,
when its soul is with God, and conuerseth with the blessed. But if in being
released out of prison, we must endure death, or martyrdom, Christ will be
benefit and gain, unto us both in life and death. 2. Tim. 2. If we die with
him, we shall also live with him; and happy is that death which brings with it
life, and opens unto us the gate of immortality. And further, it will be much
glory for us, to set together and cyment the Church of God, with our blood and
ashes. And if this death be outwardly odious and ignominious, we do but in it
contemn the dishonor of the world, we being for the name of Christ,
annihilated in worldly honor, calling to mind, how Christ was first crowned
with thorns, before with glory; he did first climb the cross before he
mounted up into heaven; and nailed thereunto between two thieves, before he sat
at the right hand of God his Father. If this death be painful, our soul shall
be victorious over all bodily torments, by the divine virtue of our Lord, who
out of his dear love transforming us into himself, will make us incompatible,
even as he has done many other zealous and constant Martyrs, which have
suffered in their bodies, as in strange and different flesh, who, without
astonishment, beheld their bodies, all on a light fire, their entrails hanging
down, their members burnt off, and falling down piece by piece, and their
^iuely flesh brought to dust and ashes. By their heavenly notes, they have
drowned the wind and rumor of the ^^ames; and by the and our of their zeal,
vanquished that of the burning fire, and in the midst of fire-hot coals, as if
it had bin upon a bed of flowers, they have joyfully exalted their happy and
blessed souls. Whereunto may further be added, that the more cruel and
torm^^ting our kind of death is, so much more excellent and eminent w^^ ^e
constan^y of our

(...)
