A LAMENTABLE discourse of the fall of Hughe Sureau (commonly called Du Rosier)
from the truth: and his shameful offense to the church together with
confession of his fault, penitent submissio^ and remorse. Serving for a
notable example to all the world of the fraieltie and untowardness of man, and
of the great and unmeasurable mercy of God to his Chosen.

Imprinted at London for Lucas Harison, and George Bishop. 1573.

THE TRANSLATOVR TO THE READER.
AS of all the blessings that we receue here in earth there is none that does
so lively express Gods inward favor toward man as conversion from sin, so
truly there is none so dreadful a sign of his heavy revenge as falling from
faith. Mark but the history of the people of Israel and you shall find that
there falling from the law of God, as it was the greatest sin which they
committed, so was it the greatest plague that ever they had. Their sickness and
pestilence was nothing, their dearth and famine was nothing, the loss that
they endured by war was nothing, their captivity and death was nothing in
comparison of reuolting from God, who had chosen them for his people. This was
a plague of al plagues. Likewise if we consider of Gods benefits toward them,
neither their deliverance out of the land of Egypt, neither their safe conduct
into the land of promise, neither their well governed common wealth, nor all
the victories obtained against their enemies may ons be compared with that,
that it pleased him to turn their hearts from sin and Idolatry to the true
honoring of his name. This was a blessing of al blessings. So that in these two
points chiefly, is set forth unto us both Gods justice and mercy. His mercy
in co^uerting us from sin, his justice in leaving us to our selves. And
surely there are perilous examples of renouncing and denying a professed
treuth. The tragical histories of Frauncis Speyra and Judge Hales are able to
make a christian conscience to tremble. No doubt it is commonly seen (and it
is a just plague) that who so with his mouth belieth his conscience, the same
with his hand destroys him self. Here I deny not but that God has his
secret working beyond the reason and capacity of man, as by the pitiful
discourse of this book may easily appear. This man's fall was great, his fact
was detestable, his mouth blasphemous, his heart traiterous and injurious to the
blud of Christ: yet notwithstanding all this, did not God suffer him to sincke
down into the pit of dispeire, but did raise him up ageine by the operation
of his holy spirit. Undoubtedly this is a rare exaumple, like unto the which
many have not ben seen in the church of God. Therefore I would wish all such as
are called to the testimony of the truth, to beware how grounding hereuppon,
they do tempt god in hope of the like favor. Let that hell and torment of
conscience which they do here plainly see in this man terrify the^ likewise
from denying the truth

He was sometime one of the chief ministers of the reformed church in Orleance,
and because I knew him my self and have hard him preach there sundry times, I
was the more willing at my friends request to put his book into english,
hoping that all Christen men will rejoice as much at his penitent conversion,
as they have cause to be grieved at his revolt. I doubt not but there are that
will scoff at this matter and say that he can not be of a sound religion
that has turned his coat so often. Of what religion then are these our men,
that have turned always with the time? Let al turners with time learn of this
man to return a right. It may be that some seek to show now a more stedfastnes
in error then in deed they have* to gain thereby the credit of constancy. But
alas, it can not be called constancy to abide in evil, to continue in Idolatry,
to stick fast in ignorance. This is obstinacy. They shall never be accused of
wavering that come out of Babel to dwell in Sion. If this poor man had abidden
still in the way of perdition renouncing Christ's verity, and betraying of
Christians to Romish wolves, oh, what a heavy damnation had he procured to him
self: but God in his rich mercy has better provided for this lost sheep. Let
all those therefore which are touched in heart with the care of gods truth,
and do bewail the ruinous decays of Jerusalem judge rightle hereof. To
conclude we may all see in this book the lively pattern of a true remorse,
here may we see how Saul does become Paul. Why should not the tears and
mourning of Peter argue and declare the conversion of Peter? remember what a
worthi father of our time (when he came to the Fire to be brent) did to his
hand that had subscribed to vntrewth. The like may we hope of this man,
Cranmer
that when time shall serve, he will make both hand and tongue, body and life,
yea and all that he has to feel the smart of that his deloyaulty. Therefore
(good Reader) be not hasty in condemning others, but pray to God to strengthen
thy self that thou may not fall, and if thou do fall that thou may rise
again, to the glory of GOD, the edifying of his Church, and thine own
salvation.

AMEN.
Hugh Suriaus fall and penitent Submission.
THe church of Christ has had this custom of all antiquity, ye the acts of
Martyrs have been faithfully set down in writing, and namely their death, their
confession of faith, their disputing and refutation of the doctrine of the
adversaries. The reading of such histories did serve to confirm the faithful
in the faith, and to stir them up to the imitacion of the co^stancy and
virtue of those personages. As we read ye same to have been observed by S. Luke
in the narration of S. Stephens death: and of all the other persecutions done
sens against the church, the self same diligence has been followed even till
our time: wherein our Lord has had worthy members a great nu^bre that have for
his name sake suffered death, and namely in our country of, France, first by
form and order of justice, and by sentence of the Judge to the ^^ath of fire
the most cruel and horrible yt may be devised, then afterward by murders
committed without controlement, and last of al by ye unnatural slaughters
lately executed through out ye whole Realm, whereof the trwe and faithful
histories shall in time to come bear witness, signifying to posterity how God
having at the first but cropped as it were certain first fruts of his field,
thought good now in these later days to make a great and plentiful harvest of
his chosen. In like case if there have been any treason, revolt, or notable
breach of faith committed by any one during the time of those persecutions, men
have not ben slack in noting such accidences, to serve for an admonition to
the faithful to consider with them selves and to tremble at the dreadful
judgments of God, especially when those that commit such faults be public
persons, and in some respect notable. The fall of whom as it is a proof of a
horrible vengeance of God through the which they have been abandoned, so is it a
very violent temptacion to shake the weak consciences and therewithal to draw
a great multitude to the same perdition. And no doubt the rage of the cruel
enemies does not give so dangerous a wou^d to ye flock of Christ, as does such
treachery and infidelity. Moreover if there have been any one of the church,
that has by gods grace prevented the hands of the murderers that he has not
fallen into them, or if there have been any apprehended and yet escaped thens
without having either suffered or committed any evil, the favor of god in that
his deliverance ought not to be buried in silence, but to be published to
assure others to put their confidence in him that can draw fourth his own out
of all perils, as much as he knows to be expedient for him so to do. Of
these three sorts, there are at this day many examples in the extreme
calamity of the present persecution full of cruelty and falsehood, whereof in
time the truth shall be known and published. But as for me, I having ben of
that miserable and pestilent sect thorough my fall and offenciue denial,
wherein I lay wallowing a long time: now after that God has given me grace to
come again to my right wits, I will my self be the historiographer of the
detestable crime that I have committed, describing it according to the truth
and as it happened: then afterward noting the circumstances, I will assaye to
make confession of the enormitie and grieuousnes thereof as much as in me shall
be possible. Finally when ye shall set before your eyes this writing (Dearly
beloved brethren and readers of this pitiful discourse) I beseech you that
through christian compassion ye do help me to feel to the quick such an
offense, and, in as much as good may be drawn from evil, that ye do take
instruction by my example.

I was then abiding in France in a small congregation not passing a days
journey from Paris, where being aduertysed of the slaughter within the said
city. I took deliberation four days after to save my self out of the
Realm. And casting with my self the difficulties and dangers that there should
be to pass, I determined after a sort to counterfeit ye papist, by the badge
that was worn in the hatts, by gesture and countenance as much as I should see
my self ^^ged thereunto by necessity. The morrow after being come to the next
town, The white Cr^sse.
I was demanded who I was, wherewith finding my self wonderfully amassed, I had
not the memory to speak that which before I had premeditated, but making an
answer without head or foot, they had me in suspicion: and the Judge
examyning me by oath what I was, forthwith without ought disguising I freely
confessed the whole. By ye means whereof being clapped in prison, I took this
resolution to suffer any kind of death ye they should lay upon me, and I felt
some peace and rest in my conscience if I did defend the truth of the Gospel
whereof I was most assured. Although I had even than my head busyed with
certain cogitacions touching the personal succession of the Romish church,
whereof I then disputed against some that were there present, and the truth had
always the victory against falsehod. But this boldness of mine was but a puff
that did not co^tinew long. For being all alone I began to discourse with my
self touching the grieuousnes of the persecution then befallen, and I found
the same to be far beyond all the former. For I always took the calamities
of the time past to be but visitations and rods wherwithall God did purge his
church, and had ever judged them to be assured marks of ye children of God.
But because that in this last there did appear as it were a ruin and utter
destruction of the whole without any appearance or hope of restablishment, I
began to value it at none other rate then a plain testimony of gods wrath and
indignation, as if he had by this means declared, that he did detest and
condemn ye profession and exercise of our Religion, for that he had so often
turned again to stryke us, yea and finally so to overthrow us, as if he were
willing wholly to destroy and root out this congregation, and favor that of
Rome. By this means I began to give strength to this temptation of Satan, and
the flesh desyring to save it self from the present danger got the upper hand.
In so much that I did straight way conclude with my self to acknowledge and
auow the church of Rome for the true church, wherinto I did desire to be
receued. The which I did declare the same day to the Judge, imagening that
without delay I should be set at liberty, which being obtained I would withdraw
my self with all speed out of the Realm, to keep me solitary, and to apply
my self to do what I could to pass away ye rest of my time. In the same
prison there were others of ye Religion, unto whom I gave counsel to do the
like, alleging to them that the Romish church was the ancient church whens we
were departed, and whereunto we ought to return, with many other devises tending
to the same end. Who consenting to my cursed allurements and suggestions made
the same protestations to the Judge, and not long after they were delivered,
yet not content with yt which I had done and said, to show that I did it with
heart and good will, I wrote to the chief of my congregation, and farther, to
them of mine own famyly, exhorting them to betake them selves to popery, and
to be assistant at the service there, as I for my part minded to be. And to
the end that this Metamorphosis or change happened in my person, should not
astonish them, I declared that I had reasons to move me thereunto, whereof some I
did set down in writing, as well in the said letters, as in a certain scrole
that I presented to the Judge. Now thought I verily that betwixt that and the
morrow after, I should be let out of prison to go where I would, but it
happened quite otherwise. For the Judge having given intelligence how I was
taken, and of the great and manifest signs of my conversion and return to the
catholic church (as they term it) kept me until he hard news from the Court,
whens he received letters of the King, who gave him commandment to send me to
him to be an instrument and to serve to persuade ye King of Nauarra and the
prince of Conde to renounce the religion wherein they had been brought up, with
a protestation to follow the faith and doctrine of Rome, and to acknowledge the
Pope for head. This news being brought, I was very sorry when I saw my self
frustrate of mine intent, knowing that I must now play a part on the greatest
stage in all France, to confess and defend infinite things which I had
heretofore by word of mouth and writing condemned, yea and did yet condemn in
my heart. Notwithstanding having already made the first breach into my
conscience, by the which Satan had made his entrey, I left him the full and
peaceable possession of ye whole, minding now to do al things wholly to the
lyking of men, laying aside the reverence of God, and the respect of his glory.

Being brought to Paris and presented before the King, I declared the self
same abouesayd, auowing the Romish church to be the true church, and sundry
days together in the presence of ye king of Nauarra and the prince of Conde I
maynteyned ye same cause agreing with the Sorbonists in that point principally,
and refelling that which some of the king of Nauarra his officers (men fearing
God) did allege to the contrary, that the Reformed church was the true
church, and their religion the true religion. Furthermore touching the
controversies and points of doctrine commenly debated, in some I spoke lewdly
and against mine own conscience, even as they are taught in popery: of other
some, (as principally of ye Mass, the oblation, and the presence of Christ's
body) I made some doubt and contradiction, being urged thereto by the force of
the truth: but immediately I let go and abandoned all yt ever I had truly
spoken and by a false collusion I suffered them to conclude as they would them
selves, having beside that served therein against mine own conscience, for a
miserable instrument to lead those young Princes to go to Mass, and by that
means to worship a false God, and to tread under their feet ye only sacrifice
of Christ his death. And since I have fallen in hand with this conference and
disputation, I will give you good advertisement of an edict published in the
name of ye king of Nauarra, for that they have not been contented there to
Chronycle my name and calling, but they have followed therein ye custom of the
Papists, who can not simply recyte that which is happened without some
addition. For there it is said that there were certain other ministers of the
City of Orleance, that did jointly confess with me them selves to be
vanquished by the force of the Popish Doctors arguments, in so much that
they should renounce and forsake the doctrine before time preached to the
reformed Churches in France. Which I do testify and maynteyne to you to be
false: for there was never any but my self. The other Ministers of the said
congregation were better assisted of God, then to have committed such an
offense. Being then these two Princes through my false persuasions drawn in a
short space to the profession of Poperye, with the submissions to the same
required, I abode a certain time at Paris, during the which I was lead up and
down (as a bird to ye call) to certain noble Ladies and Gentlewomen of the
religion, who not long before had hard me preach the word of God, or else had
known me in particular communication to have exhorted the^ to persevere in the
doctrine of the gospel, who were al maruelously abashed to see me thus
transformed into an other shape, and they could not be persuaded that in that
which they understood of me. I spoke as I thought. Nevertheless I told them
all indifferently that I spoke even as I did believe in my heart touching the
opinion so stiffly maynteyned of me, that the Romish Church was the Catholyke
Church beside other points ye do depend thereof. And not content to serve their
turn at all assayes that did thus employe me here and there. I went of mine
own accord to diverse of mine acquayntance or else to those that them selves did
seek me or by fortune met with me: to whom generally I gave this counsel to
acknowledge this Church, albeit that I did grant her to be full of
superstitions and errors so that she had more then need of a reformation:
with sundry such other counselles of false Nicodemites and Temporizers or (to
speak uprightly) of ypocrits and enemies to God by outward profession. And
when I found any displeased with them selves for the fault that they had
committed to their great grief, I did by and by lay before them the foresaid
reasons lulling them a sleep therwithall and laying Pillows under their elbows
as says the Prophet Ezechiel. Namely I went one day of purpose to a certain
good and virtuous Lady fearing god, and to her daughter boothe nobly descended.
To conclude, I left no body with who^ I might talk familiarly yt I did not
corrupt with this pernicious counsel: saying that albeit the body of the Lord be
not in that which is showed at ye mass, yet notwithstanding yt on might
lawfully knele down to it, because there is a certain remnant and trace of
the true Sacrament of that precious body: and that in beholding ye Sacrament
(although it differ far from the institution of Christ, and the
administration of the ancient church) it suffiseth to lift up our hatts to
heaven, in which place only is the true living body where our Lord ^deth
reign and sits at the right hand of God his father. Thus in this place did
I moderate al absurdities, and went about to plaster this old ruinous buylding
of popery, to make there appear a certain likelyhoode of a goodly tabernacle.
And so I did entyce against my conscience al those that I could to go to mass
the very heap of all Idolatry and renouncing of Jesus Christ; yea and I wrote
letters to Madame de Buillon at Sodan by the commandment of the Duke
Montpensier her father to draw her to the same opinion: making her a sorrowful
and simple recompense* for the curtisy and liberality received at her hands as
well by me as by diverse others during ye troubles of the year of our Lord God
1568. And albeit that I felt in my self the condemnation of mine own
conscience, for the points now a days in controversy, and that no reasons
could content me to approve the doctrine ceremonies and exercise of the popish
religion, and, (...) that diverse persons had been so bold to reprove me of my
faults, to represent the judgments of God before mine eyes, to cite me before
the tribunal seat of Jesus Christ where all men must appear: yet
notwithstanding I was therewith (...) sleep, that I minded not to make my abode
any where but at Paris: now and then there came upon me a certain grief of mind
to think of that which was past with ye remembrance of the invocation and
service of God of the pure administration of the sacraments the preaching of
the word, and diligent practice of discipline, and I made comparison thereof
with the life, conversation and exercise of the Priests and Monks. But I was
so wholly in the possession of the Prince of this world, that I smothered up
this fire which upon every occasion did thus enkindle within me, laying before
my self this reason emongst others, that they of the Church were so offended at
this act of mine, that they would never receive me again into their society.
And if I had been let alone in some private estate where I might have found my
self occupied, there is no doubt but I had abode even til this hour moyling
in that filth. For after ye first heat of desire (where with I had been thrust
forward to yield my self to popery) was some thing cooled, I began fourthwith
to feel this inward war within my self, especially when I was employed
toward any body to bring him home again (as they term it): But if I had
remained a while by my self, I did by little and little kill and wear away
that worm of my conscience. Wherefore the very way and undoubted means to make
me bethink my self was when the said Duke Montpensier did send me the tewsday
the fourth of Nouembre with Maldonat a Jesuit to go to Sedan to bring his
daughter Madam de Buillon, home to the obedience of of the Pope. For abiding
with a certain Gentleman on the borders of ye Realm, whilst Maldonat was a
disputing at Sedan, I received letters aduertisements and advise of my frindes
that I should withdraw my self toward them, have an eye to mine own
safegarde, and not continewe held in that manner within the paws of Satan: As
for them they did offer me all the means and assistaunce they could possibly
to draw me out of that cursed srinking puddle wherein I was be myred. Then
began I more lively to wake out of this dead sleep and this lethargy of my
sens, I began to bewail the holy house of my father with the christian
entertaynement that his servants do receive there, too acknowledge my
wretchedness and vile ingratitude, in that I had cast of and abandoned that
holy and comfortable nourishment which I my self sometime had distributed to
others. Notwithstanding, because I had left my wife and children in France, I
thought in needful to return thither again to see whether I could get them
thence, and chiefly for that I had left my wife extreme sick. Therefore
tarying til Maldonat were come again, I resolved to put this deliberation in
execution. But he being returned gave me to understand that the Earl of Retz
had sent for him and me with him to come to Mets. Which was to me a grievous
delay whereby my enterprise was stayed. Thither must I go then to turn ye pore
faithful Christians out of the right way to salvation. To the which place
being come I spoke once openly as I was commanded to declare to the^ (as I had
done else where) that the Romish Church was that wherein we ought to setlte our
selves and abide. The rest of the time that we were there I harkened to the
Sermons of the Jesuit who labored hard to prove the sacrifyse of the Mass
and Purgatory, to learn if he taught any new thing. I hard another also named
Maurus who preached of the invocation of Saints and worshipping of Images. But
I was so far of from being brought to believe any whit of these things for
ought that they did say, that clean contrary I was farther of then ever:
because I did clearly perceive with what violence and boldness they did wrest
and falsefy the scriptures, as by Gods grace, I shall make known heareafter,
having to that end gathered their proofs and allegations by note in my
memory. Now the friday being ye xix. of December, the Earl being come home
from a Journey that he had made, gave us to understand that we must depart the
morrow after, which was the hour that I desired above al things, for the
causes alleged. But the same day a little before ye gates were shut, letters
were brought me whereby I was aduertysed that my wife and children were out of
the Realm, that I should look to my self and beware how I did return
thither where I had nothing to do. Hereuppon I considered that it was not
without the singular providence of God that such advertisement was come even as
I would wish, and that I ought not to let slip such an occasion. Therefore
after I had prayed to God at night for the danger that was in such an
enterprise, ye morrow after according to the means that God had offered me
upon the sudden, I set forth about nine of the clock in the morning without
being known, stayed or caught again, albeit there were men sent after me. By
this means GOD having drawn me thense has in the end conducted me into this
city making an end of the ouerlong abode which I made in the midst of
Idolatry. Heidelberg.


Behold my brethren the tragical and miserable discourse of my fall,
treachery, and rebellion against my God, wherein there are so many
circumstances yt make it offensive and detestable, that when they are now
presented before mine eyes, I do not think all my whole life sufficient to
acknowledge and comprehend the same as it ought to be. There is not any one at
this day among so many thousands ye do against their conscience honor to that
Idol, but he ought to confess that he does offend god horribly in
dishonoring him by that means, and in worshipping the creature in stead of the
creator. And although there be none but may allege weakness and infirmitye
in this act, (and in deed it is not likely but that many do believe in their
heart that which they are compelled to do outwardly) yet notwithstanding yt
their allegatio^ can not serve for an excuse, but rather for their condemnation
and reproach, because it is to set God behind himself, to love more this
transsitory life than the glory of God, it is to fear those that can kill the
body, and not him that can cast both body and soul into everlasting fire. To
conclude, it is plainly to renounce Jesus Christ before that overthwart and
bastard generation. What may one say of me then, who have not only ben of the
Church of God, a partaker of those gracious blessings that are there
distributed, but also have therein borne the most honorable rank, preaching
the gospel there more then ten year, that have been of on of the goodliest
congregatio^s of al France, the which within this four or five year has not
ceased to furnish to God an innumerable multitude of witnesses, by ye murders
and bluddy flaughters so often committed whereof the inhabytants have yet their
hands died and their hearts swilled with innocent blud? Alas what imaginations
should now enter into ye minds of those poor wretches yt yet remain, when
they shall hear of this yt I have done? Is it not as if I did condemn ye cause
for yt which so many godly men have suffered? what a trouble of conscience have
I put into the hearts of those yt did before time comfort them selves upon
ye death of their Parents and frinds praising god, who had done them this
honor to suffer for his name? Now are they grievously tempted to mistrust the
uprightness of the cause, because they can not be resolved on the opinion
that men ought to have of the honorable death that so many godly Martyrs have
abiden through the cruelty of Antichrist and his Supposts. Here behold an
inestimable injury done to the dead (of whom the memory ought to be blessed for
ever) to the living, and to Christ him self for whose treuth they have shead
their blud. And if I had long abidden emprisonment, honger, darkness and rough
handeling, and that to conclude this frail flesh overwhelmed with so many
miseries, had made the spirit to yield and stoop to such persecution, it might
well have sauered of some humane fraylty, to have moved compassion thereof. But
I at the very first rumor of the slaughter resolved to save this miserable
life to dissemble yea and to renounce the treuth. True it is yt not long before
my mind was something disquieted touching the personal succession of the
Church. In so much that I stood in doubt whether it were not a dangerous
matter, to depart from ye church of Rome in the which I found this succession.
Nevertheless this is the truth, that as soon as I had intelligence of that
which was bruted, the fear of death, the love of this life and commodities
thereof serving their turn of this my trouble of mind, caused me to yield more
force thereunto then the thing required: Insomuch that I was clean out of taste
with that doctrine in general, which for all that, I neither did nor could
doubt of. But I lost all will and inclination to confess and maynteine the
same: And albeit that I had rather have escaped out of ye Realm (as in deed I
had prepared my self there unto) tha^ to have stayed there any longer, and yt of
mine own mere disposition without any manner of co^pulsion, I had never the
affection to bend my self against the doctrine: Yet notwithstanding I was
utterly discouraged to take in hand the defense of the same, and I rather
took this resolution, to do what soever was offered me at the instant to
clear me of al suspectio^ every where where I should pass. So the great and
righteous Judge did not fail on his part to handle me thereafter. For having
ben so many years together taught by him the nature of the Gospel of his
son, which is called the word of the cross, it had been my part, to have been
ye more and more assured of my vocation, and of the truth of his Church,
because I saw the cross continue still, and the persecutions to grow daily
more violent. But perceiving the affliction to exceed the measure that I would
have prescribed to GOD, I fell to doubt, not of the doctrine in it self, but
of the Church in the respect of the personal succession. For this cause GOD
did justly deliver me to the desyer of mine own heart, to commit a fault
not only foul and detestable, but also clean sounding against reason and
man's judgment: that is to say: to immagine I had some reason not to confess a
truth whereof I was fully persuaded. Others that fall by infirmity do
acknowledge that they do against that they ought to do, in inpugning and
deniyng a known and undoubted truth, but I took it to be a point requisite
in my self to speak against mine own conscience, and against ye assured
knowledge of mine own heart. Thus in the judgment of God those that think
them selves wise are proved fools: neither did god in this beginning suffer
me to escape away so lightly, but since I would needs dally with him,
thinking that I should be easily set at liberty, he paid me the just reward of
my first leudnes and treachery, punishing ye former offense by later enormities
as ye have understood. The first prancke of my deloyaulty was that I did show
my self not a hyreling that does Abandon his charge when he sees the
Woulphe come, but I was my self a Woulphe yea and a ravening Woulphe,
scatering and dissipating mine own propre flock. For I wrote immediately to the
principalls of that assembly where I had been, admonishing them to acknowledge,
and follow the church of Rome: I did the like to mine own famyly which I had
before instructed in the fear of God: and my little children consecrated to
Jesus Christ, were by this means plonged in the popish filthy polutions, to
prostrate them selves before the Idol of Idols. Being thus foundred in this
first quagmyre, I ceased not to wade from evil to worsse: and after I had
betrayed mine own flock, mine own flesh and bones, and the little young imps
that God had given me, no marvel, if I played so lamentable parts toward
others. Neither then did this false dealing of mine keep it self within these
bounds. For I was brought to Paris to be tied as a carthorse to the Charet where
Satan sat in triumph against the members of Jesus Christ bringing them after
him conquered and captives. These two young princes buds of the flower de Luce
royal, virtuously and faithfully instructed in the doctrine of the truth,
consecrated to the glory of God, called to be nurces of the Church, of whom
she might one day hope for some comfort and perfection, were by me diuerted from
the true reformed Church, brought (as touching their persons) to go to Mass,
and consequently to set up again and restablish that cursed Idolatry within
the places and lymits of their dominion and seigneury. To be short, they were
by me delivered up as it were, to the tyrannical clutches and grypes of
Antichrist, to swear obedience to him, and to make war against the children of
God. For although they had great occasions to shrink: considering the murders
that they saw committed, the practices that were used to terrefy the^: and
although that the brute was already spread that they went to Mass, yet had
they continewed pure and constant until my arrival. Wherefore there is no doubt,
but that my tongue traiterous and untrue to my God did more prevail with them,
then all the threats, dangers, and horrible slaughters which they hard and
saw daily before their eyes: whereof also, if they be now wholly changed with
a willing mind to persecute the Gospel, (which God forbid) I am alas the
principal cause. If they do yt which they do against their will, they may
chiefly lay the fault in me, for that pain and anguish of mind wherewith
they be tormented.

Touching this point be ye aduertysed, (ye that read this) to pray to GOD
for those personages, that it will please him to take pytie upon them, and when
he sees good to repair that inestimable loss. In the mean season, I was not
without remorse and trouble in my conscience, seeinge the pytteous work that
was a building, whereof I was an instrument, or rather seeing the ruin and
subversion of the Church, where I my self gave the greatest blows to
overthrow it. And many times there came to my memory a verse of a certain
poet alleged by Tertulian: Vsque ad eone morj miserum est? I felt my self
moved with heavenly inspirations to mainteyn gods truth. I did after a sort
consider of the wound that was made by my means, some times the force of
reason and truth did prick me forewarde to speak against the doctors of
Sorbona in certain points: but the same vanished away immediately, because that
I had already passed forth to the chiefest difficulty, having a vowed theirs
for the true Church. And certainly I remember that being often pressed with my
self, and feeling a kind of conviction in that I did let pass so many false
things against the truth, at night I prayed to God that he would not suffer me
to live to the day following, forseeing that the morrow after I should yet be
driven to consent and agree to many things which I thought and knew to be
false, but this was not a well ordered prayer because I should rather have
craved his spirit of strength and magnanimity to sustain and defend that
which he had revealed to me to be true, and refer to him the issue and
falling out of the whole. Neither was I hard of him, but was still abiding in
ye midst of the enemies of his poor afflicted Church, being forced to hear
the scoffs and iestes that they did spewe out, laughing at the present
affliction, as did the Id^means when they reioysed at the destruction of
Jerusalem. Thus went I clean deprived of all sens and feeling to enure my
self like a brute, beast with this most mischeuous and accursed hau^t. The
murderers have killed the bodies with their most cruel hand* but in the mean
time the souls are escaped and passed from travel to rest. But I have been a
murderer of souls subuerting the faith of many through my word, and taking
from their understanding the judgment and knowledge of the evil which they
went about to do. And beside those that have hard me speak with mine own
propre mouth, there are infinite others yt may have read that which I had
sundry times written touching the same, the copies whereof were spread all
abroad, amplyfied with pretty gloses and additions, where I had not written
plain enough to the contenting of the papists, as I my self have both seen and
perceived. And those that have not read them might thereof be informed by
others: In such sort that I can not express nor comprehend how great a ruin
and decay has ensued of this my fall* From all the which mishaps one only death
had at one instant preserved me if I had abyden it after the example of so many
poor sheep of Jesus Christ laid forth to the slaughter without mercy. Such
a death had been precious before God, honorable for me and mine, and of a good
savor to the congregation of the Lord. And yet for any thing that I have done
I shall not escape death, which shall come at the hour and in the manner that
God has appointed it after I have lived in ignomyny in the sight of all good
men. Wherefore when I consider all the circumstances, I can hardlye pycke out an
example to be balanced with this act of mine. Saint Peter did renounce
Christ, but it was in his first weakness before he was yet fortyfied, whereas
I ought to have been a leader and a captain, considering how long I had been
called to the service of God. Saint Peter at the instant withdrew him self and
went out to weep: as for me I was in a good way to have continewed all my life
long in the botomlesse pit of perdition. Saint Paul did persecute the
Church of God, but it was in ignorance and through an unadvised zeal, having
not the faith, whereas I did put my helping hand to the reedifying of that which
before I had pulled down, declaring my self a sinful transgressour. John
Mark left of his labor and the voyage that he had in hands, for the which
Saint Paul did not think it reasonable that he should be afterward
employed. Demas forsook his vocation for the love and desire of this present
world. But none of these did for all that persecute the truth as I have done.
Touching the fact I find but one comparable to my self, and that is he that
laid his head together with ye sacryficers and took money of them to be traye
and make sale of the innocent blud as he confessed himself. Even so did I
acquainte my self with such kind of people the very successors of the
Pharyseyes, swear my self into the hands of the bishop, and received the hyre
of vntrewth as did Balaam, with a promise of a yearly pension in time to come.

Briefly, I see my self painted out in that which Saint Peter says: that
this man has been the leader of the^ that have taken Jesus, who (says he) was
accounted in the number of us, and had received his part of the administration
of his word* See here then (my brethren) on part of those enormities that I do
note in mi revolt. I did not only give occasion to men to yield to the
infirmity of ye flesh, but more then that I did fill the consciences of ye
well affectioned with scrupelous vexatio^s, of the weak with troublesome
offenses, to make them fall never to rise again: to the ypocrites I did serve
for a mask and cloak to cover them selves, in assisting to those things that
they condemned: to the open enemies I gave occasion to boast and glorify them
selves in exercysing cruelty against the members of Jesus Christ, and to
confirm the^ selves in an (...) they have, yt they do God good se^^^ce, that
they advance his honor, that they mayneteyne the true Church when they kill
and murder the innocent. I have offended God almighty, condemned the cause of
his son Christ, resisted the holy ghost, made sorrowful the Angels of heaven,
ben a stumbling block to the Church in earth, boldened and hardened ye wicked
in their fury, defiled my mouth with blasphemy, which was before honored with
preaching of the Gospel. Saint Cyprian excusing him self for yt he had seemed
to have somewhat lightlye established Aurelius reader in the Church, gives a
good reason, that it was very meet and seemly ye the mouth which had
confessed Christ in time of persecution, should be employed to read his word
in the Church. Contrariwise I by mine infidelity have stopped mine own mouth
that I might not hereafter speak in the holy assemblyes* I beseech you
(brethren) that every one of you do add what ye can to this that I have
said: which is not hard to do in so (...) a case. And all you that may any
ways make me understand it, spare me (...) to pulle me down according to
the desert of so heinous a (...): spurn at the feet yt salt that has lost
his savor, see how justly my candlestick is taken from his place. Alas I have
good cause to tremble at yt which our Lord has denounced, that at ye great day
he will be ashamed of those, that are ashamed of him and his word before men.
Let my exaumple serve you for a glass, and have a dilygent eye to your selves,
you that have abode upright till this present, see that you keep preciously
that so singular a benefit that God has so carefully kept for you: suffer not
that incorruptible crown to be taken from you, but constantly finish your
course, knowing that he that contineweth to the end shall be saved. And you
alas that are the greatest number, who either by mine exaumple are slipte out
of the way or by mine occasion confirmed in your revolt, take heed the Devil
do not bewitch you, to make you find that sweet which is bitter, to call
light darkness and darkness light: bu keep the seed of the fear of God which
is yet remaining in your hearts, nurrish and cherish it as a languishing fire,
waiting the means to escape out of the captivity more griouous then that of
Egypt, and using the same when.. God shall offer them unto you* Especially your
grace Sir, that have received this good and holy instruction from your youth
in the true knowledge of GOD.

Remember the faith that was in your mother and Grandmother Queens of Nauarra.
And as Saint Paul does by such exaumples exhort his Timothe, so think the
same to apperteyne to you, to the end that you may be as well heir to the
faith of those holy Ladies, as you have succeeded them in the Realm. And
pardon me the injury that I have done to you: humbly beseeching you in the
name of GOD that as I have been a pestilent instrument to pervert you, so now
my exaumple may serve to convert you to the Lord. You also most noble Prince,
be myndfull of the zeal, godliness, and constancy in true religion whereof you
have seen the lively paterns of your late (of worthy memory) Grandmother,
Father and mother: I have served you in stead of a wicked spirit and evil
counseler, but let not that which was said in time of force and violence,
bear so much sway and authority with you, that for the same you should
forgette the holy instructions which have been given you by advised
deliberation many years before. Compare the present estate whereunto you be
now brought receiving no comfort or edificatio^ at al of that which your Amner
does read or sing before you in his Portesse or Massebooke, with ye when you
were present at the holy exhortatio^s and enterpreting of Gods word, where you
your self did help to sing praises unto his name. And for as much as many may
be kept back in this revolt through the reasons yt they then understood of me
at sundry times and in sundry places, or else through certain writings that
have been scattered abroad, touching the true Church, and by what marks she
ought to be discerned, by the which at that time I went about to conclude
that ye Church of Room deserved this title: I beseech al Christian readers not
to stay upon those reasons so vain and of so small importance. True it is
that see that time yea and somewhat before I had be shaken therwithall as I have
confessed. But sens, having withdrawe^ mi self into these parts, I have learned
and found out that they are but abuses and fallacyes easy to be discovered
and refuted, for the which (let it be granted that they had greater appearance
of sound reasons) yet can not I be excused, but that I did leudly and
villenously to refuse to witness that treuth with my mouth which I did verily
believe in my heart, and to exhort those that I could against my conscience to
go to Mass, and to yield obedience to Antichrist. Now as I do by this present
writing make open confession of my to too heinous enormity, for a piece of
amends and reparation of the offense publicly given: so am I determined (God
willing) to write of this matter of the Church to take away all doubt and
scruple from the wavering consciences that be not yet fully resolved, for that
they have hard the said reasons. To conclude, being now at full liberty to
stick boldly without fear to that Church which in my heart I do allow of, I
protest before god to recognyse and acknowledge that for the true Church
which has for the rule of her faith ye holy scripture of the old and new
Testament, the old contained in the law, Psalms, and Prophets (as our Lord
him self does divide it) the new in the writings of the Evangelists and
Apostles, anowyng for true marks of the Church not the succession of
persons and of men, but of the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles:
Since it is manifest that we can not acknowledge any for the house of GOD,
but that which is the pillar and stay of the treweth, nor any to be of the
fold of Christ, but those only that hear his voice and follow him: and that
she is the true Spouse, that has Christ for her Spouse: briefly that it is
necessary to go out of that Church wherein one can not abide without
renouncyng of Jesus Christ, and to be short without loss of body and Soul
by dishonoring and offending of GOD.

According whereunto I do also embrace the confession of Faith published in
the name of the reformed Churches of France, acknowledging and auowing the
same to be a Christian confession by the conformitye and agreement that it has
with the holy Scripturs, and jointly the Ecclesiastycall discyplyne to be the
conducte and government of the people of GOD. With like assurance I hold and
believe with all my heart, and confess as well by mouth as by writing, that
those which for this reformation have a few years sense suffered death,
either by order of Justice, or by the late blouddy murders more cruel then
those of the Gotes or Vandales, are true and blessed Martyrs of Jesus Christ,
dead for his name, and his holy truth. And for the commendation and praise of
them, together for their comfort and consolation that are yet living, women,
children, parents and frindes, this sentence of Saint Paul to the
Thessalonians may by good right be applied: ye are made followers of the
congregacions of GOD that are at Judea in Jesus Christ, because ye have
suffered the self same things by them of your own natyon as they did by the
Jews. Who likewise have killed the Lord Jesus and their own Prophets, and
have banyshed us, they please not GOD and are adversaries to al men, not
suffering us to speak to the Gentiles for their salvation: to the end that they
may daily heap up their sins, for the wrath of god is come upon them to the
uttermost.

Wherefore O ye faithful pastors of the Christian Church, Stewards of ye
mysteries of god, that has given you the word of reconciliation, to the end
that ye may be Ambassadors for Christ, ye that sometimes have taken me for
your fellow in the work of the Lord, continue in that holy vocation, waiting
for the reward promised in that great day, wherein those that have instructed
many to righteousness shall shine like stars. God has preserved the greatest
part of you whole and sound, so well, that ye have not ben at all apprehended,
or else ye have gotten out of the enemies hands, without any thing done that
might seem unworthy the conscience of a Christian man. A few are fallen and
bent against the Gospel, and I miserable wretch was the first in that small
number. I have darkened and defaced the beuty and excellency of that heavenly
doctrine that I had my self sometime preached. But ye know the assured
foundation whero^ it is grounded. Accursed be he that shall announce any
contrary thing yea were he an Angel in heaven. O ye happy and blessed of God,
that have in your hearts the testimony of an unspotted conscience, to have
walked in sincerity and playnnes: blessed that shall hear at the later day,
enter into the joy of thy Lord, thou good and faithful servant, for that thou
have increased the talents committed to thee, whereas I have not only buried
in the earth the talent that I had, but have employed the same in making war
against the truth. God grant you the grace to co^tinew and give a happy
success to your godly trauells. Assist me with your prayers that the heavenly
father may receive me now that I return to him after this horrible sliding and
revolt, and pardon me my so grievous enormity. O Lord almighty and wholly wise,
how easy is it for thee to entrappe the crafty in their deceypte. O how thy
judgments be just and righteous.

Who know each one of all our works
And see what we do
To good, to pure, to clean of heart
Thou show thy goodness to.
To thy beloved and elect
Thy love thou do reserve
And thou do use the wicked men
As wicked men deserve.
Even so have thou drawn out of the bottom of my heart that which was there
hyd, not suffering that I should beguyle the world any longer. For having
determined to abando^ my charge and to slipps thens covertly for certain
doubts and difficulties that I had in my mind, to the end to continue as it
were a neutre touching thy outward profession: thou have justly cast me of to
mine own sens. By that means gyuing more force to mine own illusions, the^
reverence to thy word. I am fallen where I well deserved. For in stead of
being but a forsaker of the charge where thou had placed me, I became a
formal enemy, reproouing and co^demning it: of the other side being willing to
authoryse and allow the vocation of them that do teach popish scysmes and
errors, thou did cause me to come so near it, that I was driven to be
better acquaynted with them then I desired. Such was the punishment yt thou
did cast upon thy people in times past: who when they would not keep them
selves pure from idolatry after long sufferance, thou did in the end
deliver the^ up into thy enemies hand, who brought them into Babylon, where
they were lothed with the fight of false Gods.

But the same did serve this people to take these idols in such disdain and
horror, that they never fell into that fault again, after their return into
Jerusalem. Even so my GOD grant me this grace, that the displeasure and grief
that I have of so great a fault, do engendre in my soul such a hate and
detestation of the evil that I have committed, that I may bestow my whole
life in lamenting and bewayling the same, craving thy mercy, to the end that
thou may forgive it me. Thou have brought me marvelous low, punishing the
pride wherewith I was fully infected, and the conceyte that I had of my self: as
thou art accustomed, to take from him that has nothing, eue^ that which he
thinks to have. To thee be all glory, and to me confusion of face.
Notwithstanding my God, who have put in my heart the affection to acknowledge
the danger of the horrible and everlasting perdition, where into I did throw my
self hedlong, restore me thy spirit that may comfort me, and give me hope of
mercy. And in this time of extreme affliction, grant me ye grace to follow
the exaumple of thy servant Moses who chose rather to be afflicted with thy
people, then to enjoy for a time the pleasures of sin, esteeming the reproach
of Christ to be greater riches then the treasors of Egypt. Thy Church is at
this day straungely oppressed and threatened with an utter and perpetual ruin
and destruction: but by thy aid and assistance I do mind to accompany her,
and to drink my part of her afflictions, praying thee to this end O Lord, to
make me feel in what miserable estate they be that do withdraw them selves
toward the enemies of thy truth even then when they think themselves most in
thy favor. Strengthen and maynteine this desire in me to the end: that if I be
once more called to the profession of thy name, I do abandon my self in
sacrifyce for that godly quarrel as I am bound. Take compassion of thy poor
and desolate Church, and mollefy the strypes wherewithal at this day thou have
stricken her. Appease thy wrath toward thy people, for whom thy dear son
has shead his blood, and with thy spirit fortify those that are at this day
under the Cross for thy sacred truth, giving them hope against all hope, and
making them invincible against all the assaults and violent enforcements of thy
adversaries. Amen.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Thomas East, for Lucas Harison, and George Bishop.


