THE ANTIBARBARIAN: OR, A Treatise concerning an unknown tongue.

As well in the prayers of particulars in private as in the public Liturgy.

Wherein also are exhibited the principal clauses of the Mass, which would
offend the people, if they understood them.

By PETER DV MOVLIN, Minister of the Word of GOD in the Church of Sedan and
Professor of Divinity.

LONDON, Printed by George Miller, for George Edwa^d^, and are to be sold in
the Old Baily, in Green Arbor, at the sign of the Angel. 1630

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Right Reverend and Worthy Father of the Law, Sir
GEORGE CROOK Knight, one of his Majesty's Judges of the Kings Bench.
SIR,
THIS learned and Orthodox divine has both at home, and abroad, both in
himself, and in his profitable and useful works given such Heroic proofs
of his own worth and exquisite learning, that here to go about to use any
encomium in his praise and worth would be but to light a candle at the noone
day which this Sun shining in his own strength would utterly obscure. He
has done and said so much to vindicate himself from out of the jaws of
obscurity, or oblivion, that no addition in that kind is needful; and were
he herein wanting to himself, I would add no other testimony of him in his
behalf, then his who well may be instar omnium, namely that of our late
revere^d and learned Bishop in his opuscula posthuma, where any that would
nodum in hoc scirto quaerere, may find ample satisfaction, so that indeed for
my own part I will only with the Orator, say, quid opus est verbis ubi rerum
testimonia adsunt. In that I have presumed to dedicate this book thus
translated, and what herein I may call mine, confined indeed within the narrow
verge of my weak performance, to your judicious peruse all, grave patronage,
and protection, it is out of that assurance, you have given all good men of
your unfeigned love of the truth and true religion, that the same may remain
upon record, for some though but a weak testimony of that my ever vowed
observance and due respect, wherein for your many worthy favors, I stand so
mainely obliged, wherein also being confident of your wonted favor, and good
acceptance, whereunto I humbly commend the same, and my farther service, I will
ever rest

At your Worships service and command RICHARD BAYLIE.

TO MY NEPHEW Mounsieur Bochart Pastor of the Church of Caen.
DEAR Nephew,
if the Church of GOD receive any benefit by this my labor her obligation will
be acknowledged unto you for the same. For in the answer which I made unto the
Cardinal Du Perron, when it happened I had improvidently omitted the Chapter
which treats of an unknown tongue: You advertised me of that defect, and
moved me to supply the same. I have condescended to your motion, and have
composed this Treatise, which I here tender unto you. You shall receive it, if
you please, for a testimony of my hearty affection, and of that joy which I
receive by seeing you serve in the work of the Lord with so great applause. It
is a comfort to me amidst so many desolations to see that God causes to spring
up lights to shine in the darkness which grow thicker from day to day. For
seeing God raises up good workmen and laborers, it is a sign that he will
yet leave us some harvest. He who from your infancy has endued his fear,
and has set you apart for his service, will cloth you with strength, and with
courage not to faint under the burden. For you are entered upon your charge in
a time wherein you shall have need of double zeal, and of an holy
magnanimity: It shall be a great honor for you to stand in the breach, and in
the shock of the maine battle: and amidst the darkness of the time to be the
bearer of so fair a light. There shall you have experience of those succors,
which God promises to those which love him, and who esteem it a great honor
and gain to loose their lives or goods for his service. He, who has given
unto trees, which grow on the tops of the rocks, stronger roots, because they
are more exposed to the boisterousnesse of the winds, will give unto you also
strength according to the measure of the combats, whereunto he will expose you.
The match indeed seems very unequal, and the enterprise no less difficult,
even as if with pinnes we should take in hand to supplant a rock. But we must
remember, that we defend Gods cause, who is wont to use the weakest tools or
instruments for the effecting of his works of wonder: that the glory of the
success might not be attributed to our strength. And that the heavenly truth,
were it plunged down unto bottom of the bottomless deeps, might at last
regaine the upper hand. And as the Church is more firm then the world; seeing
the world was made for it. Whereunto may be applied what is written of the
city of Jericho, to wit, that he that built it, laid her foundation upon his
first borne. The same God, who at the sound of Iosua's tru^pets made his
enemies walls to fall flat to the ground, will one day make to fall down the
walls of Babylon at the blast of the trumpet of the Gospel. But if by reason
of the ingratitude of this stiffe-neckt age, God puts off unto another time
so excellent a work, we which have sowed on earth with small success, shall
not fail to reap abundantly in heaven. We bear, like Gedeons soldiers, this
light in earthen vessels: namely, in weak bodies, the breaking whereof will be
happy and honorable, if it may but serve to set forth in sight the light of
the Gospel. For we which preach the Cross of Christ, should we be exempted
from it? We that bear this arc, should not we pass first through this
Jordan? being patterns not only in doctrine, but also in zeal and in all
virtue? as for me, having presently finished my course, and heartily breathing
after that rest, which God has promised to them that fear him, I rejoice to
leave behind me men endued with his graces in greater measure: and
particularly a Nephew, whom I have loved with a fatherly affection: who
treading in the steps of a virtuous father, and whose memory is as a blessing
to the Church of God, shall surpass and much outstrip his predecessors, and
shall be an example unto posterity. But whilst I am in this temporal abode
you owe me the relief of your prayers, as I also on my part do beseech
Almighty God to give you grace to be unto him a faithful servant, and to
fight the good fight, and to bring forth fruit unto his glory.

From Sedan this 6. of August. 1629. Your dear Uncle, and humble brother, and
servant. P. DV MOVLIN.

A Table of the Chapters.
CHAP. I. THat false religions love obscurity, but true religion sets forth
to view her doctrine, and holds nothing secret. page 1. CHAP. II. Two
dfferences between us and the Church of Rome, touching an unknown tongue.
page 22. CHAP. III. Of prayers of particular persons in a tongue not understood
by themselves that pray. p. 25. CHAP. IIII. That in the Primitive Church every
one prayed in his own tongue. page 41. CHAP. V. That the Liturgy or public
service in a tongue not understood is contrary to the Word of God, and unto
reason. page 49. CHAP. VI. This assertion prooved by the Church of the old
Testament. page 81. CHAP. VII. That the Primitive Christian Church through out
the whole world, used a tongue understood in their public service. page 90.
CHAP. VIII. Two causes that move the Pope and his Clergy, to will that the
Mass and the whole ordinary service be said in the Latin tongue. p. 120.
CHAP. IX. The third cause for the which they are not willing to have the Mass
understood by the people, the clauses of the Mass which would scandalize the
people, if they understood them. p. 124. CHAP. X. An examination of the
Adversaries reasons: especially of them of Mounsieur the Cardinal du Perron.
p. 180. CHAP. XI. An examination of the proofs, which Mounsieur the Cardinal
du Perron draws from antiquity for service in a tongue not understood. p.
129. CHAP. XII. By what means the Latin tongue was brought into divine
service in France and in Spain. p. 232. CHAP. XIII. Concerning England and
Germany, and how the Roman service and the Latin tongue was brought in
thither. p. 252. CHAP. XIIII. Concerning Africa, and how the service in the
Latin tongue thither entered. p. 273.
A TREATISE; Concerning a strange language in prayers and in the service of GOD.
CHAP. I. That false religions love obscurity: But the true Religion sets
forth to the view her doctrine, and holds nothing hidden.
IT is an opinion commonly received, that ignorance is the mother of devotion.
In the matter of Gods service, men admire most, what they understand least; and
obscurity augments reverence, and herewith fares it as with beauties; the
which when men do nothing but stand at enterview and at gaze, they kindle and
inflame the more concupiscence.

Negligence and profaneness contribute to this evil; For men having no
natural inclination to be instructed in the knowledge of God, they
uoluntarily disburden themselves of that care upon them that make profession to
instruct them; rather then they will take the pains to learn, they had rather
believe without knowing, and follow others without any further inquisition to
inform themselves; and this affected ignorance cloketh it self with the
specious title of respect toward the Church, and of quickness of
apprehension; if there be question of putting forth a man's money, there men
will be sure to enquire out the best securities, and men are in this point full
of diffidence and distrust: but when the point of salvatition falls into
debate, they refer themselves to rely on the faith of another, and blindfold
their own eyes with a uoluntarie ignorance.

Satan that seaseth on men by natural handels, snares and nooses, uses this
inclination to seduce them, it being easy for him to make them go astray out
of their way that shun the light. He it is, that has taught Magicians and
coniurers to insert and blend in their coniurations, barbarous and sustian
terms not to be understood. He it is, that instructed the Pagan Priests to
cover and keep close their mysteries under a religious silence: and to keep
aloof off at a distance the profane, who now a days are termed the
lay people or the laiques. Thus Hetrusca disciplina.
the Toscane discipline, wherein was contained the old religion of the Romans,
Quintilianus lib. 1. Carmina Saliorum vix sacerdotibus suis satis intellecta
sed quae mutari vetat religio.
and the verses of the Salique Priests sung by those Priests of Mars, were
coucht in rude and barbarous terms, and such as were not understood of the
people. Epiphanius in the heresy of the Ossenians, (...)
says that the heretics taught to pray with obscure words, forbidding to
enquire after the interpretation of them. Saint Augustine in his 16. Chapter,
Quod vult Deus, affirms the same of the Heracleonites. And Clemens
Alexandrinus in his first book of Tapisseries, says that (...).
men hold that prayers pronounced in a barbarous tongue have more efficacy.
Hierome in his Epitaphe Barbaro simplices quosque terrent sono, ut quod non
intelligunt plus mirentur.
of Lucinius Andalusien: they affright the simple with a barbarous sound, so
that they admire most what they understand least. The Mahumetans, Turks, and
Persians have their service in the Arabic tongue, which the people understand
not. And the Jews, whom God has given up to reprobate sense, do read in their
Synagogues the Law and the Prophets in the Hebrew tongue, whereas the most part
of their people have but little or no understanding thereof.

They that have the charge to guide and instruct the people, have been
careful to foment and increase this evil; for they endeavor to keep the
people in ignorance, withholding from them the key of knowledge, as our
Savior Jesus Christ says, Luke 11.52.
and hindering others from entering in. By this means they make themselves
respectable and of account, as such that are only capable of understanding
divine matters the things that belong to God, and having only and alone a
familiar communication with God. And by the self same means, they themselves
take sanctuary, and hinder, that there can no clear inspection be made into
their affairs; and gain the liberty to accommodate religion to their own
profit, and to carve and shred it at their pleasure. Dealing as thieves do,
that blow out the candells for fear of being discride; for they are afraid,
least the things which men admire a far off, being known and better taken
notice of at a nearer distance, should become contemptible and utterly out of
request: Like unto painted women, who would not willingly be uiewed near at
hand; having learned by experience, that there is trouble to lead the ignorant;
and that it is easiest diving into a blind man's purse, and that every man that
would be informed in the reason and original of things is not easily persuaded.

Hence comes it that they withdraw the people from reading of the Scriptures,
and that they hinder the translating of them into the vulgar tongue. Hence
comes it, that they labor so much to cast an aspersion upon the Scriptures,
and to make them to be suspected by the people, as a dangerous book; and that
the reading thereof is the cause of heresies. Hence came in Images, which serve
to amaze, and to hold at gaze the eyes whilst they blind their
understandings; and to afford them recreation, whilst they withdraw and bereave
the of instruction Hence came that heap of Ceremonies, which are shadows,
which grow apace, and stretch out themselves in length, when the night of
ignorance is near at hand. Hence came that implicit faith, which relyeth on
the faith of another, and which believes that which the Church of his country
believes, without ever knowing that which the Church ought to believe: and
which serves God by custom, following the thronge, and involveing themselves
in the multitude. Hence came in the Liturgy in a strange tongue, and not
understood; as if the english tongue were too base and trivial for divine
service. Hence came in the custom of praying to God without knowing what they
asked of him; as if they were afraid to understand themselves. Hence came it
to pass, that as in the public reading of the Scriptures; God is a barbarian
unto men, so also in public prayers the Priest is a barbarian to the
Assembly, and in the prayers of particulars, every one is a barbarian to
himself.

The occasions and the change of affairs, have hereunto often contributed: For
the vulgar tongue of a country coming to be abbasterdised by laps of time, or
being suddenly changed by the confused medley, the blending, and inundation and
uiolent breaking in of strange people, the Pastors and leaders of the people
have not been careful to accommodate the public service unto the
understanding of the new inhabitants, and to the tongue in use: So that the
Liturgy became in less then fifty years, not to be understood by the people
And this came to pass in Italy, where the Latin was the vulgar in the time
of the Apostles, and many ages after: But the Latin being corrupted by the
inundation of the Goths, Lumbards and French, and by the extinguishing and
abolishing of good letters and learning; the Bishops still retained the service
in the ancient tongue, and suffered the people to loose the understanding of
it: The like happened in France and in Spain, as we shall see hereafter.

True religion takes a quite contrary way. It resists this natural
inclination of men, by which they fly instruction, fearing to learn the will
of God, least thereby they should oblige themselves to follow it: through the
brightness of the Gospel it dissipates the kingdom of the Prince of
darkness: For the people ought to be clearly instructed in the doctrine of
salvation; seeing they have as great a share in salvation as the Pastors. Who
shall not answer for the people, at the day of judgment: if the blind lead
the blind, Matthew. 25.24.
they will both fall into the ditch. The Prophet Habacuk tells us, Habac. 2.4.
that The just shall live by his faith, and not by the faith of another. He
which believes in God by proxy, or attornie, deserves that another should be
saved for him between the false and the true religion; there is as much
difference, as between two Temples; the one whereof has his windows and
lights shut and stopped up, the other receives in lights on all sides; in the
one, the people make profession of a blind obedience; in the other, the people
demand instruction. The one sets forth to the view the Lamp of Gods Word;
the other suppressing this spiritual light, lights up candells at high
noone: And like as the light which struck Saint Peter on the side when he
slept in prison, Acts 12.
made the irons to fall off from his hands, and opened him the prison: even so
the light of the true doctrine breaks asunder the bands of superstition, and
sets a man at liberty; according to that which our Savior Jesus Christ
teaches in the 8. of S. John. You shall know the truth, and the truth shall
make you free. Whereupon also God said in the 5. Chapter of Esaias. My people are
led captive, because there is no knowledge; and Jesus Christ in the 22. of S.
Matthew said to the Sadduces, You err, not knowing the Scriptures: Whereupon
he also said to the Jews: John 3.39.
Search the Scriptures; which is a commandment, which is not made to the
people by the Church of Rome. And God himself by his Prophet Jeremy, in his
Chapter 31. promises a happy time, wherein every one shall not teach his
brother, saying, Know ye the Lord, for, says the Lord, they shall know me
from the least to the greatest. God rejects a Zeal without knowledge, Romans
10.2. and the Apostle desires that the charity of the Philippians might be
with knowledge and all understanding. Philip. 1.9.
This is the condemnation of the world (SAYS THE LORD) that light is come into
the world, John 3.19.
but men love darkness better then the light. Matthew. 10.16.
God indeed would have us to be simple and innocent, but withal, he will have
us to be prudent and wise, he forbids curiosity in things he has concealed
from us; but it follows not thence, that we must be ignorant of things
necessary, and which he has manifested to us in his Word.

For these causes have we taken away images out of our Churches, which speak
not, and have set in their places the holy Scriptures, wherein God speaks unto
us, these images are fallen down to the ground before the doctrine of the
Gospel, as Dagon before the Arc of the Covenant, 1. Sam. 5.3.
and we have brought in the Scripture in the vulgar tongue; and have
established again the service of God in words understood: for teaching no
other doctrine, then that which is contained in the holy Scriptures; we are not
ashamed of our religion; and we do desire that our doctrine might be known of
every one, and examined by the Scriptures, John 10.38. John 17.8. Romans 10.17.
having learned by the holy Scriptures, that faith consists in knowledge; and
that Jesus Christ will, that men know before they believe; and that faith is by
hearing of the Word of God: whence it follows, that we must hear the Word of
God, and be therein instructed, before we can have faith: we reject the
counsel of our adversaries, who would have men believe before they choose the
way of salvation, in stead of that, they must know to the end to choose aright:
Can there a greater abuse then to make the faith of Christians to consist in
ignorance, Bellar. lib. 2. de iustificatione cap. 7. Iudicium. Fides
distinguitur contra scientiam, and melius per ignorantiam quam per notitiam
definitur. Du Perron in his book against the King of great Britain. lib. 6.
chapter 1. page 1080.
as Cardinal Bellarmine does, who says, that faith is distinguished against
knowledge, and is better defined by ignorance then by knowledge. Whereupon
likewise the Cardinal du Perron thinks, that the greater ignorance is, the
greater is the merit of faith; saying, that when as any one understands not the
public service, for that the Priest speaks in an unknown tongue, and not
understood, that defect is recompensed by the merit of the endeavor and greater
exercise of faith. Which is a new kind of merit, to endeavor to know nothing,
and an endeavor of faith which consists in negligence; and a faith which
consists in having none at all, seeing that faith comes by hearing of the
Word of God; for it is not to hear the Word of God, to hear a sound without
understanding; the Apostle then by this reckoning, was destitute of reason,
when he gave thanks to God, for that, that the Corinthians were rich in all
knowledge. 1. Cor. 1.5.
And that wish he made, that the Philippians might abound in knowledge and
understanding, was very inofficious and unkind; seeing that by that knowledge
the endeavor of their faith slackned and enfeebled, Coloss. 3.16.
and their merit diminished. Hereon we have an excellent passage of Saint
Chrysostom in his Homily, 61. upon Saint John, wherein after he had in many
words reprooved the people, and reproched them too for their ignorance, and for
their incapacity and disabilitie to defend the cause of God, and to render a
reason of their faith, and had laid before them the Apostles commandment, that
wills that the Word of God should dwell plentifully in every one of us in all
wisdom; Col. 3.16.
he asks (...).
What answer hereunto make those persons more unprofitable then drones? They
say that the soul is blessed which is simple, and that he which walks in
simplicity, walks with affiance: That this is that which is the source and
fountain of all this evil, to wit, that amongst the people, there are but
very few of them, that could in time of need allege any testimonies of
Scriptures. This complaint of this good Doctor, was at this day ridiculous: for
the people would answer him, how should we be able to alleadg the Scriptures,
whereof you have forbidden us the reading? And indeed there is not extant any
approved and allowed translation in the vulgar tongue. It is now adays a badg
of an heresy to read carefully the Scriptures and to alleadg them.

CHAP. II. Two differences between us and the Church of Rome, touching an
unknown tongue.
COncerning an unknown tongue; when we speak unto God, or when God speaks
unto us; we have two sorts of differences with the Church of Rome, the one
concerning the prayers of particular persons, the other touching the public
service: For in the Church of Rome the people use to pray without understanding
themselves, and to speak unto God and unto the Saints in a tongue, which he
that prays understands not, as if it were suspected to themselves, or they
were afraid to understand their own prayer: thinking that the Latin has
something in it that is more holy, and that barbarous terms have more
efficacy, and that prayer in Or in any other tongue then Latin.
English is less acceptable to God.

The very same abuse has intruded it self into the public service, which is
performed in Latin, where the people of France, Germany and Spain, understand
nothing. Whereupon also the people use to say, let us go hear a Mass; but
not, let us go observe the words, or understand the Mass, they might say
far better if they said, let us go see the Mass; for they go to it, as
unto a show, and not as unto an instruction; and as if it were not enough that
the Mass is said in Latin; a great part of the Mass is pronounced exceeding
low, and with a deep silence: the rest is said in confused terms, and with
quivering of an inarticulate voice: whereof their Doctors render us the reason,
namely, for that Shepherds in hearing of the Mass having learned the words of
consecration, Durand. Rat. lib. 4. c. 35. Cum quidam pastores Canonem in agro
canta^ent, and panem super lapidem posuissent, ad verboru^ ipsorum ptolationem
panis in carnem conuer sus est, ipsi tamen divino iudicio igne coelitus misso
percussi sunt. Propter quodsancti Patres statueru^t verba ista sub silentio
dici.
pronounced them over the bread of their meal, which was incontinently
transubstantiated into flesh: whereupon withal they were struck with thunder
from heaven. This History is recited by Durand in his 4. book of his Rational
chap. 35. and by Pope Innocent the III. in his third book of the mysteries of
the Mass, chap. 1.

CHAP. III. Of prayers of particular persons in a tongue not understood by
themselves that pray.
I. PRayer is a request or supplication, which man presents unto God,
forwarded and suggested by the sense and feeling of our want and necessity, it
is a kind of alms which man asks of God. Whence it follows, that he that
prays ought to pray according to his feeling, and to apply his prayer
accordingly unto his necessity; this cannot be done by him that prays
without understanding himself, and who by custom says a prayer in terms not
understood: very often it falls out, that the party which has an intention
to ask of God something, says in his Latin prayers things far from his
own intention: Thus Courtizans and women, that understand the Latin just as
much as the Greek, do say in Latin their seven Psalms; Psalm. 38. and 143.
wherein David being sick, complains that he halteth as he goes, and that
his raines were enflamed, and speaks as one shut up in a dark Cave, whither
Saul had brought him: is it credible, that a silly woman pronouncing these
things in Latin, once thinks of asking salvation or the forgiveness of
sins?

II. The Apostle Saint James in his 1. Chap. wills, that when we ask any
thing of God, we ask it in faith, not doubting at all. Now it is impossible
to ask of God any thing in faith and in full assurance, when the thing is not
known which is asked of God, for faith implies and brings knowledge.
Whereupon also our Savior Jesus Christ conioyneth ordinarily knowledge with
faith, as in the 10 of Saint John, ver. 38. That you may know and believe that
the Father is in me: and in the 17. Chap. ver. 8. They have known and believed
that thou have sent me. Wherefore instead that Saint Paul so often says, that
we are justified by faith. Esaias in his 53. Chap. ver. 11. says, that we are
justified by knowledge.

III. One cannot accuse a man in plainer terms to be out of his wits, then
in saying to him; You know not what you say. But all things which in civil
conversation would be esteemed absurd, in the Romish religion are held for
good: as if religion served to trouble the wits, or were a receptacle of
absurdities; and that which otherways is a folly, here is a devotion. God then
shall deal justly to grant nothing to that person, that knows not what he
asks; and by consequent knows this, that God has denied him.

IV. Here experience and necessity reform men by force; for they who shall
have all their life long, made their prayers in latin without understanding of
themselves, in sudden afflictions and in great griefs will change their
language, and will cast forth unto God their fervent prayers in their ordinary
tongue. A man which is in the pangues of death, or that is upon the Iibbet
(unless he be utterly brutish) will never say Beati quorum, nor the Pater in
Latin.

V. But what good grace can a Latin prayer have, which a poor silly woman
says to S. Mary the Egyptian, or to S. Magdaleine who never understood the
Latin? And albeit that indeed they had learned their Latin in Paradise, yet
so it is, that all that is nothing to understand the voice without knowing the
heart: it is required that he on whom we must call, do know the faith and the
repentance of him, that prays least he hear an hypocrite. Now the Word of
God teaches us, that God alone knows the hearts of men, 2. Chron. 6. ver. 30.

VI. Above all to be pitied is the Latin prayer of a woman, or of an Artizan,
which prays to S. Vrsula, or to S. Margarite, or to S. Catherine, or to S.
Chrystopher, or to S. Martial, or to S. Lo^gius, or to S. Lazarus patron of
lepers, or to the eleve^ thousand Virgins, which are Saints, and yet never were
men, and which are placed in heaven, and yet never lived upon the earth, by
this means he that prays, speaks to a Saint, which has no being at all,
in a tongue which he himself that prays understands not, which is an
heap of absurdity. These are not the calves of the lips, but the lips of
calves. Osee 14.2.
Hi non sunt vituli labiorum, sed labia vitulorum, Osea 14.2.

VII. That if unto a man that prays in Latin, not understanding that which
he says, any one had given one of Esops fables in Latin, persuading him, that
it is a prayer to the Virgin Mary: such a man, according to the doctrine of the
Church of Rome, pronouncing this fable with fervent affection, should not cease
to pray in faith, and should not loose the merit of his prayer.

VIII. That if a French man not understanding the Germane tongue, should come
and ask something of the King in the high Dutch, the King although he
understood the high Dutch, would take this discourse for a mockery, or would
think such a man to be beside himself.

IX. In this point the example of Jesus Christ ought to serve us for a rule,
who prescribing a form of prayer unto his Disciples, gave them one in their
usual and ordinary tongue, saying unto them, When you pray, say our Father
which art in heaven, etc. He gave them not this prayer in the Byscane, nor in
the Arabian. For he would have them when they prayed, know what they asked of
God; and what were the things whereof they stood in need.

X. And with such excellent art is this prayer framed and composed; that the
faithful speaking unto God, speaks also unto himself, and that every
petition is a commandment; for as the commandments of God are the matter of
our prayers, and teach us that which we ought to ask of God; so also the
petitions which God has prescribed us contain the commandments. In asking of
God that his kingdom may come, we oblige and bind over our selves to labor
for the advancement of this kingdom. In asking and praying that the name of
God may be hallowed, we are advertised to hallowe it our selves; and we are
taught by this prayer, not to covet another man's bread, and to forgive them
that have trespassed against us, and to eschew the temptations of evil;
lessons which cannot be comprised by him, that understands not himself, and
prays in a tongue which he understands not.

XI. True it is that God understands all tongues; but withal, his pleasure is,
that he that speaks unto him, know what he says, and that he speak as a
man, and a reasonable creature, that is to say, with reason and understanding.
God indeed understands thy tongue; but withal, he understands that thou
understands not thy self; it is a grand abuse to think that we speak unto
God, to the end he might understand our language; for before we opened our
mouths he knew our thoughts; and it is be that puts prayer into the heart of
them that fear him: now it is the heart that must move the lips, and suggest
to the mouth words conformable to the thought.

XII. Thus prayed the Prophets: David prayed in his own tongue, and dictated
unto the Israelites the Psalms in a tongue they understood: who whilst they
pronounced the Psalms of David, had this contentment, whereof the Church of
Rome has deprived her self: reading in particular, and hearing read in
public the Psalms of David without all understanding of them.

XIII. The prodigal child returning home to his Father and saying; Father I
have sinned against heaven and before thee, I am not worthy to be called thy
son, understood himself well: Luke 15.21. Thus prayed the poor Publican,
smiting his breast, and saying, O God be merciful unto me a poor sinner,
Luke 18.13.

XIV. Thus prayed the Primitive Christians for the Apostle to the Colossians,
Chap. 3. ver. 16. had taught them to exhort one another mutually in Psalms and
praises; so prayed the Apostle Saint Paul being at Philippi, where the
faithful used to go forth of the town, and met together by a river side to
pray: Act. 16. verse 13. For Lydia a seller of purple had not been touched
either with his prayers, or with his exhortations, if he had prayed, or spoke
in a tongue which she understood not. And none has hitherto doubted but that
the faithful of the Church of Jerusalem, in the time of the Apostles prayed in
their vulgar tongue, when they prayed for the deliverance of Saint Peter being
prisoner: Act. 12.5.
and that the Fathers when they prayed in their families, were understood by
their children.

XV. The Apostle Saint Paul in the first to the Corinthians, has a whole
Chapter upon this subject; namely, the 14. wherein he utterly condemns prayers
in an unknown tongue: 1. Cor. 14.
If (says he) I know not the meaning of the voice, I shall be unto him that
speaks a barbarian, and he that speaks shall be a barbarian unto me. If he
forbid to be a barbarian to another in praying, then how much more to be a
barbarian to ones self? And in the 15. ver. I will pray with the spirit, verse
11.
and will pray with the understanding also: but this passage shall be handled
hereafter more at large, when we shall come to speak of public prayers.

XVI. Thomas Harding a Doctor of Lovane an English man, the Target of Popery
in England, in his Treatise of prayers in a strange tongue, in the 33. Section,
constrained by the evidence of the truth, passes his sentence of condemnation
against it, saying, Est optabilius ut populus preces publicas vernacula sua
lingua recitaret.
it were to be wished that the people could say their public prayers in their
vulgar tongue; Hardin. Section. 9. Non potest populus fateor, dicere Amen ad
benedictionem Sacerdotis aeque ac si Latinam linguam perfect calleret.
and in the 29. Section, he acknowledges that at this day the people cannot
so easily say Amen to the blessing of the Priest, as if they understood the
Latin.

CHAP. IV. That in the Primitive Church every one prayed in his own tongue.
We have already in the first Chapter alleged many of the Ancients, who
derided the superstition of those that thought that prayers in a barbarous
tongue have more efficacy in them.

Origin in his 8. book against Celsus: (...).
The Grecians in their prayers use Greek words, and the Romans the Roman
language, and so every one according to his tongue prays unto God, and
praises him, as he is able. Note that he sets not down only his opinion,
but that he shows forth the custom and practice of the Christian Church.

Chrysostom in the Homily 35. upon the first to the Corinthians: (...),
If any one speak only in the Persian tongue, or in any other strange tongue,
not knowing what he says, he shall be a barbarian to himself, and not only
to another man.

Hierome in his 18. Epistle to Marcella: In tota Christi villa tota rusticitas
est. Extra Psalmos si^entium est Quocunque te vertetis arator stiuam tenens
alleluia decantat: Sudans messor Psalmis le avocat: and curva attondens vites
falce vinitor aliquid Davidicum canit.
Through out the whole City of Jesus Christ they are all country swains.
Without Psalms there is not a word spoken: which way so ere thou turnest thee,
the very husbandman holding the plough sings praises to the Lord: and the
reapers and the sweating harvest-men withdraw themselves aside with Psalms:
and the vine-dressor with his hooked vine-knife shragging his vines, sings
something out of David. This is not, nor cannot be done by the common people of
the Church of Rome, that have no mind to sing at the Cart, or in their shops
Latin Psalms which they understand not, and where to sing Psalms in English
is a badge of heresy.

The same Father in his Epitaph of Paula, says that at the performing of the
funeral rites of Paula, Psalms were by course sung in the Hebrew, the Greek,
in the Latin, and in the Syriack tongue, Hebreo, Greco, Latino, Syroque
sermon Psalmi in ordine personabant. Every one singing according to the
language of his own country.

And not to weary the Reader with a multitude of passages in a matter so
evident: Thomas himself the Angelical Doctor, whom the Pope has made a Saint,
in his Commentary upon the 14. Chapter of the 1. to the Corinth: in the 4.
Lect: has these words: It is a thing certain, that he that prays and
understands what he says, profits more then he, which prays only with the
tongue, but understands not that which he says, for he which understands
is edified, both in his understanding and in his affection, but his
understanding that understands not, receives not any fruit whereby to be
edified. And in the same Lect: he acknowledges that the Primitive Church
prayed in the vulgar tongue, but that this course was changed afterward.

It would be a very pleasant conceit to bring in the Virgin Mary, or Elizabeth
her Cozen, saying their hours in a barbarous tongue and not understood,
turning over a chapelet, prayer of beads or Rosarie: according to the custom
of the Church of Rome, who say their hours by dropping down the grains of a
consecrated pair of beads. The good women rub these their beads against the
feet of an image; they bring from Rome chests full of hallowed grains,
Consecrated by the Pope, which are sold dearer, because they have more virtue.
M. the Cardinal du Perron coming back from Rome, brought back with him a
budget full of hallowed grains, every of which grains filed on a pair of
beads had that virtue, that but kissing of it, one might purchase an hundred
years of pardon; but this privilege was but only for the French: one might
see silly women saying their Pater-nosters in Latin, in their way going to
market, and the Spanish talking and conferring of affairs, turning over fair
and softly the grains of their beads, saying at every grain a Latin prayer,
which is to be repeated fifty times over, blending the Paters with the Aves,
and by saying five Aves, for one Paternoster; for the virtue of prayers now
adays consists in number, repeated over in the same words not understood: And
the poor people, when they say their Ave think they pray to the Virgin Mary;
whereas indeed they pray for the Virgin Mary. At the end of all this, there is
said, It is the Church, etc. and It is an Apostolical tradition. For this word
Church is become a cloak to cover a multitude of abuses.

CHAP. V. That public service in a tongue not understood, is contrary to the
Word of God, and to reason.
I. ABuse in the Liturgy and public service is yet more pernicious, because
God himself is therein wrapped up, and made a barbarian unto men, and his word
by this means becomes not intelligible: as if men would frustrate God of his
intention, which is to speak unto us to instruct us; as if Jesus Christ came
down from heaven of purpose to speak to men without being understood. For in
the Mass there are not only prayers unto God, but also therein are read
places of Scriptures in which God speaks unto men. In prayers in a tongue not
understood, there is used this impertinent excuse, that God understands all
tongues, as if we spoke with the mouth; to the end, to be understood by God:
But here where the business is concerning God speaking to men, this excuse
has no place; for when God speaks unto men, he will be heard and
understood: and indeed when for excuse it is said, that God understands al
tongues, it is presupposed that he unto whom he speaks, should understand
that which is said unto him.

II. Therefore the Scripture teaches us that when God is provoked to
displeasure against his people; he makes them heavy of hearing, that they may
not hear, and that their hearts may not understand; as God himself speaks
by his Prophet Esaias. Chap. 6. verse 10.

III. Besides it is also one of Gods curses, wherewith he punishes the
ingratitude and the contempt of his word, when he speaks to a people in a
strange tongue, that they may not understand, as the Apostle teaches in the
first to the Corinthians, Chap. 14. where he brings in God speaking thus by
his Prophet Esaias. Esaias 25.11.
I will speak to this people by men of another tongue, and by strange lips,
and thus they shall not understand, says the Lord. Wherefore tongues are for a
sign not unto believers, but unto infidells. This threatening is fulfilled in
the Church of Rome; wherein God punishes the hardness of men's hearts by
speaking unto them in a tongue which they understand not.

IIII. In this matter this maxim taken out of the nature of man, and from the
intention of the creature ought to be laid for the foundation; namely, that the
tongue was given unto man to be the interpreter of his thoughts, and messenger
of his conceptions. Whence it follows that to use the tongue to a contrary
end, and to speak to the end to be not understood, is to turn nature topsie
turvie and quite to overthrowe her; and as much as in us lies to frustrate the
Creator of his intention: and to change humane speech into an unprofitable
Echo, and into a sound beating the air. Now if this be true in him which
speaks to others in a tongue which he understands not, it is yet more true
in him which is understood neither by himself nor by another.

V. Out of the self same maxim, it follows that when the Priest speaks
Latin in the Church, he ought to speak to be understood by some body. Our
adversaries must tell us, whether he speak to be understood by the
assistants, or to be understood by himself, or to be understood by God, for
there is no fourth. Now he speaks not to be understood of the bystanders,
seeing he speaks so very low, and in a tongue which the people understand
not: and besides, in private Masses he speaks alone and without any
assistants: Besides he speaks not to be understood of God; for God
understands us without our speaking, though we speak not at all, and before
we open our mouths: nor can it rather be said, that the Priest in the Mass
speaks to the end to be understood by himself, for he knew his own thought
before he spoke: speech was given man not to inform himself in his own
thoughts, but to the end to make it known to another; he is utterly beside
himself that speaks to himself, to the end, to understand himself.

VI. Add hereunto, that in many places of the Mass, the Priest speaks to the
people, saying unto them, Oremus, etc. and Orate pro me fratres, etc. and many
other such like things, wherein the Priest bids the people ask of God such and
such things, and to join their prayers with his: but the people have no mind
to obey that his commandment, not so much as knowing what the Priest bids them
do; the people might justly say to him, make us understand thee, if thou will
be obeyed.

VII. Wherefore in the Church of the Old Testament, the whole public service
was performed in the vulgar tongue; and the prayers which Aaron and his
Successors made for the Hebrew people were made in the Hebrew tongue: which
after the captivity of Babylon being corrupted, yet was still understood by
the people, as we will show hereafter.

VIII. Our Lord Jesus Christ instituted and celebrated the holy Supper amongst
his Disciples in the vulgar tongue, and that which was understood by the
assistants; his will was, that when the faithful shall eat of that bread, and
drink of that cup, they show forth the Lords death until he come again. 1
Cor. 11. ver. 26. Now this is not to show forth a thing, to propound it in an
unknown tongue, not understood.

IX. To this very self same end he gave unto his Apostles the gift of diverse
tongues, to the end, that in all nations they might establish the service of
God in the tongue of the country, and that in every tongue God might be
served, in such sort, that the diversity of tongues which at the building of
Babel was a curse, at the building of the Church is become a blessing.

X. The Apostles followed their Masters example; for the Apostle writing to the
Corinthians, that were Grecians, gave them in their own tongue the form of
the Celebration of the holy Supper. 1 Cor. 11.

XI. Would Jesus Christ who is the light of the world come to plunge it in
darkness, and to make things more obscure? And God having spoken to his people
by Moses in a tongue understood, would he now wrap and infold up himself in
darkness by propounding his Word, and by giving his Sacraments in a barbarous
and an unknown tongue?

XII. But that which is yet of more strength in this matter, and which clearly
decides, and fully determins this controversy, is the authority of the
Apostle Saint Paul, who employed the 14. Chapter of his 1. Epistle to the
Corinthians, in a manner wholly to condemn the use of strange tongues, and not
understood in the Church. If (says he) the trumpet give an uncertain sound,
who shall be prepared to the war? So likewise you, except you utter words
which may be understood, how shall it be known what is spoken? For ye shall
speak unto the air, and a little after. Wherefore if I know not the meaning
of the voice, I shall be a barbarian to him that speaks, and he that
speaks shall be a barbarian to me: and a little after: If thou bless with
the spirit, how shall he that occupies the place of the unlearned, say Amen, at
thy giving of thanks; saying, he understands not what thou say? Thou
verily give thanks well, but another is not thereby edified. Whereupon he
concludes, I had rather in the Church speak five words with my understanding,
that I may teach others also then ten thousand words in an unknown tongue.

Du Perron against the King of great Britain, book 6. chap. 1. p. 109. the
word tongue in S. Paul, signifies an unknown tongue.
XIII. Mounsieur du Perron answers, that Saint Paul speaks not of an
unknown tongue which was in the Church, but of tongues infused and miraculous.
This I willingly agree to, for this augments the force of that place against
the ordinary service in an unknown tongue. For these miraculous gifts of
tongues were rare, and given unto some Christians for a small time; to the end
to declare the power of God, and by consequent the use of them in the Church
brought with them a benefit, which the Mass in Latin cannot bring.
Nevertheless, the Apostle forbids them the use of this miraculous gift in the
Church, unless they interpret them instantly; because he will have nothing
spoken in the Church which is not understood. How much more condemns he a
strange language in the ordinary service, wherein that extraordinary evil
which the Apostle would avoid, would become ordinary? The Apostle forbids not
an unknown tongue in the Church, for that it is miraculous: but because it is
not understood, and because that he which speaks is a barbarian to him that
hears him; and because that is not understood, which is spoken, and because
it is to speak in the air, and because ye people cannot say Amen to the
thanksgiving, they understand not; and because that they that hear are not
thereby edified, which are truly reasons of moment: be it that he which speaks
in an unknown tongue in the Church, have learned that tongue by miracle or by
study, the question here is not of the manner by which a tongue is learned,
but of the peoples instruction. Saint Paul had learned without miracle the
Hebrew tongue; and yet for all that would he not celebrate at Corinth, or at
Rome the holy Supper amongst the Gentiles, in the Hebrew tongue; in a word he
gives two general rules and without exception. The one it is better to speak
in the Church five words understood, then ten thousand not understood. The
other, it is a curse of God, when he speaks to a people in a tongue they
understand not.

XIV. Others go about to escape by another way. They say that Saint Paul
speaks not of the ordinary service which is said in the Church, but of
certain hymns and spiritual songs. In speaking thus they would persuade us,
that such hymns ought to be pronounced in a tongue understood, but that the
rest of the service was said in a tongue not understood by the Corinthians, but
this they know to be false. It being a thing well known, that in Greece the
public service was ever performed and said in Greek, and is so said yet to
this day. So that if such hymns and spiritual songs ought to be pronounced in
a tongue understood, then much more the ordinary prayers and the reading of
Gods Word, whence the people receive more edification.

XV. But it is easy for us to prove that the Apostle in this place speaks of
another matter then of hymns and spiritual songs. For when he says that
strange tongues are for a sign, not unto the believers, but unto unbeleevers:
and ranketh that amongst the threatenings and curses of God; when God threatens
to speak to a people in a strange tongue, to the end, not to be understood; it
is clear that he speaks not of hymns or songs in which men speak unto God,
but of the Word of God, which is directed unto men.

XVI. And when the Apostle says, that he had rather speak five words in the
Church understood to instruct others, then ten thousand in a tongue, it is
evident he speaks of whatsoever is spoken in the Church.

XVII. And these words, If I know not what is signified by the words, I shall
be a barbarian to him that speaks, and he that speaks shall be a barbarian
unto me; are they not also as true in him that reads the Scriptures in
public, as in him that pronounces hymns? For barbarians are all they
esteemed, whose tongue one understands not: and this is it that Ovid says of
himself being banished among the Getes. Ovid Tri^^ium lib. 5. Eleg. 10.


Barbarus hic ego sum quia non intelligor vlli.
Et rident stolidi verba Latina Getae.
XVIII. Moreover, when the Priest pronounces prayers in the Mass, and the
people understand not so much as one word of them; may we not, and ought we
not to apply unto him the Apostles sentence: how shall he which occupies the
place of the unlearned, say Amen unto thy giving of thanks? for he knows
not what thou say.

Chrysostom comm^nting on this place, understood it as we do. For he brings
in the Apostle speaking thus: Chrysostom. Hom. 35. in 1. ad Corinth. (...).
If I speak not the thing to you, which may be understood by you, and which
may be plain and evident unto you: but show you only that I have the gift of
tongues, when you have heard strange tongues, you shall go your way from me
without any benefit at all thereby. For what profit can there redound to you
from a voice you understand not?

Saint Ambrose in his commentary on this place, has given it the very same
sense. Si utique ad aedificandam Ecclesiam conueneritis, ea debent dici quae
intelligant audientes Nam quid prodest ut quis loquatur lingua quam solus scit,
ut qui audit nih^l proficiat? etc.
If (says he) you meet together to edify the Church, those things must be
delivered which the Auditors understand: for to what purpose or profit is it
that any one speak a tongue which he himself only understands, and whereof
he that hears can reap no fruit? and a little after In Ecclesia volo qumque
verba loqui per legem, ut and alios aedificem quam prolixam orationem habere in
obscuro.
The Apostle says, I had rather speak five words in the Church acccording to
the law, that I edify withal others, then any long and large discourse with
obscurity.

Saint Hierome in his commentary on this place, Omnis sermo qui non
intelligitur barbarus iudicatur.
Every word which is not understood is adjudged barbarous. And in the same
place, Ibid. Si quis incognitis aliis linguis loquatur, men's eius non ipsi
efficitur fine fructu, sed audienti: quic quid enim dicitur ignorant.
if any man speak in a tongue not understood unto another, his spirit is
unfruitful, not to himself, but unto his hearer, for he understands not what
is heard.

Basil in his Ascepticks is very express for this point, in his 278. answer of
his brief definitions. He asks, (...) etc. (...).
what is this that the spirit of a man prays, but his understanding is
without fruit? Then he answers it. This was spoken [by the Apostle] touching
those that make their prayers in an unknown tongue unto them that hear them;
for he says, if I pray in a tongue, my spirit prays, but my understanding is
without fruit. For when the words of the prayer are unknown to them that are
there present, his understanding that prays is without fruit, not profiting
at all. But when the assistants understand the prayer, which may profit them
which hear, then he which prays has this fruit, namely, the bettering of
those that have thereby profited. And so it fares with ALL, and with
whatsoever is delivered out of the Word of God. For it is written, if there be
any word profitable for the building up of faith. This holy man understands
this place of the Apostle, not only of hymns or songs, but of all prayer, and
of all reading and pronouncing of the Word of God.

And concerning this we have a law of the Emperor Justinian which is in
Nouvelle 123. in the Greek Editions in these words, Ad haec iubemus ut omnes
Episcopi pariter and Presbyteri non tacito modo, sed clara voce quae a fideli
populo exandiatur sacram oblationem and preces in sancto baptismate ad hibitas
celebrent, quo maiore exinde devotione in depromendis Dei laudibus audientum
animi efferantur. Ita enim and Divus Apostolus docet 1. ad Cor. epist
we will and command that all Bishops and Priests celebrate the sacred
oblation, and the prayers thereunto added in holy Baptism not in a low voice,
but with a loud and clear voice which may be understood by the faithful
people, that thereby the minds of the hearers may be raised up with greater
devotion to set forth the praises of the Lord God. For so teaches the holy
Apostle in the first to the Corinthians. This Imperial law is extant in the
Greek Coppies of Haloander, and is alleged by Cassander the Divine of
Cologne, and is acknowledged by Cardinal Bellarmine in his 2. book of the
Mass, Chap. 12. Whence detestable is the fraud and perversitie of those that
have rased it out of the Latin versions of Justinian.

Hereunto Bellarmine answers, that it belongs not to the Emperor to give laws
touching sacred matters. But if this N be not received for a law, at the least
it serves for a testimony of the custom of the Church in the Roman Empire
unto the time of this Emperor, who died about the year of our Lord 165.

He says also that commandment is only given to the Greek Churches: This
Cardinal could not be ignorant that the City of Rome, and the Bishop thereof
were then in the Emperor Justinians Subjection, which might appear by the same
Nouvel; in the which, the Bishop of Rome is taxed by the Emperor at four
thousand Crowns for his entrance into his charge, and the other Patriarchs at
three thousand: For then the Bishops of the principal Seas, paid first fruits
to the Emperor, and the same Emperor created two Bishops of Rome, namely,
Silverius, and Vigilius.

In a word, this passage of the Apostle Saint Paul of the 14. Chapter of the 1.
to the Corinthians; wherein is condemned the use of strange tongues in the
Church, does so rack our Adversaries, that some of them of better conscience
let fall from them a voluntary condemnation thereof.

Nicholas de Lyra in his notes on this Chapter speaks thus: Hic consequenter
idem o^^endit in oratione publica, quia si populus intelligat orationem seu
benedictionem sacerdotis, melius reducitur in Deum, and deuotius respondet Amen.
Here consequently the Apostle shows the same concerning public prayer,
for that if the people understand the prayer and blessing of the Priest, they
are the more easily carried on to think on God, and to answer more devoutly
Amen. Also, if the Priest bless in mind, that is to say, without being
understood of the people, what benefit reap the simple people that understand
him not?

Anselme whom the Pope has Canonized for a Saint, in his exposition on this
Chapter. Bonum est quod Ioqueris, sed alter non aedificatur in verbis tuis quae
non intelligit. Ideo cum ad Ecclesia^ propter aedificationem conueniatis, ea
debent in Ecclesia dici quae intelligantur ab hominibus, and praestent
aedificationem audientibus.
That which thou say is good, but another is not edified by thy words, which
he understands not; therefore seeing you are assembled together in the Church
for edification, there must be nothing spoken in the Church, but what is
understood by the people, and may bring edification to the hearers.

Thomas the chief of the Schoolmen in his commentary upon this very Chapter
of the Apostle, in the fourth Lect: finds himself so pusled, that at the
last he is feign to say, that this commandment of the Apostle was good for the
Primitive Church, but that now it is no more in practice, because the faithful
are better instructed. Sed qu are non dantur benedictiones in vulgari, vt
intelligatur a populo, and conforment se magis eis? R. Dicendum est quod hoc
forte fuit in Ecclesia primitiua, sed postqua^ fideles instructi sunt and
sciunt quae audiunt in communi officio, fiunt benedictiones in Latino.
Wherefore (says he) are not the blessings given in the vulgar tongue, that
the people might understand them, and conform themselves the better unto them?
His answer is; We must say, that it may be this was done in the Primitive
Church, but since, the people were afterward instructed, and knew what they
heard in the Common service, the blessings were delivered in Latin. And in his
fifth Lect: he says, that in the Primitive Church, it had been a folly to
pray in an unknown tongue, because men were rude, but that now all are
instructed, wherein he much deceives himself. For never were the people more
ignorant then they were in the time of this Thomas, and in the two hundred
years following And even now that the Scripture is set forth to the sight, and
that learning florisheth, scarce of an hundred persons of the Church of Rome,
shall there be found two, that know what is contained in the Mass, or that so
much as take the pains once to enquire after it.

Harding a great Defendor of Popery in England, in his 3. Article of his
disputation against Jewel in the 30. Section has followed the impiety of
Thomas, speaking thus. Hardin. Art. 3. Sect. 30. Quod autem Divus Paulus morem
precandi lingua in Ecclesia tanquam fructus and aedificationi^ ex pertem
improbare videtur, and quinque verba aut sententias intellectas and perceptas,
ex quibus reliquus populus instituatur december mil libus pe reg^ino incognito
sermon pronuntiatis anteponere, ista omnia ad illorum temporum conditionem
referenda sunt, quae hodierno Ecclesiae statui long dissimilis est.
As for that it seems that Saint Paul disalloweth prayer made in the Church
in an unknown tongue, as being fruitless, and without edification, and that
he prefers five words or sentences understood wherewith the people might be
instructed, before ten thousand pronounced in a strange tongue and not
understand; all things ought to be referred to the condition of those times,
which is very unlike to the estate of the Church of this time. Mark this
audacious boldness and impiety, which hewes down the authority of Gods Word
even by the very root. For if it be permitted unto men to say, that was the
law at the beginning, and so they were taught in the time of the Apostles; but
now this is changed, and the Church being better tutored does otherways. What
remains there but to change the whole Word of God? And to give the Pope
authority to casheere Gods laws, and to pluck God out of his throne to set
up the Pope above God?

Cardinal Cajetan was ashamed of this: For in his commentary upon the
fourteenth of the first to the Corinthians, he speaks as one desiring, that
the Latin were banished out of the public service, and that it were
performed in the vulgar. Ex hac Pauli uoctrina habetur quod melius ad
aedificationem Ecclesiae est orationes publicas quae audiente populo dicuntur
dici lingua communi clericis and populo qua^ dici Latin.
By this doctrine of Saint Paul (says he) it is to be gathered, that it is
better for the edification of the Church, that the public prayers which are
said in the hearing of the people, were said in a tongue common as well to the
Clergy as to the people, then to say it in the Latin. Which is a very notable
confession of a Cardinal of so great authority in the Church of Rome.

CHAP. VI. Proof hereof even by the example of the Church of the old Testament.
BY what has been hitherto said, it appears that in this question
concerning a tongue not understood, which is used in the public service, we
have the Word of God, and reason, and the confession of our Adversaries on our
side. Whereunto we must add the example of the ancient Church, as well of the
old as of the new Testament, which ought to serve us for a rule.

I. To fetch the matter from the beginning: God gave his law in a tongue
understood: and the form of prayers and blessings, which God prescribed to
Aaron to make before the people, was in the vulgar tongue of Gods people; as
are those prayers and blessings which are read in the 6. of Numbers, verse 23.
and following, and in the 10. Chap. ver. 35. and 36. and then of thanksgiving
in the oblation of first fruits, Deuteronomy. 26. ver. 3. and the form of prayer
after the payment of Tithes in the third year, Deuteronomy. 26. ver. 13. in a word,
all the public prayers which were made by the Priests or by the people, were
made in a tongue understood by the people. And David dictated to the people
Psalms which were sung in the Temple upon instruments of Music in the Hebrew
tongue, which was the tongue used in Israel.

II. During the captivity of Babylon, the Hebrew tongue degenerated from it
purity. Notwithstanding the which, the change was not so great, but that the
Hebrew tongue, in the which Moses and the Prophets writ, was still understood
by the Jews. Not only for that the people were exercised in the reading and
hearing of those books, as well in their private houses, as in the Synagogues
every Sabbath; but also for that the corruption was not so great, but that the
common people easily understand the Hebrew, by reason of the proximitie and
near resemblance between the Jewish and the Hebrew tongue. Whence also in the
new Testament the Iudaique tongue is often called the Hebrew; as in 27. of
Saint Matthew, verse 33. where Golgotha, which is a word of the Iudaique
tongue, is said to be an Hebrew word: but the Hebrews say Golgoleth, that is to
say, scalpe or scull, and in the Chap. 19. of Saint John, verse 19. it is said
that Gabbatha in Hebrew signifies pavement, although Gabbatha be a Syrian
word. For that the Jews after their return from the captivity of Babylon,
understood the Hebrew tongue, and the Text of the books of the Law, appears
by the 8. Chapter of Nehemiah, ver. 2. where it is said that Esdras the Priest
brought the law before the congregation of men and women, and of all them of
hearing; and it is added that Esdras read in the book in the presence of the
men and of the women, and of as many as were capable to understand: and the
ears of the people were attentive to the reading. This could not be done in
the Church of Rome, in the which the Deacon reads the Gospel, and the
Subdeacon reads the Epistle in Latin before women, peisants, and tradesmen,
that understand them not, and consequently cannot be attentive thereunto.

The exposition which the Levites added unto this Lecture, which is mentioned
in the Sequel, was not to interpret the terms thereof into another tongue,
but to expound the meaning and sense of them, as Nicholas de Lyra acknowledges
upon the 8. of Nehemiah. Esdras legit in eo aperte, id est intelligibiliter
declarando ea quae videbantur obscura. Iospehus
Esdras read in the book plainly, that is to say, intelligibly, opening and
declaring the things which seemed obscure.

III. (...) cap. 12. (...), etc.
Josephus in his 12. and in his 16. Chapter of his book of the Empire of
reason, describes the Martyrdom of seven brethren, and of their mother, by the
cruelty of King Antiochus the illustrious: and says, that the mother exhorted
her children, and especially the youngest to die constantly for the law of God,
and that she spoke to them in the Hebrew tongue. It is to be presumed she
spoke in Hebrew that she might not be understood by Antiochus, who was a
Grecian: and seeing she spoke thus to the youngest and least, it appears that
then amongst the Jews, even women and children spoke Hebrew.

IIII. In the fourth Chapter of Saint Luke, verse 16. and following; our Lord
Jesus being in the Synagogue of Nazareth, takes the book of the Prophet Esaias,
and reads before the people a long passage of Esaias: then adds, This day is
accomplished this Scripture which you hear: which words do witness that the
auditors and bystanders well understood the words of that place. Is it
credible, that in the Synagogues of the Jews the Scriptures were read in a
tongue not understood, seeing that in the Scriptures God speaks to the people
to the end to be understood.

V. In the 22. of the Acts verse 2. the Apostle Saint Paul makes an oration to
the Jews in the Hebrew tongue, which made them the more attentive: Which he
would not have done if they had not understood it. And this Apostle would not
have spoken to a people in a tongue not understood: as also the sequel of the
Chapter, especially the 22. verse, shows that the Jews understood him very
well.

CHAP. VII. That the Primitive Christian Church through out the whole world,
used a tongue understood in the public service.
HEre we have for us the whole Primitive Church. It is a thing without all
contestation, and witnessed by the Ancients, that every country and nation,
even unto the most barbarous, had the holy Scriptures translated into their
vulgar tongues, to the end, that the people might be instructed by the reading
of them. Chrysostom in the first Homily upon the 8. of Saint John. (...).
The Syrians, Egyptians, Indians, Persians, Ethiopians, and infinite other
nations having translated into their tongues, the instructions propounded by
him, (to wit by Saint John) being barbarous people have learned to be lovers of
wisdom. And Theodoret in his 5. Sermon of the means how to correct the
indispositions of the Grecians. Theod. Graec. affectionum curationis Sermon. 5.
(...), etc.
The Hebrew has not only been translated into Greek, but into the Latin,
into the Egyptian, Persian, Indian, Armenian, Scythique, yea and even into the
Polonian: and to speak in a word, into all languages, which the nations use at
this day.

Saint Hierome translated the Bible into the Dalmatick tongue, as himself
witnesses in his Epistle to Hieron. Sophronio. Quorum translationem
diligentissime emendatam, olim meae linguae hominibus dederim.
Sophronius.

Saint Augustnie in his book of Christian doctrine Chap. 5. Ex quo factum est,
ut etiam Script^ra Divina, qua tauti^ mor bis humanarum voluntatum subvenitur,
ab una lingua pro fecta, quae opportune potuit per totum orbem disseminari, per
varias inter pretum linguas long lateque diffusa innotesceret Gentibus ad
salutem.
Hence came it that the holy Scriptures which cures such a number of the
deseases of man's will, having begun to be set forth in a tongue which might
fitly be dispersed abroad through the whole earth, was manifested to the nations
unto salvation, being spread abroad far and wide, by the means of the diverse
tongues of sundry interpreters.

And Vlfilas a Bishop of the Goths translated the holy Scriptures into the
Gothique tongue, Sozom. (...).
as Sozomene witnesses in his 6. book of his history, Chap. 37.

We may be bold to avouch that the holy Scriptures were very common among
the common people, seeing that Saint Hierome in the Epistle to Laeta, exhorts
her to exercise her daughter Paula in the reading of the holy Scriptures, and
commends Fabiola Deus bone, quo illa feruore, quo studio intenta erat divinis
voluminibus.
for her diligence in the reading of the holy Scriptures, those sacred books
especially the Prophets, and the Evangelists, and the Psalms. So Chrysostom
in his 3. Homily of Lazarus, and in the Homily 2. upon Saint Matthew, and in
the 3. upon the 2. to the Thessalonians, and often elsewhere, exhorts
tradesmen, women, simple Idiots to the often and careful reading of the holy
Scriptures.

The Epistle unto the Virgin Demetrias, which is the 142. amongst the Epistles
of Saint Augustine, in the 23. Chap. Ita Scripturas sanctas lege, ut semper
memineris Dei illa verba esse. Athanas. Tomo 2. p. 249* adver. eos qui nec quae
rendum, nec loquendum ex Scriptura praecipiunt. Edit. Commel.
So read the holy Scriptures, that thou remember evermore that they are the
words of God.

Athanasius 2. Tom. page 249. says, that the Heretics dissuaded the people
from the Scriptures, saying, they were not of easy access, but (says he) the
truth is; It is because they fly from being reproved by them.

All this presupposes that the Scripture in the vulgar tongue, was in the
hands of the people: for otherwise the exhortation to read them had been vain
and ridiculous.

This Scripture was read in the Church in a tongue understood by the people, as
appears in these words, (...).
frequent in the Homilies of the Fathers both Greek and Latin, As it was read
to you to day, this had been a great absurdity to put the people in mind of
a reading, wherein they had understood nothing.

Sulpitiue Severus in the life of Saint Martin recites, Inter Episcopos qui
affuerant praecipue Defensor quidam nomine dicitur restitisse, etc. Nam cum
fortuitu lector, cui legendi eo die officium erat, interclusus a populo d^
fuisset turbatis ministris, dum expectatur qui non aderat, unus e
circumstantibus sumpto Psalterio, quem primum versum invenit artipuit: Psalmus
autem hic erat, ex ore infantium, etc.
that one called Defensor opposed himself against the receiving of Saint
Martin into his Bishopric, saying, that he was a gross and sordid fellow, but
when one day as in the absence of the Deacon, one of the people taking up the
Psalter, began to read in the Church the 8. Psalm, where it is said, Out of
the mouth of babes and sucklings thou have established thy praise, because of
thine enemies, to destroy the enemy and avenger. Whereupon was raised a cry
of the people against this Defensor: believing that, that Lecture so fell out
to be read by the very providence of God.

Our Adversaries themselves acknowledge that in the Church of the Apostles and
many ages after; the service and the prayers were made and performed in a
tongue understood by the people. Lyranus upon the 14. Chapter of the first to
the Corinthians, In Primitivae Ecclesia benedictiones and caetera omnia fieba^t
in vulgari.
In the Primitive Church blessings and all other things were done in the vulgar
tongue. We have heard before Thomas Aquinas, and Harding the Englishman, who
acknowledge that in the Primitive Church men prayed in a tongue understood, but
they say, that it was good for that season and time, but that afterward that
custom was changed, because the people are better instructed.

Lactantius in his 5. book of divine Institutions in the 20. Chapter, derides
the Pagans who conceal their mysteries from the people fearing to be mocked,
and least their error should come to be known. Hinc fida silentia sacris
instituta sunt ab hominibus callidis ut populus nesciat quid colat.
Hence it comes (says he) that subtle men have taken order that there
should be kept a faithful silence and nothing should be made known of their
sacred service, least the people should know what they worship.

Saint Augustine in his book of the Master, 1. Chapter. When August. lib de
Magistro c. 1. Quare non opus est locutione cum oramus, id est sonantibus
verbis, nisi forte sicut sacerdotes faciunt significandae mentis suae causa Non
ut Deus sed ut homines audiant.
we pray (says he) there is no need of of words, that is to say, of words
which are sounded forth, unless it be as the Priests do, to make the people
understand their minds and conceptions, not that God should hear them, but
that men might hear them.

In the Council of Lateran held under Innocent the III. in the year 1215. in
the 9. chapter is extant this ordinance or Canon. Queniam in plerisque partib
intra eandem civitatem atque dioecesim permixti sunt populi diversarum
linguarum habentes sub vna fide varios ritus and mo^es, districte praecipimus,
ut Pontifices hujusmodi civit^tum sive dioecesum provideant vi^os idoneos qui
secundum diversitatem rituum and ling^arum di^^^a officia illis celebre^^, and
Ecclesiastica Sacramenta ministrent, instruendo cos verbo pariter and exemplo.
For as much as in most parts in one and the same City or Diocese, the people
of diverse tongues are blended and mixed together, having under one and the same
faith, sundry Ceremony and rites we straightly charge and command, that the
Bishops of such towns or Dioceses provide me^ fit, who may celebrate divine
service according to the diversity of ceremonies and tongues, and administer
the Sacraments of the Church, instructing them both by word and example. Behold
here a Council which our Adversaries reckon amongst the General Councills to
be one of them, authorized by the presence and approbation of so renowned a
Pope, who not only permits, but withal commands to celebrate the divine
service in another tongue, then in the Latin amongst people of diverse tongue;
and observe that he speaks of people diverse in language, but agreeing in
faith. That it might not be thought, that he spoke only of the Greeks and
Latins, who at that time were already of diverse beleefes, and separated in
Communion one from the other, and this not only in some few places, In
plerisque partibus.
but in most parts and places.

Isidore in his first book of Ecclesiastical Offices, Chap. 10. Est autem
lectio non parua audientium aedificatio. Vnde oportet ut quando psallitur, ab
omnibus psallatu^: cum oratur, oretur ab omnibus. Quando lectio legitur facto
silentio aeque audiatur a cunctis.
Reading is no small edification to them that hear. Whence it is meet, that
when the Psalms are said or sung, they should be said or sung by all, and
when prayer is said, it should be said by all, and when reading is in hand,
that it be heard with reverent silence of all.

And yet even unto this day in the Church of Rome, the order of reading is
conferd by the Bishop, pronouncing to him these words: Studete verba Dei,
videlicet lectiones sacr^s distinct and ane^re ad intelligentiam and
aedificationem fidelium ab que omni me^dacio falsitatis profer^e, etc. quatenus
auditores vestros verbo patiter and exemplo vestro docere possitis.
Study you to pronounce the words of God, that is, to say the sacred lessons,
distinctly and plainly, to the end, that the faithful may understand them,
and be edified by them, without all error of falsehood: And alitle after, In
such sort that you may instruct your Auditors both by word, and by example.
This is found extant in the Pontifical, deformed by Pope Clement the Eighth,
in the Chapt: of the ordination of Readers. This form of ordination is
ancienter then the abuse which crept in afterward: And I wonder at this, that
the said Pope having corrected many things in the Pontifical, caused not this
clause utterly to be expunged and put out, which enwraps and infolds in flat
perjury the readers of the Church of Rome, who are bound in their ordination
to read in such sort and manner that the faithful may understand their
readings, and that they may edify their hearers: for in making them read the
Scriptures in Latin, they bereave them of the means to accomplish that
promise, which they have made unto God.

Wherefore John Bellet in his recital of Cassander in his Sum of divine
Offices, in the Prologue, after he had commended the custom of the Primitive
Church, wherein it was not permitted any thing should be spoken in the Church
in a strange language, without a present addition of the interpretation
thereof; he adds: Quid autem in nostris temporibus est agendum? vbi nullus
vel rarus invenitur legens vel audiens quod intelligat? videns vel agens quod
a^^maduertat? Iam videtur esse completum quod a Propheta dict ur: Et erit
sacerdos quasi de populo vnus. Videtur ergo potiu^ ess^ tacendum quam
psallendum: potius silendum quam tripudiandum.
What course must we take in these our times, wherein either none, or but very
few are found, that understand what they read, or what they hear? that sees,
or practices what they observe? now seems to be come to pass that which was
said by the Prophet; The Priest shall be as one of the people. It seems then
that it were better to be silent, then to sing, and rather to hold our peace
then to danse. Thus derided he the singing and mimique gestures of the Priest.

All the Churches of the world, which are not subject to the Pope, yea and even
some of them which are subject to him are for us in this point. For in Greece
the service is said in Greek, and by more then a thousand years after Jesus
Christ the tongue of the liturgy was the vulgar tongue; and now whereas by the
empire of the Turks, and by the abolishing of schools and learning the tongue
is altered, yet so it is, that the vulgar Greek is not so far corrupted,
that the Greek of the liturgy is not understood of the people: and if it were
otherwise, yet so it is that the example of antiquity by the space of a
thousand years and upward, ought to be more considerable with us, then the
corruption of but yesterdaies birth.

Cassiodore who writ about the year 520. or 530. of our Lord, has an
excellent passage upon this subject, upon the Psalm 44. Perscrutemur cur
Ecclesia Dei de vestis varietate laudetur, cui totum simplex convenit atque
unum. Sed hic varietatem aut linguas multiplices significat, quia omnes gen tes
secundum suam patriam in Ecclesia psallunt, ut authori virtutum pulcherimam
diversitatem demonstrent.
Let us carefully seek out, why the Church of God is praised and commended for
her variety of party colored garments. But here this signifies the
variety, or diversity of tongues for that all nations said the Psalter in the
Church according to their several tongues of their countries to show forth
unto the author of virtues a most beautiful diversity.

Harding Hardingus lib. de precibus linguae pereg^. Sect. 38. Quae gentes
preces publicas vernaculo semper sermon habuerunt, etc. quales sunt
Moscovitae, Armenij, and Aethiopes, etc. Ruscianis, Moravis, alijsque quibusdam
any 600. ab hinc annos permissum fuit ut Missam lingua Dalmatica celebrarent.
acknowledges that the Muscouits, Armenians, and Ethiopians have ever had
their public prayers in their vulgar tongue, and that to the Russians,
Moravians, and to other people it was permitted from about 600. years to have
the service in the Dalmatick tongue.

The Churches of the Abissines or Ethiopians have their service in the
Ethiopian tongue, as witnesses Francis Aluares a Portugal Munck, who lived
seven years in the Court of the Great Neguz of Ethiope in his 3. Chap. of his
Ethiopian History. Et in tanto consecra nella sua lingua con le proprie nostre
parole, and non la lieva. Et il medesimo fa nel calice, and non l'alza. Dice
sopra quello le proprie nostre parolo nella sua lingua.
Only (says he) he consecrates in his own with our very words, and he makes
no elevation, he does the same over the cup, and elevates it not, and says
over the same our very words in his own tongue. Cassander in his Liturgicks
has translated these very words of Alvares into Latin.

Who also in the 15. Chapter of the same book, cites the commentaries of
Sigismund Liber De rebus Muscoviticis, speaking thus. In singulis templis
unicum tantum altar, and in dies singulos unum quod que sacrum faciendum
putant. To tum sacrum seu Missa gentili ac vernacula lingua apud illos peragi
solet.
The Muscovites have but one altar in every temple, and think that every day
they ought to celebrate once the Sacrament and all the service, where the
service is used to be said in the country language and vulgar tongue.

In a word, no Church, nor people had divine service in Latin, saving they
that are subject to the Pope. Nay there will be some Churches found, which obey
him, the which yet in this point would never be conformable to the Church of
Rome. Bellarmine in his revisalls of the books de verbo Dei, acknowledges
that among the Muscovites, and Armenians, and Maronites, there are some Roman
Catholics, that have not their public service in Latin.

The Custom of the Ancient Church, as well in the East, as in the West, was
that the Priest and the people answered one another, the Priest saying, Lift up
your hearts on high; and the people answering, We lift them up to the Lord.
The Priest saying, the Lord be with you; and the people answering, And with thy
spirit: and every where saying, Amen to the prayers of the Priest with a great
noise, as it were a thunder, as appears in the Liturgies attributed to Basil,
and to Chrysostom, and Hierome in his preface upon the second book of the
Epistle to the Calathians, says Ad similitudinem coelestis tonit^ui Amen
reboat.
that at Rome the (peoles) Amen echoed like the thunder from heaven. Which
Bellarmine in his 26. Chapter of his second book of the Word of God. Tunc quia
Christiani era^t pauci omnes simul psallebant in Ecclesia, and respondebant in
divinis officij: at postea crescente populo divisa sunt magis officia and solis
clericis relictum est ut communes and preces and lauds in Ecclesia peragant.
Then (says he) because the Christians were but few in number, all did sing
together in the Church, and answered one another in the divine service. But
afterward the people increasing, the divine service was more separated and
divided, and was reserved and sequestered to the Clergy men only to say in the
Church common prayers and praises. This he says, according to his wonted
fidelity, for he knew well enough that the most populous Churches that were
ever in the world, were the Churches of Constantinople, and of Rome in the
fourth and fifth Ages: in the which these responds of the people were made, as
well as in the less frequented, and wherein all the service was done in the
vulgar tongue. Besides this is not to divide a service, but rather to have
reduced the people to silence, and not to permit any to speak but the Clergy.

I say then that these answers of the people are an evident proof, that the
people understood that which the Pastor said, for otherwise how could they have
made answer to words not understood? But this custom ceased in the Church of
Rome, when the people lost their understanding of divine service, the Priest
being become a barbarian to the people, the people likewise became mute and
deaf to the words of the Priest.

And hereupon it is to the purpose to take into our consideration the words of
the Jesuit Salmeron in his commentary upon the first to the Corinthians, Chap.
14. Disp. 22.. Ac subdit Ne benedicens sacerdos dicat, Ego quidem intelligo,
and gratis ago peregrina lingua, respondet Apostolus [At alter non aedificatur]
id est inde nullam deriuari aedificationem Ecclesiae, cuius imprimis ratio
habenda erat. Nam omnia tunc ad aedificationem Ecclesiae fieri solebant, ut
docet Apostolus, ita ut nolit vllas preces publicas, in Ecclesia celebrari
ignoto prorsus sermon.
Least the Priest that gives the blessing, might say, I understand well what I
say, when I give thanks in a strange tongue; The Apostle tells him, YEA BUT
ANOTHER IS NOT EDEFIED THEREBY, that is to say, there redounds not thence any
edification to the Church, unto which chiefly and above all there should regard
be had. For then AT THAT TIME ought all things to be done to the edification
and consolation of the Church, as the Apostle teaches, in such sort, that he
will not have any public prayer to be made in the Church in a tongue which is
not understood of all. Now if this was the Apostles decree, as this Jesuit
acknowledges, who gave the Pope power to change it? and to forbid to perform
divine service in vulgar tongues? as Bellarmine acknowledges, saying, Bellar.
lib. 2. de verbo Dei c. 15.. At Catholica. Prohibetur ne in publico and communi
usu Ecclesiae scripturae legantur vel canantur vulgaribus linguis.
is it forbidden to read or sing the Scriptures in the Church in the vulgar
tongue? But if in the Apostles times all the public prayers ought to be said
in a tongue understood, because (says this Doctor) all things ought to be done
to the edification and consolation of the Church; have not we now the same
necessity at this day? and should the now Pastors of the Church have less
care of the edification of the Church?

Wherefore when the Council of Trent Si quis dixerit lingua tantum vulgari
Missam celebrari debere anathema fit.
in the 9. Canon of the XXII. Session anathematized, and scorch't and ouercast
with thunderbolts all those that say, that the Eucharist which they call the
Mass, ought to be celebrated in the vulgar tongue; do they not include and
enwrap the Apostle Saint Paul, and the Prophets and the Apostles, and the whole
ancient and Primitive Church in this excommunication?

Sixtus Senensis in his sixth book of his Bibliothek in the Annotation 263. to
refute Cardinal Caietan, who says, that public prayers ought rather to be
said in a tongue understood, then in Latin, alleges Ambrose de Compsa, who
Miratus sum Caietanum non esse deterritum a fructu huiusmodi traditionis, quae
primum a Luthero, immo a diabolo in Luthero loquente inventa est.
says, that this tradition was invented by Luther, or rather by the devil
that spoke in Luther: in the mean while Luther has taught in this point,
nothing else but what the Apostle Saint Paul has taught, by the very
confession even of our Adversaries, as we have prooved.

But Polidore Virgil, a learned man amongst our Adversaries, takes up his
complaint against the abuse which is committed in the Church of Rome, saying,
Polidor. Virgil: de Inventor. rerum lib. 6. cap. 2. Cantores nostri in templis
nostris constrepunt, ut nihil praeter vocem audiatur, and qui interfunt,
ejusmodi vocum concentu quo eorum aures maxim calent, contenti de vi verborum
nihil curant. Vnde ve^tum eo est, ut omnis divini cultus ratio in istis
cantoribus sita esse videatur.
Our singers make a noise in our Churches, so that nothing can be heard but
their voices, and all that are present, contenting themselves with the harmony
of such voices, wherewith their ears are tickled, take no care at all for the
sense of their words, whence the matter is come to this pass: That amongst the
people, the whole divine service consists in nothing else but in these Chanters
or singers, and a great sort of the people come to Church to hear them, as it
were to the Stage.

But which is yet more, Sixtus Senensis on the place above alleged, after
Ambrose de Compsa, acknowledges that in the Church of Rome very often the very
Priests themselves understand not that which they say. Illud potius
vituperandumerat, quod solum qui suppient locum idiotae, ^lerumque non
intelligunt quid oretur, verum etiam saepenumero nec ipsi presbyteri aut
diaconi, qui orant aut legunt.
Not only (says he) they that fill the place of the simple and unlearned
understand not for the most part that which is said in the prayer, but also
very often, noe not the very Priests themselves, nor Deacons that pray or read
understand them, which is a gross abuse, etc. This the Du Perron in his book
against the King of great Britain, book 6. chap. 1. page 1079.
Cardinal du Perron could not dissemble, saying, that if there be any
Churchmen, that understand them not, it is their fault that gave them orders.
For he was not ignorant that the Country is full of Priests, that hardly can
read, so far are they from understanding the Latin.

Estius a Doctor of Doway in his Commentary upon the 14. Chapter of the first
to the Corinthians, forbids to the utmost of his power an unknown tongue in
the public service. Nevertheless this confession slipped from him. Quamvis per
se bonum sit ut officia divina celebrentur ea lingua quam plebs intelligat, id
enim per se confert ad plebis aedisicationem, ut been probat hic locus.
It is (says he) a good thing of it self, that divine service should be
celebrated in a tongue understood by the people: for that serves of i^ self
unto the edification of the people, as it is well prooved by this place of
Saint Paul. And therefore Caietans opinion being formally and abstractedly
considered is true.

CHAP. VIII. Two causes which move the Pope and his Clergy, to will that the
Mass, and the whole ordinary service be said in the Latin tongue.
PApistrie is a pile or timpanie rather of doctrines and ceremonies, cemented
and built with admirable skill. All the subtilties and counsels and cunning
sleights of humane wit have been employed in the framing of it. Whereupon it
is not to be wondered at, that the Apostle styles this structure of the son of
perdition the mystery of iniquity.

In this very point, whereof we treat, the Pope and his Clergy have
propounded to themselves two ends, whereof the former is to keep the people in
ignorance, and to inure them to believe without knowing, and to follow their
eyes being blindfolded, and to obey without all inquiry into any thing: this
evidently appears in this, that they have entertained a fear, least in deed
the Latin should be too well understood, and therefore have ordered that the
principal parts of the Mass should be said in so low a fumbling murmr,
that the Priests voice cannot be heard; to the same end tends their forbidding
to read the Scriptures. And Images, and implicit faith, and their Maxim that
the Pope cannot err in the faith. For in effect his empire is founded upon the
blindness of the people, and public ignorance is his firmest prop.

The second end which the Pope propounds to himself in the establishment of
the Latin tongue in the public service, has been to plant among the
nations, he has conquered the badges and cognisances of his Empire. The
custom and manner of great Monarcks, is to give their language to the people
subdued by them, to the end to civilize and reclaim them unto their
government. Thus did the Romans to the Gauls and Spanish, and the King of
Spain ties the Indians to speak Spanish: who becoming Spanish in their
language, become also such in affection. The Pope does the like, in giving to
the people he has conquered, his tongue together with his religion. The simple
people think, that their religion ought to be Romish as well as the tongue,
which is used in that religion, and that the Christian faith, and the tongue
came both to them from the same place.

CHAP. IX. The third cause for the which they will not have the Mass
understood by the people. The clauses of the Mass which would offend the
people if they understood them.
But the principal cause why the Pope will not have the Mass to be understood
by every one, is because the Mass contains many things, which if the people
understood, they would thereby be either instructed, or scandalized.

For the Mass is full of clauses, whereof some of them are contrary to Popery,
and are conformable to our Religion, others of them are clearly opposite and
contrary to the doctrine of the Gospel, and some of them contrary to common
sense.

I. For example, the people should be instructed and taught not to believe the
point of merits, if they understood the words of the Mass. Which condemns
them, when the Priest asks of God that he would receive us into the company of
the Saints: Non aestimator meriti, sed veniae largitor: Not by regarding or
having any respect to our deserts, but by granting us pardon.

II. Also the people that are taught to pray for the souls departed out of
this life which broyle in purgatory, would be astonished to hear the Priest
pray for the deceased in these words: Memento etiam, Domine, famulorum and
famularum tuarum qui nos praecesserunt cum signo fidei and dormiunt in somno
pacis.
Remember, Lord, thy servants, and handmaids which have gone before us with the
signet and stamp of faith, and who sleep the sleep of peace. He that has
given the Priest money to pray for one of his deceased friends, at this Memento
of the Mass, would say, I gave money indeed for a soul, which I believed was
tormented in burning fire, but now that I perceive it sleeps in peace, I Will
beware hereafter how I give any money to draw it out of torment.

III. So the poor people being taught to believe, that after the words of
consecration the bread is transubstantiated into the body of our Lord, and
that, that which the Priest holds between his hands, is not bread, but the
natural body of Jesus Christ, would be much amassed to hear the Priest say
these words over the consecrated Host: Per quem [Christum] haec omnia, Domine,
semper bona creas, sanctificas, vivificas, benedicis, and praestas nobis. By
the which Jesus Christ, o Lord, thou createst for us daily all these good
things thou sanctifiest them, and do bless them, and do bestow them upon
us. For he would think it very strange, that the Priest calls the body of
Jesus Christ, all these good things: and that the Priest says, that God
creates daily Jesus Christ, seeing that God creates only the things which had
no being before they were created: and that God does no more create the
glorious body of his Son Jesus Christ, and that it is a great abuse to say
that God does always create a thing, which is always in its perfection. He
would wonder, hearing that the Priest says, that God daily quickens Jesus
Christ, as if every moment God raised him up again. And scruples would arise
in the minds of the people, hearing the Priest say these words unto God. Per
Christum haec omomnia bona creas and praestas nobis, thou createst for us, and
bestowest and conferrest upon us all these good things by Jesus Christ: for he
that has any liberty of judgment, would say in himself. A man may well say,
that these good things which the Priest has before him, are not Jesus Christ
himself, seeing God gives us them by and through Jesus Christ. And God does not
create nor quicken Jesus Christ by Jesus Christ. Hereupon every man in his
right wits would say, questionless this prayer was said in times past in
another sense; for every word is proper and fitting to be said over a quantity
of Bread and Wine set upon the table, but not over the body of Jesus Christ.

IIII. The people would not be less astonished, seeing the Priest offering unto
God the consecrated Host in these words, Supra quae propitio ac sereno vultu
respicere digneris.
Upon the which things vouchsafe to look with a merciful and gracious
countenance. For he would say, how comes this to pass? That the body of Jesus
Christ, which is but one, is called, these things, as if he had many bodies?
And what an abuse is this that the Priest prays that God would daigne to
look upon his Son Jesus Christ with a merciful and gracious eye; as if he
feared that Jesus Christ were not acceptable and pleasing to his Father; or as
if Jesus Christ had need to be prayed for unto God, or to have our
recommendation unto God to accept him? For observe, that by these things the
Priest understands and means the Host, which he holds, and not the faith, and
the devotion, or the prayer of the people, as it appears by the words next
before going, where he says that he offers unto God an immaculate Host, an
holy bread, a cup of everlasting salvation: and then he adds, upon which things
vouchsafe, etc.

V. Supra quae propitio and sereno vultu respicere digneris, and accepta habere
sicut accepta habere dignatus es munera pueri tui iusti Abel, and sacrificium
Patriarchae nostri Abrahae.
The people would be yet more offended by the words, which follow: Upon the
which things (says he) daigne to look with a propitious and gracious
countenance, and to accept them as thou did daigne to accept the offerings of
thy righteous son Abel, and the Sacrifice of our Patriarch Abraham. For
enquiring but what were the offerings which Abel offered unto God, and having
learned, that it was a calfe, or a lamb, he would be provoked to the heart to
hear this comparison, wherein Jesus Christ is compared to a beast: and wherein
the Priest beseeches God, that the body of Jesus Christ may be as acceptable
unto him, as a calfe or a lamb offered by Abel. For we have already showed
that by These things, he means the consecrated Hoaste; and the Cup which he
paralels and compares with the offerings of Abel, and not our faith or devotion
with that of Abel.

VI. The like subject of scandal would offer it self in the words following,
wherein the Priest adjoyneth, Supplices te rogamus, omnipotens D us, i^be haec
preferri per manus sancti Angeli tui in sublime altar tuum in co^spectu
divinae majestatis tuae.
We humbly b^seech thee, o Almighty God, command that these things may be
carried by the hands of thine holy Angel, unto thine high Altar into the
presence of thy divine Majesty. This surely is enough to offend a mind that
has but never so little clearenesse and light of judgment in it: what (will
he say) ask we of God, that an Angel may come, and that he may take the
Ho^st out of the Priests hand? Needs it that the eternal Son of God, be
offered unto his Father by an Angel? Or has he any need of the mediation of
Angels to be acceptable to his Father? Or if the Priest desire the Angel to
come, and take the Host from between his hands, Why does he eat it a little
while after these words? Why stays he not the coming of the Angel? It
seems then he fears he is not heard, as also that in calling Jesus Christ
These things, he speaks manifestly against his own intention, for Jesus
Christ is not these things, but a person.

And here will present it self again the same thought: that is, that these
prayers are good being said over the Alms, and over some quantity of Bread
and Wine not Transubstantiated, set upon the Table, according to the custom of
the Primitive Church; but are absurd being spoken of Jesus Christ. Without
doubt these prayers elder then the belief of Transubstantiation, have lost
their first signification through the change of the doctrine.

VII. The words following afford like subject of offense, when the Priest
adjoynes; Vt quotquot ex haec altaris participatione sacrosanctum filij tui
corpus sumpserimus: To the end that all and every one of us, which have taken
from this Altar the sacred body of thy Son. For to what purpose uses he
these words, when none participates with him? seeing in the most of their
Masses the Priest eats alone, and drinks always alone? And in private Masses
there are none present, and yet the Priest speaks in them, as if a number
partaked in the same.

VIII. There would be also a subject whereout to take offense in the words,
which are used as the consecration is made which they speak only by way of
recital, that is to say, in form of narration and rehearsal as when a
history is related. Whereas the Church of Rome will have them spoken effective
as seconded with an effect, and as if God thereby declaring that he will have
that bread become flesh. When God said, Let th^re be light, and let the earth
bring forth herbs, etc. these words were effective and operative, and
produced light and plants. But he that recites what God spoke, Let there be
light, by this recital produces not light. Yet for all that, the words of the
Priest are but a mere recital of that which Jesus Christ spoke. The words of
the Priest are, Who Qui pridie quam pateretur acce pit panem in sanctas and
venerabiles manus suas and elevatis oc^lis in coelum ad te Deum patrem suu^
omnipotente^ tibi gratias agens, benedixit fregit, deditque discipulis suis
dicens, Accipite and manducate ex hoc omnes, Hoc est enim corpumeum.
(meaning Jesus Christ) the day before he suffered, took bread into his
sacred and venerable hands, and when he had lift up his eyes to heaven unto
thee his Father Almighty, giving thee thanks blessed it, brake it, and gave
it to his Disciples, saying, For this is my body. All this is but a mere
recital of that which Jesus Christ has done: Which cannot have any effective
virtue, and this is fortified by these words, Accipite, Manducate, by which it
is evident that the Priest expresses not that which he does, or would do,
but only that which Jesus Christ has done. For ordinarily when the Priest
pronounces these words, there is no body that takes or eats after the
Priest. And the private Masses are without Communicants.

IX. It might also fall out that some one of the people more curious then
others would take the boldness to search the holy Scriptures, and would
observe that the Apostle Saint Paul in the first to the Corinthians, Chapter
11. verse 24. witnesses that Jesus Christ said, This is my body which is
broken for you. And there above out of a curiosity which is doubtless the way
to heresy, would be inquisitive, why the Priest omits these words, which is
broken for you. For these are the words that are the deciders of the
difference. It being most clear and evident, that as the body of our Lord in
the Eucharist is not broken really, but sacramentally; that so also the body
of our Lord is not really but sacramentally between the hands of the Priest.
Nor is there any reason to require that these words which is broken for you
should be a Sacramental and figurative manner of speech, and that these
words, This is my body, should be taken in any other manner. In a word, it is
certain that the bread in the Sacrament is in the same manner the body of
Christ, as that it is broken in. Now broken it is not really, nor then likewise
is the body of Jesus Christ therein broken really. But Satan has endeavored
to damn and stop up this window, thorough which the light shines in unto us
so clearly, having this Word utterly out of the Bibles of the Church of Rome,
wherein, in steed of frangitur, there is inserted tradetur, in steed of is
broken, they have put shall be given.

X. From the bread the Priest passes to the Cup, and recites the words of our
Lord, saying, that Jesus Christ having taken the Cup, said, Accipite, bibite ex
eo omnes. Hic est enim calix sanguinis mei novi and aeterni Testamenti,
mysterium fidei. Take ye, drink ye all hereof: for this is the Cup of my
blood of the New and eternal Testament, the Mystery of faith. There also many
subjects of scandal offer themselves. For seeing the Priest witnesses that
Jesus Christ said, Drink ye all hereof. Why is it the privilege of Priests
and Kings only to drink of this Cup? If it belong to Priests and Kings only,
that this word Drink ye is directed, then must the like be said of this word
Eat ye: For these words are directed to the same persons. Then should there
be none but Priests and Kings, that ought to eat of the Sacrament. Add
moreover that the Apostles being in the company of Jesus Christ, held not the
rank of Pastors, but of sheep, and of Disciples. Therefore the Apostle
wills, that the people of Corinth examine themselves, 1 Cor. 11.28.
and so eat of this bread and drink of this Cup.

XI. Above all, these words afford subject of offense in this, that the Priest
changes the words of our Lord: For the words of the Mass are neither found in
Saint Paul, nor in any of the Evangelists. Saint Paul says, that the Lord
said, This Cup is the New Testament in my blood: do this in remembrance of me
Excellent words. For these words This is my body, and those, This Cup is the
New Testament, ought to be understood after the same manner. Now neither the
Cup, nor that which is in it, is really a Testament, but sacramentally and in
signification. Nor then the bread, which they call the Host, is really the
body of Jesus Christ, but sacramentally, and in signification. Therefore that
this might not be discerned, the words of our Lord have been changed in the
Text of the Mass. For in the place of these words, This Cup is the New
Testament, The Priest says, This is the Cup of my blood of the New and
eternal Testament.

XII. To the same end in the place, and instead of these words, Do this in
remembrance of me, the Priest says, The Mystery of faith, which is a strange
depravation, made of purpose, because the word in remembrance, expounds these
words, This is my body, to ^it, that the bread is called the body of the Lord,
because it is the commemoration of it, according as the Scripture denominates
the signs and commemorations by the names of the things signified.

XIII. Behold here yet another subject of scruple and of scandal, that the
people would receive if the Mass were said in a tongue understood: And this is
it, A great while before the words which are called the words of consecration,
there are prayers in the Mass, wherein the unconsecrated bread is called the
sacrifice, or immaculate Host, which is offered to God for the sins of the
quick and the dead, in these words, Suscipe hanc immaculatam hostiam, quam ego
indignus famulus tuns offero tibi Deo meo vivo and vero, pro innumerabilibus
peccatis and offensionibus and negligentijs meis, and pro omnibus
circumstantibus, sed and pro omnibus fidelibus Christianis vivis atque
defunctis.
Receive this immaculate Host, which I thine unworthy servant offer unto thee
my living and true God for my numberless sins and offenses, and negligences,
and for all them that stand round about, and withal for all faithful
Christians quick and dead. He says, the like thing over the unconsecrated Cup.
All this is full of difficulties. For the unconsecrated bread is not the same
Host with that which is consecrated, which is said to be the true body of
Jesus Christ; by this means behold in the Mass two Hoasts of diverse natures,
and two sorts of Sacrifices. And that which is more strange and of more
difficult disgestion is, that the Priest offers unto God in Sacrifice
unconsecrated bread, for satisfaction for our sins: Which is to offer a
morsel of bread for payment for our sins, and for the price of our
redemption.

Bell lib. 2. de Missa cap. 17.. Offertorium Quinque illae orationes, Suscipe
sancte pater, etc. Offerimus tibi Domine, etc. Veni sanctificator, etc. In
spiritu humilitatis, etc. Suscipo Sancta Trinitas, etc. Neque antiquae admodum
sunt, ^eque in Romana Ecclesia ante quingentos annos legeba^tur.
Bellarmine in his 2. book of the Mass, Chap. 17. seems to condescend and
to yield as much touching these prayers, for he says, that they are not very
ancient, and that until within these five hundred years they were not said in
the Church of Rome: for there are five prayers in rank of like nature in that
part of the Mass, which is called the offertorie, the which this so renowned
Cardinal has been bold to accuse of noveltie, and has observed, that
Innocent the III. who writ of the Mass in the year 1214. has made no mention
of them.

But that by these prayers the Priest makes an oblation, and offers in
sacrifice unconsecrated bread, Bellarmine acacknowledgeth it in his first book
of the Mass, Chap. 27. saying, Bellarm. c. 27.. Primo Negari non debet, panem
and vinum aliquo modo in Missa offerri, and proinde pertinere ad rem quae
sacrificatur. Haec propositio patet primum ex ipsa Liturgia. Nam cum ante
consecrationem dicimus, Suscipe sancte Pater, hanc immaculatam hostiam, certe
pronomen HANC demonstrat ad sensum id quod tunc manibus tenemus, id autem panis
est. Et similes sunt in Liturgia non paucae sententiae, quae panem offerri
manifestissime demonstrant.
It must not be denied, that bread and wine are in some manner offered in the
Mass. This may appear first of all by the Liturgy it self: for when, before
consecration, we say, Suscipe, sancte pater hanc immaculatam Hostiam: Receive
o holy father, this immaculate Host: Certainly this Pronounce HANC
demonstrates sensibly that which we then hold in our hands: but it is bread
which we hold. And in the Liturgy (so he calls the Mass) there are many
sentences, which manifestly show that bread is offered. Behold here then in the
Mass an Host offered in sacrifice for the sins of the quick and of the
dead, which is not the body of Christ, but unconsecrated bread.

But as concerning that, which the said Cardinal says, that these prayers are
new, and brought in within these five hundred years, he says true in some
sort. It is true, that it is a very new thing to sacrifice unto God
unconsecrated bread for the sins of men. But to call the bread and the wine
of the holy Supper, which the people brought, and which the Pastor offered unto
God, sacrifices, and holy oblations, it is a thing very ancient, and a prayer
conformable to the Word of God, which calls Alms and prayers, and al holy
actions, sacrifices. Bellarm. Ibid.. Deinde. Veteres Patres passim ita tradunt.
Ireneus lib. 4. cap 32. dicit Ecclesiam offerre Deo sacrificium ex creaturis,
id est ex pane and vino. Cyprianus lib. 2. Epist. 3. dicit Christum obtulisse
patricalicem vino and aqua mistum. Et in sermon de eleemosyna, reprehendens
divites foeminas, quae non adferebant panem consecrandum. Locuples (inquit) and
dives, in Dominicum sine sacrificio venis, and partem de sacrificio, quod
pauper obtulit, sumis. Vbi per sacrificium panem intelligit, qui per sacerdotes
Deo sacrificandus erat.
The fathers of the first Ages spoke thus. So spoke Ireneus in his 4. book,
Chap. 32. saying, The Church offers to God a sacrifice of his creatures; that
is to say of bread and wine. And Cyprian in the Epistle 3. of the 2. book,
says that Christ offered unto his Father a Cup blended with wine and water.
And in his Sermon Of Alms, reproving the rich women, that brought not bread to
Church for an offering, said unto them, Thou rich and wealthy woman, that
come to the Supper of the Lord without a sacrifice, that take part of the
sacrifice which the poor has offered: Where it is evident, that by these
sacrifices he calls the offerings of bread and of wine not consecrated, brought
by the people, as freely acknowledges the same Cardinal in the same place.

But that which is more express in this matter, is that the Priest on
Christmasse day, adioyneth, Oblata, Domine, munera nova unigeniti tui
nativitate sanctifica.
O Lord Hallow by the new birth of thy Son, these offerings which we have
offered unto thee. He speaks of an oblation already offered, and yet this is
spoken before consecration.

The title of the 24. Canon of the third Council of Carthage is such, Vt in
sacrificio tantum panis and calix offeratur.
That in sacrifice nothing be offered but bread and the Cup. Ipse Canon Vt in
Sacramentis corporis and sanguinis Domi i, nihil ampl^us offeratur, quam ipse
Dominus tradidit, hoc est panis and vinum aqua mixtum. Nec amplius in
sacrificijs offeratur, quam de uvis and frumentis.
And in the Text of the Canon there is, That in the Sacraments of the body and
blood of our Lord, nothing be offered but what the Lord has ordained, namely
of bread and of wine mingled with water; and that nothing be offered in
sacrifices, but that which comes of the grape and wheat.

XIIII. But behold here the things, which as much, or more then the precedent,
would give the people a very strong impression, and would discover unto them
the abuses of the Mass, were it but pronounced with an audible voice in the
vulgar tongue. The Priest in the beginning of the Mass says his Confiteor, in
these words, Confiteor Deo omnipotenti, beatae Matiae, semper Virgini: beato
Iohanni Baptistae, sanctis Apostolis ^etro and Paulo: omnibus Sanctis, and
vobis, fratres; quia peccavi nimis cogitatione, verbo, opere Mea culpa, mea
culpa, mea maxima culpa. Ideo precor b^atam Mariam semper Virginem, be^tum
Micha^lem Archang^lum, beatum Iohannem Baptu^^a^, sanctos Apostostol^^ke trum
and Paulum, omnes Sancto^, and vos fratres, orate pro me ad Dominum Deum
nostrum.
I confess unto Almighty God, and to the blessed Marie ever a Virgin: To
blessed John Baptist, to the holy Apostles Peter and Paul, to all the Saints,
and to you brethren, I have too exceedingly sinned in thought, word, and deed.
Mine offense, mine offense, mine exceeding great offense. Wherefore I beseech
the blessed Marie ever a Virgin, the blessed Michael Archangell, the blessed
John Baptist, the holy Apostles Peter and Paul, all the Saints, and you
brethren, to pray for me unto the Lord our God. In this confession the Priest
confesses his sins to the dead departed this life, contrary to the example
of all the prayers and confessions, which are found in the Scriptures, all
which are made unto God only. For even as it is God only, whom we have
especially offended, Tibi soli peccavi, Psalm 51. verse 6. I have sinned
against thee only, so also is it God alone, that can forgive us our sins,
and it is he alone that understands the prayers of the heart: because he it is
only that knows the hearts of men, 2. Chron. 6. ver. 30. and it is to be
noted, that by the 23. Canon of the third Council of Carthage it is expressly
forbidden to direct in the Eucharist any prayer to any other then to the person
of the Father, Vt cum altari assistitur, semper ad Patrem dirigatur oration.
not permitting so much as to address it only to the person of the Son. How
much less would these fathers have suffered, that in the Eucharist there
should be offered prayers to Saints, and to Angels?

XV. But that which is yet worse in this confession, is, that the Priest
prays to have for intercessors unto God the Archangell Michael, John Baptist,
Peter, and Paul, etc. never so much as making in one word mention of the
intercession of Jesus Christ, who nevertheless went up into heaven of purpose
to make request for us, as Saint Paul teaches us, Romans 8. verse 33. We have an
Advocate with the Father, to wit, Jesus Christ the righteous. For he it is, who
is the propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2. ver. 1. and 2. thus in their
Letanies they say to every Saint, Ora pro nobis, But unto Jesus Christ.
Miserere nobis, dispoiling him of the office of Intercessor.

XVI. That if the Mass were said in English, would not the people be
offended, hearing the Priest saying in his entering into the Mass, We beseech
thee, Oramus te Domine, per mertia Sanctorum, quorum reliq^iae hic sunt, ut
indulgere digneris omni peccata mea.
Lord, by the merits of the Saints, whose relics are herevnder, that thou will vouchsafe to forgive me all my sins. What? (would the people say) must
then the Lords Table needs be changed into a Sepulcher? And must the Mass be
said over dead-mens bones? And why is salvation prayed for through the merits of
the Saints? As if Jesus Christ had not sufficiently satisfied for us? or as if
to obtain remission of our sins, it were behovefull that men, that have
been sinners, and that have had need of pardon themselves, do merit the
remission of our sins for us? For the effecting whereof must there be found
out payments for debts already paid, and for which Jesus Christ has fully
satisfied? And if the Saints have merited any thing, God in giving them
eternal salvation has more then sufficiently paid them their merits. It is a
point of injustice to will, that the same money should serve to make two
purchases, when scarcely they have been sufficient for to compass the first.
Besides, they told us that the Saints are not Mediators of redemption, but
only of intercession: but now I see that the Mass speaks of them as of
mediators of redemprion, in as much as it says, that they have deserved for us
salvation, and remission of our sins.

XVII. But if the people knew that amongst these Saints, whose bones are
stooved up under the Altar, and unto whose merits the Priest has recourse,
that there are many of them, whose Sanctity is very doubtful; namely, those
whom the Pope has foisted into the Catalogue of his Saints with commandment
to call upon them: and that of those relics, the greatest part of them are
false and suborned: Buckler or shield of faith, in the Chapt. of the invocation
of Saints.
and that many of these Saints never were men, being imaginary persons, or
forged at pleasure, as we have elsewhere showed, they would be yet much more
astonished, and would groan under the burden of so cruel a captivity.

XVIII. The people likewise would have a just ground to be offended, knowing
that the Priest in private Masses, and without assistants, says Orate,
fratres, etc. pray brethren, etc. For who are these brethren, to whom he
speaks being all alone? Pope Innocent III. in the second book of the
Mysteries of the Mass, Pie creden dum est, and sacris authoritatibus
comprobatur, quod Angeli comites assista^t orantibus.
Chap. 25. answers, that these brethren are the Angels: But the words
immediately following contradict his answer; Pray my brethren, that my
sacrifice, and yours may be acceptable unto almighty God: For this sacrifice
is not made for Angels, nor by Angels. As also that if these words, Pray ye, my
brethren, be directed to Angels, even so also these words, Take ye, eat ye,
will be directed unto them: and so must we believe, that in solitary Masses
the Angels are present in the room of the people to eat.

XIX. But what would the people say hearing these words of the Canon of the
Mass, Communicantes and memoriam venerantes imprimis gloriosae semperque
Virginis Mariae. Communicating and honoring the memory chiefly of the
glorious and ever a Virgin Mary. To what purpose is it to say, Communicating
together, when none communicates? But who could endure that the Communion of
the holy Sacrament should be celebrated IN THE FIRST PLACE for the honor the
memory of the Virgin Mary? Seeing that the Institution of the Sacred Supper by
Jesus Christ carries it expressly, that it is instituted in remembrance of Jesus
Christ, who said, Do this in remembrance of me? By this relation, Jesus Christ
should have said, Do this IN THE FIRST PLACE in remembrance of my Mother. We
ought to speak of the holy and blessed Virgin with all respect and reverence:
but for all this, ought we not to change the nature of the Sacred Supper, nor
to divert or alienate it from it true end. For it is instituted to show forth
the Lords death, but not to show forth the death of the holy Virgin: since she
suffered not death for our redemption.

XX. Some comfort had it been, if the Priest having said, that this communion
is celebrated in the first place, to honor the mememorie of the blessed
Virgin, he had added, that it is likewise done in the remembrance of Jesus
Christ. But this is it which he omits: Communicantes and memoriam venerantes
imprimis gloriosae semperque virginis Mariae genetricis Dei and Domini nostri
Jesus Christi, sed and beatorum Apostolo rum ac mart^^um tuorum Petri, Pauli,
etc. Lini, Gleri, Clementis, etc. Cosmae, Damiani, and omnium Sanctorum tuorum,
quorum meritis precibusque roga^^nus ut in omnibus protectionis tuae muniamur
auxilio, per eundem Christum, etc.
Communicating and honoring the memory in the first place of the glorious
ever Virgin Marie, Mother of our God and Lord Jesus Christ, but likewise of all
thy holy Apostles, Peter, Paul, etc. Cosmus and Damian, and all thy Saints by
the merits and prayers of whom we beseech thee, that in all things we may be
furnished with the succors of thy protection by the same Jesus Christ our
Lord. He makes indeed mention of Jesus Christ, but he does not say, that this
communion is done in his memory, only he says that in the first place he
celebrates the memory of the Virgin Mary, and next the memory of the Saints,
amongst whom he thrusts in many Popes. And always falls back upon the merits
of the Saints, and says, precibus meritisque. Not contenting himself that the
prayers of the Saints bestead us, he wills, that they merit for us the grace
of God.

XXI. About the end of the Mass the Priest having taken the Host and the Cup,
makes his prayer for himself. Corpus tuum, Domine, quod sumpsi, and sanguis
que potavi adhaereat visceribus meis.
Thy body, Lord, which I have taken, and thy blood, which I have drunk,
cleaves close to my entralles: He should rather have prayed with the Apostle,
that Jesus Christ would dwell in his heart by faith, Ephesians. 3.19. and that his
body might be the temple of the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.16. for as Saint John
says in his first Epistle, Chap. 4. verse 13. By this we know that we abide in
him, and he in us, because he has given us of his spirit. But to imagine that
the body of Jesus Christ sitting at the right hand of God sticks fast to the
guts and entrails of a Priest, it is in dishonouring Jesus Christ to defile
ones self with carnal thoughts. And the rather for that our Adversaries hold
that the wicked; yea beasts, do also eat the body of our Lord, into whose
entrails also we must believe that the glorious body of the Son of God, is
clapped up. And that he was annexed to Judas his entrails after he had
participated in the Sacrament. Pope Innocent III. in 4. book of the Mysteries
of the Mass, Chap. 16. propounds an important question: Si forte secessus
vel fluxus aut vomitus post solam Eucharistiae perceptionem evenerit, ex
accidentibus and humoribus generatur.
If (says he) any one having nothing else in his belly but the consecrated
Host, and the blood of the Cup, be seized on by a scowring, or flux of the
belly, of what manner, and of what nature are those excrements? The solution
is, that they are accidents and humors: but he cleares not that difficulty,
namely, if Jesus Christ stick fast to his entrails.

XXII. It would be a thing too infinite to set forth all that may be met
withal in the Masses of the whole year, and in the whole public service of
the Church of Rome, which might offend the people, were it but propounded in
the vulgar tongue. As that which is said on Good-fryday. Ecce lignum crucis, in
quo salus mundi pependit, venite adoremus. Deus misereatur nostri, Evovac.
Lo here the wood of the Cross, whereon the salvation of the world hung,
come, let us worship, God have mercy upon us, Evovac. The which word, Evovac,
is a word of triumph, which the furious and drunken Priests of Bacchus used as
they did sing in the honor of their God Bacchus. Then puts the Priest off his
shoes to worship barefoot the wood of the Cross.

Then is said this Antheme. Crucem tuam adoramus, Domine, and sanctam tuam
resurrectionem laudamus. Crux fidelis, inter omnes, arbor vna nobilis, nulla
sylva tantum profert, fronde, flore, germine. Dulce lignum, dulces clavos,
dulce pondus sustinet.
We adore thy Cross, O Lord, and praise thy resurrection. And in speaking of
the Cross, Faithful Cross, only noble amongst the trees, there is no
forest brings forth so much in l^afe, flower, or budd, This sweet wood
sustaines sweet nails, sweet weight. Whilst these words are spoken, every one
worships the Cross, and when they lift up the Cross, they say, Ave lignum
triumphale, etc. I salute thee, or hail triumphant Cross: which is manifestly
spoken to the wood. And hereupon most of the Doctors maintain, that the Cross
ought to be adored with the worship of Latria, which is the highest kind of
adoration.

XXIII. The Saturday before Easter Mass is said in violet: wherein they hallow
Incens, and there is virtue given it to drive away devils: and they put out all
the candles in the Church, and then they light them again with hallowed fire:
and the Deacon brings three great wax candles at the end of a staff: then he
sticks five grains of incens in a great wax Candle in form of a Cross; upon
which wax candle, this blessing is said in singing it in a style, whereof the
impiety is absurd, and the terms ridiculous. Lo here the very words In huius
igitur noctis gratia, suscipe, sancte Pater, incensi huius sacrificium
vespertinum, quod tibi in hac cerei oblatione solenni per ministorum manus de
operibus apum sacrosancta reddit Ecclesia. Sed iam columnae huius praeconia
novimus, quam in honorem Dei rutillans ignis accendit. Qui licet sit divisus in
parts, mutuati tamen luminis detrimenta non novit. Aliter enim liquantibus
ceris, quas in substantiam pretiosae huius lampadis apis matter eduxit. O vere
beata nox, quae spoliauit Aegyptios, etc.
In the grace of this night, receive, holy father, the evening Sacrifice of
this incense, which the holy Church offers up unto thee in this solemn
oblation of waxen Candles by the hands of Ministers, of the work of Bees. But
already we acknowledge the praises of this column, which the glistering fire
kindles in the honor of God, which although it be divided into parts,
acknowledges no loss of borrowed light, for it is fedd by the liquid wax,
which the mother Be has produced into the substance of this precious lamp. O
truly happy night, which dispoiled the Egyptians, and enricht the Hebrews.
Night wherein earthly things are blended with celestial, and divine with
humane; We pray thee then Lord, that this waxen candle consecrated to the
honor of thy name, may hold out without failing, to destroy the darkness of
this night, and being acceptable in the odor of a good sent, may be blended
and ranked amongst the heavenly lights above. Let the morning bringer Lucifer
meet with it flames, that Lucifer I say, that cannot set, or go down. All
this gallimaufrey and medley of absurd terms, which give to a waxen taper,
that which belongs to the doctrine of the Gospel, and places a waxen taper
composed of the work of Bees amongst the stars of heaven, is far from the
language of the spirit of God.

XXIIII. On the same Saturday they hallow their fonts, in which is the water
for baptism, in these words, Make this water by thy Majesty's Empire, Note.
The God head blending it self with water, gives it virtue to regenerate
souls, and makes the water to become a new creature, and a celestial race by
the immaculate womb of the fountain.
take the grace of thy only Son by the holy Ghost, which by the secret
admixtion of his Godhead make fruitful this water prepared for the
regeneration of men; to the end, that having conceived sanctification through
the immaculate womb of the divine fountain, borne again, as a new creature,
may become a celestial race, and let the mother grace bring forth in the
infancy all them, that the Sex distinguishes unto the body, or the age unto
time. Set far away from hence, thou that commanding Lord, every unclean
spirit, let all wickedness of diabolical fraud keep far away, let the
mixture of any contrary power here have place, let it not hover over about it
to lay any ambushes, let it not slide in covertly, let it not corrupt by
annoying it Let this holy and innocent creature be free from all assaults of
the enemy, and be purged by the departure of all wickedness. Let this water
be a living well, a regenerating water, a purifying wave, that all they that
shall be washed in this wholesome lavor, the holy Ghost working in them, may
obtain indulgence of perfect purgation; wherefore I bless thee creature of
water, by the living God, by the true God, by the holy God, by the God, who in
the beginning by his word separated thee from the dry land, etc. Then he
breathes upon the water in form of a Cross, and prays that those waters may
be efficatious to purify the understanding, and dipping the taper three times
into the water, he says, Let the power of the holy Ghost descend in fullness
upon this fountain. Then he blows thrice upon the water in this figure. Then
powers he oil and cream into it in form of a Cross. There is even as much
sense in all these words, as efficacy in the ceremony. I think some
broken-winded Monk, whose brain swarmed out extravagant conceptions, made
these prayers in an ignorant age; or that some profane fellow sported him self
in ridiculous terms to mock God.

XXV. Thus when they consecrate salt, the Bishop, or Priest says, I conjure
thee, creature salt, etc. And speaking to salt, as if it understood him, gives
it power against evil spirits.

In the Masse-booke which is in use at Paris, in the Mass of the holy Virgin
Mary, is extant a Passage, which says, O faelix puerpera, nostra pians
scelera; iure matris impera, redemptori. O thou happy woman in childbed, who
expiatest our sins, command by the right of a mother, the redeemer.

XXVI. These things and many other the like wherewith swarmeth the whole Romish
service, could they but be pronounced in English without exasperating the
minds, and without moving in some distate, in other some laughter, in others
execration? Who would laugh hearing the Priest saying in the beginning of the
Mass. Ad Deum qui laetificat iuventutem meam. Unto God that gladds my youth,
Albeit this Priest have a gray head.

In a word, the whole body of the Romish service, principally the Canon of the
Mass, is composed in such a manner, that I doubt not but that the Popes would
willingly correct many things in it, if it were in their power: and that they
would make the same alteration, which they have made in the Masses of the
Saints, out of which the Popes, Pius the V. and Clement the VIII. have rased
out many Proofs and prayers to the Saints, which are still extant in most of
the Masse-bookes. In the which Canon that which most displeases our
Adversaries, is, that there are many clauses, which contradict Merits,
Purgatory, and Transubstantiation. In private Masses; In the Communion under
one kind, and in an unknown tongue, and that it is evident, that the prayers
of this Canon are in a manner all made to be said over the Alms, and over the
bread and wine, and not over the body of our Lord. Syn. Trid. Session. XXII.
Can. 6. Si quis dixerit Canonem Missae errores continere, ideoque abrogandu^
esse, anathema sit.
But they dare not touch this piece, because the Council of Trent in the XXII.
Session thundreth and Anathematiseth every man that shall say, that in the
Canon of the Mass there is any thing to be corrected, they have bound their
own hands by this decree. This is the sole remedy, that remains for them, to
estrange the people from the understanding of the Mass, whereunto serves the
barbarous tongue, and the low murmur, and the confused and inarticulate
singing thereof.

CHAP. X. An examination of our Adversaries reasons: especially of those of
Mounsieur the Cardinal du Perron.
AS touching the prayers of particulars in a tongue not understood so much as
by him himself that prays, our adversaries cast down the bucklers and
defend not themselves, but abandon their cause, only they say, That it is the
Church. For this word Church is a covert and starting hole, for every sort of
abuse, and a plaster for every sore. This is it they oppose against the Word
of God, and unto all antiquity, unto reason, and unto common sense, which in
this point are contrary to the now Church of Rome of this time.

But as for the public service in an unknown tongue not understood, our
adversaries propound some slender reasons, which we must examine.

I. They say that the title of the Cross was writ by Pilate in three tongues,
in Hebrew, Greek and Latin, they will have Pilate; that was a Pagan Judge,
give this law to the Christian Church. For being a man of great prudence, it is
to be presumed that he had a care that the Mass should be sung in a fit
tongue. Thus Pilates authority carries it away, above the Word of God, and
against the examples of Jesus Christ, of the Prophets and of the Apostles. That
if, according to the custom of the Romans, the title of the Cross had been
written but in one tongue, then should they not, by this reason, sing the Mass
but in one tongue, or if Pilate had writ nothing, the Mass had not been sung
at all.

Du Perron lib. 6. of his book against the King of great Britain.
II. They have no better grace when they say, that it is expedient that divine
service be said thorowout and in all places in the same tongue, that strangers
may understand it. This reason contradicts the former, for if it be expedient,
that divine service be said in one and the same tongue every where, then shall
we be forced not to rest upon the inscription of the Cross in three tongues,
and we shall be driven to say service in one only tongue thorowout the whole
universal Church.

By the same reason, Sermons ought to be made every where in the same tongue in
favor of strangers. Certainly the service in Latin does in no measure at all
comfort the strangers that are in France: For of these strangers, three fourth
parts at the least understand not the Latin, and there will be found in
France, ten times more strangers which understand the French, then the Latin.
And these strangers which understand the Latin cannot understand the Mass,
whereof a great part is pronounced in so low a voice, that they that are near
the Priest cannot hear his voice. But what shadow of reason is there for it,
that in favor of a few strangers, which are in great towns, all the people of
France must be deprived of the understanding of divine service? and especially
all the towns and Burroughes wherein there are no strangers? That if in one
great Town, as in Paris, they would gratify strangers, there should be
assigned for the Italians one Church, wherein service should be said in
Italian, and so of other nations, by this means every nation should have at
Paris the service in their own tongue.

III. They further add that to have every where the same tongue, is a sign of
union, and of concord in the Catholic Church. In thus speaking they declare
that it would be expedient, that the service should neither be said in
Greek, nor in Hebrew, tongues nevertheless which they say were authorized by
the inscription of the Cross. But the union which God approves and applaudeth
in his Word, is not the union of one and the same tongue, but of faith and
charity. Which union may be amongst those of diverse tongues; as on the
contrary, men of the same tongue do often dissent in faith. Which is more.
God is glorified, when in diverse tongues he is purely and unanimously served
and called upon: as God himself witnesses saying, As I live, says the Lord,
every knee shall bow before me, and every tongue shall give glory unto God.
Romans 14. verse 11. Esaias 45.23. For this it was that God gave to his Apostles
the gift of diverse tongues, to the end, that in all tongues God might be
served and called upon.

Du Perron the same.
IIII. Also presupposing that divine service be not done for the instruction of
the people, but only to glorify God by prayers, and thanksgiving, and by
their assistance to bring their consent unto that which is done in the Church,
and to be partakers of the fruits which the Church obtaines of God by the
Liturgy, they say, that the people which understand not, loose not these
fruits, nor the ends for the which divine service is instituted: because that
the Churches authority is a sufficient caution and security for the people:
And that it is enough that the Pastors understand for them. But by the same
ends for the which they say that divine service is instituted, it is easy to
convince them. For persons assembled and met together to glorify God by
prayers and giving of thanks, ought to know that which they ask, and what
they give thanks for. Now these Rabbines will have the people ask they wot
not what, and give thanks for they know not why. And seeing that they will
have the people assemble to yield their consent to what is done and said in the
Church, how will they have them approve, and assent unto things they understand
not? But if the people assist to participate in the good things which the
Church receives by the public service, they assist then to be instructed and
comforted, for that is one of the fruits for which divine service is
instituted. And seeing that in the Mass the Priest speaks to the people, in
vain speaks he to a people that understands him not. And seeing that in the
Mass are read Chapters of the Scriptures, wherein God speaks unto men, they
ought not to hinder, that God be not understood by men. The Apostle to the
Romans, Chapter 10. tells us, that faith comes by hearing of the Word of God,
not then by an assistance without understanding that which God propounds unto
us in his Word. And the same Apostle speaking to the people of Corinth, 1. Cor.
11. ver. 26.
will that in eating the bread of the Lords Supper, and in drinking of the Cup,
they show forth the Lords death, which cannot be done by persons that assist
without understanding the same. Of all these fruits are they deprived, that
assist and are present at a service where they understand not,

V. As for that, that Du Perron says, that the Church stands for the peoples
caution and security: as if it could answer for the people at Gods judgment
Seat; I say, that for this Church, that boasts it self to be a caution, it
shall stand in need of another caution to give us assurance that it erres not,
and that God receives her for caution. Surely at the day of judgment, Priests
shall not answer for the people. He shall find himself deceived and fowly
mistaken; who then would give his Curate for his caution. Above all those
Pastors shall not be current, who to enhaunse their authority, and to lead
the people on in ignorance at their pleasure, have estranged them from all
understanding. But why may not the Greek Church as well be caution as the
Roman? Seeing the Greek Church is more ancient then the Roman, and the
Church of Rome is but her daughter, and received from her the Christian
religion, and boasts her self as well to be Catholic, and to have the
chaires of Saint Peter and of many Apostles?

Du Perron page 1079.
VI. But says this Cardinal, if to profit at a Mass it were necessary to
understand it, the deaf, and the persons that stand a far off from him that
says service, should receive no benefit by it, if this reason were of any
weight. Then might we as well say, that we must preach in a tongue not
understood, for though it were necessary to preach in a tongue understood, yet
the deaf, and such as were at too far a distance from the Preacher, would
receive no profit by him. I say then, that where the defects of nature hinder
from understanding what is said, we are not for that accountable before God:
for God imputes not that for a crime which he himself has done. But we stand
accountable unto him for the impeachments, and hindrances, which we our selves
lay in the way to hinder the understanding of his Word: God supplies the
defects of nature by means, which are known to himself: but man after he
has done evils, cannot remedy them. If the light of the Sun be
unprofitable to the blind, it thence follows, not that the eyes of them that
see, must be put out, even so if any be deaf, yet ought we not for that to
deprive the rest of the people of understanding and he that stands far of
from him says service speaking in a tongue understood, had profited more if he
had been near: and another time he may come nearer.

VII. He objects also that strangers are present in England at the English
service without understanding the same, whereunto I say, that such are
strangers present at it, it may be once or twice out of curiosity, and not
for devotion, and that if they understood the English, they would profit more
by it, and that the French have at London, and other towns the service in
French.

VIII. He says moreover that in the time of Christ Jesus and of the Apostles,
the Jews assisted and were present at the ordinary service, of the Synagogues
without understanding any thing thereof. Which we have already showed to be
false. For then the Hebrew tongue was understood generally by the people of
Judea. It fared not so with the Jews which are called Helenists in the 6. of
the Acts, who were Jews transported into Egypt by Ptolomeus Lagus, who also
were called Babelim, and were dispersed abroad in very great numbers through out
all Africa, so called, because they were issued of the people which had been
transported into Babylon, for they there read in Synagogues the Greek
translation of the Septuagints. Whereupon also the Apostle to the Hebrews
writing to them, alleges to them the Scripture according to their
translation. Of these Jews was Philo a Jew of Alexandria, See Scaliger de
emendat. Temp. p. 143.
A man learned in the Greek, but ignorant of the Hebrew. For in Alexandria the
Greek tongue was there so common, that the Bishops, as Athanasius, Cyrill,
Theophilus, etc. there preached to the people in Greek.

IX. It is without reason that Du Perron obiecteth unto us the example of the
sacrificing Priests of the Law, interceading for the people in the Temple, the
whilst, that the people were without in the Court, and by consequent could not
understand that which the Priest said. For here the question is of the Priest
speaking unto God in the Mass in the presence of the people. And withal, the
question is of the Mass, in the which are read Chapters to the people out of
the Scripture, all in a tongue, which the people understand not. And indeed
there are many Priests that understand not their Mass: to what purpose then is
it to bring us the example of a sacrificing Priest, who spoke not to the
people, and spoke not to God before the people, the whilst that he was was
within in the holy place? And read not to the people any place, nor Chapter of
the Law of God? And indeed we find not in the holy Scripture that the Priest
spoke, or pronounced by mouth any prayer whilst that he was in the holy place,
or whilst he was in the Sanctuary as he performed the propitiation for the
people. I think that if this Priest coming out of the Temple to the people
that waited for his coming forth in the Court, had spoken to the congregation
in a barbarous and strange tongue, this people would have stoned him.

X. Now these Gentlemen confess, that by this unknown tongue the people is
deprived of instruction and of consolation, but they say that their Such
prayers as they think fit for them to understand.
pronesse and Sermons supply this defect in which they set forth that which is
said in the Mass: Put we the case that it were so. For it is a maine abuse to
do evil, to the end to bring remedies for the same: to make wounds, to the
end to apply playsters to them. It were better the Priest made himself
understood in the Mass, instead of making the poor people hope that within
some years they shall learn the explication of it in some Sermon. But it is
most false, that in their Sermons there is any explication made of the Mass,
neither in regard of the word, nor of the matters; take me a Pesant, or a
Tradesman, that has heard Mass fifty years, and you shall find him wholly
ignorant of that which is said in the Mass; are the people made to understa^d
in Sermons, why the Priest, praying for the dead, says, that he prays for
them that sleep a peaceable sleep? Or why the Priest presenting unto God the
consecrated Host, which they say is the body of Jesus Christ, asks of God,
that he would so accept of that offering, as he did of Abels sacrifice, that
is to say, of a calse, or of a lamb offered by Abel? Or why the Priest
beseeches God in the Mass, that the Angels may take Jesus Christ which is
upon the Altar, and carry him up unto the celestial Altar? Or why the Priest
calls the body of Jesus Christ. These gifts, These offerings, which God
creates daily and quickneth? Or why the Priest in his confiteor, confesses
his sins to God, to the holy Virgin Marie, to Michael the Archangel, to
Saint John Baptist, without speaking of Jesus Christ? Or why in the Mass the
holy Virgin is preferred before Jesus Christ, in saying; communicating, and
celebrating in the first place the memory of the Virgin Marie: notwithstanding
that the sacred Supper was only instituted for a remembrance and commemoration
of Christ, and to show forth his death.

XI. The Cardinal du Perron finds that the discommoditie which is in the
people not understanding of the service, brings this profit, that the merit
of the peoples endeavor, and the exercise of their faith is thereby the
greater. He thinks that the less knowledge there is, the more merit there is
in the faith: and that he that has least understanding, he it is, that has
most faith, and that merits most. Which is the same that Harding Harding. De
precibus peregtina lingua factis. Hic pius animorum affectus tam est
proculdubio Deo gratus, ut nulla ^erborum intelligentia conferri queat.
says. That the people indeed understand not the Latin of the Mass, but that
the pious affection which they thither bring, is so acceptable to God, that
thee understanding of the words cannot be compared unto it. By this reason
there is merit in knowing nothing, and ignorance shall be ranked amongst the
blessings of God, and to instruct a man in the true knowledge of God, it is to
diminish the merit and the price of his faith. And why not? Seeing that faith
consists in being ignorant, and in not knowing, and is opposite to knowledge,
as Cardinal Bellarmine has before told us? Certainly this maxim is a maine
prop to uphold the Popes Dominion, and the Authority of the Clergy: seeing it
teaches to believe without knowledge, and to follow the Pope and his doctrine,
with their eyes shut, with not so much as enquiring at all after the will of
God, nor after his Word: which is a light which God offers us, to the end
that we our selves might know the right way. Now albeit that remediless
ignorance lessens the fault, yet so it is that it is an evil: as being borne
blind excuses going out of the way. And yet going out of the way is still an
evil: But to study to be ignorant, and to be afraid to learn, and to be
voluntarily blind, and to think that there is merit in voluntary ignorance,
besides the folly of it, is a stiff and wilful obstinacy not to have a will
to learn the Will of God: nor can I conceave what that endeavor is, and that
great exercise of faith, which Du Perron says, is in those, that do believe
without understanding, seeing it is no labor to know nothing, and to will not
to learn.

XII. The same Prelate insisteth strongly upon the danger, it would be to
translate the Liturgy into the Vulgar tongue: saying, that the changing though
but of one sole syllable, yea but of one letter, in the Mystery of the Church,
might bring a change in the faith: Witness the (...) of the Arrians, that the
divine service cannot be translated into so many tongues without incurring that
danger, like as the phrases of the old French would at this day be ridiculous,
as appears by the In the Confines of Germany and Lorraine, ^he language that
is not Germane is at this day called Roman.
Romans: and an hundred years hence Marots translation of the Psalms will be
sottish, fond and ridiculous.

If this objection carry any weight with it, it should rather have more force to
hinder and debar the translating of the holy Scriptures into Latin, and into
the vulgar tongues, least that some depravation in a word, or in a syllable
might alter the doctrine of Salvation. For the Text of the Scripture is of
far more importance, then the Text of the Mass, seeing that to change but a
word in the Scripture is a fault, but the Text of the Mass has received a
Thousand changes and additions, as our Adversaries themselves acknowledge. The
whilst that this fear has not hindered the Ancients to make sundry
translations of the Scriptures Greek and Latin: the multitude whereof was so
diverse, that Hieron. praefat. in Euangelistas ad Damasum. Si Latinis
exemplaribus fides est adhibenda, respondeant quibus? tot enim sunt exemplaria
pene, quot codices.
Saint Hierome says, there were almost as many diverse versions, as there were
coppies thereof. Vt ad exemplaria praecedenti^ recutratur, si quam dubitatione^
attulerit Latinorum interpretum infinita varietas.
And Saint Augustine in his second book of Christian doctrine, Chapter 11.
says, that the multitude of Latin interpreters were in a manner infinite. And
our Adversaries confess that their Latin vulgar Translation is very much
different from the Hebrew and Greek Texts. But they confess not, that this
diversity has brought into the Church of Rome any change in the faith, This
fear hindered not Saint Hierome to translate the Bible into the Dalmaticke
tongue, nor Vlfilas to turn it into the Goticke tongue, nor any Nation to
translate it into their own tongue. And so far was it from all such issue,
that the vulgar versions produced any alteration in the faith or in the
authority of the original Greek and Hebrew, that on the contrary the
Churches which have at this day, their service in the vulgar tongue, are they
that have reduced, and brought again the Hebrew and the Greek tongues, and
have brought to light and laid open to the view the Original Hebrew and
Greek, and have restored the translation of the Scripture into its integrity,
which the Church of Rome in their translation had deformed and disfigured.

But there is matter of wonder in it, See touching these additions Platinae in
the life of Sixtus I. and of Innocent III. in 2 lib. of the Mass chap. 61.
Bellarmin. 2. lib. of the Mass, chap. 17. acknowledges that five prayers
which are in the offertorie of the Mass, were not in it five hundred years
since.
that Mounsieur Du Perron finds perrill in the translation of divine service,
and finds it not strange that so many changes have been made in the
institution of the Lord, and that so many new pieces have been thrust into the
Mass, many Popes having thereunto added clauses: namely Pope Pius the V. all a
new caused the Masse-bookes to be reformed, and rased out an infinite number of
Prayers, and of Proofs, and sequences which were in the old Mass books, so
that the Priests found themselves very much pussel'd.

But to what purpose is it to allege inconveniences, for the which (if our
Adversaries be to be believed) the remedy is ready at hand: seeing they
affirm, that the Pope and the Church of Rome cannot err in the faith? For
when the Pope shall have examined and approved the Mass translated into
French, or into any other vulgar, this translation will be well assured amongst
our Adversaries, and there will be nothing to be spoken against his
approbation.

As for this that he says of the French terms would become ridiculous at the
end of two or three hundred years the same may be said of the Latin and of
the Greek, and of every other tongue, whence it would follow that the Mass
should not be said in Latin, least through laps of time the terms thereof
might become ridiculous. The words which in the form of divine service, have
been kept become not ridiculous amongst them that approve this service. In the
public service of the Romish Mass there are words truly ridiculous, and
which never were other then worthless, as Evovae, Miserere nobis, and Stabat
matter dolorosa, and many the like, which nevertheless in the Church of Rome
are not ridiculous, because they are authorized by the divine service. And
these words Alleluja and Osanna have long since ceased to be vulgar, and yet
for all that are not ridiculous, when they are pronounced, or in reading of the
Scripture, or in public service.

XIII. Finally, Du Perron objecteth, that if service were not said in Latin,
there being no more any common tongue, there could no more any General
Councills be held: And so all means would be taken away of deciding points of
faith with infallible certainty, and that the Decrees, and ancient Canons
would be abolished. This objection is refuted by experience. For the Greek
Church and the Roman had not in time past, nor ever had a common tongue, and
yet in the mean while ceased they not to celebrate between themselves
Councills. There were chosen out of Italy Deputies, which understood the
Greek, for then the Latin Church complied with the Greek; because the
Emperors resided in Greece. By whose commandment the Bishop of Rome sent his
Deputies to the General Councills, of which none of them were held in Italy,
although the Bishops of Rome desired it, and humbly sued to the Emperors for
it. But if for the holding of Councills in the West, it be necessary that the
Latin tongue be common every where. The Universities and Colleges where the
Latin are taught every where, suffice to preserve the Latin tongue; although
the public service were in the vulgar. Witnesses hereof might be the
Countries, whence Papistrie is banished, where their youth is carefully
instructed in the Latin tongue, although their service be in their vulgar
tongues; there also the Councills and ancient Canons are carefully preserved.
It is a great fondness to think that the barbarous Latin of the Mass serves
unto the preservation of the Latin tongue: or that the Text of the Mass
serves for the understanding of Virgill, or of Titus Livius, or to speak
Tullies Latin, and to make one a Ciceronian. Nay in very deed were the Latin
of the Mass as elegant as it is gross and barbarous, yet would it be but a
very weak means to preserve the Latin tongue, the Greek of the Greek
Liturgy, which is pure, has not hindered that the Greek tongue was not then
corrupted, when the Turks abolished and bereaved them of their Schools. And
the Liturgy of the Armenians which is in the Armenian tongue, and the liturgy
of the Ethiopians, which is in the Ethiopian tongue, have not hindered the
corruption of the Ancient Armenian and Ethiopian language.

As for their founding of the Christian faith upon the decision of Councills,
which are found contrary one to another, and the new contradicting the
ancient: and of whom the Pope allows but what makes for himself: opposing
himself often against general Councills: It is another question, which is not
for this place. The clear passages of Scripture and which have no need to be
interpreted, are sufficient unto salvation. Whosoever writes himself for an
infallible judge of the sense of the Scripture, sets himself above God. For he
makes God speak after his own will, and may change the Scripture under color
of interpreting it: and has the open way to build and erect an Empire. And he
should be exempt from all vice, lest he bring an interpretation unto it, that
may serve to color his vices, and to feed his avarice, or to undershore his
Ambition.

Such as these are the reasons of our Adversaries, which are but shifts, and
humane reasons and considerations, without, yea against the Word of God, and
which indeed are refuted by experience, and by common sense.

CHAP. XI. An examination of the proofs which Mounsieur the Cardinal du
Perron draws from antiquity for service in a tongue not understood.
IF our Adversaries reasons have been weak, their allegations out of
Antiquity have no more color. Mounsieur the Cardinal Du Perron is he that
has brought the most to this purpose.

He says that the service in the time of the ancient fathers was never said in
the Christian Religion saving in two tongues, to wit, Against the King of great
Britain. lib. 6. chap. 1. p. 1089.
in the Greek tongue and in the Latin, this he affirms without proof, and
against the truth, and we already have given a multitude of proofs to the
contrary. He himself in the beginning of that Chapter acknowledges that the
Syrian Churches had their service in the old Syrian, and the Ethiopian in the
ancient Ethiopian tongue. And the Armenians in the ancient Armenian tongue. It
had been then his part to prove that the Armenians and the Ethiopians ever
had their Liturgy in Greek or in Latin, which can never be made to appear.
I say the same of the Indian and Persian Churches, the which never had in their
Liturgy, no more then in civil use, any use of either of the Greek or of the
Latin, unless that which in this last age, the Jesuits have brought into some
corners of the East Indies.

He alleges in the Sequel the Jews, who in their Synagogues used the
Hebrew tongue, which is not the vulgar in any Country of the world. He bears
up himself upon the example of the sworn enemies of Jesus Christ; whose
example if we must follow, we must with all circumcise our selves, and
renounce Christianity. We on the contrary, do acknowledge in this, the
accomplishment of Gods curse uppn this people. It is that which God had
foretold of them: I will speak to this people by folk of another tongue and
by strange lips, and so they shall not understand me. 1. Cor. 14. ver. 21.
Esaias 28.11. for as for the Jews in the time of Jesus Christ and of the
Apostles. We have prooved in the sixth Chapter, that the people then understood
the Hebrew tongue.

Du Perron page 1077.
It is not unto the very Pagans and Mahumetans, but the Cardinal imployeth
himself, and has his recourse, thinking that the Church of Rome has dealt
very wisely to conform her self unto their example. We must needs say, that
the Word of God fails him seeing he has recourse to such examples he says
then that the Turks and Persians do their service in the Grammatical Arabic
and not in the vulgar of the simple Turks and Persians, that the verses of the
Saliques, in which were contained the ancient service of the Roman
commonwealth, were hardly understood of the Priests: He might also add that
the Magicians farce their conjurations with barbarous words, such as are not
understood. If in this question the Devil which seduced the Pagans, and which
blinds the Mahumetans, be taken for judge, there must be no service of God, nor
Gospel, needs must that cause be adjudged deplorable, and without support,
that is drived to employ such poor proofs. We must observe by the way, that
this Prelate making as though he were very well seen in History, discovers
himself to be but a very novice and smatterer therein. For the Arabians which
are near the half of the Mahumetans, have the service and the Alcoran in the
vulgar tongue; and the Salique verses contain but a small part of the service
of the Romans, to wit, the service of Mars, and Quirinus, for they were the
Priests of Mars. The body of the Roman religion was contained in the Toscane
discipline, given by Numa.

He says further, Page 1089.
that for the regard of the East-Church, the service was therein done only in
Greek: This we have convinced to be false. Never had the ancient Churches of
Armenia, of Persia, and of the Indians their service in Greek. Nor must it be
doubted that the Church of Jerusalem in the time of the Apostles celebrated the
Sacraments in the same tongue in the which Jesus Christ had instituted them, In
primitiva Ecclesia mysteria Hebraice celebrabantur. Sed tem pore Adriani I.
Imperatoris Graece in Ecclesia Orientali Christianorum, primo celebrari
caeperunt.
and was understood by the people. Durand in his Rational * lib. 4. Chap. 1.
says, that in the Primitive Church the mysteries were celebrated in Hebrew,
but that in the time of the Emperor Adrian, they began to be celebrated in
Greek in the Western Churches of the Christians. Understanding by the
East-Church that which on the East side was subject to the Roman Empire: to
wit, Syria, Judea, Natolia, or Asia the less, unto the which may also be added
Egypt. In these Countries every where, where the service was done in Greek,
there also their Sermons or preachings were likewise done in Greek. An evident
proof that the Greek tongue was there most used, although it was different
from the ancient vulgar tongues. So Athanasius and Cyrill, and Theophilus
preached in Greek to the people of Alexandria: and Cyrill of Jerusalem
preached in Greek at Jerusalem: And Eusebius in Caesaria of Palestine: And
Chrysostom in Antioch, Capital of Syria, and Basil in Caesaria of Cappadocia,
and Gregory of Nazianzen at Nazianzen, Graeca leguntur in omnibus fere
gentibus, Latina suis finibus exiguis sane continentur.
and Gregory of Nysse at Nysse. Cicero in his Oration for the Poet Archias,
says that the Greek was read in a manner thorowout all nations. For the
Empire of the Greek Successors of Alexandria had planted the Greek tongue in
Syria, and in Egypt, and in Cilicia, and in Cappadocia, and Galatia, and had
made it so familiar, that the vulgar tongues used before the reign of
Seleucides, and of Ptolomie, were less familiar then the Greek: For evermore
preaching ought to be accommodated to the ear of the simple people, even so in
the Churhes of Gascogne, and of Languedock Sermons and public service are
performed in French, although different from the tongue of the Country. But
the French is there in such sort understood by the people, that they far
better love the French then the Gascogne, and understand it with like
facility. Mounsieur the Cardinal was not ignorant of this, which appears by
this, that he maintains only that in the East the Greek was not the vulgar
tongue, but maintains not that the Greek was not there understood, by that
means he wanders from the question. For our difference is not, that the
public service ought to be said in a vulgar tongue, but whether it ought to
be done in a tongue understood of the people. Saint Hierome in the preface of
his second book upon the Epistle to the Galathians, says that the tongue of
the Galathians was like to that of the Gauls of Treves. But there he speaks of
the tongue that the Galathians had brought to the Country, and not of that,
which they there had learned. The Cardinal Du Perron uses this place of Saint
Hierome to prove that in Galatia the Greek was not the vulgar tongue. But he
fasifies this place according to his wonted manner, which makes wholly against
him. The words of Saint Hierome are, Galatas, excepto sermon Graeco, quo omnis
Oriens loquitur, propriam eandem linguam habere quam Treveros: That the
Galathians besides the Greeeke tongue which all the East uses, have a tongue
proper, like to that of them of Treves. This place speaks clearly, that the
Greek was current in Galatia, as in all the East. But the Cardinal alleges
Saint Hierome in these words, The tongue of the Galathians was like to that of
the Gauls near to Treves. This falsification is evident. Besides, the Apostle
writing to the Galathians in Greek, presupposed that they understood the
Greek. The Lycaonian language which is mentioned in the 14. Chapter of the
Acts, verse 11. was rather a dialect, then a diversity of tongues, and though
indeed it had been a tongue a part of it self; yet so it is that it
appears, that the Greek tongue was understood by Lycaonians, seeing that
Paul and Barnabas speak to the multitude, the press and throngue of the
people in Greek.

CHAP. XII. By what means the Latin tongue is brought into divine service in
France and in Spain.
FRom the East Du Perron passes on to the West, and says, that thorowout all
the West the service was done in Latin: for wheresoever the public service
was done in Latin, there also were preached the Sermons in the same tongue:
and the Letany was there understood by women and children. It will not be
found that in times past, the service has been in Latin in any Country.
Where the Latin was not understood thus amongst the Gauls the service was done
in Latin, because the Latin was there more used then the ancient French
tongue, which was so abolished by little and little, in such sort, that the
Gauls were called Romans, and are so ordinarily called by Gregory of Tours,
and distinguished by that name from the Franks and Burgunians, which were
strangers. and the tongue of the Country was called Roman: different from the
tongue of the Court, which was High Dutch, such as is spoken in Guelders and
Iubiers. This difference continued still unto the time of Charlemagne. For in
the third Council of Tours held under his reign, in the year 812. Chap. 17.
there is commandment given to every Bishop to have Et ut easdem homilias
quisque aperte tra^sferre studeat in rusticam Romanam linguam aut Theotiscam
quo facilius cuncti possint intelligere quae dicantur.
Homilies or Sermons in two tongues, to wit, in the country Roman tongue,
that is the tongue of the common people, and in the Theotisk or Tudesk, that is
to say, in the High Dutch tongue, to the end that all might understand the
Sermons. Now this was the time wherein the French-Church began by the violence
of this King, to receive the Romish service, notwithstanding the resistance of
the Clergy, who before that had the Ambrosian service, and was not in any
thing subject to the Bishop of Rome.

Under the Empire of Marcus Aurelius about the year of our Lord 168. the
Christian Religion began to spread it self amongst the Gauls, and then first
began there to be Martyrs, as says Sulpitius Severus a Gaulois Author, near
about that time in his 2. book of his sacred History, Sub Aurelio deinde
Antonini silio persecutio iquinta agitata. Ac tum primum intra Gallias martyria
visa, serius trans Alps Dei religione transgressa.
under Aurelius (says he) the Son of Antoninus the fifth persecution was
raised up, and then first were seen Martyrs in France, the Religion of God
having very slowly passed over the Alps. At this time the Latin tongue was so
familiar amongst the Gauls, that it was more used then the old Gaulois, and
the language of the Country was called Roman, and the French Romans, as we
have said. Besides it is to be presumed that this Latin of the Gauls or old
Frenchmen was not so polished nor so congruous as that of the town of Rome.
Whereupon also Pacatus in a Panegirick to Theodosius, Tum difficilius pro
genita atquae haereditaria ora^di facilitate non esse fastidio rude^ hunc and
incultum Tra^salpini sermonis horrorem.
excuses himself in that he spoke not Latin so well as they that were borne
in Italy. Then were the contracts and lawpleas, and all the acts of justice
done in Latin. The Gottick laws which were observed from the straits of
Gibraltar unto the river of Loyre abridged by the Code of Theodosius by the
Kings of the Visigots were Latins, as teaches Fauchet the most learned French
Antiquarie that we have, in the life of King Clovis.

In the year of our Lord 252. under the Emperor Decius, according as
observes Gregory of Tours in the first book of his History, Gratian came to
Tours to preach the Gospel amongst the Pagans, and Saturnine to Toulouse, and
Dionysius to Paris, where he was Bishop, and there suffered Martyrdom. This is
he, whom they falsely surname Dionysius Areopagita. Saturnine was cast down
headlong from the Capitol of Toulouse. These men's tongues being Latin, and
preaching to a people that spoke Latin, it is no marvel if they established
the service in Latin: not after the Romish manner, but with diverse
Ceremonies, according to the necessity of the times, and decensie of the
places, to reclaim and civilize the Pagans. Which diversity continued until
the Ambrosian service was received by the Gauls, which amongst them bore the
sway until the time of Charlemaigne, who brought in the Romish service.

The Franks being entered France, and having made themselves masters unto the
river of Loire: (for the rest unto the Pirene was held by the Visigots, unto
the time of Clovis, who left not the Visigots, that reigned also in Spain, any
more but Languedoc, which the Romans called Septimania, Fauchet in the life of
Cloves. chap. 15.
and a small part of Guien) the Latin or Roman tongue was corrupted, and fell
from her purity, yet for all that not in such sort that divine service which
was done in Latin, was not still understood. We have formerly heard the
witness of Sulpitius Severus in the life of Saint Martin, reciting that one of
the people taking up the Psalter in the place of the absent Deacon or Reader
began to read the 8. Psalm, wherein there is, ut destruas inimicum and
defensorem: which raised such a shout of the people against one called
Defensor, who opposed himself against the election of Martin unto the
Bishopric.

Prosper of Aquitan writ about the year of our Lord, 450. He in 1. book of
the contemplative life Chap. 23 will have the preachers language to be simple
and plain, sit simplex and apertus etiamsi minus Latinus, disciplinatus tamen
and gravis, let it be simple and open, although it be not so good latin, yet
let it be regular and grave, that it may not hinder any, though he be ignorant
to understand it. Now he speaks of the people of Guien.

Much about the same time lived Sidonius Apolinaris Bishop of Clermunt in
Auvernie, who married the daughter of the Emperor Avitus, by whom he had
children. This Bishop, Vt nisi vel paucissimi quique meram Latiaris linguae pro
prietatem de trivialium barbarismorum rubigine vindicav eris, eam brevi
abolitam defleamus.
who writ all his letters in Latin, preached also in Latin. In the tenth
Epistle of the second book, he complains that in his time amongst the common
people the purity and propriety of the Latin tongue fell away, and
degenerated into Barbarism; and in his Epistle to Perpetuus Pope (for so then
were styled all the Bishops a little more respected then the common sort of
Bishops) which is the ninth of the seventh book there is a Latin Sermon made
by the said Sidonius to the people of Bourges, an undoubted proof that the
people of Bourges understood the Latin.

Now albeit that the medley of the Visigots and of the Franks among the Gauls,
had altered the latin tongue yet so it was that the Latin could not thereby
be utterly rooted out, but rather the Kings of the Franks, whose language was
that of Guelders, to accommodate themselves unto, and to comply with their
people, learned the Latin tongue, as witnesses Fortunatus, speaking of King
Aribert.

Cum sis progenitus clara de gente Sicamber,
Floret in eloquio lingua Latina tuo.
But through laps of time the Latin being abastardised amongst the Gauls, and
the Thioise abolisht, the Roman was corrupted in such sort, that it became
another tongue from the Latin. And already in the time of the second race of
our Kings the tongue of the Country was no more Latin: and nevertheless
through the negligence of Bishops, and by the ignorance of people, there was no
care taken to put the divine service into the vulgar tongue. One might see that
then the studdie of the Bishops was to adorn their Churches, and to heap
together relics, and to find out men that had a fair Organe to diversifie
and descant on a Church song and make their voices sound out the loudest.
Images were not as yet received into them, nor the single life of the Clergy,
nor the power of the Popes, nor Purgatory, nor Romish indulgences. But the
Wars of the French in Italy against the Lumbards in the time of Pepin, and
of his Son Charlemagne, brought a strait communion between our Kings and the
Bishop of Rome, who in that war used all his power, and was a mortal enemy
of the Lumbards: Whence it fell out that Pepin, and after him Charles his
Son, and Lewis le Debonnaire, Charles his Son, bestowed on the Bishops of
Rome great presents, and gave them all the lands and possessions, which the
Pope holds at this day in Italy: reserving nevertheless the Royalty. Unto
these benefits Charlemaigne added this: That at the request of Pope Adrian I.
See Durand in the 5. book of his Ratioonal chap. 2. and Fauchet in 7. book of
his french Antiquities in the year. 796.
he abolished out of the Kingdom of France the Ambrosian Service, and
established therein by force, and Maugre the Clergy of France, the Romish or
Gregorian service. By this change the Latin tongue in the public service was
fully established: for that which was but done formerly through the negligence
of the Bishops of France, from thenceforth was done by law, according as the
servitude increased, from age to age. It would be now a crime of Heresy, and a
manifest rebellion against the papal Sea, to go about to have divine service
in any other tongue, then in the Latin or Roman. At this day one of the most
essential Marks of the Romish Hierarchy, is the Romish language. And I wot
not, whether it was by chance, or by conjecture, or by inspiration, that
Ireneus above fourteen hundred years ago, in this word Latin, found out the
name of Antichrist, and the number of six hundred sixty six.

The like matters happened in Spain, where the Latin tongue became so
frequent and so familiar, that in the times of the Emperors Domitian and
Trajan, and a long time after them, the Latin tongue was there as familiar, as
at Rome, except in Arragon, and in the Cantabrick Mountains, which is the
country of Biscay and in Galicia. Seneca and Quintilian and Martial,
excellent Authors of the Lain tongue, were Spaniards; The Father and the
Mother of Martial were called Fronto and Flacilla, which are Roman names, as
also the names of Martial and of Quintilian, an evident sign, that the
language was there Roman. Whereupon we need not wonder, if when the Christian
religion thither entered, the ordinary service was done in Latin, not for all
that, after the form, nor by the ordinance of the Bishop of Rome, who indeed
there was respected, by reason of the dignity of the City, but had not there
any power, nor jurisdiction.

In the year of our Lord' 408. Genseric King of the Va^dals Conquered Spain
upon the Roman Empire, which a while after he left to pass over into Africa,
and left the place to the Visigots, who reigning formerly in Aquitane, made
themselves masters of Spain in the year of our Lord, 417. The laws of the
Visigots were Latin: and although their tongue was Gotick, yet did they
accommodate themselves to the Latin: Whence likewise their Councills and
general Assemblies were made in Latin. The office or ordinary service of the
Orthodox Spaniards (for the Visigots at the beginning were Arians) was called
the Mosarabicke, or Toletain office: whereof may be seen an abridgement in
Isidore in his first book of Ecclesiastic offices, which Isidore borne in
Sevill writ in the year of our Lord about 630.

In the year 713. the Sarasins abolished in Spain the kingdom of the Goths,
slew their King Roderick in battle, and extinguished in the most part of
Spain the Christian Religion. And held Spain for many ages, until that the
residue of the Christians, which were retired and fled into the Mou^tains
having recollected their forces in the end, drove out the Mores, and replaced
again the Christian Religion in Spain, and established many petty kingdoms.
Their service was done yet in Latin, according to the ancient form, albeit by
reason of the mixture of the Sarasins they had lost the use of the Latin
tongue. Their office or service was the ancient, to wit the Mozorabick office:
which still continued in Spain, until about the year of our Lord, 1080. in
the which King Alphonsus to gratify Pope Gregory the VII. Roderick Archbishop
of Toledo. lib. 6. chap. 25. and 26.
by strong hand, and Maulgre the estates of the Country established in Spain
the Romish service, then the Latin tongue which heretofore was used by
custom, was now established by law. And so has continued unto this day.

CHAP. XIII. Of England and Germany, and and how the Romish service and the
Latin tongue were thither brought in.
IT will not be amiss to say somewhat also of England, which in times past was
called Britain. Etenim circiter non gentos ab hinc annos constat plebem in
nonnullis regionibus p^eces suas publicas ignota lingue recitaste, id quod in
Anglia nostra fuisse factitatum, manifestum faciam.
Harding in the first Section of his treatise Of prayers in a strange tongue,
says about nine hundred years since public prayers have begun in some
Countries to be said in a tongue not understood, especially in England. This
Doctor very much versed in Antiquity finds not the use of the Latin tongue
in England to be more ancient since the term of nine hundred years: and he
has in this spoken according to the truth.

We must then know that England received the Christian religion, before there
were any Churches erected amongst the Gauls or old French. Nicephorus in his
second book, Chap. 40. says, that Simon Zelotes the Apostle brought the
doctrine of the Gospel unto the Western Sea, and unto the Isles of Britain.
Gildas an English Author who lived in the sixth age, and Polidore Virgil in his
second book of his History say, that Joseph of Arimathea there first preached
the Gospel Balaeus in his first Centurie, alleges many other witnesses,
Tertullian Britannorum in accessa loca Christo vero subdita.
who writ at the end of the second age in 7. Chap. of his book against the
Jews, says, that the inaccessible places of the Britains are subject to the
true Christ. (...), etc. (...).
And Theodoret in his 9. book of the means to cure the indisposition of the
Greeks. Our fishers and toule-gatherers and our currier (so qualifieth he the
Apostles) have brought to all men the Evangelicall Laws, and have persuaded
not only the Romans, and those which are tributaries to them, but even the
Scithians, Indians, etc. and those of Britain to receive the laws of him
that was crucified.

Some West-monasteriensis and Galfridus.
Authors affirm, that in the year 185. Lucius King of Britain sent to Pope
Eleutherius, praying to be instructed by him in the Christian religion, and
that he abolished Paganism out of all Britain, so that there was not left so
much as one infidel. Which is a a story invented in favor of the Pope. For
these Historians place in this Isle peaceable Britain Kings reigning in the
South-part of the Isle, which was subject to the Romans, and which had no
other King but the Emperor of Rome. The estate of this Isle under the Romans,
may be seen in Cornelius Tacitus in the life of Julius Agricola, and in
Xiphilinus an Epitomiser of Dion, in the life of Nero, and of Severus
Emperors. At this time the Christians of South- Britain suffered persecution
under the Romans, that were Pagans. And as for the Northerly part, which at
this day is called Scotland, and the Country of Northumberland it was
Heathenish, and was so a long time after Eleutherius. Hieron. Oceano. Scotorum
and Asotorum ritu, ac de republica Platonis, promiscuas uxores ac communes
liberos habeant.
Saint Hierome in his Epistle to Oceanus speaks of the Scots, as having in
his time their wives common 200. years after Elutherius. And Idem lib. 2. in
lovinianum, Cum ipse adolescentulus in Gallia viderim Scottos gentem Britannam
humanis vescicarnibus, and cum per sylvas porcorum greges and armentorum
pecudumque reperiam, pastorum nates and foeminarum papillas solere abscindere,
and has solas ciborum delicias arbitrari. Scottorum natio vxores proprias non
habet, etc.
in 2. lib. against Iovinian, he says, he had seen the Scotch eating man's
flesh. And Galfride in his 2. Chapter of his third book of his History
speaks of them as of Pagans. Furthermore the Christians of this Isle
celebrated Easter precisely the fourteenth of the month of March, contrary to
the rules of the church of Rome, which they would not have done, had they been
brought to Christianity by the Church of Rome.

This Isle so continued under the government of the Roman Pagans until the
time of Dioclesian in the year 286. The Senate of Rome sent thither Caurasius
to oppose the courses of the barbarous, but he enleagu'd himself with the
Islanders, and thence drove out the Romans, and made himself King, and after
that time, one while the Romans prevailing, another while the Islanders, that
Isse was but weakly held by the Roman Empire.

In the year of our Lord, 307. Constantine Son of Constantius and of Helene,
a Christian woman governed that Island. Being Pagan, he took the title of
Roman Emperor, and passed through the Gauls, and from thence into Italy, and
made himself absolute Emperor. Then becoming Christian, he granted peace to
the Churches of Britain.

In the year 383. Maximus a Christian and Orthodox Prince governed Britain:
for as then all that part of the Isle which was subject to the Romans was
Christian. This Maximus invaded with a maine army the Gauls, and conquered
them, and took the title of Roman Emperor against Gratian, Son to
Theodosius.

In the year of our Lord, 434. The Roman Empire being fallen into the West,
and rent by the Goths, Franks, Vandals, and Bourgagnions, the Romans abandoned
the Isle of Britain. Which moved the Islanders to confer the kingdom upon
Constantine, the brother of the King of Britain Armorique, who was issued of
their nation, a Christian and virtuous man.

In the year 446. according to Westmonasteriensis, calculation. The Pelagian
heresy reinforcing it self in the Island of Britain, the Bishops of the
Country assembled in a Synod, writ into France to Germanicus Bishop of Auxerre
and to Lewis Bishop of Troyes in Champagne, men renowned for their learning and
piety, and prayed them to come to them, to assist them with their aid and
counsel, which they did, and with success, God blessing their travel. This
Historian says not that the Pope sent them, as some do fable, but that they
came at the request of the Islanders.

In the year of our Lord, 449. three ships of the Anglosaxons came from the
East Frises, landed in the Isle of Britain, and took the same beaten way of
those others which some four years before arived there in great multitude.
This nation was High Dutch, and Paganish, serving Saturn, Jupiter, and
Mercury, who having set foot in the Isle could not be driven out a gain, and
at length made it self mistress of the East and South-part of the Isle, and
there established Paganism, dividing the Country into many petty kingdoms,
and called the Country England. But besides the Christians living under the
Dominion of the Pagan Saxons, all the Occidentall part, to wit Cornwall, and
the Country in times past called Cambria, and now Wales, was Christian. The
Scotch had already received Christianity: in such sort that the Isle was half
Christian.

In the year 596. Pope Gregory judged the time fit to improve the authority
of his Sea: for the Christians of England not being fit to give instruction to
the petty Pagan kings, by reason of their continual wars, and those petty
kings being savage, and easy to be persuaded: and the Christians of that
Island living under other laws, and other ceremonies then those of the Church
of Rome, he sent Augustine, Monk of Saint Bennet (for as then in the West,
there was but that sole order of Monks) into England, a man fit and
industrious to travel and to take pains for two things. The one to reduce the
Christians of the Isle unto the form, and to the service of the Church of
Rome, and to induce them to acknowledge his Sea. The other to endeavor to draw
some of those petty Pagan kings to the Christian Religion.

This Austin came to England with a train of forty persons, and presented
himself to one of the petty kings named Ethelbert King of Kent, who
rereceived him with honor. A while after insinuating into the Queens favor
and good liking, he persuaded her to embrase the Christian faith. The Queen a
while after drew in her husband, who was followed by a multitude of Pagans. Of
this King the above named Augustine obtained permission to communicate with the
Christians of the North-part of England, whom he exhorted to join themselves
with him, because (as faith Westmonasteriensis) Sanctum Pascha and alia
perplura vnitati Ecclesiae concontraria faciebant. They did keep the holy
Easter, and many other things in a contrary manner to the unity of the
Church. These Christians before they would communicate with him, consulted a
certain person of the Isle, who lived a solitary life, esteemed a prudent
man, and of holy life, and they asked him whether at Augustines persuasion they
should part with their ancient customs. To whom this good man answered, if he
be a man of God, follow him, but (said they) how shall we discern whether he
be a a man of God or no? he answered them, You shall know him by his
humility, and if he induce you by his example to bear the Cross of Christ.
So they made their appearance in the Synod assigned, where Augustine received
them with contempt, and vouchsafed not so much as to rise up from of his seat
when they entered. This was the cause, that they likewise contemned him and
contradicted whatsoever be propounded, accusing him of pride: and although
Gregory had sent him the Pallium, The robe.
and had styled him Archbishop, nevertheless they declared unto him, that
they acknowledged not his authority, nor would obey him in any thing.
Wherewith Augustine being netled, threatened them that the Anglo-Saxons should
revenge it upon them, and he lied not. So Aethelfrid King of Northumberland,
although he were a Pagan, favoring this Augustine, in hatred of these
Christians his enemies, fell upon them, and made a great slaughter of them.
They had in a Town called Bangor a great Monastery, wherein there were some
twelve hundred Monks, who were all poor artisans getting their living by
their trade: of whom this Pagan King made a massacre and a sacrifice unto
Augustine, but as for the Saxon Christians converted by Augustine from
Paganism, they received the Roman service, such as Augustine pleased to give
them, and subjected themselves to Augustine sent by the Bishop of Rome, about
the year 600. of our Lord. Which is the time which Harding points out unto
us, saying, that at the least nine hundred, or a thousand years since service
was done in England in a tongue not understood, acknowledging that it was this
Augustine, who together with the Roman service thither brought in the roman
language, which ever after that time forward continued in England in their
public service, unto the time of the reformation: every age from that time
on-ward patched on some piece in religion. In such sort, that had Augustine
lived again seven or eight hundred years after his death, he should have
found in England, and at Rome too quite another religion then that which he
preached. This that we have recited concerning this Augustine, and of his
entry, and of his carriage and behavior in England is extant in Bid in his
second chap. of the second book of the History of the Anglosaxons. In Geffrey
of Monmouth, in his 4. chap. of his eight book of the History of the two
Britains, and in the flower of the Histories of Matthew of Westminster.

Bid in the 4. book of his History says that in the year of our Lord 668.
one surnamed, Stephen taught the people of Northumberland to follow the Romish
singing in public service As then the Romish service was not yet received in
France, nor in Spain. This selfsame Augustine passing through France, and
there observing the service different from the Romish Liturgy, asked advice of
Gregory his Master how he should carry himself in that diversity. Gregory
answered him that he should follow that which he found good, and should
accommodate himself unto, and comply with the Churches wherein he was. This
is extant in the Interrogatories of the said Augustine added to the end of the
works of Gregory the first.

As for Germany, Christianity came in thither very late. Radbod King of the
Frisons in the year 700. of our Lord, was a Pagan: and Franconia began to
receive the Gospel. And the Saxons against whom Charlemagne made so great
wars in the year 775. and following, were Pagans, and were ranged to
Christianity by the sword, as were also the Frisons.

Suibert in the year 704. and following, very much advanced Christianity
along the Rhine, and in the Country of Brandenbourge. But it appears not to
us by Histories in what tongue he established the service.

In the year 719. Winofrid, surnamed Boniface, preached the Gospel to the
Germane Pagans, sent by Gregory II. Pope, a great defendor of images. This
Boniface being wholly given to the advancing of the Papal Sea, I doubt not but
that he gave to the Germans newly converted from Paganism, the service in
the Roman form, and tongue.

CHAP. XIIII. Concerning Africa, and how the service in the Latin tongue
entered thither.
COncerning Africa, Mounsieur du Perron speaks thus. Lib. 6. c. 1. p. 1091.
Saint Augustine witnesses to us, that in Africa the custom which was amongst
the people of pronouncing in singing of the Psalms, De doctrina Christiana.
lib. 2. cap. 13.
Floret sanctificatio mea, instead of saying, Florebit, was so deeply rooted
through long use amongst the people, that there was no means to bereave them or
to weane them from it, and yet nevertheless it is certain that the Latin
tongue was not vulgar any where out of Italy, and the towns of the Roman
Colonies, spread abroad through the Empire: as was Carthage in Africa, wherein
the Latin tongue was vulgar, whence it was that Saint Augustine (as such)
says, that he learned it from the blandishments and hugging of his Nurses.

This Prelat does according to his accustomed manner, which is to prove a
thing, which is not in controversy, and so to wander from the question. He
says, that the Latin tongue was not vulgar in Africa: but that is not the
question. We dispute not here of the vulgar tongue, but of a tongue understood
by the people. It matters not whether the Latin was, or was not the vulgar
tongue in Africa: the question is whether it was there understood or no. In
this part of Africa, which he notes to us, the Liturgy was said in Latin,
because the Latin tongue was there more common and better understood by the
people then the Punick tongue, which was their ancient vulgar tongue. It is
already much that Du Perron yields us that the Latin tongue was the vulgar
tongue of Carthage a Capital town of Africa. He confesses also the like of
the towns of Africa, which were Colonies. Now the vulgar tongue of the
capital town of the country being Latin, where the Proconsuls Court was,
and the officers of the Emperor, and where the causes were judged in Latin,
and wherein there were an innumerable multitude of people, and many other
towns being Roman Colonies: and through out all these towns, they whom the
Romans called Curiales, and the Greeks (...), whom in France we call les Gens
du Roy, being Latin, it is no wonder, if all the people through the maine
Country were accustomed to speak Latin, and that the Latin tongue there was
more usual then the Punick tongue, which was the vulgar tongue. Wherefore as
at Carthage, so also at Bonne, and in other towns of Africa subject to the
Romans, not only the Liturgy, but also their Sermons were made in Latin. In
Latin it was that Saint Cyprian, and Aurelius, and Augustine preached. The
which Augustine being borne in the town of Thagast or Tegest in Numidia, where
the people were half barbarous, and far from Carthage: yet nevertheless in
the 1 of his Confessions, Chapter 14. Latina didici sine vllo metu atque
cruciatu, inter etiam blandimenta nu tricum, and ioca arridentium.
says, he had learned the Latin amongst the blandishments and flatteries of
his Nurces: for that his Father was a Courtier and an officer of the Roman
Emperor: as witnesses Possidonius in the life of Saint Augustine. And
therefore also in the books of Saint Augustine there are many passages by the
which it appears, that the people of Africa understood the Latin, better
then the Punicke tongue. As in the Ser. 16. de verbis Apostoli. Proverbium
notum est Punicum, quod quide^ Latin vobis dicam, quia Punice non omnes nostis.
26. Sermon of the words of the Apostle, he speaks thus to the people. There
is a Punicke proverb well known, which I will tell you in Latin, because you
do not all of you understand the Punicke. And upon the 50. Psalm. We all know
that in Latin we say not sanguines, nor sanguina. And in his second book of
Christian doctrine, Chapter 10. Cum dicimus bovem, Cum dicimus bove^
intelligimus pecus, quod omnes nobiscum Latinae linguae homines hoc nomine
vocunt.
When we say OX, we mean that beast, which all they which with us are
Latinists by tongue do call by that name. And in his first book of
retractations, Chapter 20. Volens causam Donatistarum ad ipsius humilimi vulgi
and omnino imperitoru^ and idiotarum notitiam pervenire, and eorum, qua^tum
fieri posset per nos, inhaerere memoriae, Psalmum qui eis cantaretur per
literas Latinas feci.
Desiring that the cause of the Donatists might come to the knowledge of the
common people, and of the most ignorant and of very Idiots, and that by our
means it might be deeply imprinted in their memories, I have put it into
Latin in a Psalm for them to sing.

By all this hitherto laid open it appears as clear as day that the
Primitive and ancient Church in Greece, Egypt, Asia, Armenia, Ethiopia, Africa
subject to the Romans, In Italy, in France, Spain, and England divine
service was said in a tongue understood. And this Mounsieur Du Perron covertly
without any words acknowledged, in that he durst not say, that in these
Churches service was said in an unknown tongue, but maintains that it was not
said in the vulgar tongue, and that is false too in Italy, in Greece, and in
the most part of Asia the less, In the Town of Carthage, and and in all the
Roman Colonies of Africa: and in all of them it is true without exception,
that Sermons and service were performed and done in the same tongue.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by George Miller, for George Edwards, dwelling in
Greene-Arbor, without Newgate. 1630.


