THE LIFE, DEATH AND ACTIONS OF THE MOST CHASTE, learned, and Religious Lady,
the Lady JANE GRAY, Daughter to the Duke of SVFFOLKE. CONTAINING FOUR
PRINCIPAL Discourses written with her own hands.

The first an Admonition to such as are weak in FAITH: The second a
CATECHISM: The third an exhortation to her SISTER: And the last her words at
her DEATH.


MATH. 5. 8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. London
printed by G. Eld, for John wright: and are to be sold at his shop without
Newgate, at the sign of the Bible. 1615.

THE LIFE, DEATH and actions of the most chaste, learned and Religious Lady, the
Lady Jane Gray, Daughter to the Duke of Suffolk: containing four principal
discourses written with her own hands; the first an admonition to such as are
weak in Faith, the second a Catechism, the third an exhortation to her
Sister, and the last her words at her death.
SOme worthy parcels or excellent Essays of the (...) ^ough to be imitated
virtues, of that most admirable, wise, learned, and religious Lady, the Lady
Jane Gray, Daughter to the Duke of Suffolk, and unfortunate wife of the Lord
Guilford Dudley son to the duke of Northumberland, coming, in an old
ancient Printed Copy, unto my hands as it were half forgotten in the world,
or like a curious monument whose well-carned figures, and rare architecture the
dust and Cobwebs had injuriously defaced: I could not, out of Charity and
Christian love to a mirror of such excellence, but with my best Art and
industry pollish and cleanse a perfection so Noble, Holy, and worthy all good
men's imitations, and as it were to awaken the sleepie world from her
fantastic Lethargy, to behold in that, which we call the weaker sex a
strength matchless and invincible: A Saba that had so often heard the wisdom
of Solomon, that ten thousand of our Salomons may come now to be instructed at
this Saba: Briefly a Lady in all goodness so perfect, that whosoever could
gain but some part of her shadow, might have enough in these latter days to
boast and rank themselves with the best that are called virtuous, so
flatteringly are attributes cast upon the living, and so maliciously slander
upon the dead.

To return then to my discourse, you may by that which has been formerly
spoke of her birth and marriage, Judge the greatness of her blood and place,
both which were far over shined by her virtues as shall be declared
hereafter: she was born in England, and there brought up in learning, and
religion, with that prosperous and devout painfulnesse, that as seed cast upon
the best and most fruitfulst ground she brought forth her increase in such
abundance of infinits, that the least of her excellencies were impossible to
be circumscribed: for proof whereof, that every judgment may stand steadfast
in the opinion of her perfection* I will here deliver unto you an Epistle of
her own penning, sent to a noble friend of hers in the Court of England, being
in those days of persecution fallen from the truth of Gods holy word for fear
of the world, in which you shall find so much learning chariti^ and divine
readings that by this one Talent only this princely Eagle may be truly
discovered how potent and unmatchable the great substance of so rich a virtue
is.

An Epistle of the Lady Jane Grayes to a Noble friend of hers newly fallen from
the Truth.
SO often as I call to mind (dear friend and chosen Brother) the dreadful and
fearful sayings of God, that he which lays hold upon the plow and looks
back again, is not meet for the kingdom of heaven. And on the other side to
remember the comfortable words of our Savior Christ, to all those that
forsaking themselves do follow him: I cannot but marvel at thee, and lament
thy case; that thou which sometimes were the lively member of Christ, but now
the deformed impe of the devil; sometimes the beautiful temple of God, but
now the stinking and filthy kenell of Satan; sometimes the unspotted spouse of
thy Savior, but now the unshamefast paramour of Antichrist, sometimes my
faithful brother, but now a stranger and Apostata, yea sometimes a stout
christian soldior, but now a cowardly runaway. So often as I consider the
threatenings and promises of the divine Justice to all those which faithfully
love him: I cannot but speak to thee, yea rather cry out and exclaim against
thee, thou seed of Satan, and not of Judah, whom the Devil has deceived, the
world has beguiled, and desire of life has subverted, and made of a Christian
an Infidel.

Wherefore have thou taken upon thee the Testament of the Lord in thy mouth?
wherefore have thou hitherto yielded thy body to the ^ir^, and to the bloody
hands of cruel tyrants? wherefore have thou instructed others to be strong in
Christ, when thou thy self do now so horribly abuse the testament and Law of
the Lord, when thou thy self preachedst (as it were not to steal) yet most
abhominably stealest, not from men, but from God, and as a most heinous
sacrilegious robber, robbest Christ thy redeemer of his right in his members
thy body and thy soul; when thou thy self do rather choose to live miserably
(with shame) in this world, then to die gloriously and reign in honor with
Christ, to the end of all eternity, in whom even in death there is life beyond
wish, beyond all expression: And when I say thou thy self art most weak, thou
ought to show thy self most s^rong, for the strength of a fort is not
known before the a^^ult, but thou yeeldest (like a faint Captain) thy hold
before any battry be brought against thee.

Oh wretched and unhappy man what art thou but dust and ashes, and will thou
resist thy maker, that formed and fashioned thee: will thou now forsake him
that called thee from custome-gathering among the Romish Antichristians, to be
an Ambassador and messenger of his eternal word; he that first framed thee,
and since thy creation and birth preserved thee, nourished thee, and kept thee,
yea and inspired thee with the spirit of knowledge (I cannot, I would I could
say of grace) shall he not possess thee, dare thou deliver up thy self to
another, being not thine own but his? How can thou, having knowledge, or how
dare thou neglect the law of the Lord, and follow the vain traditions of
men? And whereas thou have been a public professor of his Name, become now a
defacer of his glory.

I will not refuse the true God, and worship the invention of man, the golden
Calfe, the whore of Babylon the Romish religion, the abominable Idol, the most
wicked Mass: will thou torment again, rent and tear the most precious body
of our Savior Christ with thy bodily and fleshly teeth, without the breaking
whereof upon the cross, our sins and transgressions, could else no way be
redeemed? will thou take upon thee to offer up any sacrifice unto God for our
sins, considering that Christ offorod up himself (as S. Paul says) upon the
Cross, a lively sacrifice once for all.

Can neither the punishment of the Israelites (which for their Idolatry so often
they received) move thee; neither the terrible threatenings of the ancient
Prophets stir thee, nor the crosses of Gods own mouth fear thee to honor any
other God then him? will thou so regard him that spared not his dear and only
son for thee, so diminishing, yea utterly extinguishing his glory, that thou will attribute the praise and honor to Idols, which have mouths and speak not,
eyes and see not, ears and yet hear not, which shall perish with them that
made them: What says the Prophet Baruck, where he recites the Epistle of
Jeremy, written to the captive Jews, did he not forewarne them that in
Babylon they should see Gods of Gold, Silver, Wood and Stone, borne upon men's
sholders to cause a fear upon the Heathen? But be not you afraid of them
(says Jeremy) nor do as other do: But when you see others worship them, say
you in your hearts, It is thou (O Lord) that ought only to be worshipped:
for as touching the timber of those Gods the Carpenter framed them, and
pollished them, yea gilded they be and laid over with silver and vain things
and cannot speak: he shows moreover, the abuse of their deckings, how the
priests took off their ornaments, and apparelled their women therewithal: How
one holds a Scepter, another a sword in his hand, and yet can they judge in
no matter, nor defend themselves, much less any other, from either hatred or
murder, nor yet from gnawing worms, dust, filth, or any other evil thing:
these and such like words speaks Jeremy unto them, whereby he proves them but
vain things, and no Gods, and at last he concludes thus; confounded be
those that worship them.

They were warned by Jeremy, and thou as Jeremy have warned others, and art
warned thy self by many Scriptures in many places.

God says he is a jealous God, which will have all honor, glory, and worship
given to him onoly. And Christ says in the fourth of Luke to Satan which
tempted him: even to the same Satan, the same Beelzebub, the same Devil which
has prevailed against thee: It is written (says he) thou shall honor the
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

These and such like do prohibit thee, and all Christians to worship any other
God then he which was before al worlds, and laid the foundations both of heaven
and earth, and will thou honor a detestable Idol invented by the popes of Rome,
and the uncharitable college of politic Cardinals?

Christ offered up himself once for all, and will thou offer him up again
daily at thy pleasure? But thou will say thou do it for a good intent? Oh
sink of sin! Oh child of perdition! can thou dream of any good intent
therein, when thy conscience bears thee witness of the wrath of God promised
against thee?

How did Saul, who for that he disobayed the word of God for a good intent:
was thrown from his worldly and temporal kingdom: shall thou then which do
so deface Gods honeur, and rob him of his right, inherit the eternal heavenly
Kingdom? will thou for a good intent pluck Christ out of heaven, and make his
death void, and deface the triumph of his cross offering him up daily? will thou either for fear of death, or hope of life, deny and refuse thy God, who
enriched thy poverty, healed thine infirmity, and yielded to this victory if
thou would have kept it? do thou not consider that the thryd of life
hangs upon him that made thee, who can (as his will is) either tw^e it hard
to last the longer, or untwine it again to break the sooner? Do thou not
remember the saying of David, a notable King, which teaches thee, a miserable
wretch, in his 104. Psalm, where he says, When thou take away thy Spirit (O
Lord) from men, they dye, and are turned again to their dust, but when thou
let thy breath go forth, they shall be made and thou shall renew the face
of the earth.

Remember the saying of Christ in his Gospel, whosoever seeks to save his
life shall loose it, but whosoever will loose it for my sake shall find it:
And in an other place: Who so ever loves Father or Mother above me, is not
meet for me, for he that will be my Disciple, must forsake Father and Mother,
and himself, and take up his cross and follow me: what cross, the cross of
infamy and shame, of misery and poverty, of affliction and persecution for his
Names sake.

Let the often falling of those heavenly showers pierce thy stony heart, let the
two edged sword of Gods holy word hew a sunder the knit-together sinews of
worldly respects, even to the very marrow and life blood of thy carnal heart,
that thou may once again forsake thy self, to embrace Christ, and like as
good subjects will not refuse to hazard all in the defense of their earthly and
temporal Governors, so fly not like a white lyuerd milke-sop from thy
standard, whereby thy chief Captain Christ has placed thee in a noble array
of this life: Viriliter ago confortetur cor tuum and sustine dominum, fight
manfully, come life, come death, the quarrel is Gods, and undoubtedly the
victory is ours.

But thou will say I will not break unity: What? No^ the unity of Satan and
his members, not the unity of darkness, the agreement of Antichrist, and his
adherents; nay then thou deceiuest thy self with fond imaginations of such an
unity as is amongst the enemies of Christ: were not the false Prophets in an
unity: were not Joseph's brethren* Jacobs sons, in an unity: were not the
Heathen as the Amelechites* the Pheresits and Iebusits in an unity? I keep no
order but look rather to my matter: were not the Scribes and Pharisees in an
unity: does not King David testify, conueniunt in vnum aduersus Dominum, yea
thieves and murderers, conspirators and Traitors have their unity.

Mark my dear friend (yea friend if thou be not Gods enemy,) there is no
unity but when Christ knitteth the knot amongst such as be his, yea be you
well assured that where his truth is resident, there it is verified, that he
says: Non veni mittere pacem in terram sed gladium, that is, Christ came to
set one against another* the Son against the Father, the Daughter against the
Mother: Deceive not thy self therefore with the glistring and glorious name of
unity* for Antichrist has his unity, yet not in deed, but in name, for the
agreement of evil men is not an unity, but a conspiracy.

Thou have heard some threatenings, some curses, and some admonishments of the
Scriptures to those which love themselves above Christ.

Thou have heard also the sharp and biting words to those which deny him for
love of life, says he not, that he which denies me before men, I will deny
him before my Father which is in heaven: And to the same effect writes S. Paul
in the 6. to the Hebrews, saying, It is impossible, that they which have been
once lightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift of grace, and been made
partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have rellished of the pure word of God, if
they fall and slide away, it is impossible that they should be renewed again
by repentance, crucifying again to themselves the Son of God, and making him
as it were a mocking-stock, or gaud of their fancies. And again (says he) If
we shall willingly sin after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there
is no oblation left for sin, but the terrible expectation of Judgment and fire
which shall devour the adversaries. Thus S. Paul writes, and thus thou
read, and do thou not quake and tremble? well, if these terrible and
thundering alarums cannot stir thee to arise and cleave unto Christ, and
forsake the world, yet let the sweet consolations and promises of the
Scriptures: let the examples of Christ and his Apostles, both Martyrs and
Confessors encourage thee to take faster hold by Christ. Hearken what he says
again in his holy Gospel; Blessed are you when men revile you, and persecute
you for my sake, rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven, for
so persecuted they the Prophets before you.

Hear what Esaias says; Fear not the curse of men, be not afraid of their
blasphemies and reuilings, for Worms and Mothes shall eat them up like cloth
and wool, but my righteousness shall endure for ever, and my saving health
from Generation to Generation: What art thou then (says he) that fear a
mortal man, the Child of a man, which fades away as does the flower, and
forgettest the Lord that made thee, that spread out the heavens like a
curtain, and laid the foundations of the earth so sure, that they can not be
removed: I am the Lord thy God, which makes the Sea to rage, and to be still,
who is the Lord of Hoasts; I shall put my word in thy mouth, and defend thee
with the turning of a hand. And our Savior Christ says to his Disciples: They
shall accuse you, and bring you before the Princes and Rulers for my name sake,
and some of you they shall persecute and kill: But fear you not (says he)
neither care you not what you shall say, for it is my Spirit that speaks in
you, the hand of the highest shall defend you, for the hairs of your heads are
numbered, and none of them shall perish. I have laid up treasure for you (says
he) where no thief can steal, nor Moth corrupt, and happy are you if you
endure to the end. Fear not them (says Christ) which have power over the body
only, but fear him that has power both over the body and the Soul; The
world loves her own, and if you were of the world the world would love you,
but you are mine, and therefore the world does hate you.

Let these and such like consolations out of the scriptures, strengthen you to
Godward: let not the examples of holy men and women go out of your mind, as
that of Daniel, and the rest of the Prophets; of the three Children of
Eleazarus, that constant Father; the Machabees Children, that of Peter, Paul,
Stephen, and other Apostles and holy Martyrs, in the beginning and infancy of
the Church; as of good Simeon Archbishop of Seloma and Zetrophon^, with
infinite others, under Sapores the King of the Persians and Indians, who
contemned all torments devised by the Tyrants for their Saviors sake.

Return, return again for honor and mercies sake into the way of Christ
Jesus, and as becomes a faithful Soldier, put on that Armor which S. Paul
teaches to be most necessary for a Christian man, and above all things, take
to you the shield of Faith.

And be you most devoutly provoked by Christ's own example, to withstand the
devil, to forsake the world, and to become a true and faithful member of his
mystical body, who spared not his own flesh for our sins. Throw down thy
self with the fear of his threatened vengeance for this so great and heinous
offense of Apostasy, and comfort your self on the other part with the mercy,
blood, and promises of him that is ready to turn to you whenever you turn
to him: disdain not to come again with the lost son, seeing you have so
wandered with him: be not ashamed to turn again with him from the swill of
strangers, to the delicates of the most benign and loving father,
acknowledging that you have sinned against heaven and earth, against heaven by
stayning his glorious name, and causing his most sincere and pure word to be
evil spoken of through you, against earth by offending your so many weak
Brethren to whom you have been a stumbling block through your sudden sliding.

Be not ashamed to come again with Mary, and to weep bitterly with Peter, not
only with shedding of tears out of your bodily eyes but also pouring out the
streams of your heart, to wash away, out of the sight of God, the filth and
mire of your offensive fall, be not ashamed to say with the Publican, Lord be
merciful unto me a sinner: Remember the horrible history of Julian of old,
and the lamentable case of Francis Spira of late, whose remembrance me thinks
should be yet so green to your memory, that being a thing of our time, you
should fear the like inconvenience, seeing that you are fallen into the like
offense. Last of all, let the lively remembrance of the last day be always
before your eyes, remembering the terror that such shall be in at that time,
with the Runnagates and Fugitives from Christ, which setting more by the world
then by heaven, more by their life then by him that gave them their life, more
by the vanity of a painful ^^^th, then the p^^s^^ assurance of eternal
salvation, did shrink; yea, did clean fall away from him that never forsook
them. And contrariwise, the inestimable joys prepared for them, which feared
no peril nor dreading death, have manfully fought, and victoriously
tryumphed over all power of darkness; over Hell, Death, and Damnation, through
their most redoubted Captain JESUS CHRIST our Savior, who even now stretches
out his Arms to receive you* ready to fall upon your neck, and kiss you:
and last of all, to feast you with the dainties and delicates of his own most
precious blood, which undoubtedly, if it might stand with his determinate
purpose, he would not let to shed again, rather then you should be lost: To
whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all honor, praise and glory
everlastingly.

Amen.
Yours if you be Christ's. Jane Gray.
Postscript.
Be constant, be constant, fear not for pain, Christ has delivered thee, and
heaven is thy gain.


I. G.

THus having read her own words, penned by her own hand, and wayed well the
depth and greatness of her most charitable devotion, her pregnant and rare
knowledge in the Book of God, her sweet ell^cution in the schollerlike
connexture and marriage of the best words and phrases together: who can have
that possible dullness of spirit in him, as not to conclude and believe that
her birth, her education, and all the natural inclinations of her own Spirits
were suitable and agreeing with that best goodness, which (how sildome extant)
yet is ever expected in all noble personages, for indeed Gentry it self is but
virtue* and all dignity added to Gentry does but as it were baptize it with a
more renowned Title of the most excellent virtue; in which style this Lady
might take a large boast, and instead of Caesar's veni, vidi, vici; Of her may
be said, she was Noble, Chaste, and Religious: But some (ouer-curious to examine
goodness) may reply unto me, that her honor was her Ancestors, and not the
work of her fundamental institution, and therefore not altogether so
glorious: that her sober and chaste life was either a singular gift from above,
or a tormenting fear of the shame of this world, continually stird up in her
blood, through the discourse of readings or examples, and that her religion
being traduced from the instructions of her first Parents, and seconded by the
learned Admonitions of them of the same opinion: her mind, as it were, being
utterly unacquainted with any other contrary Argument, but ever foothed up and
fort^fied in one path only, that it was no great work either of marvel or
maistery, that she continued either so good, constant, or violent in the heat
of her zealousnesse, whereas if she had heard the continual temptations of
the adversary, and been enforced to have held a long battle with men,
esteemed profound in a quite opposite opinion, or had been burdened with the
heavy and tyrannous yoke of authority, which by intolerable afflictions would
have not only threatened the bending, but the breaking of her heart and bowels,
if she had not yielded to the will of their opinions, then for her bravely to
have held out such a weary siedge, and with a settled constancy to have undergone
and triumphed in such a Christian warfare, had not only been memorable, but
rare, matchless, and renowned.

To let pass the two first suggestions, being slight, and not worthy the
labor of any serious Pen, because no doubt ought to be made where there is a
probable assurance: and to come to this last inference touching her
temptations, being so great and heavy, that they came near to the point of
Martyrdom: you shall understand, that after her most unfortunate marriage, and
the utter defaiture almost of her name and honors; others ambitions having
embarked her into those rough waves, which of necessity must swallow her (as
you may at large read in the whole story of our Chronicles) diverse learned
Romish Catholics, and even those which were of the best fame and reputation,
were sent unto her to dissuade her from that true profession of the Gospel,
which from her cradle she had ever held, each striving, by art, by flattery, by
threatenings, by promise of life, or what else might move most in the bosom of
a weak Woman, who should become master of so great and worthy a prize, but all
their labors were bootlesse: for she had art to confound their art, wisdom
to withstand their flatteries, resolution above their menaces, and such a true
knowledge of life, that death was to her no other then a most familiar
acquaintance: In the end a deepe-read Divine called M. Feckenham, then
Chaplain to Queen Mary, was sent unto her about some four days before her
death, who had with her a long and tedious disputation, but as the rest found
himself in all holy gifts so short of her excellence, that he acknowledged
himself fitter to be her Disciple, then Teacher: And thereupon humbly besought
her to deliver unto him some brief sum of her Faith, which he might
hereafter keep, and as a faithful witness publish to the world; to which
she willingly condiscended, and bad him boldly question her in what points of
religion so ever it pleased him, and she would give her faithful and believing
answer, such as she would ever be ready to seal with her dearest blood: The
sum of which conference you shall hear read as it was written with her own
hand, and her name subscribed thereunto, as follows.

A conference Dialogue-wise held between the Lady Jane Dudley and M.
Feckenham, four days before her Death, touching her Faith and Religion.
Feck. What thing is required in a Christian?


Jane. To believe in God the Father, in God the Son, in God the Holy Ghost,
three persons and one God.


Feck. Is there nothing else required in a Christian, but to believe in God?


Jane Yes: We must believe in him, we must love him, with all our heart, with
all our soul, and all our mind, and our Neighbor as our self.


Feck. Why then Faith justifies not, nor saves not?


Jane. Yes verily, Faith (as S. Paul says) only justifies.


Feck. Why S. Paul says, if I have all the Faith of the world, without love,
it is nothing.


Jane. True it is, for how can I love him I trust not, or how can I trust in
him whom I love not, Faith and Love ever agree together, and yet Love is
comprehended in Faith.


Feck. How shall we love our Neighbor?


Jane To love our Neighbor, is to feed the hungry, cloth the naked, and to
give drink to the thirsty, and to do to him as we would do to our selves.


Feck. Why then it is necessary to salvation to do good works, and it is not
sufficent to believe?


Jane I deny that I affirm that faith only saves: But it is meet for all
Christians, in token that they follow their Master Christ, to do good works:
yet may we not say, nor in any wise believe, that they profit to salvation: for
although we have done all that we can, yet we are unprofitable servants, and
the faith we have only in Christ's blood, and his merits saves.


Feck. How many Sacraments are there?


Jane Two: the one the Sacrament of Baptism, and the other the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper.


Feck. ^o, there be seven Sacraments.


Jane By what Scripture find you that.


Feck. Well we will talk of that hereafter: But what what is signified by
your two Sacraments.


Jane By the Sacrament of Baptism I am washed with Water, and regenerated in
the Spirit, and that washing is a token to me that I am the Child of God: The
Sacrament of the Lords Supper is offered unto me as a sure Seal and
Testimony, that I am, by the blood of Christ which he shed for me on the
Cross, made partaker of the everlasting Kingdom.


Feck. Why what d^e you receive in that bread, dee you not receive the very
body and blood of Christ?


Jane No surely, I do not believe so I think^ at that Supper I receive neither
flesh nor blood, but only Bread and Wine, the which bread when it is broken,
and the wine when it is drunk, puts me in mind how that for my sins the
body of Christ was broken, and his blood shed on the cross, and with that
bread and wine I receive the benefits which came by breaking of his body, and
by the shedding of his blood on the Cross for my sins.


Feck. Why but (Madame) does not Christ speak these words; Take, eat, this is
my body: can you require any plainer words: does he not say, that it is his
body?


Jane I grant he says so; and so he says likewise in other places, I am the
Vine, I am the Door, it being only but a figurative borrowed speech: Does not
S. Paul say that he calls those things which are not as though they were: God
forbid, that I should say that I eat the very natural body and blood of
Christ: For then either I should pluck away my Redemption, or confess their
were two bodies, or two Christ's: two bodies, the one body was tormented on the
Cross, and then if they did eat another body, ^ow absurd: again if his body
was eaten really, then it was not broken upon the Cross, or if it were broken
upon the Cross (as it is doubtless) then it was not eaten of his Disciples.


Feck. Why is it not as possible that Christ by his power could make his body
both to be eaten and broken, as to be borne of a woman without the seed of
man, and as to walk on the Sea having a body, and other such like miracles
which he wrought by his power only.


Ian. Yes verily, if God would have done at his last supper a miracle, he might
have done so: but I say he minded nor intended no work or miracle, but only
to break his body, and shed his blood on the Cross for our sins: But I
beseech you answer me to this one question; where was Christ when he said:
Take, eat, this is my body: was not he at the Table, when he said so he was
at that time alive, and suffered not till the next day? Well, what took he
but bread? And what broke he but bread? And what gave he but bread? Look
what he took he brake, and look what he brake he gave, and look what he
gave that did they eat, and yet all this while he himself was at Supper
before his Disciples, or else they were deceived.


Feck. You ground your Faith upon such Authors as say and unsay, both with a
breath, and not upon the Church, to whom you ought to give credit.


Jane No, I ground my Faith upon Gods word, and not upon the Church: for if the
Church be a good Church, the faith of the Church must be tried by Gods word,
and not Gods word by the church, neither yet my faith: Shall I believe the
church because of antiquity? or shall I give credit to that church which
takes away from me a full half part of the Lords Supper, and will let no
layman receive it in bath kinds, but the Priests only themselves, which thing
if they deny to us, they deny us part of our salvation: And I say that it is an
evil and no good Church, and not the spouse of Christ, but the spouse of the
Devil, which alters the Lords Supper, and both takes from it, and adds to
it: To that Church I say God will add plagues, and from that Church will he
take their part out of the Book of Life: you may learn of S. Paul, how he did
administer it to the Corinthians in both kinds, which since your Church
refuses, shall I believe it, God forbid?


Fec. That was done by the wisdom of the Church, and to a most good intent to
avoid an heresy, which then sprung in it.


Jane. O but the Church must not alter Gods will and ordinances for the color
or gloss of a good intent, it was the error of King Saul, and he not only
reaped a curse, but perished thereby, as it is evident in the Holy Scriptures.

To this M. Feckenham gave me a long, tedious, yet eloquent reply, using many
strong and Logical persuasions, to compel me to have leaned to their Church,
but my Faith had armed my Resolution to withstand any assault that words could
then use against me: Of many other Articles of Religion we reasoned, but these
formerly rehearsed were the chiefest and most effectual.


Subscribed Jane Dudley.

THis catechizing argument between the Lady Jane and M. Feckenham was held in
the tower publicly, before diverse worthy and noble personages, in all which
she bore her self with such a modest humility, yet so honorably stout in all
things, which either concerned her God and her religion, that she ravished and
stole unto her, all the hearts of her auditory, while M. Feckenam lost much of
that good opinion of his learning, which formerly for a long time be had
inioyed: insomuch, that finding his own weakness and his much disability to
refell her truths with his scholastical fallacies he grew into a little
choler, and used unto her some immodest speeches most unsuitable for his
gravity, to which only her smiles and patience gave answer, and amongst the
rest coming to take his leave of her* he said, Madam I am sorry for you and
your obstinacy, and now I am assured you and I shall never meet again, it is
most true sir that we shall never meet again except God turn your heart, for
I stand undoubtedly assured that unless you repent and turn to God, you are
in a sad and desperate case, and I pray to God in the bowels of his mercy to
s^nd you^ is holy spirit, for he has given you his great gift of vt^^ance,
if it please him to open the eyes of your heart to his truth, but at these
words he rudely departed without further answer, while the Saintlike Lady
withdrew herself into her private bedchamber, where she bestowed her self in
most devout prayer, till the night before her death, at what time she took a
fair new Testament in Greek, on which after she had read a while, offering to
close up the book she found in the end thereof some few leaves of clean paper
unwritten, which as it were awakening and incyting her zeal to some good and
charitable office, she took pen and ink and in those wast leaves wrote a
most Godly and learned exhortation* which as soon as she had finished it,
she closed up the book and delivered it to her servant to bear unto her
Sister the Lady Katherine, as the last token of her love and remembrance, which
was with great diligence performed. The tenor of the exhortation was this which
follows.

A exhortation written by the Lady Jane Dudley, the night before her death in
the end of the new Testament, in Greek, which she sent to her Sister, the
Lady Katherine Gray.
I Have here sent you (my dear Sister Katherine) a book, which although it
be not outwardly trimmed with gold, or the curious imbroderie of the artful'st
needles, yet inwardly it is more worth then all the precious mines which the
vast world can boast of: It is the book (my only best and best loved Sister)
of the Law of the Lord: It is the Testament and last Will, which he bequeathed
unto us wretches and wretched sinners, which shall lead you to the path of
eternal joy: And if you with a good mind read it, and with an earnest desire
follow it, no doubt it shall bring you to an immortal and everlasting life: It
will teach you to live, and learn you to dye: It shall win you more, and endow
you with greater felicitite, then you should have gained by the possession of
our woeful fathers lands: for as if God had prospered him, you should have
inherited his hon^rs and Manors, so if you apply diligently this book, seeking
to direct your life according to the rule of the same, you shall be an
inheritor of such riches, as neither the covetous shall withdraw from you,
neither the thief shall steal, neither yet the moathes corrupt: desire with
David (my best Sister) to understand the Law of the Lord your God, live still
to dye, that you by death may purchase eternal life, and trust not that the
tenderness of your age shall lengthen your life: for unto God, when he
calls, all hours, times and seasons are alike, and blessed are they whose
lamps are furnished when he comes, for as soon will the Lord be glorified
in the young as in the old.

My good Sister once again more let me entreat thee to learn to dye; deny
the World, defy the Devil, and despise the Flesh, and delight your self
only in the Lord: be penitent for your sins, and yet despair not: be strong
in faith, yet presume not, and desire with S. Paul, to be dissolved, and to be
with Christ, with whom, even in death there is life.

Be like the good servant, and even at midnight be waking, least when death
comes and steals upon you, like a thief in the night, you be with the
servants of darkness found sleeping* and least for lack of Oil you be found
like the five foolish Virgins, or like him that had not on the wedding Garment,
and then you be cast into darkness, or banished from the marriage: Rejoice in
Christ, as I trust you do, and seeing you have the name of a Christian, as
near as you can follo^ the steps, and be a true imitator of your Master Christ
Jesus, and take up your Cross, lay your sins on his back, and always
embrace him.

Now as touching my Death, rejoice as I do (my dearest Sister) that I shall be
delivered of this corruption, and put on incorruption: For I am assured that I
shall, for loosing of a mortal life, win one that is immortal, joyful and
everlasting: the which I pray GOD grant you in his most blessed hour, and send
you his all-sauing grace to live in his fear, and to dye in the true Christian
Faith: From which in Gods Name I exhort you that you never swerve, neither so
hope of life, nor fear of death: for if you will deny his truth, to give
length to a weary and corrupt breath, God himself will deny you, and by
vengeance make short what you by your souls loss would prolong: But if you
will cleave to him, he will stretch forth your days to an uncircumcised
comfort, and to his own glory: To the which glory God bring me now, and you
hereafter, when it shall please him to call you: Farewell once again (my
beloved Sister) and put your only trust in God who only must help you.

Amen.
Your loving Sister. Jane Dudley.

AFter the Lady Jane had finished this exhortation to her sister, and sent it
away by her servant, there came unto her two Bishops and other learned Doctors,
who likewise held with her more then two hours conference, striving with all
their powers to have drawn her to have dyed in the obedience of their Church
and fellowship, but found themselves infinitely deceived: for her faith being
built upon the rock of Christ, was by no worldly perswation or comfort to be
either moved or shaken, so that after the expense of time and the loss of
much speech, they left her (as they said) a lost and forsaken member, but she,
as before, prayed for them, and with a most charitable patience endured their
worst censures.

The next day she was called down to go to the place of execution, to which
she had prepared her self with more diligence then either the malice of her
adversaries could desire or the vigilance of any officer for the discharge of
his duty expect, and being come down and delivered into the hands of the
Sheriffs, they might behold in her a countenance so gravely settled with all
modest and comely resolution, that not the least hair or mote either of fear
or grief could be perceived to proceed either out of her speech or motions,
but like a demure body, going to be vmted to her hearts best and longest
beloved: so showed she forth all the beams of a well mixed and tempered
alacrity, rather instructing patience how it should suffer, then being by
patience any way able to endure the travel of so grievous a journey, with this
blessed and modest boldness of spirit undaunted and unaltered, she went toward
the scaffold, till whether through the malice of some great adversary or the
indiscretion of the officers (but the latter is more credible,) she incountred
upon the way (as she went) the headless trunk of her new dead Lord and
Husband the Lord Guilford Dudley, at that instant returning from the Scaffold
to the Tower to be buried, this spectacle a little startled her, and many
tears were seen to descend and fall upon her cheeks, which her silence and
great heart soon dried, and being now come upon the Scaffold, after
reverence done to the Lords and others in Commission, (turning her self round
about to the people) she spoke these words as follows.

The Lady Jane Dudleys words upon the Scaffold before her death.
MY Lords, and you good Christian people, which come to see me dye, I am under
a law, and by that law (as a never erring Judge) I am condemned to dye, not for
any thing I have offended the Queens Majesty, for I will wash my hands guiltles
thereof, and deliver to my God a soul as pure from such trespass, as innocence
from injustice, but only for that I consented to the thing which I was
enforced unto, constraint making the law believe I did that which I never
understood: notwithstanding, I have offended almighty God in that I have
followed overmuch the lust of mine own flesh and the pleasures of this
wretched world, neither have I lived according to the knowledge that God has
given me, for which cause God has appointed unto me this kind of death, and
that most worthily, according to my deserts, how be it I thank him heartily
that he has given me time to repent my sins here in this world, and to
reconcile my self to my redeemer, whom my former vanities have in a great
measure displeased. Wherefore (my Lords, and all you good Christian people) I
must earnestly desire you all to pray with me and for me whilst I am yet
alive, that God of his infinite goodness and me^cy, will forgive me my sins
how numberless add grievous soever against him: And I beseech you all to bear
me witness that I here ^re a true christian woman, professing and auouching
from my soul yt I trust to be saved by the blood, Passion, and merits of Jesus
Christ my Savior only, and by none other means, casting far behind me
all the works and merits of mine own actions, as things so far short of the
true duty I owe, that I quake to think how much they may stand up against me.
And now I pray you all pray for me, and with me, and at those words she
repeated the Psalm of Miserere mei: which done, she said; Lord save my Soul
which now I commend into thy hands, and so with all meekness of Spirit, and a
Saint-like patience, she prepared her self to the block.

FINIS.

