THEOPHILUS, OR LOVE DIVINE. A TREATISE CONTAINING FIVE DEGREES, FIVE MARKS,
FIVE AIDES, OF THE LOVE OF GOD. Translated by Richard Goring, out of the third
French edition: renewed, corrected and augmented by the author M. Peter Moulin,
Preacher to the reformed Church of Paris.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Macham, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's
churchyard, at the sign of the Bul-head. 1610.

To my Worshipful good Friend M. George Hakewill, Bachelor of Divinity, and
Fellow of Exeter College in Oxford.
SIR, when you first wished me to read this Discourse, (commending it as a
work, no less scholerlike then religious) I was thinking how I might some way
requite with somewhat more then verbal thankfulness, your kind favors and good
wishes toward me. But having perused the same, I thought I could not better
employ my time of small emploiment, then to translate the same, as being a
subject fit for all men seriously to meditate upon, supplying with my willing
but poor endeavor, that which you could have better polished; and I dare say
willingly would, by reason of your familiar acquaintance with the Author, if
your leisure might have served you to have taken it in hand your self.
Therefore as you commended it unto me, for a piece neatly and eloquently done
in the original: so surely it did ravish me in the reading, as being a most
worthy theme; and has emboldned me to recommend it back again unto you,
thus homely apparelled in our mother tongue; in which it can leese but little
grace, being in it self so gracious as it is. Suffer it therefore I pray you
(if it be not too full of defects) to pass under your name, who best deserve
herin, if ought there be deserving. For mine own part, I will only say, I have
striued to show some part of the pains, I would gladly take to do you any
pleasing service in requital of your many favors; which I will pray you
still to continue, as I will always endeavor to be thankful, and constantly
rest

Your very affectionate and much bounden Rich. Goring.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY Lady Anne D' Allegre, wife unto the high and mighty
Lord Monsieur de Fervaques, Marshall of France, and the Kings Lieutenant in
Normandy.
MAdame: The Apostle unto the Hebrews teaches us, that within the Ark of the
covenant there was a cruse full of Manna and Aarons rod. Heb. 9. 4.
God thereby instructing us, that he has not only a care of the nourishing of
our souls, but to correct us for our sins also: and that he has given us
together with the bread of his word, his rod of afflictions. The one nourishes
us, the other exercises us: the one instructs us, the other reformeth us:
the one teaches us to do the will of God, the other makes us to renounce our
own: both equally effects of his love. For God humbles us by afflictions, and
pricketh the swelling of our pride. He cutteth and loppeth us, to the end we
may bring forth the more fruit. He fills us with bitterness in this life,
to the end we might long for the life to come. For those whom God afflicts
grievously in this world, leave it with less grief. And indeed if the
children of Israel, being come out of Egypt, after having endured there so many
afflictions, did notwithstanding grieve, and oftentimes mutined to return
thither again: how much more had they grieved if they had suffered nothing?
Add hereunto, that God who has formed us to fear him, knows that our
prayers are slack and cold in prosperity, as proceeding from a spirit that is
cooled by success, and which are endited by custom. The cries which our own
will produces are feeble, in comparison of those which grief expresses.
There is nothing so strong as necessity: nothing so ingenious to pray well as
sorrow, which in an instant forms the slowest tongues to a holy eloquence, and
furnishes us with sighs which cannot be expressed. It is not then in anger
that God afflicts us; but because that sin is a kind of falling sickness,
God strikes and afflicts us to awaken us. His beatings are fatherly
corrections: if he used us otherwise, we should not be his children. For if a
man seeing two children a fighting, do chastise one for the same, without
touching the other; the standers by, without further knowing him, presume that
it is his father: so God corrects as his children those which he embraces
with a fatherly love. 1. Pet. 4. 17.
He begins his chastisings at his own house. Now if Jesus Christ (as says
the Apostle) has learned obedience by the things which he has suffered, Heb.
5. 8.
although he were the Son: how much more ought we to bow down our necks unto
Gods corrections, and humble our selves in his presence, rather then to kick
against the prick, or to make the afflictions which are bitter enough of
themselves, to be yet more bitter by impatie^ce? None can make a white hair
become black with all his care: but well may he make his black hair become
white through his unprofitable discontent. It is ever better to follow, then to
be dragged on, above all when God conducteth us: for if the way through which
he leads us be thornie, yet is it straight.

Now when I cast mine eye upon all the remedies of afflictions, I find there
are three things which may assuage grief; time, reason, and the fear of God.
For length of time mitigateth sorrow, and closes up the wound, yea even in the
weakest spirits, and most incapable of consolation: but reason esteems this
remedy too long, and unworthy of a courageous man; for weariness of weeping
is a poor remedy. The fear of God does more: for as to appease grief,
reason stays not for time, so the fear of God stays not for reason; but
before that reason can bring in her consolations drawn from the inevitable
necessity of evils, or from the unprofitableness of tears, that resolves
promptly upon the love of God, who chastises us for our good: so as in steed
of casting forth complaints, it finds out occasion of thanksgiving, and
forms not only unto patience, but also unto joy, as acknowledging amongst his
afflictions certain signs of Gods love.

These documents Madame, are so much the more familiar unto you, as you have
had often experience of them, and who being past her appre^tiship in
afflictions, have carefully sought out the lenitiues which Gods word does
furnish us withal: which, besides that sobriety and modesty which shines in
you, and has altogether estranged you from the vanity which now a days
reigns in the world, have taught you to solace your self with God. But take
heed also lest you suffer your self to be overwhelmed with sorrow, and make
piety the nurse of disconte^t. Inueterat griefs do often turn into habit, and
old wounds become fresh with too much handling; which me thinks is above all
very unfitting your nature, whose meeknes and gentleness so pleasing unto all,
is much more at accord with joy. Shall it be said, that the great viuacity of
spirit which God has given you, serves you but to feel grief more sensibly?
or that God has made you great, that your tears might have the greater fall?
Time which eases the most ignorant people of their evils, cannot it finish the
sighs of a person whom God has so much enriched with his knowledge? Shall it
not be better to joy in future good things, which are great and certain, then
to afflict our selves for evils past, which are remediles? Herein surely God is
offended, if in worldly crosses we find more occasion of grief, then matter of
joy in heavenly riches. And wrongfully do we complain of our afflictions;
seeing we hurt our selves, we do underhand as it were confess, that God has
not afflicted us enough. The Psalmist says indeed, that God puts up our
tears into his bottels, as precious things: but he speaks of tears bred of
repentance, or of grief, to see God blasphemed and despised amongst men. For
God gathers not up obstinate tears, which extending themselves beyond their
limits, occupy the time due to consolation. How many times (giving your self
to reading) have you bedewed the holy scripture with your tears, and yet this
book contains the matter of our joy? And in the book of Psalms, the tunes
whereof you love, and yet much more the matter, where you see your own picture,
and the anatomy of your inward affections: Have you not observed that all the
Psalms which have their beginnings troubled, and whose first lines contain
nothing but profou^d sighs and broken complaints, do end in delight, and
terms which witness contentment and peace of conscience? Let your tears Madame,
be formed upon this example, and let them end in spiritual joy. Let your faith
raise her self from under her burden, and let the sluices of afflictions,
which God has stopped her course withal, make her to run forth with the
greater impetuousnes: let her take strength from resistance. Hereunto the
meditation of Gods graces will much serve you: the which if you cou^terballance
with your evils, they will mightily weigh them down. The only attention of
future glory, which you apprehend by faith, can it not digest all bitterness?
That faith which filled the Martyrs with joy in the midst of their present
torments, may she not in our rest comfort us against the memory of passed
evils. And you who acknowledge what servitude those people live in, which are
dragged into perdition by the invisible chains of opinion and custom: can you
sufficiently magnify the grace which God has given you, in honoring you with
his alliance; and enlightening you with his truth? Yea, and in your life time,
how many of Gods assistances, how many difficulties happily ouergone? God
having given you the grace to be alone in your family an example of constancy
and holy perseverance in the profession of his truth, having made you great,
that in the contradiction of the world, you might be an example of firmness
and constancy. And yet admit your wounds were more grievous, as taking all at
the worst, our lives being so short, they cannot long last: for you are not
troubled to seek consolations against death, seeing that death it self is a
consolation unto us. For God if he receive the sighs which we power forth in
our prayers, much more regards he the sighs which our souls give up unto
him in our deaths. Which being a place of shelter, and which puts our souls
into security, we ought not only look for his coming, but even go forth to
meet him: hastening his coming by our desires, by the example of S. Paul,
Phil. 1. 23.
who says, that his desire tends to dislodge, and be with Christ. And to say
with David: Psalm. 42. 2.
O when shall I present my self before Gods face? For our souls being bound
unto our bodies by two bonds, whereof the one is natural, and the other
voluntary: if through hatred and contempt of life present, we untie the
voluntary bond, waiting the time when God shall break the natural, death then
coming shall find the business begun, and our souls prepared to this
dissolution.

These cogitations Madame, and such like, have hitherto given you consolation:
the which although you be sufficiently provided of, and have always ready,
many spiritual remedies, yet you borrow from other the receipts; and have
thought that I could contribute something to your consolation. And to this
effect having heard talk of some of my Sermons upon the Love of God, you would
needs make use of the power you have over me, demanding them of me in writing;
knowing well, that of the discontentments of this life, there is no such gentle
remouall as the love of God, or more stronger remedy then that he loves us.
Herefrom I drew back a long time, partly through idleness accompanied with
some other distractions: partly through fear, apprehending your judgment,
which far surpassing ordinary spirits, feeds it self not upon vulgar meats.
At length, after long delay, being not any longer able to strive against your
instant requests, which are unto me as so many commandments, I have let this
discourse come forth in public, under the protection of your name, to the end
that the imperfections thereof may likewise be imputed unto you, and that you
might bear also a part of the blame, for having assisted at the birth of that
which ought not to have seen the light: but I shall be easily excused, as
having obeyed you. For honor shall it ever be unto me, to execute your
commandments, and to employ my self to do you most humble service, as being
your

Most humble and most obedient servant Peter du Moulin.

A Table of the Chapters, and principal points contained in this Treatise of
the Love of God.
OF true and false love. Chap. 1. fol. 1. Five degrees of the love of God.
Chap. 2. fol. 24. 1. Degree to love God, because of the good he does us, and
which we hope to receive of him. fol. 28. 2. To love God for his own sake,
because he is soueraignlie excellent, and chiefly to be beloved. fol. 45. 3.
Not only to love God above all things, and more then our selves: but also not
to love any thing in this world but for his sake. Fol. 67. 4. To hate our
selves for the love of God. Fol. 79. 5. Is the love wherewith we shall love God
in the life to come. Fol. 94.
Of the marks and effects of the love of God. Cha. 3. Fol. 102. 1. Mark is,
that it extinguisheth all voluptuous love. Fol. 105. 2. That it is the peace
and tranquillity of the soul. Fol. 122. 3. That it is charity to our
neighbors. Fol. 136. 4. And the pleasure to communicate often with God. Fol.
153. 5. It is the zeal of the glory of God. Fol. 184.
Five means or aids to inflame us in this love of God. Chap. 4. Fol. 202. 1.
Means is the image of vices. Fol. 206. 2. The choice of friends. Fol. 215. 3.
The hatred of the world Fol. 226. 4. Prayer. Fol. 238. 5. The hearing and
reading of the word of God. Fol. 254.

CHAP. I. Of true and false Love.
Love is that point of our spirits, whereby she joins her self unto
objects. That which is weight in heavy things, Love is the very same in our
souls. For as weight moves earthly bodies toward the place of their rest,
so love moves our souls toward that object which promises rest and
contentment. Whereupon it follows, that as heavy things do move in a direct
line toward the place of their rest; so if we will attain unto any perfect
repose, our love must go right, and have an equal motion.

1 True love then is that same, Seven reasons to prove that the love of God, is
the only true love.
which gives rest and contentment unto the soul; whereas false love is an
irregular agitation, and endless motion. Such is worldly love, which we see to
be filled with unquietness, and not to stay his agitation, but through
wearisomnesse or despair, which is no rest, but an unableness to move,
because that force failing, desire does still continue; like unto a tied horse,
which gnaweth his bit. Such are almost all men: they have many desires, and
little power; they most desire that they can least do: neither being able to
obey or command their covetousness. They cannot obey it, because of their
weakness; nor command it, because of their incontinencie. So that if a man
enjoy, without any let, that which he loves, that very easiness it self
brings him a distaste withal. For worldly love is enflamed by resista^ce, and
nourished with difficulties: like unto those fishes which love to be in violent
streams and floud-gates, but do die in a still water.

The cause of this unquietness, is because that our love chooses false
objects, and which cannot satisfy covetousness. For if you pass your eye upon
all which is best and most pleasing in the world, you shall not find therein
any firm and stable quiet, but a chain of cares linked together, a web of
perpetual unrest. The most grave sweetes are sow^ed in bitterness. The
atcheiuement of riches, pleasure and honor, is painful, and many perish in
the pursuit thereof: the possession is uncertain, but the loss certain. For
if these things leave not us by some accident, we shall leave the^ by death.
These are things which are bestowed not only upon the wicked, but even because
they are bad, as being rewards of wickedness. To expose a man's love toward
these things, is but a pursuing of the wind, and a perpetual travel. For
even when these things might be termed always good, yet are they uncertain. A
man cannot take good aim at a flying foul, nor have any assured designement,
aiming after transitory goods and pleasures. We must seek our rest then some
other where the^ on earth, and turn the edge of our love, toward heaven. For
even as the lower part of the elementary region, is the seat of winds,
tempests and earthquakes, but that part toward heaven is always peaceable and
still: so our love shall be ever full of unquietness, whilst it sets it self
upon base things; but it shall find rest if it raise it self toward heaven,
and Gods promises. And for this cause is it, that in the midst of tempestuous
wether at sea, the needle of the Compass remains always immovable, and
stayed upon one point, namely, be cause it governs it self by the Pole. In
like sort the soul of a faithful Christian, in the midst of the confusio^s of
this world, and most grievous afflictions, shall enjoy a most assured peace,
because his love aims at heaven, and stays it self upon Gods promises,
which is the true object of our love, which alone is to be chiefly loved; which
can make us lovely in loving us, and which alone can, yea will make them happy
who love them. As the Apostle S. Paul says: 1. Cor. 2. 9.
The eye of man has not seen, his ears heard, nor has ever entered into his
heart, what things God has prepared for those which love him. Also he promises
in S. John: To come unto him which loves him, Ioh. 14. 23.
and to dwell with him. Admirable love, which makes our souls to be the
palace of the King of heaven, and the sanctuary of his Spirit.

2 Philosophy leads us hereunto at unawares: for it has for a general
Maxim, that God and nature make nothing in vain. Now this infinite desire,
this un satiable appetite which is in man, should be in vain, if there were
not something to content it; which being not found upon earth, must be sought
for in heaven, and toward God, who is infinite goodness.

3 Add hereunto, that God having created the world for man's use, has without
all doubt created man for some better thing then the world, to wit, for God
himself.

4 And that amongst all creatures, God has created man alone unto his Image,
alone with upright stature, and visage erected upwards, to the end he might
love him whose resemblance he bears, and that his desire and his love might
aim at heavenly things.

5 Add we hereunto, that the perfection of our spirits cannot be but in the
union with the Chief of spirits, which communicates his virtue unto the
creature, in like fashion as the Sun darteth out his beams, that is, gives
it in such sort, that it yet depends upon him after having given it.

6 Moreover, true love is that which transformeth the lover into the thing
beloved. Now if a deformed man love a corporal beauty, never shall he by
that love correct his own imperfection: contrariwise, by loving God, we become
like to him, and as the Apostle says in the 2. Corinthians. chap. 3. Beholding as
in a mirror the glory of the Lord with open face, we are changed into the
same image.

7 Finally, beauty being the first spark of love, we shall see hereby how that
which we call love, is not so, but only a superficial color which covers
filth; but that light is true beauty. God then being the first light, and
father of lights, is also the chief beauty, and by consequent he that we
ought chiefly to love.

Yet humane Philosophy disagreeth here in one point from divine, which is the
word of God. For natural Philosophy holds, that natural motion is always
better then that which is against nature. On the contrary, in matter of love,
the Scripture teaches us, that the love contrary unto our nature, is better
then the natural. For sithence Satan by seducing Adam has disfigured the
Image of God in man, man's desires have turned toward the world, and in a manner
our love has been fallen headlong down from heaven to earth. The affections
of the flesh are enmity with God. Romans 8.
Romans 8. If any one love God, it is not of his own nature, but it is a gift of
God. Wherefore our Lord Jesus in the eight of Saint John, says, that none can
come to him if his Father draw him not, And the Apostle S. Paul pulling us out
of the mire and thick mud, commands us to seek the things which are on
high. Coloss. 3. ver. 1, 2. For the saying of the Apostle S. John is most true,
that we must love God because he has loved us first. This is also one of the
effects of the love of God toward us, to wit, Ephesians. 3. 19.
our love toward him. And there is nothing that we ought to demand of God
with more feruencie, then to have the grace to love him: for this is unto the
faithful a witness that God loves him: it is the first effect of faith: it
is a most express trace of Gods image: it is the most lively mark of Gods
children. This love is the soul of other virtues, the rule of our actions, the
summary of the law. This love is the vpholder of Martyrs, the ladder of heaven,
the peace of conscience: yea, I dare say, it is a taste and a beginning of the
union and communication which we shall have with God in heaven. Our meditation
cannot choose a more excellent subject: for what is there which is greater then
God, or more sweet the^ his love? The profit likewise is no less then the
sweetness: for men are good or bad, Austins Enchiridion to Laurentius cap. 117.
not because they believe, but because they love. Those be good which love good
things; and amongst good things what is there like unto God? who not only is
soueraignely good, but who also makes them good which love him. Let us then
endeavor so to do, and to be disciples unto the holy Spirit, which is love it
self, and which will form our hearts unto love; lest we be deceived under
this name of love, and lest we should take for this true love, a corporal
love, an importunate itching, a furious heat, to wit, the worst of vices for
the chief of virtues, a brutall sickness for an Angelical perfection.

I know truly that he who shall dispose himself to love God with all his heart,
and to neglect all other considerations in regard of his service, shall
necessarily incur the hatred of the world, whose love is enmity with God,
Iam. 4. 4.
as the Apostle Saint James says. But God causes this hatred of the world to
profit us: for as the Apostle says, All things together, Romans 8.
one with another, turn to the good of those which love God. Evils become
blessings unto them, corporal afflictions are so many spiritual exercises unto
them, the sicknesses of the body are medicines unto their souls: for in the
hands of this sovereign Physitio^, very poison it self becomes a medicine;
his strokes are balm, Psalm. 141. 5
as David says: and in suffering for Gods cause, there is not only matter of
patience, but even occasion of glory. They are like scarres on the forehead,
honorable maimes, conformities unto Jesus Christ, liueries of a Christian
soldier. And all through the underpropping of this love, whose sweetness
tempereth this bitterness, and makes us rejoice for his names sake.

Some one will say, that the love of God is an excellent virtue indeed: but
that to love him, we must know him before, and that we cannot know him in this
life, but with a slender and obscure knowledge. This is true: but for all this,
we must not let to study the same, we must not suffer ignorance to be cause of
negligence: for we cannot have so little knowledge of God, but it will profit
us, and stir us up unto the love of God. One beam of his light is worth the
whole Sun. A man were better to have an obscure knowledge of God, then a clear
understanding of natural things. If a beam of the Sun do enter into an obscure
den or dungeo^, the prisoner by this little snip knows the beauty of light:
so the little which we have of the knowledge of God, is sufficient to give us
a taste of his excellency, and to inflame us with his love. Moreover, the
knowledge which Gods gives us of himself, is not so small, but it is
sufficient unto salvation: and the obligations which we owe unto the goodness
of God (the causes of our love) are fully represented unto us in the word of
God, where the Apostle Saint Paul herald of the said word, says, That unto us
is declared all the counsel of God. Acts 20. 27.

CHAP. II. Five degrees of the Love of God.
WE are so incapable of the love of God, that we are even ignorant what it is.
This herb grows not in our garden; it is a gift from above, coming from the
Father of lights, who is love and charity it self, as says Saint John. It is
a licour which God powers into our souls by drops as into narrow mouthed
vessels. Wherefore to deal with our selves according to our own slownesse, we
will endeavor to receive it into our minds by little and little, and by easy
steps to bring our selves to the highest degree of love.

There are five degrees of this love; the lowest whereof being the most
imperfect, does serve notwithstanding to raise us to the highest.

1 The first degree is to love God, because of the good which he does us, and
which we hope to receive of him.

2 The second degree is to love him for his own sake, because he is
soueraignely excellent, and most excellently amiable.

3 The third is, not only to love God above al things, and more then our
selves, but also not to love any thing in the world but for Gods love.

4 The fourth is, to hate our selves for Gods sake.

5 Above all which degrees, that love of God excels, wherewith we shall love
him in the life to come. A love which burns in the breasts of Saints and
Angels, which stand before his throne of glory.

We call these sorts of love, degrees, and not kinds; because the higher
degrees contain the inferior: even as the most excellent white differs from
other whiteness less clear, not in kind of color, but in degree: steps
upon which we must get up, and upon each of them stay a little our spirits.

The first degree.
THe first and lowest step, To love God for his blessings.
is to love God because of the good which he does us. Upon this degree of love
was David, when in the 116 Psalm he says, I love the Lord because he has
heard my voice: and so in the 18. Psalm. For God will be loved for doing good
unto us. It is God which has made us, which keeps and guides us, which
nourishes our bodies and instructs our souls; redeemeth us by his Son,
governs us by his holy Spirit, teaches us by his word: makes us his
servants, yea his friends, Ioh. 15. 15. and Ioh. 17. 17.
yea his children, yea even one with himself. Plato philosophizing upon the
grace of God, according as he was able, gave thanks unto him for three things.
1. For that he had created him a man, and not a beast. 2. That he was borne a
Grecian, and not a Barbarian. 3. That not only so, but a Philosopher also. We
that are instructed in a better school, do otherwise distribute our
thanksgiving, and do praise him for three things also. 1. That amongst all his
creatures, he has made us men, created after his own image. 2. That from
amongst all sorts of men he has made us Christians. 3. That amongst those
which bear the name of Christians, he has made us faithful ones. Herunto you
may add if you will the 4. that he has adopted and elected us in his Son
before the foundation of the world: having had care of us not only before we
were borne, but even before the world was made. For if a woman lately
conceiving, love her future fruit, much more does she so when it is borne and
embraced in her arms: so if God loved us before we had any being, how much
more when we call upon him and love him with a filial love? Now in this grace,
the less our number is, the greater is our privilege, the greater his bounty
and mercy toward us, to be like a few well sighted amongst a throng of blind
men; like the portion of Jacob in Egypt, alone enlightened in the midst of that
darkness which covered all the country: like Gedeons fleece, alonely watered
with his blessing, whilst all the rest of the earth is dry and destitute of
his grace. God has environed us with examples of blindness, to the end we
might make the more account of light, and that we should go on in the way of
righteousness whilst the day lasts, whilst he enlighteneth us by his word.

All these graces depend upon one special grace, which is our reconciliation
with God by the death of Jesus Christ; it is he that is the conduit-pipe,
through which the graces of God do flow unto us: it is Jacobs ladder, which
joins earth unto heaven, which ioineth man again with God. The Angels
ascending this ladder, do signify our prayers. The Angels descending, signify
Gods blessings. Jacobs sleeping at the foot of this ladder, represents the
rest of our consciences under the shadow of his intercession. For before, on
what side soever man could turn his eyes, he could see nothing but matter of
fear and astonishment. If he looked on God, he saw a consuming fire, and a
sovereign justice armed against sinners. If he looked on the law, he saw the
sentence of his condemnation: if on the heaven, he said, I am shut out thereof
by my sins: if on the world, he saw himself fallen from the empire he before
had over the creatures: if on himself, he saw a thousand corporal and
spiritual infirmities. By the signs in heaven, and earthquakes, he was seized
with trembling and fear: then Satan, death and hell were the enemies which
either drew him to perdition, or tortured him with their apprehension. But now
each man which has an assured trust in Jesus Christ, looks on all these
things with another eye, and sings another song. If he look upon God, he
will say, It is my Father, who has adopted me in his Son. If he think on
the judgment seat of the last day, he will say, My elder brother sits
thereon, and he who is my Judge, is also my advocate. If he think on the
Angels, he will say, These are my keepers, Psalm. 34. If he look on heaven, he
will say, It is my house. If he hear it thunder from above, he will say, It is
my Fathers voice. If he consider the law, he says, The Son of God has
fulfilled it for me. If he be in prosperity on earth, he will say, God has
yet better things for me in store. If he be in adversity, he will say, Jesus
Christ has suffered much more hereof for my sake; God exercises me, proves
me, or corrects me, or rather honors me, making me like unto his Son.
If he think on the devil, death, or hell, then he will triumph over all,
saying with the Apostle, 1. Cor. 15. O death, where is thy victory? O grave
where is thy sting? Thanks be to God who has given us victory through Jesus
Christ our Lord. If these things buzze and keep a noise like angry waspes,
yet have they lost their sting. If the old Serpent prick our heel, yet is his
head bruised. If the devil through persecutions give us a false alarm, yet
belong we to Jesus Christ, who has bought us, and none shall snatch us out of
his hand. Who will fear having such a patron, who not only makes intercession
for sinners, but of sinners makes them just? who not only pleads for a bad
case, but also of bad, makes it good, because that he does not only pray, but
also pay for us: so that to pardon us is not only a work of his mercy, but
also an effect of his justice.

These obligations unto the loving God, are common unto all the faithful. But
I think, if each one would look back into the course of his life, and call
to mind the time passed, there is none of us but should find just cause to
acknowledge besides these common benefits, many particular witnesses of the
care and love of God toward us: Of deliverances out of many dangers, unhoped
for good chances, commodious afflictions, our purposes crossed, but for our
good, extraordinary means to bring us unto the knowledge of his truth. Shall
it be said, that the blessings of God have rained upon the sands, without
making us more fruitful of good works? Shall we be like unto beasts, which
drink of the brook without thinking of the spring; without raising up our
thoughts unto God the wel-spring of all blessing?

Mean while, when we say that God does us good, to the end we should love him:
it is not because he has any need of our love: but because he would save us,
he would that we should love him; because it is impossible to be saved whilst
we hate him. Moreover, our loving him also, is partly his gift; for it is he
which kindles his love in us. God does not only give us his graces, but gives
also grace to demand them, the hand to apprehend them, and grace to make good
use thereof: the virtue to glorify him for the same, in such sort, as to
acknowledge that we owe unto him not only those his good things, but even our
selves also. God does good unto the unworthy, but he makes them worthy by this
doing them good: his spiritual graces being of such nature, as that they
transform such as receive them.

This first degree of love being holy and necessary, is not for all that any
more then a beginning of the love of God and as the first stroke of true
piety. For he who loves God but for his profit, is like unto little
children, who say their prayers that they may break their fasts: and to speak
properly, they love not God but themselves. Such a love, if it extend it self
no further, is a mercenary love, yea and injurious unto God. For it may be
always thought, that the end is better then those things which tend thereunto.
If then the love of God have no other end but our own profit, we place the
same above God, and make our interest more exelle^t then his service. Let him
then which is come to this first degree of love, if he pass on no further,
know that God pardons us much, if he punish not that which is grounded but
upon the love of our selves: wherefore we must mount higher, and come to the
second step.

The second degree of Gods love.
THe second step of Gods love, To love God for Gods own sake.
is to love him, not only for our profits sake, but even for his own sake, to
wit, that laying aside all consideration of his benefits, yea and our hope of
any profit from him, yet to love him above all things. David speaks of this
love in the 69. Psalm, Psalm. 69. 37
ver. 37. Let all them which love thy name, rejoice. He would have us love God
for his names sake, that is to say, because he is sovereign Lord, wise in his
counsels, just in his actions, true in his promises, dwelling in glory which
none can attain unto, possessing a sovereign perfection. God, whose life is
without beginning and ending, his eternity without change, his greatness
without measure, his power without resistance: who has made the world by his
word, governs it by his sight, and shall ruinate it by his will: who in one
virtue and perfection, which is his essence, incloseth all virtue, which is
every where dispersed in the creatures; as diverse lines which meet in one
center, do disperse themselves by their extentio^. For these considerations,
God ought to be loved more then for the good which he does us. Jesus Christ
himself teaches us the same, in the prayer he formed for us; in which he
appoints us to demand the sanctifying of his name, and the advancement of
his kingdom, before we crave any thing for our profit. A desire which so
possessed the spirit of Moses, and the Apostle S. Paul, that forgetting
themselves, they desired rather to be blotted out of the book of life, and to
be accursed, then that God should not be glorified.

Wherefore to plant in us this love, which loves God for his own sake, it is
necessary to know so far forth as we may, what he is in himself, and
wherefore soueraignly to be beloved.

We naturally love beauty; now light is the chief of beauties, without which
all other beauties do nothing differ from deformities. God then being the
chief light, is necessarily the chiefest beauty: He is the Father of lights,
says S. James. The fountain of light is in him, and through his light we see
crearly, says David in the 36. Psalm. For this cause, when he first set his
hand unto the creation, he began with the light, as a thing best representing
his nature. He is the Sun of justice: the Sun which sets not, which
makes no shadow; unto which all things are transparent: which not only
enlighteneth the eyes, but even gives sight. And judge you what this
sovereign brightness is, Psalm. 146. 8
seeing that the Scraphins standing before the Throne are dazeled, Esaias 6. 2.
and feign to cover their faces with their wings, as Esaias says, being not able
to endure so great a splendour. For if at the glorious apparition of the
humanity of Jesus Christ, the Sun shall be darkened as some little light at
the appearing of a greater, what may be the splendour of his Divinity?

If you will consider the life of God, The life of God.
ours is but a shadow, and nothing in comparison. For our life is a flowing and
succession of parts: but God possesses his life entirely at one instant, and
all at once. He who will know what the life of God is in comparison of man's
life, let him compare the sea with some little brook. 1. The sea is very great,
and the brook very little. 2. The sea budgeth not from his place, but the
brook runs still forth, and is always a new water. 3. The waters of the
Sea come from no other place; but all running waters come from the sea, and
return thither. The like is the life of God compared with ours. 1. His life is
infinite, and ours very short. 2. His life consists in rest, and to possess
all his life at one instant: but our life is a flux, and succession of parts.
3. His life comes from none other, but our life comes from him, Acts 17.
ver. 28. and returns unto him again, as Solomon says in the 12. of
Ecclesiastes: The earth returns unto the earth, as it was before, and the
spirit unto God which gave it.

Gods knowledge is also a bottomless pit. The knowledge of God, what it is.
He knows all things, yea even such as are not. Things passed, are not passed
unto him: the future are present before him. He sounds the heart: he sees
through the cloak of hypocrisy. We behold things one after another, but he
sees them all at one view: as if a man were all eye, and should see all that
were about him without turning himself. We see things because they are: on the
contrary, things are, because God sees them. For in God to see, is as much as
to will, and his will is, to do. To know things, we look upon them: but God to
know things, looks on himself, because that in his wisdom he has the
models of all things, and in his will the sentence of all chances.

How admirable also is his holiness! His holiness.
It infinitely surpasses the holiness of Angels and Saints: as it is said in
the book of Job, chap. 15. Behold, he has no assurance in his Saints, and the
heavens are not pure in his sight: how much more abominable and vile is man,
who drinks iniquity like water. Even as the holy Scripture calls the
highest heaven, the heaven of heavens, because it incloseth the inferior: so
also it calls God, the holy of holies, because his holiness incloseth that
of all the Saints, as being infinitely inferior. The holiness of the creature
is a quality: that of God is his substance. God is holy of himself; but men
and Angels are not Saints, but because God has sanctified them. His justice.


Also after a clean contrary manner unto men, is he just. For men are just,
because they do just things. In God it is otherwise: for the things are just
because God does them. For he is justice it self. Wherefore he is just for no
other cause, but for that he does according to his will: according to which he
has given us his law, the perfect rule of justice, which he not only sets
before us, but also writes it in us, and engraueth it with his finger in the
stone, as he promises us in the 31. of Jeremy: I will put my law into them,
and will write it in their hearts. He loves justice and truth. He hates the
workers of iniquity, he rooteth out liers, he hates the bloodthirsty and
deceitful man. Psalm. 5.

What shall we say of his goodness, His goodness
through which he loves them which hate him, by which he causes his Sun to
shine upon the just and unjust, the good and bad: by which he raineth down his
goodness even into the mouths which are open to blaspheme him? Above all,
this infinite goodness shines in the person of his Son: This Son so begotten
before all eternity, that he yet now begets him: Son without beginning of
time, Son of the like age as his Father: Essential Word, eternal Wisdom,
God everlastingly blessed. That Son which Esaias calls the Father of
Eternity, Esaias 9.
would make himself the Son of man, to the end that we might be children of
God: yea was content to be borne in a stable, to the end that we might be
received into heaven; to be borne amongst beasts, to the end that we might be
companions with Angels. He who is the Word it self, was content to stammer as
a child, to the end that we might speak unto God in all liberty. He who is
the bread of life, was content to be an hungered, to the end we might be
satisfied. He who is the fountain of life, was content to be athirst, to the
end our souls might be moistened. Briefly, he who is life it self, has
suffered death, that he might give us life. All this for vile creatures, yea
enemies unto God, that he might make them of slaves unto Satan, his own
children, and transport them from hell into his kingdom. These are the
bottomless pits of the bounty and goodness of God, which do gently swallow
up our souls; there is pleasure to lose ones self therein. For these are the
bottomless depths of the grace of God, which pass our understanding, but do
recreate our hearts; which give matter of admiration, and also no less subject
of consolation. Here are the highest witnesses of his love: here are all his
fatherly affections laid open; all the riches of that grace which the Angels
themselves admire, and as Saint Peter says, 1. Pet. 1. and 12.
endeavor to pry profoundly into; loving in this case the goodness of God, not
for their own profit, but in respect of God himself: for Jesus Christ is not
come into the world for their redemption.

Now to what end all this, but that we should love him who has so much loved
us, and admire with joy the treasures of his grace? O God, as thy greatness is
incomprehensible, so also thy bounty is infinite! our spirits are stopped with
this contemplation; our words are beneath our thoughts, and our thoughts yet
much lower then the truth. We speak of this greatness but stammeringly, our
praises do abase thee, we draw the picture of the Sun with a coal. But o God,
raise up our souls to thee: and if our spirits be too weak to know thee, make
our affections ardent to love thee. Thou who wast pleased to be our Father,
touch our hearts with a filial affection. Thou which give us occasion to
love thee, give us also the motions thereof. For, as much as we are poor in
means, so much are we incapable to receive them, and to love thee after having
received them, if thou thy self do not plant thy love in us.

All these considerations do raise up our spirits to love God, not for our
selves, but for his own sake: which appears also in this, that our love to
God cannot be well directed, if it be not formed upon the model of that love
wherewith God has loved us. Now God loves us for the love of himself, as he
says by the mouth of Esaias: Esaias 43.
It is I, it is I, that blotteth out thy sins for mine own sake. And it is
the prayer which Daniel makes in his ninth chapter, Lord hear, Lord pardon,
Lord tarry not, but hasten for thine own sake; for thy name has been called
upon this city, and upon thy people. God considers that we bear his image:
he considers that we are unworthy of his grace, but that it is a thing
worthy of his bounty, to do good unto the unworthy, and which is more, to make
them worthy by doing them good. He considers that his Church is like unto a
flock which carries his name, Osea 2.
and is called the people of God; and therefore he will not let it be Satan's
prey, nor a matter of triumph unto the adversary.

The third degree of the love of God.
THe third degree or step, is so to love God above all things; that we should
love nothing in the world but for his sake. For example, there are many persons
and many things in the world that we cannot keep our selves from loving, yea
and it would be ill done not to love them. So a father loves his children, a
wife her husband; our kindred, allies, neighbors and friends have part in this
amity. So a man loves his health, his house, his land, his study, etc. To go
about to dispossess a man of the love of these things, would be an inhumane
doctrine, and more then tending to brutalitie. He is worse then an infidel
that has not care of his family, says the Apostle. Piety rooteth not out
these affections, but does husband them, and of mistrisses which they were,
makes them but handmaids unto the love and fear of the Lord. No more then
Joshua would kill the Gibeonites, but subjected them unto the service of Gods
house. For then does a father love his children as he ought, if in bringing
them up, he purpose to use them as me^ do young plants, which shall one day
bring forth fruit to the glory of God. If he so remember himself to be their
father, that he be yet more mindful that God is his. Then a man loves his
friends as he ought, when he loves them because they love God, and because he
sees the image of God shining in them. So we shall then justly love health,
when we shall love it, not because it is more gamesom and without pain, but
because it brings vigor unto our bodies, and liberty unto our minds to
serve God in our vocation. The like ought to be said of riches, of honors, of
knowledge, things which one may honestly love; provided that their love do not
distract us from the love of God, but may rather thereto advance and help us to
perform good works. And as there is not any so little brook but it leads
unto the sea: so let these goodnesses of God, seem they never so small, lead
our thoughts to this great depth of the goodness and greatness of God. Briefly,
all our lives and affections toward our neighbors, shall be well squared out,
when they shall be branches and brooks of Gods love, and a reflection of our
sight, which from God glanceth upon his image. Never love the persons for that
which is about them, but for what is in them. Esteem not of men, as of purses
for the money which is therein. If you honor a man because he is well clothed,
by consequence ought we to salute satin in whole pieces. If you account of a
man for his honors sake, you tie his dignity to his titles and to his habit:
which things being taken away, there is no more of any thing which ought to be
loved; as a horse which carries an idol, which being taken away, has no more
reuerences done about him. On the contrary, if you love a man because he
fears God, because he is firm in the faith, forward in the knowledge of God,
true in his words, just in his actions, charitable toward the afflicted,
burning with the zeal of Gods house, you shall never want occasion to love
him. Take away from him his goods, his honors, yea his clothes, yea even his
body; all these ornaments will remain, and that excellency which consists
in the image of God, and the graces of his Spirit.

I am not ignorant, that the secrets of men's hearts are very deep; and
oftentimes the friends which a man chooses for virtuous, do become vicious, or
else show they were never otherwise In this case the man which loves God,
ought to reprehend his friend, and to reform him if he can possible. Flattery
has taken away from true friendship all his terms, except the liberty to
reprehend. To be afraid to chide ones friend, lest we should offend him, is a
respect full of cruelty: as if when he were ready to be drowned, thou
should fear to catch him by the hair of the head, lest he should leese a
hair or two. If by these reprehe^sions thy friend do not amend, the friendship
of a man must then give place unto Gods love. We must do like Moses, who made
use of his rod whilst it was a rod, but fled from before it when it became a
serpent. And yet in this case it were better to separate our selves by little
and little, and to vnsow friendship rather then to tear it asunder.

Unto all these difficulties the love of God serves as a rule. Many heathen
have gathered a number of precepts of friendship, but have not discovered this
secret, which rules all their rules, that is, to learn first to love God, and
to cause our friendships to be derived from his love. Such as the brain is
unto the sinews, the liver unto the veins, and the heart unto the arteries,
that very same is the love of God unto humane friendships; that is to say, they
are but threads and branches which depend thereon. This divine love not being
therein, friendships are no friendships, but a conspiration; an accord or
agreement to disagree with God: friendships grounded upon pleasure or upon
gain, which cease when pleasures leese their taste through age, or when
profit diminishes, or is not equally distributed: but friendships grounded
upon the love of God, are firm, because they are grounded upon a sure
foundation. Which love ought so far to advance it self, that for the love of
God we ought not only to love our friends, but even our enemies, because God
wills it. Matthew. 5. Because that amongst these enmities, some marks of Gods
image do yet appear; because they are as it were rods in Gods hand for our
amendment, and inforcements unto his fear.

The fourth degree of the love of God.
WE are not yet at the highest. To hate ones own self for the love of God
For we must come even to the hating of our selves for the love of God. For
even as there is not in man, any love more strong or more natural then the
love of our selves: so is it that same which most resists the love of God,
and which is most uneasy to be surmounted. That which the shirt is in our
clothing, the same is the love of our selves in our affections, to wit, that
which is last put off. There we are to fight a great combat: it is as it were
Satan's last intrenchment, from whence he is uneasily driven away. Yet none can
love God as he ought, who hates not his own nature; who is not grieved at his
own desires, and makes not mortal war against them, being desirous to finish
this combat by death, and to be dissolved, that he might be with God: ready to
be prodigal of his blood, that he may be sparing of Gods glory: waxing weary
of this body of ours, as of a moving prison or portable sepulcher. Like unto
him that being in prison, looks through the grates, desiring his liberty: so
look you not to get out at the door, you shall only get out through the
ruins thereof, by the destruction of this body: as when the prison sinketh,
and the prisoner escapes at some breach thereof. He which shall have most
made war with himself, shall have the more peace with God: he which shall
not have pardoned himself, God shall pardon him: he which shall have despised,
Luke 9. and 14.
yea hated his own life, he shall save it.

Here is the fourth degree or step of love, and the highest that man can reach
unto in this life. It was this degree of love, which made the Apostle to cry
out: Romans 7. 24.
Alas miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death? It was this degree of love which caused David, having a scepter in his
hand, being vanquisher of his enemies, and filled with earthly riches and
honor, to acknowledge himself but a stranger and way faring man upon earth.
Psalm. 39. and 129.
It is this degree of love which has sustained Martyrs in their torments, the
heat whereof has been hoter then the heat of the fire: can you think that
they had their muscles of steel, or bodies incapable of torment and pain? it
is not so. But as the heat of a fever dries up outward ulcers, and a lesser
heat is surmounted by a greater: so the interior heat of Gods love did
surmount the heat of the flame, and had more strength to sustain them, then
pain had power to prevail against them. Martyrs, whose virtues do yet unto
this day sustain our vices; whose ashes do yet heat our coldness; whose
blood does yet cry, speaking both for the truth of the Gospel, and against
our slacknesse, who in a little time are so far degenerate from their
constancy. Surely if they do not serve us for an example, they will serve us
for a reproach and condemnation.

Now to come to this degree of love, we must have a long and hard combat: for
our flesh is rebellious and mutinous, and covetousness so rooted therein, that
to pluck it up (as witnesses the Son of God himself) is as if a man should
cut off a hand, Math. 5.
or pluck out an eye. And Saint Paul also calls our desires our members.
Coloss* 3.
Notwithstanding God says, that he will make an end of his work in our
infirmity: 2. Cor. 12.
he makes us to be victorious, but after many falls. Oftentimes man being
placed as in a crosseway, Gal. 5.
between the spirit and the flesh, between the love of God and the love of
the world, he feels contrary suggestions, and a marvelous combat. How many
times comes it to pass, that after the love of God has had the upper hand,
and that the faithful has resolved to be good, by and by his desires do
reassemble themselves, and give a new assault unto the fear of God? The
faithful being thus assailed, either with some appetite of revenge, of rapine,
or lust, shall feel this love of God speaking thus unto him in his heart:
Miserable man, whither go thou? does not God see this? despisest thou his
threatenings? reiectest thou his promises? forgettest thou thy vocation?
Wherefore would thou grieve the Spirit of God? wherefore would thou bring
a scandal upon his Church? Where are the promises which thou have made him?
where is thy mindfulnesse of his benefits? Is this the way to the kingdom of
heaven? Art thou assured that being fallen, thou shall rise again? For a
little pleasure mingled with bitterness, will thou trouble the peace of thy
conscience? For a little porttage of herbs, will thou neglect thy birthright?
At these suggestions the faithful will stay himself, he will sigh before God;
and like Sampson, he will break the bonds of his desires: but all is not yet
done, nor this rebellious flesh is not yet quelled. For after these holy
resolutions, we have for certain spaces, great dullness again. Then the devil
espieth occasion, if he see us in bad company, if he see us idle, if we have
discontinued prayer, reading or hearing of the word of God, then our desires
do rouse themselves up again; then the contrary suggestions of the flesh and
the spirit struggle together for masterie: which makes the life of the
faithful oftentimes seem bitter, even to the desiring of death to end this
combat. O miserable nature, enemy to it own self! o ingrafted and deep
rooted corruption! O mutinous sedition, which would bring us back into Egypt:
which after our coming out of Sodom, make us look back again, like unto
Lots wife; and make us loath to leave the evil we are come from. Corruption
which troubles our best actions by bad suggestions, and besmeareth them with
some evil. If we think upon death, our flesh suggesteth unto us, that there
is yet time enough to think thereon. If we hear or read the reprehensions of
Gods word, it persuades us that it is spoken unto others. If we think of
heaven, it says, we shall come time enough thither. If thou think to give
alms, it will softly suggest in thine ear, What know I that I shall have no
need thereof my self? If thou would reprehend thy friend for his amendment,
it will draw thee by a cruel respect, namely, for fear of offending him. Each
good affection has as it were two ears like a pot, by which the flesh and the
world take hold to hinder the execution thereof.

Here then we must carefully have recourse to Gods assistance, and imitate
Rebecca, who had recourse unto prayer when two children strove in her womb: a
most express figure of these two men which are in every faithful person; the
one which is the old, the other which is the new man; the one our corrupted
nature, the other the regenerate spirit, which do covet one against another, as
says the Apostle S. Paul. Gal. 5. 17.
Wherefore also God answered Rebecca, The elder shall serve the younger. For the
old man must be subjected unto the new, until he be fully ranked in due
obedience unto God.

The fifth degree of the love of God.
THere remains now the last and chiefest degree or step, How the Saints in
glory, do love God.
which is the love wherewith we shall love God in the glory celestial. For we
love things according as we know them. We shall therefore love God much more
then, because we shall much better know him. Now (says the Apostle) we know
in part, 1. Cor. 13. 12.
now we see as in a glass obscurely; but then we shall see face to face. Our
love which sees from a far off, and which is distracted by diverse objects,
shall then see near at hand, and shall wholly be fixed upon God. And as when
two great high swelling rivers come to encounter one another, they make a
marvelous inundation: so the love of our selves and the love of God, are like
two streams which never join themselves together on earth, but shall meet in
heaven. What then shall the vehemency be of both these affections, when they
shall be mingled both together, and joined in one love? For then in loving God,
we shall love our selves, because God shall dwell in us, and because that
(says the Apostle S. John) we shall be like unto him. 1. Ioh. 3.
Nor are we not to doubt, but that the Angels and Saints do love themselves
ardently, but with a love which distilleth from the love of God. O happy and
admirable love of ones self, which is mingled with the love of God! Let us
forbear to love our selves until that time, and let us love nothing in our
selves but what does prepare us and entertain us with the hope of this love.

But because this love, with which we shall love God in Paradise, does grow from
the view and contemplation of his face, (for love is kindled by the sight) let
us learn what sight this shall be, that shall cause this our love. Our bodily
eyes see things by two means, either by receiving their images; for so we see
the bodies exposed to our view; or by receiving into our eyes the thing it
self which we see: so we see the light, which we see in such sort as that
it enters even into our eyes. Now God who is the chiefest of lights, will
make our souls to see him in heaven in this latter fashion. For he dwells in
his Saints, and is in them all in all. But in this life he causes himself to
be seen by images, that is, by the contemplation of his works, in which he
has imprinted a picture (as it were) of himself, and the express marks of
his virtue. Therefore we shall then see our God in such sort as we now see the
light: but that now we see it not but by the windows of the body, that is, by
the eyes: for then we shall receive throughout all our parts the light of God,
which shall enlighten us on all sides with the beams of his holiness. Even as
if a man were all eye throughout, and should receive light in himself on all
sides.

This same sight of God, will make us like unto God, as Saint John says, 1.
Ioh. 3.
We shall be like unto him, for we shall see him as he is. For as a
lookingglasse cannot be exposed to the Sun but it will shine like the same:
so God receives none to contemplate his face, but he transformeth them into
his own likeness by the irradiation of his light and perfection. Vrim and
Thumim.
And as God is charity and love it self, 1. Ioh. 4. 8.
as the same Apostle teaches; it is necessary that the creature being by this
view made like unto God, should also be seized with this love, and enflamed
with this spiritual fire. A fire which has given name unto the Seraphins, so
called because of their ardour, which is nothing else but the love of God, the
fervor of their zeal, and their readiness to do him service.

Here necessarily must end these degrees or steps of love, and our meditation
can mount no higher: it is the last step of Jacobs ladder, by which we mount
up unto God.

CHAP. III. Of the marks and effects of the love of God.
WE all make profession to love God, but few love him seriously. By this
profession we deceive men, yea we deceive our selves, but cannot deceive God.
Wherefore it is necessary to bring hither the touchstone, to discern the true
and pure love of God from the false, and of base allay.

As there are five degrees of true love, so are there also five marks to
discern it.

1 The first mark of the true love of God, is, that it quenches all unchaste
loves.

2 The second mark and effect of this love, is, that it brings peace and
tranquillity to the mind.

3 The third is, charity toward our neighbors.

4 The fourth is, the pleasure to communicate often with God.

5 The fifth is, the Zeal of the glory of God, which rejoices or sorroweth
according as God is honored or dishonored.

Whosoever feels in himself these effects, may assure himself that he
loves God with a true affection, yea although that some coldness chance
amongst this holy ardour, and that the love of himself be mingled withal; yet
this love for being weak, shall not let to be true, provided, it do daily go on
tending unto perfection. Let us run over again each one of these marks,
that we may know them more perfectly.

The first mark of Gods Love.
THere are three sorts of love: That unchaste loves must be extinguished.
the one whereof, is ever good: the other is ever bad: the third, good of his
own nature, but accidentally bad because of our bad disposition. That which is
always good, is the love of God, in which it is impossible to sin through
excess: and in this point it is good to let slip the reins of our desires.
The measure of loving God, is to love him without measure. The love which is
always bad, is the love of murder, of theft, and of unchaste pleasures, etc.
The love which being good of it own nature, becomes evil by accident, is the
love of meat, of drink, of ease, or recreation; appetites which are naturally
good and necessary, but which we make to be bad by excess and intemperance.

The love of God does diversely behave it self toward the other two sorts of
love. For it ranketh the latter within the limits of mediocritie, and teaches
us to satisfy our necessity, and not our curiosity. It rejects all
farre-fetched delicates, being the distaste of a proud stomach, which
awakeneth it self with artificial means: teaching us to nourish this body,
so that it may not be a hinderance to the soul: to watch and be sober lest we
enter into temptation. As for the second love, it can in no wise remain with
the love of God: but the fear of God does wholly cut it off, because that in a
thing entirely bad, we are not to seek for any mediocritie. None can be a
fornicator, an adulterer, or a murderer by measure; for the least inclination
unto these things is sin against God.

But above all, the strength of Gods love is shown in rooting out of our
hearts unchaste love, which kindles in the minds of worldly men a firebrand
of filthy desires, which defile our souls with a thousand beastly thoughts,
and importunate; which of our bodies dedicated to be temples of God, make an
infectious brothell, and (as says Saint Paul) of the members of Christ do make
them the members of a harlot. Pleasures which weaken the body, cool the
spirit, and abate courage, which after the strength is consumed, leave yet a
desire. Infamous pleasures, which place men beneath beasts; of which, man in
this point ought to learn the laws of continency and sobriety. Traitorous
pleasures, which embrace men to strangle them: dally with him on the lap of
delight, as Dalilah played with Sampson, that they may deliver him, not to the
Philistians, but unto the devil; who having poaked out the sinners eyes,
oftentimes lead him this way unto the temple of the Idol. Yet as if this were
not enough, man has chosen out a painful way unto his pleasures; they are
not esteemed if not troublesome. The stolen waters are sweetest, says
Solomon; and the malice of man supposes all other entries better then the
legitimate.

The love of God entering into the spirit of any one for to purge it, does
presently void out this filth, and smothereth up this love by his greater
force: which teaches us to love in our neighbors, not their bodily beauty,
but their souls ornaments. This holy love having for his object the chief of
spirits, What is true beauty
loves consequently in men their spiritual beauty, a beauty which
consists in the image of God: an image, whose principal lineaments are
justice and holiness. A beauty which is not superficial as that of the body,
which hides within it self blood, brain, and things which one may not behold
without horror; but it is a beauty which extends it self unto the bottom,
as the beauty of a diamond, or of the light it self. The beauty of the body,
is but a flower which is withered with age; but the beauty of the soul is not
subject unto time; and which is more, the wrinkles which it has, are done out
with time. Many women might have bin more happy if they had been less
beautiful; for their beauty has plentifully afflicted them: but spiritual
beauty is always accompanied with Gods blessing. Besides, consider
attentively the fairest visage of the world, and you will become never a whit
the more fair your self, but shall rather seem the fouler being near it. But
carefully to contemplate a soul which God has embellished with virtue, will
make you become virtuous, and will form you according to his example. Carnal
eyes perceive not this beauty, and pleasure knows not what it is. For, as a
horse loving a mare, thinks that in the world there is no other beauty: so
the carnal and sensual man thinks there is no other beauty but that which
through the sight touches his desires. But the view of the faithful pierces
further, and oftentimes clean through a corporal beauty, sees the vetie
image of the devil. Contrariwise, the inward beauty is oftentimes under an
exterior foulness, as that of a slubbered diamond. As that of Jesus Christ
during his opprobrious handling; whereof Esaias in the 53. chap. says, that
there was not in him either form or beauty: and yet in the 45. Psalm, he is
called the most fair amongst the sons of men. As the beauty of the Church,
whereof it is said in the first of Canticles, that she is brown, and yet
fair; being black without, and burnt with afflictions, which notwithstanding
blot not out her inward beauty.

Therefore that women curious of their beauty, may rather study to adorn
themselves inwardly, as it is said in the 45. Psalm, The Kings daughter is full
of glory within: Let them take heed lest in decking artificially their bodies,
they become a snare of desires, an instrument in the devils hand. A soldier
having a sword that has surely served him in many combats, will be careful to
scowre and polish it: and do we marvel if the woman having served Satan to
overthrow Adam, be carefully decked and embellished by him; and that women are
so curious in ornaments, by the suggestion of the devil?

But we whom God has honored with his knowledge, to the end we might be
inflamed with this love, let us shut our eyes to these allurements, possessing
(as says Saint Paul) our vessels in holiness: abstain your selves not only
from evil, but also from all appearance and occasions of evil. Eschew
idleness, for it is the pillow of vices. Let Satan, coming to assail you,
find you ever occupied. Fly bad company, filthy talk, books of love; for
they are firebrarnds of lust, the hooks and baits of the devil. None comes to
do evil but by these accessaries, yea the evil is already in these
accessaries. Many will say, that they are chaste of body, but their eyes, their
ears, and their thoughts are culpable of lust. Yet Christ says, that he who
looks on his neighbors wife to lust after her, has already committed
adultery. The best company and the best business to divert our minds from this
evil, is the careful reading of the word of God joined unto prayer. Saint
Augustine in the eight book of his Confessions, cap. 8. and 12. says, that
when he was upon terms of rendering himself a Christian, that which most
troubled him, was, that he must leave his fornication; and that in this
combatfull anguish, he withdrew himself into a garden, where twice he heard
the voice of a child, as it were, coming from the houses hard by, saying, Take
and read. At this voice he took the book of the Epistles of S. Paul, and
chanced at the first opening of the book, on this text of the 13. chapter to
the Romans, where he says: Let us walk honestly as in the day time, not in
riot and drunke^nesse, not in chambering and wantonness, neither in strife or
envy; but put you on the Lord Jesus Christ, and have no care of the flesh to
fulfill the lusts thereof. There was enough for him: and thereupon, were it that
this voice came from God, or that it chanced by other means, he resolved to
follow the counsel of the Apostle, who without looking for any revelation
thereupon, does sufficiently manifest unto us the will of God touching the laying
off of these desires.

The second mark of the love of God.
THis same love brings forth another effect, Peace and tranquillity of the
soul.
by which it is to be known, to wit, the peace and tranquillity of the soul:
it chaseth away fears, asswageth cares, sweetneth afflictions. For what evil
soever happens him who loves God, he will ever remember the sentence of the
Apostle, Romans 8. That all things turn to the best for them which love God.
Even their crosses become blessings; their bodily poverty is a spiritual diet
unto them; their banishments teach them to leave the world: their sequestring
from honors is their approach unto God: their enemies are their Physicians,
causing them to be wary, and to live in Gods fear. Their corporal diseases
are spiritual cares: death is an entry into life, and a bringing forth, by
which the soul is delivered of the body, as of her last afterbirth; and
comes forth of a dark den, to enter into Gods light. The passage through
afflictions, resembles the passage of the red sea; for the wicked are
overwhelmed therein, they are unto them forerunners of damnation; but the
faithful and Gods people find that way a passage unto the land of promise.

This very same love of God, will suggest unto the faithful this thought:
Seeing that I love God, it is certain that he loves me. For Saint John says,
1. Ioh. 4*
that we love him because he loved us first. For I had not naturally in me any
inclination to love him; but it was he who loving me, framed my heart to love
him. Now if God love me, he intends my good; and he can do all that he will,
nothing happens but according to his will. He will not then permit that any
evil happen me; he will turn my evils unto good for my salvation: he will
lead me thereunto, through a way thornie unto flesh, but healthful to my
soul. Briefly, the love of God excludes fears, and is the prop of our
assurance, as says the Apostle Saint John: 1. Ioh. 4 3.
There is no fear in charity, but perfect charity drives forth fear. This
same love sweetneth afflictions, and makes our Lords yoke easy and
tolerable. For you shall see by experience, that in a house where love is
great between the husband and the wife, they pass the bad time over with
content, and have mutual consolation one of another: yea, to have a faithful
friend, into whose bosom you may shed your tears, and power forth your
complaints, does bring a man much ease, although it bring no remedy. How much
more shall the faithful soul find and feel in the love of his God? of God,
who not only knows our evils, counts our sighs, lays up our tears in
his vessels; but who can and will remedy them: and not only remedy them, but
turn them to good; giving us in our afflictions, not only occasion to suffer,
but even matter of rejoicing. So the faithful speak in the 46. Psalm: Let the
waters of the sea make a noise, and let the mountains shake by the rising of
his waves: in the mean time the brooks of the river shall rejoice the city of
God. These troblesome waters are the people banded against God, as is expounded
in the Apocalypse, chapter 17. These brooks which in the mean time do rejoice
the holy city, are the instructions of Gods word, whose voice is our
consolation. For in his afflictions the faithful will turn aside his eyes
from his enemies, and from all second causes, and will say: Lord, it is thou
that have done it; I receive this affliction at thy hand; make this prove
healthful unto me, and permit not that I ever come to murmur against thee, or
to kick against the prick. We swallow with the better resolution a bitter
potion, when it is presented us by a friendly hand, whose ignorance or falsehood
we fear not. We find all these things in God, who moreover makes venomes
themselves to prove good medicines.

So the love of God is a retraite and shelter against all anguish: it is the
ground of true peace: it is the prop of our assurance, which causes us to
despise the threatenings of men; to look on the enterprises of great men, and
the risings of people with disdain; which causes us to find ease on the rack,
and to look on deaths face with assurance, and take off his mask to see Jesus
Christ, which comes unto us under that show: which makes the faithful to
stand upright in the midst of the ruins of his country. This holy love made
S. Paul to say, Romans 8. If God be with us, who shall be against us? He which
has not spared his own Son, but delivered him over for us, how shall not he
give us all things with him? Let us likewise say, He that lays up our tears,
will not he gather up our prayers? He, without whose providence a sparrow
lights not on the ground, would he permit that our souls should fall into
hell for lack of caring for them? He who extends his care to gather up our
tears, yea to count our hairs, how much more care will he have of our
souls, for which his Son has died? This same love made David say, Psalm. 23.
Even when I should walk in the way of the shadow of death, I would fear none
evil, for thou art with me, thy rod and staff do comfort me.

Hereby we may judge what difference there is between loving God and men. Let
us not speak of the weakness of our friends to deliver us, their little
constancy in their love, yea and of the cruel officiousnes of some friends,
who desire to see their friends in trouble, to make them beholding unto them
for succouring them. And let us talk that which is best and honestest in our
friendships. I say then, if there be any one who loves a douzen persons
faithfully, he must then necessarily be miserable: for it is a very likely
matter, that one of a douzen persons will ever be in trouble, or sick, or
afflicted. If then a man shall according to the laws of friendship participate
of his friends afflictions, shall he not by having many friends, be in
perpetual misery? Love is a thing full of care and fear.
And if any one of them be absent, it is a subject of continual apprehension.
So that many are of opinion, that to be obdurate, and without compassion, is
commodious. Faithful friendships are kinds of sicknesses ingenious to fear,
and which from diverse parts draw unto themselves grief and compassion. The
love of God has none of these inco^modities: for we love him for whom we can
be in no fear, and who puts us out of all fear for our selves, and warranteth
us from all evil.

Now if the love of God be so full of rest, in comparison of the most faithful
and honest friendships amongst me^; how much more then in comparison of
dishonest loves, which torture the conscience, which hide themselves for shame;
where spending, riot, jealousy, lyings in wait, and alteration of humors,
torment the mind with a perpetual unquietness?

The third mark of the love of God.
IN the third place, The love of our neighbor.
the love of God is manifested by the love of ones neighbor. It is impossible
to love God, and hate his image; to love Jesus Christ, who is the head, and
hate our neighbors who are his members: it were as if a man kissing another
should tread on his toes; things insufferable: as says the Apostle Saint John:
1. Ioh. 4. 20.
He who says, he loves God, and hates his brother, is a lier: for who so
loves not his brother whom he sees, how can he love God whom he has not
seen? That is to say, if he have not so much as natural love, how can he have
the supernatural? Wherefore, in the summarie of the law expressed in the
Gospel, unto the love of God is adjoined the love of our neighbor, as a
necessary consequent, and an undoubted proof. And the Apostle S. Paul says,
Gal. 5. 14.
that all the law is accomplished in this word alone, Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. Not that it is enough to love ones neighbor without
loving God; but because the love of ones neighbor does necessarily presuppose
the love of God.

Now if we ought to love our neighbors for Gods sake, it follows that above
all we ought to love those which love God: following the commandment of the
Apostle unto the Galathians, chap. 6. Let us do good unto all, but principally
unto the household of faith; with whom we have many good things in common, to be
together children of one Father, and likewise brethren of Jesus Christ;
nourished with the same meat, which is the word: of one household, namely the
Church: travelers and pilgrims together, combattants for one selfsame cause,
called unto one selfsame hope, coheires of one selfsame kingdom. All which
are consideratio^s resembling many lines, which do all meet in one point: for
these are obligations to love one another, who do all of us meet in Jesus
Christ, in whom we are all one, because we are one with him.

This charity amongst the faithful, is extended two ways. The one is the
charitable relieuing of our afflicted brethren. The other is, peace and concord
amongst our selves.

As touching our brotherly relief, it necessarily comes from the love of
God, as S. John says: 1. Ioh. 3. 17.
Who so shall have goods in this world, and see his brother in necessity, and
shall shut up his compassion, Brotherly relief.
how shall the love of God dwell in him? Also, God appoints himself a
rewarder of alms, as done unto him self, yea even unto a cup of cold water,
Math. 10. To give unto the poor, is to lend out money for usury unto God.
Prouer. 19. Of all that we possess, we shall save nothing but that which we
shall have thus given. By this means (says Jesus Christ in Luke 16.) we make
our selves friends, which shall receive us into the everlasting tabernacles.
Thou fear to leese thy money by giving it; and yet the bestowing it in
alms, is the means to keep it. Thou fear to leese thy money by giving it,
and fear not to leese thy self by keeping it. For our goods auariciously
reserved, are not only spoiled, but do also spoil and corrupt our spirits. It
will be for this sin that God will judge the wicked at the latter day. Math.
25. The wicked rich man, who despised the poor Lazarus craving a morsel of
bread, does now beg of Lazarus a drop of water to allay his heat. An heat
begun by the retentio^ of those goods which were due to the poor: which (as
Saint James says) shall consume James 5.
the flesh of the rich like fire: and are as a treasure gathered for them
against the latter day. And justly are they ranked with murderers. For as there
is two ways to put out a lamp, either by blowing it, or not pouring in oil
in good time: so the covetous man, if he take not away the life of the poor by
killing him; at least he suffers him to wither and dry away for lack of
pouring into him some liberality.

The root of this duty, is the love of God, which redounds upon his members:
wherefore also, as the love of God is free and voluntary; so also must not our
alms be forced or unwillingly done, but free and voluntary. God loves a
cheerful giver, 2. Cor. 9. 7. says the Apostle Saint Paul. And to this
purpose he calls there in that same place almesdeeds a seed. A seed which
we cast in the earth, but gather the crop in heaven. Seeing then we must give
cheerfully, it is here the contrary of that which is said in the 126. Psalm:
Those which shall sow in tears, shall reap in joy and triumph. For he who
shall sow this relief with tears, shall reap with grief. None shall reap
with joy in heaven, if he have not joyfully sowed upon earth. An alms given
unwillingly, does not only leese all reward, but also deserves no pardon. It
fares alike with alms which are vaingloriously given, and to be seen of men,
which our Lord condemns in the 6. of Matthew. Also it fares alike with alms
done of goods ill gotten; who having enriched himself by fraudulent means and
extortion, thinks to appease God by giving part of his robberies in alms, goes
about to corrupt God with presents, and call him to take part of the spoil. As
in the law, God received not as an offering, neither the price of a dog, nor the
hire of the letcher: so in the Gospel, God will that alms (which the Apostle
to the Hebrews calls a sacrifice) should be of just things, Heb. 13. 16.
and gotten by labor: that he who has stolen, steal no more, but rather
labor with his hands, that he may have to give unto him that has need. Ephesians.
4. Wherefore when Jesus Christ in the 16. of S. Luke, will that we give alms of
unjust riches; he calls riches there evil, not because they were unjustly
gotten, but because that ordinarily they are enticements and baits of
iniquity; otherwise he would sooner have commanded them to be rendered unto
such as they had been wrongfully taken from.

This same love of God, Agreement among brethren.
produces peace and concord amongst brethren. For it is impossible to love
God, without imitating him. Now he is the God of peace. Romans 16. We must
therefore be children of peace, in imitation of him: for so are the faithful
called in the 10. of Luke. To this purpose in the 19. of the first of Kings,
God is represented as not being in the storm and boisterous wind, but in the
still and quiet sound; because God is not amongst confusions and quarrels,
amongst persons which eat up one another, but amongst those which be at peace
and unity. But the devil lives upon discord, and is friend unto strife. Even
as men cause two dogs or two cocks to fight together for pleasure, the
lookers on encouraging them to the combat: so doubt you not, but when two men
fight together, the devil pricketh them on, and takes pleasure thereat. Let us
take heed lest before we be aware, we make our selves the devils babble or
pastime. We (I say) that be brothers, who have all the world on our skirts; who
by one self same combat, do tend to one self same hope: called to repair the
breaches of Jerusalem, to build again the house of God in the view and despite
of the devil. It is written in the 1. of Kings, chap. 6. that Salomons temple
was builded without any noise, there was not one stroke of a hammer heard. Let
us labor in the work of God without any noise, and without strife. And here
may and ought to be remembered the advertisement which Joseph gave to his
brethren, at their going out of Egypt, to return to their father; he sent them
away, and said unto them, Genesis 45. 24.
Fall not out by the way. For what is the life of a faithful man but an issue
out of Egypt, a voyage to return home to our father? Let us not quarrel then
on the way, let us live in peace, and the God of peace will remain with us;
whom we shall love the more ardently, when we are joined in affections for to
love him.

The fourth mark of the Love of God.
WE presume that such are friends whom we ordinarily see together. Often
communication with God.
Communication and familiarity are the nurses of friendship, yea more then good
turns. He which does a pleasure with a severity, withdrawing his company
from all; who gives with a refusing countenance, like one that should fling
his bread at a beggars head, does unbind in binding, and is paid well enough if
his benefits be pardoned. Friendship also requires, that a friend should in
all things be advised by his friend, discharge unto him his cares, discover his
sorrows, and power all his grief into his bosom, to take counsel of him if
there be any remedy, and to ease himself if there be none. This is then also
one of the marks of the love of God, to wit, a frequent communication, by the
which the faithful Christian does counsel or consolate himself with God.

For the man which loves God, being to deliberate upon any thing of
importance, does first consult with the oracle of Gods mouth, and enquireth
after his will. As for example, upon the choice of religion, he will not call
the belly to counsel, nor worldly hopes; he will not imitate the Shechemites,
Genesis 34, 23.
which took the seal of Gods covenant upon them, to have the substance and
cattle of the children of Jacob: nor the Jews, which in the 6. of Saint John,
follow Christ to have bread; he will not make Jesus Christ serve him for a
puruey or, nor religion to be a mercha^dize of the time, or a dependancie of
his domestical affairs. The fear of men, shame, respect, worldly honors,
covetousness, like blind and traitorous cou^sellers, shall not be admitted unto
this counsel: but he will withdraw himself unto God; and after having
ardently craved his grace, he will resolve to believe nothing but what he
teaches us in his word: wherein if there be any difficulty, yet that which
remains clear, is sufficient for our instruction. Add hereunto, that if he
demand faithfully in Jesus Christ his name, the grace to understand enough for
his salvation, Jesus Christ promises that all which we shall so demand in his
name, he will give us.

Likewise if he be to make a match, or choose any vocation, he will first
counsel himself with God, that he may choose that vocation in which he shall be
least solicited to offend God, and in which he shall have most means to
glorify him. After this consultation, humane wisdom may be heard in her
rank, not as a mistress to rule the roast, but as a servant, who speaks when he
is questioned: she shall propound what our forces are, what the present
necessity is, what the courses of the time, and the circumstances of places
and persons. In like sort, if there be any question of marriage, the faithful
will before all other things consult with Gods mouth, and will hear the Apostle
Saint Paul (1. Corin. 7.) commanding that it be done in the Lord. And God
himself in the 7. of Deuteronomie, charging us not to contract marriage but with
true believers. So Isaac and Jacob were married by the commandment of their
fathers; but Esau took unto him wives of the Gentiles, Genesis 26. 35.
which were a bitterness unto Isaac and Rebecca. I pass over the
consideration of the inconveniences which do spring thereof, for at this time
we do seek only after the proofs and effects of the true love of God. For if
a friend should marry himself without communicating the matter unto his
friend; might he not take occasion to say, You do mistrust me, and do all your
business without speaking thereof unto me. Now if God has communicated unto
us all his counsel, as says S. Paul, Acts 20: shall we make difficulty to let
him know ours? His counsel (I say) which is a bottomless depth of wisdom,
full of wholesome and holy mysteries: on the contrary, our counsels which are
but light things, and wherein he will be our counselor for our good, and which
he knows without our communicating them. Certainly the word of God is our
good counselor, who counsels us without flattery, who rules us without
ambiguitie: and the Prophet Esaias, cha. 9. calls Jesus Christ the Counselor,
not only because he has manifested to us the counsel of God in the Gospel,
but because he is to counsel us in our doubts, and resolve us in our
deliberations.

That which I say of our difficulties, ought also to be understood of our
sorrows; in which we ought to address our selves to God, make our complaint
to him, power out our tears and discover our afflictions unto him with a son
like liberty: and though he know them well without this communicating, yet
will he thereby give us ease and contenting. Take example hereof in the Psalms
of David, where you have an anatomy of the thoughts of the faithful, and the
picture of a diverse agitation within him. You shall see many Psalms, as the 6.
the 22. the 51. etc. wherein the beginnings are full of fear, and the entry
full of anguish, and as it were within two fingers of despair; but in the end
you see nothing but joy and assurance: so that you would think that the Psalm
were composed by two men of contrary humors. From whence comes this so sudden
change? was it, that in the midst of his prayer, some good news arrived, which
might allay his grief? no such matter: but thus, that according as he grew
more and more fervent with God, his soul rising from under her burden, stayed
her self upon his promises, and came forth with peace and assurance. Who is
that faithful Christian, who has practiced this exercise, and has not felt
ease? And if an obstinate pensiuenes, which holds the hand still on the
wound, seize on our spirits and consume them, ought it not to be imputed unto
the want of communicating with God? for tears suppressed procure double smart;
and although but unprofitably spent, yet do they discharge us of grief, and
give air unto the wound. But being spent before God, who has bound himself
by promise, yea even by oath, not to abandon us, does bring us a great
consolation, before God (I say) who does register our requests, yea even
preuenteth them, so far forth as David says in the 32. Psalm, that God has
pardoned him his sin, not only after his prayer, but even as soon as he had
any will to crave it.

For he requires not any prayers of us, because he has need of our service,
but because we have need of his grace: and that according to his justice it
cannot be given to those which shall not daigne to crave it. As the Sun
draws up vapors from the earth, not for it self, but to render them to the
earth in rain to moisten and fatten it: so God the true Sun of our souls,
draws from us our sighs and prayers, not for his own profit, but to make them
rain down again upon us in so many blessings. This same frequent
communication with God in our afflictions, will teach us to turn away our eyes
from men which do afflict us, toward God who does employ them, that we may not
be like the angry dog, which biteth the stone which is cast at him. The man
that shall love, will say as David when Shimei cursed him: 2. Sam. 16.
Suffer him to curse, for the Lord has bidden him. The Lord proves me, or
corrects me; my sins fortify mine enemies, and make them necessary: the
strokes of God are more wholesome then the flatteries of the world. In our
domesticke harms let us take heed of resembling such hurt men, as falling into
frenzy, do tear all things prepared to dress them withal. Yea even out of
affliction, and in full prosperity, what sweetness and pleasure is there in
this communication? For according to the commandment of our Savior, Math. 6.
the faithful shall enter into his closet, and having shut his door, shall pray
unto his Father, who sees him in secret, and who will reward him openly. There
being covered from the eyes of men, he shall discover himself before God with
less distraction, and more familiarity. There, after having spoken to
himself, he will frame his own indictment, and condemn himself that God may
pardon him. And taking the law as a looking-glass, he will acknowledge therein
the spots of his soul, will seek to cover them by faith, and to correct them
by repentance. There he will meditate upon the works of God throughout the
world, his judgments against his enemies, his benefits toward his Church;
and particularly unto himself, how God has guided him, instructed him, and
brought him unto his knowledge. How many monarks and peoples have set
themselves against the church being weak and contemptible in appeara^ce, and
have crushed themselves thereagainst: but the church of God subsisteth, and so
shall do unto the end. Yea even using a ladder as it were in his meditation, he
shall raise himself to the contemplation of the works of our redemption,
marking therein how God would have the remedies proportionable unto the evil.
For, because man desiring to make himself like unto God, by exalting himself,
is fallen into death: God having made himself like unto man, by abasing
himself, has restored him unto life. And as the woman brought unto man the
fruit of death: so God would that woman, to wit, the holy Virgin, should
bring man the fruit of life. And as out of the profound sleep of the first
Adam, God drew him forth a woman, who was bone of his bone, and flesh of his
flesh: so by the death of the second Adam (which the Scripture calls a sleep)
God has gotten him a Spouse, that is to say, his Church, which is one body
with him. In this same meditation he will admire, how in one person, God has
united himself unto man, having joined the author of life with a mortal
body, shutting up all his celestial treasures in a vessel of earth, to the
end we might there draw of his fullness. How by the infirmity of this flesh,
he vanquished the force of Satan; from his extreme shame has drawn exceeding
glory; from the death of that man, drawn the life of all me^, by that very
same virtue, through which in the beginning of the world he had drawn light
out of darkness.

In this contemplatio^, as being enflamed with this divine love, he will raise
up himself through faith, eue^ unto the joys of heaven; where God discouers
himself face to face; where the harps of Saints sound forth; and where the
Seraphins assisting before the throne, cry, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of
hoasts. O how sweet a thing is it to join unto these their praises, and have
a part in this celestial harmony! One only beam of this glory in the
transfiguratio^ of Jesus Christ on the mountain, had taken away from S. Peter
the remembrance of his home, and of his wife and family: It were good (said he)
that we stayed here; and would have set up tents there. How much more would he
have bin ravished, if himself had been transfigured: as the Apostle says,
Phil. 3. 21.
that Jesus Christ shall transform our vile bodies, that they may be made like
unto his glorious body. Who doubts, but that when this glory vanished, S.
Peter was seized with great sorrow: and so indeed the heart of the faithful
coming from this meditation again to consider these base and earthly things,
is necessarily touched with a great distaste and base esteem of them, and is
grieved to see himself tied thereunto, and to say with David, Psalm. 42. O when
shall I present my self before the face of God? It was these thoughts which
made the Prophet greedy and thirsty after the Lord. These were the thoughts
which made Paul desire to be dislodged, and to be with Christ: which made him
think that which was gain unto others, to be loss unto him. These are the
thoughts which have even in our time sustained the Martyrs, which have made
them go unto death as cheerfully as those which come thence. For love is strong
(says Solomon) as death, yea stronger, seeing it makes one to despise life.

This ardour of love is entertained in our souls by a frequent communication
with God: and we may easily see, that the cause of our slacknesse and
coldness in this love, is, because we speak not often with God. The most
exquisite friendships do wax cold for want of communication: how much more if
friendship never has been, as indeed man is naturally borne and inclined unto
enmity with God. This is a common evil, to wit, that we are much exercised
in speaking with others, but very little with our selves, and yet less with
God. If some hours of leisure do steal us from men, they give us not any whit
the more unto God. If we enter alone into our closet, we enter not ever the
sooner into our selves, to examine our consciences, to search our wounds, to
feel the pulses of our consciences, or to talk with God. And yet none shall
see him above, who has not carefully sought him here below; and has not
carefully walked with him by prayers, meditations, and by the study and
reading of the word. This let us study, and from our life, which is divided
into a thousand parts, amongst a thousand occupatio^s, suites, solicitations,
public and domesticke affairs; let us withdraw some hours to give our
selves unto God, retiring our selves out of the throng and noise of this world,
quietly to meditate on those things which pertain to our salvation. As if by a
little channel we would divert a part of the troubled waters of a stream, that
they may run more gently and clearly. A running brook presents not any
images; nor a spirit which is ever in action, and always pussed with
business, hardly can he frame himself unto the image of God. We must then
separate some hours to speak with God. All the time of our life is lost
except that which is thus husbanded. That time alone is only ours which we give
to God.

Let none here allege his domesticke affairs. For if we be Gods children, his
service is part of our domestical affairs: yea, and whilst we are doing our
handy works, what hinders us that we may not think of God, and send him up
by our broken sighs, those sort of prayers which the ancient Fathers called
eiaculatoriae? short prayers which may be said every where, prayers lanced
forth, spiritual sallies borne of the present occasion; prayers which have no
other ornament but feruency, whose clauses have no other contexture but
necessity. Who doubts, but that the Prophet Eliseus ploughing of his field,
of that very labor of his took occasion to say, We sow here in tears, but
we shall reap in heaven with joy? Or that the Apostle S. Paul, laboring with
his hands to make tents, of this earthly travel, took occasion to think of
our heavenly rest? The way is every where open unto prayer: and the love of God
is ingenious to suggest thoughts, which like sparks of piety mount up unto
God.

The fifth mark of the Love of God.
THe life of the body is discerned by these Zeal of the glory of God.
two marks: 1. by motion: 2. by feeling. The love of God being the life of our
souls, is also known by these two things. The four marks of this love which
we have hitherto presented, are the motions of our souls; for they are holy
actions, and spiritual motions, produced by the love of God: but this fifth
mark is the feeling, to wit, an affection which makes a man sensible, to be
moved either with grief or with joy, according as God is blasphemed or
glorified. Carnal and vicious love may serve us for an example. We read of
the son of king Antigonus, that being grievously sick, and none knowing the
cause of his malady: his Physician perceived the cause to be the love of his
mother in law, because that she being entered into the chamber, his pulse began
to beat extraordinarily. The like happens in the love of God. All men that
are therewith possessed, when that they see God glorified, or his name and his
truth blasphemed, although he intend to contain himself, yet will the pulse
of his conscience be extraordinarily moved, either with joy, or sorrow and
impatience. It will chance him as it happened unto Croesus his son, who
having been ever dumb, came suddenly to his speech, seeing his father
assailed, fear and grief having overcome all natural hindrances. For the
Spirit of Jesus Christ dwelling in him, produces the same effects in him as in
himself; Ioh. 2. 17.
of whom it is written, The zeal of thy house has eaten me up. Romans 15. 3.
This affection did exulcerate the Apostle Saint Paul being at Athens, Act. 17.
26.
and grieved his soul to see the Town so given to idolatry. This same zeal
was it which seized on the soul of Eli his daughter in law; so as in her death
she was not so much afflicted either for his or for her husbands, as for the
Arc of the covenant which was taken by the infidels. It is of this alone that
she speaks dying: Sam. 4. 21.
The glory of the Lord (says she) is departed from Israel. There is no more
certain effect of the love of God then this here: for if at one time we receive
several news; the one of the loss of a lawsuite; the other of the revolt of
some persons bought; and are more grieved with the last then the first. Or if
we be more angry to hear Gods name blasphemed then to hear our selves evil
spoken of; then have we in us an assured witness, that the love of God is
lively imprinted in our souls. Good blood will not belly it self. All
wel-borne children are touched at the quick with the injuries are done unto
their fathers: who so is not moved therewith, confesses himself a bastard or
a stranger. This is an evil which we see before our eyes, to our great grief:
that unto them which make profession to carry weapons, and to understand the
terms of reputation, if one speak the least cross word, it is enough to cut
one another throat: so that they confess their lives to be little worth,
seeing they will hazard them for so little, making it an every days exercise:
but if God be blasphemed, and his truth slandered, if his name be abused before
their eyes, they remain immovable, and bear a part therein. We are leapers,
without feeling in spiritual things, but very sensible in carnal. We go for
curiosity unto sermons, where Gods truth is opposed against, and our presence
by the weak taken for an approbation: but we would be loath to be found i^ a
place or company where the honor of our house should be defamed, but to
contradict the same. Let us undergo in this point a voluntary condemnation, and
let us acknowledge that this spiritual feeling is very feeble in us, to the
end we may crave of God to awaken it, by quickening us with his love.

From these five degrees and five marks, you may easily gather, that the love
of God consists not only in having a good opinion of him, or to have a good
feeling, or to speak well of him; but that chiefly it consists in obeying
him, and conforming us to his will. So God in his law says, that he shows
mercy unto them which love him; but he adds, and which keep my
commandments. And Jesus Christ, Ioh. 14. Who so loves me, will keep my
sayings. And the same Apostle in another place: 1. Ioh. 3.
My little children, love not in word, neither in tongue only, but in deed and
in truth. So S. James says: Cha. 1. v. 17
That pure and vnderfield religion before God, is to visit the fatherless and
widows in their adversity, and to keep our selves unspotted of the world. But
there be many that are religious in speech, not in actions; and who study to
be more skillful, not more wise; who confess God with their lips, but deny
him in their hearts. Like unto those which struck Jesus Christ, saying, Hail
master: or to Rabshakeh, who spoke not the language of the people of God, but
for to dishonor him withal. He knows not God, who loves him not; and he
loves him not, who obeieth not his will. The children of Eli were instructed in
the will of God; for being Priests they taught it unto others; and yet the
Scripture says, 1 Samuel 2. 12. that they knew not God, because they loved him
not. 1. Cor. 4. 20.
The kingdom of God (says S. Paul) lies not in words, but in power. It is
even so with his love. So David in the 33. Psalm. says, that praises are very
comely; but he adds, in the mouths of just men. As for the wicked, God says
unto him in the 50 Psalm, Wherefore take thou my words into thy mouth? For
this cause was it that Jesus Christ, when the devil confessed him, said unto
him, Hold thy peace, hold thy peace. For the praise of God, and the truth of
religion, are vilified and debased in the mouth of the wicked, and thereby lose
their authority: for she is made a companion of vice; and the liuerie of Gods
children becomes by this means a cloak of impiety. Thou say, I love God,
but do despise his will: I love God, but do hate the image of God. Can
thou love God without following him? or follow such as do good to their
enemies, whilst thou live in discord with thy brethren? We protest all of us
to love God, but we better love the increase of our moneys then the advancement
of his cause. We protest to fear him, but we do not fear to do before him
such things as we would shame to do before men. Who is that quarreller or
thief, that will strike or steal in the presence of the Judge? and for all
this, what do we not in Gods sight, the Judge not only of our actions, but
also of our thoughts? We protest to love Jesus Christ, and yet abandon his
members which are the poor. We spend more in a quarter of an hour at play,
then in a whole year in alms. The superfluity of our attire, would cloathe a
great number of poor. All is spent in pleasure, and nothing in piety. All is
for our covetousness, and nothing for Gods sake. Does that man love God, which
will not willingly speak unto him, nor of him; or who takes no counsel of God
in his distress? or who is not touched with the zeal of his glory? In the
mean time there is none amongst us, who makes not profession to love God:
which shows that we love him in gross, but hate him in retaile; this being
in general, and gainsaid in particular. We speak of heaven, but have our
hearts on the earth. By this means if one mark apart our love to God, it may
be found some special matter; but if we balance it with our love of the
world, our pleasures, our riches, our preferments, it is found very light: so
that our love is a kind of disesteeme, and almost an hatred. Let us take heed
to our selves; for we shall not be judged according to this general profession,
but according to our particular actions. And if so it be, that we love not God
as we ought, or if we love some other thing with him otherwise then for his
sake, how shall we subsist before him, loving any thing better better then he?
yea even against him, loving that which God hates, to wit, the world and the
desires thereof, and cherishing his enemies in his presence.

CHAP. IV. Five means or helps to inflame us in the love of God.
NOw we are to treat of the means to nourish in us this love. It is surely an
effect of the Spirit of sanctification, which God gives only to his children:
whereupon this spirit is called the spirit of adoption by the Apostle, Romans 8.
because it is not given to any other then the children of God, which he has
adopted in Jesus Christ: and that therefore he frames their hearts unto a
childlike love, and to have recourse unto God as their Father. It is requisite,
that the grace of God should prevent our wills, to make them willing; that it
may accompany them, that they may will fervently; and that it follow them, to
the end they may not will in vain, and without fruit. Phil. 2. 13.
It is God which brings forth in us with efficacy, both the will and the
deed, according to his good pleasure. Notwithstanding God moves us not like
stones; he makes us follow willingly, he bends our wills by an unconstrained
necessity. For this cause is it, that we are called, workers together with
God: 1 Cor. 3. 9.
and that in the same place where S. Paul says, that God gives the will and
the deed according to his good pleasure: he wills notwithstanding that we
should work out our own salvation with fear and trembling. Phil. 2. 12. 13.

The means then which we have to employ our selves in the nourishing and
cherishing of this love of God in us, is in general, to give our selves to
good works, which be pleasing unto him. But in this travel, I find five
helps, by which, wisdom joined with piety, through a holy industry do
quicken this love in us, and do put matches as it were unto our hearts,
thereby to kindle this spiritual flame.

These means or aids are:

I. The image of vices.

II. The choice of friends.

III. Hatred of the world.

IV. Prayer.

V. The hearing and reading of the word.

The first help or aid of the Love of God.
THose who void out of their lodgings their stable dung, The image of vices.
do fatten their fields withal; and by ridding themselves of this infection,
do otherwise make a profit thereof. The faithful Christian ought to follow
this example. For it is the duty of piety, to discharge our selves of those
vices which are of ill savor before God: but Christian wisdom finds means
to draw eue^ from this filth, some commodity. He then which would seek some
model, whereon to form the love of his God, ought to observe amongst all the
rest, the most monstrous and the most obstinate vices, and they are so all
indeed. Yet I think that extreme avarice does some deal bear away the bell.
Let it then be exposed to open view; and let this monster, which corrupts man
when it is within him, teach man being thrust forth, and instruct him afar
off. For will you love God, as you ought? love him then as a man extremely
covetous loves his money. Avarice takes away rest, and troubles sleep; his
money is the first thought at his waking: so let the love of God break our
sleep, possess our thoughts in the night; let it be the first of our thoughts
at our awaking, to meditate on his former graces, to dispose of our future
life, to bewail our sins at the cock-crowing. Covetousness does shut the
heart of the covetous into his coffer, where his treasure is: so also let the
love of God fix our hearts in heaven, to the end that there where our
treasures be, there may our hearts be also. Avarice snatcheth out of the
niggards hand the bread he should eat, and makes him be content with little:
so must the love of God teach us abstine^ce, and how to bring under our bodies;
to live with little, and to deprive our selves when it is requisite, of
temporal commodities for his service. The auaricious man undertakes for gain
long voyages, sequestring himself from his wife and children: so must the love
of God prepare us to endure banishment, to leave wife and children to follow
God; remembering the saying of our Lord, Mat. 10. Who so loves father or mother
more then me, is not worthy of me: or who so loves son or daughter more
then me, is not worthy of me. The covetous man having put his money unto
usury, calculateth the time, and with impatience atte^deth the term: so we
that know that God has in his hands our pledge, and that he will render us
our alms with usury, ought with impatience to attend the time of payment; and
in the mean time very preciously keep his obligation, which is the doctrine
of the Gospel. The covetous man, the older he waxes, the more greedy he is
to gather; he lives poorly, that he may die rich; his purpose to gather is at
the greatest, when the term of his life is at the shortest: so must the old
man fearing God, make more careful provision of faith and good works. Let him
live poor in worldly goods, that he may die rich in heavenly. Old age is the
grounds and lees of life; but in the faithful man it renews, Psalm. 103.
as unto an Eagle: for then he feels more lively and certainly the motions of
the life to come; then has he the wager almost in his hand, being near the
end of his course. When the rivers are near their end, and approach unto the
sea; the tide comes toward them, and meets them: so when the course of a
faithful man's life comes near his end, then God comes to meet him; and
before death, gives him some taste and feeling of the life to come. Then it is
that we ought to have a holy covetousness to husband our time, make a stock
of faith, send our good works before us, and to make our selves friends which
may receive us into the everlasting habitations. This meditation, which gives
vice a double construction, and makes it look both ways, enforces it to be
an example and help unto virtue: as Amorrhea^ captives, to cleanse and deck
the tabernacle; as a woman of Hethe, whose hair and nails are cut off, Deuteronomy.
21. For virtue is so feeble in us, that to raise it self up, it boroweth help
of vice; it passes over to the Philistia^s to whet her tools. 1. Sam. 13. 20.
Because we cannot comprehend how much we owe unto God, but through the
consideration of that which we give unto our concupiscence; for all that is
stolen from him,

The second help unto the Love of God.
THe sheep of Jacob brought forth spotted lambs, Choice of friends.
according to the color of the rods were laid before them: so men produce
works conformable unto the objects which they have before their eyes. And this
is a great evil, that good examples have nothing like so great force to form
us unto goodness, as bad have to induce us unto evil. For, as a man stricken
with the pestilence, will sooner infect a douzen sound men which shall approach
to him, then these whole men can help him: in like sort, a vicious man will
sooner infect many honest me^, then he will correct him self by their example.
For vice is here in his own soil, it comes up without pla^ting, it grows
without pain; much more then being fortified from without, and well labored:
but virtue is a stranger, and resembles a grain brought from the East, which
after much care and labor, does yet little prosper but degenerate; especially
in the contagion of these times, which is as the dregs and sink of all
seasons and ages, in which virtue is a prodigy, and piety a crime or
simplicity. For thus do men call foolishness in this age; in which, that they
may render or make virtue to be odious, they cloth brutishness with his
habit. Even as it is uneasy that the flocks feeding amongst the thornie
bushes, should not leave some of their wool: so is it hard for an honest man,
living amongst so great corruption, but he must leave some of his innocence.
We fall away insensibly; we go on in badnesse, without being aware thereof,
like people sleeping in a boat, and carried down the stream, which make much
way without thinking thereon. Wherefore we are to look to our selves, and in
so contagious an air, to provide our selves of preservatives, of which, the
best is the love and fear of God. And this love is nourished by hanting those
which love him. We must acquaint our selves with such as we should be like; to
the end that the faithful with some few friends loving God, withdrawing
himself as it were from vices, may look with horror upon them as from a far
off, upon this ouerflowing torrent and powerful reign of the devil;
comforting himself in the mean time in God, and relying on his love.

This same friendship among the faithful, will serve the better to make them
know themselves. For seeing we be blind in our imperfections, we ought to
borrow our friends eyes, and lend them ours, to the end we may mutually
reprehend and correct one another. The serious reprehensions of a friend, do
more good then praises, were they never so true. Whosoever shall take away from
friendship the liberty of reprehending, leaves nothing that may distinguish
it from flattery.

And seeing that we are naturally lame and benu^med in things touching Gods
service, we must employ the help of our friends, to the end they may bring us
into this bath to receive healing. For God communicates not his graces unto
us, that they should fade and vanish with us, but that we might multiply our
talent; and that the spring of his spiritual benedictions, which he causes to
break forth in us, may run out, and serve for instruction to our neighbors: as
Christ says to S. Peter: But thou being converted, confirm thy brethren. For
if God command us to take up our enemies strayed beast; how much more to
reform the soul of our friend, when it wandereth out of the way of salvation?
This communication also among the faithful, brings comfort in affliction,
which being divided among many, is more easily borne. Many small brooks
reunited in one channel, carry great vessels: many afflicted spirits joining
themselves together by concord and mutual support, will easily bear an
affliction. And the word of God witnesses unto us, that God looks on,
hearkneth unto, and takes pleasure in the consolations and mutual
exhortations of his children. So the Prophet Malachie in the 3. chapter says,
that when the proud are esteemed happy, and the bad advanced, then those which
feared the Lord, spoke one unto another, and the Lord was attentive and heard:
and a book of remembrance was written before him, for them which fear the
Lord, and think on his name; and they shall be mine (said the Lord) when I
shall lay apart my most precious jewels. O how precious a treasure is a
virtuous friend fearing God! And would to God that as we are used to know by
certain marks the goodness and courage of a horse; so also in the choice of
friends, that we might with the sight of a man know his virtue: but the lurking
holes of the spirit of a man are so deep, that he deceives both himself and
others, and he is hidden even from himself. Yet by a man's innocence of his
actions, sobriety of his words, by the simplicity of his habit, by his zeal
and ardour in Gods cause, by his disesteem of gain, by his eschuing of
pleasures, you may very probably know the purity of his mind within: eue^ as
by the sparks coming forth of a heap of ashes, men know the hidden fire.

The third help of the love of God.
THe disesteeme likewise and hatred of the world, Contempt and hatred of the
world
does not a little aid unto the love of God. For the love of the world (says
S. James) is enmity against God. And S. John likewise: 1. Ioh. 2.
If any one love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. By the
world, I understand humane business, worldly pomp, carnal enticements, earthly
desires, deceitful and uncertain hopes: who so loves God, will look on these
things with disdain. He will pass over all the ages of man, from his
conception unto his rotten sepulcher: he will consider in all the conditions
and states of his life, his certain misery, his uncertain hopes, unfruitful
gain, that he may say with Solomon, Vanity of vanities, Eccles. 1.
all is vanity. Looking on these things with a disdain, mingled with
compassion: a disdain extending even unto hatred, when he shall consider
wickedness to be mingled with vanity, and the devil to have so established
his reign in the world, that it is a kind of miracle and prodigy to see
therein a good man. So as the Prophet Esaias acknowledges chap. 8. Behold me
(says he) and the children which the Lord has given me, for a sign and for a
miracle in Israel. Now if it were a miracle in Israel to see a family
instructed in the fear of the Lord, how much more amongst infidels? and if in
Jerusalem, how much more in Babylon? It is then without reason that we wonder
when we see examples of disloyalty, cruelty, uncleanness; seeing that on
the contrary the Spirit of God teaches us, to hold the example of piety and
the fear of God for a miraculous and unusual thing. These and such like
considerations joined unto the feeling of the excellency of the children of
God, will cause the faithful to esteem himself better then the world; and
looking on the earth as a place cursed, will live therein as a passenger and
traveler: as an Englishman that should travel over Persia or Tartaria,
intending to return into his country. For he will not answer as that
Philosopher, who being enquired, of what country he was, answered, that he was
a citizen of the world: but the faithful says, he is a stranger in this
world, and a citizen of heaven; and therefore withdrawing his affection from the
world, and raising up his heart unto God, he does like him, who from the top of
the Alps where the air is clear, looks upon the fields beaten with tempest,
the country all about foggie and mistie; and there rejoices him self, resting
himself upon the love of God, which has delivered him from this general male
dictio^. So in the 29. Psalm, after having represented the tearing of the
Cedars, the shaking of the mountains, and the discovering of the forests by
the force of the thundering voice of God; he withdraws the children of God
out of this confusion, and assembles them into Gods palace, where he is
glorified; and assures himself that God will give peace and strength unto his
people. For in this palace of God, which is his church, does sound that voice,
not which shakes the mountains, but which assures our hearts; not that voice
which rooteth up the Cedars, but that which comfort our consciences: not
that which causes the Hindes to cast their young ones, but which makes us to
conceive hope. It is the word of the Gospel, in which God lays open the
treasures of his love: in which whosoever shall take a relish, he shall find
the sweetes of the world to be bitterness, and hating the same, will learn to
love God.

Now we say this, not to discharge our selves of all earthly things: this
carelesnes of the world hinders not the love of our children, nor the care of
our family, nor our endeavor in the administration of our magistracy; but the
faithful will do these things, as a passenger fits himself in the best manner
he may at some Inn. He who is not to stay there above a night, will not stand
to build a wall; and if he suffer there any discommodity, he will patiently
digest it, because it is but a passage. For the faithful will follow
domestical and civil affairs, not as if he meant there to set up his staff,
to tie thereunto his desseignes, or therein to place his hope. His thoughts will
ever be in some other place; and during his business, will ever think of the
vanity of his travel. He will always begin his actions with the service of
God, and invocation of his name; and that shall ever be the first, which he will
have last: whilst worldlings, after the example of Martha, pain themselves
excessiuely in domesticke affairs; he after Mary's example, will choose the
good part, which shall not be taken from him, placing himself at Christ's feet
to hear his word. If he have any worldly fears, they will give place unto the
fear of God. If he have any hopes, they will give place unto his hope of the
kingdom of heaven. If he have any sorrows, they will be swallowed up of a
greater sorrow, proceeding from the sense of his sins, or the bruisings of
Joseph. God himself herein is an example unto us. For in building of the
world, he has done contrary unto men which do build also: men begin at the
foundation, but God begins at the top. He stretched out the heavens, before
he laid the foundations of the earth. The natural works of God, are
spiritual instructions unto us. To the end that we may follow this order, and
that we may ever begin by the care of heavenly things; the earthly will
present themselves in the second rank to be thought on, not of love or of
purpose, but by necessity, and as much as is required, for not seeming cruel
unto those which be ours, or enemies to our selves. Seek ye first the kingdom
of God, and the righteousness thereof, and all other things shall be administered
unto you. Math. 6. 33.

The fourth aid of the love of God.
FRequent and often prayers do likewise nourish this love; Prayer.
I mean as well public as private: for the public, are a quire of sighs, a
harmony of affections sent up with one accord unto God; which imitateth that
holy consort of the Angels and souls of the Saints sounding on their harps in
heaven; whereof mention is made in the 5. of the Apocalypse. In our private
prayers, the faithful man being hidden from man's eyes, discovers himself
unto God, makes his complaints to him with a child-like familiarity, prays
unto him, not of custom, but with affection, with words broken off with
sighs, which are used even in the midst of business, through a gentle
distraction and wholesome interruption: which prayers have no other motive but
love, nor other subject but necessity, or other eloquence but affection. None
craves an alms with the flowers of Rhetoric. Familiar simplicity is very
comely in prayer. To make these solitary prayers, Genesis 24. 63.
Isaac went out into the fields. So king Ezechias turned his face unto the
wall, Esaias 38. 2.
for fear to be troubled in his prayer. So the Apostle S. Peter went up unto
an high room of the house to pray alone. Act. 10. 9.
Jesus Christ himself in the 6. of Luke, withdrew himself into a mountain to
make his prayers, and continued therein all night. Both these sorts of prayers
have promise of God to be heard. As touching the public, our Savior promises
us, Matthew. 18. v. 19. 20.
that there where two or three be gathered together in his name, he will be in
the midst of them: and that all which they shall ask with one accord, shall be
ganted them. As for the private, he also speaks thus in the 6. of S. Matthew.
When thou prayest, enter into the closet, and having shut the door, pray unto
thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father which is in secret, shall reward
thee openly.

These prayers are so many matches of the love of God. For as soon as God will
be prayed unto by us, this is a great witness unto us that he loves us. Our
importunity is pleasing unto him; he gives by his commandment free access
unto our prayers. That we may obtain his graces, he demands no other price
of us but our prayers. For rivers of his goodness, he demands but some drops
of our thankfulness. He is attentive unto the cry of the afflicted. He is nigh
unto them which call upon him. Psalm. 45. 18*
If the cry of dead Abels blood came up unto him; how much more the cry of his
living children, which call upon him in the name of Jesus Christ? If he reckon
our hairs, how much more our sighs and our prayers, which he himself has
prescribed us? Add hereunto, that prayer is a strong bridle unto us, to hold
us in the fear of God. For this only thought, that it is before him that we
present our selves, before him who knows our hearts, who sees all our
filthiness through the cloak of hypocrisy; obliges us to purify our hearts
and our hands, to wit, our thoughts and actions; according to the commandment
of the Apostle: 1. Tim. 2.
I will (says he) that all men make prayers in all places, heauing up pure
hands without anger or debate. On the contrary, God (by the Prophet Esai)
rejects hands full of blood, Esaias 1.
even when they lengthen out their prayers.

Then when we come to frame our prayers, each word that we say, is a lesson or
a reproach. For example, we thus begin the Lords prayer, Our Father which art
in heaven. In calling him our Father, we learn on the one part to be his
obedient children, and to be persuaded of his love: on the other side, to
despise the world, as inferior to our dignity, seeing we be the children of
God. This word also of Our, frames us unto charity toward our neighbors, and
to procure their good, not only in our prayers, but in all our actions. And
these words, which art in heaven, advertise us to seek for heavenly things;
and that our conversation should be as that of heavenly citizens, and children
of the heavenly King. Then when the faithful shall come to propose his
demands, he will chide himself on this sort: I crave of God that his name may
be hallowed, and yet I profane and dishonor it. I desire that his kingdom may
come, and be advanced; and notwithstanding I resist and foreslow it as much as
lies in me, unwilling that he should reign in me; not subiecting my self
unto the scepter of his kingdom, which is his word; nor contributing any thing
to his Church, which is called in the Gospel, Gods kingdom. Item, I pray his
will may be done, and yet I resist this will. I beg my bread, and yet covet
another man's: My daily bread, and yet my covetous care extends it self unto
many years. So likewise we crave that God would forgive us as we forgive
them which have trespassed against us: and for all that we are
unreconcilable, our hatred is mortal, or to say better, immortal; and yet
fear not that God should hear us, pardoning us according as we pardon our
neighbors. So we desire not to be led into temptation, and yet we run after
temptations, bad companies, books of loue-tales, after enticements and
occasions of doing ill. Finally, we finish this prayer with mention of the
kingdom and glory of God, by which this same prayer began, that it might
warn us, that eue^ as our prayers, so also al our affections ought to begin
and end with the glory of God. So many petitions, so many aduertisements: for
Jesus Christ most artificially, by teaching us how to crave for good, teaches
us also to do it. In ordering our prayers, he also orders our actions: so as
speaking to God, we also speak to our selves; by praying unto God, we learn
also to fear him. And surely when you shall see unruliness in a household,
either by disobedience of the children, or by dissension between man and wife,
it is a certain witness that God is not there called upon as he ought. For
this only action of lifting up of hearts and hands together unto God, might
have sufficed to reunite their divided affections, and entertain from day to
day their family in the fear of God. For by speaking often to God, we learn
to love him, and loving him to follow him. Moses his face became shining for
having spoken with God: so our souls will become enlightened in the knowledge of
God, when we (...)

and counsel, all the ambition of so great a monarch, and making him
contribute at unawares unto the accomplishment of the prophesies? That which is
the greatest of the world, employeth it self for the least of his children,
and serves for the execution of his love.

The holy Scripture being full of such examples, rightly may it be called the
book of true love; seeing that therein God not only unfolds his love, but
also binds us to love him; and not only exhorts us to this love, but also
produces it in us by this same word, accompanying the preaching of the same
with the efficacy of his holy Spirit. And to say true, I think that the most
part of us have had experience, that after the hearing of the word, the sparks
of love do kindle in our hearts; and that hearing God speak, or speaking of
God, we are inflamed with his love. So the two disciples being in Emaus, after
Jesus Christ was vanished, said, Did not our hearts burn within us, when he
spoke unto us on the way, and preached the Scriptures? And Jeremy in the 20.
chap. desiring to reserve the word of God in his heart without uttering it,
says, that he felt it in his heart like a burning fire. Wherefore so? but
because this word received into the hearts of the auditors, heateth them with
the like ardour: as also the tongues of fire descending upon the Apostles,
witnessed that God gave them burning tongues, and a word full of efficacy, to
inflame men's hearts. Wherefore those which being carried away with their
business, or withheld by fear, or persuaded of their sufficiency, neglect
coming to sermons, shall insensibly feel that this heat waxes cool, and
that a caul grows over their consciences. This negligence will grow to a
distaste, this distaste to a disdain, this disesteeme unto a hardness of heart
and enmity against God. Whosoever will entertain the love of God in his
heart, ought daily to come and hear his word, the which he has chosen as a
wholesome means to move our hearts and to purge our spirits: as Christ says to
his Apostles: Ioh. 15. 3.
You are clean through the word which I have spoken unto you. Being there, we
must hearken to the preaching with greediness, suffer reprehensions gently,
receive exhortations with ardor. And eue^ as those, upon whom men mean to make
some incision, suffer themselves to be bound and pinioned by the Surgeon,
lest the motion of the patient should hinder the operation: so must we, when
the servants of God are occupied about pricking the apostumes of our vices, and
cutting off our concupiscences, which S. Paul calls our members; Coloss. 3. 5.
stay our moving, lightness and inconstancy, lest it hinder the efficacy of
this word by our impatiencie.

To the hearing of the word, we must add the reading, according to the example
of those of Beroea; Act. 17. 11.
who after they had heard S. Paul's preaching, went and consulted with the
Scriptures, to see the conformity thereof with the writings of the Prophets;
although that the Apostle being powerful in miracles and in words, did preach
with authority enough to be believed, as might be thought: how much more ought
we now a days, at our coming from the sermon, content our curiosity, to know
if that we hear that day, be true? We which hear Pastors which are not
receiueable, but so far forth as they prove their sayings by the word of God?
Amongst all the books of holy Scripture, the most obscure is the Apocalypse,
and yet it is said in the first chapter, that happy are they that read, and
those which hear the words of this prophecy. In the 17. of Deuter. God
commands Kings to read the book of the law, all the days of their life.
Reading thereof was the exercise of the Queen Candaces Eunuch, as he rode in
his chariot. If he read being a paga^, how much more being become a Christian?
And if he read when he understood not, how much more when he began to
understand? If he read in his chariot, how much more in his house? Also God
has tendered him his hand by the ministry of Philip; and upon the reading,
the light of the Gospel is come unto him, for an argument unto us of hope,
that in reading carefully the holy Scriptures, God will enlighten us. He which
accuses it of obscurity, accuses it also of leasing: for it says of it
self, Psalm. 19. v. 9 and 10.
that it enlightneth the eyes; that it gives wisdom to the poor and simple;
that it is a lantern to our feet, Psalm. 119. v. 103.
and a light unto our paths. If it be obscure, 1. Cor. 3.
it is (says the Apostle) to those, of who^ the god of this world has blinded
the understandings. At least let us have good opinion of God our Father. Let us
not think that he has written his Testament in obscure terms and ambiguous
clauses, to entangle us in suites. The Father of lights in never cause of
obscurity. Let us not endeavor to make this word suspicious unto the people, as
if the reading thereof were dangerous; as do those profanely fearful people
who under every stone imagine a Scorpion to lurk. If there be any
difficulties, the rest which is clear is sufficient unto salvation. If it
appertain but unto the learned to read the Scriptures, it appertains then
unto none to read them, for no body is skillful before he have read them. We
read not the word of God because we are learned, but to become so.

Now here we pass over an infinite number of profits which we gather of this
reading; as is the confirmation of our faith, consolation in affliction, a
gentle diuerting; a master which flattereth not, a company which is not
troublesome, a spiritual munition house, which contains all sorts of weapons
against temptations, which furnishes wherewithal to resist against error,
following the example of our Lord, ever resisting the devil by Scripture, and
saying unto him, Mat. 4.
It is written, it is written, Luke 4.
etc. Only we will stay our selves upon this, to wit, that the reading
kindles in our hearts the love of God. This is known by experience. For after
a man once begins to take a taste in reading the holy Scriptures, other studies
begin to prove without relish: you shall see no more upon the Carpet, books of
love; the ridiculous Romans and tales of Amadis do fly before the Bible more
then the devil before holywater: all these pleasing and vain readings which
busied the spirit and tickled the imagination, do leese their taste after this
spiritual nourishment. Another kind of love is kindled in the spirits of those
which daily propose unto themselves the witnesses of the love of God toward
us, contained in his word.

This meditation furnishes us with a just subject of complaint. For then when
they burned us for reading the Scripture, we burned with zeal to be reading
them. Now with our liberty is bread also our negligence and disesteem thereof.
We are barbarous, and new to seek in the language of Gods Spirit. Our hearts
then resemble flint-stones, which cast no sparks but when they are stricken.
Many will have a Bible well bound and gilt, lying upon a cupboord, more for
show then for instruction: we love but the outside thereof. We adorn the holy
Scriptures outwardly, but it were better it might deck us within. It were
better it were torn with often reading, that thy conscience might be more
entire: for it is more easy for thee to have another, then it is easy for
thee to be an honest man without it. We desire a fair impression; but the
fairest impression is that which is made with the finger of God in our souls.
The matrices of these characters are in heaven. This love of God is engraven in
our hearts with his hand, and is formed upon the model of that love which he
has borne us in his Son: according as he says in the 15. of Saint John: As my
Father loved me, so have I loved you: remain in my love.

FINIS.

