COALS FROM THE ALTAR; OR, Four religious TREATISES to kindle Devotion in
this cold AGE.

Written in French by Mounsieur du Moulin: And Translated into English by N. M.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Pauier, and are to be sold at his shop in Iuie
lane. 1623.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, the Lady Elizabeth Norrisse, the only Daughter and
heir of the Right Honorable Francis, Earl of Berkeshire, and Wife to the
Right Worshipful Mr. Edward Wray, Esquire.
MADAME,
SO great is my Obligation to your Honor; that your Honor may challenge the
best services of my tongue, or pen, as due to your Ladyship for those brightest
beams of your bounty lately cast upon me: whereby you have comforted, and
revived my languishing and drooping fortunes. The less I am able to discharge
so great a debt, the more I am bound to acknowledge it. Anaxagoras finding
Perides very ready to make use of his learning in Philosophy, but slow to
contribute any thing to his maintenance, brake with him in the end after this
manner: Sir, if you desire to see by my light, you must minister oil to my
lamp. I must confess, and I willingly profess it (Right Noble and virtuous
Lady) that you have poured oil into my Lamp in abundant measure; and
therefore by Anaxagoras his Apophthegne, the light of my Lamp is yours by
right. A Lamp that burns dimly at the first kindling, yet afterward
yields a clear and comfortable light; which puts me in some good hope
that my labors, how obscure soever they are now, yet hereafter by more
industry, and practice in this kind, may serve not only to illustrate my
Authors, but also your Ladyships name. For the present, I must entreat a
favorable glance of your Ladyships eye upon the work I have now adventured to
Translate and Dedicate to your Honor. It consists of four rare pieces,
drawn by an excellent hand. The first presents to your view the lively image
of a Christians confidence in the word; the second, of his devotion at the
Sacrament; the third, of his patience in adversity; the fourth, of his
watchfulness in prosperity. All the parts and lineaments of these beautiful
pictures, I have entirely represented in my translated draught: but our
language did not always afford me colors answerable to my Authors: Which
defect in them, if your Ladyship will dispense with, I doubt not but that they
will seem very agreeable to your Honor, and not altogether unworthy to be
laid up in your Ladyships rich Cabinet of spiritual rarities and divine
Treatises in this kind, which you rightly value above all other precious
things in the world: For, jewels and precious stones adorn but the body, these
beautify the mind, and repair the image of God in the hidden man of the
heart. The first of these will dispose you to the diligent hearing of the Word;
the second will prepare you to the worthy receiving of the Sacrament; The third
will offer you comfort in sickness and distress; The fourth will give you
wholesome counsel in prosperity. Before you go to Sermon, to set an edge upon
your spiritual appetite for the food of your soul, I commend to your devout
meditations, the first of them, which discourses of the excellency of the
Gospel. When you are bid to the Lords Table, to take your Savior, with
Simeon, into your hand, peruse the second Treatise, being wholly of that
subject. And if God at any time shake his rod over you, and you fear a fit of
sickness, or any grievous trouble and affliction, make use of the cordial
contained in the third Treatise. Lastly, when you find your self dull and
heavy in your devotion, and in a manner lulled a sleep by the sweet
enchantments of worldly comforts and delights, then take the silver Larum-Bell
in the fourth Treatise, into your hand, and ring it out to awake you. So shall
your prosperity be secure, your affliction cheerful, your receiving the
Sacrament most comfortable, and your hearing the Word most delightful and
fruitful. Which he never cease to pray for, who remains

Your Ladyships humbly devoted, and perpetually obliged servant, NICH. METCALFE.

Errata.
PAge 6. line 14. read a happy news; p. 7. l. 17. r. declaring, p. 8. l. 11.
r. acknowledge, p. 9. l 21 r. driving, p. 15. l. 13. r. spirit, ibid. l. 17. r.
we, p. 17. l. 5. r. being opposite to the course, p. 18. l. 10. r. it spoken of
God that he, ibid. l. 19. r. it, ibid. l. 2^. r. they, p. 19. l. 1. r. his
Kingdom, ibid. l. 2. r. delivered, ibid. l. 11. r. to the, p. 20. l. 15. r. by
a, p. 21. l. 1. r. shed his blood for us? ibid. l. 20. by the sword, or of, p.
22. l. 17. r. he, ibid. l. 23. r. plainness, p. 23. l. 10. r. eloquence. p.
24. l. 15. r. it, ibid. l. 19. r. discourse, p. 5. l. 19. r. rises, ibid. l.
24. r. how hardly they can stand. p. 6. l. 3. r. bears out or up, ibid. l.
24. r. grown, p. 27. l. 1. r. weak are scandalized at our prophannesse, ibid.
l. 3. r. our, ibid. l. 17. an, ibid. l. 18. r. dark, ibid. l. 20. r. the
bottomless pit, p. 28. l. 81. r. will, ibid. l. 22. Shepherds, p. 29. l. 6.
r. proclaimer, p. 30. l. 10. r. covered, p. 31. l. 21. those good things, p.
3^. l. 7. r. glories in being, p. 33. l. 1. r. that, ibid. l. 10. r. it, p.
34. l. 9. r. it, ibid. l. 14. r. strike, ibid. l. 18. r. it, p. 37. l. 6. r.
within, ibid. l. 7. r. on, ibid. l. 23. r. The, p. 38. l. 20. r. Wherefore, p.
39. l. 12. r. life, ibid. l. 13. r. implicit, ib. l. 20. r. by an Attorney or a
proxy, p. 40. l. 2. r. his, p. 41. l. 9. r. being, p. 42. l. 22. r. strengthen,
p. 43. l. 1. r. who, ibid. l. 2. r. who, ibid. l. 11. r. needles, p. 44. l. 15.
r. prohibition which Christ gave, ibid. l. 17. r. wherefore, ibid. l. 18. r.
that he was sent, p. 45. l. 21. r. Goshen, ibid. l. 23. r. was, ibid. l. 24. r.
palpable.

FINIS.
THE BOLDNESS AND CONFIDENCE OF A Christian.

In a SERMON, made by Mounsieur du Moulin, Minister of the Reformed Church at
PARIS.

LONDON, Printed by T. S. for Thomas Pauier, and are to be sold at his shop in
Iuie lane. 1623.

A SERMON, Made by Mounsieur du Moulin, Minister of the Reformed Church at
PARIS: Expounding the first Chapter of the Epistle of St. Paul to the Romans.
ROMANS 1. VER. 16. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, seeing it is the
power of God to salvation to every one that believes.


EVen as the Walls of Ierico fell at the sound of Iosuahs Trumpets; So did the
Walls of Babylon fall at the sound of the Trumpet of the Gospel. For the
preaching of the Gospel is the means by which God establishes his Kingdom
amongst men, and makes the Kingdom of the Devil to tremble. For even as
death entered into the world by the ear, so God has willed that life should
enter in by the same means: and as man is fallen by believing the word of the
Serpent, so man should be raised again by believing the Word of God. It is no
wonder then if Satan oppose himself at the preaching of the Gospel, and
enforce himself to make it seem odious, because it is the means to diminish
his Empire. He has stitched the skin of the Fox to the skin of the Lion:
adding subtilty to force, coupling together with persecution the stings of
Philosophy; Even as the Sun that brings in the Spring, with Flowers and new
Verdure, begetting thousands of flies and vermin, which serve to no end, but
loss and damage. Also in like sort, so soon as God has powered out his
blessings upon a Country, with the Sunshine of the Gospel, presently there
arises a thousand lies, tricks and conspiracies, to extinguish the growing
truth, and to stifle the Church of God in the Cradle. Before the preaching of
the Gospel, published by the Apostles, there was a wonderful confusion of
contrary Religions, and yet there was never any contention or fighting for
Religion amongst themselves. When the Romans conquered any Country, they
carried triumphantly away with them their Captiuates Gods of strange Religions,
and made Temples for their imprisoned Gods, and so brought in into their City
all sorts of Religion. They never differed with any but the Christian Religion,
only against it have they enlighted their fire, and unsheathed their swords:
for many and diverse lies may dwell together, but there is no accord between a
lie and the truth: two false Religions agree much better together then the
false with the true.

Pilate and Herod, although they were enemies, yet agreed together against
Jesus Christ. Also one may see at this present in Rome, the Jews (who
maintain that Christ Jesus was a dissembler) are suffered to dwell there with
Greeks and Turks likewise: Our Religion only, is not suffered there, because
that it alone ruinateth the Empire of Satan, professing Jesus Christ only for
the purgation of all our sins, and his death only for sacrifice, and his
Word for the only rule of our faith.

Now although Satan work all that is possible against us, yet shall he never
come to the end of his purpose. For even as the Rays of the Sun cannot be
moved with the wind out of their proper lines, because their nature is
heavenly; so the world and the Devil never extinguish the light of the Word of
God, because it comes from Heaven, and is of a spiritual nature.

He which could speak of these things with more experience then any other
was, St. Paul, who suffered so many travails, run so many dangers, endured
so many ignominies for the testimony of the Gospel: And being strengthened
with virtue from above, loses no courage, but disgesteth his bitterness,
mispriseth their misprises, and glorifying himself in their contempt of him,
saying, I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, etc.

The understanding of these words, depend upon the Exposition of That it is the
power of Christ, etc.

To begin with the first point. This word Gospel, signifies a new man and a
happy; the Gospel of Christ is the good news, which not only declares Jesus
Christ unto us, but also is declared unto us by Jesus Christ: It is a happy
news, whereof Jesus Christ is not only the subject and the substance, but
also the bringer, and the reuealer. To make us understand what the substance of
this good news is, you ought to put for foundation, that the good of the
Creature depends upon the Creator, and that the felicity of man proceeds
not from his own proper virtue, but from the grace of God, which was the cause
why God did not create Adam in the earthly Paradise, but only introduced him
in, to the end he might learn that he was not heir of Paradise by nature,
but it was God that by his grace led man in, even as it were by the hand. In
this earthly Paradise, God had planted two Trees, which serve for two
aduertisements, the one setting out human infirmity, the other claring the
grace of God: the Tree himself expounds it, in speaking of his graces;
Whosoever shall overcome, I will give him to eat of the Tree of life, etc.

Now we see, that if before the fall of man, God would by these documents make
man know and understand, he did not subsist at all by his own proper virtue,
but only by the grace of God: How much more must he now subject and confess
his weakness, seeing he is fallen away from this grace by his sins? For, if
a living man subsist not of himself, much less can a dead man raise himself
up by his proper virtue: whereupon God promised to Abraham the possession of
the land of Canaan, which was a figure of the Kingdom of Heaven; yet he would
not put him into the possession thereof, although he were the natural Father
of all the people of God, to the end man might learn, that the possession of
the inheritance of Heaven, comes not by Nature, but by the grace of God: And
moreover, God would not that Moses, the bearer of the Law, should introduce the
people into the land of Canaan, purposely to declare unto us, that it is not by
the Law, or by our works, that we can come to the Kingdom of Heaven.

What then? The charge to bring in the people of God into the promised
inheritance, was given to Iosuah, who was also called Jesus, and a Savior,
being only a figure of Jesus Christ. Moses led the people to the borders of
the Land, and delivered them into the hands of Iosuah, because the law leads
us to the Gospel, and is a Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, chasing us
on our way by threatenings, and representing it unto us by shadows and figures.
Man then being so cast down, and fallen into death, could not get up again,
but by the only assistance and grace of God. He that did blow upon the face
of Adam Respiration of life, is he only from whom man can receive inspiration
of spiritual life. For as Epiphanius recites of those that travailed by the
deserts of Siria, where are nothing but miserable Marshes and Sands, destitute
of all commodities; if it happened that their fire went out by the way, then they
lighted it again at the Sun, by some device; even so, if man have suffered
the sparks of divine grace to dye in him, he has no other means to inlighten
himself again, but at the Sun of Justice, there to have relief at the
Sun of Justice, and Father of lights.

The means that God used to raise man from his fall, is that which he has
declared unto Adam; The seed of the Woman should bruise the Serpents head, Genesis
3.15. God himself being pleased to be the first Evangelist; and as Woman
brought to man the fruit of death, Woman should bring to man again the fruit
of life, the means is, that in the accomplishment of times, he has sent his
Son, his eternal Word, and taken upon him our flesh, allying by this means
God with man, making the Son of God our Brother, to the end, we might be the
Sons of God. He has taken our humane nature upon him, to the end we should
participate of his divine nature; he has taken our flesh, for to give us his
spirit; he has made himself a stranger here below, to the end we should be
domesticke with God; he which is Father of eternity was well pleased to have
it so; and has sent his word amongst us, to the end we might speak to God
with assurance; making himself a servant, to the end we might reign with him.

By this means we have familiar access to God, seeing he has taken away the
rays from his face, and that Majesty that would have amazed and astonished us,
showing himself in a familiar and accessible fashion in his Son, who is our
Emanuel, that is to say, God with us.

In stead of the Proverb which was used in Israel, We dye, for we have
seen God; now we ought and may say, We live, for God has made himself
visible and accessible by his Son.

The second Person of the Trinity has bin employed in this work: For by what
means could we be made the Children of God, but by him who is his only Son?
which brings us to understand that he is the wisdom of the Father; by whom
he tells us, that he is the Word it self, putting all things into order by
him, by which he has created all things? Yet this is not all, for in this
selfsame flesh, he would have him suffer the pain which we have merited, and
to satisfy for us the divine justice, as he says of himself, I paid them the
things that I never took, Psalm 69.5. For Jesus Christ had not wherwithall to
hide his head, to the end we might have where to repose our consciences: He
which is the bread of Life was hungry, to the end, we might be filled.

He is dead, to the end to give us life; having drunk the Cup of the wrath of
God, to the end we should drink at the River of his pleasures, and as Saint
Peter says, 1 Pet. 2. Verse 24. He has borne our sins upon his Body, upon
the Tree, to the end that being dead to sin, we should live to
righteousness, by the breach whereof, we have been healed, for says Saint
Paul, Col. 1.19. the good pleasure of the Father, that all fullness should
dwell in him, and to reconcile by him every thing to himself, having made
peace with the blood of his Cross, etc. Death swallowed him up, but it was
like the fishes, that swallowing the Bait are taken: so Death, in taking Jesus
Christ, is surmounted and overcome by him, for he is life it self, and also
because of his righteousness and innocence death has no power over him.

There is nothing so admirable as this death, by the which he has triumphed
over the power of Hell, and of the Devil, by the which God has punished and
pardoned our sins, declaring in one only Action his sovereign justice, and
his infinite mercy: all the triumphs of Emperors are of no value in
comparison of the death of Christ; the life of all men are of no value in
regard of the death of Jesus Christ; all the Crowns of Kings are not
comparable to the Cross of Jesus Christ, and all the glory of the world is
inferior to his opprobrie; as it is the ground of our faith, so it is the
sum of our knowledge, to know Jesus Christ crucified.

This death takes away the bitterness and malediction of our own, and makes
it, that although a far off it seems a fantasy which walks upon the
waters, when it approaches and comes nearer unto us, we shall confess that
it is Jesus Christ that comes unto us, and have by the blood of Jesus Christ,
liberty to speak to God, with assurance, that not only we may implore his
mercy, but also we may call for justice, saying, Lord, thou are just, and
therefore take not two payments for one debt, and correct me not in thine anger
for my sins, for which thy Son has been punished. By this means the
justice of God changes nature toward us, and of justice judging, becomes
justice justifying, and of justice which punishes sin, it becomes a
justice which makes us just.

And consider what the Advocate is, who not only pleads for us, but pays
for us; who not only intercedeth for sinners, but of sinners makes them just:
Where is the Physician which takes the medicine, and by it heals his
Patient? Having so endured death for us, for us also has overcome death; as
the combat of his death is for us, so the victory of his Resurrection is ours,
after the which he ascended into Heaven, from whence he sends his graces;
there he receives our souls, which he has bought with his own blood: He
is our only assurance in the Kingdom of Heaven, to whom we aspire and tend
unto, as strangers in this world, but domestickes with God; as dying, but
heirs of eternal life, having to resist the Courts of this world, to public
judgments, to customs received, to the over flowing of vices and idolatry;
like unto diverse kinds of Fishes, which always swim against the stream,
and tend toward the Fountain; attending his coming to judge the quick and
the dead, and raise our bodies from the earth, to the end, that in body and
soul we may reign with him eternally.

Behold my Brethren the substance of the Gospel of Christ, whereof Saint Paul
says, that he is not ashamed, but glorifieth himself, notwithstanding humane
judgments and contradictions, which contradictions we have to speak of in
the second place, and of the means wherewith Satan and the flesh ^^^ue
themselves, for to make men distaste and be ashamed of the Gospel of Christ:
for Saint Paul says, that the Gospel is a scandal to the Jews, and folly to
the Greeks, that is to say, that the Jews were offended with it, and the
Gentiles mocked at it: They were offended to hear spoken that God became man,
of a crucified God, of one that was called the Son of David, and
nevertheless he said, he was before Abraham was; They were offended to hear
in the Gospel, where the first clause thereof begun with Blessed are those
that weep, and which promises afflictions to those that follow them, as if it
had been to chase away the Hearer; found it strange that Jesus Christ had sent
Disciples that were Idiots, to confound Philosophers, poor Fishers for to
establish him throughout a Kingdom; also that the Gospel is hidden in terms
very simple and without eloquence, in a world where humane knowledges were in
their height, and humane eloquence was come up to the top of perfection: these
things which seemed to be of so hard digestion to humane sense, nevertheless
being more carefully considered, they are agreeable to wisdom, and the power
of God.

For to speak of the humility of the Incarnation of Jesus Christ the Son of
God, we need not think it strange although he were so humbled, because he was
come to satisfy for our pride; seeing that man had so far precipitated
himself in desiring to make himself like unto God; it was needful that God
should make himself like unto man for to save him; it was needful that he
should become man to dye, and God for to vanquish, and that he might be
infinite in riches, because he was to pay an infinite debt.

As for the rest, be not ye scandalized for the humility of his Birth; but
behold the star that then appeared, and the Angels that sung, and Herod who
was afraid. If you think it strange that he was hungry, of the other part,
behold how he fed five thousand people with a few loaves; if it be a thing
unworthy for the King of Kings to pay Tribute to Caesar, consider how he caused
it to be paid with Fish. Briefly says the Apostle in the same Chapter, and the
fourth Verse, He is dead, but he has declared himself to be the Son of
God, etc. And his divine virtue appeared more evidently in his infirmity, even
as the splendour of a lightening appears better during the Night, then at
Noonday.

We have no cause to be offended that he would have us take up his Cross after
him and prepare our selves for sufferings: For what is there more just then to
be partaker of the afflictions of Christ, seeing we desire to be partakers of
his glory? These are fair spots, and an honorable opprobrie for to carry in
his Body the wounds of our Lord Jesus. Is it so great a matter to loose our
goods for him that has lost his life for our salvation? to let fall our tears
for him that has lost his blood? to suffer corporal death for him that has
purchased eternal life for us? What matter is it to the faithful, whether he
loose his life by the mouth, or by a wound, if he dye of a Sword, or a Fever,
seeing he dies the death of the just, and that his soul enters into the
promised repose, with the Children of God?

Concerning the condition of the Apostles, who were Fishers and Idiots, it
serves to make Gods work more admirable, then did the virtue of the Lord
appear better, when humane help failed: To vanquish ignorance by knowledge,
is no admirable thing, but to convince the knowledge of wise men with the
simplicity of Idiots, is a work which none but God could do, who in an
instant gave to ignorant men the knowledge of all Tongues, who changed the
Bark of the Apostles, into the Church, their Fishes into Men, their Nets into
Sermons: and of Saint Paul, who was a Wolf, in an instant made him a Lamb;
and of a Lamb, an excellent Shepherd; to the end he should know that his
vocation came not from Men but God.

Concerning scandale taken at the rudeness and simplicity of the style of the
Gospel, this simple style is the style of the Laws, which should loose their
force, if they were written with the flowers of Rhetoric, because that Kings
will not show their eloquence but their authority. Also it is not reasonable
to apparel a chaste Virgin in the fashion of a Strumpet, nor to clothe
heavenly wisdom in fantastical and humane knowledge.

It may be you think, that all this that is spoken, is not spoken but against
Persecutors and Tyrants, or against Pagans and Infidels, who strive to defame
the Doctrine of the Gospel. Let us not abuse our selves: for even amongst our
selves, there are many to be found that are ashamed of the Gospel of Christ.
How few are there amongst us, that rejoice in the Cross of Jesus Christ? who
lay all their greatness at the feet of his Cross, and glorify themselves in
his approbic? hold it for certain, that whosoever rejoices more in his
riches, or in his nobleness, or in his honors, then in the alliance of Jesus
Christ, not esteeming his true greatness to be one of the children of God
through Jesus Christ, such an one is ashamed of the Gospel of Christ.

Is it not too true that in Company, and amongst our pleasures, we are ashamed
of the Gospel of Christ, for at any of these meetings, who is he at any time
that prefers any speech of Religion, tending to edification, but if so
happen, he have any thought thereof, fear presently conuerteth him, least he
should be thought to bring in an impertinent kind of wisdom, where men love
better to speak uncivilly or filthily, or any evil of his friend or
Neighbor? which truly declares them to be ashamed of the Gospel of Christ.
But if these people should dwell in a Country where they should suffer
persecution for the cause of the Gospel, how quickly would they turn their
backs on Christ? For he that is ashamed of Jesus Christ amongst his friends,
how will he acknowledge him amongst his enemies? He that in a garden, or in
company at Table dare not speak of Jesus Christ, how dare he defend him being
tortured, or in the fire? how can he sustain adversity, that is thus corrupt
in prosperity?

In like sort, when a stormy wind blows upon a Tree that is laden with
fruits, and rotten at the heart, it presently falls: So when the wind of
persecution gets up, we see presently those which have their hearts thus
corrupted with hypocrisy, or which hold not of Jesus Christ, but by custom, or
for humane consideration, how can they stand. And thereupon when I read the
History of Martyrs, the virtue of whom, even at this day sustaineth our vices,
who in our Ancestors times have been so liberal of their blood, and so
thirsty for Gods glory; I find that they dyed more willingly then we now
speak of the Gospel; and that they powered out their blood more willingly for
the glory of God, then we at this day spend our money for his service: In such
sort, that if any one of those good servants of God, which have planted the
Church, during persecution, should now come again, he could not know his
flock, but would be astonished, how in so short a time, they are so much
degenerated. He should find riches increased, and zeal diminished: more
repose, but much less virtue. From whence it comes that the Gospel is
become odious, and Popery insensibly gotten up.

The infirm scandalize our profane humor, and impute our vices to Religion,
but God grant you long to preserve this peace and prosperity, and preserve your
King, under whose wise conduct you live quietly: But you must understand, that
the security of the Kings life, is the piety and innocence of his subjects: and
the means long to preserve that grace which God has given you, is not to
abuse it, but to manage the time and the Commodity which God has given you,
which he has not given to neighbor Nations, but has rather set before your
eyes, as it were for example of servitude and obscure ignorance, whereupon
Satan has powered out a filthy smoke, even out of the pits of the Abisme,
whilst that in our own Country shines the clearness of the truth of the
Gospel: to the end that by this comparison, you may learn to glorify God,
and not to abuse and corrupt his blessings with ingratitude.

Out of all this you are to learn two points; First, what the Gospel of
Christ is, and next, what it is to be ashamed of the Gospel: Now let us learn
the third, which is the resolution of Saint Paul, by which he glorifieth
himself in the reproach of the Gospel, and contemns the misprise of men,
saying, I am not ashamed, etc. which is the exhortation he makes to his
disciple Timothy, Be not ashamed of the testimony of the Lord Jesus, but
participate of the afflictions of the Gospel, according to the power of God.
This holy Apostle knew what the hatred of the world was against the Gospel.
He knew the Egyptians naturally hated the Pastors, as Joseph said to his
Brethren. He esteemed it no shame to do that which David did; which is to feed
the flock of his Father, principally those which Jesus Christ has bought with
his blood; and glorified himself to be Heralde of the Ministry of
reconciliation, ambassador for Christ, and declarer of peace between God and
men, 2 Cor. 5. and as Saint Paul saint after Isaiah, Romans 10. Oh how fair are
the feet of those which declare peace, which say to Sion, thy kingdom come?
He was not ashamed to bear that burden which he himself had carried. For
even as a King makes a company of Knights of his own order, of which order he
himself is the principal* So Jesus Christ has instituted the Ministry of
the Gospel, of which order he himself is the chief, and has vouchsafed to
participate of the same charge. He was not ashamed to publish to men the
Divine Mysteries, which the Angels themselves admired, and were diligent to
behold with admiration, even to the very bottom, as Saint Peter says: having
regard to the structure of the Arc of alliance, called the Eternal, whereupon
the Propitiator was placed, as a figure of Jesus Christ our propitiation: also
there were put two Cherubins, having their heads curled, and their eyes blinded
toward the propitiatory, for to figure out unto us the attention of the
Evangelical spirits, and to admire the mysteries of our Redemption in Jesus
Christ: whereupon we need not be dismayed, if in the first of Samuel the
Bethsemites having taken away the propitiatory for to look within the Arc,
(that is to say, to approach to God without Jesus CHRIST) were consumed with
wounds and mortality.

To be short, our Apostle was not ashamed to declare the mystery of our
Reconciliation, which is above all other mysteries, even surpassing the work
of the creation: For if it be an admirable thing that the Creator has made the
creature, it is also a thing much more admirable, that the Creator was made a
creature. And as for the goods which God has given us; so much difference is
there between the earthly and celestial Paradise, between the Tree of life,
and between Jesus Christ; between those four Rivers which run by the
Garden of Eden, and these other four, which proceed from Jesus Christ, which
Saint Paul numbreth unto us, that he has been made for us, Wisdom, Justice,
Sanctification and Redemption; So much difference is there between the goods
which we have lost in Adam, and those which we have offered unto us in Jesus
Christ: In such sort, that I dare say, this fall of Adam, has been happy for
Gods children, and that there was happiness in this unhappiness, and if we
had not fallen into death, we should not have come to so happy a life.

But the principal reason why the Apostle glorifieth himself to be a
messenger of the Gospel, is, that which he expresses in this Text, that it is
the power of God to salvation to all believers, that is to say, because it is
the saving virtue of God, by which he saves all believers. For the Gospel is
the means which serves to purify men's hearts. Now you are clean through the
Word of God which I have spoken unto you, Ioh. 15. As the Spettle coming out
of man's mouth makes Serpents dye, so that which comes out of the mouth of
faithful Pastors, makes wicked desires dye, which are a legion of domestical
spirits that hold correspondency with the Devil. It is by the Word of God,
which God touches the hearts of the repentant, and imprinteth Faith in them.
For Faith is by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God. It is a powerful
means which by a sweet violence, and by a necessity unconstrained, directs
the hearts and draws them into the way of salvation, by reason of the
efficacy, whereof he is called the arm of the Lord, because God by this means
handles the souls, and pulls them out of the power of Satan, leading them
into the way of salvation.

The Apostle in the fourth to the Hebrews, compares it to a two edged sword,
because of the double virtue. Jeremy calls it a fire and a Trowell which
breaks the stones, for it warmeth the hearts with zeal, and tameth the
hardness thereof. For as God writ with his finger the Law in stone, so he
engraueth his Gospel in our hard and rebellious hearts, by the efficacy of his
holy Spirit, which is the finger of God. Which I speak of the rather, fearing
that some should think by their eloquence to give efficacy to the Word of God;
Believe it not in any sort: for that virtue comes unto him, and to every man
also, even from the Spirit of God, which gives it efficacy, without the which
the Word of God is but a dead letter, and a tinkling sound in the air. We beat
your ears, but God touches your hearts; we cast the seed, but God sends the
rain, and makes the Sun of benediction light upon him: He which planteth,
and he which waters is nothing, but he that gives the increase.

Who was ever more eloquent then Isay? and his quality also seemed to enforce
attention; for he was of the blood-royall; nevertheless, he complains that
he labored in vain, and none would believe in his preaching; to the end that
those whom God employeth in this work, if they would have their labor to
prosper, they must impute all to the blessing of God, and not to their own
industry and sufficiency. Besides, they must look well about them, and not
apply themselves to the proud distaste of their Auditors, who in this Age
desire eloquence, more then solidity; who would have words without matter, and
sawces without meat; who would have their ears tickled, and not their
consciences pricked: like unto a wicked Porter, who will not let an honest man
enter in at the gate, because he is not well apparelled.

In the mean while, this is not the way to profit in the Word of God. Do you
think with the flowers of eloquence you can persuade a man to suffer
Martyrdom? or with figures and fair words, you can comfort a man at the hour
of death? Is not the Gospel the medicine of our souls? What avails it for
the Physician to be eloquent, if his medicine be wholesome? Is not the Gospel
the letter of grace and abolition of our crime? then what matter is it in what
terms it be written, seeing that it brings us out of captivity?

God in the Old Testament commanded that his Altar should be built with
unpolished stones, to testify that he loved simplicity in his service, be
assured of it, that he that has most profited in a Sermon, is not he that
says, This man spoke very well: but he that says, Oh I have led an evil
life: how far am I from the rules that this man has propounded? It is not he
that wayeth periods of speeches, but he that sounds his own conscience:
Those that ruminated were marked for clean beasts: you shall be clean and
agreeable sacrifices to God, if you ruminate and meditate in your selves the
Word of God.

I am certainly persuaded that all my Brethren and Companions in the work of
the LORD would wish with me that we were without words, so you were without
vices; and that we were despised, so God might be glorified. If they would
have efficacy in their Sermons, they must speak with a holy boldness, as God
speaking by their mouth, that they flatter not sinners, but in good earnest,
make them feel their sins, without exception of persons, or flattering the
great ones.

A rich man is taught no otherwise then a poor. Selfsame medicines serve for
little and great. Even so it is in spiritual medicines. Sermons without
reprehensions, are like Swords without points, or Lamps where Oil is powered
in without enlightening of them: To fear to touch the sinner, lest he should
offend him, is a cruel respect, like unto him that fears to save a man that
is in drowning, lest he should hurt his arm, or pull some of his hair away.

These wholesome effects of the Word of God, are not without faith, without
which the Word cannot take root, or fructify in our souls, as the Apostle in
the fourth to the Hebrews, says, that hearing of the Word has not profited
them, because it was not mingled with faith. Whereof St. Paul also after he
has said, that the Gospel is the power of God, adds to every believer.
This faith is not an historical faith, as that is of the Church of Rome, which
only believes in general, that all that which is contained in the word of
God is true; but it is a faith which has knowledge added to belief; which
besides the general knowledge, applies the word of God in particular, not
only saying that Jesus Christ dyed for sinners, but also adds with Saint
Paul, the second to the Galat. Jesus Christ has loved me, and has given his
soul for me.

Neither is it an enforced, or circumuenting faith, by the which they believe
what the Church believes, or what the Curate believes, without knowing what
they ought to believe, neither wherefore this belief of the Church is the
better. One cannot believe by Advocate, neither is a man saved by the belief
of another; He that is persuaded that another can believe for him, is in danger
that another shall be in Paradise for him. Habacucke tells us, The just shall
live by faith; then he cannot live by the faith of another.

Also it is not a faith of Miracles, whereof the greatness of a grain of
Mustard-seede can transport mountains, but the greatness of a Mountain of
this faith cannot remove a soul out of hell into heaven, which chaseth into
another, wicked spirits, but cannot chase from it self wicked desires; which
heals corporal maladies: in another, but cannot heal his own soul from
spiritual maladies: but it is a faith which receives the promises of Jesus
Christ with joy, which imbraceth him as good news sent from Heaven, who
applies himself to the words which the Apostle said to the blind Man that
Jesus called, be of good courage, the Master calls thee: it is a faith that
disburdeneth his sins upon Jesus Christ, which gives repose and peace to the
conscience, which beholds the Book of the Gospel with the same eye that a
faithful husband beholds his contract in marriage, or a good Son that
beholds the will of his Father, who by it is incited to love God, and to
glorify him in works and words, just in his actions, humble in prosperity,
patient in adversity, charitable to the Church, burning in zeal of the house
of God.

For without these things, faith is a name without a thing, a shadow without a
Body, and in stead of a belief, a confusion and spiritual lethargy: without
this faith we cannot please God, Heb. 11. without this faith, we make God a
liar, as doubting of the truth of his promises; without this faith we expose
our selves naked to the temptations of the adversary, for it is a Buckler to
beat back the fiery darts of Satan. Be not ye then amazed that the
blessings of Jesus Christ are sufficient for all; yet nevertheless all cannot
be saved, because that all have not faith: for misbeliefe rejects the
remedies which God presents, and overthrows the medicine. This faith ought
to be nourished and fortified by prayer, by the hearing of the word of God, by
holy companies, by all sort of good works; and although after all that,
infirmity remains in you, fear not your salvation, with a trembling hand
give not over taking of Alms.

All those which beheld the brazen Serpent, had not their sights equally good,
and nevertheless were equally healed. God requires not of us a perfect faith,
but true without hypocrisy, and which indeauoureth to fortify it self, and
says as the father of him that was possessed, I believe Lord, but help my
infirmity. God which has put these Treasures in a Vessel of earth, which
perfecteth his grace in our infirmity, in time of necessity sustaineth our
feebleness, above all at the hour of death, there he dries up the drops of
blood, he says to the faithful soul, fear not, Christ Jesus is besides
thee, which shows thee a Crown. The faith of the faithful cannot be
confounded, like the Nodes of Compasses in the midst of the sea remain
immovable amidst the Tempest, because they govern themselves not according to
the winds, but according to heaven: even so the faith of the faithful
remains firm amongst the most rude agitations, because it governs it self
not according to the instabilitie of the affairs of this world, but according
to the promises of God.

But to the end, that every one being invited to receive this grace, esteem
himself not excluded, by his quality, his kindred, or his condition, Saint
Paul adds, that this salvation is addressed to the Jews first, and
afterward to the Greeks; leaving us by this example to gather this general
Rule that Saint Peter propounds, Acts the tenth, and thirty four, God has
no respect of persons: for Jesus Christ by the calling of the Gentiles, has
broken the partition between the Jews and Gentiles; yet nevertheless Saint
Paul says to the Jews, putting the Jews in the first place, as having regard
to the defense which God made to his Disciples; Go not into the way of the
Gentiles. Whereof also he said, were sent to the lost sheep of Israel.
Following the same example, Saint Paul, Acts 13.46. speaks also to the
incredulous Jews, It was necessary that the word of God should first have
been spoken unto you, but seeing you put it from you, etc. By this means, the
first have been the last, and the eldest Son has been made inferior to
the prodigal child returned to repentance.

Then happened that to the Jews, which happened to Gedeons fleece, which in
the beginning was only watered, whilst all the land besides was dry; but the
day after the fleece was dry only, and all the earth wholly watered; for upon
the Jews only in former times, the dew of the grace of God rained down, but
afterward it has so come to pass, that they are deprived of this grace, and
other Nations received into Gods favor. For this purpose, the holy Scripture
speaking of those which are out of the Church of God, says, that they are in
outward darkness: because in Egypt only God gave light to his people,
whilst all Egypt besides round about were environed with outward darkness.
But at the death of Jesus Christ there happened the contrary: for darkness
was only over all Judea, although Tertullian says to the contrary, whilst
the rest of the earth was enlightened; then at that time, the darkness was
interior, and the light exterior; God signifying by this miracle the
rejecting of the Jews, and reception of the Gentiles, which is a great
advertisement unto us: For if they did so with green wood, what shall become
of the dry wood? If the natural branches have been so handled, what will
become of wild branches ingrafted in their places, if we sin with like
incredulity? For, has God bound himself always to protect his Churches
which abuse his grace, and bring blame upon the doctrine of the Gospel? Let us
tremble at such examples, and prevent Gods judgments by repentance.

It remains my Brethren, to gather fruit from this doctrine, for our
instruction and consolation. First, this excellency of the Gospel of Christ,
wherewith God declares his incomprehensible love in giving his Son for
mortal man, for sinners, for his enemies, for the slaves of the Devil, to the
end to make them his servants, even his friends, and even his Brethren, a Body
and a Spirit with him, and by it, heirs of eternal life; so many sweet
inuitements, which bids us come to him; so many promises to give us all that
which we shall ask in his Sons Name, serves for the comfort of all
consciences that are oppressed with the burden of their sins, to the end,
that when the horror of the judgment of God, presents it self before their
eyes, they presently turn their eyes toward the sacred blessing of Jesus
Christ, toward the blood of alliance, which cries better things then that of
Abell, which cries vengeance, but this cries peace and reconciliation.

If the Conscience take some by the throat, and dragge him before the Judicial
Throne of God, it will bring forth before God this acquittance, sustained with
the blood of the Son of God, by which God declares that he is fully content
and satisfied.

If Satan produces before God his accusations against us, and brings in a
long sedule of our sins, say unto him, I do not excuse my self, but set
down underneath, The blood of Jesus Christ does cleanse us from all our
sins, 1 Ioh. 1.7. and also these sins which thou bring in against me,
are not my sins, but the sins of Jesus Christ, seeing he has taken them
upon him: as on the other part, his righteousness is ours, for he is our
eternal righteousness, and by the obedience of a Man, many shall be made
just, Romans 5.19. He who is dead for his enemies, will he not hear his
friends? He that prayed upon the Cross for those that crucified him, will he
not intercede in his glory for those which put their trust in him? God which
understands the cry of the little Crows in their nests, as the Prophet says
in the 147. Ps. will he not hear his Children that call upon him? Should his
promises be false, or the death of his Son without efficacy toward those
that believe in Jesus Christ?

In the second place, the Ministers of the word of God have here a fair
lesson, for the Apostle exhorts them; by his example, not to be ashamed, but
to rejoice that they are the Ministers of the Gospel of Christ, and to make
account of their charge: not because it gives them occasion to be well
apparelled, and plentifully fed with small travail, whilst they leave to
others the care of their flock, which afterward is often negligently taught
and instructed; but because they manage the Scepter of the Kingdom of Heaven,
which is his Word, and that God has consecrated their mouths to signify unto
men his holy will.

In the third place, that they remember the Gospel of Christ which they
deliver, to the end, they mingle not humane inventions, nor vain subtilties,
nor diversities of tongues, to establish their knowledge; if they would have
their preaching effectual to touch men's hearts, and to retain this power of
God to salvation to those that hear; and that they offer not to God a strange
fire, like Nadab and Abihu; that they remember themselves of the Law, which
forbids to sow two kinds of Corn in one field, or to make a stuff of
diverse sorts of matter: God teaching us thereby, that he will not have an
artificial mingling in his service, and also they must remember that which
they preach be the Gospel of Christ. Even as the Apostles which had fished all
the night and got nothing; but when at the word of the Lord they cast their
Nets, they got great store of Fish: Even so, if you cast the nets of your
sermons by the word of Jesus Christ, and follow his commandments, you shall
draw souls unto you, and see fruit of your labor. If you distribute nothing
but the bread of Christ which he has put into his hands, you shall perceive
it to increase, and to multiply it self in your hands, and the blessing of God
to be poured out upon your travail.

Seeing that the Gospel is the sauing-power of God, let let us take heed above
all, we take not away this efficacy by a wicked life, contrary to our
preaching. For as the staff of Elizeus had not the same virtue in the hand of
Gehazi, that it had in Elizeus hand; so the instructions that are in the mouth
of a man fearing God, are full of force, but in the mouth of a profane
Minister they have no virtue at all; and therefore the eternal has said to
the wicked: Wherefore do thou take my words in thy mouth? And Jesus Christ
commanded Satan to hold his tongue, when he cried, thou art the Christ, the
Son of God: knowing that the Gospel in the mouth of the Devil loses the
authority. For the people will never truly believe the Pastor, as long as they
see him do the contrary, and be like the Trumpets, who encourage to the Combat,
and keep themselves out of the Battle, or like him thar carries the
Lantern, and sees the least. How will you that the people should come to be
sober and modest in apparel, to be chaste and holy in words, if the Ministers
be disordered, sumptuous in apparel, and contemners of the name of God? How
would you that the people should be turned from their idleness, and from
Theaters, and unchaste loves and lechery, if the Pastor himself be given to
it? Wherefore, as in the time of Heli the sacrificer, because of the sins of
his Children, the Oblation was not accepted: Even so because of the vices of
Preachers, the people misprise Preaching. For which cause howsoever eloquent
and learned they be, they cannot escape the Judgment of God; they shall be
like the Carpenters which builded the Arc, and yet were drowned in the flood;
or like the Tirrians, Sidonians, who furnished Solomon with Materials for the
building of the Temple, and yet notwithstanding were strangers of the house of
God, and his alliance.

In general Brethren, we exhort you in the name of God, and for the
compassion of the Lord, by the precious blood of his alliance, by the honor
which you have to be the Children of God, for that you are desirous of Gods
glory, and your own salvation, that you cherish and esteem the Gospel of
Christ, and not be careless of this grace of God, to have made shine in this
Country so clearly the clearenesse of his Gospel; for it is arrived in these
quarters, that which happened in Jerusalem, then when the Law was hidden in the
Temple, and they thought it to be lost, it was found again and came to light:
As to the wise men, who rejoiced with great joy at the sight of the blasing
Star which brought them to Jesus Christ: As to Saint John, Apoc. 5. who wept
that there was none found worthy to open the book because of the seals, but
afterward he was comforted, for that the Lamb of God, which was also called
the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, came before and opened the book, to manifest to
men the will of God. You are of those to whom it was manifested with most
clearenesse, with least trouble and incommoditie: But take heed that you be
not of the number of those that Saint Jude speaks of, who turn the grace of
God into dissolution, and with Gods patience are become idle and negligent.

Take heed that the ease of the world do not make you forget what the Cross of
Christ is. Know that although God exempt you to fly from your Country for the
Gospel, so it is that you ought to live like Travelers and Strangers on the
earth; for as much as God exempteth you from the Cross, that you ought to
crucify your flesh, and mortify every affection. Although you loose not your
goods for Christ's Gospel, yet ought you to be ready to loose and to possess,
as not possessing, being charitable to the poor, making you friends of unjust
riches which will receive you into everlasting Tabernacles.

These things are represented unto you by your Pastors, with more Doctrine both
of grace and familiarity. But it is good that God be glorified in every
tongue, and that you acknowledge the joy and delight which the Stranger
Churches do receive of Gods benedictions poured out upon you, and the union
which is between you in the same Doctrine and union of Faith.

The God of Heaven, who has given his Son for our Savior, pour down his
graces from above, upon your gracious King, and inspire him more and more with
holy resolutions for the good of his Church; and conduct by his holy Spirit,
the Pastors of his flock; abundantly bless the people which is chosen for his
inheritance, to the end that after he shall be served of you, to glorify his
Name in this world, he may glorify you in Heaven. Amen.

FINIS.
THE COMFORT OF A Communicant: Jn a Sermon made before the receiving of the
COMMUNION; By Peter Moulin, Minister in the Reformed Church at PARIS.

LONDON, Printed by T.S. for Thomas Pauier, and are to be sold at his shop in
Iuie lane. 1623.

A SERMON, made before the receiving of the COMMUNION.
LVKE 2. VER. 28.29.30. 28 Simeon took the Child in his arms, and blessed
God, and said,

29 Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy Word.

30 For mine eyes have seen thy salvation.


YOU know that in all Contracts of Marriage, there is speech of death: but the
alliance of Jesus Christ with us is a spiritual marriage: The contract of this
marriage, is that which we call the Gospel; a Contract, whereof the Apostles
have been the Writers, and Jesus Christ himself has sealed it with his
blood. Let it not seem strange unto you then, if we speak of death to day,
and of the preparation to die, because we are to speak unto you of a contract
of marriage, and of our conjunction with the only Son of the Eternal God.

For these Sacraments which we administer unto you at this Holy Table, are
kinds of assurances, which serve us as pledges of the assurance that Jesus
Christ is ours.

Now although the consummation of this marriage, shall not fully be made but in
the kingdom of Heaven; and that no man can enter in but at this gate, which is
called death, which in times past was the gate of Hell, but Jesus Christ has
altered and transported it from that place, and has made it the port of
Heaven; from whence it follows that no man can think of Jesus Christ and our
conjunction with him, but he must also think of death.

There is nothing more nearly conjoined together, then the promises of life,
and the preparation to death: it is impossible for us to think of Jesus
Christ, but presently we must think that by his death, he has taken away the
bitterness and malediction of death, like unto that wood that being cast into
the water of Mara, it makes it sweet and wholesome. It is impossible to love
Jesus Christ as we ought, but presently this life must needs become
unpleasant, which hinders us from going to him, until death put an end to
our banishment, and bring us near unto his presence.

Know then my Brethren, that these benefits, by which God makes you live,
teaches you happily to dye; and with this food of life also teaches you the
preparations and consolations to die. You have not meanly profited, if at your
going away from the Sacrament, you say with Simeon, Lord, now let thou thy
servant depart in peace, according to thy Word: For mine eyes have seen thy
salvation: and if you carry from hence a full confidence, it will make you
victorious against the terrors of death, for if you have this salvation which
Simeon speaks of, it will bring you unto a great peace of conscience, which
is a beginning of that peace whereinto Simeon desires to enter.

Of this (my Brethren) you easily conceiu what the Text means, for although
it seems not to speak of the Holy Supper, yet it is not very far from the
meaning thereof: because that this Sacrament renueth unto us the Contract of
marriage, and that the promises which are here propounded, are certain
remedies and preparations against death.

Whereof the Ancients were accustomed to send to the sick, from the Holy
Table, and at the same time of the action and administration thereof.

This Simeon who dyed when Jesus Christ was borne, who being full of years,
waited with impatience the coming of Christ Jesus, to the end to raise
himself from the sentitinell, and to set his soul at liberty; teaches us
with what firmness, we ought to attend death, and with what desire to receive
him.

The life of man is not long lasting; some comes weeping, some comes in
labor, some with pain, and the abiding is so short, that man ordinarily dies
then, when he has but newly learned what it is to live.

Jacob said that his days had been short and evil, although he lived until
he was a hundred thirty and three years: how short are ours then, who rarely
come to the half of that age, and nevertheless sleep and sorrow must
likewise be taken away; for in that time we live not? and most people die in
the flower of their age, with their Candle extinguished before it be half
burnt out.

The Holy Scripture calls death, the way of all the earth: it is a natural
debt, which if a man should deny, it were as much as pleading against his own
deed: to strive to be exempt, is to desire to be exempt from the general Law,
and to desire, that God for the love of thee, should change the Laws of the
world, and make for thee another humane nature.

When death comes it is in vain to say any thing; as Pope Gregory says in
his Dialogues, of one whose name was Stephen, that told Death being sick, he
was mistaken, and it was not he. The Pagans who have made Altars and services
to vices and sickenesses, to fear an evil hap never adressed any to death,
because they were assured that she was always inexorable, and will entertain
no terms of composition.

This necessity being so strong, and examples so frequent in such sort, that
although we daily bury our neighbors, and carry and accompany to the earth the
one half of our selves, yet we look another way both in mind and heart,
still holding on the same course we have been accustomed unto, as if we
should never dye. For our designs, we make large lived, and task our selves
to establish our Name upon earth, spending and lauishing out the time, as if we
had but overmuch: still taking out by handfuls, out of the sack, with an
assured presumption, never to be empty. We would have long life, to loose it:
as if we should accuse God, that it is too long, because we employ it in
things either unprofitable or wicked. If any man in company speak of death, it
shall be esteemed troublesome, unfashionable, and impertinent, as if there were
never any use of such thoughts. Yet being truly considered, there is no
thought or meditation so necessary: It is better, says Solomon, Eccles. 7. To
enter into the house of sorrow, then into the house of joy; From hence is
derived the placing of Churchyards round about the Churches, to the end that
men may pass by the Graves before they present themselves before God: that is,
to think and meditate well of death, before we come to look for life, and
that first we must acknowledge our selves mortals and sinners, before we can
come to implore the grace of God. There is a great accord between the fear of
God, and the remembrance of death: for the thought of death makes us fear
God, and the fear of God comfort us against death. This thought disposes
us to live well, because the day of death is the day when we must make our
account to God. As Death shall find us, so shall the last day judge us; For it
will be too late to speak for our selves upon the gybbet; it will be too late
to justify our selves, when we are encompassed with Gods anger; it behooves
therefore to make our peace whilst we have time, and to fortify our selves
with faith against the terrors of Gods Judgments; let us manage the time,
and live as the faithful die; that is, live as we would have wished to have
lived, when we must die; this preparation makes a man courageous: for what can
he fear that fears not death? whosoever hops for death, shall not fear
the sorrows of life; The threatenings of a Tyrant threatening death, are promises
unto him: He will shorten the sorrows of the faithful, he will open the
door of the prison of his soul to set it at liberty. To think to loose a Man
that fears God in killing him, is like him that in anger throws a Fish away
into a River to drown it: for it is there where it lives, and in that death
it finds life.

This holy servant of God Simeon, carefully prepared himself, because he has
not only attended death, but also run before to meet it by the way. For he
knew well he should die, so soon as he had seen Jesus Christ: and no sooner
had he heard tell that Jesus Christ was borne, and carried to the Temple,
without delay or detracting the time with himself, in saying, although he be
borne, yet I have time enough to see him without making any great haste; and I
shall rejoice to see him great: The desire to prolong life never came into his
mind: but without let or staying at all, goes before Jesus Christ: that is to
say, before death, although that Jesus Christ was the Prince of life: he
attends not until he be entered into the Temple, but meets him at the
door, with joy imbraceth him, and humbles his old age before the infancy of
Jesus Christ, and desires to dye, seeing that he has seen the beginning of
the Kingdom of God, which was all he could see upon earth: for to himself he
said, is Jesus Christ come so far, from the very highest Heavens to visit
me, and wherefore shoul-not I go before him? and how sweet will death be now
unto me, having seen him who is come to take away all malediction?

You may say peradventure, that this good man made too great haste: first, for
it was sufficient for Christian constancy to attend evils without hastening
them, and to forbear until they fall of themselves. Secondly, that it is a
loss for the Church, that such a holy man as Simeon, should be taken from the
world, whose life was an edification to the Church. Thirdly, and that he
abandoned his wife and his children, in having no more care of them and his
family. Fourthly, and in conclusion, that Death is an evil which Jesus Christ
himself, as man feared, having prayed that the Cup might pass from him; and
St. Peter was dragged to Martyrdom, after a sort, against his will. They shall
lead thee whither thou would not. Ioh.
And Jesus Christ wept for the death of Lazarus, although he had resolved to
raise him up again. First, to this I answer: the faithful ought not to run
to death, but we ought to follow when God calls: Now God called Simeon, and
by the promise which was made, that he should not dye until he had seen the
Messiah, he knew that his hour was come. Secondly, many say that the death of
a holy man is a loss to the Church. I answer, that God preserves those that
he will employ for the service thereof, as Jesus Christ said when the Soldiers
held him, If you seek for me, let these go; for he would employ them: if he
mean to take any away, he will find other means to perfect his work. Moses
did bring the people out of Egypt, and led Israel forty years, even to the
very border, and conquered some part of the land beyond Jorden, yet dyed even
at the very entrance thereof: but God raised Iosuah, to whom he gave strength
to effect it. David had proiected the building of of the Temple, and gathered
together the materials, and made choice of the place, but God would not that he
should lay the foundation, but ordained Solomon for that work. It is the work
of God, to the which he provides workmen always according to his
providence. Thirdly, may another say, but he abandoned his wife, his children
and family. This which seems to be a kind of cruelty, is far better then
all clemency, that smothereth all natural affection to obey God, which was the
cause that made Abraham resolute to sacrifice his son, which made the Levites
draw their swords against their brethren and kindred, for to obey the
commandments of God. Simeon at his death was resolved to obey him, and to
refuse his family, to follow God: Besides, he knew his family in this
affliction wanted no consolation, for it might comfort and arm it self with
these considerations.

How vainly would we resist the will of God, and kick against the pricks?
God is wise, and does all for the best, and for causes only known to
himself. Life is not given us in propriety, but lent us; the Term is not
according to our desires, but according to his ordinance: We make up our
account amiss, and think we enjoy our life as if it were our own; or else we
do not look that God should take it way so soon: by which means the most of
the sorrow proceeds not from the nature of the evil it self, but from our
selves, and our carelessness, and want of attendance. The Holy Scripture says
thereupon very well, That he has rendered his spirit: and David says, I
render my soul into thy hands, for thou have bought me. What would this word
of render my soul signify, but only to show unto us that God demands
nothing but that which belongs unto him? as Saint Luke 12. says, To morrow
shall thy soul be asked for, and principally those whom Jesus Chirst has
bought with his blood and precious sufferings. When he calls us away, he
does like the buyer, that would have that he paid for: And we ought to say
with David, I render my soul into thy hands, for thou have bought it, and have
bought it, not to enrich thy self, but to better it.

It will be well done in our dolours and domesticke sorrows to look upon
others, and to behold the ruin of their Countries and Cities: So many battles,
where fifty thousand men have been slain; where so many Cities have been
destroyed; where Kings have been slain in the middle of the Army, or amiddest
their triumphs: and we shall find our own miseries indifferent tolerable in
comparison of theirs, having cause to accuse our selves of delicacy, living but
too effeminately, especially, when we come to behold the wounds of the Church,
the forepast massacres, with the executions and burnings of so many faithful
people in the Kingdom of Satan, under the which the Church breaths so
hardly: then I say, if we be disposed as we should be, we will be much more
grieved with such a general misery, then with our own particular: for it is
but of small importance to have domesticke evils in our own house, in
comparison of the miseries that the world does suffer. It is a small matter
when God takes one of his servants from the world, in comparison of the
streets when they run with the blood of the faithful, massacred by
blasphemous and bloody villains. You who are constant in public afflictions,
where God is blasphemed, wherefore should you be careless in particular, that
dwell where Gods name is called upon? wherefore should you be so sensible for
your domestical grieuances, and so insensible of the wounds of the Church? If
any sorrow more for the loss of their own, then for the affliction of the
Church, I say, his tears is cruel against the Church, and it is a sign of
his little zeal to the glory of God. When Satan holds the Church by the
throat, we should be glad to comfort it; Yet in the affliction of our family,
we grow so passionate, that we reject all consolation; although with dry
eyes, we can be content to see for the public good, millions of people
thronging down to Hell: and if God take away from amongst us a soul he
loves, or if he take away a wife, or a son, or a husband, then we loose all
constancy, and our fashion is to murmr against him?

It is very necessary that these domesticke sorrows be mastred by a greater
power, and that the zeal to the house of God may command us and possess us,
as David in the 66. Psalm, says, The zeal of thy house has eaten me. Above
all we fail in our Tears; for when we have seen a friend die that was dear
unto us, and seen him die the death of the righteous, with a holy joy, and go
out of this world, like one that goes out of prison, that is to say, with
cheerfulness, and assurance of salvation; yet nevertheless we make too much
lamentation for him, which is wrong to Jesus Christ, as if his children were
with him in misery; it is also a wrong to the deceased, for if we should but
taste a few drops, and behold but the sparkles of the glory and contentment
which they receive with God, we would say, our tears are injurious; and
wherefore should we envy their repose? Doubtless if our tears could bring him
again, we ought not, to do it; for they would say, Wherefore have thou
troubled our rest, and brought our souls again into this filthiness, and put
us again into the combat, after the victory? They had rather that we would
prepare our selves to go to them; and that we will think they are not lost,
but gone before us; and let our chief work be to prepare our selves to dye,
instead of mourning for them: and turn our mourning, with a holy fear, into a
holy care, and deep contemplation. And indeed the reason why God so soon
takes from us those we so much affect, is, that he would have a pledge of us
in taking the one half of our selves unto him, to the end we may so dispose of
our selves, that he may also have the rest, and that all our desires may run
that way; in so much that there be nothing in the house, nor in the chambers,
nor moueables, nor books, whereof the dead was owner, but that it may
advertise us to be dissolved, and in good time, whilst it is daylight to
dispose of our Souls, ever thinking to go the same way, and to follow that
current.

These thoughts ought to change our sorrows and desires, and turn our minds
from the memory of evils past, toward the blessings to come; and to change
sadness into hope, and forepast evils into aduertisements to come. Yet
notwithstanding I find it sometimes very fit to be sorrowful, but with such a
kind of respect, as it be alike for those that are without, as for those that
are at home. When God takes any that was an example of virtue, and that was of
special worth in the Church, we ought to say God is angry, he makes a breach
in his house: this world was unworthy of so great virtue; it presageth our
misery; as the death of Josias was presently followed with the Captivity of
Babylon; or like the death of S. Augustine, after which presently succeeded the
ruin of the city where he was Bishop. For the life of this good man, stayed
the judgment of God, and was a kind of Rampart to the Church. Also Elizeus
although he were old and feeble, and having nothing but a staff to uphold his
weakness, yet nevertheless it served Israel for an entire Army; which is
called by King Ioram, The Chariot of Israel disarmed, and his men of War: As if
he should have said, that by his death Israel was disarmed, and all the force
it had quite taken away. For even as we see Swallows remove their young from an
old house that is like to fall; even so the souls of the Saints fly from
this earth here below, before the ruin thereof. This kind of dolor is healed
with fear, and the evil that one fears, is cured by amendment of life: and
the death of the faithful shall then greatly profit, if with the sorrow we
learn to form our selves by the example of the deceased. I think good
Brethren that such thoughts as these, possessed the kindred and friends of
Simeon, by which they were not only comforted in his death, but also
instructed and edified.

But as for Simeon, how do you think he prepared himself to dye, and with
what resolution did he go before? His prayer to God sufficiently shows, when
he said; Lord, now let thy servant depart in peace, Note well what he says,
Now, without asking any delay: He was prepared for it long before, having
nothing else to do in the world, but to die. Like a Ship at Anchor, which is
already rigged and trimmed, attending only the wind, at last it came, and that
wind was the Messiah.

He is not the first servant of God nor the last, that desired to die; Elias
before him, 1 Kings 19. said to God, he was sorry to see the Idolatry of
Israel; It is enough O Eternal, now take my soul, for I am no better then my
Fathers: And after him, Saint Paul, Phil. 1. I desire to be dissolved and to be
with Christ: And in another place; I desire to dye, and to be with Christ. The
end wherefore Simeon desired to dye, was to enter into peace: He calls death
a peace or a repose, as Isaiah says, The just is dead, he shall enter in
peace; they repose upon their beds, whosoever shall have walked before him; and
so the spirit of God says, in the 14. of the Apoc. Blessed are they that dye
in the Lord, for they Now, says the spirit, rest from their labors. Also
death is called a peaceable sleep: as in the 2. of John, Lazarus our friend
sleeps, but I go to awake him: And Saint Stephen slept after he had said,
Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Daniel 12. says, That many of those that sleep
in the earth, shall rise to eternal life. It is the language of Heaven, the
style of the heavenly Court, and the saying of the word of God, to call sleep
that which we call death; from whence it comes, that the Churchyard, where
the dead are Ezechias, for the best Will you can make, leave your Soul to God,
who shall not be more rich, but you shall be more happy. Himself dying, left
his Purse to Judas, his Body to the earth, but left his Soul to his Father:
for of that was his only care.

and live orderly, sleep with quietness; but disordered people, and
Drunkards, rest with terror and grief, even so shall they dye peaceably and
religiously who have so lived; but those that have lived disorderly, and like
Swine, are in danger to dye woefully and lamentably.

And even as the King Assuerus,

And as in sleep, the body is immovable,

Lazarus when he did rise, after he had called him by his name.



Adam, brought him forth a Wife: so our death will bring us near unto Jesus
Christ our true Espouse, who marries us in Righteousness and Mercy: for there
is nothing but peace in Heaven, and in earth nothing but confusion. Near unto
the earth are Winds and Rain, and heat after cold; but high up in the air,
nothing moves: So what peace must that be in Heaven, where the King of peace
himself reigns, and where the blessed spirits join their Songs and
affections to praise and serve God with a holy Harmony?

Of the peace of the Blessed, the faithful feel here a kind of taste, which
is the peace of Conscience, giving them repose even upon the torture, which
sustaineth Martyrs, and makes them easily digest poverty and misery, by the
inward contentment they feel in the love of God, to be reconciled unto him
through Jesus Christ. For even as a man that is in health, will sleep upon a
Bench, but he that is sick of the Stone, cannot rest upon a Bed; even so the
tranquillity of conscience makes a man content, amidst the incommodities of
this life, but the wicked in prosperity find no rest. Do you think it
strange that Jacob slept quietly, albeit he had but a stone for his Pillow,
seeing that God spoke to him sleeping, and showed him the gate of Heaven
opened? I think Jonas had more rest in the Whales belly, then Iezabel in her
bed, or Nabuchadnezzar upon his Throne; whereof the Apostle in the 4. of the
Phil. calls the peace of Conscience, the peace of God, and says, that it
passes all understanding. Whereupon I gather, that if the first Pastes and
sparks of eternal peace surpass all understanding, how much more then the
full repose, and full peace with eternal contentment? The faithful servants
of God having but half dipped in the end of the finger into this Honey, as
Jonathan did, had their eyes enlightened, and with this sweetness overcome the
bitterness of death: and Saint Paul, before he dyed, tasted of this glory,
being ravished in spirit into the third heavens; when he came to speak of
these things, he said, that these are things which is not lawful to express:
and putting his finger in his mouth, glorifyeth himself in his infirmities and
in his approbriousnesse for the name of Christ. And David in the 80. Psalm,
asks in this life all the contentment that a man can have in this world, in
asking, That God would shine upon him with the clearenesse of his face: and yet
this clearenes comes from a-farre: It is but like a little Raye of the Sun
shining through a little hole, into a dark plaee; what will this be then when
the day shall shine all out so clear, and that God will shine clearly upon us
so near, that he will show his face unto us, which no man did ever see and
live, as God says to Moses? Many give money for old Coins, and the forms of
the buildings of ancient times, but how much would a man give to see the
persons of those times? and how much more would a man give to see Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, David, the Prophets, and the Apostles? To see the least of them,
you would travail a thousand leagues; and how much more then would you give to
see all, to see them all, and all free from sin and infirmity, such as they
are in the Kingdom of God? And how much more then above all the rest, to see
this Jesus Christ, which is declared in the word, and figured by the
Sacraments; who has suffered all evil for us; who descended upon earth for to
raise us up to heaven; who took upon him our flesh, to cloathe us with his holy
spirit: who made himself the son of Man, to make us the Children of God, who
suffered death to give us life; who daily receives our prayers, presents
them to God, sends his Angels from above, and makes his blessings daily fall
down upon us? your eyes see it: which is declared unto you amongst the
troubles and throngs of this world, you see it in the peace which Simeon did
wait for.

Truly we do but lightly esteem these things: a humane spirit moves but
with one wing; we have a greater desire unto it, then capacity to understand
it. For we ought to be more occupied in keeping on the high way to come to
this peace, then in the contemplation of the excellency thereof: We shall know
it one day; now let us strive, only, to tend that way.

This thought puts another into my mind, and makes me admire many persons,
who know and believe these things, and yet are not once moved therewith; who
knowing the truth, being in their decrepit age, and in the bed of death, yet
notwithstanding fear to confess God for the displeasure of men: they would
willingly say with Simeon, Lord now let thy servant depart in peace: but the
fear of men hinders them from making their peace with God: what hope they
for, or what fear they in this world? who for an hour of life, that they yet
have in this world; would lose eternal life? who to please men in dying, would
displease God after death? There is certainly besides hardness and rebellion,
a blindness and an evident folly.

Some will say, this peace is to be wished for, and I aspire to it even with
all my heart, but the way to come thereto is very hard to find out, the
passage to death is dolorous and fearful, and Satan lies in Ambush even in
the way; and all the fear, and feebleness, and sorrow that is there, is
purposely placed to entrap a man in such extremity: it is a good thing to be
dead, but a grievous thing to dye.

I confess that death is very terrible in nature. Men care to dye, when they
can defer it no longer: Many cut off Legs and Arms to save the rest, and
are very glad so to live with the one half of their body; there are many
troubled with the stone that resolve to be cut; and although the combat be
great, yet they hope to escape; but if they were assured to die, they would
resolve to be twenty years tormented: Nevertheless he says, that death is
not so terrible as they make it, principally to the faithful, which are
prepared for it: It is not death that is so grievous, but the things thereto
belonging.

He that fears God, has wherewithal to sustain him in these trials: for it
is then that God assisteth all those that call upon him, call upon me in thy
necessity, and I will hear thee: and what greater Necessity can there be
then death? He that gives his Angels charge to defend those that live in his
fear, how can he abandon those that dye, calling upon him? He that opens
his eye over the prosperity of the wicked, can he have his ear shut to the
sighs of the good that call upon him in their extremity? and although Satan
epsy him, the Angels watch over him, to whom our defense is committed; and
besides, Satan is enchayned with a chain, both great and strong, which is
called the providence of God, having his Head wounded to death; and the
soldiers that he sets to assail us, which are sorrow and the figure of
death, their Arms and weapons are no better then strawes and pinnes, against
the faith of the faithful.

Some say the Devil appeared to a dying man, and showed him a Parchment that
was very long, wherein was written on every side the sins of the poor sick
man, which were many in number: and that there were also written the Idle words
he had spoken, which made up three quarters of the words that he had spoken in
his life; together with the false words, the unchaste words, and the words of
injury; afterward came in rank, his vain and ungodly words; and lastly,
his actions; digested according to the Commandments: whereupon Satan said,
See thou? Behold thy virtues, see here what thine examination shall be:
Whereunto the poor sinner answered, It is true Satan; but thou have not set
down all; for thou should have added and set down here below, The blood of
Jesus Christ cleanses us from all our sins; and this also should not have
bin forgotten, That whosoever believes in him, shall not perish, but have
everlasting life: there are none so feeble as the Devil, nor so cowardly when
he is to assail a true Christian: only name Jesus Christ, and he flies a
way: for he wayteth but for the day when he shall be bound in chains, and
cast into the bottomless pit, which made him say to Jesus Christ, art thou
come to torment me before my time? And he prayed Jesus Christ that he would not
send him into the Abisme. If we have the eyes of Faith open, we shall not need
to fear death, but outface her, and make our selves familiar with her; for
she annoyeth none but those that she surprizeth; and we likewise love her
like one that opens the Prison door to those that are in durance: Even as if
the Children which come out of the Mothers womb, should have some reason, they
would not weep, but rejoice to come out of such a noisome and obscure place to
see the Sun: Even so if our souls were instructed as they ought to be, and
had true reason, they would not be sorry to go out of the prison of the Body,
to come into the light of God: for this issue is another Birth, whereof we
ought not to be amazed, if it be done with some sorrow: it is a means to enter
into the light. For in the ancient Church, the day of the celebration of the
death of the Martyrs, was called the day of Nativity. Let him fear death, who
hops not for life: let him fear death, who would not go to Jesus Christ:
let him fear death, that is a slave to his Belly, and to gormundizing: but as
for me, Christ is gain to me to live and die. Even then when Jesus Christ was
resolved to dye, Peter dissuaded him, but Christ replied, Get thee behind me
Satan; even so we check the flesh, which fills us with fears; for it
knows nothing of the things of God.

Now you see death, which was common to us, is now become favorable, she is
nothing fearful but in show, for life is hidden under the Image of death: as
if one should send us a fair present, by a deformed Blackamore; so God by the
hand of hideous death, presents unto us the heavenly life. It is that pale
and terrible Horse, which is spoken of in the 6. of the Apocalypse, which is
called Death, whereupon we must get up to go to God: It is the passage of the
Red sea, which is very fearful to walk amongst the swelling waves that hang
over the head: but by that, God opened the passage to the promised land. It is
the Lion of Sampson, out of the carrion whereof, they got Honey, as Sampsons
companions said, That out of that which was bitter, came forth sweetness:
Indeed there is nothing more bitter then death, when it is accompanied with
the malediction of God: when it carries with it a terror of conscience, an
oppression of heart, a trembling of the soul, when it feels it self
summoned to appear before the judgment seat of God; but these things being
taken away, death is sweet and blessed: for Jesus Christ has borne our
malediction, and has suffered all the deeds of the Judgment of God, nothing
now remaining, but only so much evil as is needful to open the gate, for the
soul to depart and be at liberty: and this little sorrow that must be endured,
is not long lasting, wonderful little in regard of our sins: light in
comparison of the torments of hell which we have deserved: light, in comparison
of the sufferings of Christ Jesus: light in comparison of the infinite glory,
and eternal weight of heavenly glory which stays for us: flesh is feeble but
the spirit of God fortifyeth: it mightily suffers under sorrow, but an Angel
dries up the drops of blood, and Jesus Christ shows the Crown.

You may say unto me, This is true: but wherefore is it that God will have the
death of the faithful so full of dolor? It is because he will have us feel
sin still to dwell in us, seeing we perceive the effects do show it: also
he will by these sorrows, make us feel what the grace is that he has done
us, in delivering us from eternal death; seeing that our death is an easy,
short, and sweet death, in comparison of everlasting torments; he would have us
in dying, pray ardently: which sorrow serves to inlighten our prayers,
quickened with the violency thereof, and enforced by Necessity: he knows, that
one cannot come out of an evil, without evil; he will not have us enter into
this peace without combat and resistance.

All this good comes by Jesus Christ, who by his death has taken the
malediction from ours: who has changed our sepulchers into Couches, our death
into a peaceable sleep, and of the entry into Hell, has made it the entry
into Paradise. Shall we fear to enter into this prison after him. Or to enter
into death, where he leads the way, and holds us by the hand? I am, says
he, the resurrection and the life, whosoever believes in me, although he be
dead, shall live.

This is the cause also why Simeon, after he desired to dye, and called death a
peace, and a repose, comes to the cause of this assurance that is to say, to
Jesus Christ, whom he calls the salvation of God, let (says he) go thy
servant in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, that is to say, the
saving health which thou offerest unto us, and the only means which thou have
ordained to save us.

For it is he which is our Jesus, because he saves the people from their
sins: It is he that God has ordained for a propitiation by the blood of the
Gross, and there is no other name under Heaven, by which we can possibly be
saved: He is the Prince of life, because we draw from him, as from the
fountain of life, even as the four first days of the Creation, all was
wholly light of it self, but the fourth day God created the Sun, whereto he
confined and placed all that that he had of light in the world, that it might
afterward flow from the Sun: even so all life is enclosed in Jesus Christ,
to the end that going to him, we may draw out of his fullness.

And even as the Virgin vestals of the Pagans (from whence proceeds the
Nuns of these times) had a continual fire, which if it happened by any
mischance to go out, they might not give it light again but only from the
Sun: so our Natural clearenesse, and our life being extinguished by the sin
of Adam, we cannot kindle again, but at the Sun of Justice, which is our
Lord Jesus Christ, to whom belongs that which is said in the 36. Psalm, The
Fountain of life lies in thee, and by thy clearenesse we see clearly.

It is salvation which is propounded in this Table, which is Jesus Christ, now
offered unto you. Simeon embraced him in his arms; but you embrace him by
faith: Simeon saluted his birth in his infirmity; but you adore and contemplate
him in his glory: Simeon came to dye besides his Cradle, but you are made alive
by his kingdom: Come near unto him with repentance, receive this meat with
faith, digest it with careful meditation of the excellency of salvation, make
this salvation fruitful, and of sweet odor, by your good works, that dogs and
swine come not near to eat up childrens bread, and profane this holy Table.
I call them swine that wallow in the mire of their filthy pleasures, who serve
their belly more then God, who live of Gods gifts, and look not from whence
they come: like swine that eat Acornes, and never look up to the Trees.

I call them swine likewise, who do no good to any, till they be dead, who give
nothing whilst they are alive, and live basely to dye Rich. I call those
dogs which are injurious in words, who murmr against all men, who byte the
renown of their neighbor, who bark against God blasphemously, and would
wrong them that reprove and instruct them; who after a little leaving of their
vices, return to their vomitting again. With this company, I rank those that
are negligent in participating of the holy Supper, as an impertinent thing, and
love not to declare the death of the Lord, contemning the happy helps which
God has ordained to strengthen faith.

Such people make their own Inditements; and in abstaining from the Lords
Table, acknowledge themselves unworthy to be of his Household: they will not
receive the body of the Lord, and the Lord will not receive their souls: they
contemn his Table, and they shall not enter into his Kingdom. As much or more
are they to be blamed, that know themselves stained with these things, and yet
not touched with repentance, come without a holy purpose to do better
hereafter, to take the Sacrament, which is life and salvation to the faithful,
but poison and death to the unbeliever and impenitent. Do you come to receive
the Sacrament of the Lord with profane hearts? Come you to take with hands
full of Usury and rapine the Body of the Lord? Come you with riots and quarrels
to receive the assurance of your peace with God? or with pride to declare the
death of the Lord, which is the miracle of Humiliation? or to please men with
curious apparel, where only your innocence ought to appear before God?

But for you that are brokenhearted, and displeased in your selves, this Table
is prepared: Do not say, I am too great a sinner to come near it: for that is
the cause wherefore thou ought to come near: for the more one is sick, so
much more need is there of the Physician. Jesus Christ is not come to save the
Just, but to call sinners to repentance: only be displeased with your selves
to have offended God, and desire to amend and to do better, and ask help at
Gods hands to assist you to this Combat. He is sufficiently acceptable to God,
who is displeased with himself. He is of the most perfect, who acknowledging
himself Imperfect, seeks his perfection in Jesus Christ; whose
righteousness is imputed unto us. The faithful will have fallings and
weaknesses, but he will always return again; He will rejoice in trembling,
Psalm 2. He will gather on in his way in stumbling; He will say, I believe,
but help my unbelief.

This Sacament is a means to sustain this feebleness, a restoratiue for
spiritual failings, a succor to a combatted faith, to the end that you
representing this salvation and this grace, you say I am lost and miserable,
and have merited death, but behold God calls me, and offers me his grace,
and Redemption; he is no mocker, and his vocation cannot be frustrated, yet
nevertheless I go bathed with the tears of a holy sorrow, pouring at his
feet this precious liquour of repentance; and I do assure my self, he will
have mercy upon me, because he has so promised: I trust in his promises
amidst my afflictions, and for all my sins, I fear not but to find a full
Consolation.

And so I go on my way, saying with Simeon, Lord, now let thy servant depart
in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation.

FINIS.
A HEAVENLY ALARVM.

OR THE HOLY Spiritual Awakening.

By Mounsieur du MOOLIN, Minister of PARIS at CHARRENTON.

LONDON, Printed by John Hauiland for THOMAS PAVIER. 1622.

THE HOLY SPIRITVALL Awakening.
IT is too much still to go on, and grow old in vanity: let not the foolish
affections of our carnal desires transport us any further: we love the things
here below but too well; let us estrange our selves from them, and address our
selves to heaven, without frustrating it of that that belongs unto it: the
example of Creatures without reason (even without sense) leads us unto this
reason: we see the water, come out of the water, returning again to the water;
the earth drawn from the earth, seeks for the earth; and so consequently
every thing tends to his place: but we which are borne for heaven, fly from
it. The eternal Beatitude and the knowledge thereof is our beatitude, which we
possess already by the assurance of our union with Jesus Christ, in whose
death we have been baptized to participate at the Resurrection, and to be at
Gods appointed time coheirs of the heavenly inheritance; should not this make
us lift up our selves on high, and entirely unloose our affections from the
earth? But alas! we must confess, that this knowledge is almost wholly
unknown to us; for our conversation is little otherwise than theirs that never
knew God, walking without all fear of the Lord, and often doing those things
which ought not even to be so much as thought of or named amongst us: for we
live after the common example, even of the most ungodly, wickedly professing
that man is not borne but for his flesh, and to glut himself with his
irregular desires and passions: O marvelous brutalitie!

Romans 6.3. Coloss. 3.1. Where shall this knowledge be? Where is the
understanding and waiting for heavenly joy? for this Union does no kind of way
exercise the functions: should we not walk in fear and trembling all the
days of our life, to mortify the old Man and our corrupt Nature? Otherwise
where will the fruit of our Baptism appear? And where the efficacy of the
passions and sufferings of Jesus Christ? And if we be deprived of these
things, remain we not in death, even in eternal death?

Romans 2.4. Wherefore let us begin to be astonished, let us now be afraid,
seeing the anger of God does threaten us if we still desist: his patience
inuiteth us to repentance; do not undervalue the riches of his mercy; even to
this present day he has supported us, shall we not say the mercy of God is
great, he will have pity of the multitude of our sins, although we have added
sin to sin: let us not still defer our conversion till to morrow, for
Mercy and Anger both come from the Lord, and his day will come when we think
not of it, no man knows the hour: let us remember that, that is understood
of the evil servant in the Parable, Matthew. 24.48.
who saying in his heart, My Master will be long in coming, and therefore I
will lead a wicked life; but when the unlooked for day does come, that he
shall be surprised by his Master, he shall be cast away where is weeping and
gnashing of teeth. Let us fear, let us fear to be so surprised; let us watch
to do good, and sleep no longer in our sins.

O little better than Atheists, infamous monsters, who say, let us sin that
God may pardon us, for what else serves his mercy? Is he not come to save
sinners? Alas how you deceive your selves? And also those who glut their
beastly appetites, and feed their odious and detestable desires, who
(profaning likewise the mercy of God) promise rest to themselves after they
have spent all their life in such wicked ways, with saying a Peccaui at their
death, wherein they heap up as much evil in hoping for happiness after such
a sort, as the most wicked can possibly do; wherein they make it to be in man's
power to have repentance, and to ask and obtain pardon at every moment when
he pleases, and no special gift and singular Grace of God. As Jeremy
manifests unto us, Ierem. 31.18.
when he says, Convert me and I shall be converted, for thou art my Lord my
God: truly after I have been converted, I repented. To the end that it shall
appear how grace comes from God alone, even out of his own free will, the
holy Ghost says, Act. 11.18. God has given repentance to the Gentiles, that
they might live: which is also clearly showed by Saint Paul, charging
Timothy, 2.25. to teach those of contrary understanding, To see if in any
time God will give them repentance for to know the truth, and that they may
awake and come out of the snare of the Devil, Isaiah 1.15. as in this we now
understand, That man sometimes cries to the Lord for nothing, and afterward
gets no answer.

Psalm. 18.41. Consider then to whom, when, and how is mercy done? And in this
behalf let us all acknowledge that we have not to morrow to repent in: let us
no longer grow old in our iniquity, for fear, as the Wiseman says, Wisd.
12.10. That wickedness having taken root in us, our heart will never change:
Even as the tree that has been planted of old, cannot easily be vnrooted:
having always remembrance of this threatening, Apoc. 3.3. If thou do not
watch I will come against thee, like a thief, and thou shall not know what
hour. But why should we not be wise by so many examples, which daily we see,
that the strongest man, even he that in all his affairs builds farthest from
the Tomb, and that thinks nothing less than of the tribute which he owes
unto death; and then at the same instant he miscaries? And therefore no man
knows the hour, nor how he shall be taken from this vile earth. Every
moment, night and day, show us there are a thousand and a thousand ways in the
hand of God, to cut, when he pleases, the Thread of life, even of the most
Robust: Which was well expressed by a grave Author, saying: In what Act, or
Place, or Time soever a man is, he is covered with death. Pause a little, O
thou Temporiser, that still deferrest thy amendment to another time, let not
this present time pass without thinking of it, and this shall be thy entrance
in making profit of the advertisement which Jesus Christ gives, Mat. 24.42.
That we ought to keep our selves always ready to watch for fear to be
surprised, not knowing the hour of our departing. Let us not make our selves
deaf: if we lend our hearing sometimes to an Instrument which recreateth us,
shall we stop it when we should understand wholesome counsel? No, no, this
is spoken for our good, Prou. 1. I have called, and you have refused: I have
stretched out my hand, and you have not understood, you have contemned all my
counsel, and would not be corrected: therefore I will laugh at your perdition,
and will mock at your fear when it shall come upon you: when torment and
anguish shall come upon you you will call upon me, but I will not answer,
because you have hated knowledge, and have not chosen the fear of God: you
would not hearken to my counsel, but despised my correction: wherefore you eat
the fruit of your own ways, and shall be glutted therewith: for the fools
shall be slain with ease; and fools shall be ruined by their prosperity. O
perverse people, remember how I dealt with Sodom and Gomorrah, Esdras 2.8.
even so I will do with them that will not hear me, says the Eternal. Let us
be better advised, Psalm. 95.7, 8. Prou. 19.20. Let us hear the voice of God,
let us not harden our hearts: but hear counsel and receive instruction, that
we may be more wise. And making profit by these admonitions, let us not put off
from one day to another (even every one) to say, I have sinned; and let us
repent at this present, and no longer profane this special gift of God, this
gift of Repentance so precious ( Hebr. 12.17. which Esau asks with tears,
but was not granted him) lest that the misery of the five foolish Virgins fall
upon us, who being not furnished with oil, which their leisure would have
furnished them withal, entered not in with the bridegroom: but let us keep
watch in walking in newness of life, as already departed from the world, not
knowing the hour when we shall be called; witnessing that we are dead to
sin, and alive to God through Jesus Christ, in whom we are made new Creatures
to serve to righteousness; and now let us truly show to have more care of
heavenly than of earthly things; the covetous man in renouncing his
covetousness; the ambitious worldling in renouncing his insolent ambition; and
the voluptuous in hating his vile fleshly affections; for from thence springs
all our impiety, it is the root and fountain which begets and brings
forth all wickedness, which wicked people so much esteem.

Without particularizing the enormitie of these vices, where the most guilty
will clear himself, in saying he is no such man; although indeed he will not
forbear the honor of God, even to trample it under foot as much as he has
power, to fulfill his disordinate desires: willingly detracting from the way of
salvation, and hold against his conscience the wide way of the world, with
those that know not God, adoring the Creature for the Creator, not fearing to
do any thing that may please the appetite. These sins draw after them all
iniquity, and to make war against God, is no better than to renounce him:
can man with all the wickedness of the world be more abominable? No no, it is
impossible, it is in the height of iniquity!

But to the end that we may not condemn the parties without hearing them
answer for themselves; let us understand what they can say: God desires the
interior and not the exterior, that which is within, not that without; and if
they strive to be in better concord and society, yet they do but apply
themselves (in show only) that is, but to seek outwardly for union, and by
endeavor to preserve that which is not, still inwardly remaining one and the
same they were before, which is contrary to the way and walk of a good soul.

O true sentence most worthy noting, Prove. 12.15. 1 Cor. 3.19. That the way of
a fool is right in his own eyes. Poor blind fools, think you by your
humane wisdom (folly before the eternal) to put your selves safelier upon the
pitch-banke of Gods wrath, than those whom you do condemn; hear what S. Paul
says of those desiring to be wise, Romans 1.21.22. You are become fools, in
this, that forasmuch as you have known God, yet have you not glorified him as
God; let us learn that he which knows the will of his master and does it
not, shall be beaten more grievously than he that knows it not.

Your Hypocrisy is here most apparent, in desiring to be thought of, in better
part than that which is within your heart: a detestable sin, which Jesus
Christ never speaks of, but in wonderful anger: it is the high way of
Atheism, for he which enforces himself to feign a religion that he
condemns in his soul, can have no quiet in soul nor conscience, until he
come to believe that all things are indifferent, and there is no other means
to untie himself from the terror of Gods judgments, and to free his miserable
conscience, but to persuade himself that God will not so strictly look to the
cariages of men, and then that makes him a spiritual thief: or having lost
the sense and feeling of divine justice, it is a true testimony, he knows God
no more; for to deny God and to deny his justice is all one. Do we not see
that these for the most part, who fainingly adhere but to idolaters, in the end
wholly become idolaters, or fall into the blindness of being of no religion,
having wholly forgot God, and live as if there were none? who because men
should think better of them, are like the Camelion, according as they meet
withal, sometimes this and sometimes that: such the Prophet Elias cries
against in the 3. of Kings the 18. Wherefore do you halt of both sides? if God
be God, wherefore do you not follow him? if Baal, Baal. But if yet they have
any spark of knowledge that there is a God, a terrible God, that is to be
feared in his judgments when he is angry; should they not be loath to hear
the Eternal say in his anger, Apoc. 3.16. They being neither hot nor cold, but
lukewarm, he will spue them out of his mouth. And Ier. 48.10. says, He is
accursed that does the work of the Lord loosely; what can be more terrible,
but only the execution?

And you that say ye are the best; you that agree with the Spirit in what you
do: Lamentable wise fools, whose wisdom is folly, do not you know that he
that is Creator of the soul, is also of the body? Can we with the one serve
God, and Mammon with the other? Wherefore did not Daniel faigne as you use,
when he was to be cast into the Lions den, or Sidrack, Misack and Abednego,
when they were to be cast into the furnace? wherefore have not all other
Martyrs spoken your language, and made a fair show to have escaped such
horrible torments, even of death it self? But what was the cause that made
many of them even with a yea or a no, without any profession of religion (being
desired by those which thought to do friendly offices for their escape) rather
choose death, and so abandon their lives, than they would hear one word in hope
thereof?

Romans 10.10. No, no, we must, as Saint Paul says, not only believe with the
heart to be justified, but confess with the mouth to have salvation; for God
desires the outward with the inward, and would have our light so shine before
men, to the end that seeing our good works he may be glorified: this is the
doctrine of Jesus Christ: let us strive to do this, for otherwise we shall
find as in the Apocal. 2.16. Repent, or else I will come unto thee quickly,
and will fight against them with the sword of my mouth: But let us take up with
our selves, and at last sing with David, Psalm. 35. Our tongues shall sing
highly of the justice of the eternal, and the humble shall hear that our
souls shall glorify the Lord, whereat they will rejoice: and as Saint Paul
exhorts us, Let us glorify our God not only in our spirit, but also in our
bodies which are Gods; and let us give one another a good sign of our
adoption, that we have in Jesus Christ; which all men may witness that by him
we are inheritors of the kingdom of heaven; let us rejoice in this glory,
which no glory can compare with, and so precious a blessing that no man can
value with any price.

Let our piety shine clearly for the instruction of our families, and not
show our selves careless, but careful to make them know the riches of
salvation, with the means how it must be attained: otherwise we are no better
than the executioners of their souls, worse than bruit beasts, who but for a
while care for their young ones; or like those that sacrificed their children
to Baal; I say if we consent that they be nourished with the milk and venom
of spiritual whoredom, we do as much as we can to make them one day
participate of the malediction of the eternal, even as if we had vowed to be
instruments, to deliver them up into the hands of Satan: which we do testify,
if against our knowledge and conscience we nourish them not up in the ways of
the Lord. Let us apply our whole study to that, after a sort doing as God has
committed to our charge, for their holy conversation, to publish to every one
the truth of our profession, as a thing that we make most esteem of.

I pray you where is he that is borne of a noble family, who is not jealous to
be acknowledged for one of that race? What Lord will not set out his Titles?
and will not wear his Arms? even in the best places for to be most beheld?
although it be but of small continuance, and little better than pure vanity!
yet can it hold no comparison with this Title, so high above all, so full of
glory, the top of all Honor, this Title, I say, of the child and servant of
God, coheire with Christ; dignities (O the most Noble and magnificent!) which
make Monarks happy, not for a while but eternally, in regard whereof all other
things, be they never so precious, which are under Heaven, are much less than
nothing, even most unhappy, if this other be not adjoined unto it: and moreover
if the noble man of the family, in his Arms will not suffer to take away or
add any thing, lest the world should detract from his dignity; how much more
should we be careful to commit any thing that is not convenient, who are truly
the children and servants of God? and in contempt of the world enforce our
selves to walk in integrity, and strive to be so esteemed? which if we do
not, how can we be esteemed to be in the grace and favor of Heaven? let us not
then be ashamed of the truth of Christ's Gospel, which is the virtue of God to
salvation unto all believers; for alas! if it be so that we are become so bruit
and bestiall, that to possess the world, or for fear of it, we will dissemble
the knowledge that is in us; the Son of God himself says unto us, Luke
9.26. even as we have denied him before men, he will also deny us before his
Father, and there will be ashamed of us, and very justly: Let us then hold the
confession of our hope without varying for any thing, according as S. Paul
teaches us, That that which is present and to come, height, depth, poverty,
nakedness, persecution, affliction, nor death, nor life, shall not separate us
from the love of Christ: always prepared in every place, and before all to
render a reason to every one of the hope that is in us; and as truly faithful
let us take our neighbors by the hand and say, let us go up to the Mountain
of Sion, into the house of the God of Jacob, and there will he teach us his
ways: and let us one stir up another to Charity and good Works, without
swaruing from the company of the faithful: for S. Paul says, If we willingly
sin after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there is no more
sacrifice for sin, but a terrible looking for judgment, and a fury of fire,
which shall devour the adversaries: Representing unto us, that if any have
misprised the Law of Moses, he was without all mercy put to death: from thence
then conclude, how much greater torment do they deserve who have the blood of
JESUS CHRIST in no reverence or holiness, by which they have been sanctified,
doing this injury even to the spirit of grace? afterward that this comes to
be known, the custom is to deprive such odious people of great men's favors,
which makes all fair designs prove abortiue; this is no true nor fair
proceeding, but rather an encouragement still to continue in their wicked
ways. Here must the place be of the wrestling, behold the Combat, but before
we enter the lists let us know our enemies, they are the World and the Flesh:
shall we ask of our enemies convenient things to destroy them? No, that would
be worse than to cast flax into the fire to quench it.

For to defend our selves from the first assault, let us rank our selves like
Daniel, Sidrack, Misack, and Abednego; let us march their pace, and we shall
serve our selves with the like Arms of Martyrs which they did: having our
reins girt with the girdle of Truth, clothed with the breast plate of
Righteousness, and our feet with the preparation of the Gospel of peace, in
every thing taking the buckler of Faith, the helmet of Salvation, and the sword
of the Spirit, which is the Word of God; renouncing our selves to follow JESUS
CHRIST, as every true Christian ought: so shall we pass a greater conflict
than this we have at this present, if we meet it, and shall remain conquerers
as they have done, which have not only known, but also followed the will of
the Eternal, and not the sensuality of the Flesh, of the World (a gift of God
which he gives to all that ask it of him with confidence) knowing that the
Almighty curses the man that puts his trust in Man, and in the flesh of
the arm, for the greatest is but vanity and lies, and whosoever should weigh
all the great ones of the earth against nothing, yet should they all be found
more light than nothing. But they have not waited for salvation from any other
sovereign, but reposed wholly in him; Do we not see that there never was any
Monarch in the world that displeased God, but presently was reduced to nothing?
do we want any proofs that God ever failed in his promises? neither has it
been ever known but the wrath of God followed him that trusted in his own
arm and power; were it never so powerful? let us at last renounce it, for he
that has nothing but earthly force, has none at all. Let us therefore follow
the counsel of David, and put our trust always in God, for he is good, and
will give us all that is convenient; mighty in power and truth, and immovable
in all his promises for to bring every thing to pass; therefore let us all say
with him, God is my force, and my hope, neither is there any other help but
from him, Psalm 28. Thou that fear thy Honors, and fear that the goods
of the earth will leave thee, which when they have done so, thou art so
hartlesse and without hope, that thou confirmest all this to be true; that it
is impossible to serve God and Riches, which is pronounced by the very Truth it
self. But it behooves thee to set the looking glass before thy face, to see
how much thou art disfigured, and if thine eyes be not offuscated, behold thy
deformity. O fool, that so much esteemest the glory and treasure of the
earth, as if in that consisted thy felicity. Horrible idolate (...) if thy
soul had been asked for this night, what would have become of all? and
suppose thy life shall continue even to the utmost of old age, it proves but a
moment: what profit have they carried away that thou have known, of all those
that are now in their graves? do thou think if they died rich, that they
were more happy? alas there is much danger to think the contrary: Luke 18.24.
It is a hard thing for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of heaven: What
hope can thou draw from S. James 5.1. You rich men, weep, crying for your
sins, and your miseries: your riches are rotten, your clothes are full of
mothes, your gold and silver is rustie, and their rustinesse shall witness
against you, and shall eat your flesh like fire. Now wherefore would thou
desire abundance? 1. Tim. 6.9. for Those that would be rich fall into
temptation, into the snares of the devil, and into many foolish and filthy
desires, which plunge men into destruction and perdition: Which the Wise man
understood well, when he prayed unto God, not to give him riches, but only his
daily bread.

James 1.2. What is all this but Vanity upon Vanity, which have no sooner
taken their being, but presently slide away, as if they had never been at all?
no more remembrance left to be seen, than of the bird that has flowen in the
air, which no man can find out the tract: He that with such greediness
heaped it up, at his death left it behind him, and to whom? alas, he knows
not, as the Prophet says, Psalm 15.39.

But if it should be of some continuance; would thou bastardize and shorten
thy felicity, to fix thy sovereign good there? tell me how many years have
thou lived, and in what part of thy life did thou first delight in these
riches? has thy life since that time been so blessed? if thou think so for a
little; at what a value would thou have prized all the World? But listen,
and consult with Jesus Christ a while. We must know, that whosoever searches
and loves these things, cannot please God: for they have his heart, and not
the Lord, and therefore let us beware whilst it is light, and learn to
misprise and contemn them; following the counsel of JESUS CHRIST, Let us lay
up treasure in Heaven, where neither rust nor the mothes can corrupt, and let
us think of things above, and not of those that are below: for whose ever is
not ready to renounce all things that are of this world, and that he possesses
in the earth, even as he himself says, He cannot be his. But if once that
come to be found in us, we will then strive rather to glorify God, than to
possess all the riches of the world that are so wicked: preferring the riches
of Christ above all the treasures of Egypt, after the example of Moses: and let
us no longer deprive our selves from the hearing of the word of God, and of the
means of serving him according to his known will, for to heap up happiness
more commodiously than heretofore we have been accustomed: desiring with David
to be rather a door keeper in the house of God, than to enjoy all the
pleasures and delights of the flesh that may be: for happy are they that dwell
in Gods house, and those that are far from it most unhappy; Amos 8.2. There is
no greater misery than to have a famine of Gods word.

There are, I fear, too many that to please themselves and their own humors
turn away from God, as if it were a disgrace to follow him, preferring the
Temporal life before the Spiritual, having more care of the body than the
soul, like those that love their apparel better than themselves;
nevertheless, such are sometimes put to their proof, because of the defects
that are in Men, of their infirmity and baseness, having not yet tasted the
promises of God: yet there cannot any thing be more detestable, and more to be
condemned: No; and we may say what we will, to color such an offense; but it
is (to speak properly) no other than to put man in Gods place; for we make
lying man true, and God which is Truth it self, false: we make man who is
altogether feeble, mighty; and God who is Power it self, vnpowerfull, in
putting our trust in man (as it is in this behalf) and upon his promises: and
of the contrary, we do nothing but distrust that which is promised unto us by
God, and hold our selves strong enough to the business: although this is his
voice, Math. 6.25. Take no care for your life what you shall eat or drink, nor
for what you shall put on. If God, says Jesus Christ, feed the fowls of the
air, and clotheth the grass of the field, will he not do more for you, O ye
of little faith: Ask then, says he, and seek first the kingdom of God and
the righteousness thereof, and all these things shall be given unto you: and
be not careful for to morrow. This is the Word of God, these are his promises,
yet notwithstanding, for all this, in sted of turning to him, who has promised
never to leave us, nor to abandon us (from whence S. Paul argues, that we must
be content with things present) we turn to men, and hope in them for all our
necessities: and if any rich man have made a profession of amity, and promised
us that his purse shall be open in our needs, presently we make account as of
a most sure possession, and we do cherish it in such sort that we will not by
any means displease such a friend: even to the great dishonor of God, whom we
leave even as he from whom we can receive nothing, or hope for any benefit: who
is he (except it be with a marvelous and detestable ingratitude) dare accuse
God, and say he is not powerful, or that he will not accomplish that which he
has promised, and so to make him a liar? a thing infinitely (as the offense is
infinite) horrible to think upon: attributing that to man which belongs only
to God, He to whom every thing belongs, who brings the rich to poverty,
and raises the poor into glory, making him to abound in all happiness.

Here may some take occasion to say, we will henceforth labor no more, and
cast away all care, and put our trust only in God and his promises: but we must
know that that would be but only to tempt him; who has not made us to show our
selves careless in our vocation: we have showed our selves careless in not
employing our selves to that which we are called unto, since that he himself
has ordained (as a mark and cause of our iniquity) that we shall eat our
bread in the sweat of our brow all the days of our life: which made S. Paul
say, that he that labored not should not eat: which is the reason why the
Psalmist says, considering we are constrained to it (speaking to him that
fears God and walks in his ways) Of thy labor thou shall live, and thy
business shall happily go forward: but the principal end of these promises,
is to the end that we be not lost, when by Gods providence, we shall want all
possessions, and also be deprived of receiving fruit from any thing we can do;
a travel very vain if God give not his blessing, without the which, wherefore
do we watch so late, and rise so early, and after all this, yet we know from
man's help comes nothing, but only from God, who raises and pulls down
whom he list; of him I speak who wants nothing to give to those that are in
need: and so let us be brought to walk in his obedience and fear, as wholly
depending upon him, even the most mighty and great above all creatures.

But let us return, and a little further discover our filthiness: do we not
see that nevertheless that God assures us, that none can take a hair from
our head without his will; and that it is that which S. Paul says, If God be
for us, who can be against us? and although he say, he will preserve his
people as the apple of his eye (enticing us, as it were, to embrace his love)
yet how much is our distrust notwithstanding? and if it happen, that we be
either threatened with banishment, or to be apprehended for the profession of
God and his truth, at the first we are wholly terrified, even to disauow him,
and to be disposed to yield to any thing that the adversary will have us
confess: the most part of these that follow the great and wide way (even of
perdition) and who (as they say) howl like wolves; do they not with a kind
of fear foresee it, even before it comes? although Christ does teach us,
that we should not fear him which can kill the body, and not hurt the soul,
but fear him that can kill the soul, and put the body into Hell: we having
spoken before, that whosoever would save his life shall lose it; but he that
for the love of God would lose it, shall save it.

If we be not sufficiently confuted to lead us to condemnation: let us imagine
some silly body that has offended a greater than himself, who desires to be
revenged; if the offender find some favor with the Prince, that he will
defend him from all danger whatsoever he can be subject unto, the Prince
declaring to all his subjects his love to this man, and that he will defend him
even as himself; will we not say, that this is a good warrant? shall we not
esteem him out of all danger of fear? and will we not easily believe the
power of the Prince will preserve him? But this great God, who is the Prince of
Princes, who has power above all power (more soueraignly powerful without all
comparison above all Princes, than any earthly Prince has power over the
poorest vassal in the world) to whom nothing is impossible, the only True, the
Immovable, cannot he keep us? and wherefore? so many innumerable benefits
have we received, and daily do receive of him, fulfilling his promises, ought
not these to be sufficient to make us put all our trust and confidence in him,
and no way to doubt the sure effect of his word?

O! perverse distrust, and disobedience more than unthankful! to prefer the
trust in men before the trust in God, to have more fear to please men than
God, even to the turning back from God, to follow Baal; as Balaam did, who for
unjust hire put himself out of the right way.

Many will not confess the debt, but will say (although their conscience
speak to the contrary) without fear of malediction pronounced by the
Eternal, against those that will say, and make men believe the evil to be
good, and the good to be evil, that they walk according to God in all
integrity without dissimulation, who for hiding so much more their hypocrisy,
they will be careful to observe greatest idolatries and superstitions, and
will be glad to make known to every one that they omit nothing of that which
is necessary for such a one as they feign to be: and to the end they may not
be doubted at all, but to be truly sincere, they make their children take
this poison, and nourish them in this venom, which one day they will answer
for before God: wherein they openly make war against the truth: also we may
see how such impieties and iniquities plunge them into a reprobate sense, Sap.
2.15. Man being punished by the same things wherein he sinned, which always
happens to those that mock God, 4. Ezdr. 16, who knows the intentions of
men, what they think in their hearts, in sinning, and in desiring to hide
their sins: alas, the condition of such people had better never to have
known the way of righteousness and truth, than after they have known it, to
turn behind the holy Commandment: sinful people, people rooted in iniquity,
corrupt children, to leave the Lord in such a sort, provoking the Holy one of
Israel! alas, what will the recompense be of such idleness?

1 Kings 8.39. Those that commit these impieties, can deceive men, but not God,
Act. 1.24. who is the only searcher of all hearts, from whom nothing is hid. He
will manifest them in their due time; for there is nothing so secret, but when
he pleases, it shall come to be revealed, Matthew. 10.26. and seen even on the
house tops, even when it is least expected: and shall say unto them one day,
(it may be much sooner than they expect) if they repent not presently, without
abusing of his mercy, Matthew. 25.41. Go ye accursed into everlasting fire,
which is prepared for the Devil and his angels: and then will they cry out in
vain, Lord, but it will be answered them, Isaiah 2. I never knew you, ye
workers of iniquity, who have loved the glory of men more than of God.

O! how horrible it is to fall into the hands of the living God; he which not
only sees our actions, but also is Judge of our intentions, and indeed to
whose eyes all things are known and discovered. Let us not any longer defer
our repentance; let us strive to do well, being to walk before the eternal,
who contemplateth all our deeds, and searches the reins, and examineth the
thoughts, having neither wisdom, force, prudence, or secret place unknown to
him, knowing that he will never deal better with us, for hiding our iniquities
from men, which notwithstanding we ordinarily think he seems to suffer or
forget, yet does nothing less, for without repentance he will be confessed to
our woeful condemnation, that he forgets nothing; and therefore in all
fear, let us apply our members to righteousness, and with S. Paul, Romans 12.1
1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Psalm. 13.4. Let us offer our bodies as a living sacrifice,
holy, pleasing to God, which is our reasonable service: Let us sleep no longer
in our vain conversation, from whence we are redeemed, neither with gold nor
silver, but with the precious blood of the Son of God. And now let us awake,
let us awake, I say, to sanctification and newness of life, lest that it
should prove the fearful slumber of eternal death. Let not the world nor the
things of the world any longer hinder our affections, to constrain our
continuance in this horrible hypocrisy; being content with the condition which
it has pleased the Lord to call us unto, Romans 3. seeing that all things turn
to good to those that fear God: So that poverty when it finds us, may not
affright us, nor persecution astonish us, when we must bear it for the name
of the Eternal; but let us suffer with Christ cheerfully, to the end to
reign with him eternally: And let not the works of the worldly, which are
servile, ever trouble us, nor any thing, no not the very loss of life, may
make us decline from the way of the Lord; for S. Paul says, Romans 8.18. The
sufferings of the time present, are not worthy to be compared to those
blessings which are to come, which are reserved for us in Christ, which S.
Paul, Philip. 1.21. says, It is not only gain for us to live, but to die; and
hereafter let us not run to any unlawful means, but only to God, Eccles.
11.14. who gives blessings and curses, life and death, poverty and riches, and
who, I say, has so loved us, that he has given his only Son to die for us,
Romans 8.3. will he suffer us to want those things that are infinitely less? No,
he will let us want nothing that is fitting for our good: his eye watches over
them always that fear him and trust in him; for he is our strength, our hope,
and our sure fortress: and let us chase away all vanity, and cast away the
foolish and cursed confidence which we ordinarily have in the arm of man, and
in riches, and from henceforth let us not look for any other thing in all the
rest of our pilgrimage, but to glorify God, and to edify our neighbors,
putting our whole trust in him; as David did, Psalm 40.4. Blessed is the man
that makes the Lord his trust, and respects not the proud, nor such as turn
aside to lies.

Let us renounce our own wisdom which is but folly, for so the Spirit of God
calls it, Isaiah 5.2. Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and
prudent in their own sight: and let us no longer think our felicity
depends in the desires of the flesh (which is the all in all of bruit beasts,
who die together both in soul and body) but that there is a sovereign and
eternal good for those that walk in the fear of the Lord: let us esteem
this above all other things, knowing that the world and the desires of it
vanish away, and that all the glory of man is like the flower of the grass
which is fallen, but the word of God remains for ever, and therefore let us
say with David, Psalm. 62. That our soul only reposeth in God, for from him
only is our salvation, every day remembering this prayer, Psalm 90. O Lord
teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom;
waiting for the full enjoying of all the benefits which are purchased for us,
by the Death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ, to the participation of this
eternal beatitude, and of the union which we have by him in God: to whom only
wise, only powerful, infinite, and our only Creator, be all honor and glory
world without end, through Jesus Christ his only Son and our only Savior,
who in the unity of the Holy Ghost, lives and reigns with him eternally.
Amen.

The Almighty power of God and his will.
Wherein is declared, how the Almighty power of God and of his will, ought to
rule our faith in the receiving of the holy Sacrament.

TO bind us to believe the Transubstantiation of bread with the body of Jesus
Christ, our adversaries set before us the Almighty power of God, who (they
say) has wrought as great miracles; whereupon we say, That use we ought to
make of the Almighty power of God, is to believe that he will do all which
he has promised in his word, but not to believe all that we would imagine.
By that way one may defend the most false and absurd things in the world, in
saying that God is powerful enough to do it: The power of God is not the rule
of our religion, but his will.

For to know if the bread of the Eucharist becomes flesh, and
transubstantiateth it self into the body of Jesus Christ, one must not begin
with the consideration of the Almighty power of God; but we must first
inform our selves of his will in his word. And if we find that God will have
it so, we must believe it without all difficulty.

First, we learn in the Gospel, that Jesus Christ having taken the bread,
gave it. He gave bread then. But it is not given until after the Consecration.

Also we find, that Jesus Christ giving this bread, said, This is my body.
And to show that that which he gave was his body, he adds, that it is done
in remembrance of him. For ordinarily the Scripture calls the remembrance or
representative sign of any thing of name, with that it signifies and
represents, in the same manner, as when we say, This is the King, when we
see but the portrait. If then this Sacrament be the commemoration of Jesus
Christ, it is not Jesus Christ himself: for a man cannot be the remembrance
of himself.

This appears clearly by that which is added. For Jesus Christ giving the
cup, said, This cap is the new Testament in my blood. From whence it appears,
that this cup is not the blood of Jesus Christ, for the blood of Jesus Christ
is not in the blood of Jesus Christ, and so cannot he blood of his blood. If I
say that Baptism is the new Testament in the blood of Jesus Christ, by
consequence I say, that Baptism is not the blood of Jesus Christ. So Jesus
Christ saying, that the cup is the Testament in his blood, also very clearly
says, that the cup is not his blood.

And even as a man does not find it strange, that Jesus said, that the cup is
an alliance, although the cup, nor that which is within is not
transubstantiated into an alliance, but only is the Sacrament of the alliance
of Jesus Christ; so we may not find it strange, if Jesus Christ giving the
bread, has said, that it was his body, although it be not transubstantiated
into his body.

And S. Matthew in the 26. chapter 29. Jesus Christ having given the cup to his
Disciples, said unto them, Henceforth I will not drink of the fruit of this
vine: he drunk then the fruit of the vine, and not of the blood. For although
that there had been two cups, yet S. Matthew speaks but of one, and calls
not the fruit of the vine, the wine of one cup, he speaks nothing of it.

Also we find the Apostle S. Paul in the 1 Cor. 2.16. says three times, We
eat of this bread, and drink of this cup: so we see it is still bread that
they did eat.

The same Apostle in the same chapter and 16. verse says, The bread which we
eat is the communion of the body of Christ: he says, The bread which we
break: it is then bread when it is broken in the Sacrament: yet it is not
broken but after the consecration.

So in the 20. of the Acts 17. the Disciples are assembled to break the bread:
It was bread then they broke amongst them, and not flesh.

Jesus Christ says in the 12. of S. John 8. You shall always have the poor,
but you cannot have me always. And in the 16. ver. 18. I leave the world, and
go to my Father, And in the 10. I am no more of the world. This sentence
should be false, if we should have Jesus Christ shut up within a piece of
bread, if he were yet remaining in the world. For he says, You shall not have
me always. Now may one answer, that we have Jesus Christ no more visibly;
which is nothing to the purpose: for to have Jesus Christ inuisibly, is always
to have Jesus Christ. He should be a lier that should say he had no money,
because his money was hid: or he that should say he had no soul, because it
is invisible.

And it is a strange liberty which the Doctors of the Roman Church take; for
to make these texts of no value, they interpret them figuratively, and for to
shun a natural and usual figure in speaking of the Sacraments, they
introduce a dozen of unusual figures without example.

The action entirely whole of Jesus Christ and of his Disciples, makes for us:
for the Apostles sat at the Table without any kind of adoration, which should
have been a very great irreuerence in them, to eat Jesus Christ, and to
sacrifice him to God without making any adoration, which is so much more
remarkable, because the Apostles never gave assistance in such an action, and
also because it was the first institution of this Sacrament, which is given for
a pattern to the end to make them hereafter conformable. Also we see not that
Jesus Christ makes any elevation of the Host, he presents nothing to God,
but only to his Disciples. To conclude, in every action Jesus Christ does the
contrary to that which is done in the Mass.

The text of the Mass makes for us, wherein the Priest, after the
Consecration, asks of God that he take this offering as acceptable as ever
the Sacrifice of Abel was acceptable unto him: a prayer that was good before
Transubstantiation was believed. But in these days, is it not a great offense
to God, to entreat him to accept the Sacrifice of his Son as acceptable, as a
beast offered by Abel? And which is more, the Priest desires of God that the
Offering which he holds may be acceptable through Jesus Christ: he believes
not then that he holds Jesus Christ.

And to take away all doubt, the Priest long after the Consecration, looks
upon the Host and the Cup standing upon the Altar, and says that these are
goods which God has always created, which he viuifieth and sanctifies
through Jesus Christ. All this may he say of bread and wine, but not one of
these words can agree with the body of Jesus Christ: for can the body of Jesus
Christ be called goods in the plural? Does God create always Jesus Christ?
Does God always viuifie Jesus Christ, seeing that Jesus Christ himself says,
that he himself is life? Does God create Jesus Christ by Jesus Christ? Truly
if these things should be spoken openly before the people in the vulgar tongue,
they would be much offended: and that is the reason why they say their Service
in an unknown tongue, against the example of Jesus Christ, and against the
saying of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 14. The Priest and the Reader speak to a people
in a tongue they understand not. The sixth of Saint John makes also for the
truth which we defend; for although there is nothing spoken of the holy
Sacrament of the Eucharist, which was not then instituted; yet notwithstanding
he speaks there of the Communion of the Body of Jesus Christ; whereof Jesus
Christ speaks in a manner, that he manifestly shows he speaks of a
manducation, which is not by the mouth: for he speaks of a manducation,
without the which no man can be saved; saying, If you do not eat my flesh, you
shall not live. So you see he speaks not of a manducation by the mouth,
without the which so many persons are saved, as the good thief crucified with
Jesus Christ, holy John Baptist, and infinite others.

Also our Lord speaks of a manducation, which how many soever participate
thereof, have eternal life; for he says, He that eats his flesh has life
eternal; he speaks not then of the eating the Sacrament with the mouth,
which many have done, and yet escaped not damnation, witness Judas and many
more Hypocrites. But we may not so conclude nor say thereupon, of those that
eat the flesh of Jesus Christ worthily. For we find in S. Paul, 1 Cor. 2.
that some eat the bread unworthily; but we shall not find that the flesh of
Jesus Christ can be eaten unworthily: and indeed, seeing that to eat the flesh
of Jesus Christ, and to drink his blood, is to believe in his incarnation and
in his death; who knows not that one cannot possibly believe in Jesus Christ
unworthily, seeing in the belief of Jesus Christ consists our dignity.

But to eat and drink is to be understood to believe; the Doctors and Canons
of the Church of Rome say with us, and the holy Scripture is full of such
manner of speaking; and Jesus Christ in the same place says, That whosoever
believes in him, shall never thirst; to the end we may know that this Thirst
is quenched in believing, and not in drinking with the mouth. And a little
after having said, Who believes in me, shall have eternal life; thence he
infers that he is the bread of life: and aduertiseth us that these words of
eating and drinking, are spirit and life, for if they be not taken
spiritually, they cannot viuifie.

Thereupon we ought not to fear, if Transubstantiation be taken away, the
Sacrament should become contemptible: For Baptism is not become contemptible,
but is more honored in the Church of Rome, than the Eucharist, and is esteemed
a thousand thousand times more, albeit the water be not transubstantiated into
blood. For they hold, Baptism is necessary to salvation, but not the
Eucharist. They hold, that by Baptism every kind of sin is wholly forgiven;
but the Eucharist takes away but venial sins, and those which they have
freed their consciences of before. The Sacraments ought not to be honored but
for JESUS CHRIST'S sake, which when you shall adore in heaven, whitherto he is
mounted, to return again at the last day, and shall serve him according to
his word, we need not fear that the memorials which he has left in the
Church, and by the which he works in our hearts, with efficacy, should ever
become contemptible. We must honor the Sacraments, but we may not put them in
the place of things signified.

All this abouesaid, serves to show, that for to know the truth in Religion,
we must not begin with the consideration of the Almighty power of God, but
first of all enquire after his will; which when it is learned, then the
Almighty power of God that can do all, assures us, that being able to do
all, he will do that which he willed, and that which he teaches in his
holy word.

I will say more: It is the Doctors of the Church of Rome, that dishonor and
disgrace, the power of the Almighty God, and of Jesus Christ our Lord.

For first of all, they make it serve to do things more miraculous than the
creation of the world, and yet notwithstanding no profit comes by it. For
they hold, that Jesus Christ has eaten himself, for he has participated in
the holy Sacrament with his disciples; and yet notwithstanding they cannot
declare unto us, to what end such a prodigious and incomprehensible thing
serves for; that a man has his head and his body in his mouth, and that Jesus
Christ is entered into the stomach of JESUS CHRIST.

Also they hold, that Mise can eat the Body of the Lord. What a horrible shame
and reproach do they make the Son of God to be to the Church of God! For
although that Jesus Chirst do not suffer, yet he is mightily dishonored.

Also, they put Jesus Christ upon the Host, whereupon they say, that he can
neither open his eyes, nor remove the hands, nor breath, and therefore he has
not the power which other men have. Is this to magnify the power of the Son
of God? or is it to diminish it, to the end to lift up the power of Priests?
who have the power given them, as they teach, to make Jesus Christ; which is a
thing, that the blessed Virgin Mary, and all the Angels, and Saints together,
could never do.

What serves it for to the Church of God, that Jesus Christ in the Host has
two eyes, and that he is wholly entire in every crum of the Host, and his Body
entire in every drop of the Cup? And that in the Host it has the length, and
yet nothing long, as the Doctors of the Roman Church do teach? We ought never
to exalt the Almighty power of God in the employment of unprofitable things.

And indeed, the examples which they bring to hold up Transubstantiation, are
examples of the works of God, which have been profitable, and the use whereof
is apparent. As when God created the world, and brought forth the light; and
changed the rod into a Serpent; and converted water into wine.

It is needful to consider, that in these miracles of Transubstantiation, God
has converted one substance into another, which was not before the changing of
it: For the rod of Moses was changed into a Serpent, which was not so before
the changing; and at the marriage in Cana in Galilee, the Lord converted water
into wine, which was not so before the conversion. But they would that God
should here convert the bread into a body which is already: As if a man should
beget a man that is already borne; or should turn money into gold which is
already gold: Or who would go about to make the Moon, unless it were unmade.
Besides, the word of God expressly says, that the water was converted into
wine; but it says not, that the bread was converted into flesh. In giving the
bread, Jesus Christ says, That it is his body, in such sort, as it was
needful it should be bread, and also that it should be the body of Christ.
For bread cannot be in substance the body of Christ, but it may well be in the
Sacrament, and according as the signs and memorials take the name, of that
which they signify and represent.

We exalt the almighty power of the Son of God in this, that without
descending from heaven he communicates himself unto us; but the Church of
Rome disableth this power, in subiecting it to the will of a man, which diverse
times happening is found no good man, who makes Jesus Christ when he will, and
afterward eats it; whereupon it happens that Jesus Christ is sometimes
eaten by his enemies, and also (as they say) even by beasts; if the Host be
stolen, if it fall upon the ground, if worms and corruption get into it: if a
lew strike it with a knife and makes it bleed, as it is painted in the
Billettes of Paris: if (as the cautions of the Mess and the penitential
Canons say) the Priest or the sick man reuomit up the Host through infirmity:
All which redoundeth to the misprise and dishonor of Jesus Christ, which is
the eternal Son of God.

They say for excuse, that the dogs licked up some of the blood of Christ
Jesus: but all that is nothing to the purpose; for Jesus Christ was expressly
here in this world to suffer ignominy, and to be subject to infirmities: but
now he is exempt from all opprobriousnesse and infirmity. And moreover, all
that he then suffered: was for our salvation. But one may well say unto me, To
what end serves it that Jesus Christ should still be subject to so many
indignities above spoken of? If a Mouse has carried away the Host, or the Cup
be spilt, what serves that to our salvation?

And if our Adversaries were asked, what becomes of the Body of Jesus Christ
received into the stomach: whether it go out, or remain always there, or
nothing comes of it: also how Jesus Christ has one body like unto ours, and
of like nature, seeing it is in an hundred thousand places at one time, and he
is wholly entire in every part of the Host, having the feet thorowout the
Host, and the head thorowout the Host, and head and feet under one point, and
by consequence having a humane body without extension, and a length under one
point, and a continuance without extension: where the Body which was at the
Table, a little after in the Garden, was afflicted and sweat drops of Blood:
and he who in the same time was in the mouths and stomachs of the Apostles,
suffered nothing and was impassible, and yet nevertheless was but one body: I
believe that they found themselves much troubled; where since that Judas has
eaten Jesus Christ in the Eucharist, and even at the same time the devil
entered into him; can it be convenient or possible to think that Jesus Christ
and the devil entered into one body together, and remained together?

One thing I think is very convenient, that in every Sacrament, as also at the
sacrifice, it is necessary that the thing which they administer to the people,
and that they offer to God, be consecrated: but in the Eucharist of the Roman
Church there is nothing of consecrate which is administered to the people, nor
which is offered to God: for is this the bread which is consecrated? No way:
for they say it is no more bread. Is it the body of Jesus Christ? it is not:
for Jesus Christ cannot be consecrated, but it is he that consecrateth us. Are
these the accidents of bread which are consecrated, that they call forms, that
is to say, the roundnesse, the color and taste of the bread? It is not
neither; for these things are not offered to God in sacrifice: neither are they
given to the people for to sanctify them. But behold one Sacrament and one
sacrifice, where there is nothing consecrated: where he does make a
Consecration, but they cannot say what it is that is consecrated.

All this abuse comes by the fault of some Priests, who could if they would,
make us all agree very easily in one way. For all confess that Jesus Christ
has instituted the holy Sacrament as it ought to be, and that there is
nothing to say against it.

If then the Pope would reduce the Holy Supper into the same form wherein
Jesus Christ instituted it, in speaking as he did, and doing as he did,
without further dispute, we should all agree, and so we should all come to be
of one assembly unanimously to glorify God. By this means, divine service
should be done in the vulgar tongue; there should be no more private Masses:
All should communicate under both kinds; there should be no more adoration of
the Host, nor any elevation of the sacrifice: and the Priests bending over the
Altar should not pray to God for salvation through the merit of Saints whose
bones and relics are hidden under the Altar. But contenting our selves with
the prescribed simplicity of Jesus Christ, we should reject these additions
which disfigure this Sacrament under the shadow of adorning it. God give us
grace to see this happy time, and to that end dispose of the hearts of Princes
and people, for the love of JESUS CHRIST our LORD. Amen.

FINIS.
COMFORTABLE INSTRVCTIONS for the SICK: By Peter Moulin, Minister in the
Reformed Church at PARIS.

LONDON, Printed by T.S. for Thomas Pauier, and are to be sold at his shop in
Iuie lane. 1623.

Short and Familiar Instructions to comfort the SICK.
When the sickness appears not to be mortal: For the comfort of the party,
one may thus begin.
SIR, it behooves you first to acknowledge that this sickness is not fallen
upon you by chance, but by the wise conduct and providence of Almighty God,
our Creator and Father, who so disposes of prosperity and adversity, health
and sickness upon his children, that he never sends either the one or the
other, but to his own glory, and the parties good and salvation. As the
Apostle Saint Paul says, Romans 8.27. We know that all things work together
for good to them that love God. He purposely speaks of afflictions, wherein
sicknesses are ranked. Those people love God, who are first loved of him, and
as the Apostle says, called according to his own determinated purpose. That
you are of this number, you have occasion to take assurance by the faith which
he has given you, in making you believe that he is your Father and Savior,
in his Well-beloved Son Jesus Christ our Lord, by which you receive the spirit
of adoption, which is that that witnesses with our spirit, that we are the
children of God, Heirs, and co-heires with Christ, Romans 8.11.16.17.

You must also take assurance by the sanctification of his holy spirit, by
which he has brought you into his obedience: For those that are led by the
spirit of God, are the children of God.

But to those which are such, the Apostle Saint Paul says, that every thing
works together for good: afflictions, sicknesses, even death it self: all
that they have is turned, by the grace of God to their own profit, and great
good, and for the advancement and furtherance of their salvation.

Three principal fruits, God makes us gather of our maladies and afflictions.

The first is the amendment of good: it is therefore necessary to look about
us, and become more sensible of our sins, to retire our selves, and to be
displeased with them; which is made by the means of sicknesses, and other
adversities of this life, occasioned by sin, and very often purposely sent
from God to chastise and correct us: and in that this good Father of Heaven
shows how much he loves us, hindering our undoing, and confusion, in our
inordinate life; like a good Father, that very well loves his Children, he
chastises and corrects us, to hinder and draw us back again, lest we
should be lost; as Saint Paul says, in the 1. of the Corin. 32. Verse, When we
are afflicted, we are taught by the Lord, to the end, we should not be
condemned with the world: and in another place he says, Heb. 12. Ver. 6.7. and
11. That the Lord chastises him he loves, and beats every child whom he
auoweth: If you endure Chastisement, God presents himself unto us, as to his
Children; For, who is the child that the Father corrects not? and although
that all discipline in the instant, seem not to be of joy, but of sadness;
nevertheless it brings a peaceable fruit of righteousness to those that
thereby are exercised: It behooves us therefore first of all, to gather this
excellent fruit of our sicknesses, to feel the innumerable number of our
sins and offenses, whereof we are culpable before God; to ask pardon of him
in all humility and repentance, and to make a holy protestation to live better
hereafter; and to walk in his obedience and fear, by the grace of God, and
the conduct of his holy Spirit: which we ought to ask with ardent prayers, and
with an assured faith to be heard according to his promises. And so we may say
with David, that excellent servant of God, Psalm. 119. Ver. 6^. and 92. Before I
was afflicted, I went astray, but now I have kept thy word. It is good for me
that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes.

Now we may behold the sicknesses of our Bodies, how they come to be by Gods
grace wholesome medicines for our souls.



Experience teaches, that our affections are but too much rooted and tied here
below, whilst we are in health, and at our case, we would willingly never part
from it, we would be content that our sovereign good and felicity were here
assigned, so stupid and blind we are: But God who has destinated us to a
better life, makes us behold and perceive how vain and deceitful the present
imaginary sweetnesses and prosperities are: For when he pleases to visit us
with any sickness, then we begin to consider the many miseries and
incommodities that lackey our lives along even from the cradle to the
sepulcher, which makes us know, and cry out with Esaias, 47. v. 6. That all
flesh is like grass, and all the glory of it, no better then a flower of the
field; And David, Psalm 90. That the flower of this short life is such, that
we are always in pain and Martyrdom: And with Job 14. That man that is
borne of a woman, is but of short life, and full of care. Which is the cause
wherefore God makes us remember, principally when we feel our selves sick,
or otherwise afflicted, to make us contemn the world, and aspire to heaven,
making this miserable life distastefull, that we may by meditation taste of the
Heavenly life, to the end that where our Treasure is, there may be also our
heart, and that our faith and hope being retired from the world, and from the
things of the world; we may be lifted up where they have their true objects;
that is, to God, and to eternal life. For faith also is not of things visible,
but invisible, and Hope is not of present goods, but of goods to come, that is
to say, of Heavenly and Eternal goods, purchased by Jesus Christ; goods so
great and incomprehensible, which as Saint Paul says, 1 Cor. 1.9. Eye has not
seen, nor ear has understood, nor is not come up into the heart of man,
which God has prepared for those that love him.

of sickenesses which he sends us; for by this means we come to the trial
and proof, for to purify and amend our faith, making it appear to his glory,
and to the edification of our neighbor. For as by this means, our faith is
excited, and raised up from the world to God, from earth to heaven, from this
life, to the most happy and permanent for ever: So is it by such proves
examined and exercised, and even as it were refined and purified; like gold
that is tried and purified in the fire: as Saint Peter speaks, 1 Pet. 1.7. It
is also brought in evidence and to the light, with patience, constancy, and
other Christian virtues, which God has put in us, without the which we should
not be known of any, and so in regard of our neighbors should remain without
all use or profit. And certainly we should never have known what the
patience of Job had been, of Abraham, David, and many other excellent servants
of God, if God had not made them pass through the fire of proofs and
temptations, and at this day we should not have had so many fair examples as
we have, to comfort and encourage us to their imitation. It is the same of
Christian faith and patience, as of a Soldier and his valor, who never sees
well but in the middle of the combat; or of the clearenesse of Stars, which are
not beheld but in the night; or the odor of incense, which is not smelt till
it be cast into the fire: So God makes known to our brethren the courage
which he has given us, when he makes it come to our hands, with some rude
and violent sickness: he manifests unto them the clearenesse of our faith,
when he covers us with some night of affliction: he makes them smell the
odor of our patience, when he casts us into any fire of adversity: and by
this means our brethren are not only instructed, edified, and comforted by
this our good example; but likewise led to praise and glorify God, who
strengthens and sustaineth us in the feebleness of our flesh, which
demonstrateth and accomplisheth his great virtue in our great infirmity.

Now behold the principal and most notable spiritual fruits which God of his
bounty propounds unto us, what we may gather of our corporal sickenesses.

And therefore Sir, now that God does visit you with this malady, and puts
you into this bed of infirmity, it behooves you to know and to acknowledge
that this is his fatherly hand that handles you after this manner, as one of
his children, and by which he calls you to rejoice in those excellent fruits
and profits, which have been declared for his glory, and for your good and
salvation.

You must likewise acknowledge, that he would raise you out of your sins and
faults, and would have you effectually feel a displeasure within your self,
that you may seek for true pardon in Christ's mercies; renouncing withal your
heart your former evil life, with a sound resolution hereafter to serve him,
and to walk in his fear with more zeal and affection then you have done
heretofore, wholly relying upon his grace; Is not this that you promise?


Patient. It is.


Also consider, it is his will by this means to make you feel the miseries of
this life, that you may contemn and tread down these worldly vanities under
foot, to the end that with all your heart, you may aspire to the heavenly and
eternal life, and thereby to answer the dignity of that condition to which
you are called, to be children of God, and not children of men, to have your
conversation as Citizens of heaven, and not of earth, and to follow after and
search, as Saint Paul says, for Phil. 3.20. Col. 2.12. The things which are
above, and not those things which are below. Is not this also by Gods grace,
your resolution, to do all the days of your life.


Patient. It is.


Acknowledge in the end, that the good will of God is by this sickness to
examine and prove you, to the end, that your faith and your patience may become
more perfect, and that they may be seen and manifested to your Brethren and
neighbors round about you, that thereby they may be comforted and edefied, and
give glory to God, to see you so patiently and constantly to carry the
violences and sorrows of this affliction, and that you esteem your self to
rest with a peaceable and quiet mind, to receive whatsoever else it shall
please God to send unto you: Is not this the resolution which you take?


Patient. It is.


I beseech God to give you grace happily to accomplish your holy promises, to
his glory, and your own salvation; also you must with all your heart, often
beseech him, and implore his grace, otherwise you shall never be capable of
your self.

But if you earnestly and ardently desire him, with a true and a lively faith,
in the Name of his blessed Son Jesus Christ our Lord, doubt not but according
to his promises he will hear you, and at the present be with you, and fill
your soul full of all holy consolation, fortifying you with patience, and in
like sort comforting you as much as is fit for you, by which means he will
bind you so much more to rejoice in his bounty, and to glorify his holy Name
with all obedience. This is his own saying, to all that are afflicted as you
are; Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will hear thee: Is it not then
your desire that here we call upon him with you altogether, that he will be
pleased to assist you with his mercy?


Patient. Yes.


A Prayer.
O Lord our God and merciful Father, we prostrate ourselves here, in all
humility, at the feet of thy divine Majesty, to acknowledge that it is too
true, that we are unworthy of thy favor, and worthy of Hell, if thou should
deal with us according to thy Justice, for so many offenses which we hear
confess our selves to be guilty of. But we beseech thee remember thy infinite
bounty, be merciful unto us miserable sinners, and take pity upon us, for the
love of thy blessed Sons sake Jesus Christ our Lord, not beholding of us in
our selves, but in the person of this Son of thy delight, as members of his
Body, reconciled to thy Majesty by the blessing of his death. And as thou art
the Father of mercy, and God of all consolation, rich in compassion, and
gracious to all those that call upon thee, and have confidence in thee; we
beseech thee that thou will be pleased to show thy self liberal in general
toward us all, who now cry out for mercy, and particularly toward the person
of this thy child and servant, lying in this bed of infirmity: give him first
of all to understand, that no other hand has struck him but thine own, to
the end he may learn to submit himself to it in all humility and reverence:
And to this end, that he may remember that it is a fatherly hand and a gentle,
who strikes not to loose but to save; and after having wounded viuifieth, and
wounds by the same wounds which it has made; make him feel that he is a
miserable and poor sinner, not only proceeding out of this mass of
corruption, from whence we all do come in Adam, but also and principally, that
since it has pleased thee to give him grace to acknowledge thee the only true
God, and him whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ, in whom consists eternal
life, manifesting by this means thy free adoption in thy well-beloved Son,
receiving him to thee, having also put him into the rank amongst the number of
thy children and servants in thy Church; although he has not well known the
abundant riches of thy mercy, to love and serve thee with all his heart as he
ought, in renouncing the world and himself, by reason of unthankfulness
naturally bred in him and in us all, continually rebelling and fighting against
thy great bounty and grace. O dear Father, touch him in his heart with a
lively feeling of all his infirmities and offenses, to the end that without
flattering of himself, he may condemn himself before thy Majesty, that he
may acknowledge all Righteousness to thee, and to himself nothing but
confusion of face; make him renounce himself wholly, and confess that justly
and rightly thou bring upon him these chastisements; and that if thou
should deal with him according to his deserts, thou should bind him up
and throw him even into eternal destruction. Good Lord also grant that this
acknowledgement be also but to humble him, and not to deiect him into the
bottom of despair, and so being of one side cast down, and laid upon the
ground by thy powerful hand (not so much from the feeling of his sickness,
as from the feeling of his sins) he may be on the other side, by the same
blessed hand, relieved and raised up again in assured hope, by the
consideration of this thy incomprehensible mercy, whereof thou have given us so
precious and so rich a pledge, as thy well-beloved Son Jesus Christ our Lord,
whom thou have not spared, but delivered to death, even to the ignominious and
wicked death of the Cross, to redeem us from the ignominious malediction of
sin: Good Lord, grant that from hence, thy poor distressed servant may
receive all his refuge, fortify his faith, by the which he may search and
find in this death and holy obedience of thy Son; the forgiveness of all
his sins, and firmly embrace the perfect Righteousness thereof, where
withal being clothed, he may find peace with thee, and glorify himself in
the hope of thy glory amongst all his tribulations. And that the sorrow of his
sickness, wherewith he is corporally visited, may be sweetened with the
repose and contentment of his soul. And if it be thy pleasure to recover him
from this sickness, to prolong his days, whereof thou do give us some
signs; good Lord give him grace to use it to thy glory, perpetually beating in
mind this thy grace, to consecrate the rest of his life with much more
affection and zeal then heretofore he has done: And make him receive this
sickness as a fatherly affliction to draw him from sin, and to make him
take a holy resolution by thy grace, all the days of his life, to remember the
duty and obedience wherewithal he is bound to thee, to walk in thy fear more
purely, and more fervently then ever heretofore. Bless the remedies which thou
art pleased to let him use, that he may receive comfort in his distress,
moderate the sharpness of his color, and stay the course of it, if thou Lord
think it fitting, to the end he may glorify thy Name, and be thankful
for thy mercy. But if it be thy will still to continue or augment his pain,
make that it may be for his good, and to give him an increase of strength and
constancy to bear these thy trials with a tranquile and sweet spirit, without
murmr or impatience: and also in these testimonies of his faith and patience,
so Christianly, we desire that thou may be glorified, and his neighbors
edified and comforted. And that he may by the experience of this miserable
life, be taught to withdraw his heart and affection, and to raise them up
freely to the meditation and seeking of true repose, and to the
incomprehensible felicity, which is provided for us in Heaven to live
eternally: Grant also good Lord, the same graces to all other that are sick
and afflicted; Comfort them and fortify them according to their necessity,
and above all, give them grace and a lively faith, to embrace thy mercy in
Jesus Christ for their comfort. Hear us, O Father of mercy, for the love of
thy well-beloved Son our Lord Jesus Christ, even as he himself has commanded
us to present our selves unto thee: Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

And forasmuch, O Lord, as without faith, we cannot be agreeable, or acceptable
unto thee, we beseech thee so to increase it in this thy servant, and in us
all, that he may come to the last breath of life, and we with him, to persevere
therein, and to be always disposed to render a pure confession, with heart and
mouth, as we now present our selves unto thee, saying, I believe in God, etc.

This is his faith, O Lord, and ours: give us grace to live and dye herein,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, who in unity of the Holy Spirit, lives and
reigns with thee eternally, Amen.


When there is apparencie that the sickness is mortal, follow this form.
Sir, It behooves you to be of good courage in the middle of your affliction,
which it pleases God still to continue upon your body; and be assured that he
has neither sent or continued it, but for the good and salvation of your
soul: to teach you by this means to understand your self, as being a poor
sinner; more and more to detest your sins, contemn the world, to lift you up
to God, and to invoke and call upon him with much more fervor, with
assurance to be heard, following his holy promises, and to obtain of him
Christian Constancy, which is most necessary for you in this trial.


The assurance of the mercy of God in Jesus Christ, the true ground of all
Consolation.
That which ought most to comfort you, and with courage and patience to
strengthen you, is the assurance which you ought always to take; that God, for
the love of his well-beloved Son our Lord Jesus, has embraced you into his
love and free favor, has pardoned your offenses, has adopted you and
received you amongst the number of his children, to make you inherit the
Kingdom of Heaven, by virtue of the purchase which Jesus Christ has made for
you by the merit of his death, such an assurance will make you always certain
that nothing can happen unto you, whether it be in life or death, which can be
any other then the favor and blessing of your Heavenly Father, and so
consequently are aides and means ordained by his wise providence, to conduct
you to the blessed life.


This assurance comes from Faith.
It is true that this assurance we cannot take of our selves, it is our good
God that gives it, when by the virtue of his holy Spirit, and holy Word, he
creates in our hearts a true and a lively faith, with the which we receive,
and we appropriate the promises of his grace which he has ordained us in the
preaching of the gospel. Which promises in effect are, That God has so loved
the world, that he has given his only Son, that whosoever believes in him,
should not perish, but have life everlasting. Ioh. 3.16. If God then has given
you the grace to believe in his only Son; and to embrace him for your Redeemer
and Savior, (as we gather hitherto by the profession you have made, and still
continues in the Church) you may take from thence a holy assurance, that God,
according to the infallible truth of his Word, has received you into his love,
that you shall not perish, but have everlasting life. Now being so, what can
you fear? Romans 8.30.31. If God be with us, who can be against us? He, who
has not spared his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he
not with him also freely give us all things? He has given you the most, that
is his Son; he will not euerthelesse deny you any thing else that can be
necessary for to keep you from all sort of evil, corporal and spiritual, as
well in life, as in death.


Faith applies to all the faithful, the promises of the Gospel.
This application whereof I have spoken, which you must make to your self,
from the promises of the Gospel, to gather such a holy assurance, it is
necessarily required by Faith. For to believe in Jesus Christ, it is not enough
to believe in gross, that there is a Jesus Christ, and who believes in him,
has eternal life: neither is it enough to believe that the promises of the
Gospel are altogether true; the Devil believes so much, yet notwithstanding
he has no true believing faith: But to believe in Jesus Christ, is, when the
faithful believes that there is salvation in Jesus Christ for him; which the
Devil cannot believe. And the true justifying faith, whereby the just lives,
chiefly consists in that, that we apply and appropriate unto our selves,
every one in his own particular, the promises of salvation, that every one in
his own behalf, may say, that which St. Paul says, in the person of every
one of the faithful, Gal. 2.20. I live in the faith of the Son of God, who
has loved me, and given himself for me; and in the 2 Timothy 1.2. I know whom I
have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have
committed unto him, against that day; and Romans 8.37.38. I am assured that
neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things
to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature can separate us from the
love of God, which he has showed us in Jesus Christ our Lord. This faith does
not bring us a simple opinion or conjecture of our salvation, but a certain
knowledge, following that which Saint John says, 5.14. We know that we are
translated from death to life, And John 10. We know that we are of God, and I
have says he, 1 Ioh. 5.13. written these things to you which believe in the
Name of the Son of God, to the end that you should know that you have
eternal life. This faith freely lets us go to the treasure of Gods grace,
Heb. 4.10. With assurance, as he says in the 10.22. even with a true heart
and a full assurance of faith, as Saint Paul says, Ephesians. 3.12. that, by Jesus
Christ we have boldness and access, in our belief, by the faith which we
have in him. This faith is called, Hebrews 11.1. the substance of things hoped
for, that is to say, that makes things believed and hoped subsist in our
souls, neither more nor less then if we were already in the very Actual
possession and inioying. This Faith makes us find peace and rest in our
souls and consciences, chasing away the fears and terrors which sin would
set before us, with the apprehension of Gods judgments, following that which
Saint Paul says, Romans 5. Verse 1. That being justified by faith, we have peace
with God through Jesus Christ our Lord, by the which also we have been led by
Faith to this grace; wherein we hold our selves fast, and glorifye our selves
in the hope of the glory of God.


The gift of perseverance assured to the Faithful.
Moreover, these passages propound unto us this holy assurance of Faith, not
only for the present, but also to come, and contains a promise which God
gives us to persevere in this Faith, even to the end. Otherwise, where should
be this assurance which the Apostle speaks of, of not being able to be
separated from the love of God in Jesus Christ? Where should be this
subsistence of things hoped for? How should we have in our souls a solid
peace with God? How should we find our selves firm in this grace? How can we
glorify our selves in the hope of the glory of God? Such is then the
incomprehensible bounty of this heavenly Father, that he begins not in us
the work of our salvation, for to leave it imperfect, according as Saint Paul
says to the Philippians, and in their persons, speaks also to all truly
faithful, Phil. 1.6. I am assured, that he that has begun this good work
in you, will perfect it, even to the coming of Jesus Christ: As also he says
in another place, Romans 11.29. That the gifts and calling of God are without
Repentance: that is to say, he gain says not, nor ever goes from his word.


Against the objection that this assurance of Faith should be a presumption.
It may not be that this certainty of Faith be blamed in us, and to be thought
rashness and presumption; for on the contrary, it should be thought an
extreme rashness and presumption, if we should not believe such excellent
promises of our God: And it is Humility and Obedience to receive and rest upon
it with reverence; For it is said, that he which has received the Testimony of
God, has sealed that God is veritable, John 3.33. that is to say, subscribed,
and given approbation to the truth of God, which he demonstrateth in the
accomplishment of his promises; and it is said on the contrary, in the 1 of
John, 5.10.11. That he that believes not God, he has made him a liar: For
he has not believed in the testimony which God has witnessed of his own
Son, and this is the testimony, that God has given us eternal life, and
this life is in his Son.

Two things might make us rash and bold in this assurance which we take of our
salvation; the one is, if we should build upon the merit of our works, Romans
3.20. For no flesh shall be justified before God, by the works of the law; and
all those that seek to be justified thereby, are under malediction; so says
Saint Paul, 3.10.2. It is not by our own righteousness, which is nothing,
whereupon we build such an assurance, but upon the righteousness of him whom
God has made to be sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. that is to say, a sacrifice for
sin: to the end that we might be made the righteousness of God in him; and
by the obedience of whom we are made just, in exchange of our disobedience in
Adam, which made us all sinners, Romans 5.19. The other point which might make us
bold in this behalf; that if we should presume to purchase such a knowledge
of our salvation by the subtilty of our spirits, as it is said, that the
Natural man conceiueth not the things of God, 1 Cor. 2.14. But certainly, we
make account to have received, as the same Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.12. Not the spirit
of this world, but the spirit which is of God, to the end that we should know
the things which have been given us from God. Also he says in the same
place, 1 Cor. 2.9.10. That these things, which are altogether incomprehensible,
God has revealed them by his holy spirit: Finally, he adds, 1 Cor. 1.16.
That by this means we hold the intention of Christ. But by this spirit of
God, are all those conducted which are the Children of God, which the same
Apostle says, Romans 8.14. And he is called, The spirit of adoption, and by him
we cry Abba Father, Gal. 4.6. that is to say, we cry and call upon God as our
Father. And also it is This same spirit, says Saint Paul, Romans 8.11.16. which
gives testimony with our spirit, that we are the Children of God. In like sort
the Apostle to the Ephesians, says, 1.13.14. That when we believe in the
Gospel, we are sealed with the holy spirit of promise, which is the earnest of
our inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased possession, unto the
praise of his glory: by which we learn that the testimony of the Holy Ghost
received into our hearts with Faith, is like unto a seal, which the holy
Spirit imprinteth in our hearts, to assure us of the promises of God, and to
assure us that we are his Children, and as men use in the Market, giving of
earnest, that is to say, a part of the price agreed for, as well to begin the
payment, as to make the bargain irreuocable, and assured, that it may be kept
firm: Even so the Holy Ghost, which through Faith begets peace and joy in
our hearts, is given us for earnest of the Kingdom of Heaven, Romans 14.17. to
the end to assure us by this beginning of spiritual goods (which God has
promised to his children) that he holds us for his own purchased
possession, to the praise of his glory, and that without ever reuoking his
promises, he will at last gather us to the full fruition of the Inheritance in
Heaven.


It is needful, if it be possible, to draw from the mouth of the sick person,
confession of his sins, of his Repentance and his Faith; and if he have not
the use of his Tongue, but of his understanding, it is necessary for him to
answer by some sign.
Now Sir it behooves you to take good courage, and willingly to apply this holy
doctrine, for the comfort of your soul; this doctrine has been declared unto
you by the preaching of the Gospel, in the Church of God, whereof you have
been a member; it has also been confirmed unto you by the use of the
Sacrament, with whom you have communicated. Have you not received it with Faith?


Patient. I have.


Also do you not believe, that God is not only your Creator, (but sin
having lost you,) he is your Savior in Jesus Christ?


Patient. Yes.


Do you not acknowledge, that you are a poor and miserable sinner, that if he
should reckon with you according to your sins, of necessity he should make
you perish in death and eternal damnation?


Patient. Yes.


Are you not very heartily sorry and grieved so to have offended, and do you
repent your self, even with your whole heart?


Patient. Yes.


Do you not renounce all opinion and trust in our own Righteousness, for to
repose your self entirely, and your hope in the mercy of God, by which he
justifies and saves us, in his blessed Son Jesus Christ?


Patient. Yes.


Do you not believe that he has received you into his mercy, that he is
pleased and appeased with you, and has in grace reconciled you unto him, in
the favor, and through the obedience and merit of the same Jesus Christ his
Son, who you firmly believe died for your sins, and is risen for your
justification?


Patient. Yes.


Now I beseech God to confirm and increase you more and more in this faith,
following the which, you need not doubt a certain assurance to be justified
and saved, seeing that God has given you this grace to believe with your heart
to Righteousness, and to make confession with your mouth to salvation. Romans
1.1.


For the sick person to resolve, whether it be for life or death, according to
Gods will.
Being thus resolved upon this firm foundation of faith, now you must take a
holy resolution, constantly to attend without all fear, what the Lord will be
pleased to send unto you in this your sickness, with a firm persuasion that
all will go well with you; whether it be you shall remain here below, or
that it be his pleasure to make you more happy. If his pleasure be to restore
you to former health again, as he is powerful to draw the dead out of the
sepulcher, and make them live again: which will be if he please, for to make
you more affectionate to the honor and service of God, then ever heretofore
you have been: But if it be his will to lead you by this sickness, to the
end of your course, it will be to receive you into the possession of that
perfect felicity which the Son of God has so dearly bought with the price
of his blood. And therefore go your ways unto him, with a holy cheerfulness
in the assurance of his mercies. Rejoice your self in the happy exchange of
your removing from earth to Heaven, from this short and miserable life, to the
blessed life for ever to endure; from these triuiall and perishing goods, to
those that are heavenly and eternal, which eye has not seen, nor ear has
heard, and which are not yet come up into the heart of Man, which God has
prepared for those that love him.

Are you not then well resolved in all this, to conform your will to your
Heavenly Father? to the end, that whether you live, you live to the Lord, or
whether you dye, you die to the Lord, Romans 14.8. being well assured that Christ
shall be always to you to live or to dye? Phil. 1.21.


Patient. Yes.


God give you the grace.


For to assure and comfort the sick in the infirmity of Faith.
I am not ignorant that your faith, how great soever it may be, yet
notwithstanding it is both little in you and feeble: for whilst the
infirmities of this life remain, the Holy Spirit is not given us, but in a
certain measure, according to the which we know not but in part, and our
spiritual renewing is yet but in the beginning; it is certain that here below
we cannot attain to the perfection of faith; and therefore I doubt not but
that your faith is yet weak, and infirm, and that it cannot but be moved with
diverse temptations, and combated with diverse assaults of doubt and distrust.
But yet nevertheless, it behooves you to be of good courage; for this combat
which you feel in your self, is the combat, which as Saint Paul says to the
Galatians, 5. v. 17. is in the soul of every faithful, between the flesh and
the Spirit; and therefore this is a sure testimony which you have by faith. For
as the flesh fights in you through unbelief, so does the Spirit fight in you
by faith: and this faith never fails, being fortified by the Spirit of God,
which makes a man victorious, and whatsoever imperfection it has, God will
make it sufficient to salvation; for it is not said, Who shall perfectly
believe shall be saved, but simply, Who shall believe. Moreover, as you
perceive in your self, your faith feeble and imperfect, also I doubt not, but
you perceive in your self a Holy desire that it may be increased in you and
made stronger, and that in your heart you make your prayers to God that it may
be so; Is it not true?


Patient. Yes.


But seeing it is so, and that this faith and desire may increase in you, and
that this prayer which you make to God, proceed from the fruit of the Spirit,
and not of the flesh? and seeing these are the fruits which the Spirit of God
brings forth in you? is it not a sure testimony, that you are conducted by
the same Spirit, and so consequently the child of God? for all those that are
conducted by the Spirit of God, are the children of God, which Saint Paul
says, Romans 8.14.

Be of good cheer Sir, and boldly say with the Apostle in the midst of your
combats, I am assured that nothing can separate me from the love of God, which
he has showed me in Jesus Christ our Lord.


For to assure the sick against the affrights and temptations of Conscience.
There are four things to be marked, which in this spiritual combat may
affright you, shake your faith, and trouble the peace of your conscience; which
is the feeling of your sins, the apprehension of death, the fear of the
Devil, and the horror of Gods Judgments; before whom we must make our
appearance at the going out of this life. But against the fear of all these
things, the bounty of God, in the blessings of Christ, and in the testimony of
his Word, furnishes you with all sufficient remedies, for to assure you and
truly to confirm you in invincible constancy.


Against fear proceeding from the feeling of sin.
First of all, for the respect of your sins, it is very necessary to have a
lively feeling thereof, for to humble your self before God: but seeing yon
protest to have a serious and true repentance, and to search and apprehend by
faith the satisfaction and expiation in the blood of Jesus Christ, assure your
self, they can no way hinder the effect of your salvation. If you be a
sinner, So Jesus Christ is come into the world to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. He
is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, John 1.29. It is
his blood which cleanses us from all iniquity, 1 John 1.7.9. And whosoever
shall believe in him, shall receive remission of his sins, through his Name,
Acts, 10.43. And therefore he has commanded, that repentance and forgiveness
of sins should be preached in his Name, Luke 24.47. He himself inuiteth us
to come to him, for to enjoy this blessing: Come unto me all ye that labor
and are ouer-laden, and I will refresh you, Matthew. 11.28. Go your ways then
unto him, if you find your selves grieved with the burden of your sins, in
assurance to find remedy for your souls. And for that very thing, every day
he makes himself an Advocate to the Father for us. If we have sinned, says
Saint John 2.1.2. we have an Advocate with the Father, that is to say, Jesus
Christ the Just, who is the propitiation for our sins.


Against the fear of Death.
In regard of death, wherefore do you fear it, seeing that your sins are no
more imputed unto you? for sin was the cause that death entered into the
world, as Saint Paul, Romans 5.12. and by consequence, there where no sin is,
there can be no death. And indeed concerning death eternal, which the
Scripture calls the second death, you have an entire and full freedom, by
the means of this faith which God has given you. In verity, says the Son
of God, John 5.24. I say unto you, that he that hears my Word and believes
in him that sent me, shall have everlasting life, and shall not come to
condemnation, but is passed from death to life.

And as for the corporal death, of which we are assured, it is never a
testimony to the faithful of the anger of God against them, as it is always
to the wicked; but a singular favor of Gods bounty, bringing an infinite
number of blessings with it. First of all, it delivers us from all sorts of
dangers, putting an end to so many miseries and griefs, which vexes us
without cease, both in our souls and Bodies during the course of this
miserable life, or rather of this continual death, wherewithal we languish
here below: Also it takes us away from amidst the throng of this wicked world,
with the corruption whereof we cannot but be infected, and so we come to be
freed from this unhappy necessity of sinful living, and from the daily and
hourly offending of our Heavenly Father who is so bountiful and gracious a
God unto us.

Secondly, this bodily death is an entrance to the true life, by the death of
Jesus Christ, whose sacred self has passed through this death, to make our
passage safe and happy unto us: this is now an assured bridge to pass and make
our travail from the world to God, and from the mischieues of this life to the
incomprehensible Beatitude of eternal life; to that fullness of joy, which is
as David says, Psalm, 16.11. In the contemplation of the face of the
Eternal. This is the good which your Soul shall enjoy at the departing from
your body: And as for your body, which shall be put into the earth, it shall
not be there to perish always, but only for a while to rest, attending the
happy resurrection; which is the cause why death is called in the Scripture, A
Sleep, and and they are said to be sleeping, in regard of their bodies, which
at the last day shall be awaked and rise from dust, to possess together with
their souls the glorious mortality, being made conformable to the glorious
Body of our Lord Jesus Christ. Phil. 3.21. He is the head, and they are the
members: and therefore it behooves that the members be conformable to their
Head.

What find you then in death that may affright you, seeing it delivers you
from all evil, and will raise you to the height of all goodness? Rather you
shall not meet with any thing, but will give you comfort and assurance, to
confirm your attendance with resolution and tranquillity of spirit, even to
aspire with all your hearr, when the Hour will ^ome, to say with Saint Paul,
My desire is to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.


Against the fear of the Devil.
For the fear that you may have of the Devil, you see now there is no great
cause to doubt, seeing that death cannot annoy you, but by death, by which it
domineareth. But the Apostle testifies, that Jesus Christ has not only
destroyed death, but him also that has the empire of death, which is the
Devil, Heb. 2.14.

Our Lord himself says, that the Prince of this world has nothing in him;
neither has any thing in those that are his Members, amongst which number you
are by the grace of God. Also this has been for us and our profit, that the
Son of God has vanquished and overcome upon the Cross, where He has, as
Saint Paul says to the Collossians, 2.15. overcome the principalities and
powers of Hell, which he has publicly brought in evidence, therein
triumphing over them.

I doubt not but the enemy of our salvation, makes war against you, for to
astonish and trouble your Faith, for as Saint Peter says, 1.5. Verse 8.9. Our
adversary the Devil walks like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour: Saint Peter adds, being firm in faith, it behooves us to resist
him: Resist the Devil, as Saint James says, 4.7. and he will fly from you.
But for to resist and vanquish him, it behooves you to be defended with the
armor of God, whereof Saint Paul speaks to the Ephesians, Chap. 6. Verse 16.
Taking, above all, as he says, the Buckler of Faith, by which you shall be
able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked.


Against the Apprehension of the Judgment of God.
Now remains the fear which you may take of the Judgment of God, before
whom you must appear. But whereupon ground you your apprehension, seeing that
your sins shall be no more imputed unto you, seeing you shall be no more
condemned to death, seeing that it will nothing avail Satan to accuse you,
being thereby absolved and justified by the grace of God? It is the doctrine
which the Apostle Saint Paul gives us, Romans 8. Verse 32.33. Who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that justifies, Who is he that
condemns? It is Christ that dyed, yea, rather that is risen again, who is
even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us.

Even so ought we to come before God, but not as before a severe and rigorous
Judge, but as before a Father, that is well-pleased with you through the
intercession of Jesus Christ: of Jesus Christ I say, who is both your
Intercessor and Advocate to God the Father. He will not be refused of the
Father in his request for you, by Jesus Christ, whereof you are a Member: For
there is no condemnation to those that are in Jesus Christ, says Saint Paul,
Romans 8.1. By Jesus Christ, in the end, in whom you believe, But he that
believes in me, (says he) shall have eternal life, and shall not come to
condemnation, but is passed from death to life.

Is not this then Sir your Faith, and firm belief, which by the benefit of
our Lord Jesus Christ, you have forgiveness of your sins, John 5.24. That
you are saved from eternal death, and freed from the rigor of Gods
judgments, and by consequence, Satan cannot annoy you by his accusations and
temptations, and that this corporal death can be no other unto you, but
profitable, and every way happy.


Also a protestation of charity, must be drawn from the sick party to his
Neighbor.
As for the rest Sir, you know Faith works by Charity, and necessarily
brings it forth, seeing it has pleased God to unite you unto him by Faith,
also of necessity you must be united to all your Brethren and Neighbors by a
true christian Charity. And therefore tell us if you freely renounce not all
hatred, rancour, and enmity with every one without exception, and desire the
good and salvation of all in general, and every one in particular, even as of
your own?


Patient. Yes.


Do you not pardon with all your heart, all those that might have offended you
in any sort, as you likewise require pardon of all those that might have been
offended by you?

Patient. Yes.


Now Sir it behooves us to address our prayer to God, to the end that he will
be pleased to fortify you in faith, which he has given you, and to make his
graces more and more abound in you; and it is your part to humble your self
with us before him, and to lift up your heart to him, to implore his Mercy from
the bottom of your Heart.


A Prayer for the sick when there is any sign of death.
O Lord our God, and Merciful Father, we are very unworthy to lift up our eyes
unto thee, our sins and wicked deeds are so many, wherewith we are so
polluted before thy face; neither is this out of the confidence of our own
worth to be thus bold to present our selves at the feet of thy divine
Majesty, but in the assurance of the great Compassions and perfect obedience
which thy well-beloved Son Jesus Christ our Lord has made for us; with the
righteousness whereof, we beseech thee cover us with thy grace, to the end
we may be by his favor made agreeable and reconciled unto thee. But we
beseech thee O good God, particularly vouchsafe thy great mercy to this thy
poor servant, so feeble, mightily dejected under thy powerful hand: poor
sinner remaining under the weight and rigor of thy high Justice, if thou do
not extend thy great clemency toward him.

Give him grace, good Lord, to enter more and more into a serious examination
and acknowledgement of his faults, to conceive that true detestation which
always brings forth true repentance, and set him forward entirely to
renounce himself and his own way, to have all his refuge in thee, and in thy
bounty: In the mean while receive him graciously, O Lord, show him the face of
a father and assure and comfort him: Say to his soul, Soul, I am he that can
warrant thee. Dispose of his heart, patiently to receive with Action of graces,
this Fatherly correction, which thou have sent him, and to put himself wholly
into thy hands, to submit himself peaceably under all that thou shall please
to lay upon him by thy holy providence. Lord thou know better then he
himself, or any of us what is most convenient, whether he shall live or die:
If thy good pleasure be that he shall live, let it be that he may only live
to thee: in such sort that having profited well by thy chastisements, he may
learn to love thee, honor and serve thee, all the days of his life in thy
Church; perpetually studying to bring sorth fruits of piety and holiness,
worthy of thy Gospel, and convenient for a child of such a Father; so that in
him thou may be glorified, and his neighbors edified. But contrarily of the
other part, it be thy pleasure, to take him out of this miserable world, assure
him that it shall be to put him into the possession of thy Heavenly kingdom,
which thou have prepared before the foundations of the world, and which thy
Son has purchased by the merit of his death. To this end, O Father of light,
from whom proceeds every good gift, that thou will be pleased to give him a
true and a lively faith, with the which he may search, find, and apprehend the
propitiation for his sins, and the true righteousness in the obedience of thy
well-beloved Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who has suffered for our sins, and
risen again for our justification, and ascended into Heaven to take possession
in our Name, and by this means, gives us access and entrance, which sin
had banished us from. Imprint in his heart a full assurance of all these thy
graces, to the end that by this means, he may peaceably repose himself in thy
mercy, and happily overcome all the snares and temptations which Satan and his
own flesh would put before him, to trouble the clearness of his faith, and
tranquillity of his conscience. That his sins then may not make him despair,
because thy Justice has been so well paid, not with gold or silver, but with
the precious blood of thy Christ, as of the Lamb without spot or blemish. Let
not death affright him, seeing sin is abolished and destroyed in him, which
is the sting of death, who now is disarmed and without all power: that his
spirit being separated from the body by this corporal death, it shall be to
come triumphantly to thee, and delivered from the captivity of sin, to the
end to taste of the enjoying the most happy life, which he never tasted in this
world, but by hope: leaving his body in the earth, but not for ever, but to be
refined, transformed, and in time convenient made conformable to the glorious
body of his Redeemer by the benefit of his resurrection. So Satan shall no
more astonish him but by sin and death, which he has utterly lost all power
in over our visited Brother. Assuring him in the end that this accuser can
intend nothing against him, before the Throne of thy justice, seeing he is
absolved and justified by thy grace, there is no judge that can condemn him.
That thou will also be pleased, O good God, to be likewise merciful to all
other sick souls, comfort and fortify them according as thou know them
needful: and above all, give them grace always to embrace with a true and
lively faith, thy mercy in Jesus Christ, wherein they may ever be comforted.
Good Lord vouchsafe unto us all this grace, that this example may profit and
teach us to renounce the world and our selves, to employ that time we have here
below, to meditate thy wisdom, walk carefully in thy fear, retire our
hearts from the vanities of this life, to raise them up to attend and meditate
upon the Heavenly life, and to this end to be always prepared to appear
before thee, with assurance to be gathered and received into thy mercy, for the
love of thy well-beloved Son Jesus Christ our Lord: In whose name we beseech
thee, O Father of mercy, here us in these things, and in all other things
which thou know better to be necessary for thy poor servant, and for us,
then we do our selves; as we do now request thee in that prayer which thou
have commanded us to present our selves before thee: Our Father which art in
Heaven, etc.

Lord give us a good increase of Faith, which thou have planted in the heart of
this thy child and servant: defend him as with a Buckler, by the which he may
extinguish all the fiery darts of the Devil, and make him persevere constantly
therein, until the very last breath of his life, and that he may always, at
the least in his heart, render unto thee a pure and Christian confession, as we
now present with heart and mouth: I believe in God the Father Almighty, etc.

This is his Faith O Lord, and ours, give us grace to live and dye in it,
through Jesus Christ thy Son our Lord, who in the unity of the Holy Spirit,
lives and reigns with thee God eternally, Amen.


If the sick person continue long, and still in danger of death, it will be
convenient to repeat at times necessary, the abouesaid Comforts, but especially
those which are to assure and fortify against the temptations and combats of
Conscience.
And if it happen the sick party be troubled with idle talk, or cannot
understand a long discourse: use short sentences, such as hereafter follows;
speaking but at sometimes.

Sir, it behooves you to take good courage; it is the fatherly hand of God
that visits you for your good and salvation: For to those whom God loves,
all things work together for good.

Lift up your heart to God, and confess your sins and offenses, and embrace
by faith his mercy in Jesus Christ, which he has promised to all those that
repent, and believe in him.

Have you not always a good assurance in the mercy of God, and a firm faith
in Jesus Christ your Savior?


Patient. Yes.


Do you not believe that Jesus Christ is dead for your sins, and risen
again for your justification?


Patient. Yes.


Do you not believe that he has before the Father, been your wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption?


Patient. Yes.


Do you not think that he has freely justified you by the grace of God,
through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus?


Patient. Yes.


Following this your faith, doubt not, but God will warrant you from all
perdition, and give you everlasting life.

For God has given his Son, to the end that whosoever shall believe in him,
shall not perish but have eternal life, Ioh. 16.

Fear not death, seeing by faith you embrace Jesus Christ, who is your life. I
am, says he, the resurrection and the life, who shall believe in me, although
he be dead, shall live: and whosoever lives and believes in me, shall never
dye, Ioh. 11.25.26.

If your sins do afflict you, address your self always by faith, and
run to Christ Jesus, and you shall find rest to your soul; Come to me,
says Saint Matthew, 11.28. all you that labor, and are ouer-laden, and I will
ease you: Doubt not the rigor of Gods justice; for there is no condemnation to
those that are in Christ Jesus, as the Apostle Saint Paul says, Romans 8.1. And
who is he, Romans 8.32.33. that will bring in accusation against the elect of
God? God is he that justifies, who will be he that shall condemn? Christ is
he which is dead, and which is more, is risen again: who is also at the right
hand of God, and makes intercession for us.

Be not sorry to leave this miserable life, which as Saint James says, 4.14.
is but a vapor, which appears a little while and afterward vanishes;
besides, in exchange thereof, everlasting life shall be given unto you, and in
that the very height of felicity, so great and incomprehensible, That eye has
not seen, nor ear understood, and is not come up into the heart of man, that
which God has prepared for those that love him.


When the sick person is apparently at the point of death, or ready to yield
up the Ghost, it is necessary to repeat this short consolation following, with
prayer.
Comfort your self Sir, you now approach near unto the end of the Combat,
which cannot be otherwise but happy unto you, assure your self, the victory is
of your side, by means of your faith, which is the victory that overcomes
the world, and the Prince of the world. Jesus Christ your head and Savior
extends forth his hand, and stays for you at the end of the lists, to
present unto you the incorruptible Crown of glory, which he has purchased
with the price of his blood, commend your self unto him now with all your
heart: go unto him with joy: throw your self into his Arms, and say, Into
thy hands I commend my soul, for thou have bought me O God of truth. Psalm. 31.
Let us again pray to God that he will give you his grace.


A Prayer.
O Lord, Father of Mercy, and God of all Consolation, let fall thy mercies and
comforts upon this occasion, upon this person, thy poor child and servant:
Make him now gather and apply unto himself excellent and abundant profit of
the holy Instructions which in thy school thou have taught him during the
course of his life: give him an invincible faith in this Combat.

Arm him with all thy spiritual Armor, that he may resist all the
Temptations of Satan: and having overcome all, make him remain firm.

If thy Justice astonish, let thy mercy assure and comfort: if his sins
accuse him let the obedience of thy well-beloved excuse and justify him, if the
apprehension of death, trouble him, make him contemplate the open gate of
everlasting life, to which thou go to make him enter. Thou have given him it
in thy Son, make it perfectly happy to him. He is of the flock of this
great Shepherd, let it not be taken from him. Thou have begun his salvation,
let not the work remain imperfect. And now that thou have brought him to the
end of his sorrowful course, now receive his soul into thy hands, and bring
it into thy heavenly paradise, into the fullness of repose and beatitude, into
the company of thy blessed Angels, and holy souls of thine Elect, which thou
have gathered for ever to enjoy together the perfection of all joy, which
consists in the contemplation of his face. Hear us, O Father of mercy, for
the love of thy well-beloved Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who in unity of the holy
Spirit, lives and reigns with thee God eternally, Amen.


A short comfort for those that are friends of the deceased, to be given after
the body is interred.
Friends, it is needful in this business, for you to remember, of the holy
Christian instruction which you have received in the school of Jesus Christ,
for to make your profit in bearing your affliction with patience, and in
humility, resting in a quiet Spirit at the will of God, to which we ought
always to be subject and conformable. Our Nature in such accidents leads us
to tears, but the Spirit of God, author of all Regeneration, teaches us to
keep measure, and not to afflict our selves, like those that have no hope (1 Thessalonians. 4.13.) If we be men in weeping, yet we must show our selves Christians,
adorned with faith and hope, to assure us that this corporal death, is no
other to the faithful children of God, but a happy port to enter into eternal
life, Ioh. 5.28.29. and as for the body it must remain in earth, until that
day when they shall hear the voice of the Lord, which shall make them rise out
of the grave, into the resurrection of life. That the deceased is of the number
of Gods children, the marks and testimonies which God has given him, by the
good profession of piety and wisdom, which he has made in the Church, unto
the last breath of his life, need not leave us in doubt. He has lived to the
Lord, and is dead to the Lord, by consequence is happy, and rests from his
labor, Apoc. 14.13. by the heavenly testimony of the Spirit of God himself.
You have no cause to weep over him, for the condition he is in, being in every
kind thrice happy. He has also a great advantage of us, that remain in this
world behind him. For he is arrived at the port of salvation, where as we are
still beaten with the storm and torment of the confused and dangerous sea of
this miserable world. And therefore it is much better to aspire to go with him,
then to wish him to remain here below with us; for the discommodity that you
may receive by his absence, it behooves you to consider, that God that gave him
to you, remains still with you, who is enough for us without all other
things, whereas all other things without him are nothing: It is he that will
continue always over you the care of his fatherly providence, if you continue
always to walk in his fear. I beseech God to give you grace, and fortify
you with a holy and constant resolution. Amen.


FINIS.

