THE ART OF WAR, OR Military discourses Of leavying, marching, encamping;
and embattailing an army. Of building, defending, and expugning forts and
fortified cities. Of ordinance, petards, and fireworks. Of the several duties
of officers, and soldiers. Of the Grecian, and Roman Militia, and forming of
battaillons; etc.


BY The Lord of PRAISSAC.

Englished by I. C.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by ROGER DANIEL, Printer to that famous UNIVERSITIE. And
are to be sold by John Williams at the Crane in Paul's churchyard in London.
1639.

This translation (entitled The Art of War, or Military discourses by the
Lord of Praissac) may be imprinted.

ARUNDEL and SURREY.

Imprimatur

Cantabrigiae. Ra. Brownrigg Procan. Sa. Collins. L. Chaderton. Tho. Bachcroft.


Upon the accurate translation of the Lord Du Praissac his Military
discourses, done by his esteemed friend Captain JOHN CRUSO.
TImes have their Genii: yea; and Places too.
For contemplation some are; some to do.
That Laurel, which has crowned Astraea's head,
May to Bellona's front be altered.
Arts have their times too. In that season sing
The Muses nine about their dancing spring:
Another while much fitter Music are
Those sterner arts, that teach us how to war:
(Happy that age, that can so much foresee,
To study war in her tranquillity.)
That Amazonian offspring, which does sit
Near Pallas strength, and near Minerva's wit.
These teach the needful use of Arms to know;
To march by their field-musick quick, or slow;
To sit down before a town; T'encamp in field;
How to embattail; And how forts to build;
T'assault; defend; To famine; force; surprise;
How to releeve besieged; void treacheries;
And (that which makes commanders worths grow high)
How stratagems to make; and how to apply:
Of these the Lord Praissac the skill has shown:
(So Greatness by her virtues best is known)
To fortify; To make a Canonier;
To contrive fireworks are directed here;
And, lest the unpractick off'cer of a Band
Should know his title, but not understand
His place, and duty, he has taken some pain
To teach. 'Twere hard, his labor should prove vain;
And most industrious Cruso loose his end,
That to the state did so much oil intend.
He, that has but the language, boldly may
Seek to translate, yet is but half the way.
Who renders Sense for Sense, and Words of Art
Does properly expound, does act the Part.
Praissac is well-come into England. We
May joy in him: But yield our thanks to Thee.
W. DENNY Esquire. Serg. Ma.

To his very worthy friend Captain JOHN CRUSO.
COuld I command an Army forth, and train
Inventions Forces, had I a Martial vein:
I would lay siege to Censure, and surprise
The strongest Fortress Envy could devise
To raise against thee, Momus force to yield,
And leave thy judgment Master of the field.
Had thou vouchsafed only to impart
The Centaures skill, and the Thessalian Art;
Had I but known thee in thy Cavallrie
What dim-ey'd A^lian spied not to descrie,
And, where Walhausen faild, to bring to light
What Basta wanted and the Luys Melzo.
Malta Knight:
An oath had gone for it, Cruso to beget
Mars with Minerva incest did commit.
But when I further see the Infantrie
Commanded by thee, and the Artillery;
Pike, halbert, partizan, musket, carbine,
The faulcon, minion, canon, culverine:
Forts raise d, by siege cities environed,
Encamped Armies, and embattailed:
Me thinks that God of war which heretofore
(How e're Great Greece and Rome did him adore)
But an Apprentice was, at length by thee
Is Master of his trade, and now made free,
Nor is it sufficient to set Praissac's name
Before thy book as author to the same.
I know thou can not like a cipher be,
Unless another worth to decuply.
And this thou have done. For it will be said,
'Twas writ by Praissac, but by Cruso made.
Nay, Poets Prophets are. In time to come
They Will say, Thou stol'st France's Palladium.
Till then I Will style thee (and not think I err)
The warlike Hermes, Mars's Interpreter.
Ri. Watson Col. Gone. and Cai. soc.

Ad dignissimum virum and de re militari optime meritum Johannem Cruso, hujus
operis Interpretem, facta primum ad Galliam Apostrophe.
GAllia, quid nostras armato milite comples
Oras, belligeri prodiga terra Dei?
Non ita dividuam concors alit Anglia pacem,
Non est, ut vires ambiat illa tuas.
Non ita de proprio diffidit Mart, triumphat
Vnica praesidiis imperiosa suis.
Vestra vel adversas si vis juvet invida parts,
Sentiet emeritam lis rediviva manum.
Interea non culpo tuos Crusoe labores:
Id dubito, ars major sit tua sitve fides.
Illa, vel extremi recoletur limite mundi,
Haec intr^ patriae limina nota tuae.
Quae, cum per multos tranquilla quieverit annos,
Sera capit Scoticae pignora perfidiae.
At ne fort^ manu infaeli agitata rebelli
Concidat, externi militis addis opem.
Quin age, siqua latet Germano sanguine parta
Ars, sit and huc genii flumine ducta tui.
Imo and ab Hispanis referat tua dextera bellis,
Militiae jactant quae been gesta suae.
Sic olim, Angliaca meritos referente triumphos,
Singula gens proprio Mart vel Art cadat.
Guil. Sigiswicke soc. Caio-Gon.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HENRY Lord MATRAVERS, Lord Lieutenant of his
Majesty's forces in Norfolk and Norwich.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
IT was the opinion of Cato, Vel otii nostri reddendam esse rationem; In
conformity whereunto I have lately spent some idle hours in bringing noble du
Praissac to speak English. An excellent principal, as your Lordship (who are
no stranger to the foreign tongues) will doubtless judge it, ^^ough but meanly
coppied. Such as it is ^our Lordships many and continued fa^ours, do embolden
me (in all humble sub^ission) to present it to your Lordship, and ^ith it the
bounden and dutiful service of

your Honors devoted and obliged servant JO. CRUSO.

TO THE GENTLEMEN OF the Artillery and Military companies in this kingdom,
and particularly of that in Norwich.
GENTLEMEN,
I Here present you with the excellencies of the Lord of Praissac, together
with mine own imperfections.

For the exercising of a Company in their postures and motions, and to dispose
that (or perhaps a regiment) into various forms of battalia, as there are
diverse helps extant (besides your commendable practice) so doubtless most of
you have attained to very good perfection therein: yet I assure my self, your
virtuous emulations will not suffer you to stick there, but will kindle a plus
oultre in your heroic breasts; especially when you shall here see that you
have much more to do, and that a soldiers Gammaut goes far beyond E-la.

These are times of action, and require every true hearted subject to employ
his talent for his Majesty's service and the public safety; If these my poor
endeavors may afford but the least furtherance thereunto, and my good
intentions receive but a courteous acceptance at your hands, I have my desires;
and rest

Your servant I. C.

The subject of the book.
The subject of this book is the Art of War, which has two parts,
Preparation and action.

Preparation there must be of men, money, instruments, and victual.

The action is performed in the field or in fortresses.

That which is performed in the field, considers the marching, encamping, and
embattailing of the army.

And that of fortresses considers their fabric, guard, expugning, defense,
and releef.

The general heads have their particular dependences, being the common
practices which are daily observed; as the examples, the figures, and the
chapters following do show.

A table of the chapters.
Chap. 1 HOw a Prince is to prepare himself to make war, to raise an army,
and the manner of marching. page 1 Chap. 2 Of encamping the army. page 15
Chap. 3 Of embattailing the army. page 26 Chap. 4 Of the building of forts.
page 31 Chap. 5 Of the defense of fortresses. page 48 Chap. 6 Of the taking of
fortresses by petard, or any other surprise, or by treachery. page 50 Chap. 7
How to besiege and expugne cities. page 61 Chap. 8 Of taking fortresses by
famine. page 82 Chap. 9 Of the defense of fortresses against the petard, and
other surprises and treacheries. page 85 Chap. 10 Of the defense of fortresses
against sieges. page 91 Chap. 11 Of the defense of fortresses against famine.
page 102 Chap. 12 Of releeving places besieged. page 103 Chap. 13 Of
Artillery, the foundings, mixtures, an^ measures of ordinance. page 104 Chap.
14 Of the offices of military men. page 12^ Chap. 15 Of fireworks. page 150
Chap. 16 Of the militia of the Grecians. page 158 Chap. 17 Of the Roman
militia. page 185 Chap. 18 Of the forming of battaillons. page 196
How a Prince is to prepare himself to make war, to raise an army, and the
manner of marching. CHAP. I.
A Prince being resolved to make war (be it offensive or defensive) ought to
make such provision of men, instruments, money, and victual, as he shall know
to be necessary for his enterprise.

In making his provision of men, he is to choose such as are fit for counsel,
for command, and for souldierie.

For his counsels, such whose age, prudence, experience and study renders
capable of such employments.

For commanders in his armies, he is to choose men of authority, respect,
prudence, experience, and good fortune. Each of them having made such proof of
their courage, sufficiency, and good success in their several charges, as it
be apparently known to all men; chiefly choosing such as are born courageous,
and are habituated in all the exercises of war: as, to handle all sorts of
arms, to know all manner of military motions, to form all sorts of
battaillons, to range armies in battalia, to make them march, encamp,
embattaile, to erect fortifications, to assault places of strength, and to
defend them, to make the trenches, and place the batteries; briefly, that they
know all the functions of war.

For soldiers (whether they be Infanterie or Cavallrie) they ought to be
elected, such as are strong, stout, and of fitting years, giving them such
arms as are most fitting for them; and disciplining them.

For the politic part, that they be sober and continent in their sustenance,
abstemious from play and women, modest in their speeches, apparel, and all
other actions.

Concerning the military part, they are to be instructed in the use and
exercise of the sword, musket, and pike; and to be taught how to encamp,
entrench, and make their huts, how to keep themselves in order, and to be
expert in all motions requisite for the forming and ready dividing of such
forms as shall be desired. To this end the Captains, Lieutenants, and Ensigns
ought to be very careful to instruct and discipline their soldiers.

The military discipline for the foot is this; The musketeers ought to be
exact in the use of their musket and rest together, to shoulder properly, to
make ready, and present all after one and the same manner, whether it be upon
entering into the guard, to pass a muster, or to go to the charge; To give
fire, either by themselves, by files, by ranks, or in a volly. The pikes to
shoulder (asloap and level) advance, trail, charge to front and rear; And both
pikes and muskets, how to wear their swords, how to keep their ranks and files,
to take their distances, both for muster and fight; To use their motions, to
the right, left, and rear; To double, open, close, and to reduce both files and
ranks; to countermarch, and wheel.

A. A calliver shouldred. The French continued the calliver longer then other
nations.
B. A calliber firing. C. A musketier shouldred. D. A musketier firing. E. A
pike ordered. F. Advanced. G. Shouldred level. H. Sloaped. I. Charged. K.
Trailed. L. Charged at foot. M. Charged to the rear.
musketeer in various poses woodcut panel of musketeer A

woodcut panel of musketeer B

woodcut panel of musketeer C

woodcut panel of musketeer D

woodcut panel of musketeer E

woodcut panel of musketeer F



musketeer in various poses woodcut panel G

woodcut panel H

woodcut panel I

woodcut panel K

woodcut panel L

woodcut panel M



Concerning the horse, they ought to be instructed how to manage their horses
and arms. Their horses to the right and left, to advance, stop, retreat.

Their arms, how properly to put on and wear their defensive ones; and to make
good use of the offensive, as how to charge and present their carbines and
pistols, and to find out the unarmed parts with their swords.

A troop of horse being to be mustered, marches three in rank; but to be
embattailed, it ought to be so disposed, that for every three in rank there be
one in file, so that a troop of 108 horse shall have 18 files and 6 ranks.

The distance of ranks ought to be (both for the length of the horse, as for
the spaces between them) of six Paces here are to be understood steps, and not
geometrical paces of 5 foot.
paces, and of files one pace.

To make one gross of many battaillons, the troops ought to be ordered into so
many ranks as the flank of the battaillon shall be intended to contain horses,
and then to draw up the troops flank to flank.

The provision of instruments of war is principally of arms and horses; Of
arms both offensive and defensive.

Of offensive, as Artillery, muskets, carbines, pistols, pikes, halberts,
partisans, half-pikes.

Of defensive, as head-pieces, casques, gorgets, cuirasses, pouldrons,
vanbraces, corslets, taces, targets, etc. And of draught horses in abundance
for the train of the Artillery, munitions, and victual.

The provision of money is to be made by a gathering of it together long before
hand in the most abundant measure that may be; by the preserving of it
diligently without employing of it upon vain and unprofitable things; and by
distributing of it where it shall be found necessary; and in needful things
not to be niggardly.

The provision of victual consists in the collection and duration of it, the
conservation and distribution.

Having made all these preparations, and filled the magazines, there must be
choice made of some city, there to make the staple of ammunition, to put the
train of Artillery in equippage, and there to take the muster of the army, as
well of the Infanterie and Cavallrie, as of the Artillery; there also to put
the army into form of battle, even as if they were that day to fight with
the enemy.

The manner of ordering the army for combat, is according to that which the
General shall intend to execute; as to go and conquer a country, to releeve a
place besieged, to give battle, to march cross through an enemies country,
or to make a retreat.

If he purpose to conquer a country, he ought to know the estate of the same,
as whether it be well peopled or not; whether he might be opposed by one or
more armies, and what manner of ones; to know their alliances, and the means
how to break them, or at least to hinder them from joining together, if it be
possible; to know the passages, their places of entrance and issuings out, the
woods, mountains, straits, ports, keys, bridges, havens; the situation of
their cities and places of strength, their garrisons and munitions. He ought to
be informed of the fertility of the country, to cause victual to be carried
thither if it be barren, or to discharge his army of that train if it abound.

He is to have the plat of the country in a general map, and also in many
particular ones, to know the situation and distance of places, and whether the
country be plain and even, or the contrary, and to judge by the capacity of
the place what front he may give to his army.

If his design be to releeve some besieged place, and to convey supplies
within it, and (to effect that) desires to force a quarter, he ought not to
spread out the wings of his army, but to keep himself serried close, as did
Prince Maurice when he releeved Coevorden against the King of Spains army
conducted by Verdugo; and the Marquis Spinola, when he went to releeve Groll.

woodcut of the army of Marquis Spinola The army of the Marquis Spinola when
he marched to releeve Groll.

Front.



If he intend to deliver battle to his enemy (the occasion offering it self,
and the country being fit for it) he ought to extend the front of his army as
much as may be (yet not so much that it be not strong enough in the depth to
sustain the enemies charge, but to have the vanguard, battle, and rear-guard
of sufficient thickness) to hinder his being surprised on the flanks, and to
the end that every man may fight (which is one of the most important
considerations) and to attempt to enclose the enemy within a crescent, so to
charge him on the front, flanks, and rear, if it may be, as did Gaston de Fois
at Ravenna against Raimond de Cardonne, and the Prince Maurice at Newport; and
also when he traversed the plains of Gulick.

The army of Prince Maurice when he went to besiege Gulick, ranged into two
forms of battle, the one when the pikes and muskets were joined, and the
other when they were divided.

The black squares represent the squadrous of horse, and the white ones the
battaillons of foot.

diagram of the formation of Prince Maurice's army at Gulick Front of the
Battle. You may see this figure more largely and more exactly in my book of
Cavallry, in figure 16.



If he desire to cause his Army to traverse or march through an enemies
country, he ought always to cause them to be quartered together in one body,
without disuniting of any part, and to march in Battalia, making choice of open
places (free from woods) and such as are plain and even, securing his quarters,
and carrying munitions with him, requisite for the time of his passing through:
for it is a very hard matter to lead an army through an enemies country,
especially if it be divided by rivers, covered with woods, and mountainous, and
if there be in it places of strength, and a mean army to defend it self; for
it always molests you, cuts off the passage of victual, hinders your army
in their march, always troubles them on the Hanks or Rear, waits upon
advantag^s, seeks occasions of surprising, and continually lays ambushes.

But after what manner soever your Army be embattailed, a care you must have
that all hands may be brought to fight, and that your Army may deliver combat
at least three times, which it shall do if it be divided into Van, Battle,
and Rear. Let the horse be so disposed as they may always second the foot,
and that in such sort, as finding themselves disordered, they may find place
to rally themselves under their shelter; having no Battaillon behind them so
near, whereby they might be again routed after such a disorder. The Artillery
ought to be so placed, that it hinder not the passage of the Battaillons, and
that it may easily discover those of the enemy. For the most part the
Infanterie is within the body of the Army, in several Battaillons, disposed
checquer wise: the Cavallrie on their Wings and Rear in several Squadrons,
and the Artillery according to the convenience of the place, on the Front of
the Army, or on the Flanks of the Battaillons.

The Army having been mustered at the place of rendez-vous, it does usually
march away in Battalia, to the place of their encamping that night (if the
country will permit it) that so they may be taught how to march in order of
Battle; which if it cannot do by reason of the unevenness of the country,
the Pioners must be caused to make many several ways, filling the ditches,
breaking down hedges, and laying bridges of boats or otherwise over rivers and
brooks.

In the middle-way the Artillery, Munition, and Baggage shall march; on the
wings of these one part of the Infanterie is to march in their long order,
either three or five in Rank; on the Flank of these Foot some Carabines; the
two third parts of Cuirassiers shall be in two Squadrons at the head of the
Army, and the other one third part in the like disposition on the Rear; the
Harquebusiers shall march before the Cuirassiers in the Front of all the Army
with the Carabines and Dragons, saving some few which shall be on the Rear;
the Infanterie o^^ t to march in the middle, in the form of double Battaillons
as much as may be, divided into Van, Battle, and Rear: all which will be
more clear by the form which the Marquis Spinola observed when he marched
through Freeseland to besiege Lingen, whereof the figure follows.

woodcut of army Front.


If the enemy be near to the place where the army is to arive, the Marshall
of the Field (having chosen a fit place for the field of combat) gives order
for the placing of the Artillery, disparteth the quarters and places of the
Regiments and Munitions, causes all the camp to be entrenched round about
according to the art of fortification. To this end he must endeavor to lodge
at a seasonable hour, that so he may have time to make his retrenchments, to
divide the quarters, to place the guards, to send out to forage, to cause the
huts to be made, to discover the actions of the enemy; and to prevent a
thousand inconveniences which the night produces; disposing all things
according to the place and time.

Of encamping the Army. CHAP. II.
AN Army is quartered in the field or in some village: in the field when the
enemy is at hand, then must it be quartered in Battaillons, as if every hour
there were occasion of cambat. Also, the lodging in the field is when you lay
any siege, or when the infection compells you to flee the places of shelter, or
when the country is wasted and without houses.

The quartering in villages is when the enemy is far off, so as you may have
time to put the Army into form of Battle in the place of Alarm, before he
can be upon your jack.

Whether the encamping be in the field or in the villages, it must be
commodious and assured.

It will be commodious if there be abundance of water, wood, forage, and
capacity of room convenient to lodge the whole army, and to make the
Alarme-place.

It will be assured (being in the field) by fortifying the camp round about, by
causing it to be well guarded by good Corps-du-guards, and Sentinels within,
and Sentinell-perdues without, having Redouts round about, if the enemy be to
be feared, or that he be near. See the Leaguer of Prince Maurice before Sluys,
and before Grave, Fol. 87, 88.

It will be assured in the villages when the Alarme-place shall front the
enemy, being eminent and commanding the ground round about it, capable to range
the whole army into order o^ battle, fortified by art and nature, commodiou^
for the advenues and sallies without confusion o^ the troops; That it be not
assaultable without great disadvantage to the enemy, being near t^ the
quarters, well defended by Artillery and well secured by Corps-du-guards,
as well o^ Infanterie as Cavallrie.

Concerning the quarters, they must be difficult to force and to assault (at
lest unawares) f^cile to be releeved, and therefore near together fortified,
retrenched, and well guarded.

So then, all that is to be considered about the lodging of an Army which is
to be encampe^ for a long time (for, for one night it is onel^ re^uisite to
make choice of places advantagiou^ and such as are strong by nature, or to
defen^ them by wagons or other means of enclosin^ the camp) consists in the
commodity of (...) things, namely, victual, water, forage, wood, ^^tuation,
and enclosures of the field.

Having regard to the certainty of victual and munitions by not adventuring
too far of; and leaving none of the enemies towns on the Flanks which might
intercept or cut off your way; seeking out the commodity of rivers, to be
served of water to drink, for conveyance, or to impale with wagons, and to
secure the one Flank of the Army; it being impossible to be without them, and
chiefly good ones.

For these reasons mountainous places are to be avoided, and also valleys; the
one for the barrenness, the other for the badnesse and discommoditie of the
filthy pooles, and for the bad air which they cause, being crude and foggie.

Regard must be had of the abundance, commodity, and certainty of forage;
for the horse make an incredible waste, besides that much is required for the
Soldiers to lie upon and to cover their huts with.

Good store of wood must be had for sires in the Corps-du-guards, and to build
huts.

A care must be had that the place where you intend to encamp be smooth, plain,
and sandy (if it may be) far from any place that commands it, or if there
be any, it must be seized upon and taken in within the retrenchment, to
discover and command the champain.

If there be any wood near, you ought to make use of it and guard it, somewhat
enlarging the retrenchment, and leaving room between both, to meet with
ambushes which the enemy might lay within it.

The form of a retrenchment of an Army is usually square, and the sides
thereof ought to be fortified by Tenailles, to defend the one by the other, and
so to be disposed of, as in giving fire by night those of the Army may not
hurt each other; making them more or less strong, as the enemy is more or
less to be feared.

Touching the particular things which concern the disparting of the lodgings
within the enclosure of the camp, these things are to be observed;

The retrenchement ought to be in breadth and depth two fadomes, and the
paraper one fadom in height. Round about the inside of the retrenchement there
must be a space left of The proportion generally observed is 200 foot.
40 or 45 fadomes broad, which is called the Alarm-place, which must be
spacious enough to contain the whole Army in Battalia.

Then follow the quarters of 300 foot The Author says 300 foot broad, but
that is a mistake.
deep, which must be divided (for the making of the lodgings) after this manner;

For a Company of 200 footmen there must be 56 foot in Front, and 200 in
depth, to make 4 rows of huts, 25 in each row: between which there must be 3
streets of 8 foot broad. Every hut has 8 foot square to lodge 2 soldiers. All
the doors of them open upon 2 streets, and answer just over against each other.

The quartering of a Foot-companie.
A.B. The Front of a Company, is of four huts. A.C. The depth, is of 25 huts.
D. The streets between the huts.
diagram of quartering an infantry companyBefore the Companies are the
Captains lodgings, every of them at the head of his own Company, possessing
in breadth the whole Front of the Company, and in depth 25 foot. These
lodgings are divided from the Companies by a street of 35 foot broad, where the
Arms are placed, as also the Corps-du-guards, and Colors. Behind the
Companies are the Sutlers huts, containing 20 foot in depth, and these are
separated from the Companies by a street of 20 foot broad. The Companies are
divided from each other by a street of 8 foot breadth.

In the middle of the Regiment, there must be a place of 80 foot breadth, in
Front of which the Colonel is to be lodged, and more inward, the Sergeant
Major, Provost, and all the Off^cers of the Regiment. The space between each
Regiment must be 200 or 300 foot.

The quartering of a Regiment of six Companies of foot.
diagram of quartering six infantry companies.

I. The retrenchment of the camp. K. The Alarme-place. A.B. The depth of the
quarter. A. The Captains lodgings. D. A street between them and their
Companies, where the Pikes are placed. C. The Companies. B. The Suttlers. E.
The street between the Companies and Sutlers. G. A void place in the middle of
the Regiment. F. The Colonels lodging. H. A space between the Regiments. The
placing of the Captains tents at the head of their Companies, is now left off.
And they are now in the Rear of them in E. and before the Sutlers: partly for
that by this means the Captains can better take notice of, and so remedy the
disorders which happen in the Sutlers huts: and that so the access to the
Alarme-place may be the freer, for that the Captains tents (taking up the
ground before) hindered it.

When the Infanterie is quartered alone without Cavallrie, it is disposed as
the figure following shows.

The Infanterie quartered on the side of a river.
diagram of quartering infantry beside a river

A. The field of battle. B. The Alarme-place. C. The huts of the quarters. D.
The Sutlers. E. The guards of the General. F. The Generals lodgings. G. The
quarter for the powder and train of Artillery. H. The wagons for victual. I.
A bridge of boats. K. A fort to guard the bridge.
If the horse be quartered amongst the foot, it is to be done after this
manner. To a troop of 100 horse must be allowed 70 foot in Front, and 200 in
depth. To two horsemen 8 foot of length Others allow but 10 foot.
12 in breadth, to make one hut. Every horse occupies 4 foot in breadth and 10
in depth. All the men are lodged in 2 Files, and so are the horses. Between the
huts and the stables there is a street of Some allow but 5 foot.
8 foot broad. The horses stand with their heads toward their riders huts. The
street between the stables is 13 foot, as some say. For this you may see my
book of Cavallrie in figure 4.
10 foot broad, for the passage of the horses.

The quartering of a troop of 100 horse.
A. B. The Front of the troop. A. C. The depth. A. C. and B.D. The soldiers
huts, 25 in each file. E.F. and G.H. The 2 rows of stables, each of them for
50 horses. K. Is the street between the stables. I. I. Are the streets between
the huts and the stables.
diagram of the quartering of the cavalryThe Captains lodgings are at the head
of the troops, every one before his own troop, taking up in Front the whole
breadth of the troops, and in depth 40 foot. Between these lodgings and the
troops there is a street of 20 foot breadth. Behind the troops are the Sutlers
huts, of 20 foot deep, separated from the troops, by a street of 20 foot broad.

The distance between each troop is 20 foot.

The quartering of a Regiment of five troops of horse.
diagram of quartering a regiment of cavalry

Q. The retrenchment of the camp. R. The Alarme-place. L.M. The depth of the
quarter. L. The Captains lodgings. N. The street between the Captains lodgings,
and their troops. O. The lodgings of the trocps. P. The street between the
troops and the Sutlers. M. The Sutlers huts. S. The streets between the troops.
T. The space between the Regiments.
When the horse and foot encamp together, they are disposed of as the figure
following demonstrateth.

It seldom happens that they are quartered together, by reason of the great
annoyance which the Cavallrie brings to the Infanterie.

A quarter of Infanterie and Cavallrie, fronting every way.
diagram of quartering of infantry and cavalry together

B. The Alarme-place. C. The quarters. D. The streets between the quarters. E,
The Regiments of foot. F. The Regiments of horse. F. F. The General of horse.
G. The General of the Army. H. The quarter for the Artillery, and the
General thereof. I. The quarter for the Commissarie General of the victual,
and his train. K. Lodgings for Strangers. L. The Market and Shambles.
Of embattailing the Army. CHAP. III.
THere be two kinds of occasions of giving battle; the one is particular,
happening between small troops, as encounters which (for the most part) are given
by accident, and sometimes upon deliberation; also such skirmishes as are
ordinarily used to draw out, entertain, or discover the enemy.

The other is general, as when one Army coming to encounter the other, they
give Battle; wherein for the diversities of times before the combat, during
it, and after it, there must be had diverse considerations. Before the combat,
you must know the enemies forces, both horse and foot, as also his Artillery
and Munitions; you must also know whereunto he chiefly trusts, in what order
he uses to fight, also the situation and passages of the country. You must
make diligent discovery of his designs and actions by your own spies, or the
enemies, being corrupted with money or promises.

You must attempt to divide his forces, to raise jealousies and diffidences
between his chiefs, or between them and their officers, to incite his soldiers
to mutiny.

You must strive to seize upon the most advantageous ground to range the Army
into Battalia, having regard to the wind to avoid the dust and smoke, and to
drive it into their eyes; and to the sun, that you be not dazzled: directing
your self according to the place, and the number of your own and the enemies
forces.

The soldiers must be deprived of all hope of saving themselves by flight, and
must be brought to a disposition to fight courageously; propounding to them the
glory, the booty, the recompense, and the necessity.

The order which must be observed in ranging the Army for In my book of
Cavallrie (before mentioned) you may see diverse forms of battle in figure 8,
9, 10, etc.
combat has been showed in the first chapter, being the same as the march in
battalia.

The Artillery must play so soon as they begin to discover the battaillons of
the enemy, making the battery fitly and speedily, to disorder and scatter
them before they come to give battle.

Whilst the Army stands ranged in battalia, expecting the signal for combat,
the Marshalls of the field ought to ride before the Van, to cause them to
advance when the fight shall begin, according to the Generals order, and to
command the battaillons to join and charge the enemy, or to receive his
charge according to occurrences.

The General of the Army by his diligence ought to be as the soul in the body
throughout all the members; always observing the countenance of the enemy, to
make his men fight to purpose; assisting the broken battaillons by fresh ones,
or by squadrons, and ordering those which (having been disbanded) shall rally
again, to send them to the combat to releeve their fellows. And because such as
have been beaten will hardly return to fight again, you must not trust too much
to them.

As soon as you be within reach of the Canon, you must go on directly upon the
enemy, (unless you be sheltered from his Artillery) by this means your
soldiers are encouraged, you avoid the danger of the enemies Canon, and you
leave behind you the place where your Army stood ranged, which ground will
serve to rally and order the Battaillons which shall happen to be routed. You
must not give on so hastily, as that thereby the Battaillons be disordered; and
on the other-side you are to use a marching pace until you come within
distance of a Pistoll-shot, but then to double your pace and to charge
furiously, the Pikes being close serried, and the Muskets continually playing
on the Flanks, having certain Targetteers in Front which may shelter the
Battaillon, and disorder the enemies Pikes.

You must give a sufficient Front to the Battaillons, that so they may overwing
the enemy, and charge him in Front and Flank, observing on which part the
enemy gives the most violent assault, and thither to send the troops of
Reserve; as also, where he is weakest, that there he may be the more easily
routed; dissembling and concealing all sinister accidents; and whatsoever
proves prosperous, to cause that to be published aloud, for the raising of
their spirits which happily might be become heartlesse, either by overmuch
labor, or by the rumor of some disaster; propounding to them the faintness
of the enemy, the death of his Commanders, the slight of his troops, the
spoil, the honor of the victory, and the great booty; Sending the orders and
commands by Officers and persons known, and not from hand to hand by pass
parolle.

After the combat, either you are vanquisher or vanquished: If you be
vanquisher, and have no cause to fear the enemy any more, as being not able
to rally himself, either you content your self with the victory, or you
attempt farther to conquer.

If you rest content with this victory, God is solemnly to be praised, the
soldiers are to be reduced, commended, and recompensed, principally the Chiefs
and such as have performed any signal acts, sharing out the spoil amongst them
according to their merits, giving order that the prisoners be trustily kept and
courteously used, causing the hurt to be carefully cured and the dead buried.

If you attempt to conquer the enemies country, you are to publish the
victory, for that will cause his confederates to shrink from their alliance,
it will affright your enemy, and will make the Neuters to declare themselves
for the victour; it will keep your confederates faithful and constant, your
subjects obedient, and will procure favor from all men. Then the Army must be
supplied with men and munitions, the enemies garrisons must be summoned,
recompensing such as shall yield the places within their custody, dealing
rigorously with such as shall be headstrong, gaining the great ones of the
country by money, estates, and honor, attempting to seize upon the advenues
and passages, and to leave nothing at your back which might hinder the passage
of your munitions and victual. If you be vanquished, either the enemy gives
you time to retreat, or else he pursues you with all his forces. If he give you
time, you must gather together all what possibly you can of your broken and
scattered men, making your retreat resolutely and honorably, and showing your
self in the field again so soon as may be with the greatest number of soldiers
that can be gotten, to make head again against the enemy, to oppose his
designs, to disquiet and molest his actions, to work his confederates to
oppose him, to divert and divide his forces, to fortify the passages, to
provide and furnish your frontier places with victual, munition, and garrisons.

If you be pursued with extremity, you must retreat in the best order you
shall be able, making it appear you are not vanquished in your courage, though
you be so in your fortunes; causing all your country to take arms, and that
such as shall be in arms do present themselves at the passage to hinder the
enemies entrance, breaking down the bridges and landing-places of rivers,
cutting of the highways, and felling of trees to lay a cross the highways,
breaking down the sluices, and drowning the country, if it be possible,
assuring your self of the fidelity of your cities and subjects, the one by
forts, cittadels and garrisons; the other by hostages, offices and benefits.

Of the building of forts. CHAP. IIII.
BEfore the fortifying of any place, consideration must be had of the
situation: for if it be on a mountain which is all a rock, and that the place
comprehends all the top, it will be difficult to approach, the flanks will be
secured, it will be free from mines and command, it will easily discover round
about, it will do horrible execution, and will be wholesome both for the
inhabitants and for the munitions. But such a place has usually these
discommodities, want of water and earth, hard to be retrenched, easy to be
quickly blocked up, and the passages and advenues for the releeving of it,
easy to be cut off

If it be on a mountain which is not a rock, it will be subject to mining, the
trenches of approach will be easily undermined, and it will have almost all the
discommodities of the place above said; but it will also have the advantage of
store of earth, and by that means it may easily be retrenched.

If the place be seated on a mountain which has one or more advenues which
command it, such place will be easy to be assailed and battered from those
advenues.

If the place be moorish, the approaches are difficult, but the discommodities
are great for them within it; for they are soon shut up, their sallies are
difficult and dangerous, the place is unwholesome for the inhabitants, the
munitions are soon corrupted, and it is hard to be releeved.

If the place be on a plain, but commanded by one or more hills, it will have
an infinite number of discommodities, and almost no conveniences.

If it be in a plain which is sandy, the works which there shall be made will
hardly be worth any thing.

But if it be on a plain champain, and level on all sides, the earth being fat
and strong, it will be easy there to fortify, and to prevent the
discommodities, having very advantageous conveniences.

But whatsoever the situation be, if you intend there to fortify, you must
first calculate whether your means be sufficient, whether the season be
fitting, whether you have a sufficient number of workmen and tools, time
enough to finish it before the season change, or the enemy can come upon you;
whether you have soldiers enough to guard it, sufficient Artillery to defend
it, munition enough for the soldiers and Artillery, victual sufficient for
the men, and fodder for the horses, succors so near as that they may arrive
within such time as it may be conceived the fort may be maintained against the
violence of the enemy.

If all these things do favor you, you may boldly fall to work, having regard
first to the matter, and secondly to the form.

Concerning the matter, if you have the commodity of stone, brick, and chaulk,
you must line all the works of the curtains, bullworks, and counterscarps with
good and strong sloapings, after this manner; those of the curtain and
counterscarp have a fourth part of the height for their sloap, and those of the
faces of the Bullworks a third.

The faces of the Bullworks must have spurs, ten foot distant from each
other, of three foot thick and 25 foot long, the said spurs being strongly
bound in with the wall, which must be built in arches underpropped 6 foot
without the foundations only on the spurs.

If you have only earth, there must be such a sloap given to the works,
according as they are strong or sandy, ordinarily of 5 foot one. Such works
must be well furnished with pallisadoes, and environed with water, for they are
subject to surprises, because the showers of rain and frosts make them moulder
away.

Touching the form, if it be regular (which is when it has the sides equal)
such as the fortification of one face is, such are all the rest. But if it be
irregular (which is when the sides be unequal, as all cities are which are
repaired) the fortification on all parts must be disagreeing. But what form
soever it has you must observe the rules following as much as may be, and
labor to make it equally strong on all sides.

Rules of Fortification.
That the angles or points of the Bullworks (which are called angles flanked)
be made as great and blunt as may be; for the more obtuse the flanked angles
be, the better; and the angles flanking are the more sharp.

A. B. C. The angle flanked. B. C. D. The angle flanking.
That the shoulders of the Bullworks be made massy enough to resist the
violence of the enemy, and to hinder him from ruining the flanks which they
cover; and long enough to cover (in sight) at least half of the flank of the
casemat, when you behold it from the point of the counterscarp of the opposite
Bullwork. The casemat must have of breadth the moytie of the thickness of the
shoulder, and the plain of it of 2 foot high above the plain of the dry moat,
or of the surface of the water. The line of the thickness of the shoulder, and
of the breadth of the casemat, is called the line of the flank, and the longer
it is, the better: provided that it bring no discommoditie to the other parts.

F. G. The thickness of the shoulder. F. E The breadth of the casemat. E G The
line of the flank.
That every face of a fortress must have two flanks, that so it may defend it
self both on the front and on the sides, and the one by the other.

O. Is the center of the Bullwork. O.P. A face of the fort. H. Is one flank. I.
Is the other flank.
That the lines of defense be not so long, that they be without the reach of
your shot; nor so short that the enemy (being lodged on the counterscarp) be
able with his musket shot to beat yours out of your casemats.

I. B. and H. D. are the lines of defense.
That the Bullworks be large and hollow, capable of diverse retrenchements, that
there may be formed large flanks, and that they may contain good store of
soldiers: for the hollow room is the place appointed to fight in, and to bear
retrenchements.

O. and P. represent the places of the Bullworks.
The sallie-ports ought to be placed between the shoulders of the Bullworks,
and the casemats.

F. The sally-port. A. B. H.B. I.D. and D.G. the faces of the Bullworks.
diagram of bulwarks

That the faces of the Bullworks and the curtains be sunk within the moat to
the upper line, and that upon this line there be a parapet of 8 foot height and
Three foot for the thickness of the parapet is (surely) far too little.
Maroloys and others say 20 foot. And the Author himself says from 15 to 20
foot, in the words following.
3 foot thickness. Then let the way for the rounds be 2 fathom broad (therein
being comprehended the 2 foot-banks of the parapet) as well of the Bullworks as
the curtains.

S. The upper line or superficies. T. The parapet of the curtain. V. The way
for the rounds. X. The foot-banks.
That the rampart of the Bullworks be 15 foot high on the plain of the city,
and that of the curtain twenty five, without reckoning the parapet: briefly
that it be so high, as it may keep the houses from being battered and ruined.
Let their parapets be from 15 to 20 foot thick, and 8 foot high.

Y. Z. The height of the rampart of the Bullworks. Z. th. The thickness of the
parapet.
The ditches must be from 12 to 16 fathom broad, and from 5 to 6 deep, beneath
the covert way (being dry) if it may be, having a small ditch in the middle of
20 foot broad, and as much or more in depth. If the moat be full of water, it
must be 20 fathom broad, and from 4 to 5 fathom deep, and divided by a dam of
earth of 30 foot thick. The town wall must be high enough, because the depth of
the dry ditch which gives height to the wall, is here filled with water.

M. S. The breadth of the ditch. M. N. The depth.
The covert way must be from 3 to 4 fathom broad, having a parapet of 10 or 12
foot high, the moytie of it being sunk into the plain.

L. M. The breadth of the covert way. K. L The height of the parapet of the
counterscarp.
The parapets must be of earth, or of unburnt brick, except the outward row,
which must be of burnt brick, to resist the injury of weather.

If the curtains be long, there must be a cavallero set on every point; but if
they be short there will need but one, which shall be on the middle of them.
They must be so high as they may command all the works, and the hillocks
without, if there be any, and if it may be. They are commonly raised 10 foot
above the rampart. Their length is taken from the number and quality of the
Artillery which you would plant thereon; and their breadth depends on the
length and reversing of the pieces of Artillery and of a parapet of three
fathomes and a half thick.

. The height of the cavallero upon the rampart.
The pieces of ordinance nearer to the center of the fort must command those
which are farther off; raising the one above the other from 8 to 10 foot.

cross sectional diagram of moat and bulwark

That all the walls of the Bullworks and curtains turn their Front from the
opposite places which command them, leading them bias-wise, that so the
battery be not raised perpendicularly upon it, and that the bullet may glance
by means of the bias and sloap, and that they be not commanded nor seen from
far off.

The market place of the city (or such places where the grand watches are
kept) must be covered in the middle, to shelter the battaillons from the rain,
and there must be pent-hous^s along the streets, which lead to the rampart, to
the same end.

The streets ought to be 6 fathom broad at the least, that so the wagons and
Artillery may pass the freelier.

The stairs to pass to the covert way of the counterscarp, must be just in the
middle of the curtain, between the two flanks of the Bullworks.

Stairs of the counterscarp.
There must be half moons made on the forepart of the curtains, right over
against the angles, flanking on the counterscarps; having their faces defended
by Bullworks open behind, that so they may be defended by the curtain, being
12 foot high from the plain; having a ditch of 25 foot broad and 15 foot deep,
beneath its covertway.

A half moon.
Before the half moons you must advance tenailles or hornworks, and at the head
of them half Bullworks, and before them redouts, casting the earth on that side
toward the city, which will serve for a parapet. These works must be 10 foot
deep and 15 foot broad, and must be desended from the city and from the
counterscarp.

Trenches, half bullworks or counterpoints.
diagram of counterscarp, half moon, trenches

The French and Spanish draw the lines of defense from the flanks of the
Bullworks; and the Hollanders and Venetians draw them from the middle of the
curtain; and this last manner seems to be best, even in great places, by
reason of the abundance of firings, which ought to be preferred before the form
of flanked angles.

The inconvenience of such places as overtop or command you, may be remedied,
either by casting them down, sheltring your self from them, or possessing and
fortifying them by a hornwork or tenaile, or by two half Bullworks, or by one
Bullwork and two half ones, thereafter as they be in greatness: at least you
must be sheltred from them by good and strong traverses.

These that follow are four several ways of fortifying, according to the
French, Spanish, Low Country, and Italian fashions.
The manner of fortifying places according to the French.
diagram of French fortifications

A. B. C. and A. I. H. Are each of them 2 half right angles, that so you may
have L. B. F. and G. I. N. right. B. D. and I. E. divide the half-right angles,
into two equal parts. In the figures which have less then nine sides: but in
those figures which have above eight, they are perpendicular upon D. E As M. D.
and O. E. D. F. is perpendicular upon B. C. E. G. is perpendicular upon I. H.
B. F. and G. I. are the faces of the Bullworks. D. F and G. E. are the flanks.
D. E. is the curtain. B. E. and I. D. are the lines of defense, from 100 to 120
fathom long.
The Spanish fortifications.
When the Bullworks are made with ears or orillons.
diagram of Spanish fortifications

A. B. Must be divided into 8 equal parts. A. C. and B. F. have each of them
two. C. D. and F. G. have each of them one. E. F. and H. C. must be from 850 to
900 foot long.
The Spanish fortification.
When the Bullworks are made without orillons.
diagram of Spanish fortifications

A. B. is divided into 6 equal parts. A. C. and B. F. have each of them one.
C. D. and F. G. have also each one. E. F. and H. C. must be from 850 to 900
foot long.
Low Country fortification. In this table you may find the quantity of the
angles flanking and flanked, in this manner.
To find them in a figure of 6 angles, look in the column A. B. the number of
the angles 6. and just over against it in the column C D. you shall find for
the moytie of its angle flanking 67 degrees, 30 min. And in the column E. F.
you shall find for the angle flanked 75 degrees. 0 min.


The angles of the figures. The moitie of angles flanking. Angles flanked or
Bullworks. The best approved Authors (for Low Country fortification) as
Samuel Marolois, Freitag, and others, dissent much from this table.
A C E 4 75 0 60 0 5 70 30 69 0 6 67 30 75 0 7 65 21 79 17 8 63 45 82 30 9 62
30 85 0 10 61 30 87 0 11 60 41 88 38 12 60 0 90 0 13 59 25 91 25 14 58 55 92 9
15 58 30 93 0 16 58 7 93 45 17 57 47 ^4 25 18 57 50 ^5 0 19 57 14 ^5 32 20 57 ^
^6 0 B D F

To design a fortification of 6 Bullworks, draw the line H. I. set the
compasses in O. and make the semicircle G. L. M. then mark L. G. and L. M.
each of them of 67 degrees 30 min. then draw the straight lines O. G. and O. M.
you shall have the angle flanking G. O. M of 135. degrees.

After that, make the straight line R. A. which cuts with right angles the line
H. I. (it matters not whether it be near or farther off from O.) divide it into
5 equal parts, and give four to each of the lines R. F. and A. C. which will
make the faces of the Bullworks. Then divide one face into 5 equal parts, and
give two to each of the flanks A. N. and R. P. which must be perpendicular upon
the line R. A. then draw the line P. N. which will make the curtain.

diagram of low country fortification

Place the compasses on the point C. make the semicircle A. Q. of 75 degrees. (as
is marked in the table) then draw the line C. Q. and you shall have the angle
of the Bullwork A. C. Q. which being divided into 2 equal parts, by the right
line C. I. will make in I. the center of the place.

It is a general rule, that the faces of the Bullworks are the four fifth
parts of the curtains, and the flanks the two fifth parts of the faces of the
Bullwork.

The faces of the Bullworks, in great figures, must have 400 foot; in mean
figures 350, and in small ones 300. You may forbear the precedent table,
observing (for a general rule) to give to the angle flanked three fifth parts
of the angle of circumference of the figure which you intend to fortify.

The Venetian fortification.
The distance of the one Center of a Bullwork to the other A. B. is never
longer then 200 Venetian paces, of 5 foot a pace: nor shorter then 150, that so
the line of defense be neither too short nor too long.

diagram of Venetian fortification

A. B. must be divided into 6 equal parts. A. C. is the sixth part of A. B. C.
E. is equal to A. C. H. G. is drawn from the third part of the curtain, in the
figures of less then 8 sides: and from the middle of them in the figures of
more then 7. M. N. divides it self into 3 equal parts, two for the shoulder,
and one for the casemat.
Of the defense of fortresses. CHAP. V.
THe defense of fortresses depends on the good order which the Governor
observes, as well within as without the place, be it for matters politic or
military.

The politic order within the place contains all things belonging to a
civil life, as livelihood, conservation, and justice, both toward the
townsmen and soldiers: always having an eye to their manners, life and
condition, being assured of their fidelity (but principally of the soldiers)
before they be brought into the place. And being there, to have subtle and
secret spies among them, who must observe how they live, what practices they
have, whether they be discontented at the Governor, and what they say in
public and in private: finally to have an eye to all their actions.

Touching his care without, he must take notice of such as enter, which are
either countrymen, who (under pretext either of bringing something to sell, or
of coming to buy) are let into the town: or else merchants, who by occasion of
commerce do come in and go out at their pleasure. Of these there must be regard
had whether they deal with persons suspected, or that themselves be such, or
whether they come from some suspected place; and not to suffer any to enter,
but persons of good assurance, and well known.

The military care has respect either to the gates or the walls. Of the
gates, either at the opening or shutting of them.

Concerning the opening of them, he must (before the setting of them open) send
out an officer with some soldiers, to discover whether there be any ambushes
in the suburbs, churches, fields, decayed buildings, hollow ways, valleys,
ditches, enclosed gardens or woods: and at the shutting of them, the Sergeant
Major must be there assisting as often as may be, and to search and feel the
locks with his own hands.

Touching the walls, he ought to have regard whether they be low, ill flanked,
decayed, the moat dry; and to use the remedies; as also to the places where
the water enters, or issues out.

The gates and walls must be secured with good corps-du-guards, and sentinells
near each other. He must never slight the danger, but must always suspect and
fear surprises and treasons, being vigilant and active: often visiting his
guards, and coming upon them at unawares: that so they may fear as much to be
surprised by the Governor as by the enemy; which course will hold them to
their duties.

Of the taking of fortresses by petard or any other surprise, or by treachery.
CHAP. VI.
THey which have an enterprise upon any place, will surprise it either by
petard, or by scalado, or by some other defect which is in the gates or walls,
or else by intelligence and treachery.

If you would surprise it by petard, you must first well know the gates, tails,
bars, pallisadoes, draw-bridges, bridges, pitfalls, portcullices, and grates:
and the places of the flanks, whether they be on the sides, above, or before;
whether the ditch be dry or filled with water; whether it be broad or deep;
whether there be loop holes over the gate, corps-du-guards, and in what place;
whether the entrance into the gate be right on or winding; and in all these
things you must observe how many paces there may be of length, breadth, height,
and distance between piece and piece, as near as may be.

The place being discovered, you must make use of stratagems to cloak your
intentions, and to divert your enemy to some other place.

When there be any suburbs, decayed houses or any woods near the place which
you intend to surprise, you may make use of them to facilitate your approaches,
and to lay your ambushes, also the easier to discover what is done about the
gates of the town, so to lay hold on the occasion at the instant when you see
it fair for you; and to receive advertisements by those persons which you shall
have sent to discover the place.

Being thus near, you may to good purpose releeve those which give the first
onset, and dispatch the readier; yet you must not approach so near, as that you
be under command of their canon, for fear (if you be put to the retreat) you be
had by the breech.

The time well taken does much facilitate enterprises, which is usually a
little before day, by reason that the sentinels (being weary and saint) do
sleep, and darkness favors the approaches, and serves for cover of those
which put the plot in practice, prepare the engines, and plant the petards, and
thence gives terror to the assailed.

The petards must be made of fine or red copper, with a tenth part of brass.
That for the bridge must be 11 inches long, and at the breech 7 inches and a
half about, and 5 inches wide within. The metal at the breech must be one inch
and one fourth part thick, and a half inch thick at the neck, without reckoning
the muzzel ring. The mouth must be 10 inches wide, and it must have three
handles, and a pipe over the touchhole joining to the breech. It must weigh
from 60 to 70 pound of metal.

That for gates with overthwart bars, must be 9 inches long, five twelve
parts of an inch thick at the neck, and one inch at the breech. The mouth 7
inches wide, 6 on the outside of the breech, and 4 within. It must weigh near
upon 40 pound.

diagram of petard

That for gates with plain bolts, or for pallisadoes, must be 7 inches long,
one third part of an inch thick at the neck, and three fourth parts of an inch
at the breech, the mouth 4 inches wide, 3 inches and a half at the outside of
the breech, and 2 within. It must weigh near upon 15 pound.

diagram of petard

Between the petard and the bridge, there must be a madrier or wooden planchier
placed, 1 foot and a half broad, 2 foot long, and 3 inches thick. If the wood
be not very strong, it must be strengthened with plates of iron, being set on
athwart on the outside of the planchier, and lengthwise on the other side.

diagram of madrier

The charge of the petard for the bridge is from 5 to 6 pound of poWder; of
those for strong gates from 3 to 4 pound. And for pallisadoes ftom one pound
and a half to two pound. They must be charged with the finest powder that can
be had, beating it hard into the petard (but not so that you bruise the grain)
which must be stopped with a wooden trencher or plug of an inch thick, very
justly fitted, and some molten wax to be powered on it to close the rifts, and
to keep the water from getting in, if perchance it should fall into the water.
The petard must not be charged up to the mouth, but there must be 3 fingers
breadth left, which room must be filled up with towe or such like, which must
be pressed down very hard, and then there must be a linen cloth to cover the
mouth of the petard, close bound with a cord about the neck, to keep it in.
Over the touchhole there must be applied a stopple of cork, and over it a
plaster of wax or pitch, for fear of water.

Before the petard be hung on, you must have a priming iron to stir the
priming powder, which must be of a slow mixture (that so the petardier may have
leisure to retire, before the reverse of the petard surprise him) and it must
be fit to resist water. It is compounded thus; take 3 parts of fine powder, 6
of sulphur, and 9 of saltpeter, pound each of them apart very small, then mix
them together in a dish with a stick; then pour oil of peter into it by
little and little (that so it may not become as a paste) and let it dry
thoroughly in the shadow, then lade your pipe with it.

The easiest way to hang the petard at the bars or gates is by a fork, as
this figure shows.

drawing of petard

But the petard for the bridge must be applied by a carriage, made as follows.

It must have a counterpoise at the tail mountted on 2 wheels of three foot
and a half high, and two inches and a half thick, mounted on a square iron
axletree, one inch and a half thick. The point of the carriage A. B. must be
broad enough to contain the petard, namely one foot; C. D. 3 foot, A. E. 20
foot, E. C. 6 foot. The carriage is composed of 3 long planks C. A. G. H. D. B.
each of which are made of 4 pieces, bound about with rings of iron, as is
showed in H. I. K. L. and are to be taken asunder, to make them portable, as is
seen in M. N. And are then fastened together with the pin O as is showed by.
These 3 planks are fastened together by bars 2 inches broad, and 1 inch thick,
one foot distant from each other, as in F. The breadth of the planks is P. Q. 5
inches. Q. R. 2 inches, T. V. 8 inches, T S. 3 inches. Along the plank of the
middle of the carriage G. H there must be a range made to lay a train to give
fire to the petard.

diagram of a carriage

The rolling briage must be made even as the carriage, saving that it is as
broad at the end X as at the other Y. and is covered with planks, as is showed
in Z.

diagram of a rolling bridge

Two men may easily thrust forward the carriage, and apply the petard to the
bridge.

woodcut of two men using a petard

When there is a gate between the bridge and the draw bridge, the petard must
be hung just at the middle of the bridge; but when there is no gate, the petard
must be placed just against the drawbridge, that so meeting with the violence
thereof, it may raise it on high, and by that means beat down the drawbridge.

If the bridge join not close aloft (as often it happens) the petard must be
placed as high as may be; for the violence of the blow which it will give
against the stone-work of the gate, will fell it down.

To fell down a drawbridge which joyneth not well to the wall, it may be done
without petard, by a tortois of brass placed between the wall and the bridge,
which will fell it down with the crack of it.

This tortois is made thus; Take 2 dishes of brass which are made hollow 5
inches, 1 foot broad, and 2 inches thick; join them one against the other, and
fill them with powder.

Ordinarily the good order, and good provision of all things necessary,
causes the execution to succeed well: so the least disorder hinders it.
Therefore every thing must be commodiously ordered, distributing to several
commanders the diversity of things which must be executed; as to arrive at the
place 2 hours before day, to send out to discover, to know whether the enemy
be not advertised, and whether he keeps himself on his guards (which would give
you cause of changing your purpose) to cause your carriages and rolling bridges
to be joined together far enough from the gate, that so they of the town may
not hear the mule go which carries them, and the noise of them which are to
unloade them: to cause the petardiers to advance, each of them carrying his
fork and planchier, and on his side a man carrying his petard, which shall make
overture of the bars, pallisadoes, and gates, so that the carriage of the
petard for the bridge may pass, that so they may fell down the bridge. If the
bridge be in several pieces, they must be drawn together with hooks. If one
shaft keep up aloft, a petard must be applied to it. If the bridge fall into
the moat, you must make use of a rowling-bridge. After that, there must be 2
crutches, shoats, or tressels set under the portcullice to hinder it from being
let down: but if it be let down down before, it must be overthrown by the
violence of petards with great planchiers (if it be of wood) but if it be of
iron, you must have a petard with strong handles, to fasten one or more bowts
of iron chains about them, having hooks at each end to grasp good store of
bars.

The gate being opened, you must readily succor the first which seized on it,
charging furiously upon those which shall oppose and make head against you,
casting grenades and fire-pots amongst them to disorder them, attempting to
gain their barricadoes by musketeers and pikes, making all possible speed (for
in this business diligence does all) hindering the assailed from gaining time
to join or rally themselves together, and to form a body to drive you out. You
must place sure guards at the gate, and seize upon the corps-du-guard (which is
upon the walls and ramparts) also on the marketplace, the churches, the
townhouse, and all places where the inhabitants might assemble, fortify, and
render combat. You must also succor those of your men which shall meet with
resistance, keeping them from pillaging, commanding every man to stand firm in
his appointed place; until the guards be placed, all the streets and parts of
the town be secured, and the quarters and lodgings for every one be laid out.
But if you would surprise a gate of a town without petard, you must by
discovery or intelligence know whether it be ill guarded, whether there be few
soldiers, whether they wander far from their arms, whether the
corps-du-guard be placed in a fit place to be surprised, whether the soldiers
keep within it or about it; whether they leave the gate at any certain hour,
(as for their meals, their devotions, their sports, or gathering of corn or
grapes.) To know whether their commanders know their several charges, or
whether they be negligent or ill obeyed, and that therefore the guards be
disordered, whether there be any place near, fit to favor your embuscadoes (as
ditches, garden walls, hemp, corn, hollow ways) to give on upon the gate at
the opening of it, amongst the throng of those that issue out, or a little
after; for the guards (having quitted their arms, and put out their matches)
may be surprised, before they can have means to recover themselves.

You may cause the gates to be surprised by soldiers disguised, in the habit
of country fellows, women, or merchants, bringing or conducting of wares,
wood, or hay, on their backs, by cart, wagon, or boat, (if there be a river,
lake, or sea) which may seize upon the gate, and hold it so long till they
which are in ambush come to releeve them.

If you would surprise a place by scalado, you must first (by discovery) know
the advenues, the counterscarp, and the moat; to know whether you may come at
it undiscovered, go in and out without difficulty, and that over against the
place where you mean to give the scalado, without being compelled to take any
great compass about the same, otherwise you are in danger to be knocked, and
taken in a trap. You must know whether the moat be dry or frozen, or the water
shallow, without mud, and easy to wade through; whether the wall be low, so
that it may be scaled, whether the place (where you mean to give on) be far
off from the corps-du-guard or sentinel, that you may not be discovered,
whether the place be large enough to raise good store of ladders, and
consequently for many men to enter at once; or strait, where you must enter one
by one; and to see, whether (after some of the first be entered) you could make
a greater overture on the place, or at least to have time to be all entered
before day, or being discovered, to discover the place of the corps-du-guards,
the nearest place to be ranged in battalia, the marketplaces and churches, and
to cause them to be seized upon by bataillons, sending them at one and the same
time toward the right and left hand, and right forward, the gross remaining
firm in battalia to send succors where need shall require, keeping near some
gate to gain and open it, to let in the Cavallrie.

A place may be surprised (at the walls) without scalado, by some defect in
them; as when they are old, decayed, weak, of little thickness, of brick,
stone, and clay, and without rampart, for they may easily be pierced by some
engine or instrument: or if there be any low windows along the curtain, or any
sallie-ports, or any sink-holes or drains for filth, or places for water to
pass in and out, being ill guarded and weak.

Intelligences and treacheries may take effect, when some occasion shall give
you means to corrupt the fidelity of those of the place, which are able to
give you entrance and deliver you the same. These occasions will be when you
shall discover a possibility to convey some desire of change into their
minds, which often happens amongst high-minded soldiers which desire to make
a fortune; or amongst those which are revengefull, when they be discontented at
the Governor or some other officer. Besides, most of them think themselves ill
dealt with, when they be not advanced to offices, having a higher estimation of
themselves then they deserve; and others be so covetous, as there is nothing
which they will not undertake for money. These and the like things may
accompany intelligences and treacheries.

How to besiege and expugne cities. CHAP. VII.
A City is said to be taken by force, when it is carried with an Army by
battery; whereunto there belong three considerations: The first before the
enterprise; The second, during the time of the siege; and the third, after the
taking of the city.

Before the enterprise, you must consider, whether you ought and whether you be
able to do it.

You ought, when by this means you recover your own, weaken your enemy, you
secure and fortify your self on that part, you increase your revenue, and you
get good store of booty. But you ought not to do it, if the charges of the
siege will surmount your profit, or that it will be difficult to hold the place
after you have gained it, or when it is so strong, so well provided of all
necessaries, or so near to places of releef, that there is greater likelihood
of damage, then hope of good success.

You are able, when you have all manner of provision necessary for the
enterprise, and that in sufficient measure. The most necessary things are
money, soldiers, artillery, munitions for the arms, as powder, bullets,
morters, grenades, muskets, pikes, etc. And for the instruments, as shovels,
pickaxes, hand-barrows, wheel-barrows, sacks, baskets, etc. And for wood to
make platforms for the artillery, gabions, sauceidges, blindes, boats, etc.
And victual in abundance. The quantity of all these must be measured by that
which shall be requisite for the soldiers, the canon, and the time that the
siege may be like to continue, which may be computed by the proportion of your
forces compared to those of your enemy; by the qualities of the works of the
place, with the number of your munitions and artillery; by the garrison, with
your number of soldiers; by the situation of the place, and the releef which
might be brought to it, with the means which you shall have to stop and hinder
it, and to facilitate the bringing of victual into your camp; by the distance,
with the means to lead your army thither; by the quality of the ground, with
the conveniences which you have to make your approaches.

And because that oftentimes accidents do befall which were not foreseen, as by
unexpected releef, an inundation or overflowing of waters, a change of weather,
a mutiny amongst your own men, or a contagion.

There must be a provident care taken for a retreat, so as (being constrained
to it) it may be made commodiously and easily without disorder, if it may be:
for thereon depends the honor or dishonor, the profit or damage of the
assailant.

During the siege, you must observe many things with good order, and
principally these; First, you must environ and shut up the place, entrenching
your self round about, fortifying your self as well against those which might
come to releeve them, as against the sallies of the town, in such sort as not
any person may be able to go in nor out; choosing a fit place for the Army to
set down, to make the field of battle, to make your quarters and their
alarm-places. Taking care that the quarters be secured by good retrenchments
and forts, well flanked and guarded, within against the sallies, and without
against such as might come to releeve the place, or disturb your Army: that
they be commodious to receive and conserve the munitions for actions and
executions. You must dispose the approaches, run your trenches, make your way
to arrive in safety to the place where you intend to raise your battery,
observing that it be as short as may be, sheltered and faithfully guarded by a
good number of men, having room enough between piece and piece, and for their
reverse, and that they command the place which you intend to batter; that the
trenches be ample, large, deep, not straightened, well slanked and defended by
forts more or fewer, according to the strength of the garrison which is within
the place, and to the time in which the releef might arrive.

During the time whilst you are making the trenches of approach, you must take
away all the high flanks with the canon, then having run your trenches to the
counterscarp, you must raise platforms with beds for the Artillery, near the
points of the counterscarp, to take away all the low flanks, by this means to
render the passage of the moat secure. And whilst this battery is a making,
you must pierce the counterscarp, and advance your galleries, until you join
them to the Bullwork; at the same time beginning the sap and the mine. But if
you be put to force it by Artillery, dispose your battery so that it may
commodiously discover the place which you intend to batter; that there be room
and liberty for the pieces, loop-holes, munitions, guards and officers; that
it be not exposed to the Artillery of the enemy, or being so, that it be
sheltered by traverses and gabions, making it hollow underneath if you fear
mines, and retrenching it round about to meet with the sallies of those of the
town; furnishing it with planks and pent-houses against their grenades and
stone-pieces; also not approaching too near, to prevent their fireworks and
grenades. Make your battery furiously and in good order, battering within a
fathom of the foundation of the wall, piercing it in diverse places; then
batter it acrosse to make the wall to totter. The breach being made, you must
cause it to be viewed by men chosen to that purpose, each having a headpiece
on his head musket proof, and a target with a long rift, and another rift
acrosse that. The breach must be accessible and not too right on, capable of
many assailants, having all the flanks broken both high and low. The soldiers
which are to give the assault must ascend in good order, assail furiously,
fight obstinately, and they must either be repulsed by those of the garrison,
or remain masters of the place. If they be repulsed by the sole valor of the
enemy, in this case (without delay or suffering the enemy to gather breath)
you must charge them again with fresh men and in greater number, so often,
until you enter by force; for fighting only against men, it were a shame that
a greater number of fresh men should not force them.

If some retrenchment and new fortification made by the garrison has held the
assailants from passing further; in this case, if that fortification be weak,
it must be forced by the sap and mine, scaling ladders, fireworks and
grenades; but if it be strong, you must lodge upon the breach, and presently
again begin the sap and mine and approach, and draw up some piece of ordinance
on the breach.

Whilst these things above said be in the executing you must molest the
besieged by all possible means you can, as by attempting them by treachery,
making them consume their munitions in short time and unprofitably, breaking
the conveyances of their waters, making feigned batteries, confounding their
signalls by making the like, stirring up causes of suspicion amongst
themselves, often making false alarmes, taking heed that you be not affronted
by spies, causing it to be made known that you want nothing to bring the siege
to an end, galling them with fireworks, grenades, and artillery, in their
magazines, corps-du-guards, and alarm-places; finally giving no rest to the
assailed until you have either forced them, or be constrained to retreat.

If you carry the town by force, and remain master of the place, the booty is
to be given to the soldiers (principally to those which made the assault)
which are the prisoners and spoils of the enemy, always having regard to the
women and children to deal fairly with them.

If it be commodious and advantageous to the vanquisher to preserve the
fortress, he must repair it presently, emptying the moat where it was filled
up, laying plain the trenches, throwing down the cavalleroes and batteries
without, repairing and making up the breaches, returning the waters into their
natural course if they were turned our, fortifying the place better then
formerly it was, if it may be, providing it of a sufficient garrison, of good,
valiant, and prudent Governors and Captains, of victual, arms, manufactures,
mechanical instruments, and Apothecaries drugs.

If it be not advantageous to maintain the fortress, he must cause it to be
demantled, and all the fortification of it to be rased; leaving the houses
entire, provided that afterward they may not again fortify there, nor
endammage him.

The usual practices to assail fortresses.
First you must labor to get a map or plat of the fortress, and of the
champain round about it, and to be informed of their munitions; to know the
bigness and capacity of the fortress, the amplitude and commodity of the
marketplaces and streets, the situations of the magazines, townhouse,
Governors lodging, the rampart and walls, their height, thickness, matter,
and form, the capacity, height and situation of their cavalleroes. What
Bullworks there be, and whether they be great or small, sunk into the moat, or
very high mounted, commanded or commanding, blunt or sharp, having ears (or
orillons) and casemats, or not; full or empty, of a large gorge, or strait;
made of earth, or lined with stone or brick; mineable or not.

Whether the casemats be seen from the champain, whether they be high or low,
single or double one upon the other, whether you can batter them in a straight
line, or glancing, and whether they have ditches before them to receive the
ruins of the battery or not.

The breadth and depth of the moat, whether the bottom be of stone or earth;
whether it be dry or with water in it, either all or in part; whether there be
sallie-ports, whereabout they be, and from whence they can be discovered.

Whether the counterscarp be of mere earth, or with a wall of dry stone, or
with lime and sand.

Whether the covert way of the counterscarp be broad or narrow, well or ill
sheltred and flanked: whether the parapet be raised above the plain, or sunk
low; whether it be of transported earth, and mingled with old ruins, or mere
earth, and whether it be easy or hard to be cut, sapped, or pierced.

If there be suburbs belonging to the place, whether you can become master of
them at first onset, or whether you must be put to batter them with Artillery.

Whether there be other works on the outside of the counterscarp, what they be,
and how they be made.

Whether the ground round about the town do command it, or whether it be level
champain; or if it be commanded, whether it be moorish or dry, whether it be
rockie or sandy, and whether you must approach it by traverses or trenches,
and whether they be easy or hard to make; whether thereabout be wood to serve
you for the making of gabions, sauceidges, and other things: whether there be
convenient place to encamp the Army safe from the Artillery of the town, or
whether you may encamp near the town by reason of some advantage, or by
sheltring your self with traverses, or whether you shall be constrained to keep
aloof off: Whether there be a river, and what manner of one; whether you can
divert it from them or not; whether you may make benefit of it, or are to fear
an inundation by it; whether it be wadeable or navigable, at sometimes, or at
all times.

Whether the situation of the place be near or far off from other places on
that side, whether it be able to get succors or munitions, whether quickly or
late, and whether you can hinder it or not, and how. Knowing all these things,
you must be informed of the munitions of the town, the number of the garrison,
how many horse, what commanders, what soldiers, what number of Artillery, as
well great as small; what powder, and how much, what Enginiers, what makers of
fireworks, and what Canoniers; whether they be at unity within the town, or
whether there be divisions.

The General being well informed of all these things, being resolved to force
the place, because he shall judge it faiseable, he must send his troops of
light horsemen to overrun and wast the country round about, and to take
prisoners, thereby to be informed more certainly of the estate of the place.

He must lead his Army near to the town, that they may see it in battalia,
causing those to be furiously charged which shall sallie out of the town to
skirmish, and by this means he shall discover the place, the Bullworks, the
moat, the counterscarp, and the other works.

He must make his quarters in such place as is most secured from the canon shot
of the town, in the best air, where he may best have the commodity of water
(and wood if it may be) and the fairest situation to make the alarm-place.

He is to ordain the quarters of his Army, and shall cause the line of
circumvallation to be well retrenched and guarded, both against releefs, and
against those of the town.

He ought not to have so much regard of assaulting the town in that part where
it is weakest, as of the commodity and security of his camp and his quarters:
and commonly the approaches are made from those places.

The trenches must not begin nearer to the place then harquebus a crock shot,
or at least musket shot, running them so that they be not seen straight along
by those of the town; that they be broad and deep, well flanked and furnished
with forts, covering those approaches with hurdles, which are subject to
grenades and stone-pieces.

The place of the Artillery intended to batter the high flanks and parapets,
must be raised so high, that it may command them; but that which should make
the breach and beat down the walls, must be sunk into the counterscarp,
battering the wall between wind and water (if there be any) or at a fathom
height above the superficies of the ditch, if it be dry. The first is placed
when you begin your trenches of approach, to favor them; the other, when you
lay your gallerie to pierce the counterscarp, this battery makes the breach,
and beats down the low flanks. Whilst this battery is a making, you are to
pierce the counterscarp, and to have the boats or the wood for the galleries in
readiness, to bring them to the face of the Bullwork, and to go to the assault
so soon as you have shot a breach, or to sap and mine the face of the Bullwork,
and there to lodge in case you cannot advance further, and to carry it by
force.

You must lodge your musketeers within the trenches, and especially in those
which run along by the counterscarp, that so they may beat away all those of
the town that might appear, as well on the curtains as casemats.

You must always make the breach on the faces of the Bullworks near their
points, unless some advantage do incite you to do otherwise.

The entrances to the galleries on the moat must be as far distant from the
flanks as may be, but in such sort as they be not seen but of one flank. The
more galleries there be, the better. Cause your grenades to play into the
middle of the Bullworks so continually, that you may hinder the enemy from
working there, or there placing their guard.

If the moat be full of water, you must empty it, or pass over it by floating
bridges (which is dangerous) or by galleries, which is not so hazardable.

You may empty it, when there is near hand some place lower then the ditch, by
piercing the counterscarp, and giving the water a course toward the place; or
else you may make a ditch, and pierce the counterscarp to cause the water to
run into it, which is drawn out by pumps. Or else you are to make floating
bridges of barrels or bundles of cork. But if the moat be shallow, you may make
galleries with sauceidges. These sauceidges are made of faggots of brush wood,
from 15 to 20 foot long, and one foot thick in diameter (all stuffed with
rubbish to keep them from floating on the water) then upon these sauceidges you
are to lay hurdles or planks.

If the moat be dry and of earth, you must make trenches: usually to that
which is dry (if a breach be made) you make neither trench nor gallerie, but
you take away all the flanks to pass it securely, and you shelter your self on
the sides by hurdles, brush wood, or gabions.

If you force the place by little and little, and that the ditch be of a rock,
you must make a traverse within the ditch with sauceidges, or with gabions, or
with linen sacks full of earth.

Having passed the moat, you are to give the assault (if the breach be
sufficient or ill retrenched) or else you are to lodge at the foot of the
Bullwork, and to go to the sap and mine; and according to their effect you must
give the assault, advance, or lodge.

If the retrenchment of the assailed be great, firm, and strong, having gained
the Bullwork, you must there draw up and plant your ordnance, and make your
battery the most speedy and violen^ that may be.

Nothing so much affrighteth the assailed as a furious and expedited battery,
for he has not leisure to retrench himself, and knows not where to range
himself to be under shelter.

That does much weary and molest the besieged, when they are assaulted at 3 or
4 several Bullworks, at 3 or 4 corners of the town; they are in continual
suspicion, they have their forces disunited, they cannot prevent false alarms,
their labors are very great, and their guards much more toilsome and
insupportable. Besides that, every man is diffident of the other guards,
breaches, retrenchments, and of their endeavor to make good defense.

It also much discommodateth the besiegers, for their forces are disunited,
their quarters are far from each other, they are in danger to be hard put to
it by sallies or by succors, being so scattered.

The figures following will facilitate the understanding of this chapter.
diagram of a city's defenses

A. The town. B. The Bullworks. C. The cavalleroes. D. The rampart. E. The
ditch. F. The counterscarp. G. The Galleries of the ditch. H. The Artillery
sunk low to beat down the low flank. I. The trenches. L. The cavalleroes. N.
The alarm-place. O. The trenches against succors.
The description of the King of Spains Army encamped before Ostend, on the
quarter of the fort Albert, with the trenches as far as the Downs. 1601.
The works of the town.
1. The town. 2. The haven. 3. The kowes fort. 4. The great poulder, guarded by
the English. 5. The small poulders. 6. A redout.
The forts which kept the town shut up.
7. The fort Albert. 8. The fort S. Elizabeth. 9. The fort S. Marie. 10. and
11. The forts of Count Frederick. 12. The fort of S. Anne.
The quartering of the camp.
13. The quarter of the court. 14. The port of brush faggots and sauceidges.
15. The Magazine. 16. The Spaniards come out of Guant, and in the Rear of them
followed the Regiments of Simon Antonio, Lowys de Vilar, Rivas, of Burgundians,
of Wallons, of Catrice and la Borlotte. 17. Irish men. 18. Spaniards come from
Cambray. 19. Wallons of Count Fresin. 20. The Regiment of the Baron of
Achicourt. 21. The Regiment of Don Alfonso d' Alvolas. 22. The Regiment of
Count Trivulsio. 23. The guards of Cavallrie. 24. The battery before the
alarm-place. 25. The trenches of S Anne. 26. The forts of Catrice.
diagram of the Siege of Ostend, 1601

The trenches made before Ostend, from the Downs on that side of the fort
Albert, to the platform.
diagram of trenches at Ostend

A. The town. B. The counterscarp. C. The channel before the counterscarp. D.
The platform. E. The trenches leading to the poulders. F. The fort of the
alarm-place. G. The great trench which sheltereth the alarm-place. H. The
galleries which were made at the beginning of the siege with sauceidges along
the Downs, to seize upon them; which were to be put forward by little and
little, as far as the haven.
The trenches made before Ostend, from the platform to the town.
diagram of trenches at Ostend

A. The new town. B. The old town. C. The old haven. D. The dam. E. The
Bullwork of Sandhill. E. The Bullwork of Helmont. F. The west Bullwork. G. The
Bullwork of the poulder. H. The sluice to keep the water within the moat. I. The
moat. K. The counterscarp. L. The channel before the counterscarp, which comes
out of the haven. M. The great platform. N. The approaches of the Spaniards,
drawing to the point of the counterscarp called Porcupine. O. The approaches of
the Italians. P. The approaches of the Burgundians and Wallons. R. The kowes
fort. S. S. Martin's redout. T. S. Augustines redout. V. S. James his redout.
The siege of Rhynberg, by Marquis Spinola. anno 1606.
diagram of the Siege of Rheinberg, 1606

A. The town. B. The river Rhyne. C. D. The French quarter. E. The English
quarter. F. The Frisons quarter. G. The quagmire. K. The castle of the town.

The lines show the works of the town, and the pricks demonstrate the
approaches of the Spaniards.

The siege of Gulick. 1610.
diagram of the siege of Gulick, 1610

A. The town. B. The Castle. C. The trenches of the Prince of Anhalt. D. The
French trenches. E. Prince Maurice his trenches.
Of taking fortresses by famine. CHAP. VIII.
THat is called taking fortresses by famine, when through want of victual,
they are constrained to yield themselves to the power of the besieger. You must
therefore before you besiege it, be well informed (by means of your
intelligencers and spies) of the munitions which be within the place, as well
of victual as drink. You must also know what townsmen and what garrison there
be, and by that you are to judge how long their provision will last them, and
what means you have to hinder their revictualling. You are to begin the siege a
little before harvest, because their provisions will be almost spent, and that
they shall have no means to have new; making waste of that about the town which
might stand them in stead, and hindering them from water if it be possible. You
are to batter down their gates and bridges with your Artillery, and also you
must attempt to break down their mills and magazines, firing them by
fireballs. When you intend to besiege them, you must surprise them on the
sudden, least they send out their unprofitable eaters, and attempt to provide
themselves. You must have good store of Cavallrie, to be master of the field,
and always to send out upon discovery. The town must be shut up with trenches
round about, fortified with many good forts, that so you may hinder their
revictualling, and withstand the force of a releef, if it be to be expected: as
the Prince Maurice did before Grave, anno 1602. and before Sluice anno 1604.

Grave besieged by Prince Maurice.
diagram of the Siege of Grave

A. The town. B. The trenches which shut it up. C. The trenches against
releefs, with redouts round about. G. The trenches of approach* E. Prince
Maurice his quarter; and on the otherside of the river Count Ernests quarter.
D. Count William his quarter. F. Colonel Vere his quarter. H. The trenches of
the Spanish releevers.
Sluice besieged by Prince Maurice.
diagram of the siege of Sluice

A. The town. B. The outworks. C. The castle. D. The Isle of Cassant, with the
trenches of the Hollanders, marked with pricks in all this figure. E. Prince
Maurice his quarter. F. Count William his quarter. G. Count Ernest his quarter.
H. The quarters of Colonel Dort, and Colonel van der Noot.
Of the defense of fortresses against the petard, and other surprises and
treacheries. CHAP. IX.
THey which would prevent being surprised must have two considerations; the one
concerning the attemptours, the other touching the fortress.

Concerning the attemptours, you must (if possibly you can) have spies amongst
them; at least you must keep sentinels as far distant from the fortress as
may be, that so the Enemy arrive not and be on your jack at unawares and
without being discovered.

Touching the fortress, you must not unfurnish it to supply other places, so
as that which remains be not sufficient to keep and serve it. You must
appoint the place of rendez-vous for the soldiers and citizens in fitting
parts of the town, and that they stir not from their several places without
command from the Governor, or Sergeant Major, whatsoever pretense the enemy
may make to charge the town in diverse parts.

The lodgings of the Governor or Sergeant Major should be about the middle of
the town, near some spacious place, which must be the alarm-place of the town.

There must be iron chains at the corners of the cross streets which are
before the gates of the town: and you must batter down the fronts of the houses
which are just over against the gates, with canon shot: and place one
corps-du-guard in the alarm-place, another about the middle of the moat before
the bridge, in the manner of a dovehouse, into which the entrance is by a
little drawbridge; another on every gate of the town, into which none may
enter but by a moving plank; and others round about the walls, near enough each
to other: and these furnished with soldiers more or less, according to the
capacity of the place, and the danger.

The corps-du-guard of the alarm-place has the charge to make the rounds,
counter-rounds, and grand-round, and to place the sentinels; which must be at
so near a distance, as they may hear and understand each others speech, and
specially at the corners and the channel holes, or drains of water.

You must place sentinell-perdues without the town, which is the charge of the
corps-du-guard which is without before the bridge. If there be a dam of earth
between two moats round about the town, there must be guards placed in the
night, for that is a most secure remedy against surprises. This dam of earth
may be apprehended by the figure following:

The fort S. Andrew which the King of Spain caused to be built in the
Low Countries, in the Isle of Bommell. anno 1599.
diagram of Fort St. Andrew

A. The fort. B. One of the moats. C. The dam between the moats, fortified with
corps-du-guards on the angles. D. The other moat. E. The river Wael. F. The
river Mase. G. A pallisado in the middle of the second moat. H. Two ravelines,
wherein they kept watch in the night.

The building of the gates of strong rampierd towns should be after this manner.
diagram of gates and fortifications

A. The pallisado and the bars. B. The bridge dormant. C. The trap-bridge. D.
The turning-bridge. It were better to place it within the two towers G. without
any other stay or prop save only the tampin within the wall E. The
corps-du-guard built within the moat. F. The drawbridge. G. The portcullice.
If the moat be dry, you must there make the two pallisadoes H. and sink the
small ditch I. so low as the water, or very near it. K.L. The breadth of the
moat.

The gates and bridges must be flanked on both sides, and on the upper part
with loop-holes, which must be large enough to cast water out at them, also
pieces of timber, stones, grenades, to quench the fire of a petard, to beat it
down, and to kill the petardiers. But not so wide that surprises may be made by
them, and there to give the scalado. Some place a portcullice there, hung by a
rope, which is very fit to beat down the petards.

If you make half moons before the gates of the town, they will be the
stronger, and the better sheltred from the champain.

You must keep a light piece of Artillery (but having a great calibre) at the
corps-du-guard of the gate, which must be charged with cartouches and rubbish
or stones, to turn it toward the place where the enemy shall give on.

The moats must be deep, having a pallisado in the middle; such as have water
need not be full, for that facilitateth the boats for the surprise.

The curtains and faces of the Bullworks must be seen and discovered by the
flanks of the town, even by the low flanks, that so the canon may ruin all the
ladders which might be attempted to be there raised.

The curtains must be high and out of danger of scalado, if it may be.

The holes by which the water comes in, or drains of filth pass out, ought to
be very strait; built of lime and stone, oblique within the wall, bound with
strong grates of iron, having a corps-du-guard or a sentinel on the wall just
over against the said grate.

To be well assured of the gates and walls, the way is to appoint good guards,
and those diligent, strong, and well placed: those on the walls must be set
presently after the shutting of the gates before night; and they must not be
dismissed until day, and until the sentinel on the steeple has given the
signal by the bell; and that no man knows the place where he shall be placed
until the very instant that he enters the guard.

You may prevent treacheries knowing the cause; for either it proceeds from
the Governor who has evil entreated, disgraced, or offended the soldier in
his reputation, person, or means, and provoked him to an evil disposition; or
it proceeds from the soldier who is ambitious of honor and degrees, or
covetous of greater means; or else from the citizens who are tyrannised over by
the garrison.

This matter is so ticklish, that the very suspicion is punishable; but the
better way is to dissemble it, and to cause the matter to be further attempted;
mean time doubling your rounds, and making extraordinary counter-rounds.

Of the defense of fortresses against sieges. CHAP. X.
A Fortress is said to have resisted the enemies forces, when (having well
defended it self) it remains in its former liberty. To do this, you must
draw into the fortress whatsoever will be useful for you, and ruin all
without which might endammage you; laying flat houses, woods, barns, mills,
hollow ways, gardens, fountains, and whatsoever might batter you and command
your defenses.

Take good heed that the fortress be well disposed to resist the assault of
the enemy: which is, that the flanks (whether they be high or low) may
discover, and not be discovered but by imbocking, that is, the canons mouth:
that the countermines be well disposed and convenient; that the counterscarp
(which is the buckler of the fortress) be flanked, sheltred, and spacious;
that the casemats be secured and well sheltred, spacious, and fit to discover
the plain of the opposite bull-work, and within the moat; that the sally-ports
be secured, sheltred, low, and commodious that the parapets be of earth or
unburnt brick, and that the platforms for the ordinance be made handsomely and
even, that so the pieces may ea^^ly be moved and removed into their places,
spacious for the motions, pioners, and canoniers, and to contain the munitions.

The number of the soldiers of your garrison you are to proportion according
to the bigness of the place, to the outworks which you would hold, to the
labor of the retrenchments which you shall think fit to make, and to the
sallies which shall be requisite.

The Governor must be courageous and expert by long practice in assaulting and
defending, having been beaten to such services.

The soldiers should be men of choice, resolute, strong, obedient, and
faithful.

The quantity of provisions as well for victual and medicines as arms, must
be measured by the time which you shall conjecture that the siege may continue.

And their quality must be for the victual all sorts of grain, principally
pulse, powdered flesh, salt-fish, cheese, butter, suet, oil, salt, fresh water,
wine, beer or cider, vinegar, candles, torches, ship-pitch, good store of
coals, and plenty of wood for the ovens, for the corps-du-guard, and for
household uses.

To tend them which are hurt and sick there must be physicians, surgeons,
and medicaments, as well for contageous diseases as those which are ordinary,
and for wounds; and good store of old linen.

A good quantity of defensive weapons, as corslets, tasses, morions,
headpieces of proof, cuirasses, targets both proof and ordinary: store of
arms offensive, as well sharp, as pikes, When they were in use.
lances, halberts; as fire-weapons, as great and small Artillery, morters
great and small, muskets, harquebuses a crock, callivers, cartouches,
crossebard shot, bullets of iron and lead, lanterns, cresset-lights, match,
powder of a great, mean, and small grain.

For the fires as well simple as compound; for the simple, powder, saltpeter or
salnitre, coal of willow or sallow, campher, sulphur, refine, peter-oyl,
linseed-oyl, spike-oyl, tar, Venice-turpentine, colofonie of Spain, black
pitch, Greek pitch, Spanish pitch, wax, tallow, varnish in the seed, mastick,
sal armoniack, common salt, quicksilver, vitrioll, aqua vitae, vinegar,
frankincense, wood in abundance, of vine-trees, fir-trees, pines, osiers,
hemp-stalks, of laurel, olive, and other fat and dry woods: for compounded
fires which are used at an assault, pitched ropes, fireballs, grenades,
fire-wreathes, and fire-trunks.

Good store of master founders, armorers, carpenters, masons, forgers, miners,
saltpeter-men, powdermakers, millers, cartwrights.

Instruments or tools to make carriages for the Artillery and musket stocks;
some to cut, as hatchets, hooks, sawes, axes, adzes; to knock, as beetles,
hammers, mallets, crows of iron, and handspikes of wood; to quench the fire, as
ladders, buckets of wood and of leather, portable soaes or tubs, squirts, iron
hooks or cromes; to manage the earth, as cutting spades, hand-barrows,
pickaxes, shovels, ladles, mattocks, wheel-barrows, tumbrels, scuttle-baskets,
maunds.

Wood for the carriages, beds for the ordinance, pallisadoes, barricadoes,
bridges, barques, sauceidges, hurdles, gabions, piles, summers, joysts and
small joysts.

Metals; as copper, tin, lead, iron.

Materials for building; as stone, brick, lime, clay.

Good store of linen cloth; cordage, tow, needles and thread.

You must agree with your friends without o^ some means to give them
advertisements ordinarily when you shall be so straightly shut up, as you must
have recourse to signs.

When the enemy shows himself to begin his enterprise and to besiege you, his
Army being to move divided by reason of the diversity of occasions, you must
labor to discommodate him as much as may be.

During the time that he shall be busied in shutting up the town, in taking and
cutting off the passages, it might happen that (in distributing of his troops)
some one may fall into your hands, then lay hold on the time and occasion, of
the situation, of the commodity and favor of your outworks, never abandoning
them but upon great constraint.

Then in ordering of his quarters you must have an eye, that even upon this
occasion you might molest him; nevertheless if you conceive that by suffering
him to go on securely, you should have means afterward to offend him to greater
effect, you may defer it until then: for those discommodities which succeed
with loss of that which one possesses, bring double damage. Nevertheless
you must take great heed not to stay so long as that he be fortified, whether
it be in his trenches, quarters, or lodging of his munitions and Artillery.

When he shall begin his trenches, and make platformes to plant his ordinance
to batter you, hinder him and molest him with all your power (which you shall
hardly do if he has earth and wood) observe the imperfections of his works,
whether they be straightened or scant, imbocked, not well sheltred, ill flanked,
ill conducted, ill guarded, and endeavor to make benefit thereof.

Draw him on by false appearances to assault you where you are strongest, he
taking you to be there weakest, and this by means of assured spies, under the
name of fugitives or such as come to him for refuge, or letters artificially
written and suffered to be intercepted.

Compel your enemy to begin his batteries and trenches the furthest off from
the town that possibly you can, by some retrenchments made without, defended by
your half moons, counterscarps and ramparts, made in such manner as (the enemy
taking them) they may not stand him in any stead against you; therefore all the
trenches which you make without the counterscarp must ly open all along to the
view of the flanks of the ravelines, or of the town, as you may see in the
figures following.

The plat of Geneva. 1611.
diagram of the plat of Geneva, 1611

A. The town. B. S. Gervase. C. The lake. D. The river Rhosne. E. The Isle and
the bridges,
The lines represent the fortifications made, (...) the pricks show the
designs of those which are to b^ made.

The plat of Gulick, fortified by Prince Maurice after the taking of it.
diagram of the plat of Gulick

A. The castle. B. The town. C. The retrenchment made about the town.
For your sallies, take good heed to the time, whether it be fitting or
contrary; to the occasion, as when the enemy is wet, stiff with cold, sleepy,
tired with labor, or when the guard is not in such number, quality, and order
as it ought. Keep your self under the favor of your rampart and Artillery, go
on in good order and at unawares, by means of your sally ports and
counterscarps, place your pikes and halberts to sustain a charge, your muskets
and callivers to give the charge, your fireworks and grenades to break and
dissipate those which are in the corps-du-guards and forts of the trenches,
favoring the Infanterie by the Cavallrie, principally at the retreat, which
must be well secured, being sustained by those which you have left as a reserve
on the counterscarp. Be not so prodigal of your soldiers and munitions, that
you shall not have sufficient to guard the town and to sustain the assaults.
When the assailant shall begin to play his canon to batter your high and low
defenses, ply him on all sides with your Artillery from your Bullworks,
ramparts, and cavalleroes; repair the shoulders of your flanks and parapets the
best you can. Make new places of retreat and new flanks, principally concealed
ones.

When he shall pierce your counterscarp or open your moat, he will at the same
time batter your walls; if he have forgotten nothing of that diligence which is
requisite, you shall hardly hinder nor offend him. But if he do mistake, seize
you on the occasion, and have a watchful eye, as if his Artillery be
discovered, you shall endeavor to dismount his pieces, to kill his canoniers,
to spoil his munitions; if it be ill fortified, make a furious sally upon it,
to dismount and nail it up, making use of your Artillery and muskets.

If the assailant be well experienced, whilst he is battering you to make a
breach, he will batter all the low flanks which flank the place where he
intends to give the assault (the high flanks being already taken off before
the Artillery was brought on the counterscarp) but not before he become master
of the moat, if it be dry, or of the counterscarp if the moat be full of
water; making the platform for the Artillery upon the gallerie which pierces
the counterscarp to enter the moat, keeping the boats and galleries to pass
over the moat ready to lay suddenly when the time and occasion shall be fit to
give the assault; or else to plant them during the battery under favor of the
Artillery and musket shot. Now, against all this, an expert Governor will
keep his flanks hidden, which being opened unawares will much endammage the
assailant, who (having made a breach) will cause it to be viewed by armed men
(on which you must not spare your faulconet shot, nor that of the harquebus a
crock) and ordinarily they are of the most able and valiant men.

The breach being viewed, he will come to the assault, ^or which you must order
your self to give combat and resist him, either by handblows or retrenching
your self, or both; by handblows, so soon as he shall begin to show himself and
become a mark for you, beginning to mount up to the breach, repulsing him by
armed men, which you shall have s^lected before the assault, being resolute and
hardy, which must headstrongly withstand the first fury; which will either
cause the enemy to retreat, or at least you shall notably mischief him. You
are to make use of engines and instruments fitting to hinder the enemy from
climbing up to the breach, as calthrops strewed upon the place, rolling I^ists,
beset with nails and squibbes, morters, stone-pieces, and engines to cast
grenades, fireballs, cartouches, etc. Mines must not be forgotten, nor
fireworks, as firetrunks, pots, moveable mines, fire-garlands, etc. having
careful regard how, when, where, and from whence you cast them, doing it to
good purpose.

If the enemy assault you by degrees, or that he make his battery so
leisurely that he give you time to retrench your self, make your retrenchment
well flanked and commodious, in such sort that by it you may resist him. To
effect this, it ought to be difficult to be expugned, so flanked as it may be
defended on the front and flanks, facile for sallies, having before it a broad
and deep moat with a counterscarp and covert way, having the rampart
strengthened by pallisadoes which go along the outside of the line, enclosures
of the camp, and gabions: And by this means you shall draw the business to a
great length: for he must draw up his Artillery upon the breach, after that he
be lodged upon it, he must make a new battery, a new overture, new saps,
mines, and chambers, which will give you leisure to make new retrenchments, and
to gain and prolong the time, as the Hollanders did at Ostend, and in many
other places.

The Plat of Ostend, with the retrenchments. 1604.
diagram of the plat of Ostend, 1604

The lines represent the fortresses of the town, and the pricks the
retrenchments.

Of the defense of fortresses against famine. CHAP. XI.
THis defense may be reduced to three heads, the provision, the conservation,
the distribution. For the provisions, you must have regard to the quantity and
quality. The quantity is judged by the persons ordinary and extraordinary,
which may be shut up within the fortresses during the siege, the time that the
siege may continue, and the portion which every one must have; besides that
which wastes by time, and by the imperfection of natural things. The quality
is for nourishment (as meat and drink) for diseases, and for wounds. To
conserve the provisions, regard must be had to the inconveniences which may
happen to the magazines, by means of those without by their Artillery, by
fire, by some inundation or corruption, or least some traitor set it on fire,
or poison it, or that some vermin consume it not, or that the officers steal
it not, nor spoil it, nor give it away.

For the distribution, regard must be had to the time, to the persons, and to
the quantity. To the time, when you should begin to open the public
provisions, which is, when the private are consumed, knowing the persons and
munitions of every family. To the persons, who for the difference of their
condition must be diversely dealt with, according to their estate and quality.
To the quantity, which must be measured by that which every day one person
shall necessarily require for nourishment; having regard to their sex, age,
exercise, and disposition.

Of releeving places besieged. CHAP. XII.
IN the releeving of fortresses, you must consider the means to effect it, or
to hinder it.

To effect it, either openly or secretly, having regard to the place, to the
enemies retrenchments, and to the releef.

To the situation of the place, which may be commodious and facile by reason of
the open champains and freedom from impeachments; or discommodious and
difficult, by reason of bogs, rivers, woods, and mountains.

To the enemies forts which are about it, as defenses by pallisadoes, gabions,
moats, trenches, and redouts; who may either remain within his trenches, or go
forth into the champain to beat off the releef.

For the releef, it must be guarded by a good convoy, because otherwise the
enemy might charge and rout it, pillaging the munitions, hindering the return,
cutting off their way, being the stronger. You must know the means, the time,
the stratagems, and the passages by which the releef may be conducted and
introducted into the place, carrying with you sufficient provision of things
necessary, for the victual, for the arms, and for all that concerns the
furtherance and execution of the releef, as pioners, boats, barks, and other
engines, to pass rivers and marshes.

You must make good choice of the troop and gross of soldiers which should
execute the releef, as, that the soldiers be well selected out of the
ancientest, and that the officers be able and willing courageouslly to perform
all that is to be done, to execute the enterprise infallibly, or to retreat
honorably, or there to sell their lives at a dear rate.

A releef may be hindered, either by attending it within the trenches, or else
by advancing toward them to give them battle, and to oppose their passage,
abandoning the siege to go with all the forces, or with part of the Army,
leaving (in the mean time) the siege maintained, and the trenches manned.

Of French Artillery. Of foundings, mixtures, and measures of ordinance. CHAP.
XIII.
IN the founding of ordinance, to 100 pound of fine copper, you are to add 20
pound of bell-metall; or for want of bell-metall, add 10 pound of soft tin.

Or else, to 100 pound of copper, add 10 pound of latin, and 8 pound of soft
tin.

In the founding of ordinance, in regard of the waste, in every 6 pound of
metal you are to add 1 pound over weight.

A singular care must be taken of the melting and mixing of metals, for the
inward neatness of the pieces* To this end the materials must be good, so must
the earth for the moules; being well beaten and through wrought with hair and
flocks. The moules, models and cilinders well nointed and greased with good
tallow, and bound with hoops of iron, well and thoroughly nealed, well placed
and set. The trunions must be so justly placed, as the piece may be as in
balance on them, weighing almost equally forwards to her muzzel, as backwards
toward her breech, that so a canonier may without trouble mount or imbase her.

The piece must be strong about the trunions, for thereabout she suffers the
greatest force, and first moving.

The touchhole must be of steel, that so the piece be not made unusefull so
soon as if it were of metal, and must be close to the breech.

The pieces must be well repaired, cleared, and tried, having regard that there
be not any chink, hole, honeycomb, crack, rift, flaw, or crany within them;
which usually happens when the metal is run too cold, or that the moule be not
well nealed, or that the tin was put in before the copper was well melted, or
that it was not thoroughly mixed or incorporated.

The pieces ought to be tried before they be mounted on their carriages, the
muzzels of them mounted, for so they bear the greatest stresse. When they be so
repaired, cleared, and tried, they are to be weighed, and their weight to be
cut on their breech.

There be six calibres of Artillery, which are the canon, the culvering, the
bastard culvering, the minion, the faulcon, and the faulconet.

The names of the parts of a canon.
diagram of cannon

A. B. The diameter of the muzzel, concave, or bore of the piece. C. D. The
neck. G. I. The thickness of the metal at the touchhole or chamber. G. B.
The length of the concave or cilinder of the piece. R. S The diameter or
thickness of the truni^on. K. The muzzel ring or freese. N. A. The vacant
cilinder from the charge, for the guide of the shot. N. X. The chamber. L. The
base ring, and the sight upon it. G. X. The breech. X. The cascabell or
pummell. T. The astragall or coronice ring. Q. The reinforced ring. I The
touchhole.
Of weights. The pound (mark weight) consists of two marks, the mark of eight
ounces, the ounce of eight drams, the dram three penie weight, This weight
cannot be Troy weight, for that has but 20 penie weight in the ounce, and this
has 24.
the penie weight four and twenty grains.

Of measure. The fathom contains 6 foot, But the custom in England is to
divide the inch into eight equal parts, which I follow.
the foot 12 inches, the inch 12. lines.

The measures of the parts of a canon, and the use thereof. The diameter of the
bore of the canon is six inches and one sixth part of an inch. Our English
founding of ordinance differs from the French proportions, as appears in Mr
Nortons Gunner, page 53.


The diameter of the bullet six inches.

The vent or air for the bullet to play one sixth part.

The bullet weighs 33 pound and one third part, which is called the Calibre
of the canon.

The metal is two inches thick at the neck, and six at the breech.

The cilinder or concave is nine foot long, and equally wide in each part of it.

The whole canon is somewhat longer then ten foot.

The diameter of the trunion is six inches.

The vacant cilinder or guide is five foot and an half.

The reinforced ring is distant from the muzzell ring four foot and a half.

The thickness or height of the muzzell ring is five inches.

The coronice ring is within half a foot of the muzzell ring.

The sight of iron is placed on the flat base ring.

The metal of the piece weighs about 5600 pound.

Her carriage for the field is fourteen foot long, and the axletree seven.

The canon mounted on her field carriage is almost nineteen foot long.

The powder for her charge weighs eighteen or twenty pound.

The ordinary observation for all pieces is, That the charge of powder be at
least the moytie of the weight of the bullet, and so to two third parts, which
is rather better.

The canon may be laden ten times in an hour, and 120 times a day.

She shoots point blank almost six hundred Observe that paces are here
understood to be only steps: otherwise i^ were impossible.
paces.

Her platform must be fifteen foot broad, and 20 foot long, for her reverse.
The foremost ten foot are to be of plank, and the rest of hurdles, if plank be
wanting.

There must be twenty horses to draw a canon. A wagon drawn by four horses
carries a thousand or twelve hundred pound weight; it is about ten or twelve
foot long in the body, and the wagon with the horses about fifty foot; and
their breadth about the axletree is The breadth of the carriages, and of the
wagons ought to be alike at the axletree, because they are to go in one and
the same rut.
six foot.

One wagon carries three and thirty canon bullets.

There must be six wagons, and four and twenty horses to carry the munitions
sufficient for a canon to play one whole day, namely, one hundred and twenty
bullets, and two thousand and four hundred pound of powder.

For the service of a canon employed for battery, there must be two canoniers,
three chargers, and thirty pioners.

The cordage of the canon must be a This cable is not used in all countries.
cable fifteen fathom long, four inches and a half about: which will weigh
about seventy pound.

diagram of carriages and wheels for artillery

The names of the parts of the carriages and wheels for the Artillery.

A. A plank for the cheeks or side of the carriage 14 foot and an half long,
one foot and an half thick, and one foot eight inches broad for the canon. B.
The outside of the cheek. C. The inside of the cheek. D. The carriage being
Note that the canon, a little before, is said to be 6 inches thick of metal at
her breech, and the diameter of her bore six inches and one sixth part: so then,
the carriage ought to be somewhat above 18 inches wide for the breech, bed and
coins; and so the tail must be so much the wider of course.
13 inches broad within the work at the head, and 18 at the tail. L. The
axletree 7 foot long. K. A spoke 14 inches long between nave and felloes, 4
inches and an half thick in diameter. E. The nave of 20 inches long from E. to
I. and as much in diameter over against G. in F. 17. and in I. 14. F. G. H. I.
Four hoops of iron.
diagram of cannon

In the figure S.

A. The cheeks. B. ^ransomes. C. Bolts. D. The axletree. E. Upper plates. F.
Hooks for draught. G. The clowt. H. The hole in the arm of the axletree for the
lintspin. I. The end of the axletree. K. The shafts. L. The shaft-bolts. M. The
thill-bolt. O. The thill. Q. The rest. N. The forelock of the thill bolt.
In figure T.

1 Holes for the trunions, 21 inches distant from the head of the carriage to
the center. 2 The capsquire, or plate over the trunnion. 3 A hook for draught.
4 Nails with smooth heads. 6 Forelocks for the bolts that pin down the
capsquire. 7 The nether plate. 8 Mortais for the axletree. 9 Bolts. 10 The
upper plate. 11 The hole for the bolt. 12 The thill. 13 A hook to fasten the
rudstay, which goes upon the horseback. 14 The hole for the forelock key. 15
The thill plate. 16 The forelock, pinnes, and chain. 17 The cramp-iron of the
chain. 18 The tail-plate of the carriage. 19 The bolt-hole.
diagram of cannon wheels

The wheels are five foot high being shod.

A. Spokes. B. Felloes. C. The nave. D. Nails. E. The plates for the shoing or
tire of the wheels. F. The bars over the felloes to strengthen them. G. The
stirrops. H. Leavers or handspikes. I. Crow leavers. K. The axletree. L. The
distance between the wheels. M. The rut of the wheel. N. The end of the
axletree. O. The lintspin. P. The great and small hoops. R. The bosse of iron
for the nave. S. The great and little coins. T. The dowledge of the wheel. V.
The sight rule, to be placed upon the base-ring. X. An handscrue. Y. A bar, to
be placed over the felloes. Z. A stirrup.
diagram of cannon and casks

A. A canon mounted. B. The cable. C. The head of the ladle and sponge. D.
Thongs to tie the leavers, ladle, and sponge. E. The staff of the sponge. F.
The staff of the ladle. G. The sponge. H. The ladle of brass. I. The ladle of
brass. K. The budge-barrell. L. A casque of corn-powder. M. A casque of fine
powder. N. A barrel of priming-powder.
Of the great culvering.

The diameter of her bore is four inches and five sixth parts.

The diameter of her bullet, four inches, and two third parts.

The bullet weighs 15 pound and a quarter.

Her metal at her neck is one inch thick and three fourth parts, and at her
chamber four inches and five sixth parts.

Her cilinder is nine foot and four inches long.

From the center of the trunions to the touchhole is three foot ten inches.

The vent or air for the bullet to play is one sixth part.

Her charge of powder is ten pound weight.

She shoots point blank Understand paces as has been observed before for the
canon.
800 paces.

She may be laden ten times in an hour, and 120 times in a day.

Her metal weighs about 4000 pound weight.

She requires 17 horses to draw her.

A wagon carries 66 of her bullets.

She must have 120 bullets a day, and 1200 pound of powder; and for the
carriage of her munitions for a day, three wagons and twelve horses, 24
pioners, two ordinary canoniers, and two extraordinary.

The cordage of a great culvering is a cable of twelve fathom long, and four
inches about, weighing about 55 pound.

Of the bastard culvering. The diameter of her bore is three inches and three
fourth parts.

The diameter of her bullet three inches and two third parts.

The vent or air for the bullet to play one twelfth part.

The metal at her neck is one inch and one fourth part thick, and at her
chamber three inches and three fourth parts.

Her cilinder is eight foot seven inches in length.

From the center of her trunions to her touchhole is three foot six inches.

Her bullet weighs seven pound and a quarter, and her powder five pound.

She shoots point blanck Observe as before.
1000 paces.

She may be laden 140 times in a day, which is about twelve bullets in an hour.

Her metal weighs about 2500 pound.

She must have thirteen horses to draw her.

A wagon carries 140 of her bullets.

Her munitions for her to play one whole day, are 140 bullets, 700 pound of
powder.

She must have two wagons and eight horses to carry her munitions for one
day, twelve pioners, and two canoniers.

The cordage of the bastard culvering is a cable of Here must be a mistake: for
if the cable for the great culvering of 12 fathom long, and 4 inches thick,
weigh but 55 pound, how can this, being but 6 fathom long, and 3 inches and a
half thick, weigh 45 pound? I conceive the mistake to be in the length of the
cable, which should be longer, rather 9 then 6 fathom.
six fathom long, and three inches and an half thick, weighing about 45 pound.

Of the minion. The diameter of her bore is two inches and three fourth parts.

The diameter of her bullet is two inches and two third parts.

The vent for the bullet to play is one twelfth part.

Her metal is one inch thick at her neck.

At her breech two inches and three fourth parts.

Her cilinder is eight foot long.

From the center of her trunions to her touchhole is three foot five inches.

Her bullet weighs three pound and an half, and her charge of powder two pound
and an half.

She shoots point blanck 1400 paces.

She shoots 160 bullets a day, which is about thirteen each hour.

Her metal weighs about 1350 pound.

She must have nine horses to draw her.

A wagon carries 226 of her bullets.

She must have 160 bullets, and 400 pound of powder for a days battery.

One wagon carries her munitions for one day.

She is served with six pioners, and two canoniers.

Of the faulcon. The faulcon may be laden fifteen times in an hour, which is
180 times a day.

Her bullet weighs one pound and an half, the charge of her powder one pound,
and her metal eight hundred pound.

She must have five horses to draw her.

One wagon carries her munitions for two days.

She is served with four pioners, and one canonier.

Of the faulconet. The faulconet may be laden about 250 times a day, which is
about twenty times each hour.

Her bullet weighs three quarters of a pound, and her charge of powder an
half pound, her metal five hundred pound.

One wagon carries her munitions for 3 days.

If the faulcon which weighs eight hundred pound, requires five horses to
draw her, the faulconet weighing five hundred pound, will require three horses.
One horse draws her.

She is served with 4 pioners and one canonier.

Of the harquebus a croc. The harquebus a croc may be laden 300 times a day,
which is 25 times each hour.

Her bullet weighs 3 ounces, and her charge of powder 2 ounces.

One wagon carries 14 hurdles of 10 foot long and 6 foot broad. It may carry
12 dosen of pikes, which are usually about 18 foot long. It carries 300
shovels, pick axes, or spades.

These wagons are made with boards on the sides and bottom, like tumbrels, to
pack up those instruments within them, and also many other smaller ones, as
sawes, chopping-hooks, hatchets, hammers, chizzels, crows of iron.

It may carry 10 pieces of a bridge of bul-rushes.

These pieces are made after this manner, every piece has 10 bundles of
cane-reeds bound together with cords as much as is possible, and then well
sewed within a course cloth; so as they become 10 sacks full of reeds; being a
foot in diameter, and 6 foot in length. They are fastened with good cords upon a
hurdle of 10 foot long, and 6 foot broad.

How the Artillery is to march. Before the Artillery do march, certain
commissaries, canoniers, the wagon master, and certain pioners must go before
to accommodate the ways.

The small pieces must march before, then all the greater ones, then three
wagons; whereof the first is to carry a barrel of grease, and all the smiths
tools in a chest. The second, all the wheel-wrights and carpenters tools, the
gins the leavers and handscrue to raise the pieces. The third is to carry the
anvile, the bellows, and other smiths tools. Then follow the conductours and
canoniers to guard them.

Then the wagons laden with bullets, powder, and other munitions.

All the canoniers must accompany the ordinance, every one near his own piece.

The Artillery and munitions must be quartered in a place sufficiently
spacious, which must always have the front toward the enemy.

Round about the Artillery and munitions there must be a place large enough to
contain the guards.

Of the offices of military men. CHAP. XIIII. Of the soldier.
HE must be armed with such arms as his captain shall appoint him; for he
knows better then himself what arms are most fit for him.

He must show himself desirous to make manifestation of his courage, but must
not therefore at any time go out on any action without the express command of
his chiefs, making it appear that he is discreet as well as valorous.

His eating and sleeping must be regulated according to his leisure, not
according to his will.

He must not be a mutinier, neither must he change his company without great
reason, nor depart without leave obtained and authentical certificate of his
faithful service. Good spirits are not known but upon occasions, which offer
not themselves every day: besides that, a private soldier which desires to
attain to some place of command, has need of a long time, to gain experience
sufficient to render him worthy, and to make his abilities known to such as
can advance him.

He must study to know the use and managing of his arms, the duties of a
soldier, the motions of companies, his marching, his quartering in the field,
to make his guards, and place his sentinels, to understand the beats of the
drum, to make a guard for his superiors.

The soldier should not enroll himself under a captain of mean reputation, or
one that is covetous, lest he loose his labor and time, to prevent changing.
So also a Captain ought not to receive a soldier without knowing him, lest he
happen on some mutinier, coward, feeble or diseased person.

Of the duty of the Lanspassadoes and Appointees.
They are to ease the Corporals, and to be as their Lieutenants and aides in
time of danger: they are also rounders and sentinell-perdues, in cases of
necessity, but not otherwise.

Of the Corporal.
He has the command of his squadron, and is to teach them whatsoever is
necessary for a soldier to know and do. He is to lodge them by cameradoes, to
prevent quarrels and disorders by admonishing them, or acquainting the Captain
therewith; for to chastise them he has no power, unless it be by vexing them
with standing sentinel. He must have a list of his soldiers, and must give
notice to his Sergeant when a soldiers name is crossed out. He is to
distribute the victual, bullets, match, and powder to the soldiers of his
squadron; to know which are the most experienced of them, that so they may be
employed in the watches and actions of greatest importance; to have an eye to
their lives and manners, to take care of the baggage and money of such as are
hurt and sick, causing every man to husband his pay taken at musters. Being on
the guard, he must be vigilant and suspicious; he must place the sentinels
where the Sergeant major or his Captain shall have directed him: he must
releeve them himself, and must send a Lanspassado, or one whom his Captain
shall appoint, whereof he is always to have two, to visit them. He must attend
his rounds and counter-rounds before his corps-du-guard, which must give him
the word: and were it the General of the Army himself, the sentinels ought
not to suffer him nor any person to approach them, without charging their pike
or presenting their musket, the match cocked; and if it be the grand-watch or
other troop, to stay them until the Corporal come; who must never go alone
out of his corps-du-guard, but with three or four to accompany him. He must
advertise the sentinels how to demean themselves upon the discovery of the
enemy, either to give an alarm, or else to give notice without making any
noise. The sentinels must never remove themselves, until the Corporal releeve
them, or that they be constrained by the enemy; and in such case they are to
retreat to the corps-du-guard, as the corps-du-guard (being forced) are to
retreat to the quarters, according to the Captains or Sergeant majors
instruction.

He is to visit the soldiers entering the guard, to know whether they be
sufficiently provided of powder, bullets, and match, viz. one pound of powder,
two pound of bullets, and five fathom of match.

He must cause respect to be given to the corps-du-guard, and silence to be
kept, whether it be about the gates or the walls, that so the noise may not
hinder the hearing of the advertisements of the sentinels. He is to walk before
his corps-du-guard, or to cause a Lanspassado to do it. He must keep fire day
and night, to light the matches, and must take care to see the corps-du-guard
provided of wood, coals, and candles.

Of the Sergeant of a company.
He ought to be able to read, write, and cast account, if it may be; to keep
accounts of his soldiers, how many be pikes, and how many muskets; the best
armed and most courageous of them he is to place in the first rank. It is his
duty to cause the soldiers of his company to observe discipline both
politic and military, and all kinds of commands given by the superiors,
whereof he is to give them knowledge.

He is to instruct them in the managing of arms, in the keeping of rank and
file, and that in such order as the Sergeant major shall appoint.

He must take care of the arms and munitions, to distribute the powder and
match to the Corporals, to place his corps-du-guards and sentinels with his
corporals, in such places as his Captain or Sergeant major shall have
appointed; often visiting them, to see whether they perform their duties,
employing none thereunto but such as are capable, for otherwise an alarm might
be often given without cause; he must make frequent rounds; and if he find a
sentinel a sleep in the field, he is to commit him into the hands of justice.

When the company marches, if a soldier step out of his rank, he is to
compel him to his place with the staff of his halbert.

Whether he be in the field or in garrison, he must take care there be no want
of victual, and if there be want, to demand it of the commissarie or his
deputies, then he is to distribute it to his Corporals, and they to the
soldiers.

He must every evening fetch the word at the Sergeant majors lodging, and
carry it to his Captain, Lieutenant, Ensign, and Corporals.

He must order his company both for their marching, embattailing, as also for
their watch; but for their encamping, that belongs to the Quartermaster.

He must place his guard at the hour appointed, and having showed his
Corporals the places for the corps-du-guards and sentinells, and there placed
them, he is to give the word secretly to the Corporals, according as he shall
have received it from the Sergeant major.

Of the Ensign.
It is the Ensigns duty to carry his colors wheresoever his Captain, or (in
his absence) the Lieutenant shall command him, whether it be in assault or in
battle, having no regard to the danger, but to the means to attain it.

Entering the guard, lodging, in fight, or making alto, he is to bear his
colors on his shoulder, advanced; but when he marches in champain, he may
cause them to be born by one of the bravest soldiers, to which end he is
always to have two of them near him.

The company marching in their order, the Ensign is to be in the middle; but
in assault, scalado, or disbanded fights, he must be at the head.

In battle the Sergeant major appoints him his place of march, and he ought
rather to die then to quit or abandon his colors, for by loosing them, he
dishonors both himself and his company.

He must get the love of his soldiers, that so they may follow him with the
better courage.

If the Colonel command him to plant his colors in the field, he is to do it;
but he ought rather to acquaint his Captain therewith. And in case of alarm,
without expecting any command, he must repair to the place of arms.

The place of arms of a Company is before the Ensigns lodging, where all the
soldiers must assemble in arms; and of a regiment, it is before the Colonels
lodging.

Marching in battalia, he is to march courageously without bowing himself to
any, unless it be to his chief commanders, before whom he is to incline the
head of the colors, more or less, according to their degree, without making a
show of raising his hand to his hat, or bowing his knee.

Of the Lieutenant.
All the Lieutenants ought to be as able as the Captains, whom they represent,
seeing that in their absence they have the same charge and authority: and
ofttimes the Captains are young Gentlemen, descended from illustrious and
valorous persons, which have courage sufficient, but want strength and skill He
must keep the Ensign, drum, and all the officers and appointees near him, to
make use of them as occasion shall serve

He must neither take on, cashier, nor punish any man in the presence of his
Captain, for at that time he has no authority, and all that he does is by
permission and commission; but in his absence he is to be obeyed as the Captain.

His company being ordered for combat, if his Captain be absent, he is to lead
them; but if he be present, he must keep on the rear, and place his two
Sergeants on the flanks, that so every man may keep his rank, and fight
resolutely.

At an assault he must assist the Ensign, and lead him to the place of combat,
which he must have viewed beforehand.

It is his charge to observe the actions of the Corporals and Sergeants, to
hold them to their duties, and to cause them to provide what is necessary for
the company, and to assist them where he shall see cause.

Of the Commissarie.
The office of a Commissarie of soldiers is to cause the musters to be taken
and moneys to be paid, to receive the oath, and to give the quarters for the
lodgings.

Of the Captain.
A Captain ought to be expert, diligent, and courageous; he must know the
duties of all that are under him, but principally his own.

His office is to lead his company wheresoever his General or Colonel shall
command him.

His functions are, to give the orders to his Lieutenant and Sergeants for the
marching of his company, be it three or five in rank, placing his muskets in
the front and rear, and the pikes in the middle. Or in battaillon, placing the
muskets on the flanks of the pikes.

He must teach them how to fight, be it in surprise of an embuscado, in
approach of cities, in assaults, encounters, skirmishes, or battles. To lead
them on prudently, laboring to bring them off with as much glory, as he shall
have courageously brought them on.

The Captain must always be at the head of his company, certain paces
advanced before them, unless it be to join in battle, for his sole person
were not able to sustain the shock of the enemies pikes, but then he is to
place himself in the first rank of his company.

He must cause his soldiers to be taught the use of their swords, pikes and
muskets, teaching them how to order themselves in battalia, and to rally
themselves being disbanded, either by occasion of an alto, a narrow way, or a
defeat. Also to make their huts, and all other exercises of war.

At every dislodging he must cause his company to be put into battalia, and
then to cause them to march according as the ground will permit, and at their
lodging to lead them in a long order of march, either 3 or 5 in rank.

Marching with his company alone, he cannot punish a soldier with death,
unless he rebel, for then he ought to kill him, but for any other matter he
can but disarm him, take away his accoutrements of liverie, degrade and cashier
him; or commit him to the censure of the Colonel of that regiment.

He must take care for the payment of his soldiers, of their arms, victual,
and munitions, to cause the hurt to be healed, and to compose quarrels. He must
make choice of an expert Lieutenant, a courageous Ensign, two diligent
Sergeants, suspecting Corporals, a faithful clerk, a careful harbinger, a
bold surgeon, and a pious Chaplain.

The Captain appoints his own Sergeants, harbinger, drum, fyfe, and
surgeon: but for his Lieutenant, Ensign, Corporals, and Appointees, he must
present them to his Colonel, and to have his leave to place them in their
offices.

The company entering the guard, the Captain is to march at the head, with a
pike in his hand, and completely armed. If it be in the field, they are to be
russet; but rich ones, if it be in a city, having a fair plume on his
headpiece, which he shall cause to be carried before him.

He must cause his soldiers to know how to fight single, how in a body.

He must know the advantages of places, arms, times and occasions, and how to
make use of them.

To understand fortifications, the manner of defending and assailing of places
of strength; how, and in what manner the works are to be made; that so when it
shall come to his turn to direct or guard a work, he show not himself a novice
or fresh water soldier.

Of the drum.
In every company there must be one or two drums, and over them all a drum
major.

The duty of every drum is to beat all manner of beats, as the match, the
alarm, the troop, the chamadoes and answers thereunto, reveills, and
proclamations.

They must know how to observe what they see, to take good notice thereof, and
to make true report of it.

The drum major must be lodged near the Sergeant major, or in his own lodgings;
it being his part to give instructions to the rest, and to observe and take
into his custody the enemies drums which enter the camp.

He may with his staff correct the drums which fail of their duties.

All the drums are to attend him morning and evening to the Sergeant major, to
know the orders.

Of the harbinger.
He must have a list of the soldiers of his company, and make the divisions
for the lodgings.

At the muster he gives a muster roll of the soldiers to the commissarie,
controller, or clerk, and keeps account of the pays received and due, also of
the arms of the company belonging to his Captain.

He is to take his quarter from the Quartermaster, then to mark out the
Captains lodging, the Lieutenants, Ensigns, Sergeants, his own, the drums and
fyfes, and to put the rest into billets or lots, and to cause the Corporalls to
draw them by turn, who shall distribute them among the soldiers: this is to be
done before the Ensigns lodging. He ought to keep a register of all the
lodgings of his quarter.

Of the barber surgeon.
In every company there must be a surgeon, to trim the soldiers, to attend
them which are sick, to dress the wounds of such as are hurt (being as an
assistant to the surgeon of the regiment) having proper remedies to stench
the blood, to hinder inflammations, and to assuage the pain.

Of the Provost.
It is the Provosts charge to pursue fugitives, to apprehend delinquents, and
to imprison them.

He has under him a Lieutenant, a clerk, six Marshals, and an executioner. His
Lieutenant must be skilled in the laws; if he be not, he is to procure some
graduate in the laws to assist him.

He sets the prises on all the victual of his quarter, and no man can sell any
unless it be taxed by him. He appoints the butchers shambles, and is to take
care that the quarters be kept clean. He makes out processes, hears and
examineth witnesses, searches out the truth, etc. And having fitted the cause
for trial, the Colonel, Sergeant major, and Captains judge of it, and pass
sentence in the name of the General.

Before a soldier be delivered to the executioner to be punished for any
infamous delict, he must be publicly disarmed and degraded by the Sergeant
major.

In marching, it is his charge to conduct the ^aggage, and to see it kept in
good order.

Of the Quartermaster of a regiment.
The office of the Quartermaster is to quarter the regiment, and to distribute
the quarters to the harbingers of each company.

He must ordinarily be near the Colonel, and must every evening go to the
Quartermaster General to receive the orders for the divisions and the
rendez-vous of the troops, and to give knowledge thereof to his Colonel.

When the Marshall of the field removes, the Quartermaster General, and all
the Quartermasters of the regiments, with all the harbingers of companies are
to accompany him.

The distributions of lodgings being made by the Marshall of the field, his
assistants, and Quartermasters General, and delivered to the Quartermasters of
regiments, they are presently to advertise their Colonels of the place, and to
conduct them thereunto, either by themselves or some others.

During the time that the Quartermaster is about visiting the distributions of
the lodgings, all the troops are to keep watch round about the place, and to
send out to discover.

First he appoints the Colonels lodging and the Sergeant majors, then his
own, in the middle of the regiment if it may be, then he makes as many quarters
as there be ensigns, and the harbingers of every company choose the best
lodgings for the Captains, Lieutenants, and Ensigns.

The Quartermasters of regiments must cause the harbingers to draw the billets
for their quarters, every one in his order.

They must be informed of the lodgings of the whole Army, to know to whom to
give or from whom to receive supplies in case of necessity.

If the quarter be in the open field, the Quartermaster General shall appoint
to each Quartermaster the place and ground which he shall take, and the
Quartermaster shall dispart the ground to the harbingers.

Of the Sergeant major.
His office gives him access to the General of the Army at all hours, who
speaking with him, knows from him when, where, and how his regiment shall
march, whether alone or with others; whether in one battaillon or many, and in
what form.

It is his office to give order how the companies shall march, so that his
place gives him authority and command over all the Captains of his regiment.

He must be exceeding well experienced and exercised in his office, principally
in embattailing his men; and to rally them being routed, and that in such form
as he shall be commanded.

He must know of the General whether his regiment shall march in the vanguard,
battle, or rear.

He is to know the country, whether it be large or strait, and thereby to
judge how he is to march, and what order to observe, that he may not be
disturbed by the horse, artillery, nor baggage: being ready to march away, he
shall cause the drum major to beat, and he the rest.

He must advertise the Captains, cause the Ensigns to march out of their
quarters, form his battaillon, and give to every Captain the place which he
shall hold for that day.

Having brought his troops into the field, he must see them march away, and
observe whether they march in good order. The Colonel is to lead at the head
of the regiment.

Then the Sergeant major is to go to the General, and to keep near him as much
as may be during the march, to see whether there will be any new order for him
to receive.

If there be any difficult passage, the Sergeant major ought to be there
present, to prevent the disorder which might happen in his regiment, and to put
them in order again if they were disordered. Before the regiment enter their
quarters, the Sergeant major ought to go and take a view of them, or cause them
to be viewed; then, at his return to the regiment, to give license to the
Ensigns to lodge, except those whose turn it is to have the guard, which must
enter the corps-du-guard, and place their sentinels, until it come to the turn
of others.

Now the regiment is to be lodged either in the field or under shelter. If it
lodge in the field, either the regiment is alone, or accompanied with others.
If it be alone, the Sergeant major must cause it to be barricadoed, or
retrenched, or enclosed by wagons or other defenses of the field.

After that he is to place his corps-du-guards round about the quarters; and
the sentinels at so near a distance that they may hear each other speak, being
about eighty or an hundred paces off from the corps-du-guard: they are to be
double, that is, of two men, namely, a musket and a pike; and 500 paces from
them, other single sentinels are to be placed, which are called perdues. In
case of alarm, the sentinell-perdue shall retreat to the double sentinel; and
in case of necessity altogether (having given fire) are to retreat to the
corps-du-guard.

The Sergeant major must often, and at diverse hours of the night, visit the
corps-du-guards.

If there be more regiments, they shall fortify themselves with wagons, or
entrench themselves, and each regiment shall take their quarter, and shall make
their guard as abovesaid.

If an alarm be given in the field, the Sergeant major is to betake himself to
the alarm-place of the regiment, and there to form his battaillon, and send men
to double the guards on that part where the alarm was given, and to give notice
to his Colonel and the General of foot (if he be present) of what passes.
The Ensigns must not retreat, unless the General, or their Colonel, or
Sergeant major give them leave.

No Ensign must remove from his place, nor enter into the same, without leave
of the Sergeant major or his assistant. No order ought at any time to be
altered but by him, for he gives not any orders but by appointment of the
General or Colonel.

All sorts of munitions which are to be distributed amongst the regiment, ought
to be delivered to the Sergeant major, who is to divide them amongst the
companies. He has the charge to provide all things necessary for his
regiment, to send away the sick men to hospitals, commanding the Provost to
provide wagons.

The Captains are to receive the advises of the Sergeant majors assistant, as
from himself; the Quartermasters do usually perform this office.

The Sergeant major ought to take the word from the General, or the Marshall
of the field, or from his Colonel; In absence of these he gives it himself.

In the day of battle he ought not to be on foot amongst the Captains, but
must be on horseback, now on the front, then on the rear, to put in order those
which might happen to be disordered.

If the regiment lodge under shelter, the Sergeant major is to view the place
within and without, the moats, the gates, and the walls, appointing the places
for the corps-du-guards and sentinels, and the way of the rounders, that it may
be free.

He must choose a place to make the alarm-place for the regiment, and there the
companies are to have their rendez-vous, in case of alarm.

After that, he must lead his regiment in order into the alarm-place, placing
his guards at the gates, and on the walls; that done, he shall give leave to
the Captains to go to their lodgings in their several quarters in the town,
giving them order (under his hand) concerning the place whither they shall
resort in case of alarm; which order he may change so often as he shall think
good; for the companies ought never to be assured of the place of their
station, unless it be for the rendez-vous within the town, but not for the
quarter on the walls: for the Sergeant major must (at every turn) cause the
companies to cast lots, to know what part of the walls will fall to their turns.

He ought to take care to cause the bridges, corps-du-guards and watch-houses
to be repaired, if need be, and to have wood, torches, lanterns, and
cresset-lights for the guards.

He is to cause the companies to enter the guards about ten or eleven a clock
in the morning. He is to open and shut the town gates at the rising and setting
of the sun; and to place the watches for the walls presently upon shutting
the gates, and to releeve them at the opening of them.

The Serg ants which have the guard must be present at the opening and shutting
of the gates, and carry the keys of the gates to the Sergeant major, and he
to the Governor; but it is better that the Sergeant major be there assisting,
and be present at the placing of the guards, so often as may be.

He must have a list of all the soldiers of every company as they passed at
the muster, signed by the Commissarie or Treasurer which took the muster; and
in case he find not so many soldiers at his guard, the officers of the
companies are to give him an account thereof, because it belongs to him to
give account to the General concerning his regiment.

Of the Sergeant major General.
The Sergeant major General receives from the General a plat of the form
which he will give to his Army, the disposition and placing of the members of
it, Cavallrie, Infanterie, Artillery; the order which they should observe in
fight, with commission signed by the General to dispose it in that manner.

To this commission the whole Army must yield obedience, and the Sergeant
major General with the Marshals of the field shall dispose thereof, according
to the form and place which the General shall have prescribed.

Of the Quartermaster General.
He has the same charge of the whole Army, which the Quartermaster of a
regiment has of his regiment.

Of the Colonel.
The Colonel ought to be a man of authority and respect, to have absolute
command over his Captains, from which he must procure love and reverence, which
he is to gain by his valor and modesty.

The regiments being together, must march according as the King has given them
pre-eminence, and in that place which the General shall appoint them, in the
van, battle, or rear.

His principal charge is to lead his regiment to the combat, on the head
thereof.

He ought to visit his troops, cause his guards to be well ordered, changed,
and releeved, and to see that each officer do his duty, and that the works be
well ordered.

He ought to see how his Companies be furnished, what arms they have, and what
exercises they perform, and to command the officers what they ought to do.

In the army the Colonel cannot give leave to a soldier to depart from his
regiment, but to change his Company; the first appertaining only to the
General.

The Colonel ought to be called to council by the General, when matters are
to be agitated which belong to his charge; where he shall hear the opinion of
others, and freely speak his own. And if it be about a matter of importance,
and that he knows his opinion to be good, though the contrary opinions
(being stronger in number) do carry it, he ought to commit his opinion to
writing, to purge himself before his Sovereign, in case the execution of the
council prove ill. Mean time, he must give way to the plurality of voices,
and entirely obey his General, and appear in all places where he shall be
commanded, making it appear that the contrary opinion which he held at the
council was not for want either of courage, or of good affection.

The Colonel must render all manner of obedience to the General of the army,
and to the General of Infanterie, (for they have power to command him) and to
the Marshall of the field, as having the charge from the General to give the
orders, the quarter, the alarm-place, the field for the battle; to cause the
forces to march, lodge, dislodge, enter into guard, convoy, etc.

The assistants to the Marshall of the field, or the Sergeant major General
cannot command him any thing as of themselves, but by order signed by the
General, or the Marshall of the field for the army, with the plats and
designs of the ground of the stations and places for combat, giving command by
virtue thereof.

Of the Marshall of the field.
He ought to be valorous, judicious, and expert, to remedy many casual
accidents.

He ought to come first to the rendez-vous of the army, to receive his troops
there, to dispose of the disparting of the lodgings, as well for the Cavallrie
and Infanterie, as for the Artillery, victual, and pioners.

He is to inform the General of the whole estate of the field, and then the
General will give him the order and disposition of his army, whereof he is to
give notice to all the commanders of horse and foot, sending them the direction.

He is to set down the order of the guards of the field, and of the convoyes,
and to cause the laws and ordinances to be published and observed.

He is to view the passages by which the Army is to march, to know what order
they must observe. To do this, he is to take three or four troops of light
horsemen, of such as are to have the guard the night following, which are
warned over night to be in readiness against the morning following, and to be
at the rendez-vous which shall be appointed them, rangeing themselves under the
cornet of the said Marshall of the field with the Quartermasters, Commissaries
of the victual and artillery, engineers, harbingers, and pioners.

In marching he is to send a troop before, and one on either hand, who shall
send out before them five or six scouts to discover the champain, as perdues.

If an alarm happen, he ought to be well informed of the cause, and not to
mistake it; so ought he not to stay so long that he be put to flight, but shall
send word to the General for supplies, that so the Army may have leisure to
embattaile.

If he arrive safely at the rendez-vous of the Army, he is to send his troops
half a mile or more beyond, to discover the country, and to g^t intelligence
concerning the enemy; mean while he is to observe the ground and place for the
camp, and having traced it out in the general, the Quartermaster General
shall make the divisions, and deliver them to the Quartermasters of regiments.

Finally the Marshals of the field ought to order the quartering of the whole
Army; to be the first on horseback, and to alight last, being always present
at all the motions of the Army.

He must take the word from the Lieutenant General of the Army, to give it to
all the officers of the field, which must come to him for it.

The General and Lieutenant General of horse, the General of foot, and the
General of the Artillery take the word from the General of the Army, if
they will not take it from the Marshall of the field.

Of the Commissarie General of the victual.
The Commissarie General of the victual ought to know the number of men which
are to be fed, the place whither the munitions are to be brought, when they
must begin to be distributed, and how long to continue, that so he may make
provision of corn, and cause the bread to be baked.

The measure of wheat at Paris is this, What these make of our English
measures, see it in Cotgrave, and others.
the muyd has twelve septiers, the septier twelve boysseaux. The septier of
wheat weighs about 240 pound, and of meslin 220 pound.

The munition meslin is two third parts of wheat, and one third part of rye:
the boysseaux of this messin weighs about eighteen pound. There is drawn out
of it three pound of bran, and fifteen pound of meal, which is kneaded with ten
pound of water, whereof the paste weighs 25 pound, of 16 ounces in the pound,
and makes about 20 pound of baked bread.

To every soldier is usually given two loaves a day of ten ounces weight a
piece, and one pint of wine Paris measure, such as there is 290 in a muyd, and
three muyds make a tun.

The Cavallrie is not fed with amunition-bread, because they are usually
quartered under shelter in towns and villages. The wagons to carry
munition-bread are made after the manner of tumbrels or chests, each of them is
drawn by four horses, and carries 1500 loaves, and a mule with wicker paniers
carries 300.

There must be three times as much carriage as is needful to carry victual
for one day; as to feed five thousand mouths, there must be ten thousand
loaves, and five and thirty mules or horses to carry them; being tripled they
will be one hundred and five mules, which must be had, namely, one third part
to go to fetch the bread, one third part which is coming with it, and one third
part which is unlading. There uses ordinarily to be added to the munitions one
quarter of bread and wine more then needs.

Of the Master or General of the Artillery.
He is absolute over all the Artillery and the officers thereof, and is
subject to none but the King, and in the army to the Lieutenant General.

He must keep account or inventorie of the pieces, powder, bullets, and
equipage of the pieces, and of all the officers of the Artillery in the whole
kingdom, to inform his Majesty when he shall have a desire to execute some
design, as to besiege some place, to fight a battle in the field, or at sea,
or to strengthen his holds.

He ought to know what provisions and preparations he is to make, how and where
the ordinance are to be planted, at what distance they should be levelled, of
what quality the wall is which is to be battered, and what the power is of his
Artillery.

If a soldier of the army has committed any offense, and can convey himself
among the Artillery, he is there as in a privileged place, and cannot there
be apprehended, unless it be by the Provost of the Artillery, who shall
deliver him into the hands of his Captain, after that he be informed of his
delict by a legal trial.

In the situation of the ordinance he is to regard that the place be
commodious, that it be easy to be defended by the soldiers, that they may
skirmish with facility, that in case of necessity the ordinance may speedily
retreat, that they may discover, command, and batter point blank, and that
their distance be not excessive.

The soldiers appointed to guard the Artillery, ought not to come nearer it
then fifty paces.

The General of the Artillery ought every year to present a list of the
officers of the Artillery to the King, filling the vacant places with the
names of such persons as he shall think most fitting; then the King either
confirms the same, or alters it at his pleasure, then signeth it, and
causes it also to be signed by a secretary of state. This list is delivered
to the treasurer General of the Artillery, who prosecutes the assignations,
and pays the officers named in that list, taking their acquittances.

His officers are, a Lieutenant General, a Guard General, two Controllers
General, a Treasurer General (who pays according to the General of the
Artillery his order) a Quartermaster, a Provost; and each of them has two
Commissaries in all the storehouses and armories of France.

He causes the ordinance to be founded, tried, and mounted, he buyeth the
metal, wood, bullets, iron work, pikes, muskets, and all sorts of arms,
shovels, pickaxes, hatchets, hammers, ladders, etc. horses, wagons, cordage,
etc. causes the powders and fireworks to be compounded, and that in all the
magazines of France.

Of the General of horse.
He commands all the light horse and carabines, and in his absence the
Colonel does it.

He lodges and leads them, and sends them to the conflict, and gives them the
order of combat.

He is lodged with his Cavallrie at the head of the Army, sends out every day
to discover the enemy, renders an account daily of the same and their actions
to the Lieutenant General of the Army.

The chiefs of the forces are the King, the Kings sons, the Princes of the
blood, the General, and the Colonells, etc.

For all the troops there is a Quartermaster, and one or two harbingers
General.

And over every troop, a Captain, a Lieutenant, a Cornet, a Quartermaster, an
harbinger, and a trumpet.

The duty of the troops is, always to scour and discover the high ways and
advenues by which the enemy might come, and to be ever hovering about the
enemies Army; for this cause they are to make great and long dayes-journeys,
but are excused of watch in the night, except in their own quarters, and for
them only.

At the siege of towns they are sent before to make waste, to seize on the
passages, to invest the towns, to skirmish, and to take prisoners, thereby to
be informed of the estate of the town.

It is no disgrace for the light horse to retreat on the gallop, for their
duty is to fight as well retreating as advancing, ten against fifty, thirty
against an hundred; therefore they must be well practiced to make a good
retreat, and to single themselves out of a greater troop then their own, and to
charge them again in opportune time, according as their courage and judgment
shall give them resolution, and experience shall direct them.

Of cuirassiers.
The Constable or General of the army commands the cuirassiers, and in his
absence the Lieutenant General of the army.

They are divided into troops of an hundred men, at least those which belong to
the King, the Princes, the Constables and Marshals of France; the rest are not
so strong.

The officers of every troop are a Captain, a Lieutenant, (in the Princes
troops there be Sub-lieutenants) a Cornet (which is square for the cuirassiers)
or a Guidon (which is long and split for the harquebusiers) a Quartermaster, a
harbinger, and a trumpet.

They may fitly march, lodge, or sight in the van, battle, or rear, according
to the order prescribed by the Constable or General of the army.

The Captains choose and dispose of places amongst all their members at their
pleasure, but they cannot cashier any unless he has been wanting in the Kings
service.

Their duty is to keep close united, to march soft and fair, and never to turn
their backs, and for this reason they must be heavy armed.

Of the General of Infanterie.
The charge of the General of the Infanterie extends it self over all the
foot, much more absolutely then the Colonels of his regiment.

In all the regiments he makes the Sergeant Majors, Provosts, Quartermasters,
Surgeons, and Almoners.

All administrations of justice over all the foot, pass in his name.

He has the nomination and presenting of the Captains to the King, he is also
to give him information of the sufficiency or insufficiency of the Colonels,
seeing that the King bestows their offices upon them, that so he may know all
those of his kingdom which are capable, as having learned their profession
amongst the foot.

Of the Constable or General of the Army.
He has the command of the whole army.

He ought to know all the duties and charges of the officers thereof, and
should be of great experience, that so amongst many differing opinions, which
are usually in councels, he may be able to choose the best.

He ought to be of great authority in his commands, of great courage in
combats, constant and resolute in cross accidents, successful in his
enterprises; and that he may be such, he ought to invoke God to be propitious
to him, who will give him judgment to dispose his army after the best manner,
and (by his good discipline, disposition, and order) to render it not only
able to overcome (which is all that a General can do) but will also make it
victorious, if it depend on the power and favor of the Lord of hosts.

Good successes or bad should not make him change countenance, but to receive
both modestly, without discovering the passions of his soul by his countenance.

Impatience, sluggishnesse, choler, cruelty, or envy toward those which
acquire glory under him, should not be harbored in his soul.

He must be resolute, and well weigh the occasion of giving battle, rather
then hazard all his troops in fight; laboring to overcome his enemy as much
by industry as by force: as, in surprising him being disordered, his troops
being scattered, weary, wet, or surprised with hunger, thirst, cold, or some
other accident.

He is not to suffer skirmishes, unless he see much advantage; for by
overcoming in these small occasions, the soldier becomes more courageous,
assures himself of the good fortune and good leading of his commanders, and
easily persuades himself of the victory.

He ought to consult with many, but never to tell his resolution to any man, or
at least to very few: by this means he shall render himself so practiced as he
shall be able wisely to lay hold on fit opportunities and the instant of
occasions, to prevail thereby.

He ought to acquire the love of all men, principally of the commanders, and
not to weary or tire his army too much, for fear of diseases, yet to cause his
battaillons to be thoroughly exercised in all exercises of war. He ought to be
rigorous toward evil men, and to cause justice to be readily executed.

Of fireworks. CHAP. XV.
IN the tenth chapter has been showed what materials were to be provided for
fireworks; here shall be taught how they are to be compounded.

To make garlands or pitched ropes for cressets. Take of black pitch twelve
pound, of tallow six pound, linseed oil six pound, hard resin six pound,
turpentine six pound, melt these altogether, and lay match therein, until it
suck up all the composition and be well incorporated; then make your garlands
therewith.

To make torches against rain and wind. Take cords of fine hemp, very open
twisted, about the thickness of ones little finger, beat them with a mallet
till they be very soft; dissolve saltpeter, and boil the said cords therein,
then let them be dried. Make a paste of sulphur and gunpowder beaten together,
soaked in linseed oil until it be liquid; steep your cords in this liquour,
and let them dry again. Then take three parts of wax, two of resin, one of
sulphur, one of black pitch, half of turpentine, a quarter of campher; melt
and mix all that well together, then cover your cords after the manner of a wax
candle, and join four of them together, and in the middle of them a staff of
sallow about the thickness of a finger, prepared as the cords or matches above
said.

To dissolve saltpeter. Put to one pound of saltpeter two ounces of water, then
set it a melting over the fire in a kettle. It will also dissolve alone, but
not so easily.

To bring saltpeter to flower. Dissolve the saltpeter over the fire, then
stir it with a stick until it come to be like meal.

To make roch petre. You must melt it alone in a kettle, then let it grow cold.

To make flowers of sulphur. Melt sulphur in a limbeck, and the flowers will
gather together about the helm.

To better the flowers of sulphur, melt them and lay them into strong vinegar.

To make an excellent sulphur, take one part of flowers of sulphur, melt it:
put into it half a part of quicksilver, and stir it softly over a small fire,
until all be mixed, then slake it with strong vinegar.

To make excellent coal. Take young twigs of hasle or sallow, or the stock of a
vine, put them in small pieces into an earthen pot close covered, then set the
pot on the fire until the twigs be burnt; their coal is very good.

To make good powder for muskets and pistols. Take seven parts of saltpeter,
one part of sulphur, and one part and a quarter of charcoal; or rather eight
parts of saltpeter, one part of sulphur, and one part and one fifth part of
coal: beat it altogether very thoroughly, and sprinkle it over with good
vinegar, then grain it.

To make roch fire. Take one part of common sulphur, melt it in an earthen
pot, being melted put into it half a part of course grained powder well dried,
saltpeter one third part, beaten charcoal half a part; put these things
together by little and little, being well mingled, pour them on the flore, and
you have the roch fire.

To make burning brush-faggots to cast into the moat, to show light in the
night. Take roch fire and melt it, then anoint the faggots with it, or joyners
chips, or else anoint them with turpentine.

To make fireballs to set places on fire. Take roch fire one part, saltpeter
one part, campher one eighth part, fine powder one eighth part, beat each of
them severally, then mix them together with your hand, and put them into an
hollow ball, having holes in diverse places, with hards amongst it.

Otherwise. Take one part of campher, one part of saltpeter, half a part of
sulphur, one third part of coal, all beaten to very fine powder, then mixed
with petroll until the matter be set in clods, then set it a drying; the older
it be the better it is: then you must load the hollow balls, having holes of
sufficient bigness, and give fire to them by a match or week.

To make the match or week Take half a quarter of powder, a quarter of
saltpeter, two ounces of aqua vitae, half a septier of vinegar, and one pint
of urin, let all this be melted together; being dissolved, put into it
course-spun-cotten, until it have sucked it all up being warm, and you shall
have a violent week. Take it out while it is moist, and by pieces of two,
three, or four foot long, roll it with your hand on a table strewed with well
beaten powder, and being so powdered, hang them in the shadow to dry, then lock
them up in some dry place.

To make a fire trunk. Take a piece of light wood of three foot and an half, or
four foot long, bore it through from the one end to the other with a hole of
an inch in diameter, make the wood very smooth within and without, which must
be an inch thick, and of a like bigness every where; place at the one end an
half pike, which may enter half a foot in at the hole, and nail it sure; whip
the trunk with strong packthred, then anoint and knutle it with resin and wax
melted together, to keep it from water. The mixture of the powders are twelve
parts of saltpeter, six of sulphur, six of canon powder, six of fine powder,
two of glass meanly beaten, two of quicksilver, and of sal armoniack; beat all
these severally, then mix them together, and make a paste of them with oil of
peter, more hard then soft, then take hards and make little balls with the
mixture above said, of the bigness of the caliver of the trunk, and let them
dry, and bind them with small wire. To charge the trunk, put a charge of
beaten powder in the bottom of the trunk without ramming of it, put a ball
upon that, and then a little of your mixture, continue thus until it be
filled, augmenting the charges of powder, so that the last be of two charges.
You are to give fire to this trunk by the mouth of it with a match or week.

woodcut of instruments for casting fireworks Diverse instruments to cast
fireworks.


To make rockets. All the parts following must be understood in weight and in
measure.

The matter of rockets. Take a part of beaten sulphur, one part and an half of
ashes of ivy or vinetree, twelve parts of common gunpowder, well beaten and
sifted; put these three sorts of powders together into a basin or other
vessel, and mingle them with both hands till they be well mixed together; and
in doing so, you shall besprinkle them with a brush with common water, to keep
the dust from flying away, and that the powders may concorporate together, when
you shall press them within the concave of the rocket, you must take heed of
pouring on too much water, lest it come to a paste.

The concave cilinder of the rocket must be made of strong royal paper, which
must be rolled and mouled on a moul.

I will not here speak of the manipulation, leaving that to the makers of them,
as being common and vulgar, only I will say that you cannot beat the matter
for rockets too much with an iron hammer into the cilinders, and that the
longest osier switch is the best, so as it weigh not more then the rocket.

These sorts of rockets, the older they be, the better: and if they be well
whipped about, they will never burst. The coursest powder is best, because it
is the easier beaten, or else take the dust of powder, that is, that which has
not yet been grained.

folio 156
diagram of rocket

To make a rocket, you must have a mould to mould your paper on, as you see in
figure. H. A rammer or drift. I. The mould to charge the rocket. A, F, G, O.
The breech of the rocket. L. The needle of iron fastened in the breech. S. The
bigness of the stars. T.
This leaf is to be placed betwixt folio's 156 and 157, in the Art of War or
Military discourses.

To make cornet-rockets, which draw fire after them until they burst. Take a
part of beaten sulphur, a part of ashes of ivy or vine, half a part of osier
coals beaten, and twelve parts of gunpowder beaten and sifted, and mix it as
has been said before.

To make the composition of serpents which are added to rockets. Take ashes of
vine one part, and of gunpowder beaten and sifted twelve parts, and load the
concaves of the quills therewith; and if you would have the serpents to crack,
you must make them of paper as the rockets, and they must have a petard of
grained powder at one end.

To make the composition to charge stars. Take one part of beaten sulphur,
one part of powder, two parts of saltpeter, and half a part of coal of osiers;
all being well beaten.

Of this composition take the bigness of a musket bullet, cover it with hards,
and tie it about with thread.

You must pierce through these stars with an iron bodkin of sufficient
bigness to thread them, as a string of beads or a string of match to give fire
to them.

Of the militia of the Grecians. CHAP. XVI.
THeir foot were divided into two kinds, pikes, and such as used flying weapons.

The pikes bore a target, or a corslet and greves, a pike from 20 to 24 foot
long, and a sword.

The strongest of them covered themselves with a Macedonian target of brass,
being four foot in diameter.

All the pikes were called heavy armed.

They which used flying weapons (which were called the light armed) carried
wicker targets, bows, darts, and slings.

The heavy armed soldiers were thus disposed of, 16 men made a file: the
first man being the file-leader, commanded the whole file; the eighth man was
the bringet-up of the front-half-file; the ninth man was the half-file-leader,
and the sixteenth man was the bringer-up of the file.

The whole file was divided into four equal parts, the first soldier of
every fourth part was called Enomotarcba, and had command over the other three.

A file.
File-leader. First Enomotarch. Second Enomotarch. Bringer-up of the file.
Half-file-leader. Third Enomotarch. Fourth Enomotarch. Bringer-up of the file.

A company had 16 files, which made 256 men.

The officers of a company were, a Captain A. two Centurions B. four
Tetrarchs C. eight Dilochites D. 16 file-leaders I, E. 16 bringers-up of the
front-half-files H. 16 half-file-leaders G. and 16 bringers-up of the files F.

Besides these they had an Ensign, a Sergeant, a Trumpet, a Rear-commander,
and a Crier.

The figure of a company.
diagram of company hierarchy

The duty of the officers was to instruct their soldiers in all the military
motions; these motions were, to stand right in ranks and files, to face to the
right, left, and rear; to double files and ranks; to perform their
countermarches and wheelings.

To render this more intelligible, I will describe each of them apart. First,
the company is drawn up into a body (as has been showed before) then the
ranks and files are made straight and even, and they take their distances; E.
F. is the first file, E. I. is the first rank.

There be three kinds of distances, one for exercise, which is for every
soldier four cubits of ground (which is six foot.) The second, to be ready
for battle expecting an enemy, which is two cubits (three foot) that so the
pikes may face every way. The third for combat, which is one cubit, that being
so serried they may the more strongly charge the enemy, or sustain his charge.

The figure following shows in what order the soldiers ought to be to
perform their motions, and how they are to reduce themselves when they are
commanded as they were.

This figure is represented in all the following battaillons by these marks o,,
the white ones signify the file-leaders, or the front of the battaillon in the
first standing before the command given, and the black ones the ordinary
soldiers. The small pricks show the way by which every soldier moved, the
figures of men show in what form the battaillon stands after the motion
according to the command given them, and the cipher figures placed in the ranks
and files show which are to stand and which to move, or which are leaders, and
which are followers.

The standing of soldiers which have made even their ranks and files,
attending the word of command to perform the exercise.
diagram of a battalion

To cause all the battaillon to face to the right, every soldier must turn his
face to the place where his right hand was.

A battaillon faced to the right hand.
diagram of a battalion

To cause all the battaillon to face to the left, every soldier must turn his
face to the place where his left hand was.

A battaillon faced to the left hand.
diagram of a battalion

To cause the battaillon to face to the rear, every soldier must turn his face
by the right hand until it be where his back was.

A battaillon faced to the rear.
diagram of a battalion

To double files or ranks, is to put two into one. Doubling of files is called
doubling the flanks, or doubling the depth; doubling of ranks is called
doubling the front.

Files are doubled after three ways, either in inplacing the one within the
other, which is called doubling of files sidewayes. In this doubling the even
numbers of files mix themselves within the odd numbers, and the file-leaders
which are to move, place themselves behind them which are to stand fast, and
every soldier behind his right hand man.

A battaillon which has doubled their files side-wayes.
diagram of a battalion

Files are also doubled when one is placed before the other, which is called
doubling of files advancing, when the odd numbers place themselves before the
even numbers, as the following figure shows.

A battaillon which has doubled files advancing.
diagram of a battalion

Files are also doubled, when the left flank, or half ranks, of the battaillon
stands fast; and the right flank advances until it be before the other, then
causing it to face to the left, and to march until they stand right before
them, then to reduce their facing.

Ranks are also doubled by three ways, either by mixing them one within the
other, which is called doubling by ranks, and here the even numbers of ranks
place themselves within the odd numbers.

A battaillon which has doubled ranks by ranks.
diagram of a battalion

Ranks are also doubled, by causing the half files to advance, until the
half-file leaders come up to the front of the battaillon.

A battaillon which has doubled ranks by the half files.
diagram of a battalion

Ranks are also doubled, when the battaillon divides it self at the half files,
or rear division. The rear division again divides it self into two equal
parts at their half ranks, the one part to the right, the other to the left,
and each of these parts advances until the half-file-leaders stand even with
the front of the battaillon.

A battaillon which has doubled ranks on the flanks.
diagram of a battalion

Countermarching is, when every soldier turning his face to the rear, does
also change his place, so to exchange the soldiers of the one part of the
battaillon, to another part.

It is performed by files and ranks, and each of these is done three ways, the
Macedonian, Laconian, and Persian or Cretan.

The countermarch by files is to turn the face to the rear, and so to bring the
file-leaders again to be foremost.

The Macedonian countermarch by files is, when the file-leaders face to the
rear and stand fast, then all the rest of each file pass through and stand
behind their own leaders, by which means the battaillon leaves before it, for
the field of combat, the ground where it self stood, as appears by the figure
following.

A battaillon which has performed the Macedonian countermarch.
diagram of a battalion

The Laconian countermarch by files is when the file-leaders facing to the
rear, cause all the rest of their file to follow after them, and lead them to
another ground, leaving that ground behind them where they formerly stood; or
rather the bringers-up face about, and every man of the file places himself
before his bringer-up, in their due places, until the file-leader come up to
the front.

A battaillon which has performed the Laconian countermarch.
diagram of a battalion

The Persian or Cretan countermarch, is when the file-leaders face about, and
draw their files after them, and come into the place of the bringers-up; and
the bringers-up come into the file-leaders places; the battaillon possessing
the same ground it had before.

A battaillon which has performed the Persian or Cretan countermarch.
diagram of a battalion

Countermarches by ranks are performed by the same rules and ways, as has
been showed in those of files.

Wheeling is when the whole body of the battaillon turns, which is done upon
the angles of the battaillon (upon the right or left hand file-leader) or on
the middle of the front (the middle file-leaders being as the center) or on the
center of the battaillon.

When the battaillon wheeleth upon the right hand file-leader, it wheeleth to
the right hand. When it is upon the left hand file-leader, it wheeleth to the
left. A quarter turn is called the first wheeling, as when the battaillon A.
comes to possess the place B. turning upon the center E. An half turn is
called the second wheeling, which will be when the battaillon is come to
possess the ground C. Three quarter turn is called the third wheeling, which
will bring the battaillon into D.

A battaillon wheeling upon the right hand file-leader.
diagram of a battalion

The words of command are, Make ready your arms, Put your selves in battalia,
Make even your files and ranks, Take your distances, Advance your pikes. Faces
to the right, As you were; Faces to the left, As you were; Faces to the rear,
As you were; Files to the right double, As you were; Double your files
advancing, As you were; Double your files by the half ranks, As you were; Ranks
double by ranks, As you were; Ranks double by the half files, As you were;
Ranks double on both flanks, As you were. Countermarch, etc. As you were.
Wheel, etc. As you were.

Sixteen companies made a regiment, which consisted of 4096 men; the officers
of this regiment were, one Colonel, I. two Lieutenant Colonels, K. four
Sergeant majors, L. Eight Colonels assistants, M. The squares represent the
companies, each of them having their Captain, diagram of the hierarchy of a
regiment.

Four regiments made the battle of heavy armed foot; the two on the right
hand were called the right wing, and the two on the left, the left wing.

The officers of these four regiments were, the General of foot, N. The
Lieutenants General, O. The regiments are, P.

The front of the battle of heavy armed foot.
diagram of the front of battle

So much concerning the heavy armed foot, which differed not from the light
armed concerning their order, but only in their number, for the light armed
had their files but of 8 deep, in all the rest they were alike. For they had as
many files, as many companies, as many regiments, as many officers, disposed in
the same order

Four regiments made the front of their battle, and two made a wing: their
commanders were, The Lieutenant General, Q. The Lieutenant Colonels
assistants, R. The regiments, S.

The front of the battle of light armed foot.
diagram of the front of battle

Sometimes the light armed foot marched before the heavy armed, sometimes they
marched on their flanks, sometimes between them, and sometimes in their rear.

The form of battle of the foot, when the heavy armed marched before the
light armed.
diagram of the front of battle

T. is the left wing. V. is the right wing. X. the heavy armed regiments. Y.
the light armed regiments.

The horse were sometimes placed round about the army by squadrons, sometimes
on the wings, and also on the rear, sometimes amongst the army on the wings of
the battaillons, and sometimes only on the wings of the army, which they did
most usually, dividing them into two equal parts, placing the one half on the
right wing, and the other half on the left wing.

The form of the army ranged in battle, as well Infanterie as Cavalerie.
diagram of the front of battle

X. are the heavy armed foot. Y. the light armed foot. Z. the horse, the one
half on the right wing, and the other half on the left.

As they which use flying weapons were but half the number of the pikes, so the
horse were but half the number of those which used flying weapons, that is, a
fourth part of the foot.

The Persians and Sicilians disposed their troops of horse in square bodies, as
the French do now adays, but the Scythians, Thracians, and Macedonians put
them into a triangular form, or wedge; and the Thessalians into a rhomb or
diamond.

They ordered their horse in these wedges and rhombs, sometimes by files, and
sometimes by ranks, as in these figures.

diagram of triangular formation Captain.

Lieutenant.

Ilarchos.

Plagiophylarchos.

diagram of diamond formation Captain.

Lieutenant.

Corporal.

Ilarchos.

Plagiophylarchos.

Vragos.



The Grecians disposed their armies into fundrie forms, which was very easy
for them to do, they being able to lengthen, thicken, open, close it, change
the figure, or turn the front as pleased them; by reason their soldiers were
practiced in all the motions aforesaid; and at the sound of the trumpet both
horse and foot knew what they were to do.

Sometime their army marched with an even front, according to the form showed
before, when their enemy was before them; sometimes in two bodies, when the
enemy was on their flanks; sometimes in four, when they were in danger on all
sides: sometimes in sithes, checquers, crescents, and manches.

In the figure following are represented six dispositions of battle.
A. Double fronted. B. Four fronts. C. The sith, or open fronted wedge. D.
The checquer. E. The crescent. F The manches.. The horse.. The light armed..
The heavy armed.
diagram of dispostions of battle diagram of double fronted A

diagram of four fronts B

diagram of open fronted wedge C

diagram of the checker D

diagram of the crescent E

diagram of the manches F



A battaillon which had a greater depth then front, they called Orthion.

That which had the front exceeding the depth, Plagion.

That battaillon is called oblique which fights by the wings, one wing
serving for the vanguard.

When the battle was begun to be ranged by the wings, and was ended at the
middle, it was called Parembole.

When they began to range their battle by the midst, and finished it on the
wings, it was called Prostaxis.

When (the heavy armed foot being first placed) the light armed were placed at
their front, it was called Protaxis.

When (after that the heavy armed were ranged) the light armed foot were
placed in their rear, it was called Epitaxis.

When the light armed foot were ranged in the intervalls between the pikes, it
was called Entaxis.

When the light armed were placed on the wings of the whole army, they called
it Hypotaxis.

Of the heavy armed foot, called Hoplites.
Number of men. Files. Greek names of the troops. The names interpreted. Greek
names of officers. Officers names interpreted. 4. Enomotia. A quartain.
Enomotarcha. A quartainer. 8. Dimoeria. An half file. Dimoerites. An half
file-leader. 16. 1. Lochia. A file. Lochagos. A file-leader. 32. 2. Dilochia.
Two files. Dilochites. A Lanspassado. 64. 4. Tetrarchia. A squadron. Te^rarcha.
A Corporal. 128. 8. Taxiarchia. A centurie. Taxiarcha. A Centurion. 256. 16.
Syntagma. A company. Syntagmatarcha. A Captain. 512. 32. Pentacosiarchia. A
double company. Pentacosiarcha. A Colonels assistant. 1024. 64. Chiliarchia. A
brigado. Chiliarcha. A Commander of a brigado, or Sergeant major. 2048. 128.
Merarchia. A double brigado. Merarcha. A Lieutenant Colonel. 4096. 256.
Phalangia. A regiment. Phalangarchos. A Colonel. 8192. 512. Diphalangia. One
wing of the regiment. Diphalangarchos. Lieutenant General of foot. 16384.
1024. Tetraphalangia. The battle of the heavy armed foot.
Tetraphalangarchos. The General of foot.

Of the light armed foot, called Psyllagi.
Number of men. Files. The Greek names of the troops. The names interpreted.
The Greek names of the officers. The officers names interpreted. 4. Dimoeria.
Half a file. Dimoerites. Half file-leader. 8. 1. Lochia. A file. Lochites. A
file-leader. 16. 2. Dilochia. Two files. Dilochites. A Lanspassado. 32. 4.
Systasis. A squadron. Systasiarchos. A Corporal. 64. 8. Pentecontarchia. A
centurie. Pentecontarchos. A Centurion. 128. 16. Hecatontarchia. A company.
Hecatontarchos. A Captain. 256. 32. Psyllagia. A double company.
Psyllagiarchos. A Colonels assistant. 512. 64. Xenagia. A brigado.
Xenagiarchos. A Sergeant major. 1024. 128. Systema. A double brigado.
Systemarchos. A Lieutenant Colonel. 2048. 256. Epixenagia. A regiment.
Epixenagiarchos. A Colonel. 4096. 512. Stiphos. One wing of the battle.
Stipharchos. The Sergeant major General of foot. 8192. 1024. Epitagma. The
battle of light armed foot. Epitagmarchos. The Lieutenant General of foot.

Of the horse.
Number of men. The Greek names of the troops. The names interpreted. The Greek
names of officers. Officers names interpreted. 36 Embolos. Half a troop.
Embolarchos. A Lieutenant. 64 Archia. A troop. Archos. A Captain. 128
Epilarchia. A double troop. Epilarchos. Sergeant major. 256 Tarentinarchia.
Four troops. Tarentinarchos. Lieutenant Colonel. 512 Hipparchia. A regiment.
Hipparchos. Colonel. 1024 Ephipparchia. A double regiment. Ephipparchos.
Sergeant major General. 2048 Telarchia. One wing of the horse. Telarchos.
Lieutenant General. 4096 Epitagma. The gross of Cavallrie. Epitagmarchos.
General of horse.

Of the Roman Militia, in the time of Polybius. CHAP. XVII.
THe Romans managed their martial affairs after this manner: They chose out
of all the people such as were most fit to bear arms, as well for the
Infanterie as for the Cavallrie.

Concerning the Infanterie, the poorest and youngest of them were appointed to
be Velites; the next above these, to be Hastati; they which were in the flower
of their age, to be Principes; and the ancientest to be Triarii.

The arms of these four sorts of soldiers were these: The Velites bore a
sword, a javelin or dart three foot long, and an inch thick, with an iron at
the end one foot long, a target of three foot in diameter, and an headpiece of
leather; some bore slings, and some bows.

The Hastati and Principes bore each of them a target (two foot and an half
broad, and four foot long, or four foot and an handful) a sharp-pointed
sword, and cutting on both sides, and very stiff, an headpiece of brass with
crests and plumes, two piles of wood, the one slender as a dart, three cubits
long, with an iron at the end; and one thick one, an handful in thickness,
three cubits also in length, at the end whereof there was an iron of the length
of the pile, half whereof was driven into the wood, which was fastened strongly
thereunto, the other half extended, with a sharp point, being furnished with
hooks. This iron, next to the wood, was one finger and an half thick, the
finger being accounted at four barley kernels, and the handful at four
fingers breadth.

The Triarii bore the same arms which the Principes did, saving the piles, for
in steed of them they bore pikes.

The Hastati used to bear them in former time, and had their name from thence,
but they quitted them to take piles.

The Hastati, Principes, and Triarii bore a breast plate of brass or iron, a
foot square; and the richer sort armed themselves with scales or mails, fastened
together with hooks.

In a legion there were 4200 men of the four sorts of soldiers aforesaid,
Velites, Hastati, Principes, and Triarii; divided after this manner: There were
600 Triarii, 1200 Principes, 1200 Histati, and as many Velites.

As well the Hastati, Principes, as Triarii, were divided each into ten parts,
called Maniples; so that in a legion there were 30 Maniples, without reckoning
the Velites; for they were equally distributed amongst each Maniple. The
Hastati being 1200, divided into ten Maniples, each contained 120 men; so much
were those of the Principes, and 60 those of the Triarii; and dividing the 1200
Velites by 30, to serve for such as used flying weapons to the Maniples
aforesaid, it will appear that every Maniple of Velites contained 40 men.

One Maniple of Hastati, one Maniple of Principes, and one of the Triarii with
the Velites, made a Cohort: for there were ten Cohorts in a Legion, and six
Maniples in a Cohort; namely, one of the Hastati, one of the Principes, one of
the Triarii, and three of the Velites.

The Velites fought disbanded, keeping neither rank nor order, and it was their
duty to begin the skirmish and battle; but the Hastati, Principes, and
Triarii, were ranged into Maniples. All the Maniples of the Hastati stood in
one front, so did those of the Principes, in the rear of them, and those of the
Triarii in like manner in the rear of the Principes.

The distance of the Maniples was such, that one Maniple might stand betwixt
two of them, because that if the Hastati were repulsed, they might retreat into
the intervalls or spaces which were between the Maniples of the Principes, and
so fight together. And if both Hastati and Principes were defeated, they might
retreat between the Maniples of Triarii, and so fight again all together, as
well Hastati, and Principes, as Triarii.

The form of a Legion embattailed.
diagram of a legion

B. B. are the Maniples of Hastati. C. C. those of the Principes. D. D. those
of the Triarii. The pricks which are about the Maniples, represent the Velites.

Over every Maniple were two commanders, called Centurions, a first, and a
second; when both of them were present with their Maniple, the first commanded
the right flank, and the second the left: and if one of them were absent, he
which was present commanded the whole Maniple. In every Maniple were two
Ensigns, one under each Centurion, and two Sergeants. Every ten men had also a
commander, called a Decurion, and over all the Legion there were six Tribunes
or commanders in chief.

Every Legion had 300 horse, divided into ten troops called Turmes, every one
of which had 30 soldiers, three whereof were Decurions or file-leaders, and
three bringers-up. The first file-leader, called the Prefect, commanded the
troop, in his absence the second, and in eithers absence the third did it. In
every troop there was a Cornet.

Three Turmes in a company.
diagram of turmes in a company

B. The file-leaders. C. The three Cornets.
The Romans made use of their Allies in their wars, and had a like number of
foot of their Allies as they had of citizens of Rome, and the Legions were
alike in form, arms, and number of men: but concerning the Cavallrie, the
Allies were double the number of the Romans. It is true that of the foot they
took the fifth part, and of the horse the third part for extraordinary, and
the rest of the foot they divided into two equal parts, which they placed on
the flanks of the army, and called those on the right hand, The right wing,
and those on the left hand, The left wing, so that when the Roman Legions
consisted of 4200 men, the wings of the Allies were 3360, and the Maniples of
the Hastati and Principes, each of them were 92; of the Triarii 60; and of the
Velites 30. And the troop of extraordinary foot in every wing was 840 men. The
Cavallrie of the Allies for every of their Legions was 600 horse (double the
number of the Romans) of these they took a third part (namely 200) for
extraordinary, and divided the remaining 400 into ten Turmes, each of them of
40 horse, over which there were a Cornet, a Prefect, three Decurions or
file-leaders, and three bringers-up, as amongst the Romans. These
extraordinaries were employed for guards for the Consuls, and for troops of
reserve in combats.

When four Legions were ranged in battle, all the Roman Cavallrie was on the
right hand, that of the Allies on the left hand, and the extraordinary
Cavallrie of the Allies was placed on the right hand of the Roman horse, and
the extraordinary Infanterie of the Allies was ranged between the Legions and
the wings, over against the Triarii.

Four Legions ranged in Battalia by Maniples.
diagram of four legions

A. The Cavallrie of the two wings of Allies. H. I. K. The Hastati, Principes,
and Triarii of the first Roman Legion. E. F. G. The Hastati, Principes, and
Triarii of the second Roman Legion. L. M. N. The Hastati, Principes, and
Triarii of the right wing of the Allies. B. C. D. The Hastati, Principes, and
Triarii of the left wing of the Allies. Q. The two extraordinary Cohorts of
the left wing of the Allies. R. The 2 extraordinary Cohorts of the right wing
of the Allies. T. The Imperator or General. N. The Legate of the right wing.
D. The Legate of the left wing. O The Cavallrie of the two Roman Legions. P.
The extraordinary Cavallrie of the Allies.
When the Legion consisted of 4000 men, more or less, it was divided according
to the aforesaid proportion; as when the Legion contained 5100 men, the
Velites, Hastati, and Principes, were each of them 1500, and the Maniples of
the Hastati and Principes 150. Concerning the Triarii, they never increased nor
diminished their number of 600, nor their Maniples of 60, and the Maniples of
the Velites were of 50 men a piece.

The Legions have oft-times been augmented; for in Romulus his time they
contained 3000 foot and 300 horse.

In the time of Camillus, they were 4000 foot and 300 horse.

In Caesar's time, 5000 foot and 600 horse.

And in the time when the Sabines joined themselves with the Romans, it
consisted of 6000 foot and 600 horse.

When the army was thus strong, the Legions were ranged in battalia by
Cohorts, and not by Maniples. As when Caesar fought against Afranius, he placed
in every Legion, four Cohorts of Hastati, three of Principes, three of
Triarii. The Velites were about the middle of the army, and the horse on the
flanks.

Five Legions ranged in battalia by Cohorts.
diagram of five legions

A. B. C. Ten Cohorts of a Legion. D. E. F. Ten Cohorts of another Legion. G.
H. I. K. L. M. N. O. P. are three other legions, each of them being divided
into ten Cohorts. R. The Cavallrie of Allies. Q. The Roman Cavallrie. S. The
extraordinary Cavallrie of the Allies. T. V. The extraordinary Cohorts of the
Allies.
Concerning their manner of encamping, it was also such as is here showed by a
quartering of two Roman Legions. And if the army were greater, they lengthened
the camp on the right and left hand. If there were two armies together, they
made two equal quarters, which they joined on that side of the Pretorian gate.

The quartering of four Roman Legions.
diagram of quartering four legions

A. The Pretorie, which contained 200 foot square. B. The treasury, 200 foot
long, and 100 foot in depth. C. D. The two Legates tents, the ground for each
of which contained 50 foot in depth and 100 in length. E. The Prefects over the
Allies, whose lodgings were square; each side having 150 foot; their tents were
12 in all. T. The Tribunes of two Roman Legions: their lodgings were square, of
150 foot aside, and 12 tents F. The lodgings of the Cavallrie of the Evocati
amongst the Allies, having 80 foot to 125 in breadth. G. The Ablecti amongst
the Allies, having 120 foot to 112 in breadth. H. The quarter of the foot of
the Evocati amongst the Allies, having 80 foot to 238 in breadth. I. That of
the foot of the Ablecti amongst the Allies, containing 120 foot, upon 252 in
breadth. K. The extraordinary Cavallrie, every lodging containing 80 foot in
depth, for 167 in length. L. The extraordinary Infanterie, having 70 foot, for
200 in breadth, every quarter. N. The quarter of 20 turmes of the Roman
Cavallrie, each having 100 foot square. O. The Triarii of the Roman Legions;
the quarter of each Maniple had 100 foot in front and 50 in depth. P. The
Principes of the Roman Legions; the quarter for every Maniple was 100 square.
Q. The Hastati of the Roman Legions, each Maniples quarter was 100 foot square.
R. The Cavallrie of the Allies; the quarter for their turmes was 34 foot in
length and 100 broad. S. All the Infanterie of the Legions of the Allies, every
Cohort having 100 foot in front and 200 Observe that from the Decumane gate
there runs a street, which divides the two Legions, which have all their
quarters, facing outward, and their backs meeting at that street, both fronting
to their alarm-places X.
in depth. V. The streets, being 50 foot broad. X. The alarm-place, being 200
foot broad. Y. Z. Two streets, each of them being 100 foot broad.. The
Pretorian gate.. The right hand gate.. The left hand gate.. The Decumane gate..
Void places reserved to lodge strangers.
The manner of forming all sorts of battaillons. CHAP. XVIII.
The author follows other writers in this chapter, which some (since) have
also retained; but are (in my opinion) of little use, and savor of curious
impertinencie.
FIve sorts of battaillons are ordinarily made, namely, square of men, square of
ground, doubled, when the front is to the depth according to a proportion
given, and the broad fronted battaillon.

The space which every soldier requires, marching in battalia, is three foot
in front and seven in depth.

To make a battaillon square of men. Suppose the number of men be 100, take the
square root of 100, which is ten which is the number of men which must be
placed in front, and also in flank; As in the figure following.

diagram of a battalion

To make a battaillon square of ground. Suppose the number be 105 men, multiply
it by three (which is the space which every man occupies in front) it will
produce 315: divide this number by 7 (which is the space which a man requires
in depth) it will produce 45. Take the nearest square root to this number,
which is 7, and that is the number of men which must serve for your files.
After this divide your 105 men by 7, it will produce 15, which is the number
for the front: so that this battaillon for every 7 men in front, has 3 in
flank.

A battaillon square of ground.
diagram of a battalion

To make a doubled battaillon, that is, which has twice as many men in front
as in depth. Suppose the number be 98 men, double this number, then will be
196. take the square root of this number, which is fourteen, and that is the
number of men which must be in front, and the half of that, which is seven,
must be placed in the depth.

A doubled battaillon.
diagram of a battalion

To make a battaillon whereof the front shall be to the depth, according to any
proportion propounded. Suppose the number be 135 men, to be ranged in battalia
in such manner, that for every 5 which shall be in front, there be three in
depth, that is, that there be a proportion between that and the flanks, as
between three and five.

Divide 135 by 5, and multiply the product by three, and of the number which it
will produce, take the square root, which will be nine, for the depth of the
battaillon. And to find the front, divide 135 by 3, and multiply the product
by 5, and of the product take the square root, which is fifteen, as in the
figure following.

diagram of a battalion

To make a broad fronted battaillon. Suppose the number to be two hundred and
ten men, whereof you would make a battaillon which shall have thirty men in
front; to know how many there will be in depth, divide two hundred and ten by
thirty, it will make seven. To find the front by the depth, you must divide
two hundred and ten by seven.

A broad-fronted battaillon.
diagram of a battalion

The square battaillons (of men or ground) are weak of front, and those of
broad front are weak in depth. The Spaniards often use doubled battaillons. And
the Hollanders broad fronted ones, for they make their files no deeper then
Seeing that not only the Hollanders, but all others, make not their files to
exceed the number of ten (some be but eight, and the Swedes use but six) to
what purpose should the square root serve, especially in a great body?
ten men.

To find the square root, to the number of 4096.
To find the square root of a number, as if you were to make a square
battaillon of 1600 men, look in the table following in the column of squares
1600, and you shall find over against it in the column of roots 40, for the
root or number of men which must be placed on all sides of the battaillon.

A table to find the square root to the number of 4096.
Squares. Roots. Squares. Roots. Squares. Roots. 4 2. 529 23. 1939 44. 9 3. 576
24. 2025 45. 16 4. 625 25. 2116 46. 25 5. 676 26. 2209 47. 36 6. 729 27. 2304
48. 49 7. 784 28. 2401 49 64 8. 841 29. 2500 50. 81 9. 900 30. 2601 51. 100 10.
961 31. 2704 52. 121 11. 1024 32. 2809 53. 144 12. 1084 33. 2916 54. 169 13.
1156 34. 3025 55. 196 14. 1225 35. 3136 56. 225 15. 1296 36. 3249 57. 256 16.
1369 37. 3364 58. 289 17. 1444 38. 3481 59. 324 18. 1521 39. 3600 60. 261 19.
1600 40. 3721 61. 400 20. 1681 41. 3844 62. 441 21. 1764 42. 3969 63. 484 22.
1849 43. 4096 64.

FINIS.
A short METHOD FOR THE EASY RESOLVING OF ANY Military Question propounded.

By The Lord of PRAISSAC.

Englished by I. C.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by ROGER DANIEL, Printer to that famous UNIVERSITIE. 1639.

To the worshipful, my worthily honored friend PHILIP SKIPPON Esquire,
Captain of a Company of foot, in service of the States of the united Provinces.
SIR,
IT pleased you to put me upon the translation of the Lord of Praissac's
discourses, and (afterward) of this last piece of his; which I conceive he
intended, as a Corollarium to conclude with; or as an Epitome of his other
tractes, to put his readers to try what they had profited by them, by setting
these wheels awork. These are no speculations for every Tyro to meddle with;
but rather for such as had followed your Worthy self in your four and twenty
years Militia (in Denmark, Germany, the Low Countries and elsewhere) to
exercise their thoughts in; and to recollect those things which might (perhaps)
be slipped out of memory. I cannot compare this piece to any thing better (for
so much matter in so small a room) then to that admired artificial Fly, made
by that famous German Joan. De monte regio, (celebrated by divine du Bartas)
which (not exceeding a natural fly in bigness) contained such wheels,
springs, and other engines, as made it fly from the artists hand round about a
table, and so to his hand again. As little as this piece is, (and my pains in
it the least that may be) yet I am confident (having so much experience of your
true candor and sweet disposition) you will dain to accept of it, from

your humble servant I. C.

A SHORT METHOD, for the easy resolving of any Military question propounded.
EVery military question may be resolved by, Whether or no, with whom, where,
when, how, and how much. Deliberating to make war, peace, truce, parley,
alliance, league; Considering the diversity of persons, as compatriots,
allies, confederates, mercenaries, neuters, and enemies; directing your self in
the action propounded, either to advance, abide, retreat fight, lodge, refresh;
according to the occasion which men, means, munitions, time, works, and the
country do afford; doing all things according to reason, which proceeds from
honor, profit, obedience, obligation, necessity and facility; using the
help of instruments fitting for execution, as wagons, ladders, bridges,
pickaxes, shovels, and boats; meeting with accidents which might befall by
noise, sun, water, cold, dust, and smoke; by the fashion of order, commodity,
assurance, surprise, diligence, and foresight. So that you may make an encycle
of nine moveable circles (as the figure shows) namely of questions,
deliberations, persons, actions, occasions, reasons, instruments, accidents,
and fashions. Every circle contains six common places, the greatest is called
the first, and the least the ninth. If you turn the second circle with a whole
revolution, upon each common place of the first, you shall find 36 questions,
as, Whether you ought to make war, whether you ought to make peace, whether
you ought to make truce, whether you ought to parley, whether you ought to make
alliance, whether you ought to make league. With whom you should make war,
with whom you should make peace, with whom you should make truce, with whom you
should parley, with whom you should make alliance, with whom you should make
league. Where you should make war, where you should make peace, where you
should make truce, where you should parley, where you should make alliance,
where you should make league. When you should make war, when you should make
peace, when you should make truce, when you should parley, when you should make
alliance, when you should make league. How you should make war, how you
should make peace, how you should make truce, how you should parley, how you
should make alliance, how you should make league. How much you should make
war, how much you should make peace, how much you should make truce, how much
you should parley, how much you should make alliance, how much you should make
league. And if you turn the third circle even as the second, you shall find
that the said 36 questions being joined to the six common places of the said
circle, will produce 216. Namely, Whether you should make war with your
compatriots, whether you should make peace with your compatriots, whether you
should make truce with your compatriots, etc. These 216 questions are resolved
by the common places of the fifth, sixth and ninth circles.

If you have concluded to make war, the questions to be propounded about the
actions thereof, are to be taken out of the first and fourth circles, which
will produce 36 propositions (as was said of the first and second) namely,
Whether you ought to advance forward, whether you ought to abide still, whether
you ought to retreat, whether you ought to fight, whether you ought to lodge,
whether you ought to refresh. With whom you should advance, with whom you
should abide, with whom you should retreat, with whom you should fight, with
whom you should lodge, with whom you should refresh. Where you should advance,
etc.

The affirmation of the 36 last propositions is taken from the common places of
the fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth circles. Now, that these common
places may be sufficient to afford reasons for the confirmation of these
propositions, the following example will testify, and will give instruction
for the order which must be observed, for the resolving of other questions
propounded.

The first question is, Whether you should make war? whereupon you must
consider of the reason which you have so to do; whether it be honor, as to
conserve your own, to maintain another, to settle justice, to punish evil
doers. Whether it be profit, as to raise your state, to augment your dignities,
to gather wealth, to advance your friends. Whether it be obedience due to the
Sovereign, or to those which himself or the laws have set over us. Whether it
be obligation, being bound thereunto either by equity, or oath, or
consanguinitie, or alliance. Whether it be facility, as to resist the assaults
of the enemy, to usurp his dominions, and to bring him under subjection in
short time, and with little charge.

Having considered of the reason you must come to the occasion, which may be
either in respect of men, which are either plebeians or military. Concerning
the plebeians (if it be in a free state, and not a monarchy) to know whether
they will consent and approve of the action, furnish men for the war, deliver
places for security, money to bear all the charges, and submit themselves to
your judgment and discretion. Concerning the military men, whether they be
willing to obey you, deliver you hostages, and put their fortunes, goods, and
honors into your hands.

Now for the regard of means, as whether you have good store of money
beforehand, or means to get it, by favor of friends, or to take it from your
enemies, making war at his charge, or having good store of auxiliaries from
your allies, and means to pay them.

And in respect of munitions, whether you have abundance of victual, as well
for the provision of cities, as for the feeding of the armies, magazines well
stored, great store of draught horses for the ready drawing of the train where
it shall be needful.

Or in regard of the time, whether it be when there is a dissension, fomenting
one of the parties; in the minority of the Sovereign, insinuating with his
officers; in the midst of a profound peace, when there is no doubt of
combinations, when a great mortality rages amongst the enemies, and famine
weakneth them; or when you conceive that the fear of war will constrain them
to give you more then you could get by it.

Or in respect of the works, whether you possess strong cities, assured
havens, and well fortified cittadels.

Or in regard of the country, whether you possess the straits, the key sides,
bridges, that so you may facilitate the entrance of your releefs, and easily to
join your self to them, and by that means be master of the field, possessing so
much of the country as you are able to guard, and abandoning that which you
could not be able to maintain, and whereof the cost would surpass the profit.

Concerning the fashion of proceeding, it is taken from the order which you
must observe before you execute any thing; as whether you ought to begin, or to
give occasion to the enemy to do it, in what place you should give the first
assault, in what staple towns; and if it should be so, how you shall march
thither, with what quantity of Infanterie, Cavallrie, and Artillery you
should execute the enterprise; whether you be able to do it alone, or whether
you must call your friends to help you; who (amongst all) shall begin, who
shall do the exploit, who shall conserve that which shall be gotten.

Then what commodity you shall reap thereby, whether you shall be in peace
afterward, or the nobility be better pleased, the church more flourishing,
justice better administered, the people less burdened, the King better served,
the state better secured; what commodity will facilitate the enterprise, will
it be vicinitie, will it be the weakness of the enemy, of his country, of
his people, of his towns, of his bad council, of his disorder in his actions,
or that you have no want of any thing.

What Assurance have you that the execution will succeed according to your
desire; and if that be wanting, how shall you assure your affairs; will you
hazard all your fortune at a time, will you play at double or quit, or will not
that which you undertake be able to hurt you but in part, or but little, or
nothing at all, neither to your self nor your friends.

Shall you surprise your enem^e at unawares, keeping ill guard in his cities,
or being weakly followed in the field, at a time when he is solacing himself
either with courting or hunting, and without being able to be advertised of
your design, until he be fallen into your hands?

Can you by your diligence prevent his knowledge, and so your own obstacles and
his remedies?

Have you foreseen whatsoever may befall you, as well in your design, in the
action, and after the execution thereof, to prevent the mischief, and to
advantage your self by the good thereof? will your confederates be faithful to
you? If false, shall they be able to hinder the enterprise in the whole or
only in part, or in your very person, by seizing thereon and delivering you
into the enemies hands? and if they can, by what device shall you be able to
escape them? If the things abovesaid be so advantageous as you ought to
conclude for war, you must then come to the other question, with whom you
ought to make it, whether with your compatriots, or with your allies, or
confederates, etc. and to see the reason, the occasion, and fashion by which
you should proceed, passing through all these common places.

That done, you must handle the questions which concern the action, which are,
whether or no, with whom, where, when, how, and how much you shall do that
which you have concluded (as has been showed in the first question:) as if a
general had caused his army to be mustered, he shall deliberate wherein to
employ it, as whether he should cause it to advance, or abide, or fight, etc.
Suppose if be ought to cause his army to march, he ought to do it when it is
to fight with the enemy, to hinder him from passing a champain, a river, a
strait, to cut off his releef; or for his own effecting of these things, or to
besiege some place, to releeve it, to cut off a convoy, or to conserve, or
pillage the open country.

You must advance, when your abiding or retreat would be dishonorable, when
the hope of the profit is great, when superiors command it, when alliance
oblige you to it, when necessity constrains you thereunto, and when the thing
is so facile as nothing can oppose you.

That which will occasion your moving, will be the advantage of men, be it on
foot or horseback; of means, as money, wagons, artillery; of munitions both
for the mouth and for war; the commodiousnesse of time, fair, cold, or rain.
Of the works, as forts, trenches, redouts. Of the country, as large, spacious,
and even, to range your battaillons and squadrons; or close and mountainous, to
pass undiscovered and sheltred. The instruments which may facilitate the
design, are wagons to carry the munitions; ladders to serve for surprises;
bridges to pass over moats and rivers, pickaxes and shovels to make the
trenches and other works, and boats to pass rivers. The accidents which you
ought to foresee, are the noise which hinders the soldiers from hearing the
orders, and affrighteth them; the sun, which may dazzle them; the water of
pools, moors or rain, which may discommode you; the cold, which may put your
soldiers out of case to fight; the dust raised in the field by the footing;
and the smoke of firings, which hinders you from seeing the battaillons, and
the actions of the enemy. After that, you must consider the fas^ion of your
march, what order your Infanterie shall observe, what your Cavallrie, and what
your Artillery; what commodity this marching will afford you, whether it will
advantage you, and whether you shall be the better for it in the whole or in
part. Wherein your assurance will be, whether in your enemies being far off,
or in the strength of your site, or of the territory, or vicinitie of friends;
whether you must march upon surprise in the night, to pillage; with such
diligence as you may be far before you be discovered; foreseeing for all
things necessary, as to be able to make resistance, being charged; to arrive
timely, before the danger; to be strongly and commodiously encamped, in such
sort as you may not fear neither the surprises of the enemy, nor the violence
of his assaults.

These common places may be applied as well to diverse other actions as to that
of war, provided that you know which to choose, and how many.

FINIS.

