A LETTER OF A FRENCH PROTESTANT TO A SCOTISHMAN OF THE COVENANT. Wherein one
of their chief pretenses is removed, which is their conformity with the
French Churches in points of Discipline and Obedience.

LONDON, Printed by R. Young, and R. Badger. 1640.

A LETTER OF A FRENCH PROTESTANT TO A SCOTISHMAN OF THE COVENANT.
SIR,
AS there has been for many ages a great relation between France and Scotland
for matters of State, the like has been in matters of Religion between the
Protestant Churches of both the Kingdoms ever since the reformation: But I
wish that our example be not mistaken, and abused to our disparagement, and
your mine, and the perpetual disgrace of Christian Religion.

For whereas in one of your Petitions to his Majesty you are confident,
Alleged in the large Declaration of his Majesty, page 417.
that your neighbour-Churches will approve all your proceedings; your
neighbour-Churches of France have solemnly disapproved all your proceedings,
and herein given good satisfaction to his Majesty: For it was ever far from
our wishes, that your conformity with the reformed Churches of France should
be mis-applied as a pretense of your expulsing of your Bishops, much less a
president for you to take arms against your gracious Sovereign.

Wherefore I will endeavor to remove that false color set upon the violent
counsels of the Covenant, and show to the world, that for your differences with
Episcopal authority, which are now broken into a quarrel, you had neither
president nor encouragement from us.

And since it pleases his Majesty in the beginning of his Royal Declaration,
to make this one of his two ends, to manifest his justice and piety to the
reformed Churches abroad; these reformed Churches are bound in duty of
thankfulness to show how they rest satisfied of his Majesty's justice and
piety.

For my part, although I am happily engrafted into the body of the Church of
England, I may be admitted in this case to speak as a Frenchman borne, that
knows the tenets of that Church better then strangers, that would abuse the
example of the French to their own ends: And I am assured in my conscience,
that when I was adopted by the Church of England, I was not removed into
another Gospel.

This also I may affirm of mine own knowledge, that the French Divines and
other godly men that travel into England, return home with great
satisfaction, seeing the soundness of doctrine and decency of order so well
matched together; and join their hearty praises with the Te Deum and
Magnificat of our Quires; praising God chiefly, because they see the purity of
the Gospel, and the Royal Authority linked together with a most near interest
in their mutual conservation.

The conformity which you claim with the French is triple; with their
doctrine, with their discipline, and (in the present quarrel) with their
actions: And the French will heartily embrace a Christian conformity with you,
so far as you shall not draw their necessity into counsel, nor their faults
into example.

As for the conformity in doctrine, blessed be God that among all the reformed
Churches of Europe there is neither deformity nor difformity in that point: All
the reformed Churches profess the same holy faith with you; and of that faith
the Kings Majesty is Defender, of which he has lately published many solemn
protestations, to the great satisfaction of all good Christians, both within
and without the Kingdom. Here let all that love Gods glory and the union of
his Church upon earth, Ezra 7.17.
say, Blessed be the Lord God of our fathers, who has put such a thing as this
in the Kings heart: Psalm. 61.7.
The Lord prolong the Kings life, O prepare mercy and truth that may preserve
him.

It were superfluous to prove the consent of all reformed Churches with the
Church of England in points of doctrine: None of them but will say as much to
the English Prelates, as Beza to Bishop Grindall, Beza epist. 8. ad Grindal.
Episcopum Londmensem. Gallicas and vestras Ecclesias in omnibus fidei capitibus
consentire arbitramur.
We hold that the French Churches agree with yours in all points of faith.

He that set forth all the Confessions of the Reformed Churches in one volume,
has not lost his praise for concealing his name. Never was a more precious
harmony; none more like a heaven upon earth: such an evident consent needs
rather praises to God then proofs.

As for points of Discipline, the difference of some Churches from that of
England (if charity were on both sides) ought to set forth the consent in
points of faith with more reverence and admiration: As Irenaeus writing to
Victor, about the different Fasting of the Eastern and Western Churches, (...).
The difference of Fasting (says he) confirms the union in faith: For that
in such a difference of climats, nations, manners, and policies, there should
be such an union in faith, It is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our
eyes.

A main point of difference pretended by the Covenanters, is the superiority
of Bishops, (for I will not search into your other aims) which you affirm to
be Antichristian, and contrary to the Word of God; wherein I see not how you
can claim conformity with the French Churches. The French indeed have no
Bishops, but they never put down Bishops, nor induced others to put down
Bishops: And you know, that our Savior puts a difference between breaking of
commandments, Matthew. 5.19.
and teaching men so: Now to have Bishops is a commandment, and none of the
least; for it is an Apostolical order: Suppose then that the French break it,
yet they do not teach men so; And I will endeavor to show you that they teach
men otherwise; and that it is necessity, not choice, that keeps them from
Episcopal order. But the Scots break that commandment, and teach men so; and
represent the Antichrist in no other habit then a Rochet and a Miter.

That the French Divines do not teach men so, and allow not the abolishing of
Bishops, it may easily be justified: For in the matter of Geneva, there was
more Political then Theological reasons for refusing their Bishop: The Bishop
of Geneva was also their Prince, who had such power there, as the Duke in
Venice, and was rather Governor then Sovereign: For the people had that right
to elect four Syndics, These you have in a book, called Le Citadin Genevois.
and give them full power; It is the 22. Article of their authentical Charter:
And without the counsel, consent, and express will of those Syndics, and of
the Citizens, none was to be absolved or condemned in the City. It is the 14.
Article of their Charter: Before any Bishop was admitted, he swore to observe
and maintain these liberties, and so did the last Bishop, Ann. 1523. Who
afterward being found to treat with the Duke of Savoy, to deliver the City
into his hands, a great uproare arose in the City, which the Bishop fearing,
fled by night; and when, after many invitations, he would not return, the
people shut the door after him; not for any difference of Religion, but of
State: Yet the people being thus alienated from their Bishop, was more
susceptible of that change of Religion which happened presently after, by the
coming of Farell and Viret. In the mean while the Duke of Savoy, being now
strengthened with the Bishops right, began to annoy them. While they were thus
tottering, both in Religion and State, Calvin came, who having got great
authority in the City, took in hand the settling of that fluctuation; A matter
of great difficulty: For to receive their Bishop, they durst not, fearing to
endanger their Religion and their Liberties, and fall into the hands of their
perpetual enemy the Duke of Savoy: To make another Bishop they would not, and
could not, their old Bishop being alive: Wherefore they chose to be without a
Bishop, and rule the City by the Syndics, being persuaded that their Charter
gave them no less power: But whether they had any Charter to rule the Church
with a mingled Consistory of Clergy and Laity, without any Bishop, ipsi
viderint, let them defend their own right: My end is only to show, that in
that change of Discipline, Necessity bare more sway then Counsel, and Policy
then Divinity.

Howsoever, their actions must not be imputed to the French Churches, Geneva
being a body apart, and having interests of their own peculiar to themselves.
But the French Churches never unbishopped any Prelate: and of them also it may
be said, that it was Necessity, not any Theological decision, that made them
frame a Church without Bishops.

For Calvin, who had the greatest hand in their Discipline, was more inclined
to the Episcopacie. In his Confession made in the name of the Churches of
France, and presented to the Emperor, Anno 1562. he professes it: We would
not abolish (says he) the authority of the Church, Calvin. opuscul. in
confess. Eccles Gallic. Ecclesiae authoritatem vel Pastorum, aut Super
intendentium, quibus Ecclesiae regendae provincia mandata est, sublatam
nolumus: Fatemur ergo Episcopos, sive Pastores reverenter audiendos, quatenus
pro suae functionis ratione verbum Dei docent.
that is of Pastors and Superintendents, that have the government of the
Church committed unto them: We confess then, that Bishops or Pastors must be
reverently heard, as far as they teach the Word of God according to their
function. Here is for you a public Declaration of the French Churches, that
they disallow not the authority of Bishops; and if they had power, would not
take them away.

In that Confession of faith presented to Francis the first of France, I see
nothing contrary to the English Discipline, if it be heartily interpreted:
For the 30th. Article, that all true Pastors have equal power under their
Universal Bishop Jesus Christ, is confessed also by the Church of England: for
the power which Bishops and Priests have under their Universal Bishop Jesus
Christ, is equal, as they are Priests. A pre-eminence and authority indeed
they have, as Bishops, and that by Apostolical, and therefore Divine
institution. But the power which Christ in the Evangelists immediately gives
to Pastors, concerns only the preaching of the Word, and administering of the
Sacraments, and the power of binding and loosing in foro interiori; Herein they
are all equal, and all Vicars of Christ: No Bishop in England, but, in this
sense, will subscribe willingly to this Canon of the Council of Carthage,
Conc. Carthag. Can. 8. Ut sublimior quidem sedeat, sed tamen se collegam
Presbyterorum agnoscat.
That the Bishop sits in a higher degree, but yet acknowledges himself
colleague to the Priests.

But although the Bishop in his consecration receive no new binding and loosing
power in foro interiori, besides that which he received when he was made a
Priest; yet it is of Apostolical right, that great part of that power diffused
in the collective body of the Clergy, should be confined to the Bishop; lest
the keys of the Church, being in too many hands, should clash one against
another, and there should be playing at fast and loose. And Calvin agrees to
it, I never thought it useful (says he) to commit the power of
excommunication to every Pastor; Calvin. Epist. ad Gasparum Lizetum. Nunquam
utile putavi jus excommunicandi permitti singulis Pastoribus: Nam and res
odiosa est, nee exemplum probabile, and facilis in tyrannidem lapsus, and alium
usum Apostoli tradiderunt.
For it is an odious thing, and an example not to be approved, and which would
soon slip into tyranny; and the Apostles have delivered another custom. It
is true, that Calvin in that Epistle will not have Lizetus to meddle alone with
Ecclesiastical censures; and he is in the right, since Lizetus was no Bishop:
But he declares plainly, that the office of censures must be limited to
certain men, not promiscuously used by every Clergyman of his own head: Else
there would be soon as many petty spiritual Tyrants, as there are peevish
Ministers in the several Parishes. Had it been in the power of every Priest to
receive accusations, and pronounce excommunications, Saint Paul would not have
limited to Timothies knowledge the receiving of accusations, nor made him alone
Judge of the Priests.

Calvin indeed aimed at no such matter, as the general pulling down of
Bishops: He acknowledges, that in the Primitive Church the Calvin. lib. 2.
Instit. cap. 4. Art. 2. Presbyteri ex suo numero in singulis civitatibus unum
eligebant, cuispecialiter dabant titulum Episcopi; ne ex aequalitate, ut fieri
solet, dissidia nascerentur.
Priests out of their number would choose one in every City, to whom they gave
the title of Bishop; lest that equality, as it is ordinary, should breed
contentions.

And in his Epistle to the King of Calvin. Epist. ad regem Pol. page 140. and
141. Editionis Genevensis, an. 1576.
Poland, about the reformation of that Kingdom; he sets down to the King the
order of the Primitive Church for a pattern, where there were Patriarchs, and
Primats, and subordinate Bishops, to tie the whole body together with the bond
of concord: And advises the King to establish Bishops in every Province, and
over them an Archbishop and Primate of that great Kingdom. And if the Calvin.
instit. lib 4 cap. 12. Art. 6. Sane si very essent Episcopi, aliquid eis hac in
part authoritatis tribuerem; non quantum sibi postulant, sed quantum ad
Politiam Ecclesiae rite ordinandam requiritur.
Popish Bishops were true Bishops, he would allow them some authority; not as
much as they challenge, but as much as [hee thinkes] would serve for the right
ordering of Church government. That he would not allow them as much power as
they claim, no man can wonder at it, that knows the exemptions which they
claim from Royal authority, and their encroachments upon the civil power,
and their pretended independencie from any but the Pope, whereby they make
regnum in regno, another kingdom in every kingdom.

But although I would not clip their wings so short as Calvin would have; yet I
wish for your own good, that the Churches of Scotland would yield to Bishops
as much power as Calvin does, even the power of censures, and of presenting and
ordaining Priests: Calvin. tractat. de necessitate reformandae Ecclesiae.
Potestatem nominandi and ordinandi retincant, justum illud and serium doctrinae
and vitae examen restituant, quod sane multis saeculis obsolevit.
Let Bishops retain the power of naming and ordaining [Priests;] Let them
restore that just and serious examination of doctrine and life which is grown
out of use many ages agone. It is not then the use, but the abuse of Bishops,
that Calvin and the Reformed Churches of France reject. And were it in their
power, they would not put down Bishops: They only crave the reformation of
Religion, and are ready to submit themselves to Episcopal power.

Zanchius above all the Outlandish Writers is express upon that point; who
indeed is no Frenchman, but of the like Discipline: This is his Protestation,
That before God, and in his conscience, Hier. Zanch. Thesib. de vera
reformandarum Ecclesiarum ratione. Testor me coram Deo in mea conscientia non
alio habere loco quam Schismaticorum illos omnes qui in part reformationis
Ecclesiarum ponunt nullos habere Episcopos, qui authoritatis gradu supra fuos
compresbyteros emineant, ubi liquido possunt haberi. Praeterea cum D. Calvino,
nullo non anathemate dignos censeo, quotquot illi Hierarchiae quae se Domino
Jesu submittit, subjici nolunt.
he holds them all for no better then Schismatickes, that set this down as a
part of reformation of the Churches, to have no Bishops, that have any eminence
of degree and authority above their true fellow-Priests, where they may well
be had. And besides, that he holds with That place cited out of Calvin, is in
his Treatise de necessitate reformandae Ecclesiae.
Calvin, that they are all worthy of any execration, that will not submit
themselves unto that Hierarchy that submits it self unto the Lord Jesus
Christ. Here is a coard with two strings, the authority of two worthy men
together.

The same Zanchius says a little before, He that will receive and follow the
use and the opinion of the universal Church, Ibid. Qui universalis ominium
locorum and temporum, usque ad hanc aetatem, usum and sensum Ecclesiae certum
habet, sequiturque interpretem; facile intelligit diversos gradus Presbyterorum
and Episcoporum in gubernatione Ecclesiastica esse secundum Dei verbum, and
semper fuisse. Proinde, ubi vigent, non esse abolendos; and ubicunque iniquitas
temporum eos abolevit, aut non tulit, esse restituendos.
in all times and places unto this age for a certain interpreter of Gods word;
will easily understand, that the several degrees of Priests and Bishops in the
Ecclesiastical government, are, and ever were according to Gods word; and
therefore where they stand still, they must not be abolished: And where the
contrariety of times has abolished, or not suffered them, they must be set
up again.

This was also the tenet of Martin Bucer, who assisted the reverend Bishops of
England in the reformation. And although he lived in a Church where Ministers
were equal, he delivers himself plainly: Bucer. tract. de reformanda
Ecclesia, qui invenitur tom. 11. constitut. Imperial. Annitendum itaque ut ea
omnino procurationis Ecclesiasticae ratio and ordinatio, quam Canones Episcopis
and Metropolitanis praescribunt, restituatur and servetur.
We must endeavor, that all the manner and distribution of Ecclesiastical
government, which the Canons prescribe unto Bishops and Metropolitans, be
restored and maintained.

Beza himself, who preferred equality before superiority in the Church, yet
has declared his dislike of those that resisted Episcopal power where it was
established: For in an Epistle of his to some brethren of England, that would
be ruled by him rather then their Bishops at home, he Beza Epist. 12. ad
quosdam Anglicarum Ecclesiarum fratres. Hortamur, ut omni animorum
exacerbatione deposita, salva manente doctrinae ipsius veritate, and sana
conscientia, alii alios patienter ferant, Regiae Majestati clementissimae, and
omnibus Praesulibus suis ex animo obsequantur.
exhorts them, that leaving all bitterness, as long as the truth of the
doctrine, and purity of conscience was safe, they would bear one another with
patience, and obey the Queens most gracious Majesty, and all their Prelates
with a free heart.

And writing to Bishop Grindall, he commends his Idem Epist. 23. ad Episcop.
Grindal. Quod tu igitur quorundam (...) pertulisti, Reverendissime vir, in eo
sane insigne patientiae and lenitatis Christianae specimen edidisti, quo majore
posthac poena digni erunt, qui porro authoritatem tuam aspernabuntur.
Christian lenity and patience, for bearing with the selfe-conceited pride of
some, and says, that they shall deserve a greater punishment that will reject
again his authority.

I confess this was much from Beza, who was none of the best friends to the
Episcopal degree; but yet his desire of concord in the Church, and obedience
to public order, was greater then his aversion from Bishops: And I wish that
many among you were no worse disposed.

The latter Divines among the French are very express upon this point: My
Reverend Father Doctor Du Moulin in his Peter Du Moulin in his Buckler of the
faith, upon the 30. Article of the French Confession, Sect. 124.
Buckler of the Faith, is altogether for Episcopacie, and proves the
Antiquity of it, and that it begun a year after our Saviors death: And
shows how the Apostles were the founders of that order, sending the Reader to
the 32 Chapt. of the book of Prescriptions by Tertullian, where he reckons
the Apostolical Churches, whose Bishops were established by the Apostles.

And whereas it is alleged against the Episcopal degree, that there was in
the Primitive Church two Bishops in one Town; he tells you, that in all the
Antiquity it is hard to find three or four examples of two Bishops in one
Town: Ibid.
for the general custom was against it, as Theodoret, Chrysostom, and
Hierome upon the first to the Philippians witness, and Saint Austin in his
110th. Epistle.

There also he complains, as far as he may, of the disorders that follow
equality, relating and allowing the just objections of the English Clergy in
these words: They say, AND THAT WITH GOOD REASON, that no society, no family,
no commonwealth, can prosper without some degrees of superiority; and that it
is so among the Angels, and in the government of the universal World; That God
established degrees of superiority in his Church under the Old Testament: They
say, that to place a man of little capacity, and newly received into the
Ministry in like degree with an ancient Minister of the Church, whom God has
endowed with more gifts, and which has served a long time in the Ministry
with commendation, is the way to nourish pride in the younger, and to dishonor
those whom God has honored, and to induce confusion: As also, that thereby
the holy Ministry is become contemptible; and that the superiority of the
Bishops of England has been approved by the most worthy Pastors of our
Churches.

How can one say more, living under a different Discipline? Any man may
perceive, that he speaks feelingly, as one that had an especial knowledge
and experience of the inconveniences of his Discipline: And that he thinks
more yet then he says.

In the conclusion, he craveth a favorable construction of all that the
Reformed Divines of those Churches write against Bishops: If sometimes (says
he) we speak against the authority of Bishops, we condemn not Episcopal
order in it self, but speak only of the corruption which the Church of Rome
has brought into the Episcopacie, making it a temporal principality
depending upon the Papal throne.

As he teaches that true doctrine in his books, he traineth his Scholars in
the same: This Thesis was lately defended by him in the Academy of Sedan, where
he is Doctor of the Chair: Petrus Molinaeus, Thesib. de notis Ecclesiae,
part. 2. These. 33. Episcopos Angliae post conversionem ad fidem, and ejuratum
Papismum, asserimus fuisse fideles Dei servos, nec debuisse dese^ere munus vel
titulum Episcopi.
We affirm that the Bishops of England, after their conversion and abjuration
of Popery, were Gods faithful servants, and that they ought not to forsake the
office or title of Bishop.

In his Bible full of marginall notes written with his own hand, he
expounds this Text, Titus 1.5. Therefore I left thee in Greece, that thou
should set in order the things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every
City as I have appointed thee: This is his comment upon it, Oportuit Tito
datam aliquam (...) in caeteros symmystas, and jus (...). Ut and quod Timotheo
dicitur, Ne recipe accusationem contra Presbyterum, dare videtur Timotheo
tribunal supra Ministros. Add and illud de Angelo Ephesi: Nec si superioritas
esset res mala, Apostolis data esset potestas in caeteros.
This imports that some prebeminence was given to Titus above his other
colleagues, and the right of conferring orders: As also that which is said to
Timothy, Receive no accusation against a Presbyter, seems to give unto
Timothy a tribunal over other Ministers. The like is employed in that Text of
the Angel of the Church of Ephesus [Revel. 2.1. where there is but one Angel
mentioned, though there were many Priests in the City:] And if superiority
were an evil thing, God would not have given power to the Apostles over the
rest of the Clergy. These are his private and serious thoughts upon that
point, wherein he sought no man's satisfaction but his own.

This is also the drift of learned Chamier in his Book of the Papal
Monarchy: For he runs not to extremes, as you do; As though, because
there must be no Universal Bishop, there must be no Diocesan: All his
discourse comes to this, Chamier de Papali Monarchia, lib. 3. cap. 14. Art. 11.
In Ecclesiis etiamsi singulos assignari Episcopos consultius existimetur, tamen
omnibus unum imponendum nulla ratio evincit.
That although it is thought more convenient to assign Bishops unto the
several Churches, yet it can be proved with no reason, that there must be
one set over all; leaving that ground for granted, that it is more convenient
to assign Bishops unto the several Churches.

It is true, he says, Lib. 10. cap. 5.
that the government of the Church is not Monarchical, but Aristocraticall;
Lib. 10. cap. 7. Art. 8. Aristocratia Episcoporum regimen, quae ne tum quidem
sublata est cum inducti sunt Metropolitani qui sibi subjectos Episcopos pro
collegis habebant.
for he calls Aristocracie the government of Bishops, which Aristocracie was not
taken away, when Metropolitanes were brought in that used the Bishops subject
unto them as Colleagues.

He cannot more evidently condemn the Democracie of his Church, than by saying
that the government of the Church is Aristocraticall; and the Bishops of
England take not so much upon themselves, as he ascribes unto the first
Bishops. Ibid. C. 5. Art. 6 Constat igitur ne tum quidem cum hie Episcoporum a
Presbyteris distinctorum ordo sive gradus est constitutus, Episcopos fuisse
tanquam Monarchas qui potestatem haberent in Cleru^, sed Principes Electos qui
rebus deliberandis praeessent ficut necesse est in omni Aristocratia.
It is certain (says he) that even when the order or degree of Bishops
distinct from that of Priests was established, the Bishops were not like
Monarchs, having power over the Clergy, but ELECTED PRINCES, set over the
deliberation and administration of businesses, as it is necessary in all
Aristocracies.

If you object, since your countrymen are so good friends unto Episcopacie,
What is the reason that their practice is quite contrary? Why have they no
Bishops? Why is parity of Ministers commanded in their Discipline?

Si licet, et placidirationem admittitis, edam. I hope to show to them that
have some charity and equity, that the French have such reasons for it, which
the Church of Scotland cannot borrow from them.

I. The Protestants of France were forced, after a sort, to dislike Bishops, by
the cruel usage which they received from them; they will say with the Author
of the Apology of the Confession of Auspurg, Apolog. Confess. August. Art. 14.
Nos summa voluntate cupimus conservare politiam Ecclesiasticam, and gradus in
Ecclesia factos: Sed Episcopi Sacerdotes nostros aut cogunt hoc doctrinae genus
quod confessi sumus abjicere ac damnare, aut nova and inaud ita crudelitate
miser os and innocents occidunt: Hae causae impediunt quo minus agnoscant hos
Episcopos nostri Sacerdotes.
We desire with all our heart to preserve the Ecclesiastical Policy, and the
degrees established in the Church: But the Bishops either constrain our
Priests to renounce and condemn the Doctrine of our Confession, or kill the
poor innocent men with new and unheard of cruelty: These are the causes why
our Priests will not acknowledge those Bishops. And the reformed Churches may
say of some of the Popish Bishops, what S. Bernard was saying of those of his
time, Bern. in Regist. Epist. ad Maur. lib. 4. Epist. 32. Heu, heu Domine Deus,
Ipsi sunt in persecutione tua primi, qui videntur in Ecclesm primatum diligere.
Alas, alas Lord God, they are the foremost in persecuting of thee, that seem
to love primacie in thy Church. It is the less wonder then, if after the
fearful executions at Cabrieres and Merindol by the instigation of some
Popish Bishops, they were afraid of their very name.

II. It is most considerable, that the reformation began in France among the
people, but in England it began in the Court. The French reformers were
Priests, but the English reformers, under the King, were Bishops; and the
French Priests could not prevail with their Bishops, as the King and Bishops
of England over their Clergy; For the higher spheres are not carried by the
inferior, but the inferior by the superior: It was much that the French
Priests could get some retrogradation by their own course, against the
rapidity of the higher sphere. The reformation began among the people and
inferior Clergy, and there it stayed; Therefore the Discipline is popular,
and it was not easy for them that were opposed by Bishops to make Bishops. In
England the sacred ointment of the Gospel was powered upon the head, and thence
it fell about upon all the limbs, and to the hemmes of the garment; In France,
it was powered upon some limbs only; whence because it could not mount to the
Head, the Discipline also wants a Head: Neither could that holy dew spread so
well, because it descended not from the hills. Certainly the Discipline of
France deserves rather compassion, than invectives. And, to speak properly,
they refuse not Bishops, but they want Bishops. If you say, that the
reformation in Scotland began also among the people; You know that the work
was never perfected, till your late great King put the last hand to it, by
reforming and restoring Bishops: Which if you will not acknowledge for a
perfecting, I am sure the French (with whom you claim conformity) would in the
like case.

III. Besides, the reformed Churches of France, want means to maintain Bishops,
and with much ado maintain poor Lectures. For although the Episcopal power
be spiritual; yet without temporal means, it cannot keep either power or
respect, and not so much as subsistence: Whence they gather, that it is better
to want Bishops, than to expose Episcopacie to the scorn of adversaries.

IV. Also it would provoke envy and jealousy, if there were two Bishops in
one Dioecesse, and would but draw oppression upon the weaker side.

V. And if a general conversion happened, (which God in his mercy bring to
pass) two Bishops should meet in one See, and neither would yield to his
fellow: A consideration which would ever keep the erroneous Bishop from his
conversion.

VI. The reformed Church of France living under the cross, and expecting the
general conversion, is better without Bishops; for it is a body prepared for
obedience, whenever the Popish Bishops shall reform the Church, and
themselves. And once they were brought to that trial, as you may read in an
Epistle of Peter Martyr to Beza. The Bishop of Troyes (who was borne Prince of
Melfe) having abjured Popery, began to preach the pure Word of God in his
Cathedral Church; and sent for the Elders of the reformed Church, to know
whether they would confirm and acknowledge him for their Bishop: Which they
all with one consent did, and submitted themselves unto his authority. There is
none, I dare say, of all the Churches of France, but would do as much in the
like case. None but would obey Bishops, if Bishops would reform and obey God.
Till God extend so much mercy upon that Kingdom, the poor Churches will stay
for the leisure of the Bishops, and keep themselves in an estate fit for
obedience.

VII. Neither would their King suffer them to choose Bishops of their own, if
they would attempt it. For since their Synods provoke jealousy, a Bishops
Court would provoke more jealousy; and authority continued in one man would be
more obnoxious to envy and obloquie, then consultations of amultitude,
intermitted from Synod to Synod, and under several Presidents, et ad tempus.
Had our gracious King Charles and his Counsel the same necessity to tolerate
the Papists, as Henry the IV. of France had to reward the Protestants, that
were a strong body, and by whom he had been promoted to the Crown; yet I think
not that his Majesty would suffer them to have Bishops, or admit of any
jurisdiction, but immediately depending upon him. The reformed Churches of
France have no jurisdiction, and look for none; and if your Presbyteries of
Scotland would contain themselves in the same modesty, the Covenant would go
down, and the King should be obeyed.

Of all these reasons there is none that can serve your turn; wherefore our
want of Bishops cannot be a president for your putting down of Bishops.

Since you live under no cross, and have such a gracious Defender of the faith
for your Sovereign, and both the Kingdoms of this Island profess the same
holy Doctrine; to frame another Ecclesiastical Discipline besides that which
his Majesty allows, and the Church has kept for many ages, it is framing
two livers in a body that has but one head and one heart; For of this Island,
the King is the head, and Religion is the heart; both the which would have but
one Discipline, as it were one liver to disperse blood and spirit into the
several parts of the whole body, with one and the same Oeconomie eyere where.
Certainly if France had but one heart for Religion, I am persuaded they would
never stick for a different Oeconomie of Discipline.

And the truth is, neither you nor they have a settled Discipline, and therefore
both need less to stand upon it. This is the last Article of the French
Discipline; These things which are here contained concerning the Discipline,
are not so decreed, but that if the benefit of the Church do require it, they
may be altered. Neither do the French busy their heads about points of
Discipline; else it would be seen in their writings. But wheresoever they like
the Doctrine, they embrace the Discipline.

In the year 1615. my reverend Father was sent for by King James of glorious
and blessed memory; some discontented brethren in London seeing him highly
favored by his Majesty, came to him with a bill of grievances to be
represented to the King; which my Father having perused, returned it unto them
again, saying, That their exceptions were frivolous.

For Ceremonies, and other points of Discipline, I do not find you
conformable with the French: Whether you celebrate the holy Communion with such
reverence as they do in France, let your own consciences answer. You know
there are two gestures of praying practiced from the beginning in the Church,
kneeling, and standing: The English pray kneeling at the Communion, the French
standing. For they sit not at the Table, like the Dutch (wherein the French
Church of London, consisting most of Wallons, follows the Dutch) but walk to
the holy Table, and there with a reverent congey receive the Sacrament, which
the people takes not in the dish, as it is with the Dutch, but the Minister
delivers it to every Communicant. When I received in my country, the
Minister used these words: It is the body of the Lord Jesus Christ which
suffered for your sins. It is the blood of the Lord Jesus Christ which was
shed for your sins; And it is an express Article of their Discipline, That
the due reverence belonging to the holy Communion, Cap. 12. Art. 12
be carefully maintained.

The distribution of the Cup by a Lay-Deacon is worn out of use among them:
and whereas it was brought in, in the beginning, and in time of persecution, it
was afterward removed, Cap. 12. Art. 9.
by a Canon of their Discipline, and by way of fact, in all the Churches.

And whereas at the first (as in all beginnings of reformation) every one
taught his neighbor; Jbid.
and, for want of Ministers, Lay Deacons would catechize; It was declared by an
Article of their Discipline, That the office of those Deacons is not to preach
the Word of God, nor to administer the Sacraments.

As for the power of their Lay Elders, it is little more than the office of
Churchwardens in England: Their office is to look to the disorders of the
flock, and give account of it to the Consistory, as Churchwardens put in their
Presentiments in the Spiritual Court; A voice they have in the Censures, but
the determination and pronouncing of the Censure belongs to the Minister. They,
and the people together, may admit or refuse a Minister chosen by the Synod,
(if the King give way to it;) And so it must needs be, where there is neither
Bishop, nor Living, nor right of Patronage. Chamier Tom. 2. Lib. 5. c. 2. Nos
certe praeter electorum Ministrorum approbationem vel reprobationem, nullas
esse parts plebis censomus in Ecclesiastico regimine.
We hold indeed (says Chamier) that besides approving or refusing the
Ministers chosen, the Laity has nothing to do in the government of the
Church. This is all the power of the Laity. No mention there of ruling Elders,
that have always the casting voice, Page 424. of his Majesty's large
Declaration.
of which his Majesty says very truly, That it is a course unheard of in any
Church, and in any age.

The notable difference between the French Elders and the Scottish, In the
Year 1631.
was justified, not long since, by one M. Adam Stewart, a Scottishman,
heretofore Reader of Philosophy in Sedan, who, finding there the Consistory
ruled (as it ought to be) by the Clergy of the place, kept a great coil to
raise the power of the Lay-Eldership, which had no such ambition, and grew so
violent in his course, that after a long forbearance, and moderation of the
Ministers, they were forced to excommunicate him, and crave the Princes help,
who banished him out of his dominions. Being put out of Sedan, he went to
Paris, where he offered to stir the same matter, but he had no better
success there.

Neither shall ye find among the Protestants of France, that aversion from the
Spiritual Courts which is among you. For although they have more reason to
hate the Spiritual Courts of Popery, by whom they have suffered much; yet the
Canons of their Discipline allow them to resort to the Spiritual Courts, to
sue for their right, Cap. 14. Art. 8.9. and 10.
and Protestant Advocates are allowed to plead there.

And which is more, Protestants are allowed to exercise jurisdictions and
procurations under the Clergy of Rome, Ibid. Art. 10.
if so be they do not concern that which they call spirituality. Also to be
farmers of Tithes, Art. 2.
Priories and Church-demeanes; Which shows that when they forbid Pastors to
possess any land, under the title of Pastors, Cap. 1 art. 40
it is not because they disallow that the Church should possess demeanes; But
because in the present poverty and paritie, if some few had Livings, and the
rest none, they conceive it would breed envy and factions in the Church.

As for Holy Days, they observe reverently the days of Christmas, Easter,
Ascension, and Pentecost. And where they have Sermons upon Week days (as at
Charenton by Paris upon Thursdayes) they will change the day, when there is a
Holy Day of some note in the week. This is Calvin's counsel upon that point; I
would have you constant in refusing Holy Days; yet so, Calvini Epistola ad
Montbelgardenses. In festis non recipiendis cuperem vos esse constantiores, sic
tamen ut non litigetis de quibuslibet, sed de iis tantum, quae nec in
aedificanonem quicquam factura sunt, and superstitionem prima ipsa facie prae
se ferunt. -- Nam in papatu magna celebritate Conceptionem and Ascensionem
Virginis coluerunt.
that you pick not a quarrel with every Holy Day, but with those only that
are not at all for edification, and bear a stamp of superstition in the front;
And he gives them for example, the feasts of the Conception and Ascension of
the blessed Virgin, which are also refused by the English Church. But generally
of all Holy Days; the French Discipline commands, Cap. 14. Art. 21.
that No scandal shall be committed, by working on days appointed to rest,
according to the Kings Edict; And it were to be wished, that the Scots were no
more refractarie to their good King, the pious Defender of their Faith, than
the French Protestants are to their Sovereign, though of contrary religion,
even in those points of Ecclesiastical Discipline.

How they stand affected in all points of Ceremonies and outward Order, you may
see by their Confession presented to the Emperor, and the Princes of Germany.
We acknowledge, that both all Churches, Confess. Eccles. Gallicar. inter
Opuscula Calvini. Fatemur tum omnes tum singulas Ecclesias hoc jus habere, ut
leges et statuts sibi conda^t ad politiam communem inter suos constable ituendam,
cum omnia in domo Dei rite and ordine fieri oporteat. Ejusmodi porto statutis
obedientiam deferendam esse, modo ne conscientias astringant, neque superstitio
illis adhibeatur: Qui hoc detrectent cerebrosi and pervicaces apud nos habentur.
and every Church, have that right to make Laws and Statutes for themselves;
to establish a public Order among their own people, since all things must be
done in the House of God decently and with order; and that obedience must be
yielded to such statutes, so they do not bind the consciences, and no
superstition be mingled with them: Those that will do against this, we hold
them peevish and stubborn people.

You have heard Beza before persuading the English brethren to obedience unto
their Prelates. In the same Epistle he tells them, That the Surplice is of no
such importance, that the Ministers should leave their function, Blza ad
quesdam Anglicar. Ecclesiarum fratres. Non videntur ista tanti momenti, ut
propterea vel Pastoribus deserendum potius sit Ministerium, quam ut vestes
illas assumant; vel gregibus omittendum publicurn pabulum, potius quam ita
vestitos Pastores audiant.

Jbid. De geniculatione in Coena, De cantu Ecclesiae, Crucis consignatione,
Puerorum baptizandotum interrogatione, non est magnopere laborandum.


rather than wear that garment; and the people should leave the public food
[of Gods Word] rather than hear the Pastors that wear it; Likewise for
kneeling at the Communion, Church-musicke, the Cross in Baptism, and asking
questions to children in Baptism, He thus delivers his opinion, De his non
est magnopere laborandum; One should not trouble himself much about such
things. And Calvin praises Hooper for opposing himself manfully against the
Extreme Unction; but blames him for being too obstinate against the Cope and
Surplice.

The French Protestants keep their zeal of religion for higher matters,
Calvinus Bullingero page 98. Edit onis Genevensis, an 1576
than a Surplice or a Cross in Baptism; and wonder much, that for such small
things, you would parallel them with Antichrist, that maintain the same holy
Faith with you.

But if those ceremonies be a yoke upon your consciences, the yoke is removed;
and his Majesty is graciously pleased not to urge them upon you; which would
never have bin granted, if the King and his Council had thought them to be in
their nature necessary, and binding the conscience. And though Episcopal order
(which the King will have you to receive) were a yoke upon your consciences;
Think on the other side, that rebelling against your Sovereign, is a stain
upon your consciences; And you are no good Divines, if you choose rather a
foul stain then a light yoke. Neither do you consider, that you may suffer a
wrong in your Christian liberty, without wronging your conscience; as Beza
says very worthily, Beza Epistola eadem. Possunt ae etiam debent multa
tolerari, quae tamen non recte praecipiuntur.
Many things may, yea, and must be borne with, which are not rightly enjoined;
For spiritual liberty lies not in the outward act, but in the intention and
belief. If a thing wicked in it self be enjoined unto us, it must neither be
obeyed in the act, nor assented unto in the understanding and the will; But if
the thing be indifferent in it self, and yet seem in the judgment
inconvenient, we may and must do it, and neither wrong our liberty, nor our
conscience; for in such cases our actions are limited, though our consciences
be free, and the superior power may bind us in foro exteriori, and leave us
free in foro interiori, wherein Christian liberty lies. Spiritual liberty,
Calvin Instit. l. 4 c. 20. Art. 1. Spiritualis libertas cum politica servitute
optime stare potest.
and political bondage, will stand very well together, says Calvin.

And let not the consequence trouble you; As long as the thing commanded is
lawful in it self, we are not answerable of the consequence that may follow,
but they that command it; and we that move in the inferior orb of obedience,
must quietly follow the motions of the higher sphere of authority: To pull
against it inconsiderately, under pretense of Gods service, is dashing the
second Table against the first, and breaking both; That man abuses Christian
liberty, Beza Epist. 24. ad peregrinarum Ecclesiarum in Anglia fratres.
Consequitur eum abuti Christianae libert it is beneficro, qui vel suis
Magistratibus, vel praepositis suis sponte non paret in Domino, nec
conscientiam fratrum aedificare studet.
or rather is yet sold under sin, that will not with a free will obey in the
Lord his Magistates or Superiors, and seeks not to edify the consciences of
his brethren, says Beza.

But though it were a thing granted, that the orders imposed upon you by his
Majesty, are not indifferent, but ungodly and Antichristian: Are you therefore
allowed to defend Religion with rebellion? Will ye call the Devil to the help
of God? Sure it is a prodigious kind of Christian liberty, for a subject to
draw his sword against his Sovereign. You that stand so much upon the point of
conscience, Ought ye not to be subject for consciences sake? Romans 13.5.
Were your Sovereign unjust and froward, and his commands injurious unto God,
Had ye instead of our pious Defender of the faith, a fierce Dioclesian. Illud
solis precibus et patientia sanari potest, Nothing will mend it but prayers and
patience. Beza ibib.
It is Beza's counsel to the discontented brethren of England, conformable to
that of S. Peter, For it is better if the will of God be so that ye suffer for
well doing, 1 Pet. 3.17.
then for evil doing. If the Sovereign come to kill the subject for his
religion, The subject must yield him his throat, not charge his Pike against
him.

Calvin lived in the time of the hottest persecutions, and had credit enough to
have made the people to take arms to defend the liberty of their consciences;
But this is his doctrine; If we be persecuted for godliness by an impious and
sacrilegious Prince, Let us first of all remember our sins which no doubt are
corrected by God with such scourges; Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 20. art. 29. Si
ab impio and sacrilego Principe vexamur ob pietatem, subeat primum delictorum
nostrorum recordatio, quae talibus haud dub^e Domini flagellis castigantur;
Inde humilitas impatientiam nostram fraenabit; Succurrat deinde haec cogitatio,
non nostrum esse hu jusmodi malis mederi; hoc tantum esse reliquum, ut Domini
opem imploremus, cujus in manu sunt regum corda and regnorum inclinationes.
This will bridle our impatience with humility; Then let this thought come
into our minds, That it is not our part to mend such evils; And this only
remains unto us, even to call upon Gods help, in whose hand are the hearts
of Kings, and the inclinations of Kingdoms.

And whereas in the same Chapter, he teaches, that in case the King command
any thing contrary to Gods command, we must obey God rather then men; he will
not have Christians to fight for righteousness, but to suffer for
righteousness: Ibid. art. vlt. Hac nos cogitatione consolemur, illam tum nos
praestare quam Deus exigit obedientiam, dum quidvis perpetimur potius quam a
pietate deflectamus.
Let this thought comfort us, says he, that we yield (unto the King) that
obedience which God requires, when we suffer any thing, rather than turn
aside from Godliness.

And how the good man was averse from taking arms against a Sovereign, under
pretense of religion; he shows it in his Epistle to Francis the first of
France, If any (says he) under color of the Gospel trouble your state,
Calvin. Epist. ad Franciscum 1. Regem, quae este ante Institutiones. Quod si
qui sub praetextu Evangelii tumultuantur (quales hactenus in regno tuo fuisse
non compertum est) sunt leges and legum poenae, quibus pro meritis graviter
exerceantur; Modo ne interim Evangelium Dei ob scelestorum hominum nequitiam
male audiat.
(and hitherto there has been none such in your Kingdom) there are laws and
penal statutes, to repress them severally, according to their deserts; so
that in the mean while the Gospel of God be not defamed for the malice of
wicked men.

And after many just complaints to the King for the fearful executions used
against his party, Ibid. Sin vero ita aures tuas occupant malevolorum susurri,
ut nullus sit reis pro se dicendi locus, importunae vero illae Furiae, te
connivente, semper vinclis, flagris, equuleis, sectionibus, incendiis saeviunt:
Nos quidem ut oves mactationi destinatas ad extrema quaeque redigemur; sic
tamen ut in patientia nostra possideamus animas nostras, and manum Domini
fortem expectemus, quae indubie in tempore aderit.
he ends thus, We indeed like sheep kept for theslaughter, may be brought to
any extremity; yet still we will possess our souls in patience, and look for
the mighty hand of God, which certainly will assist us in due time.

These are the arms, the forces, and the munitions, which the Church of that
time opposed to their Sovereign, in time of persecution. And not to load this
Epistle with testimonies of the late French Writers; The Churches of France
have lately declared to his Majesty's Ambassador there, their utter dislike of
the insurrection of Scotland, under pretense of a Covenant with Christ.

But I see an objection coming, which (as far as I can guess) has
prevailed with many, to draw them to the present insurrection: That let the
French Churches give never so good counsel of obedience, yet their actions
give to the Scots a president to take arms for the defense of their religion.
And this is likely that which made the Covenanters say in one of their
Petitions to his Majesty, Page 417. of his Majesty's large Declaration.
that the neighbor Churches would approve all their proceedings.

I might answer, that the case is not alike; the two Courts of Great Britain
and France being so different in Religion, and the Scots not being pressed to
alter their Religion, as the French were for a long time: But because there can
be no just cause to take arms against a lawful Sovereign, two things may be
said to that objection.

First, that to take counsel of a friend, you must take him when he is in cold
blood, not when he is drawing his sword. Look to the opinions and behavior of
their Divines, not to the actions of some rash heads.

Next, if you look how they have done, you must look also how they have sped,
and you shall have little encouragement to follow their example.

But not to wrong my Countrymen; If you read their History from the year
1560. when the civil wars begun, you shall find, that most part of the time
their wars had such and so important occasisions, as your party cannot bring
for the present disorders.

Henry the II. of France died about the year 1560. leaving four sons under
age, the eldest whereof, Francis the II. reigned little above one year, and
his brother Charles the IX. was some ten years old when he began to reign.
During the minority of these Kings, the Queen mother, by the assistance of the
house of Guise, excluded the Princes of the blood from the protection of the
Kings person and kingdom, which was their right. The Princes being
Protestants, and finding a discontented party, who, for the space of wellnigh
forty years, had suffered a most fierce persecution, easily drew to their side
all the Protestants of France; and so twisted their interests with the interest
of Religion, that they never made a peace for themselves alone, but for the
whole party: By which several peaces they got Edicts in their favor, and
places of defense, and grew a considerable party.

King Charles the IX. being come to age, and finding a troubled State, sought
to quench with blood the fire kindled in his kingdom; and by a treacherous
match of his sister with the young King of Navarre, got the Heads of the
Protestants to Paris, and there slew them. This was the famous feast of S.
Bartholomew 1572. upon which, and some months after, there was above
fourscore thousand of the Protestant party killed in cold blood throughout all
the kingdom.

This usage, though it cannot justify the Protestants for taking arms
afterward for their defense, yet it takes away great part of the reproach; it
being no wonder, if those that have suffered more than nature can bear, will
do more than duty can justify.

Charles the IX. being dead two years after the Massacre, Henry the III.
succeeded, who being of a milder temper than his brother, the Protestants
enjoyed some quiet for a while; which his Popish subjects disliking, (or
rather, his mother, whose ordinary course was, to keep her authority by public
divisions) the League began presently for the extirpation of the Protestant
party, without the Kings consent; yet the King, being a timorous man, was
drawn to it perforce, in the end; In the mean while, the King of Navarre and
the rest of the Protestants stood upon their defense; I will not determine
whether they ought to have yielded their throats to the slaughter, the
persecution being not raised against them by their Sovereign, but by a
Covenant of his subjects with the Pope and the King of Spain, before the King
had given way to it; But the King himself soon justified their arms; for
perceiving that the League was a yoke upon his own neck, which divested him
of his right, and brought into the kingdom another authority than his own; he
renounced the League, and called the King of Navarre, and the Protestants to
his aid, who did him faithful service with great alacrity and valor; till the
King being dead in the year 1589. the right of the Crown fell to the Head of
their party, the King of Navarre, whom by Gods blessing, and their valor, they
raised to the Throne, and helped him not only with their sword, but maintained
him with their purses, and did him such services as could not be repaid.

King Henry the IV. having removed from the League all pretenses of bearing
arms against him as an Hugonot, by forsaking the reformed Religion, to our
infinite grief and loss; And seeing his Protestant party justly discontented,
granted them liberty of Religion, and a lease for years of certain places of
safety, which (as the French Protestants expound it) would have been to no
purpose, had it not been to defend themselves by way of arms when they should
be vexed. So they did afterward, when King Lewis now reigning redemanded those
places, and would continue the lease no longer.

Till the reign of King Lewis the arms of the Protestants were either
justifiable, or excusable, But their wars in his time were neither; and they
prospered accordingly.

Their first and greatest fault was in the years 1615. and 1616. when they
joined with the Prince of Conde to cross the Kings match with Spain; yet by
the persuasions of my reverend Father, living then in Paris, all the Churches
on this side Loire, that is, one half of France, kept themselves in the Kings
obedience; for which the Queen Regent gave him thanks.

But the injuriestuck so deep in the Kings stomach, that five years after he
would have all his places from the Protestants: who when they stood stiffly for
the keeping of those places in the The assembly of Rochell was a political
assembly, such as the Protestants were allowed then to keep.
Assembly of Rochell, my Father being at the same time President of the
National Synod at Alaix, stood for obedience with much eagerness, and after
the dissolution of the Synod, The Copy of that Letter is by me.
writ to the Assembly a large letter, to persuade them by reasons both of
conscience and prudence, rather to suffer for the Gospel, than stand in Arms
against their Sovereign. But the Assembly being ruled by violent men, chose
the counsels of war, and drew the Kings arms upon many that were most
desirous of obedience. What miseries we have suffered by the rashness of few
men, and the weak estate we were brought to by these violent courses, we think
on it with bitter grief: Our wounds are fresh, and are like to bleed till the
poor Church bleed out her life, if God be no more merciful to us, than we
have been to our selves.

In one point I am afraid that you shall be like us, if you go on in your
course. For whereas most of the Kings subjects in Scotland are misled, and
would gladly obey his Majesty, if their Landlords and leaders would give them
leave: It is to be feared, that the Kings artillery shall make little
distinction between good hearts and false hearts.

I beseech you, since you claim conformity with the French, compare your case
with theirs. The French Protestants had to do with a King of contrary religion;
They were incensed by many wrongs and oppressions; They were in danger (in all
likelihood) to lose with their towns and forts, their liberty, their religion,
and their life; The priveledges which they enjoyed, were rewards of their long
services. By the Charter of Rochell, when they yielded to Lewis the XI. it was
granted to them, that they should be no longer the Kings subjects, then the
King should maintain their immunittes; And yet these true reasons and just
fears, could not justify their defensive arms against their Sovereign, but
they were condemned by the best of their own, and of their neighbors; and God
showed his dislike, by the ill success he gave them.

What approbation then of all good men, what blessing of God may the
Covenanters hope for, by standing in arms against their good King, a Prince in
piety and clemency without parallel, who never provoked them by any ill usage,
but rather favored them above their fellow subjects?

It may do you good to observe, that the violent Counselors of war in the
assembly of Rochell, soon after betrayed their party, and sold their places:
Others turned Papists and were rewarded for it; which shows, that they were
won before to thrust their party into a precipice, whence there was no way to
get out. But the great Counselor of peace, my Reverend Father, at that very
time was forced to fly for his life out of the Kingdom, and leave his means
behind him, being maligned because by the respect of his presence, and his
powerful persuasions, he kept the people in the Kings obedience, which was the
greatest crossing of the designs of our adversaries, who being fully bent upon
our undoing, wanted but a pretense. I fear also that when God reveals the
secrets of the hearts, Some fierce Covenanters shall be found Iefuites, whose
purpose was to make the King lose one way or other, that supremacy which the
Pope challenges, and howsoever, to get profit by our harms.

I would desire you also to learn by our faults and misfortunes, that in a
Covenant against a lawful and undoubted Sovereign, there must needs be in the
end a great deal of disunion. Our Deputies in the Assembly of Rochell, sent
their orders over all the kingdom, but they were not followed: And when the
King appeared with an army, many turned to his side, and weakened their own
party. Likewise when his Majesty shall come to you to make himself obeyed,
either with the terror or the smart of his Royal sword, be sure that you
shall see the same disunion among you; Neither shall your Covenant beable to
keep all together; But the presence of their natural Prince, and his anger
armed with strength, will strike a greater awe in the hearts of his subjects,
than any order of your tables.

It is with Politic bodies as with quicksilver, which is easily stirred and
divided; But divide it never so much, all the several parts will of themselves
meet in their center again; for it must be a very great violence that will
quench nature, and when you have done all, the King will be King.

God give you all grace to learn wisdom by the faults of your neighbors;
And to the Churches of France so much blessedness, that for a full agreement
in all points with their King and his Clergy, there be nothing wanting on
their parts but to receive Bishops.

If you dissent from me in these points of Discipline and Obedience, you must
bear with me, for this tincture, I have kept from the education which I
received at home. But I hope you will receive this advice of mine, with the
same mind as it is given, that is with charity and a sincere desire to see God
glorified, and the Church at peace, and the King obeyed.

Which is the subject of the daily prayers of

Your friend and servant in Christ, Peter Du-Moulin the son.
Chester. March 1. 1639. 11. 1640.

