Ap: 21

New Jerusalem

The prayers of the Saints Revel. 8 4. Prayer breaks through all Act. 12.7.
The prayer of faith shall save the sick: Iam: 5.15. Wisdom cries in the
streets Prove. 1.20. THE RIGHT WAY to Heaven Prayers and Meditations of the
Faithful Soul with the Spiritual morning Sacrifice and Consolations for the
Sick By Peter D. M^^lin

These were strangers and pilgrims in the earth. Act. 1^.13 London Printed for
George Edwardes, and are sold in the Old Baily, in Green Arbor, at the Angel.
1630.



TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, truly religious, and virtuous Lady, Mary Crook,
wife to the Right Worshipful Sir George Crook Knight, one of His Majesty's
reverend and learned Judges of the Kings Bench.
Madame,
AS Speech is the Character of man: that is, the image of his heart and mind,
and be the Image of God, so silence, whilst it is a seasonable and discreet
suspension thereof, becomes a man in its time and place: unseasonable use of
either, offensive and obnoxious to censure. The excess is branded for a
nullifier of Religion, whilst it makes it vain: The seeming defect finds some
approbation in morality.

Nam nulli racuisse nocet: nocet esse locurum.

I was dumb, and opened not my mouth, because thou did it, this untuned not
this sweet singer, yet made him fall upon a large rest, which it served not to
impeach, but rather to improve his spiritual melody. Often sudden and
unexpected accidents produce semblable effects: Zacharias silenc't for his want
of faith, yet after Ward enabled both with his heart and tongue to praise God,
and to sing a Benedictus. That;

Saepe tacc^s vocem verbaque vultu^ habet.

Who holds his peace, has yet a voice, that bewrayes him, and his countenance
bears words with it. Yea a delinquent in the one, or an offender in the other,
as far as either are exempt from the mixture of the leaven of malice,
deserves an indulgent construction, and exemption from all imputation, either
of surquedrie, or sullenness, as different circumstances may accordingly
induce dissimilitude, as of affect in one, so of affection in another.

Hac ego si compellar imagine.

This plain; yet true version of these sacred expressions, Holy Prayers, and
Meditations of a faithful soul, so truly styled by their Author, so well
known to all, to be a reverend and worthy Divine of the French reformed
Church. I present and dedicate to your Ladyship. The end herein proposed to my
self, being the same with that of my Authors; which none can justly either
question, or quarrel at to wit, the advancement of this part of Gods worship,
so' much languishing in the cold if not frozen devotions of many, and opposed
by the giddie practice of mothen a good many, that so far nauzeate Prayer,
public especially, that in their unkindly and misguided zeal, they endeavor
by one Ordinance of God to shoulder out another, Prayer by Preaching. God has
styled his House the House of Prayer. Now, what my well meant pains herein
calls mine, I wish may find acceptance with you, as I do humbly tender and
resign the same unto you, not so much for supply of a supposed want in your
own particular, of these Spiritual helps to devotion, as for a testimony of
observance and due respect Where my obligation is so great. When I plowed with
mine own heifer, a smiling autumn failed not to crown those weaker performances
with a plenteous and lasting crop for after-use. But to usher in these Holy
Prayers and sacred expressions of a faithful Soul, into the approbation and
use, of all that know their Author or his works. His name (as I suppose) will
suffice. And hence is it Madame: that I presume of your good allowance for them
to bear your name in their Frontispice, that thereby others may be excited and
induced to the perusal and use of them in the frequent practice both of this
sacred duty, and of the works of mercy, whereunto the other subsequent
Tractates annex't do invite. The perusal of which as in order they stand
rankt, with like good affection I commend to those your Olive branches, that
stand about your table, to whom any tie of precedent relation may justly claim
my respect. All which I shall not fail to second with continuance of my daily
prayers for your Ladyships health and happiness, both in your stem and
branches, and will ever rest

At your Ladyships service and command, RICHARD BAILY.

A Table of the Matters contained in this present Book, in order as they stand.
A 1. A Prayer and Meditation of the faithful Soul, 2, A Prayer for the
Morning. 3 A ^ra^er f^^ the Evening. 4 A Prayer of Thanksgiving for the
accompl^shme^t of his Ans^er made to Mounsieur the Cardinal of Perroun. 5. A
^rayer in ^orme of a Confession. 6. Another ^ra^er 7 A Prayer f^r he Communion.
8. A Thank^giving after the Communion. 9 A ^onfession. 10. A Prayer f^r the
Morning. 11. A ^rayer for the Evening 12. Another Prayer for the Morning, 13.
Another Prayer for the Evening. 14. A Prayer in the time of the Plague. 15 A
Prayer touching the Creation. 16. A Morning Prayer. 17 An Evening Prayer. 18. A
Prayer for the obtaining of victory. 19. A Prayer for the Preservation of the
Church. 20. Another Prayer for the Church. 21. A Prayer to have our hearts set
on Spiritual things, and to renounce the world. 22. A Thanksgiving and a
Prayer on the same Subject. 23. A Prayer to be filled with charity. 24. The
Kings Prayer. 25. Another Prayer of the Kings. Chron. 1. 26. The Peoples Prayer
for the King. 27. A Prayer of the faithful, who fervently desires to be made
partaker of the publ^ke exercises, whereof he was deprived. 28. Another Prayer
out of the 2 Epistle of S John, 29. The Holy Spiritual Morning Song. 30. A
Consolation for the Sick. 31. A Prayer for the Sick in whom there is no
appearance of death 32. A Prayer for the sick in whom there shall be a
likelihood of death. 33. Another Prayer for the sick. 34. A singular Prayer
for a person greatly afflicted with sickness, which seems to approach nea^er
unto death, then to life. 35. A Prayer against the apprehension of death 36. A
Continued Sequel, or an Vnintermitted Course of Comforts, and Prayers for the
sick: and therein these Prayers. 37. A Prayer when the sick is in
perplexity. 38. A Prayer when the sick is near unto death 39. Another Prayer
in distress. 40. Another Prayer when the sick i^ in some grievous
perplexity. 41. A Prayer the sick being in extremity. 42. Another Prayer
unto Jesus Christ, the Great and Sovereign Shepherd of our Souls, for the
sick in his extremity. 43. A Prayer for Divine assistance to the sick. 44. A
Prayer after the sick has given up the Ghost, for the comfort of the by
standers.
Whereunto is added: A Morning Prayer. An Evening Prayer. A short Catechism,
to prepare People for the receiving of the Lords Supper.


THE PRAYER AND MEDITATION of the faithful Soul,
Touching the present affliction of the Church.
1. O LORD our good God, and gracious Father, we thy poor creatures, humbled
before thy face, are bold to present our selves before thy holy and high
majesty, although we be but dust and ashes, thou dwell in inaccessible
light; but we by nature are plunged in darkness: thou art a consuming fire,
but we are as the chafe: thou art sovereign righteousness, and we are poor
sinners, thou art the fountain of life, and we by nature are in death.

Yet O Lord, thou have commanded us to call upon thee in our necessities, with
promise to hear us, and have given us thine own Son to be our Intercessor
promising us to give us the things we shall ask in his Name, thou have called
us with an holy calling, and amidst the thick darkness of ignorance, wherewith
the earth is covered, thou have enlightened us with thy knowledge, and received
us into the number of thy children: yea every one of us severally has been
sensible of thy particular assistance and fatherly succors in the whole course
of his life.

But, O Lord, the greater thy favors are toward us, the guiltier are we of
ingratitude, for we have abused thy graces, and thy fear has not been before
our eyes; We have despised thy word, and have not reverenced it. After the
fires and massacres; whereof we are but a remnant, and as a firebrand plucked
out of fire, thou have re-establisht us, and have given us days of peace, and
of refreshing; but we have abused our repose, and turned it into
licentiousness and loosenes. We have had more care to build again our own
houses, then to advance thine, we have run after the gain and vanity of this
world. In stead of clothing the poor, we have arrayed our own bodies
sumptuously. We have rent and torn our selves with quarrels and enmities, and
are thereby become contemptible to our adversaries, our prayers have been
cold, our zeal languishing, our alms skanted, and therefore has our
iniquity abounded, and our charity been frozen. In stead of drawing the
ignorant unto the knowledge of thee, by our good life, we have scandalized and
exasperated them by our evil conversation. When we have had humane strength,
and means, and when thou raisedst up among us Princes and Potentates, who
seemed they would be a firm prop unto thy Church, and and an assured shelter,
and place of retrait during the storm, we have leaned on the arm of flesh, in
stead of relying on thee alone: O God, which castest down and abatest the
pride of the loftiest, and raisest up the miserable out of the dust, thou
liftest up, and bring low the degree, therefore have thou cast us down, and
humbled us, and have made us know the vanity of our thoughts contrary to thy
counsels: yea even the Ministers and Preachers of thy word, have failed in
their charges, and in many places evil and profanation is issued and come
forth from the Prophets, and indeed in these years of peace are seen the
revolts of many, which had the leading of thy flock.

For these causes, O Lord God, thou just Judge, thy wrath is kindled against
thy people, being confounded in our selves, we acknowledge that thy
chastisements are just: yea, Lord, far less then we have deserved, thou have
covered our faces with confusion, thou have glutted us with bitterness: thou
have caused us to drink of the cup of thine anger, thou have called us to
weeping and sighing in sacke-cloath and ashes, thou have lifted up the hand of
our adversaries, and have exposed us unto scorn, and have made thy hand heavy
upon us, thou have plucked up the plants which thou had planted, and beaten
down the Churches which thou had erected by the blood of thy Martyrs, by the
preaching of thy Gospel. Thou have broken down the hedge of thy providence,
which environed thy Church, and have exposed it as a prey to wild beasts. And
now Lord, we see, that in the places where thy Gospel was purely preached,
even there at this day ecchoeth forth alowd forgerie, and idolatry is again
established, and the enemies of thy truth insolently triumph, and insult over
the ruins of thy house.

Hereupon we have cried unto thee: but thou have turned away thy face. Thou
have covered thee with a cloud, that our prayers might not come up unto thee:
and we see thy hand lifted up to smite us yet more rigorously: and the rods
prepared which thou displayest in thy displeasure, Lord God. justice belongs
to thee, but unto us confusion of face; we acknowledge in all this which is
come to pass, the tokens of thy just displeasure, and there is no evil in the
City which the Lord has not done.

So it is that thou art our Creator, and we are the work of thine hands; thou
art God, and we are thy people, thou art our Redeemer, and we are thine own
purchase, thou have purchased us with a great price, a people whom thou have
honored with thy knowledge, thou art a merciful God, and of great benignity,
slow to anger, and do not always keep it, that take no pleasure in the
destruction of thy work. It is thy goodness that we have yet any being: It is
of thy tender compassion that we are not utterly consumed; thou dweilest in the
highest heavens, and in the humblest hearts: the broken and contrite spirit
unto thee is an acceptable sacrifice.

Now then, O God, look down from the place of thy Sanctuary, to wit, from the
heavens, hear the prayer of thy servants, and accept their humiliation, pardon
Lord, pardon the iniquity of thy children for thine own sake, for the greater
it is, by so much the more admirable is thy goodness in pardoning it, the
greatness of our sins serves to exalt thy mercy. and withal thou have
received a sufficient ransom of thine own Son, and a redemption of infinite
pric^, whereon relying we dare approach unto the throne of grace, to obtain
grace in due time.

For O God, in these anguishes we see no means on earth: but our eyes are
toward thee. Hear then from thy habitation, and regard, for thou art able to
releeve us, thou art not a God, that art only a God at hand, and not a God a
far off, even then when all humane means fail, then is it that thou
displayest thy strength, and when thorough our foolishness we have procured
unto our selves evils, thou usest our foolishness for our good, that the
subsisting of thy Church might not be a work of man's wisdom, but of thy sacred
providence.

Thou it is that in all former times have succored thy people, and drewest
them forth of the iron furnace, with a strong hand, and with an outstretched
arm, and have carried them as upon the wings of an Eagle, who even in our time
have made us sensible of thy succors by many deliverances, and who deliveredst
our fathers from many cruel persecutions, having caused them to pass through
many more grievous trials then this, thy tender compassions are not drawn dry,
thy arm is not shortened, nor thine ear grown heavy of hearing: but our
iniquities are they which make this sepation between thee and us, which take
thou away by thy mercy, and by the intercession of our Savior Jesus Christ; It
is thou that have crushed the Dragon and bruised the head of that old Serpent,
and who by the blood of thy Covenant have drawn us out of the pit, where there
was no water, having vanquished hell by the death of thy Son: thou then,
great God, that have plucked us from out the talons of the Devil, will thou not
deliver us from the hands of men, thou which have saved us from hell, will thou
not deliver us from the power of the world?

O Eternal Lord, thou will do it, and wilt not forsake us, but rather having
chastised us in measure, thou will make us sensible of thy comforts, and wilt
cause to shine upon us thy face, in joy, and in salvation, least we faint
through our infirmity, and least we be overcome through the length and hardness
of the temptation, for so also Lord, have thou promised, and thy promises are
certain, and thy word more firm then heaven and earth, thou have promised us by
the mouth of thine own Son not to forsake us, and to be with us even to the
end of the world, thou numberest our hairs, thou receivest our sighs, thou
put up our tears into thy bottles, he that touches thy children, touches
the apple of thine eye, thou causest thine Angels to pitch their camps about
them that fear thee, dear and precious is their death in thy presence.

Do then, O God, according to thy word, and let the Angel of thy face march
before us, let thy protection be round about us as a wall of fire, thou that
stillest the waves of the sea, and the insurrections of the people, and which
hold the hearts of Kings in thine hands as the rivers of waters, curb the
fury of the people, and give unto our King thoughts of peace, estrange far
from him the Counsels of violence, frustrate the expectation of our enemies,
who already have devoured us in hope, dissipate their counsels, thou that
surprisest the wise in their subtilties, which know the depths of Satan, and
piercest with thine eyes into the counsels of the son of perdition, whom thou will discomfite with the breath of thy mouth, and wilt beat down all power
which opposes it self against thine, but if our iniquities bear witness
against us, and make us unworthy to see so excellent a work, do it for thine
own sake, for though we be unworthy to be heard, thou art worthy to be
glorified, wherefore suffer not Satan to triumph and rejoice at the dissipation
of thy Church, and that thy holy Name is without punishment blasphemed.

Awake then, O God, thy jealousy, and the blustering motions of thy fatherly
affections: unbare and tucke up the arm of thy holiness, and let the ends of
the earth see thy salvation; remember thy ancient compassions, and thy covenant
with thy people; Remember the blood of thy children spilt in abundance, which
cries for vengeance from the earth.

We confess indeed that we have need to be humbled, and that thy Church has
need to be purged again, and therefore it is that thou take the fan into
thy hand to repurge thy floor, and raisest the wind of persecution, which
serves to carry away chafe, and to expel hypocrites: But withal, O good
God, amidst this tribulation the weak do faint, and the good are oppressed, and
partake in the affliction, and Idolatry gathers strength; and the night of
ignorance grows thicker and thy holy Name is blasphemed, and the doctrine of
salvation trampled under foot by thy adversaries.

Therefore is it, that we beseech thee, O Father of mercy, that if thou will
afflict us, that we may not fall into the hands of men, but that we may fall
into thine own hands, for thy compassions are great: for men hate us not, for
that we have offended thee, but because we defend thy quarrel, and because
thy Name is called upon by us, and renouned upon us, the blood-suckers thirst
after our blood, not to ease the patient, but to satisfy their lust.

Above all things, O God and most gracious Father, continue unto us thy word,
and afflict us rather with all other manner of affliction in this life, then to
take from us that light, since it is the testimony of thy favor toward us, our
privilege amongst all people, and the way to come to thy kingdom, that our
children may be instructed therein, and may be heirs of thy Cove^^nt after us,
and that our days may be finished in thy favor, may be followed with an age
wherein thy truth may shine forth again, and the kingdom of thy Son Jesus
Christ may take a great increase, and by preserving unto us this preaching of
the Gospel in the purity thereof, give it efficacy in our hearts, and break
not in thy anger the strength of this spiritual bread.

Rather, Lord, make the fear of this light incite and rowse us up to make our
profit thereof, and to redeem the time, and to further and carry us on
forward in this way, whilst we have the light: and let evils wherewith thou
visitest us, be wholesome remedies unto us, and an instruction for our souls;
and let them serve to recollect our faith, and to draw from out our hearts
fervent prayers; and that the deliverance which it shall please thee to grant
us, may make us know thy fatherly love toward us, which shall accompany us
the rest of our days, till we be retired out of this vale of misery, to put
us in possession of thy kingdom, that we may leave after us thy Church
peaceable, the breaches of thy house repaired, and thy service purely
established, to the glory of thy great Name, and the salvation of many by thy
Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Es. c. 26. v. 12. and 13. Lord, thou will ordain peace for us: for thou also
have wrought all our works in us.

O Lord our God, other Lords besides thee have had dominion over us: but by
thee only will we make mention of thy name.

Ver. 20. Come my people enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors
about thee; hide thy self as it were for a little moment, until the
indignation be overpast.

Morning Prayer.
2. O Our good God, and gracious Father, we thy poor creatures present our
selves before thy face, acknowledging that we are great sinners, who cease not
to offend thee, in thought, word, and deed, ungrateful for thy benefits, full
of diffidence and incredulity: more affectioned to the things of this world,
then unto thy service.

But there is mercy with thee, for thou love not the death of a sinner, but
that he should convert and live: and have given us thine own Son, that we
believing in him, might not perish, but have life everlasting. Thou have
commanded us to call upon thee, with promise to give us whatsoever we shall ask
in his name.

Receive then his Passion and his obedience for satisfaction for all our sins,
and in thy contemplation of his intercession be merciful and favorable unto
us, give us thy holy Spirit to touch our hearts unto true repentance, to
enlighten our understanding with thy knowledge, and to warm our spirits in thy
love, so that we may ever have thy glory for our end. thy will for our rule,
thy providence for our guide, and thy promises for our comfort.

And because we are inclined unto incredulity and distrustfulnesse, and are
assaulted with diverse temptations, strengthen us in faith, and imprint in our
hearts thy holy promises, giving us inwardly a lively sense and feeling of thy
love, and the witness of our election, to the end that we may stand against
all temptations, and may drive away all fears, griefs, and unprofitable
sorrows, by the assurance that thou love us, and art our Father in Jesus
Christ our Lord.

And as it has pleased thee to have kept us this night past, conduct us also
this day, by causing to shine upon us the brightness of thy face, by directing
us in all our actions, so that our deeds, our words, and our thoughts may be
conformable to thy holy will.

Bless our studies, open our understandings, preserve our memories, prosper
our labors, strengthen us in our callings, wherein let us not have for our end
our own humor, but the glory of thy Name, nor our own temporal profit, but
the salvation of our souls.

For the effecting hereof, give us the grace to set our affections not on
earthly things, but that we may acknowledge our selves pilgrims and strangers
upon earth, may use the things of this world, as though we used them not, and
as ready to lose them, tending always to the end of our heavenly calling,
expecting with joy and assurance that last hour wherein thou will draw forth
our souls out of these bodies, to make them partakers of thy heavenly glory.

And seeing it has pleased thee to grant us the favor to be borne in thy
Church, and have received us even from our infancy into thy sacred Covenant,
grant us the grace seriously to acknowledge the greatness of so inestimable a
benefit, and to keep even unto the end our souls unpoluted of all Idolatry,
ready to bear the opprobrie of Jesus Christ, and to suffer for the defense of
thy truth, if it shall please thee to call us thereunto.

To this end give us thy holy Spirit, which may guide us, and teach us rightly
to employ our time, and to husband the occasions of learning, by obeying our
superiors whom thou have given us to conduct and teach us, that we may at
length bring forth fruits, which may serve unto thy glory, and may glorify
thee by our works, and by our words, both in life, and in death.

Have pity also upon thy Church diversely tossed, defend it against the
complots of thine enemies, and ours; repair her breaches, give her increase in
thy graces, and in the number of persons give us faithful Pastors, whose
preaching may be pure, and their life holy: and Princes, which may be nursing
Fathers to thy Church.

Bless and preserve our King, enrich him with Christian and Royal Virtues:
Guide and direct the Queen, be merciful to our kinsfolks and friends, grant
both them and us grace to live in thy fear, and to die in thy favor, and to
be received into thy glory: These things we humbly entreat thee for in the
prayer which thy Son has taught us.

Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

I believe in God, etc.

EVENING PRAYER.
3. O Lord our good God, we prostrate our selves before thy holy Majesty,
offering up unto thee our evening sacrifice, in the acknowledgment of thy
gracious benefits, and of the special care which thou have of us thy poor
creatures, thou have kept us and led us forth this day, thou have given us
things necessary for this present life: Be graciously pleased, O good God, to
keep us also this night, and give good repose, so that in our morning-wakeing
we may be sounder in body, and fitter for our vocation, wherein we pray thee,
that thou will be pleased to guide and direct us by thy holy Spirit, making our
labor fruitful, unto thy glory, and to the edification of our neighbors, and
unto our own salvation.

Whereof be graciously pleased to give a full assurance, and to ingrave in our
hearts the promises of thy holy Gospel, that we being strengthened in says,
may overcome all temptations, and finish holily and courageously our begun
course, walking on not as before men, but as before thee which proovest our
hearts.

And seeing that a great combat is set before us, and Satan is strong, and the
world contrary; and we weak, and slow, and inclined unto evil, hold us up by
thy succors, defend us by thy providence, sanctify us by thy holy Spirit, and
cloth us with strength from above, and let thy Word imprinted in our hearts
instruct our ignorance, correct our perversity, and heat our coldness and
negligence in thy service: give us fervent charity toward our neighbors, a
pure conscience, faith unfeigned, and fervent zeal unto the setting forth of
thy glory.

Drive away from our hearts evil cares, earthly sorrows, and unprofitable
melancholies, teaching us to repose our selves upon thy providence, and to
trust in thy promises, to be sorrowful only for having offended thee, but
comforted in the assurance of thy mercies in Jesus Christ our Lord.

Give us also things necessary for this present life, not according to our
vain desires, but according to thy wisdom, what may suffice for the following
of our Callings without let, and pass this our race with sobriety, whilst we
advance on forward, toward that eternal and most happy life, which thy Son
has purchased for us.

And whilst we are in this temporal abode, grant us the favor to see the
kingdom of thy Son advanced, and thy truth manifested, and the ignorant, yea
even our enemies to be brought to thy knowledge: to this end give us faithful
Pastors, and Princes, that may employ their government to the establishment of
the kingdom of thy Son: give thy holy Spirit to the king, and to the Queen,
and a good wholesome Council, for the repose and advancement of thy Church.

Take care of our kinsmen and friends, and give them things ne^dfull both for
body and soul, and that our iniquities may not stay the course of thy
benefits, pardon them, Lord, and blot them out by the precious blood of thy
Son, in whose Name we ask these things of thee, in the prayer he has taught
us, saying:

Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

I believe in God, etc. Amen.

A Prayer of Thanksgiving for finishing the Answer made to Mounsieur the
Cardinal of Perron by Peter du Moulin.
4. O Lord my God and Father, I close this travel with thanks giving to thy
Sovereign Majesty: I should be ungrateful to thy goodness, if I ended not
my labor in thy praise: O God, that have strengthened and enabled me. It is
thou, whose strength is perfected in our weakness: it is thou that choosest
the lowly and mean, to confound the strong, and who in the weakness of the
instruments, thou imployest, displayest the greatness of thy strength: not
unto us, but to thy Name give the glory and the honor: for, who are we that we
should be able to bear so great a burden, and what is our strength to
sustain so great a combat? But that very Truth it self, which we defend,
gives strength to them that defend it, and thou deniest not them thy succors,
that in defending thy cause have no other end but the glory of thy holy Name.
It Is thou my God, who having been favorable to me from the beginning of my
days, wilt not forsake me in my old age, and wilt make it yet profitable to
the edification of thy Church, being beaten with sundry afflictions, plucked
from my flock, bewailing the pressure of thy People, disfurnisht with all
necessary aids for so great a work, traveled of a sickness almost this two
years, which has brought me within two inches of the grave, and having in my
ordinary vocation a sufficient task to take up a whole man: yet even against
all appearance I have taken in hand this great labor, and against my
expectation am come to the end thereof through thy assistance. I also hope, O
my God, that thou will make fruitful thy servants labor, to the end to draw
into the right way the minds of those, who wilfully go not out of the way, and
who err but through want of instruction. Against mine inclination I have
employed a multitude of humane testimonies in this work, for I know that thy
Word alone is the rule of our faith, and receives not men for judges in thy
cause: and I know well, that a word which comes forth of thy mouth, is more
worth then all the writings of all men. But we are hurried away with the
stream, and are constrained to give place to the malady of this age, which
holding thy word suspected as a dangerous book, searches into the writings of
men, wherewith to arm themselves against divine rules. We show unto the
advocats of error, that they lose their cause, even before the Arbitrators
whom they have chosen: but O God thou art mighty and good to bring forth an age
wherein thy Word alone shall be listened unto, and whereunto for the sole
unfolding and deciding of doubts, thy Sons mouth shall only be consulted
withal. Grant it O God and Father of all mercy, and author of all consolation,
pity the people that stoop and stand still in so profound darkness: cause to
shine forth the brightness of thy Word before the eyes of all Nations: as for
me, having traverst and struck through a way full of thorns, and with many
infirmities and defects, which are in me, sustained the contradiction of an age
contrary to thy Word, I am glad, perceiving the time to draw nigh of my repose,
and my task to be so soon finished: But thou O God wilt raise up workmen, who
with better success shall labor in thy harvest, and whom thou will cloth
with thy Spirit in greater measure, to defend thy holy Truth, Lord, it is thy
cause, Lord it is for thy sake, that we are hated. Awake thy jealousy, and
thine ancient compassions upon the people whom thou have redeemed, that many
souls may be saved, and thy holy name glorified: for, Lord, though we be
worthy to be forsaken, and unworthy to be releeved, yet ever art thou worthy to
be glorified. It is indeed a small matter that we are afflicted, were it not
that amidst our afflictions thy truth is oppressed, and thy holy name
blasphemed. Attend then O God, and Father of all consolation, and hear, and
pardon for thine own sake, thou art wise in thy counsels, just in thy
judgments, mighty to execute thy will: but withal thou art full of tender
compassion, and true true in thy words. Do then O Lord, according to thy
promise, for thou have promised not to forsake us, but to be with us to the
end of the world. Thou that have redeemed us from the power of Satan by the
death of thy Son, wilt deliver us also from the hands of those which oppress
us: the time comes, and is not long to, that out of the ashes of that
burning, which seem extinguished, thou will cause to come forth a great
brightness, and wilt confound the tongues of Babell, and wilt cause to fall
outright the seat of the son of perdition. In the mean time we will possess
our souls in patience, whilst the full measure of their iniquity be heaped
up, and we expect from heaven our Lord Jesus, who will come to examine our
cause, and to render unto every one according to his works. Amen

A Prayer to be said going to the Communion.
5. LOrd, great God, have pity on me a miserable sinner, and grant me grace to
lay hold on my Savior by true faith, and that being called to this holy and
sacred banquet in the number of thy faithful and elect, and truly repenting of
my transgressions and sins, my soul may receive her spiritual nourishment,
the true bread of life, which gives salvation to the world: look upon me,
desiring ever to receive this holy and sacred spiritual meat. Amen.

A thanksgiving after the Communion received.
6. O My Savior and my God, I render unto thee humble thanks for the great
benefit, which thou have this day bestowed on me, as having thy self for a
ransom for me; for having plucked me out of the paws of the Devil, and out of
the depths of hell, whither so many enormious sins had plunged me; guide me
by thy Spirit, and give me grace that in overcomming the concupiscence of the
world and the flesh, I may finish the rest of my days in thy fear. Amen.

HOLY PRAYERS.
A Prayer in form of a Confession.
7. LOrd my God and Father Almighty, and most gracious to thy children, I cast
down my self in thy presence, acknowledging my self a poor and miserable
creature, guilty of high treason against thy divine Majesty, For, O my God, I
came into the world tainted with sin, polluted with iniquity, and through my
evil conversation I have through the whole course of my life exceedingly
augmented the same, I have made infinite the number of my transgressions, I
have been over unthankful for so many blessings, whereof it has pleased thy
bounty to afford me the fruition: too often have I opposed to thy infinite
goodness extreme ingratitude: by my hypocrisy and dissimulation I have made
my self utterly unworthy of that freedom and faithfulness wherewith thou
have entertained me: I have been deaf to thy admonitions, have stopped mine
ear at thy Word, I have estranged my heart from thy instructions: the fear of
men has hindered me from making free and public profession of thy Truth: I
have more feared the world, then I have loved heaven: I preferred the
preservation of my goods, before the setting forth of thy glory; earthly
repose, before eternal happiness. Alas, Lord, what punishments am I worthy
of? What torments have I deserved? For my conscience accuses me, my sins
call for vengeance against me: and surely if the wages of the least of our
sins be eternal death, and if it be impossible for me to number my sins,
or to conceive the enormiousnesse of them, how, O thou God of vengeance? how,
whilst I consider my self in my self, shall I expect from thee with
unspeakeable fear eternal and infinite punishments?

Yet, O gracious God, thy word teaches us, and experience witnesses to us,
that thou will not the death of a sinner, but that he turn unto thee, and
live: so also have thou thy self found out in thine eternal counsel the
means of our deliverance: and have in the fullness of time sent into the world
the eternal Son of thy love, thy darling, even he, in whom thou art well
pleased: thou have established him a Savior and Redeemer for all those that
hope in him by converting them unto thee: He was made for us wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption: his blood cleanses us from all
sin, he was despised to raise us unto glory: he has taken our nature, to
make us partaker of his: he was borne the Son of Man to make us the Children
of God, he was full of sorrow, to fill us with happiness; he was wounded for
our sins, and bruised for our iniquities: upon him was laid the penalty which
brought us peace, and by his bruises are we healed: he came into the world to
lead us to heaven: he died to give us life. he rose again for our
justification. To conclude, Lord, thou so lovedst the world, that thou gave
that spotless Lamb, to the end, that whosoever believes in him, should not
perish, but have life everlasting.

And seeing, O my God and Father of mercy, that out of thy special favor, it
has pleased thee in the midst of my error, even in mine infidelity and
ingratitude, to take pity on me, to give me thy knowledge, and the resolution
to follow thy Gospel: seeing thou have endued me with true faith in thy Son;
seeing thou have touched my heart, wherefore Lord, shall I not have access
unto thee with confidence? Why shall I not approach with assurance to the throne
of thy grace to obtain mercy, and to be releeved by thee in due time? For
though I be miserable, art not thou merciful? If I be unrighteous, will thou
not cloth me with the righteousness of my Savior? Mine iniquity amazeth me,
but thy goodness assures me: my unworthiness estrangeth me from thee, but
the worthiness of thy Son recalleth me back, inviteth me, and conducteth me
to thee; unto thee that art the God of my salvation, that have redeemed my
soul from death: that have purchased me life everlasting and most happy: O my
God, how great is my comfort, how excellent the joy, how precious and
unspeakeable the repose, which my soul enjoys in the meditation of these
things? Unto thee only then it is that I now address my self, as to confess
my sins, so also to acknowledge thy mercy as to condemn my self, so
withal to find absolution in thy Son: If to be sorrowful, and to grieve for
my sins, so also to rejoice, and to comfort my self in thy bounty, who shall
lay any thing to my charge? Is it not thou which justifiest me? Who shall
condemn me, seeing that Christ died for me? Seeing he is risen again, seeing
that for me he is at thy right hand, making request for my salvation and quest
conservation. Nothing O my God, shall separate me from the love thou bear
me: and seeing thou have loved me in thy Son, I shall in all things be more
then victorious.

But what shall I render unto thee, O Lord, unto thee, that have delivered my
soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from sliding? Unto thee O
Lord, that have loosed the bands of death which compassed me about? Unto thee
that have converted and turned into joy the sorrows of the grave, which had
overtaken me? What shall I render unto thee O Eternal Lord, for all thy
benefits conferred upon me? I will take the cup of salvation, I will call upon
thy Name, I will pay my vows before the people: I am thy servant, thou have
unloosed my bands. I will sacrifice unto thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving, I
will offer unto thee the fruit of my lips: I will confess thy Name, thou have
purchased me with a price: I will glorify thee in my body, and in my soul, I
am thine, unto thee therefore will I present my self as a lively and holy
sacrifice, that may be pleasing and acceptable unto thee.

To this end, O my God, I crave strength from thee, and the conduct of thy
Spirit: thou have already given me a will to serve thee, produce, O Lord, in me
not only the will, but withal perfect it with efficacy, and according to thy
good pleasure. Of my self I can do nothing to thy glory, I perceive not the
things which are of thy Spirit: all the imaginations of the thoughts of my
heart are altogether continually evil: the wisdom, the desires of the flesh
is enmity against thee, It will not, it cannot be subject to thy Law: and yet
by thy Spirit thou have already given me the beginning of my regeneration: Yet
Lord, though I will the thing that is good, yet find I not the means to
perform the same: I do not the good that I would, but I do the evil that I
would not do. It is to thee then that I have my recourse, thou art the Author
of every good gift, the fountain of life lies in thee: in thy clear light we
see clearly, and from thee only is all our sufficiency: illuminate me by thy
Spirit, that being directed by the same, I may render unto thee the service
which I owe in the acknowledgment of all thy benefits.

Give me grace that to serve thee I may do nothing but what may be acceptable
to thee, that I may frame my self, not unto mine own fancy, but according to
thy will, that I may do not what seems good unto my self, but what thou
approovest, that I may perform^ not mine own designs, but thy will, not mine
own intentions, but thy commandments, not my will, but thy Word: Grant I may
propound unto my self for my end, not the vanity of the world, but thy glory,
not my reputation, but the manifestation of thy holy Name, not my establishment
on earth, but the advancement of thy truth, and of thy Church. Give me to serve
thee not unwillingly, and by constraint, but freely and with a good heart: that
I may be pricked forward, not by the rigor of Menaces, and the chastisements
of thy Law, but incited by the sweetness of the promises, and benefits of thy
Gospel: that I may be, not possessed with the Spirit of servitude, but ledd by
the spirit of fear and true filial love. Remove from my understanding all
darkness of error and ignorance: make me know thy works, cause me to see in
the mirror of nature, the excellent works which thou made in six days, and
thine admirable providence in the upholding and preservation of all thy
creatures: there appears before our eyes both thine eternal power and Godhead:
and there is not the least of the world, which is not a faithful witness of
the glory which is due to thee, by reason of thy wisdom, power, and infinite
goodness: but Lord, give me eyes to look into the mirror of thy Word, in
which are represented most clearly unto us the mysteries of our redemption:
that in it I may see thy Son, that in thy Son I may behold thee. For, O
good God, as we beseech thee that thou would not look upon us but in thy
Son; for that in him only thou find us righteous and unblameable, so can
we not behold thee but in him, because in him only thou manifestest thy self
unto us; not as a rigorous Judge, as thou do to the reprobate, but a
gracious and merciful Father to thy children.

Moreover Lord, in such sort inspire me, that having been soundly, and
faithfully instructed in the knowledge of thy Truth, I may judge uprightly of
all thy counsels, of thy whole Word, of all thy actions: for seeing it has
pleased thee to lodge me in the midst of all thy creatures, and to put as it
were into my hands the quiers of all thy Actions, namely thy holy Word, ought I
not to avouch, that thou art just, wise, good, mighty and merciful: and that
glory is due unto thee, upon occasion of every one of thy works: and wherefore
have thou brought me up in the School of thy Church, but to the end to form
in me a j^dgement, and to teach me to speak against all the reasons of men, be
it that the Lord spares, be it that he afflicts, be it that he blesses, be
it that he punishes, or what ere he does, it is every way justice, equity,
and wisdom, and his sole will is the most perfect rule of all righteousness.

But O my God, grant that I may not know thee unto my condemnation: with
science give me conscience: illuminate my understanding, rectify also my will,
accompany it with a frank affection to thy service: Grant my heart may burn
within me, let it be inflamed with the desire of thy glory, let my soul be
continually ravished with admiration: above all seeing that to save us thou have
turned our darkness into light, our evils into good, our death into life: and
us that were thine enemies, thou have made not only thy friends and servants,
but of thy household, but even thy children, without any desert of ours,
notwithstanding our contrary demerits, even of thy mere free grace and mercy,
and without sparing of thine own Son.

O Lord our God, let thy Name be magnified thorough out all the earth: but as
thy works be admirable, but as thou art merciful in thy Church, thou have done
great things for us, thou have wrought powerfully by thine arm, and in such
sort above my capacity, that I cannot but cry out, o the depth of the riches
of thy wisdom, and of the knowledge of God! Grant Lord, that I may not be
stupid nor insensible in these things: but care that my soul may be affected
with gladness, my heart with joy and solid contentment. If the Devils and all
thine enemies wonder at thy works, it is but in despite of themselves, it is
but in their murmuring against thee: but have not I wherein to rejoice? have
not I cause to put far away from me all sorrow, every vain apprehension?
seeing that I assuredly know that thou art not only wise and mighty in thy
self, nor good to others: but wise, mighty, and good unto me, and unto my
salvation and redemption.

Yet, O my God, that I may keep measure in my mirth, beget in my heart true
humility, which may serve to counterpoise it, so that whilst I rejoice in
thee, I may be humbled in my self, that I may adore in all reverence thy
divine Majesty: that I may be exempt from all pride, acknowledging how
lamentable the poverty, and weakness of my condition should be, were it not,
that I wholly depend on thy grace and on thy good pleasure. For it is thou that
resistest the proud, and that give grace to the lowly: it is thou that
abhorrest every man of an haughty heart: he shall not from hand to hand abide
scotfree and unpunished: In stead whereof thy favors flow down upon them,
which come unto thee in humility and reverence.

Form Lord, forthwith in my foul a true fear of thy Name, which may withold
me, and keep me from offending thee: for thou see, thou understandest all
things, thou art he, that wilt judge all the thoughts, words, and works of men.
But why should I not fear infinitely to offend thee? to provoke thee by mine
iniquities? thou that have always bin a most gracious and merciful Father
unto me, suffer not my heart to be hardened: for then should I fall into all
calamity, but make me happy in fearing continually. Let me fear Lord, not to
out-passe the traditions of men, but the rules and instructions of thy Word.
Let me apprehend not some imaginary punishments, but the rigor of thy just
judgments. Let me have not the fear of the damned, and of Devils, which
tremble with horror; but the fear of thy children. To this end, O my God,
give me thy love, to season my fear, and to warrant me from despair. The
wicked fear thee only for the apprehension of thy punishments: but as for me,
I will fear thee Lord, because in my heart shall lodge thy love. Also good God,
wh^refore shall I not love thee when I consider what heretofore thou have done
for me, that which now thou do in me, and that which hereafter thou will do
with me? thou have elected me before all eternity, thou have justified me in
calling me unto thy self in the fullness of time: daily thou sanctifiest me by
thy Spirit, and hereafter thou will glorify me in everlasting life. I will
love thee then with all hearty affection, and wholly accursed shall I account
him, that shall practice the contrary. For my Saviors sake, I will deprive my
self of all things; I will account them all as dung: for thou have loved me,
not simply the first, or before I knew thee, but Alas! Even then when I was of
the number of thine enemies. And to sum up all, art not thou Lord, the
Sovereign Good? Without thee, and out of thee is there any thing amiable? Let
the world love it self, let men be Idolaters of their concupiscences, of their
goods, of their lives, and of their reputations on earth. As for me Lord, if I
hate not all things for thy sake, and in case thou so requirest, and that it be
expedient for thy glory, I am most assured, that I am unworthy of thee.

I will love thee, O my God; and give me grace to put my whole trust and
confidence in thee only, and so to repose and rely upon thy goodness and
holy providence, that from thee only almighty and most gracious, I may hope
for, and expect patiently whatsoever is expedient and necessary for me. Cursed
be the man that trusts in man, that makes flesh his arm, and whose heart
withdraws it self from the Lord, It is better Lord, to cleave unto thee,
then to trust in the Princes of the people. Let worldlings and the reprobate
live full of diffidence and distrust, let them be bereaved of judgment in
their adversity, let them be daunted and forlorn in the first difficulty
that befalls them: let them have recourse to unlawful means, and those that
are forbidden by thy Word: As for me, O God of my salvation, in thee only will
I place my hope, that I may not be confounded. Yea, rather thus beholding with
a settled and fixed eye what ere shall come to pass, I shall abide steadfast as
ye mountain of thy holiness.

But, O my God, horrid should my condemnation be, if I hoorded up in my heart
the precious gift of thy knowledge: how inexcusable my proceeding if I should
boast of thy fear, of thy love, without my testifying thereof in my outward
actions? I beseech thee then so to strengthen me, that I may show forth by an
holy conversation, that it is thou Lord, that sanctifiest me by thy spirit:
Touch my soul, work so in my heart, and in my conscience, that I may be freed
from hypocrisy, that my religion may not be a cloak to veil from men the
irregularitie of my passions, the violence of mine affections: but that being
well ordered in my mind, from thence, as out of a purified fountain may flow
forth the streams of all sorts of good works, agreeable to thy Word, meet for
thy glory; and profitable to my neighbors, befitting my Vocation, and unto my
salvation. To this end, O Lord, I beseech thee that thou will be pleased to
give me courage to testify what I have in my heart by my outward actions, that
I may glorify thee every where and upon all occasions, in making free and
public profession of thy Truth: That I may not be ashamed of thy Word: that I
may not pass by thy bounty in silence, but that I may show forth thy
strength, even from thee, Lord, that have called me out of darkness into thy
marvelous light; that with my mouth I may give unto thy works praise
conformable to the judgment and approbation, I have already made of them in my
soul: that I may never cease to magnify thee, and that my heart may take no
other pleasure but to see thee glorified in the world. For if even the
livelesse creatures celebrate thee, why should I through ingratitude be mute in
the acknowledgment of thy benefits? Wherefore Lord, have thou given me a tongue,
but chiefly to serve as an instrument to bless and praise thee? And that I may
speak nothing, but what may tend to thy glory? Let me not take thy Name in
vain, nor give my self to evil speaking, nor detraction: let no rotten speech
go forth of my mouth, but let all my talk tend to edification. Moreover, O
Lord, give and enable me to confess, not only in prosperity, and whilst all
things smile upon me according to the world, but even in the greatest
adversity: that even in the midst of persecution, if it please thee not to
exempt me from the same, I may answer always with meeknes and reverence every
one that shall demand of me a reason of the hope that is in me. I know Lord,
that very great is my weakness, but is thy hand shortened or less strong for
me then for the rest of thy children? Is it thou that art pleased to perfect
thy strength in our weakness and infirmity? Thou will give me then the
constancy and that perseverance which shall be necessary for me; that without
fear, and without being troubled, I may be happy in suffering for righteousness.

Give me grace also that all my actions may be void of vanity, and presumption,
accompanied and seasoned with humility and reverence, that I may humble my
self under thy mighty hand, that the world may see, I wholly depend on thy
goodness and mercy; that I hold my life, being, and all things of thee only;
that thou only have the power to do with me thy poor and miserable creature,
what shall seem good unto thee.

And seeing thou have given me to fear thee, and to love thee; give me also
the strength to do what thou have commanded me, to avoid what thou have
forbidden me, enable me to order my life according to thy commandments, thou
have given us in thy Law: As also, Lord, in that which displeases thee, it may
be seen, that I have thy fear, and that I have thy love, whilst I do that
which thou requirest of me. Thy fear shall estrange me from that familiarity
which has no place but amongst companions, and shall contain me within that
respect which I ow unto thee, and thy love shall exempt me from that fear,
which shall ever ceaze upon thine enemies.

Lastly, O my God, above all the things which in all humility I desire of thee,
I beseech thee that often thou would often grant the leisure and desire to
call upon thee, as thou now have done. Thou do familiarly speak to me by thy
Word, grant that I may confidently speak to thee by my prayers: that often I
may withdraw my self apart, that I may shut my self up in my closet, to impart
unto thee my griefs, to confess unto thee my sins, to bewail before thee my
poverty, and my misery, and to implore from thee thine assistance and thy
mercy; For Lord, prayer will be unto me an unspeakable comfort, as an evident
testimony, that thou have not left me to my self, that I am in the number of
thy children, that thou will bless me, and power forth upon me thy mercy; and
after I have called upon thee, I shall carry my self in my vocation with much
more zeal: standing upright with thee I will not fear the world: having
discharged my conscience in thy presence, I will march with my head born aloft:
having carefully recommended my self unto thy guidance, I shall have rest in my
soul, and shall be most assured, that notwithstanding the rage and subtilty of
all mine enemies, which are also thine, thou will give me to continue
faithfully my life in thy fear, and end it in thy holy favor, even then when
out of this vale of misery thou will receive me into thy glory unto everlasting
and most happy rest.

Another Prayer.
8. O Lord, our gracious God, and almighty Father, as thou have always thy
hand open to do us good thy will is, that our mouths likewise should be so
heartily to render unto thee thanksgiving: Now then we praise and bless thee
for that thou have so graciously preserved us unto this present hour, by
reason of our sins our life is exposed to an infinitnes of inconveniences,
and in the mean time we still subsist, and are filled with thy good things. Our
being and our welbeing, Lord, we should hold it of thee, we ow it to thy free
grace and mere mercy: to thee alone for the same be all glory for evermore.
But, O our most gracious God, it is most necessary for us, that thou continue
thy gracious favors unto us: otherwise what thou have hitherto done for us,
would turn to our confusion. Leave us not then, for then we shall perish, thou
have created and redeemed us, not to destroy us, but that we might have
eternal life. Shed forth then upon us thy more especial favors, and above
all the grace of thy holy Spirit. Thou that have washed us from our sins in the
precious blood of thy Son: Sanctify also our souls by thy Word, and
according to thy promise: For Lord, shall we enjoy Jesus Christ and his
benefits without our serving of thee, without magnifying of thee? And what
honor shall we render unto thee, or what acknowledgment, unless thou thy self
confer upon us both the will and hability of performance? The will, and desire
to honor thee: We already have of thy free grace, give us also the power of
performance. Give it us Lord with efficacy, and according to thy good pleasure:
grant it unto us, and at the most humble and fervent request which we make
unto thee for the same. Give us not over neither to the malice of our enemies,
nor to our own perverseness, let neither of them hinder us in thy service, nor
let us not give them any subject of dishonoring thee let our example serve for
our conversion. That they seeing the holiness of our lives may lose their wills
to hurt us, and may gain an affection to know thee aright: to acknowledge thee,
O God, according to thy Truth, according to their duty. Let us not, O Lord,
abuse our health, and present prosperity. Grant we may employ them to the
glorifying of thee, and to the advancement of thy work with faithfulness, and
every one according to his vocation whereunto thou have called us, above all
that in the midst of our greatest repose we may prepare our selves for
afflictions, to the hour of death, and for the fruition of our eternal rest.
When thou shall visit us with thy rods, that it may be in thy mercy, and for
our amendment, when thou shall call us, that it may be in thy grace, and for
our salvation, whether in prosperity or in adversity, whether sound, or sick,
whether living or dying, we may evermore confess thy truth, and do nothing
which may be unworthy of our profession, nothing which not seriously testifies
our repentance for our sins, our desire of thy grace, our seeking of thy
glory, the peace of our souls, the comfort of our consciences, and the
assurance of our salvation in thy welbeloved Son JESUS CHRIST.

In his Name we further pray thee to confer the same good things on all our
kinsfolks and friends: call unto thee those that know thee not, and strengthen
those that already have thy fear. Establish, maintain every where, and make
effectual the Ministry of thy Word for the conversion and consolation of al
thine Elect, and for the enlarging of thy glory, and of the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ. Keep our King, and all His: grant Him a long Reign in thy fear and
for the good of of thy Church. Let his subjects O Lord, and above all, we, who
are instructed by thy Gospel, render unto him, and unto all our Superiors all
obedience, unto which thy Word obliges us. Make thine own sensible of the
bitterness of thine afflictions, and rejoice them also in the sweetness of thy
comforts: so moderate and terminate thy corrections, that they may be wholesome
unto them: Above all we beseech thee for them which have need of thy succors
in this Church, deny them not thine assistance, hear their prayers and ours,
comfort them and deliver them, that they and we may praise thee: solacing our
selves in thy goodness. And because O God, it is only our sins which are able
to hinder us from hoping to receive from thee that which we ask of thee, as
thou pardonest us our sins in thy Son, grant us grace voluntarily to renounce
all iniquity, so shall not the course of thy grace be interrupted: so shall we
have experience both in our prayers of the Truth of thy promises, and in our
whole life: Yea even unto the last gasp thereof, the continuance of thy fatherly
mercy, in the same thy welbeloved Son, in whose Name, etc.

A Prayer for him, who after he has been worthily prepared to receive the
holy Communion, approaches to the Lords Table.
9. O My God, O my Father, I have had experience of thy mercy in the whole
course of my life, especially since thou gave me the knowledge of thy Truth,
and of my salvation, and at this present time Lord, thou openest before me the
treasure of all thy riches, thou presentest and offer'st unto me whole Jesus
Christ, with all his benefits. Seeing then O God of my salvation, seeing thou will, that I should obey thy Word, that I should draw near unto thy Table:
Alas suffer not, nor permit that it shall be to my condemnation: But O good God,
far be it from me, that I should admit any such fear: For thou have touched my
heart with serious repentance. I am right sensible, that thou strengthenest my
faith, and reachest forth unto me thy hand thy self to receive me this day,
thou that art the Author of my salvation. O happy day wherein I protest before
thee to detest my sins, to renounce mine iniquity, to be admitted unto the
participation of the Sacrament of the New Testament. Good God, give me now the
grace to show forth the death of my Savior: grant that in his sufferings I may
discern how great was thy wrath, how exact thy justice against our sins,
seeing that to blot them out, thou have not spared thine own Son: Grant
also I may acknowledge thankfully thy infinite mercy toward us, in that for us
thine enemies, thou have given unto death the just, thine only Son. But,
Lord, give me to admire the never to be paralel'd love, which thy Son bears
me, in that he has undergone both my sins, and thy wrath, to afford unto me
the food of eternal life. O how wonderful art thou in thy bounties? Seeing
that this day thou will by visible and sacred signs augment my joy, and
present to the view of mine eyes thy celestial and invisible graces. At this
instant thou will give me an assured pledge of my conjunction with Jesus
Christ. And by him with thee, O my Father, as also with thy holy Spirit: Now
shall I be assured, that Christ is in me, and I in him. O excellent Union, since
it brings to pass, that I have peace with thee, that Jesus Christ takes
upon him all my evil, and bestows on me all his benefits, that he quickneth
me by his Holy Spirit, that I am united unto all the faithful, that nothing
shall separate me from thy love, that none shall pluck me neither out of the
hands of my Savior, nor out of the bosom of his Church. I fear neither my
sins; for behold here the blood of my Savior, which blotteth them out: nor thy
wrath, for lo here the seal of my reconciliation with thee: nor the Devil,
for behold here Christ who has overcome: Nor death, for this day I receive the
Sacrament of life everlasting, this day is promise made unto me, and the scale
of it is given me, that the heavens are opened unto me, that my habitation
shall be in the house of God for ever.

Lord increase my faith, Lord raise up my heart unto thee, grant that unto thy
glory, grant that unto salvation, I may comprehend the excellency and the
benefit of these things, and that thence I may take up a firm resolution to
renounce the world, to walk therein as a pilgrim, as keeping on my way toward
my Savior, to draw unto him my neighbors, to edify them by mine example, to
adhere to thy Truth, to continue their profession thereof against the rage, and
against the subtilties of all the enemies of thy Truth to my singular comfort,
even unto the last gasp of my life. Amen.

A Thanksgiving to be rendered unto God, after we have been partakers of the
holy Communion.
10. LOrd my God, how is my soul ravished in contemplation of the good things,
which thou come to give me thy poor servant. Alas, Lord, I am far less
then the least of thy mercies, and then all the truth thou usest toward me, it
is thou that assurest me that thy Son, that thine only Son died for me; It
is thou that have given me the seals of thine inviolable Covenant. But what
say I the seals? O God, thou know what ardor I feel at this present within
me, an assured testimony, that Jesus Christ is come to dwell in my heart, by
the precious faith thou have given me: Yea, Lord, I feel that he dwells in
me, I feel he engraveth in my heart the efficacy of his death and passion, he
died once upon the Cross for my sins: But he lives for ever in my heart for
my salvation. I know it, I believe it, with as much certainty as with truth, I
have been partaker of the outward signs of thy grace, O let my soul enjoy so
great repose, against her enemies, O let it have an unspeakeable contentment in
thy mercy: As Jesus Christ died for me, let Jesus Christ live in me. O God it
is so: for thou will have it so, for I am sensible of it, and my faith is
greatly strengthened. Surely, Lord, thou will be my God for ever, for thou art
with me, thou give me the bread of life, thou cloathest me with the innocence
and righteousness of thy Son. O good God, finish in me thine own work, thou have
rescued me out of the dangers of eternal death, thou have assured me of most
happy rest, grant me, Lord, yet this period unto my prayer, that I may not
repay thee with ingratitude, that I may not die in sin, but may live to
righteousness, that I may deny my self, may edify my neighbors, may
consecrate my self to thy glory, that in the sobriety, righteousness, and
religion of my life, I may affect nothing so heartily, have nothing so often
before mine eyes, as my leaving of this world: And whilst thou preservest me
therein, O God, as long as thou keep me in the same, I may expect with all
thine Elect, the most blessed hope and appearance of the glory of the great
God, which is our Savior Jesus Christ, to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost be
honor and glory from this time and for evermore. Amen.

A Confession.
11. O Lord God, Eternal and Almighty Father, we confess and acknowledge
unfainedly before thy sacred Majesty, we are poor miserable sinners,
conceived and born in iniquity and corruption, inclined unto evil doing,
unprofitable unto every good work; and that by our sins we transgress
continually and without ceasing all thy holy Commandments: In doing whereof we
purchase to our selves by thy just judgment destruction and utter ruin. Yet
Lord, we are displeased with our selves for having displeased and offended
thee, we conde^n ourselves and our sins, with true repentance, humbly praying
thy grace may relieve our misery and calamity. Have mercy then upon us, O God,
and most gracious Father and full of mercy, for Jesus Christ's sake, thy Son,
our Lord. And blotting out our sins and blemishes, enlarge in us and increase
daily the graces of thy Holy Spirit; that we acknowledging heartily all our
unrighteousnes, may be touched with true displeasure which may beget in us
sound repentance, which mortifying us unto all sin, may bring forth the
fruits of righteousness and innocence, which may be acceptable and well
pleasing unto thee, thorough the same Jesus Christ, thy welbeloved Son, our
Savior. Amen.

A Morning Prayer.
12. O Lord God, Eternal Father, seeing it has pleased thee to bring us
safely unto this present day, be pleased also to give us grace we may pass the
same without offending thee, and what ere we shall do, say, or think, may be to
the glory and praise of thy Name; and edification of our neighbors. And look
not Lord, upon our infirmities, upon our sins, and on our unthankfulness:
But look upon thine accustomed goodness; and according to the same, turn not
away thy face from us, but ever hold us up by thy hand, that we fall not from
thee at all: and let not those threatenings which thou have pronounced against
them, that have known thee, and have not glorified thee as they ought, fall
upon us. But Lord, hold us ever in thy fear, and forsake us not; teach us to
do thy will, and give us the will and the power to do it, for without thee we
can do nothing.

Above all, Lord make us always with our whole hearts embrace the memory and
the merit of the death of thy Son: And especially when the hour of our own
death shall come, grant that in the same we may have such faith, recourse, and
assurance, that we may be in the rank of those which die in the Lord. And even
then also grant us that we may leave this world without all discontent
thereat, and that all our desire may be to be with thee. Also Lord, thou have
taught us to pray that thy Kingdom may come, be pleased to advance forward the
same; and in so doing touch our Kings heart, and the hearts of his Council,
and illuminate them with thy brightness, that thou may be King, and rule
every where: And that thine enemies may be made thy footstool: look down
Lord in mercy upon all the poor afflicted ones, persecuted and oppressed,
especially for thy Word; Deliver them, O good God, as thou have begun, from
their enemies and thine, that thy children may be comforted and confirmed in
their faith and hope, and that the wicked may learn to cease from their
blaspheming of thee: And that they may know that thou art the King of Kings,
and the Lord of Lords Lord be merciful unto us poor and miserable sinners:
Give gladness unto our souls, give succors unto thy Church, for it is time;
O God, which art the God of Peace and of comfort, give us that true peace,
which is the repose of our consciences. In the mean time reform our disorders
and confusions, as it shall be expedient for thy glory and our salvation, so that
avoiding the surprises and practices which may be made against us by our
enemies, we may serve thee in all security and tranquillity according to thy
holy will. All the which things we ask, and most humbly crave of thee in the
Name, and for thy beloved Son our Lord Jesus Christ his sake, praying unto
thee as it has pleased him to teach and show us how to call upon thee, saying:

Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

An Evening Prayer.
13. O Lord God, eternal and Almighty Father, who have made and formed us with
thine own hands, that know of what matter we are fashioned and made, and
reservest to self, as Lord and Master, the prerogative of sounding and
searching of the hearts of thy creatures, even unto their most retired
thoughts. We cannot deny before thee this truth, namely; that we are poor
sinners, conceived and born in iniquity and corruption, inclined to do evil,
unprofitable unto every good work, and that through our vicious disposition we
transgress continually and without ceasing thy holy and heavenly
Commandments, in doing whereof we purchase to our selves thy just judgment, our
utter ruin and destruction. Yet Lord, we are grieved in our selves for the
same.

O Lord God, who have created the day for our travel and the night for our
rest, pardon us if we have not employed the day to thy service in performing
thy holy will and ordinance, and grant we may pass the night without offending
thee, even that we may remain unpolluted both in body and soul, to the end
that in the morning for our first work we may praise thee, and give thanks unto
thee, and dispose our selves unto thy service. And because Lord, that in the
night season our afflictions press ordinarily more then in the day, and we
have less succors from men; reinforce, Lord, thy Guard over us, and behold
with pity and compassion all thy poor, afflicted, persecuted and oppressed
ones, especially for thy Word; deliver them, O good God, as thou have begun,
from their enemies, and thine, that thy children may be comforted and confirmed
in their faith and hope, and the wicked may learn to blaspheme thee no more:
but that they may know; that thou art the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.
Lord be merciful unto us poor and miserable sinners, give joy to our souls,
give relief to thy Church, for it is high time. O God, which art the God of
peace and consolation, give us that true peace, which is the repose of our
consciences: In the mean while remedy our disorders and confusions, as shall
be expedient for thy glory, and our salvation: So that avoiding the surprises
and deceitful practices, which may be made against us by our enemies, we may
serve thee in all security and tranquillity according to thy holy will. All the
which things we ask and crave of thee most humbly, in the Name, and for the
sake of thy welbeloved Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, according as it has
pleased him to inform and teach us to pray unto thee, saying:

Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

The blessing of our gracious God and Father, the peace and grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ remain evermore with us, in the Communion of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

Another Morning Prayer.
13. O Lord God, and most gracious Father, I thy poor creature, that naturally
am wrapped in darkness, durst not lift up mine eyes toward thee, that
inhabitest inaccessible light, were it not that thy dear Son, who is the
brightness of thy glory, has made way for me to the Throne of thy Grace by the
effusion of his precious blood. And now my God, I acknowledge that it is a
great benefit, that I that am unworthy to live upon the face of the earth, and
have deserved by my sins to be cast for ever into utter darkness, have this
happiness to see the light of the day, and of the Sun, and to behold the works
of thy hands with the fruition of the good things of the earth, which thou have
given me. But because, O gracious God, thy Sun shines as well on the bad, as on
the good, and that this light is but to guide my body, be pleased O God, that
the brightness of thy face may shine upon me, in blessing me, and enlighten my
understanding by regenerating and sanctifying me, that I may walk in the way of
thy Commandments, that in my Calling I may in such sort carry my self, as that
all my words, deeds, and thoughts may be correspondent to thy honor and glory,
and to the edification of my neighbors. Lord, thou have drawn me out of the
darkness of idolatry and ignorance, thou have taken away the veil of
superstition from before mine eyes, thou have also even in my time caused to
shine forth, and as it were lighted again that lamp of the preaching of thy
Gospel. But suffer me not, that having eyes, not to see with them: But Lord,
inlighten all the parts of my soul, and grant that what ere is in me, may be
employed to give thee all honor and obedience; that in my Calling thy fear
may before mine eyes: And because thou esteemest not thy self to be loved of
us, unless we love our neighbors, imprint in me a faith working by love, in
such sort, that with confidence I may have a good conscience, doing nothing to
any other, but what I would should be done to my self: Let me have a merciful
and a relenting heart, let not my bowels be straitened toward the needy and
poor: Lastly that seeing the shape of this world to pass away, I may use it
as a passenger, remembering ever that my freedom is in heaven. Give me peace in
my family, give a blessing upon my labor, contentment to my mind, repose and
comfort to the poor afflicted, and full deliverance to thy Church by thy Son
Jesus. Amen.

Another Prayer for the Evening.
15. O Lord God, thy People Israel offered unto thee Evening and Morning
Sacrifices in token of acknowledgment unto thee, that keep us both morning
and evening; but what more acceptable sacrifice can we offer unto thee then our
contrite hearts and tongues to praise and bless thee? Wherefore Lord, in all
humility and reverence I present my self before thy face: beseeching thee, thou will be pleased not to enter into account, nor into judgment with me thy poor
creature, for whether thou look upon the first, or on the second Table of
thy Commandments, thou will find that I have offended thee many ways. Yet as
the child has always recourse to his father, I have my refuge and my retrait
unto thee O Lord, which art slow unto anger, and of great compassion,
beseeching thee by thy goodness to cover my sins, as all things are covered
through the darkness spread over the earth. Alas, my God, I know Satan goes
round about us as a roaring Lion, I know he is the governor of the darkness,
and Prince of this world: But withal if thou be for me, who shall be against me?
It is thou that have thousands of Angels that are encamped round about us: It
is thou that have created the Sun begetting heat, and the Moon affording
coolenes: It is thou that governest the whole frame of nature, and never
slumberest: Be pleased then to grant me the favor to take my rest this night
in peace, not to suffer a sleep unto the things of the earth, but more and
more to acknowledge thankfully thy goodness, until thou call me unto that so
greatly to be desired rest which thou have prepared for us; O how sweet and
amiable will that dwelling be to us, when in our graves we shall hear the
voice of thy Son to raise us up unto glorious immortality. But in the mean
time whilst we expect that last coming, we commend unto thee, O heavenly
Father, the peace and preservation of thy Church, our Superiors, and
Magistrates, and all them that have need of thy succors: beseeching thee that
in this decrepit age of the world, wherein all the kingdoms of the earth do
stagger, thou will be the prop and shore of thy poor people, and in stead of
the so many dolorous days and years which we have seen, we may see some rest
in the midst of thy Church. Raise up, Lord, some nursing father, and some
retrait for thy children, that an over-violent oppression trample them not
under foot, and this for thy beloved Son our Lord Jesus Christ his sake, in
whom I trust, and on whom I repose my self. Amen.

A Prayer in the time of the Plague.
16. LOrd, whose infinite power seems small, being compared to thy mercy,
turn thine eye of pity upon us, and amidst the dangers of this pestilent
infection, which threatens us on every side, retain and uphold our
languishing lives, which without thy grace would vanish to nothing, and be
turned to corruption in a moment. With the same mercy, wherewith thou have
cleansed our souls, consecrating them to thy service by the badge of sacred
Baptism, repurge and cleanse our bodies to serve as clean vessels unto our
souls, and to cooperate in the mystery of thy praise. Thou drewest light out
of the bottomless deep by thy power, thou drawest away the darkness which
obscured the earth: Purge away now again by ye same light the noisomnes and
corruption of the air, and in such wise power forth thy grace, that we may
breath to our safety and preservation. Lord, thou have justly suffered for the
punishment of our sins this poison and contagious venom to reign with power
over our bodies. But seeing thy dear and only beloved Son has blotted out
with his blood the sin which had provoked thee, he should withal have drowned
the scourges appointed for the punishment. We fall again every day into the
gulf, whereout thou have drawn us, we renounce by our evil life the grace
thou have given us. It is true, Lord, that if thou will judge us in thy
justice, we have but to be silent and to suffer: but we implore thy mercy,
greater yet then all our sins: thy mercy Lord, which cannot be invoked in
vain. It suffices that we lift up our eyes unto thee, it suffices that we
sigh, and turn our heart unto thee, so soon as we feel thee present, and
near unto us. But without thee, Lord, we cannot move toward thee. Take us
then my God, and inspire into us this wholesome motion: In the sequel whereof
we shall undoubtedly have what ere we crave of thee, in the name of thy
precious Son our Savior Jesus Christ. Since then that in his name we ask of
thee the health of our bodies, preserve them, my God, from the danger wherein
they are, make the air we breath, the water we drink, the victuals we use, the
garments wherewith we cloth our selves, may be instruments of health to our
life, remove far from us in every thing what is impure and pestelent, fortify
the spirits that animate our bodies, to the end to be able to resist all the
infection, they may encounter, to overcome, and surmount the same. Give us
firm and undaunted courage, to wit, relying and resting on thy grace, thorough
the which we may be enabled to pass without apprehension, the dangers amidst
the which it pleases thee that we live, and make us continually sensible of
thy comfort, by which we may be guided with a quiet mind thorough the midst of
these worldly miseries, maintaining evermore that lively hope in our hearts,
that giving thee the glory which is due to thy holy Name, we may arrive in the
end to that which thou have promised to thine Elect. Amen.

A Prayer upon the Creation.
17. LOrd God, who have created all for thy glory, especially man to be the
principal instrument thereof, and have moreover received him unto the greatest
honor, assuring him, that he shall obtain what ere he shall ask of thee in
true faith and charity, raise up my thoughts, purify my heart, sanctify my
tongue, to the end I may sing worthily thy praises, render unto thy bounty the
thanksgivings which are due thereunto, and ask that which is necessary for my
salvation, and convenient and meet for the advancement of thy glory. This Lord,
I cannot do, but thorough thy favorable assistance. Not only all good comes
forth from thee, but even the hability to ask it. As then with fiery tongues
thou openedst the lips of thine Apostles, purge now this of a poor humble
sinner, and instruct my heart to ask of thee what may be pleasing unto thee.
Give me a new spirit, which may know how to conceive that good which is to be
prayed for from thee, which therein may take content, which may therein confirm
and entertain it self, not floting and wavering, but firm and surely
anchored in the faith of thy promises and assurance of thy goodness, as in that
safe and calm haven, whither ought to be steared the whole equipage of all our
desires: looking alwayss for our most assured star the merit of thy most dear
Son our Lord Jesus Christ, by the intercession of whom we cannot fall from
any of our hopes: unto him I say be glory and honor for ever and ever. Amen.

A Morning Prayer.
18. O Light of lights, which have dispersed the darkness to bring light into
the world, and to give man for a mirror the beauty of thy works, and the
elegant variety of forms wherewith thou have distinguished them, and as thou
now bring upon the earth the brightness of the day and of the Sun, bring also
Lord, upon my soul the brightness of thy holy Spirit, that according to the
mesure, that my arms shall be employed for the maintenance of my body, the
thoughts of my soul may be engaged in the invocating of thy holy grace, through
the conduct whereof we may walk so on thorough the ways of this sensual and
corruptible world, that I may not go astray from the celestial and
incorruptible. That if my senses deceived by the pleasing baits, and delicious
objects which offer themselves in the world, would seduce my reason: hold them
back Lord, by the hope of pleasures infinitely greater, which are proposed to
them which live according to thy holy will, and by the fear of the pains
(...) number, (...) ^^out measure, which (...) them that forsake the way of thy
commandments, to follow that of their flesh. And seeing that to lead me to thy
mercy, thou have been pleased that the Author of light, that eternal wisdom
came down upon earth, and there abode for a time, that he might converse
amongst us to light the lamp of our souls, by the fire of thy holy Word:
Infuse, Lord, by the same bounty, the clear light which thou have put therein
by the operation of thy holy Spirit, that in thy wedding day, we finding our
selves adorned with the wedding garment of thy grace, we may be led into the
participation of thy celestial glory.

A Prayer for the Evening.
19. LOrd, in as much as thine unsearchable wisdom has been pleased to divide
our whole life into labor and rest; and every one of our days into light and
darkness, and yet appointest them both to serve thy glory: Now at this hour,
that it has pleased thee to shut in this day. and to call me from my labor to
sleep, I lift up my hands unto thee, and offer unto thee for an Evening
Sacrifice my heart and my tongue, and revolving and ruminating in my thoughts
that favor wherewith thou have from morning unto this evening sustained my
life, conducted my actions, guided my steps, directed my hands, governed my
thoughts, turned away the temptations of the world; I form in my voice, in the
best manner I am able, a thanksgiving and song of praise to thy infinite
goodness. And therefore, albeit I know well that in my works there is a great
deal more want then good, yea not to file upon the account, but that which
proceeds from my self, the whole must needs be damnable. I conjure thy sacred
mercy, that it will make them acceptable by pouring forth on them that infinite
grace which thy dear Son has purchased for the world, which alone gives
perfection and sanctification unto all the actions of men. Now that I go to
yield my eyes unto sleep, grant my body may take rest in bed, my soul
withal may repose in the bosom of thy Son Jesus Christ. And thy Holy Spirit
watching over me, may remove far away from me all unclean concupiscences,
foolish imaginations, and uncouth dreams, and deliver me from all fear,
saving from that of thy sacred and severe judgment; and so moderate the course
of my sleep, that repairing my strength of body, it may not lull it asleep in
idleness, but let me awake at a fit hour, and exercise my self in holy prayer
thus all the days of my life, sliding on one after another, until it shall
please thee to change this temporal into an eternal rest, through the
intercession of him, that has purchased as with the price of his blood, our
SAVIOVR JESUS CHRIST. Amen.

A Prayer for our final obtaining of victory by Jesus Christ.
20. O Almighty God, since we are filled with so many concupiscences, which must
needs pollute the pure and sacred gifts of thy Holy Spirit, grant we may take
in good part the chastisements which thou sendest us to tame and bring under
the said concupiscences: and that as we acknowledge thee to be our shepherd, we
may yield up our selves to be governed by thy shepherds staff, profiting
daily under thy chastisements, and tasting in thy severitie of thy bounty, that
we may not be discouraged but walking on forward through mis-reports and
disgraces; yea, even through the midst of death for thy Names sake, that we may
rejoice in thee, esteeming all things loss, for the price of the knowledge of
thy Son, who gives the same Spirit that has sanctified us, which also
strengthens us: That being partakers of that unction of the Holy Ghost, we
may withal be partakers of the victory of thy Son JESUS CHRIST.

A Prayer for the preservation of the Church.
21. Eternal Lord God, strong, pitiful, merciful, slow to anger, abundantly
plentiful in thy free mercy and truth, keeping Covenant to a thousand
generations, taking away iniquity, transgression, and sin: We beseech thee,
that we may find favor before thine eyes, pardon our iniquities and our sins,
and possess us, fill us with thy Spirit in wisdom, in understanding, in
knowledge, teach us that which we are to do, so that we may apply our hearts to
thy Word, and may not hold on our course of sinning, nor follow the multitude
to do evil: But that we may seriously obey thy voice, keep thy covenant, may
be ranked amongst all people thy most precious jewel, although all the earth
is thine, and we are unto thee a kingdom of Priests, and an holy Nation, dwell
thou in the midst of us, and be our God. Preserve our houses, and when thou
shall pass through the country ^o strike, and to exercise judgment, let there
be no wound unto destruction among us, bedeaw with the blood of the Lamb our
threshold and both our doore-posts: look upon that blood, and pass by the
door, and suffer not the destroyer to enter into our houses to strike, that we
may know thou put a difference between the Egyptians and the Israelites.
Grant thy children may grow and increase into exceeding great abundance, may
be multiplied and reinforced mightily, so that even the earth may be
replenished with them, and the more it shall afflict them, the more they may
multiply in all abundance. Be moved with compassion toward them which sigh
and cry, let their cry come up unto thee, look down upon their affliction.

Another Prayer for the Church.
22. LOrd, thou take no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but had rather
that he should turn from his way and live. Power not forth thy fury upon us,
heap not thy wrath upon us, judge us not after our ways; but let thine eye
spare us, and have compassion upon us, for we are thy sheep, the sheep of thy
pasture, and thou art our God. Hide not then thy face from us, but power forth
thy Spirit upon us. Grant we may have all but one heart, and put into us a new
spirit: Take from us our heart of stone, give us a heart of flesh, that we may
walk in thy statutes, may keep thy ordinances, may do them, and be thy people,
and thou our God. So shall thou make known the Name of thy holiness in the midst
of us, shall be sanctified in us, in the presence of the Nations, and we will
consider in our hearts, will regard and look on with our eyes, will hearken
unto with our ears what ere thou speak unto us, concerning all thy
ordinances, and thy Laws. Save thy flock, that it may not become a prey;
raise up Pastors thy servants, that may feed it with wholesome food. And let
them whom thou have set for watchmen in thine house hearken to the words of thy
mouth, and give warning from thee. Give them a mouth opened amongst us, that
the sheep which are dispersed through ye want of a shepherd, and which are
exposed to be devoured, and they which err, and are strayed out of the way over
the whole surface of the earth, may be drawn home, and gathered in, and that
thou may feed them, and give them rest, seek out that which is lost, bring
back that which is driven away, bind up that which is broken, strengthen that
which is sick, and those that are afarr off amongst the Nations, and those that
are scattered upon the earth, be thou unto them a safe Sanctuary in the
countries wherein they are. Sanctify thy great Name, which has been profaned
among the Nations, let them know that thou art the Lord, that thou may be
sanctified among them, and that the earth may shine abroad with thy glory.

A Prayer to be affected with Spiritual things, and to renounce the world.
23. LOrd we are rebellious against thy Truth, and have not been obedient to
thy righteousness, nor have put in practice thy Law; whence our condemnation is
just. Yet Lord, says was imputed to Abraham for righteousness: Grant it may be
so also imputed to us, and that we may obtain mercy: Seeing Christ died for
us, and he is the end of the Law, righteousness unto all believers, and that
whosoever believes in him, shall not be confounded. And for that they that are
according to the flesh, are affectioned to the things of the flesh, but they
that are according to the spirit, unto the things of the spirit: And in as much
as the affection of the flesh is death, but the affection of the spirit is life
and peace. Let thy Spirit dwell in us, and let us put on the Lord Jesus Christ,
and let us not be careful for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof: Knowing
that Christ being risen again from the dead, dies no more, death has no more
dominion over him: For in that he died, he died once for sin; but in that he
lives, he lives unto thee. Also we sum up thus our account, that we are
dead unto sin, but live unto thee in Jesus Christ our Lord: and that we shall
appear all before his Judgment Seat: and that every one of us shall render an
account for himself.

Let then thy fear be before our eyes, having in horror all evil, and
cleaving unto that which is good, that we lay no stumbling block or occasion of
falling before our brother, but may walk in charity, loving our neighbor as our
selves, being fervent in spirit, serving thee, joyful in hope, patient in
tribulations, persevering in prayer. That we may offer up our bodies as living
sacrifices, holy, and pleasing unto thee, which is our reasonable service, and
let us not fashion our selves unto this present world: But let us be
transformed by the renewing of our understanding, that we may search out what
thy good, pleasant, and perfect will is. And be it that we live, we may live
unto thee; be it wv die, we may die unto thee; that whether we live, or whether
we die, we may be thine: For therefore died Christ, and rose again, and
returned unto life, that he might have dominion both over the dead and over the
living. We commend unto thee all thy Churches, let the weak in faith be
strengthened, grant there may be the obedience of faith through out all nations.
Let every knee bow before thee, and let every tongue give thee praise. Let all
nations praise thee Lord, and let all people celebrate thee. Relieve the poor
and afflicted, and make them partakers of spiritual good things. Furnish them
with the things of this life, assist them in every thing they stand in need of
through Jesus Christ.

Grace be with us, and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus
Christ.

A Thankesgiving and a Prayer on the same subject.
24. O Our God and Father which raisedst from the dead Jesus Christ, who gave
himself for our sins, to the end, that according to thy will he might
withdraw us out of this evil world. To thee be glory for ever and ever. Amen.
It Is thou Lord, that have called us by thy grace, and have revealed unto us thy
Son, who has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, when he was made a curse
for us, that we might receive the promise of the Spirit by faith, knowing that
man is not justified by the works of the Law, but only by faith in Jesus
Christ, in whom we have believed that we might be justified by faith. Give us
to obey thy Truth, furnish us with thy Spirit, which may produce thy virtues in
us. And because we are thy children, send the Spirit of thy Son into our
hearts, crying Abba Father; so that being thy children, we may be thine heirs
through Christ, and that we may walk according to ye spirit, and not fulfill the
lusts of the flesh: because what a man sows, that shall he reap also. For he
that sows to the flesh, shall reap of the flesh corruption: But he that
sows to the Spirit, he shall reap of the Spirit life eternal. That we may
live by the Spirit, and may walk also in the Spirit, the fruit whereof is love,
joy, peace, patience, gentleness, goodness, faithfulness, meeknes; temperance. And
as they which are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the Iusts thereof,
that we may be crucified with Christ, and may live not now we, but that Christ
may live in us; and that what we now live in the flesh, we may live in the
faith of thy Son, who has loved us, and gave himself for us: that it might
not happen unto us to glory in any thing save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom the world may be crucified unto us, and we unto the world: And
that in him we may be new creatures, not growing careless of well doing,
seeing we shall reap in due season, if we grow not slack. Wherefore whilst we
have time, let us do good unto al men, but especially unto the household of
faith. And all they that shall walk according to this rule, peace be upon them,
and mercy, and upon thy Israel O God. Work with efficacy by those unto whom
the preaching of the Gospel is committed. That they which know thee not, and
who serve those that by nature are no gods, may know thee, and may be known of
thee, and may not to be turned back to the weak and beggarly rudiments which
they would serve. That all they that are baptized, may put on Christ, and that
we may be all united in Jesus Christ our Savior.

Let thy grace be with our spirit. Amen.

A Prayer to be filled with Charity.
25. LOrd, I beseech thee I may abound in faith and charity, that I may yield
up my self wholly first unto thee, and then according to thy will unto my
brethren: knowing the gracious favor of our Lord Jesus Christ, namely that he
became poor for me, although he was rich, that by his poverty I might be made
rich. That my abundance might supply their want, that I might have both a
forwardnes of will thereunto, and an ability of bringing the same into action
also, according to my means. That it may relish of bounty, not of close-hand
niggardliness: Knowing that he that sows sparingly, shall also gather
sparingly: and he that sows liberally, shall gather also liberally. That it
may not be unwillingly or by constraint, seeing thou love a cheerful giver:
and art able to make to abound all grace in me, to the end that having always
all sufficiency in all things, I may be plentiful in every good work (as it
is writ) he has scattered abroad, he has given to the poor: his righteousness
abides for ever. Now thou Lord, that give seed to the sower, be pleased also
to give unto me bread to eat, and multiply my wealth, augment the revenue of
my righteousness, and that I may be enriched in all franknes of liberality.

The Kings Prayer. Samuel II.
26. LOrd, thou have anointed me to be King, thou have accepted me to be the
Leader of thy People, be with me, be thou with me, be thou my Father, and I
shall be thy Son. Let not thy free mercy depart from me. Make an everlasting
Covenant with me. Keep me whither soever I shall go. Protect me from the hand
of all them that shall rise up against me. Establish the throne of my kingdom,
bless thou thy servants house, that it may be blessed for ever. Grant my
dominion over men may be just, that I may govern in thy fear: O God, and that
I may reign doing judgment and justice to all my people, even as thou have
commanded me, and that I may be acceptable unto thee.

Another Prayer of the Kings. Chron. I.
27. O God, give me an upright and sound heart, that I may keep thy
commandments, and thy testimonies, and thy statutes, that I may know and serve
thee with an upright heart, and with a willing mind. For thou Lord searchest
the hearts, and know all the imaginations of the thoughts thereof, grant I
may reign doing judgment and justice to all thy people, that I may be thy
Son, and that thou may be unto me a Father. Establish the throne of my
Kingdom for ever. Be with me, that I may prosper, and build thy house, O Lord
my God. Give me wisdom and understanding, and teach me how to govern, and how
I may keep thy Law, knowing that then I shall prosper, if I take heed to do thy
statutes and judgments which thou have commanded. Fortify me, and double in me
my strength, keep me wheresoever I go, bless also thy servants house, that it
may be always before thee, and may be blessed for ever. Give peace and rest
unto thy people in my time. Grant thy Name may abide firm, and be magnified
for ever.

The Peoples Prayer for the King.
27. BLessed be thou, O Lord our God, that have accepted our King to set him
upon the throne, because thou have loved us, and have established him, to the
end to do judgment and justice. Show thy great mercy unto him, and that he may
walk before thee in truth, in righteousness, and uprightnes of heart. Be with
him, magnify his Throne, lengthen his days, and let him live for ever. Let
there be peace to theewards always for him, for his posterity, for his house,
and for his Throne. Give him riches, and glory, so as there has not been the
like unto him amongst Kings: Let him be greater then all the Kings of the
earth, both in riches and in wisdom: Let him walk in thy ways, to keep thy
ordinances, and thy commandments, and let there ever be in him divine wisdom:
Put his enemies under his feet: Give him rest round about him, and let him have
no adversity nor evil luck. Let his people be very numerous, as the sand
which is on the sea shore. Let him have peace round about him on every side,
and let neither them nor their children turn back from thee, but keep thy
commandments and thy statutes, which thou have set before them, that men may
know that thou art God in this Kingdom, and that we are thy servants.

A Prayer of the faithful that fervently desires to participate in the
public exercises whereof he was deprived.
28. O Lord of Hosts how amiable are thy Tabernacles! My soul cease not to
desire greatly, and even languisheth after thy Courts, my heart and my flesh
leap for joy after thee, O mighty and living God. O how happy are they that
dwell in thy house, which praise thee uncessantly! O how happy is the man whose
strength is in thee, and they that go by troops to present themselves before
thee in thy Temple! For better is a day in thy Courts, then a thousand
elsewhere. I had rather be a doore-keeper in thy house, O my God, then to dwell
in the Tabernacles of the wicked. For Lord God, thou art unto us a Sun and a
shield: thou give grace and glory, and withholdest no good thing from them
that walk in integrity. O my God, I seek thee by the day break, my soul
thirsts after thee: my flesh desires thee as in a desert land. I am athirst,
and without water to see thy face, and thy glory, as I have beheld thee in thy
Sanctuary, for thy free mercy is better then life: therefore shall my lips
praise thee: and so will I bless thee whilst I live, and will lift up my hands
in thy Name. Satisfy my soul as it were with honey, and with fatnes, and let
my mouth praise thee with a song of rejoicing. Be my helper, and I will rejoice
in the shadow of thy wings. My soul shall cleave unto thee to follow thee, and
thy right hand shall hold me up.

Another Prayer out of the second Epistle of St. John.
29. LOrd, cause thy Truth to abide in us, and to be always with us, and let
us be ever found walking in the Truth, according as we have received thy
Commandment. Let us love one another, and walk according to thy commandments,
taking heed unto our selves, that we lose not that we have done, but rather
that we may receive our full wages, and that our joy may be full.

Grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ,
the Son of the Father be with us in truth and love.

A SACRED Spiritual Awakening, or Morning Sacrifice, to serve for the awaking
and rowsing of the carnally secure.
The ear that hears the reproof of life, abides among the wise. Pro.
15.31. He that despises the Word, shall perish by reason thereof. Proverb. 13.
It shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrha. Mat. 10.14.15
29. IT is our over much stouping unto and our settling upon the lees of our
vanities, that the foolish affections of the flesh dragge us deeper into their
disordered appetites: It is our overmuch thinking on the things here below; let
us remain no longer curbed on earth, let us rouse up, address our selves
toward heaven, and let us not defraud it of what belongs unto it: shall not the
examples of the creatures without reason (yea without sense) lead us unto this
reason? We see water comes forth of the water, and returns unto water, the
earth drawn from the earth, re-inclineth to the earth, and so every thing
tends to his place: and shall we that are borne for heaven fly from it? The
knowledge that our blessedness is there, eternal blessedness which already
we possess through the assurance of our union with Jesus Christ, into whose
death we have been baptized, to the end to participate in his resurrection, and
to be in time ordained by God fully co-heires of that celestial heritage:
ought it not to make us lift up our senses on high, and to pluck them wholly
from the earth?

But alas! We confess that this knowledge appears to be almost altogether
obscured in us: for our conversation is like unto that of them that have not
known God, walking as having no fear of the Lord, and doing the things, which
indeed ought not to be so much as thought on or named of us: it seems to
appear by the course of the most, that man is but only for the flesh, to the
end to glut his disordered passions. O wonderful brutishnes!

Where then shall this knowledge be? Or the feeling or expectation of the
heavenly joy? Romans 6. Col. 3. For this union not performing her functions,
should we not walk in fear and trembling all the course of our life? mortify
our old man and corrupt nature? Otherwise where shall be the fruit of our
baptism? Or the efficacy of the passions and sufferings of Jesus Christ? and
if we be destitute and deprived of these things, abide we not still in death,
yea eternal death?

Wherefore let us here enter into astonishment, let us be terrified with fear,
Romans 2.4. We see the anger of God threatens us, if we turn not away from
evil. His Patience inviteth us to repentance, let us not despise the riches of
his mercy. Eccles. 5.5. He has borne with us until this day, let us not say
any more, the mercy of God is great, he will have pity on the multitude of our
sins, to ad sin unto sin, and let us not stay till to morrow to convert our
selves, for mercy and wrath come both from the Lord, and his day shall be, and
will come when it shall not be thought on, no man knows the hour: And this
is it which is meant by the Parable of the evil servant, who saying in his
heart my Master deferreth the time of his coming. Math. 24.48. And therefore I
will lead an evil life: That his Master will surprise him, and will come in a
day, when he looks not for him, and will cast him thither, where there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth: Let us fear, let us fear then such a surprise,
let us awake thoroughly, and slumber no longer in our sins.

O half Atheists! infamous Monsters! that say, let us sin that God may
forgive us: otherwise, what use shall there be of his mercy, came he not for
sinners? Oh how you deceive your selves! and those also that glut their brutish
and irregular lusts, giving the full swing to their foolish desires (profaning
likewise the mercy of God) promise to themselves afterward to have the same all
the course of their lives jollily, heaped up their iniquity, to say at their
last day a peccavi, whereupon they heap and pile up in this manner, as much
mischief as the most perverse can do: As if it were in man's power to have
repentance, to ask and obtain mercy at any time or moment he shall assign
himself, and as if it were in his own free ability, and power, and not a
special and singular gift of God, as it is manifested unto us in Jeremy 31.8.
when he says, Convert me, and I shall be converted, for thou art the Lord my
God: surely after I was converted, I repented. That such grace comes from God
alone, according to his good pleasure. It is ye saying of the Holy Ghost, Act.
11.18. God gave to the Gentiles also repentance unto life. Which is also
clearly showed by Saint Paul charging Timothy to teach those that were
contrarily minded. 2 Timoth. 1.25. To try if at any time God would give them
repentance to the knowledge of the truth, that they may awake and recover
themselves out of the snare of the Devil, according to that we gather Esaias
1.15. That man sometimes cries unto the Lord in vain, and without that he
answers him.

Consider then now unto whom, when, and how mercy is granted. Psalm 18.41.
And we may acknowledge all in that behalf, that we have not the morrow to
repent in: Let us not grow elder in our iniquity, least (as wisdom
admonishes us) That malice having taken deep root in us, our heart can never
be changed: Wisdom the 12.10. So the tree long since planted is not easily
stub'd up, and let us ever bear in mind that threatening Apoc. 3.3. If
therefore thou shall not watch, I will come on thee as a thief, and thou shall
not know what hour I will come upon thee.

But what, shall we not grow wise thorough the frequent examples which daily
occur, and present themselves to our view: That the lustiest man, he that
builds his designs (as it were) far from the grave, and who thinks of
nothing less, then on the tribute he owes to death, in the same instant sinks
down: And therefore no man knows the hour, nor how he must dislodge from out
of this lower earth; Every moment both of night and of day, showing that God
has a thousand and a thousand means in his hand to cut off (when he pleases)
the thread of the soundest, and strongest life. Whereupon one has said very
well: What act, what time, what place exempt can stand?
From dreadful dart of Deaths fell hand?
Is not unpartiall proof Pope Adrians fly?
That laughing, eating, drinking man may die?


Stay a little thy mind and thoughts in this place, O thou temporiser! that
deferrest unto another season to amend and become better, let not this pass
thee without thinking on it, and it shall be an entrance unto thee to profit by
the admonition which our Savior Jesus Christ gives us, Mat. 24.44. Therefore
be ye always ready, and watch for fear of being surprised, not knowing the
hour of your departure. Let us not here make as though we were deaf. If we
give ear to an instrument which affoords us some recreation, shall we stop it
from hearing of wholesome counsel? No, no: least it may be said to us as in
Proverb. 1.24. I have called and ye refused. I have stretched out my hand, and
no man regarded. Ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my
reproof. I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear
comes: when your fear comes as desolation, and your destruction comes as
a whirle-winde, when distress and anguish comes upon you. Then shall you
call upon me, but I will not answer: For you have hated knowledge, and not
chosen the fear of the Lord: you would none of my counsel, but have despised
all my reproof: therefore shall you eat of the fruit of your ways, and shall be
filled with your own devises. For the turning away of the simple shall slay
them, and the prosperity of fools shall destroy them. Remember what I did to
Sodom and Gomorrha, 4. Esd. 2.8. So will I deal with them that have not
harkened unto me. Psalm. 95:7.8. says the mighty Lord. Let us then be better
advised, harkening to the voice of God. Let us not harden our hearts: Let us
listen to his counsel, and receive reproof to become wiser: and profiting by
these admonitions, may not procrastinate nor delay any more from day to day by
saying (every one) I have sinned, and we must repent. But even now instantly,
without putting it off, let us no more profane this so special a gift of God.
This most precious gift I say, of repentance, (which Esau begged yea even with
tears, and it was not granted him Heb. 12.17.) For fear least that befall us
which was said to the five foolish Virgins, who because they wanted oil, when
they had leisure to have made their provision thereof, entered not in with the
bridegroom, and let us stand on our gards, walking in newness of life, as
having already left this world, not knowing the hour when we shall be called
out of it: Witnessing that we are dead unto sin, and living unto God through
Jesus Christ, Col. 3. in whom we are made new creatures, to serve unto
righteousness: And do show that truly we have more care of the things above
then of these which are upon the earth, by renouncing and utterly abandoning
the covetous to his coveteousnes; the ambitious worldling to his insolent and
vain ambition; the voluptuous person to the lascivious affections of his
flesh: for from thence is it, that spring and issue forth all impieties. Hence
is the root and the spring, this is that which produces them, and which
foments them. What will not the covetous man do to augment his heap of wealth?
The ambitious to enjoy his ambition? The voluptuous to accomplish his desires?
Their hearts being in these things, as if in them consisted their sovereign
happiness.

Not here to descend to the particular enormitie of these vices (whereof he that
is fulliest fraught, makes himself ordinarily believe, that he is altogether
exempt from them, or else glories in them, as in most commendable parts) nor
particularly to lay open, how detestable they are. To wind up all in brief;
appears it not that they that take their pleasure in these things, spare not
the very honor of God, which they annihilate and utterly abolish, as much as
in them lies, to give place to their irregular and disordered affections? For
although they know, and are informed of his will, and how he ought to be obeyed
and served; they voluntarily seduce and mislead themselves out of the way of
salvation, and hold (though against their conscience) the great and wide way of
the world: the way of those, which in their hearts they reproove, and know they
serve not the Lord as they should: And with them often serve the creature (yea
their own work) in stead of the Creator, call upon it (or feign to call upon
it) committing Idolatry with all superstition, (at ye least in hypocrisy) and
so harden the poor ignorant, and by that means, not only impeach Gods glory,
but even withal fight against it to the uttermost of their possibility. Why
then, these vices, draw they not after and with them this full measure of all
wickedness, for what is this but so to renounce God? Yea often times to make
war against him? Can man with all his perversitie conceive a thing more
abominable? No, no; it is not possible, this is extreme iniquity.

But least it should fare with them, as with a pleader which should be
condemned, unheard before he had put in his answer to his adversaries plea: let
us hear what defense they make, who will excuse themselves in this case: God
requires (say they) rather the inward man then the outward; the inside then
the outside. Then if to remain in good concord, and better fellowship they
accommodate and comply in themselves (in regard of outward appearance) with
those whom otherwise they should thwart and be cross unto, it is but only to
maintain peace and unity: and so to retain the means to settle themselves,
and to thrive and prosper ameng men, not ceasing nevertheless to condemn the
actions of those, unto whom seemingly they conform themselves, and in their
hearts hold themselves unto that, which GOD requires of the faithful.

A doom it is most certain, and truly remarkable of all other: That the way
of the fool is right in his own eyes, Proverb. 12.15, Silly sots, to think by
your humane wisdom (foolishness before the Lord) to take Sanctuary, and
better to shelter your selves from the wrath of God, then those whom you
condemn? Hear what Saint Paul says to you, Romans 1.21.22. Whilst you think
your selves wise, you are become fools. Because when ye knew God, yet you have
not glorified him as God. Luke 2.47: We learn, that he that knows his
Masters will, and does it not, shall be more grievously beaten, then he who not
knowing it, has not done it. Why, is not your hypocrisy here most manifest?
Whilst you endeavor to make men believe another thing then that which you have
inwardly in your heart: that detestable vice, which our Savior Jesus Christ
never speaks of without expression of his anger: the high way of Atheism. For
he which strives to counterfeit a Religion, which he condemns in his heart,
can never have any rest in his conscience, until he give himself over to
believe that all things are indifferent, nor has he any other means to free
himself from that dread and from those horrors, which the just judgment of
God inflicts upon that miserable and wretched conscience of his, as to be
persuaded that God will not look so narrowly to men's demeanours, and then is he
truly a spiritual leper: For having lost the feeling and fear of Gods
justice, it is a sure testimony, that such an one knows not God; because to
deny God, and to deny his justice is all one. Indeed appears it not that the
most of them, who at the beginning but fainingly shall adhere to Idolaters, at
length become wholly Idolaters, or fall into that blindness, that there is no
longer any religion at all in them, having altogether forgotten God, and live
as though there were no God, of whom many that would have men esteem better of
them, do as the Cameleon, and according to the object they encounter, they
resemble one while one thing, another while another: And unto such the Prophet
Elias cries out, saying: How long will ye halt between two opinions on both
sides? If God be God, why do you not follow him? If Baal, Baal? But if they
have yet any spark of knowledge that there is a God, a God terrible, to be
feared in his judgments given in his anger, shall they not be astonished to
hear the Lord say to them in his displeasure? Apoc. 3.16. That because they
are neither hot nor cold, but lukewarm, that he will vomit them out of his
mouth. And hearing, that by his Prophet Jeremy, Jeremy 48.20. He curses him
that does the work of the Lord negligently: for what is there more fearful,
saving the execution?

O you the best of these, that say you consent not in mind to that you do?
Lamentably wise fools, whose wisdom consists in folly, know you not that he
who is the Creator of the soul, is also of the body? Can we serve God with the
one, and Mammon with the other? Dan. ^. If you can carry your selves in that
manner, why then did not Daniel to avoid casting into the Lions den, following
the decree of King Darius dissemble and feign to obey that was enjoined him?
Why did not Sidrach, Mi^a^^, and Abednego (outwardly at least) yee^d and submit
to what Nebuch^dnezzar required of them, rather then to cause him to cast them
into the fire? Why have not so many Martyrs spoken your language, and made some
fair show to be delivered from that infinitenes of horrible torments, and even
from death it self? But who by reason of many, of whom sometimes there was no
more required; but a yea, or a nay, without any further profession of Religion
(solicited by them that thought to do them a friendly office for their
escape) chose rather death, and forsook their life.

No, no, we must a^ Saint Paul says, not only believe with the heart, to
justification, Romans 10.10. But also confess with the mouth unto salvation, for
God require to the inward par^s, with the outward, and will have our light so
shine before men, that they seeing our good works, may thereupon glorify him.
It is the instruction of our Savior Jesus Christ. Cease then and leave off
this evil custom, seeing God by his Holy Spirit says yet, repent you, Math.
5.16. Who adds, for otherwise I will come against you speedily, Apo. 1.16. and
will fight against you with the sword of my mouth. And let us say all
henceforth with David, Psalm. 34. Henceforth shall our tongues sing aloud the
righteousness of the Lord, and the lowly minded shall hear that we boast our
selves of the Lord, and shall be glad thereof. Even as Saint Paul exhorts
us, 1. Corinthians. 6.20. Let us glorify God, not only in our spirits, but also
in our bodies which are Gods. And in emulation one of another, let us give
testimony to every one of the adoption which we have in Jesus Christ: that all
may know and take notice, that through him we are heirs of the kingdom of
heaven: let us boast of this glory, a glory to be paralel'd by no other, being
a special benefit which is unvaluable.

That our piety may shine forth singularly to the instruction of our families.
Let us not be so lukewarm in following of Christ. And let us not a little
cherish the riches of his opprobries, as to take our chiefest care to make them
capable of sharing in the vanities of the world: For if we have no other care
of their salvation, we are the executioners of their souls; worse then the
bruit beasts, that are careful for the good of their young: no less lewd then
they that sacrificed their children to Baal* yea, if (say I) we consent that
they be brought up with the milk and poison of the spiritual strumpet, as much
as in us lies, to make them one day partakers of all the curses of the Lord,
as if we had vowed to be instruments to deliver them over our selves unto
Satan. This we shall witness to be thus, if against our science and conscience
we bring them not up in the ways of the Lord. Let us then herein place all our
study, dealing in such sort, that they whom God shall have committed to our
guidance, may be as it were trumpets by their good and holy conversation, to
publish unto every one the truth of our profession, as the thing wherewith we
account our selves most honored.

I pray you, where is he, who being descended of some illustrious and noble
family, is not jealous unto the end to be held and known by every one to be
issued of that race? What Lord of some goodly possession does not divulge his
titles, bears not willingly his coats of Arms? Yea, does he not set them up
in sight on the highest places to be so much the more conspicuous and better
discerned? A thing nevertheless bu^ of small continuance: and which in very
deed, when all comes to all, is but mere vanity: and whereof there can no
comparison be made to this so lofty a title, and so full of glory; the highest
pitch of all honor: this title, say I, of Child and Servant of God, Coheire
with Christ. A quality, O the noblest, and most magnificent, (which makes
happy Monarchs) not for a season, but eternally in comparison of which, surely
all other even the greatest and the most precious that are under the coap of
heaven, and compass of the earth, are less then nothing, yea most wretched,
if these be not adjoined unto them. And then if a Noble Person^ge so much
affect his ancient scutchions of arms for so small fruit; if he would not
endure that ought should be detracted, or any thing added, lest his lineage
might either be questioned or unknown? How much more careful ought we to be,
to take good heed we do not any act, which may not suit with those that are
truly the children and servants of God? And in contempt of the world, to
enforce our selves to walk in that integrity and uprightness, we ought to be
by so much the more remarkably such? Seeing otherwise especially, we exclude
and shut out our selves from his grace; Romans 1.16. Let us not then be ashamed
of the truth of the Gospel of Christ, which is the power of God unto salvation
unto all that believe. For alas, if it be so, that we are so brutish and
beastly, that to possess the world, to please it, or for fear of it we
dissemble the knowledge we have of him, the Son of God himself tells us, That as
we have denied him before men, he will deny us also before his Father, and
will be ashamed of us, and that worthily. Luke 9.26. Let us hold (then) the
confession of our hope, without varying for any thing whatsoever: According as
Saint Paul teaches us, Heb. 10. And with him we say, Neither that which is
present, nor that which is to come, nor height, nor depth, poverty, nor
nakedness, persecution, affliction, nor death, nor life, shall separate us from
the love of Christ. Romans 8.34. Prepare always in every place and before all
men to give a reason and an account to every one of the hope that is in us,
Peter 1.3. Yea as true faithful ones let us take especially our neighbors by
the hands, saying to them, let us go up; let us ascend up to the mountain,
unto the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us his ways, Esa. 4. And
let us stir up one another unto charity, and to good works Mic. 2. Not
forsaking the assembly of the faithful: For (as Saint Paul says) if we sin
willingly after we have received the knowledge of the truth, Heb. 10. There
remains no sacrifice for that sin, but a fearful expectation of judgment, and
the vengeance of fire, which shall devour the adversaries: Setting before us,
that if any one had despised the Law of Moses, he was put to death without any
mercy: and thence concludes, how much more grievous torments shall he deserve
that shall esteem the blood of the Son of God as a thing of no holiness,
through the which he had been sanctified, and had done injury to the Spirit of
Grace?

Yea, but what say you to this, that by making open profession of this known
truth, men shall deprive themselves of the favor and good will of the great
ones: It is a course that will bring an untimely issue to our best designs,
and we shall run a hazard to fall from our honors; yea, we shall be in danger
to be brought to the lowest ebb of the greatest misery (the ordinary condition
of those that will be followers of Jesus Christ) and some will say more; they
who earne me the bread which my family eats, will not henceforth serve me: and
what shall then my condition be? how shall I live.

It is here high time to sound the alarm, the combat is at hand; but before we
give the onset, let us take better notice of our enemies, to wit, the world,
and the flesh. Shall we demand of him that makes war upon us, the things
that are fit to destroy him? No, no: this were all one as if we should cast
flax into fire to quench it.

To shelter our selves then from the first encounter of the assault, let us set
our selves in battell-array with Daniel, Sidrach, and Abednego, let us march
forward in their steps, and use the same weapons with the Martyrs, Ephesians. 6.11.
Let us have our loins girt about with truth, and have on the breast plate of
righteousness, and let us have our feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel
of Peace; and above all let us take the shield of Faith, and the helmet of
salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God. Let us deny
our selves to follow Christ, as every true Christian ought: so shall we pass
through the greatest conflict, which shall present it self, if he encounter
himself, and we shall remain conquerors as they have done, that have known,
and withal have followed the will of the Lord, and not the sensuality of the
flesh, and the world. A gift of God, which he gives to them that ask it in
faith, without wavering. James 1.6. They know that the Almighty curses the man
that makes flesh his arm, and that trusts in man. Jeremy 7.2. That surely men
of high degree are vanity, Psalm. 62.9. and a lie: and that he that shall put
into the balance the grandes of the earth against nothing, shall find them yet
lighter then nothing. Wherefore they have not expected salvation from any other
but from the highest, relying wholly and trusting in him only. And see we not
also indeed, that there is no Monarch so great, but God when he pleases, out
of hand brings him to nothing? Want we proofs for the uncertainty of the
performance of man's promises? Now when it was in his own power to perform
(which he never has but as it is given him from above) shall there be any
found that says he has not found as much by exp^rience? The thing is too too
frequent. So also do we not see, that not only it is in vain, but withal
draws down the wrath of God upon himself that depends on man, how great or
mighty soever he be in appearance? Let us then forgo for ever such a thing.
Psalm 60.11. Give us help from trouble, for vain is the help of man. And
following David's counsel, let us ever put our trust in God alone, he is good
and gracious to will what shall be expedient for us; mighty in his power,
true and immutable in his promises to accomplish them: And let every one of us
say with him, Psalm. 28.7.

He is my shield and fortitude,
my buckler in distress: My hope, my help, my hearts relief,
my song shall him confess.
To dive yet deeper into this matter: Thou that fear thine honors, and art
afraid that thy earthly goods will leave thee, after the which thou so
breathest and barkest, thou verifiest that which cannot but be most true: That
it is impossible that a man should serve God and riches. Luke 16.14. He which
is truth it self spoke it. But it shall not be amiss to set a glass before
thee, that thou may see how thou art disfigured, and that thou may know
thine own deformity, if thou have sight enough to discern it. O fool, that
seek after, and prisest at so high a rate the glory and treasures of the
earth, as if therein consisted thy happiness. (horrible Idolatry) If thy soul
be required of thee this night, what shall become of the total? And put the
case, thou live the longest age of man, that length is but a moment: What
profit have they gained by it, whom thou have seen go before thee, who are now
in the grave? Psalm 90. think thou they are much more happy thereby? Alas,
the danger is great, it is contrary. Luke 18.24. For it is a very hard thing for
the rich to enter into the Kingdom of heaven. What hope thereof will thou draw
from out of that which St. James says. chapter 5.2. Weep you rich men, howl for
your miseries which shall come upon you: your riches are corrupted, your
garments moath-eaten: your gold and silver is cancred, and the rust of them
shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire: Tim.
6, 9 Then what shall make thee desire abundance? For they that will be rich,
fall into temptation, into the snares of the Devil, and into many foolish and
hurtful lusts. Wisdom. 5. Which plunge men into destruction and ruin. Which
the Wiseman knowing, made his prayer unto God, not to give him riches, but only
his daily bread.

And withal what are all other things, but most vain vanity? Which not so
soon have taken their being, as they are glided away, and passed by, as if they
had not been at all. Nor is there any more appearance left of them, then of a
bird that has flowne through the air, whose track cannot be found: flying away
from him, who so greedily and with all carefulnes had heaped them up together,
or if not, he himself leaves them by death, and unto whom? Surely he knows
not: as says the Prophet, Psalm 39.6. He heapeth up riches, and knows not
who shall gather them.

But when this should obtain some continuance, would thou so abastardise and
curtall thy felicity, as therein to limit thy sovereign good? Tell me, how many
years thou have already passed, and what a portion of thy age is glided on,
which is no more to be reckoned on then when thou beginnest therein to take
pleasure, and if it were not so, but rather that man might rejoice in and enjoy
his pleasure even from the day of his birth, would thou then esteem it a
profit, that for to possess even the whole world, he should lose his soul?
Hearken unto, and consult with Jesus Christ in this question. Matthew. 16.26. We
shall know, that whosoever seeks after and loves these things, cannot please
God: For there is his heart, and not with the Lord, and therefore let us
contemn them, Matthew. 6.9. And following the instruction of Jesus Christ, Let
us lay up our treasures in heaven, where neither the rust, nor moath corrupt,
and think on those things which are above, and not on these that are here
below: for whosoever is not ready to forsake all he has in the world, and
which he possesses on earth, (as he himself says) he cannot be one of his.
Now if this be once found in us, surely then we will seek rather to glor^fie
God, then to possess the goods, which oftentimes the very wicked enjoy: We
will prefer the riches of the opprobries of Christ, Heb. 11. before the
treasures of Egypt, after the example of Moses, nor will we commit such an
error, as to deprive our selves of the hearing of Gods Word, and of the means
to serve him according to his already known will, thereby the more commodiously
to heap up wealth as we are wont to do: But we had rather as David, Psalm. 48.
dwell simple doore-keepers in the house of the Lord, then to enjoy the delights
of the flesh: Yea by so much the more willingly, if as we hold them happy that
dwell in the house of God, praise him without ceasing: And on the contrary for
most miserable those that are estranged far from it. Amos 8.11. There being no
greater evil, then to have a famine of the Word of the Lord.

It remains to satisfy more particularly him, who does not already see
himself closely pursued with misery, but has his eye fixed on those by the
means of whom he thinks to live, that regards nothing more then to
conform himself to their humor, even to the turning of his back unto God,
for-feare of disgrace, preferring this temporal life before eternal life:
having more care of the body then of the soul, as one that makes more of his
apparel then of himself: Yet such a one in truth is brought to some trial,
by reason of the defects which are in man through his infirmity and baseness,
when as he has not yet tasted of the promises of God, but that he may commit a
thing yet more horrible, nothing more detestable, and which may make more for
his condemnation, no: And say we what we will to palliate such sin, so it is,
that to speak properly, we must know that we set man in Gods place: For we
make lying man true; and God who is power it self, a liar. Man that is merely
impotent we make powerful, and God, who is power it self, impotent: in
reposing our trust ordinarily (as in this behalf) upon man, and on his
promises: And on the contrary, there is nothing but diffidence and
distrustfulnesse in that which is promised us from God, do we rely more upon
him in our need? Is not this his voice? Mat. 6.25. Take no thought for your
life, what you shall eat, or what you shall drink, nor for your bodies, what
you shall put on. If God (says Jesus Christ) feed the birds of the air, and
cloth the grass of the field, will he not much more do it for you? O you of
little faith. Ask then (says he) and seek you first of all the kingdom of
God, and the righteousness thereof, and all these shall be ministered unto you
withal: and be not careful for to morrow. This is the Word of God, these are
his promises: and yet in stead of retiring our selves unto him, and toward
him, who has promised never to leave us, and never to forsake us, whence Saint
Paul, Heb. 15. Draws an argument to bid us to be content with things present,
we turn our selves unto men, and hope from them, as from them, that which we
want: if any man mighty in possession has made us protestation of friendship,
and has promised us his purse shall be open to us in our need, forthwith we
make an account of it as of a thing most certain, and which cannot fail us,
and we so cherish this in such sort, that we take good heed in no wise to
displease such an one: Yea with the dispense even of Gods honor, as he whom we
leave out, as he of whom we had not received ought, and from whom we could not
hope for any benefit: and what is this? but (with marvelous and detestable
ingratitude) to accuse God of impotencie, or of want of will to make good that
which he has promised, and so to make him a liar? A thing infinitely (as the
offense is infinite) horrible to think only. And on the contrary, setting man
in his place, by attributing unto him, what appertains unto God alone. Psalm.
42, 1.50.12. Yea we so prefer man before God, him, whose all things are, that
brings the wealthy to beggerie, and raises up the poor unt^ glory, making him
aboun^ in wealth.

It seems, that he^^ some may say we will cease then henceforth to take
pains, and trample upon all care, trusting and reposing our selves wholly upon
the promises of God: Now know we, that this would be truly to tempt him: which
makes us not these promises to make us careless to employ our selves in that
whereunto we are cal^ed by him, and which our calling requires, seeing he
himself has ordained (for a badge and by reason of our sin) that we shall eat
our bread in the sweat of our brows. Genesis 3.19. all the time of our life;
Which made Saint Paul say, that he that labors not (if he be able to do it)
ought not to eat, 1 These. 3.10. This is it also why the Psalmist considering we
are necessitated unto action, says (speaking of him that fears God, and
walks in his ways) Psa. 127.128.2. Blessed art thou that fear God, and
walk in his way:
For of thy labor thou shall eat happy art thou I say.


But the end of these promises is to the end we should not be dismayed, when by
the providence of God we shall be destitute of all possessions, and even
deprived of drawing any fruit from the labor we can undergo; labor truly
vain, unless he extend his blessing to the same, without which in vain wake
we late and rise up early, Psalm. 146. and that we might know, that from man's
industry his wealth proceeds not, but from God only, who advances and
casts down when he pleases. From him, I say, that knows no want, to give
provision whereof to live unto them that need. And that thus we might be led on
forward to walk in his obedience and fear, as of him on whom we wholly depend,
yea even the mightiest and highest that are among the creatures.

But let us return, let us yet further discover our own filthiness, Luke 21.18
Appears it not that albeit that God assures us, that no man shall be able so
much as to pluck a hair from our head without his will (which is the same St.
Paul says, Romans 8.3. If God be for us, who shall be against us?) and although
he say he will keep his people as the apple of his eye, seeming to express
himself after our imperfect manner, to make us the better to comprehend his
love, yet for all this, how great are our diffidences and distrusts? That if it
happen, that we be threatened with banishment, or otherwise to make any attempt
upon our persons by reason of the confession of the Name of God, and of his
Truth, we be altogether appaled with fear and terrible apprehensions, even to
the renouncing of him, and to be disposed to speak such language: And to be
short, to do that which they would do, that in appearance shall have strength in
their hands? Yea the greater part of them which follow the great and broad way,
Ma. 7.13. of destruction, and who as they say, houle when others yell, will
follow the fashion, be it never so vile, do not they act it before they see it,
out of a foresight of the fear they have thereof? Howsoever for a matter of
this nature, following our SAVIOVR CHRIST'S teaching, we ought not to fear them
that can kill the body, Mat. 10.28. and are not able to touch the soul; but
rather and only to fear him, who is able to destroy the soul, and to send the
body to hell, Matthew. 10.19. Having elsewhere said unto us, that whosoever will
save his life, shall lose it: But he that for Gods sake shall lose it, shall
save it.

And what shall we say? Is not this all one as if one should affirm the
promises of God were every one vain. Could we make less reckoning of them
then of some poor beggar destitute of all means, who had promised to lend us
at our need a great sum of money? even thus fares it with the confidence we
repose in man, a thing execrable.

If we be not now sufficiently convinced to lead us to pass the sentence of
condemnation upon our selves, let us put the case h^re some miserable fellow
had offended one that was greater then himself, who had the will to be
revenged on him; if he that has offended finds grace and credit with the
Prince, in common, both to him, and to the offended; and that the Prince
promise him with all true affection to stay his evil willer that he do him no
hurt, declaring in process of time unto all his subjects that he loves that
person, will keep and cherish him as himself; will we not then say, such an
one is well assured of a good Protector; shall we not think him exempt from all
occasion of fear? For shall we not acknowledge that Prince of power easily to
protect him? And that great God, who is the Prince of Princes, who has power
above all the powers (much more soveraignly without all comparison, then has
the greatest Monarch of the earth, over the most forlorn and most desolate of
all his Dominion, Romans 13.1. there being none of them in the world but by
divine dispensation by Gods appointment) unto whom nothing is impossible, true
of his word, unchangeable, cannot he keep us? What? So great, and so many
numberless benefits which we have received, and daily do receive from him,
fulfilling his promises, should it not be sufficient to carry us to put our
whole trust and confidence in him, and not to doubt in any wise of the certain
effect of his Word.

O perverse diffidence, and disobedience, more then ungrateful to have
preferred the prop and protection of men before that of God, to have had more
fear of their displeasure then of him, 2 Pet. 21. Yea so much as to have
turned their backs unto him for their respect to follow Baal, as Balaam, who
for the wages of unrighteousness turned from the right way.

Many will not confess the debt; but will say (although their conscience speak
to the contrary: without fear of the curse pronounced by the Lord, Esaias 5.20.
against them that will make evil to be believed to be good, and good to be
evil) that they walk according to God, and in all integrity without
dissimulation, who to palliate by so much the more their hypocrisy, will take
heed to observe even unto the grossest superstitions, and notorious abominable
idolatries, they will be very glad to make known unto every one, they omit
nothing of what is required to be done, by him that is such, as they
counterfeit themselves to be: namely, to the end men might not doubt of them,
and to make them believe they have sincerity in their course (they which have
children, make them suck in this poison, and will nourish them, and bring them
up with this venom, for which they shall answer one day before God) they will
freely and openly make war against the truth. See how from these impieties
and wickednesses they fall into other, which at last do plunge them into a
reprobate sense, Wisdom. 11.15. Man being punished by the same things where in
he sins. Thus is it, as it happens and falls out with them that think to
mock God, 4. Esdr. 16. That knows the inventions of men, what they think in
their hearts, when in sinning they would hide their sins. 2 Peter 21. O how
far better would be the condition of such people that they had never known
the way of righteousness, and of the truth: seeing after they have so known
the same, they turn back from the holy commandment: Esaias 1.14. A sinful
people, laden with iniquity, malignant seed, corrupt children, thus to
forsake the Lord, to provoke in that manner the Holy One of Israel. Alas: What
will be the retribution for such lewdnes?

They that commit these impieties, may deceive men, but God they cannot, who is
the sole searcher of ye heart. Act. ^.44. And from whom nothing is hid: He
will disclose them in due time, for there is nothing so secret, Matthew. 10.26.
which (when he please) shall not come to light, and be published even upon the
house tops, yea when there is the least appearance: And he will one day say
unto them (it may be much nearer then they think) if they repent not speedily,
no longer abusing his mercy, Matthew. 25.41. Go ye cursed into eternal fire,
which is prepared for the Devil and his angels: And in vain then shall they
cry, Lord, Lord, Esa: 2. For he will answer them: I never knew you, you workers
of iniquity, that have loved better the praise of men, then of God.

O how fearful a thing is it to fall into the hands of the living God; he,
who not only sees our actions, but also is judge of our intentions: and in a
word, he unto whose eyes all things are known and open: let us not defer then
to repent, let us seek to do good, as having to walk before the Lord, Psalm. 44.
Who beholds all our actions, yea who searches our reins, and examins our
thoughts, Proverb. 21. there being no wisdom, strength, prudence, hid,
retired, nor shrouded from him, knowing that it shall not be any deal the
better for us for having our iniquities concealed from men, which ordinarily
seems to suffice us: and so we take no further care. And in all fear let us
apply and employ our our members unto righteousness, and according as Saint
Paul exhorts us Romans 12.1. Let us offer up our bodies a living sacrifice, holy,
and acceptable unto God, which is our reasonable serving of him. Let us not any
longer remain asleep in our vain conversation, from the which we were
redeemed, neither with gold, nor with silver, but by the most precious blood of
the Son of God: And let us awake up, let us awake, I say, unto holiness of life,
lest it prove the sleep of eternal death: let not the world nor the things of
the world any longer retain our affections to enforce us any longer to
continue in this horrible hypocrisy: being content with that condition
whereunto it shall please the Lord to call us, seeing all things turn to the
good of them that fear God. Romans 5. And so then that poverty make us not
afraid, when it shall find us, that persecution daunt us not, when as for the
Name of the Lord it must be undergone: but let us suffer chearefully with
Christ that we may reign with him, Heb. 11. Wisd. 2. Let the dis-reputation
and dishonor we shall reap from worldlings (grieved because we will not
follow their train) be slighted of us: To conclude, let nothing (no not the
loss even of life it self) make us warpe or decline from the ways of the
Lord: For the sufferings of the time present are not to be paralel^d with the
good things to come, which are laid up for us in Christ, Philip. 1.21. Who i^
gain unto us, not only living, but even also in death: And in our necessity
let us have recourse no more unto unlawful means to shelter our selves under,
but unto God alone, who gives both good and evil, to wit the evil of
punishment, life, and death, poverty and riches, Eccles. 11.14. Unto him, I
say, who having so much loved us as to give his only begotten Son unto death
for us, Romans 8.31. Will not let us want any thing, though never so small, as
far forth as shall be expedient for our good. Yea he, Whose ever watchful
eyes,
Over his, beyond all hope:
Their needful wants in time supplies.
His fear, his glory, is their guide, their scope.
He still their life exempts,
From what even death it self attempts:
And fills them with the things they want;
When times of famine brings them scant.
And by his bounty still recals,
The Lord his own back from their falls:
To wait on him in their distress,
To him to make their firm adresse.
Who ever is sure castle, prop, and stay,
To those that wander not from out his way.


And let us remove far away from us all vanity, let us strip and quite
disvest our selves of this foolish and cursed confidence and reliance which we
ordinarily have in the arm of man, and in riches. And henceforth for the
remainder of our course of this earthly pilgrimage, let us not seek but to
glorify God to the edification of others, and in him let us place our who^e
expectation, for as David says, Psalm. 40.

Thrice happy he his trust does place
In God the giver of all grace:
And him alone his refuge makes,
And not vain man for patron takes.
Renouncing our own wisdom, Esa. 5.21. which is but foolishnes. Besides, the
Spirit of God pronounces a curse upon those t at are wise in their own eyes,
and prudent in their own conceits. And let us not any more imagine our happiness
to consist in affoording our selves the fruition of our carnal lusts, the
total of bruit beasts whose bodies and souls both die together: For there is
a sovereign eternal happiness for him that walks in the fear of God: let us
value it above a^l things, knowing that the world and the concupiscence thereof
passes away: And that all the glory of man is fallen, Psalm. 62. But that the
Word of God abides for ever. And therefore let us say with David, That our
soul rests only in God for in him only is our salvation: Remembering daily
this prayer, Psalm. 90.12.

Instruct us Lord to know and try,
How long our days remain:
That thus we may our hearts apply,
True wisdom to attain.
Then teach us so our days,
Our wasting years to count:
That wisdom true our thoughts toward thee,
Our endless end may mount.
Attending and expecting to be fully endowed and possessed of all the benefits
which are purchased for us by the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ; unto
the participation of that eternal blessedness, and of that union, which we
have through him with God. To whom only wise, only good, only mighty,
infinite, and true, our Creator, and gracious benefactor, be all glory and
honor for evermore, through the same Jesus Christ his Son, our only Savior,
who in the unity of the holy Ghost lives and reigns with him eternally. Amen.

A FAMILIAR INSTRVCTION to comfort the Sick.

With many Prayers on the same subject.

Philip. 1.21. For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain. LONDON,
Printed by G. MILLER, for GEORGE EDWARDS, dwelling in Greene-Arbour without
Newgate, at the sign of the Angel. 1630.

To the Reader.
COurteous Reader, impute not unto my rashness either the Title or Subject of
this Book, as if I undertook to give instruction to those, from whom I ought
to receive the same: I had not writ it at first, but in the behalf of my dear
brethren, the Elders of the Church, unto the guiding of whom God has called
me: In regard the said Church being composed of many quarters, and it not being
possible for me to be with them all, necessity required, that they often
supply my absence in the visitation of the sick, whereunto they required my
assistance by this small President, my purpose was to cause some few copies to
be printed to put into their hands, and by that means to give them that
assistance with more ease, and with more conveniencie. But when it was further
alleged unto me, it might serve also for the use of others, either in regard
of their obligation thereunto, by the same charge, or for that they were so
moved out of their Christian zeal, employed themselves in that pious and
charitable duty of visiting and comforting the sick. And that moreover and
besides the reason hereof would not be unprofitable to any of the faithful in
particular, who even in his best health should ever prepare himself for
sickness and death: I yielded to make it public with this word of
information, which I suppose will arm thy ingenuitie to acquit me of all
blame. I doubt not but thou will excuse the plainness of the style; having
respect both to the nature of the subject, and withal unto whom and for whom it
was directed As for them that shall think good to make use of it, I entreat
them to bear with the length of it: Which I could not well avoid, as I
desired, in a subject so fertile, and so hard to be contracted. This remedy
there is for it, that this writing being composed of many disjointed parcels,
and accomodated to the sundry dispositions of the sick, they may be contented
to cull out of them sometimes one, sometimes another, as they shall be adjudged
more for their purpose, according to the circumstances of the persons they
visit.

A FAMILIAR Instruction to comfort the Sick.
When the sickness shall not as yet have any probability to be mortal, there
may be said to the sick for his comfort that which here follows.
SIR,
You must first of all know, that this sickness came not to you casually, nor
by chance, but rather by the wise government of the providence of God our
Creator, and Father, who so disposes of prosperity and adversity, of health,
and of sickness toward his children, that he never sends them, either the
one or the other, but it is for his own glory, and for their good and
salvation. Which the Apostle Saint Paul sets forth, To. 8.28. That to them
that love God, all things work together for good. Now he there speaks
expressly of afflictions, in the rank whereof are sicknesses. Now they love
God, who first of all are beloved of him, and as the same Apostle says, called
according to his determinate purpose. That you are of this number, you have
occasion to take your assurance thereof by the faith he has given you, in
making you to believe that he is your Father and Savior in his welbeloved
Son Jesus Christ our Lord, and causing you to receive his spirit of adoption,
which is he that gives testimony and bears witness with our spirit, that
we are the children of God, his heirs and co-heires with CHRIST, Romans
8.11.16.17.

Hereof ought you to take yet further assurance from the sanctification of his
Spirit, thorough the which you are led and guided in his obedience: For they
that are led by the Spirit of God, are the children of God.

Now unto them that are such, the Apostle Saint Paul says, that all things
work together for good, afflictions, sicknesses, death it self: All are turned
unto them by the grace of God unto their great good and profit, to serve unto
the furthering of their salvation.

There are three special fruits which God causes us to reap from our
sicknesses, and afflictions.

The first is, the amendment of our life, awakening us out of our sins. In
health and in prosperity, it is a thing too ordinary with us to flatter and to
lull our selves asleep in our sins, by reason of the great corruption of our
nature, which makes us inclinable unto all evil, and unprofitable unto all
good. Very necessary then is it for us to be awakened and to be made sensible
of our sins, to be displeased with them, and to recover our selves out of
them. All which is wrought by the means of sicknesses, and other adversities
of this life, which are the issues of sin, and oftentimes are sent unto us
from God to chasten and correct us for our sins. And therein our gracious
heavenly Father shows how he loves us, withholding us by this means that we
perish not in our dissolutions, as a good Father, and one that loves his
children, he chastises them, and gives them the rod, when need requires it to
stay them, they run not upon their own destruction. This is it which Saint
Paul says, 1. Cor. 11.32. That when we are afflicted we are chastened of the
Lord, that we should not be condemned of the world. And elsewhere he says
(Hebr. 12. ver. 6.7. and 11.) That the Lord chasteneth him whom he loves, and
scourges every child, he approoveth; if you suffer chastisement (says the
Apostle) God presents himself unto you as unto his children: For what son
is he whom the Father corrects not? And although all chastisement for the
present time seems not to be joyous, but grievous, nevertheless afterward
it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them that are exercised
thereby. We must then in the first place gather this excellent fruit of our
sicknesses to have a sensible apprehension by them of our so many and so
grievous delicts, and offenses, whereof we stand guilty before God, to the end
to crave pardon for them with repentance and humility, and to make unto him an
holy protestation to m^ke better performance of our duties hereafter to walk in
his obedienee and fear, thorough the assissance of his grace, and conduct of
his Spirit: Which we must ask of him by our fervent prayers, with faith and
assurance to be heard according to his promis^s. And so shall we be able to say
to him with David, that excellent s^rvant of God, Psalm. 119.67. and 72.

Ere thou did touch me with thy rod,
I er'd and went astray:
But now I have thy holy Word,
And make it all my stay.
And also, O happy time may I well say,
When thou did me correct:
For as a guide to know thy Laws,
Thy Word did me direct.


And behold how the maladies of our bodies are unto us thorough Gods grace,
good and wholesome medicines for our souls.

The second benefit sickness brings us, is to unloose, and pluck up our hearts
from the earth, to lift them up unto heaven.

Experience shows us that our hearts remain over much fastened and rooted
here below, whilst we are here in health and at our ease, we could be content
never to budge hence. Nay, we could be content our felicity were here assigned
us, and our sovereign happiness, so far are we blinded. But God who has
ordained us for a better life, makes us see and feel how vain and deceiveable
are the sweet allurements and imaginary prosperities of this mortal life, when
it pleases him to cross it thus with sickness, and with so many miseries and
discomodities, which accompany us therein perpetually, from the cradle to the
grave. This makes us know, yea makes us cry out with Esaias, chapter 47. v. 6. That
all flesh is as grass, and the glory thereof as the flower of the field. With
David Psalm. 90.6. That the flower of this short life is such that men are in
perpetual travel and martyrdom. And with Job, chap. 14. That man that is
borne of a woman is of short life, and fraught with sorrow. And this is it God
puts us in mind of chiefly, when we feel our selves sick, or otherwise
afflicted, to make us contemn the earth, and to aspire up unto heaven, to
cause us to distaste this miserable life, and to make us earnestly and heartily
to relish and meditate on the heavenly life, to the end, that there where our
treasure is, there also might be our heart: and that our faith and hope might
be weaned from the world, and from the things of the world to be raised up
thither where they have their true objects, unto God, and to everlasting life:
For also faith is not of things visible, but of invisible: And hope is not of
good things present, but of good to come; that is to say, of good celestial
and eternal, obtained in Jesus Christ, good so transcendently great, and so
incomprehensible, that as Saint Paul says, 1. Corinthians. 1.6. Eye has not
seen, nor ear has heard, nor has entered into the heart of man, that which
God has prepared for those that love him.

There is yet a third excellent fruit, which God makes us reap from the
sicknesses, he sends us: that is, that by this means he puts us to trial,
and to the touchstone, to purify and to amend our faith, to make it eminently
to appear to his glory, and to the edification of our neighbor. For as by
this means our faith is stirred up and elevated from the world unto God, from
the earth unto heaven, from this life unto a life most happy and lasting for
ever: as also is it by such trials exercised and examined, and as it were
refined and made more pure after the manner of gold, which is tried and
purified by fire: Even as Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 1.7. It is also by this means
drawn forth into evidence, and set in the light, with patience, constancy, and
other Christian virtues, which God has infused into us, and which otherwise
without this would not be known of any, and thereby would remain without use,
and without profit in regard of our neighbors. And indeed we could not know
what was the faith, and the patience of Job, of Abraham, of David, and of such
a number of other excellent servants of God, if God had not made them pass
thorough the fire of sundry temptations and trials, and we should not have at
this day the worthy examples which we have to lead us to conform our selves
unto their imitation. It fares with the faith and patience of Christians, as
with the courage and valor of the soldier, which is not well seen, but in
the midst of the battle: As with the light of the Stars, which appears not
but in the night: As with the odor and sweet smell of frankincense, which is
not smelt, but when it is cast into the fire. Even so does God make known unto
our brethren the courage which he has given us, when he causes us to come
into the hands of some rough and violent sickness; he makes to appear unto
them the brightness of our faith, when he spreads over us some night of
affliction, he makes them smell the good perfume of our patience, when he
casts us into some fire of adversity; and by this means our brethren not
only are instructed, edified, comforted by our good example, but withal led
to praise and glorify God, who it is that sustains and strengthens us amidst
the infirmities of our flesh, shows forth and perfecteth his great strength
in our great weakness.

Lo then the principal and more remarkable spiritual fruits, which God of his
goodness propounds unto us to be reaped from our bodily sicknesses.

And for this cause then, Sir, now that God visits you with this sickness, and
lays you on this bed of infirmity; you must acknowledge, that it is his
fatherly hand, that handles you on this fashion, as one of his children, and
that hereby he calls you to the fruition of these excellent fruits and
benefits, which have been declared unto you, for his glory, and for your good
and salvation.

Acknowledge then that he would awaken you from out your faults and sins,
that he would have you to have a feeling of them indeed, to breed in you a
dislike of them, that ye might seek for the free pardon of them in his mercy,
through Jesus Christ, that you may renounce them with your whole heart, to take
a sound resolution to serve him from henceforth, and to walk in his fear with
more zeal and affection then heretofore thorough his grace. Is not this that
which you promise?

Yes.

Acknowledge further, that it is his will to make you by this means to have a
feeling of the miseries of this life, to contemn, and trample under foot the
world and the vanities thereof, to the end to aspire with your whole heart unto
the heavenly and everlasting life, and thereby to answer unto the dignity of
that condition, whereunto you are called, to be the child of God, and not the
child of the world; to have your conversation as a Citizen of heaven, and not
of the earth, and thereby to have you to seek as Saint Paul says, Philip.
3.20. The things that are above, and not those that are here below. And is not
this also the thing which you protest you will do all the days of your life,
Gods grace thereunto assisting you?

Yes.

Acknowledge you lastly, that the good pleasure of God is to try and examine
you by this sickness, to the end that your faith and patience might be made more
perfect, and that they might be seen and known of your brethren and neighbors,
that they might thereby be edified and comforted, and might thereby give glory
to God, when they shall see that you shall bear patiently and constantly the
sorrow, and the violence of this affliction, and that you shall dispose and
apply your self to rest with a calm and peaceable mind, in all and whatsoever
handling it shall please God to impose upon you with his fatherly hand. Is not
this also moreover the resolution you take?

Yes.

I beseech God, give you grace thoroughly and happily to accomplish your holy
promises, to his glory, and your own salvation. It is your part also to pray
unto him for the same, with your heart; otherwise you can never be able to
perform it of your self. But if you ask it fervently with a true and lively
faith in the name of his welbeloved Son Jesus Christ our Lord, doubt not but
that according to his promises he hears you, yea from this very time forward
he is near unto you, and fills your soul with holy consolations, strengthening
you with patience, and even solacing you as much as he shall know it to be
necessary for you, and by that means by so much the more will he oblige you to
rejoice and solace your self in his goodness, and to glorify his holy Name by
thanksgiving. And this is it which he says himself unto you, and unto
whomsoever is afflicted as you are, call upon me when thou shall be oppressed,
and then will I help thee, and thou shall honor me for the same. Would you
not then have us now address our prayers altogether jointly with you, that it
would please him to assist you with his grace?

Yes.

A Prayer for the sick, in whom there shall be no appearance or sign of death.
LORD our good God and merciful Father, we prostrate our selves in all
humility at the feet of thy Divine Majesty, to acknowledge that, which is but
too true, that we are utterly unworthy of any grace or mercy from thee, and are
worthy of the lower-most hell: if thou should deal with us in the rigor of
thy justice, by reason of the numberless number of our sins and offenses,
wherewith we feel and confess our selves tainted and guilty before thee. But
we beseech thee (that having regard to thy great and infinite goodness, thou will be merciful unto us poor sinners, and be merciful unto us for thy dear
Son Christ Jesus sake our Lord, looking upon us not in our selves; but rather
in the person of that Son of thy love, as members of his body, reconciled
unto thy Majesty through the benefit of his death. And as thou art the Father
of Mercy, and God of all consolation, rich in compassion and free grace toward
all them that call upon thee, and put their trust in thee. We beseech thee be
graciously pleased to show unto us thy plenteous mercy both toward us, and
generally upon us all that now call upon thee for thy grace, and particularly
toward the person of this thy child and servant, lying on this his bed of
infirmity. Give him to acknowledge in the first place, that he is not struck
by any other hand, but by thine; that he may learn to submit himself unto,
and under the same in all humility and obedience. And to this end, let him
remember that it is a fatherly and a sweet hand, which strikes not to destroy,
but rather to save: and who after he has wounded, heals and quickens by
the same wounds which he has made. Make him to seele that he is a poor and
miserable sinner, not only to be issued forth of that mass of corruption out
of which we are all sprung in Adam, but also and chiefly because that after it
pleased thee to give him the grace to know thee the only true God, and him whom
thou have sent, Jesus Christ, in whom abides eternal life, manifesting unto
him by that means thy free adoption in thy welbeloved, reconciling him to thy
self, and so having done him the honor to hold the rank and place to be one of
the number of thy children and servants in the midst of thy Church, he has not
duly acknowledged these abundant riches of thy mercy, to love and serve thee
with his whole heart, as he ought to have done, in renouncing the world, and in
denying himself: even as our ingratitudes are infinite, by which we fight
ordinarily against thy bountifulnes and grace. O God and Father, touch him then
in his heart with a lively sense of all his infirmities and offenses, that
without any way flattering of himself, he may escape and be freed from
condemnation before thy sacred Majesty, may acknowledge that unto thee
belongs justice, and to himself confusion of face: may be altogether
displeased at, and wholly deny himself, and may confess that justly and by
good right thou do lay upon him thy chastisements: and that if thou should
deal with him according to his deserts, thou should utterly overwhelme him
under the unsupportable weight of thy justice, and should cast him into the
bottomless depth of eternal death. But withal make, Lord, this
acknowledgment to serve only to humble him, and not to precipitate him into
the gulf of despair, and that he being on the one side beaten down, and
dejected to the earth by thy mighty hand, not so much by the sense of this
sickness, as in the sense and feeling of his sins, he may on the other side by
the same hand of thine be succored, relieved, and raised up again in firm
hope, through the consideration of this thy incomprehensible mercy, out of which
thou have given us so precious; so rich a pledge as thy dear Son Jesus
Christ our Lord, whom thou have not spared, but rather have given him up unto
death, yea unto the ignominious and accursed death of the cross, to redeem us
from the ignominy and curse of sin. Grant Lord, that this thy poor servant
may have his whole refuge there, excite and strengthen his faith, by the which
he may seek and find in that death and entire obedience of thy Son, the
expiation of all his sins and disobediences, and may firmly embrace and lay
hold on his perfect righteousness, with the which being prepared and clothed,
he may find peace with thee, and boast himself in and of the hope of thy
glory, even in the very midst of his troubles: And that thus the sorrows of
the curse wherewith thou visitest him in his body may be sweetened through the
rest and contentment of his soul, that if it be thy good pleasure to raise him
up again from this sickness, and to prolong his days, as thou do not
thereof as yet bereave him of good hope, give him grace to use them aright, to
thy glory, and that perpetually nourishing the memory of this gracious favor
received from thee, it may serve to consecrate the remainder of his life to
serve and honor thee with so much the greater affection and zeal. And to this
end, give him to receive this sickness as a fatherly chastisement coming from
thy hand to awaken and to withdraw him from his sins, and to make him take up
an holy resolution by thy grace, all the days of his life thoroughly to make a
deep impression in his memory, of his duty and of that obedience, whereunto
hereby he stands obliged unto thee to walk in thy fear more purely, and more
affectionately for the time to come then he hitherto has done. Bless unto him
the remedies which thou permittest him to use, whereby to receive ease in his
disease: moderate the sharpnes of his griefs, and shorten the course of them,
if thou know it to be expedient for him, that thereby he may have a subject
of glorifying thee, and of rendering thanks unto thee for the same. But if it be
thy will yet to continue any longer, or even to augment unto him this sickness,
grant it may be always for his good, and give increase of strength and of
constancy to be able to bear these thy trials with a calm and meek mind,
without any impatiencie or grudging: and that thus in these truly christian
testimonies of his faith and Patience, thou may be glorified, and his
neighbors edified and comforted. And that even he also by this experience had
of the miseries of the world, and of this life, may be taught to wean his heart
and affections from them, to raise them up heartily unto the meditation and
diligent search of that repose and incomprehensible happiness which is set
before us in heaven, and in everlasting life. Grant also Lord the like graces
unto all others that are sick and afflicted: Comfort them, and strengthen them,
as thou know shall be needful for them: and above all, give them power
evermore with a true and lively faith to embrace thy mercy in Jesus Christ,
therein to find matter of consolation. Hear us Father of grace, for the same
thy dear Son Jesus Christ our Lord his sake, as we humbly beseech thee in that
form of prayer, which he himself has commanded us to offer up unto thee: Our
Father which art in heaven, etc.

And because, Lord, that without faith we cannot please thee, we beseech thee
so to increase the same in this thy servant, and in us, that he may be enabled
even unto the last gasp of his life, and we with him, to persevere in the same,
and to be evermore readily disposed thereof to render unto thee a pure
confession both with heart and mouth, as we now do: I believe in God, etc.

Such is his faith Lord, and also ours: give us grace both to live and die in
the same: through Jesus Christ thy Son our Lord, who in the unity of the Holy
Ghost, lives and reigns with thee, GOD eternally.

When there is some likelihood, that the sickness will be mortal, there must
be added other consolations* such as these following.
SIR, You must ever be of good courage in the midst of this affliction,
wherewith God continues to visit you in your body; then you must know, that he
sends it you, and continues it unto you, but for your good, and for the
salvation of your soul: To teach you by this means, to come to a true
knowledge of your self, as being a poor sinner; to detest more and more your
sins, to despise the world, to lift up your self wholly unto God, and to call
upon him so much the more fervently, with assurance to be heard, according to
his holy promises, and to obtain from him Christian constancy which is
necessary for you in this trial.

The assurance of Gods mercy in Jesus Christ, the foundation of all comfort.
NOW that which ought most to comfort you, and to strengthen you with courage
and patience, which is that assurance which you must evermore take, that God
for his welbeloved Son, Jesus Christ our Lord his sake, embraces you in his
love and free gracious good will, has pardoned your sins, has adopted and
received you into the number of his children, to make you an heir of the
kingdom of heaven, by virtue of that purchase which Jesus Christ has made for
you by his death. Such an assurance will ever make you certain, that nothing
can befall you, be it in life, or be it in death, which shall not be unto you a
favor and a blessing from your heavenly father, and which by consequence shall
not be an help and a means ordained by his wise providence to advance and
lead you unto a happy life.

This assurance comes from Faith.
TRue it is, that this assurance we cannot take of our selves, but it is this
our good God, who gives it us, when by the power of his Holy Spirit, and by his
Word, he creates in our hearts a true and a lively faith, with the which we
receive and appropriate to our selves the promises of his grace, which he
addresseth unto us in the preaching of his holy Gospel. These promises briefly
import thus much. That God so loved the world, that he has given his only
Son, to the end that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life, John 3.16. If then God give you the grace to believe in his
only Son, and to embrace and lay hold on him for your Redeemer and Savior
(as we gather you do, by the profession you hitherunto have made thereof, and
do still make the same in the midst of his Church) you may and ought to take
from thence an holy assurance, that God according to the infallible truth of
his Word, has received you into his love, that you shall not perish, but you
shall have eternal life. Now this being so, what can you be afraid of? Romans
8.30, 31. If God be for us, who shall be against us? He who has not spared his
only Son, but has given him for us, how shall he not also give us all other
things with him? He has given us the greater, namely his own Son: shall he
deny you then the less, to wit, what ere may be necessary and expedient to
keep you, and to uphold you against all manner of evils, both corporal and
spiritual, as well in life, as in death.

Faith applies unto every faithful one the promises of the Gospel.
NOw this application, (I spoke of) which you ought to make of the promises of
the Gospel, to draw from them such an holy assurance, it is necessarily to be
looked for in faith. For to believe in Jesus Christ, is not to believe only in
the gross, that there is a Jesus Christ; and that he that believes in him
has eternal life: and it is not enough to believe that the promises of the
Gospel are true in general, and out of us; The Devil himself believes
indeed all this, and yet has no true faith for all that. But to believe in
Jesus Christ, it is when the faithful believes, that there is salvation in
Jesus Christ for himself; which the Devil cannot believe: And true justifying
faith, and by which the just lives, consists properly in this, that we apply
unto our selves, and that every one of us appropriate in his own particular to
himself, the promises of salvation, to be able to say, every one in his own
behalf, that which Saint Paul said in the person of every faithful man and
woman. Gal. 2.20. I live in the faith of the Son of God, who has loved me,
and who gave himself for me. Also, Tim. 1.2. I know in whom I have believed,
and am persuaded, that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto
him, even unto that day. And again, Romans 8.37, 38. I am assured that neither
death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things to
come, neither height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to
separate us from the love of God which he has showed us in Jesus Christ our
Lord. This same faith brings us not a simple opinion, or conjecture of our
salvation, but even an assured knowledge of it, according to that which Saint
John says chap. 5. ver. 14. We know that we are translated from death to life.
Also 1. John 10. We know that we are borne of God. And, I have (says he Ioh.
5.13.) written these things unto you, that believe on the name of the Son of
God, that you might know that you have eternal life. This faith gives us to go
to the throne of ye grace of our God. Heb. 4.10. With assurance, so says the
Apostle, Heb. 10.22. Yea with a true heart, and in full certainty of faith. As
also S. Paul, Ephesians. 2.12. says that by Jesus Christ we have boldness and
access in confidence thorough faith which we have in him. This faith is called
Heb. 11.1. an hypostasie or substance of things that are hoped for: That is to
say, which makes to subsist, and to have a being in our minds of the things
believed and hoped for, nor more, nor less, then as if already we were in the
actual possession and fruition of them. This faith makes us find peace and
rest in our souls and consciences, and drives forth of them the fears and
terrors which the sense of sin brings into them, and the apprehension of the
judgment of God* according to that which Saint Paul says, Romans 5.1. That being
justified by faith we have peace with God thorough our Lord Jesus Christ by
whom also we have been led through faith unto this grace, in whom we hold our
selves firm, and boast our selves of the hope we have of the glory of God.

The gift of Perseverance assured to the faithful.
MOreover these passages propound and set forth unto us this holy assurance of
faith, not only for the present, but also for the time to come; and contain a
promise, that God will give us to persevere in this faith even unto the end.
Otherwise, where should this assurance be whereof the holy Apostle speaks,
not to be able to be separated from the love of God in Jesus Christ? Where
should be this subsistence and being of things hoped for? How should we have in
our souls a solid peace with God? How should we hold our selves firm in this
grace? How should we be able to boast and glory in the hope of the glory of
God? Such then is the incomprehensible bounty and goodness of this Heavenly
Father, that he begins not in us the work of our salvation to leave it
imperfect, according to that which Saint Paul says to the Philippians, and in
their presence unto all true faithful ones, Philip. 1.6. I am assured that he
that has begun this good work in you, will perfect it even unto the day of
Jesus Christ. As besides he says elsewhere, Romans 11.26. That the gifts of God
are without repentance, that is to say, that he never unsayes them, nor ever
retracts them.

Against the objection, that this assurance of faith is a presumption.
NOr is there cause why finally this certainty of faith should be censured in
us for rashness and presumption: For on the contrary; it were extreme rashness
and presumption in us, if we vouchsafed not to give credit unto so excellent
promises of our God: and it is humility and obedience both to receive, and to
rest in them with reverence. It is likewise said, That he that has recei^^d
the witness of God, has (...) to his seal that God is true, John 3.33. That
is to say, he has (as it were) subscribed and given approbation unto the truth
of God, which he shows in the accomplishment of his promises: And on the
contrary, it is said, 1. John 5.10.11 That he that believes not God, has made
him a liar: because he has not believed the record which God has given of his
Son: And this is the record that God has given to us eternal life, and this
life is in his Son.

Two things might make us rash and overweening in this assurance which we take
of our salvation. The one if we found it upon the worthiness and merit of our
works; Romans 3.20. For no flesh shall be justified before God by the works of the
Law, and all they that seek to be justified by them, are under the curse.
This says Saint Paul, Galat. 3.10.2. But it is not upon our own righteousness,
which is none at all, that we found any such assurance, but even upon the
righteousness of him, whom God has made to be sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. that
is to say, a sacrifice for sin: to the end that we might be the
righteousness of God in him: and by whose obedience we are made righteous, in
stead as by the disobedience of Adam we were sinners, Romans 5.19. The other
point which might make us overweening in this behalf, might be this. If we
presumed to acquire and get any such knowledge of our salvation by the subtilty
and acutenes of our own spirits or wits: it being so, that the natural man
perceives not the things which are of God, thus says Saint Paul, 1 Corinthians.
2.14. But surely we make account to have received, as the same Apostle
speaks, 1 Corinthians. 2.12. Not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is
of God, that we might know the things that are freely given unto us of God. He
says yet further in the same place, 1 Cor. 2.9.10. That the things which in
regard of us are altogether incomprehensible, God has revealed unto us by his
spirit. He adds finally (1. Corinthians. 2.16.) That by this means we apprehend
the will of Christ. Now by this spirit of God are led all they that are the
children of God. And this more yet, says the same Apostle; Romans 8.14. And it
is called the spirit of adoption, and thereby we cry Abba Father. (Gal. 6.4.)
to wit, we invoke and instantly call upon God, as our Father. As also it is the
same Spirit, (says Saint Paul, Romans 8.11.16.) which witnesses to our Spirits
that we are the children of God. The same Apostle yet further says, Ephesians.
1.13, 14. That when we believe the Gospel, we are sealed with the holy Spirit
of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption of
the purchased possession unto the praise of his glory: teaching us hereby that
the record of the Holy Ghost received in our hearts with faith, is unto us as a
seal which the Holy Ghost imprinteth in our hearts, to make us awful of the
promise of God, and to assure us that we are his children, and that as in
contracts which are made between men, they give sometimes earnest, that is to
say, a part of the price agreed upon, as well to begin the payment as to make
the match or bargain irrevocable. And to give assurance, it shall be firmly and
constantly kept: Even so the Holy Ghost which by faith begets peace and joy
in our hearts, is given us for earnest of our celestial inheritance, ( Romans
14.17.) to assure us by this beginning, of the spiritual goods, which God has
promised to his children, that he holds us for his purchased possession, unto
the praise of his glory, and without ever revoking his promises, he will gather
us finally into the full fruition of this heavenly inheritance.

There must (if it be possible) be drawn from the mouth of the sick a
confession of his sins, of his repentance, and of his faith. And if happily
he have not the use of speech, but yet of understanding, he must be exhorted to
answer by some sign.
NOw then M. it is now your part to be of good courage, and to apply unto your
self soundly and heartily this holy doctrine, for the comfort of your soul.
This doctrine has been addressed and declared unto you by the preaching of the
Gospel in the bosom of the Church of God, whereof you have the honor to be
in the number: it has been also confirmed unto you by the use of the
Sacraments, in which you have communicated. Have you not received them with
faith?

Yes.

Do you not believe according to the same, that God is not only your Creator,
but that sin having made you a castaway, he is your Savior in Jesus Christ?

Yes.

Acknowledge you not that you are a poor and miserable sinner, and confess
you not, that should he enter into a reckoning with you, to impute your sins
unto you, you should of necessity and unavoidably perish in death and eternal
damnation.

Yes.

Do you not protest you are exceeding sorry and much grieved for having so
offended him, and that you do repent the same with all your heart?

I do.

Do you not utterly renounce all conceit and confidence in your own
righteousness, to settle entirely and wholly your hope in the sole mercy of God,
by the which he justifies and saves us in his beloved Son Jesus Christ our
Lord?

Yes.

Believe you not that he has received you in this his mercy, that he is
appeased and at peace with you, and has reconciled you into his favor and
grace with him, in regard of, and through the obedience and merit of the same
Jesus Christ his Son, whom you firmly believe died for your sins, and rose
again for your justification?

Yes, I do.

Now I beseech God to be pleased to establish you, and to increase in you more
and more this faith, according to the which you must take a full assurance of
being justified and saved, seeing God has given you this grace to believe with
the heart unto righteousness, and with your mouth to make this confession unto
salvation, Romans 10.10.

To induce the sick person to set up his rest, and to resolve, be it for
life* or be it for death, according to the will of God.
BEing thus supported and sustained by the firm foundation of faith, you must
take up an holy resolution, and expect constantly without all fear, such issue
whatsoever it shall please God to send unto your sickness, with a settled
persuasion, that it cannot choose but be profitable and wholesome for you, be it
that it please him to cause you to enjoy yet longer life here below, or be it,
it shall be his pleasure to withdraw you hence, to make you more happy. If it
shall be his pleasure to return and restore you to health, as he is almighty, to
fetch even the dead out of the grave, and to make them to live again: This
shall be (if he please) to give give you to serve yet further to his glory, yea
more affectionately then ever hitherto, for which you have to pray unto him for
the grace. But if his will be to lead you by this sickness unto the end of your
course, it shall be to receive you into the fruition of that perfect happiness
which the Son of God has so dearly purchased for you by the price of his
blood. And therefore go you unto him with an holy cheerfulnes, in the assurance
of his grace and favors, cheer up your self, and rejoice in the happy exchang
which you shall make of the earth with heaven, of this miserable and short
life, for one that is most happy and permanent for evermore; from these wretched
and perishing goods, unto goods celestial and eternal, which eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, and which far surmount the thought of man, which God
has prepared for them that love him.

Are you not then well resolved to conform in all this your will unto the will
of your Father in heaven? To the end, that be it whether you live, you live to
the Lord, or be it that you dye, you dye to the Lord, Romans 14.8. Being well
assured that Christ shall be unto you always gain, both in life and in death?

Yes.

God grant you that grace.

To comfort and assure the sick in the weakness of his faith.
IN the mean time, I am not ignorant, that your faith, how great and strong
soever it may be, may yet for all that be small and weak in you: For during
the infirmities of this life, the Holy Ghost is but given you in a certain
measure, according to the which we know but in part, and our spiritual
renovation is but yet here begun. Certain it is, we cannot attain here below
unto the perfection of faith. And therefore I doubt not but your faith yet is
infirm and weak, and cannot choose but be tossed with sundry temptations, and
skirmished with diverse assaults of doubts and distrusts. But you must not
therefore shrink or be crest-fallen in courage: For this combat you feel in
yourselfe, it is the fight, which as Saint Paul says Galat. 5. ver. 17. is in
the soul of every faithful one, between the flesh and the spirit, and
therefore it is unto you an assured testimony that you have faith. For as the
flesh fights in you by distrust, the spirit also fights in you by faith;
and this faith will never yield it self, being backed and sustained by the
spirit of God, which will make it victorious. And how imperfect soever it be,
God will make it sufficient unto you unto salvation: For it is not said, he
that shall believe perfectly, shall be saved, but rather simply, he that shall
believe. Besides as you feel in your self your faith weak and imperfect, so I
doubt not, but you therewith feel an holy desire, that it might be
strengthened and increased, and that your heart prays and makes request unto
God for the same. Is it not true?

Yes, it is.

Now since it is so, this faith, this desire that it might be increased, and
this prayer you make for it unto God, are not these fruits of the spirit, and
not of the flesh? And seeing they are the fruits of Gods Spirit produced in
you; is not this a sure testimony that you are led by the same, and by
consequence the child of God? For all they that are led by the Spirit of God,
are the children of God, as Saint Paul says, Romans 8.14.

Courage then, Sir; say boldly with that holy Apostle in the midst of your
combats: I am assured that nothing shall be able to separate me from the love of
God which he has showed me in Jesus Christ our Lord

To assure the sick against the temptations and terrors of conscience.
Four things there are indeed, which in this spiritual combat may give you
terror, stagger your faith, and trouble the peace of your conscience: Namely,
the sense of your sins, the apprehension of death, the fear of the Devil,
and the horror of the judgment of God, before whom we are to appear at our
going forth of this life. But against the fear of al these things, the
goodness of God in the benefits of Christ, and in the testimonies he gives us
in his Word, furnishes you with good and sufficient remedies, thoroughly to
assure and establish you in invincible constancy.

Against the terrors proceeding from the sense of his sins.
FIrst for the regard of your sins, it is indeed very necessary to have a
through sensible apprehension and lively feeling of them, to humble you before
God: But in as much as you protest you have a true and serious repentance of
them, and do seek and lay hold of by faith the satisfaction and expiation of
them in the blood of Jesus Christ, assure your self they can in no sort hinder
the effect of your salvation. If you be a sinner, why, Jesus Christ also came
into the world to save sinners: 1. Tim. 1.15. He is that Lamb of God that takes
away the sins of the world: John 1.29. It is his blood which cleanses us
from all iniquity. 1 Ioh. 1.7.9. And whosoever shall believe in him, shall
receive remission of his sins through his name: Act. 10 43. For this cause is it
that there should be preached in his name repentance and remission of sins:
Luke 24 47. Yea he himself invites us to himself to endow us with the
fruition of such a good, come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest, Matthew. 11.28. Go you then unto him, if you
feel your self overwhelmed with the burden of your sins in assurance to
find remedy and rest to your soul. And for this self same cause performs he
yet still daily the office of an Advocat with the Father for us, If we have
sinned (says Saint John, chapter 2. ver. 1, 2.) We have an Advocat with the
Father, to wit, Jesus Christ the righteous, who is the propitiation for our
sins.

Against the fear of death.
NOW as touching death, why should you fear it, seeing your sins are not
imputed unto you? For by sin it is that death entered into the world, (thus
says Saint Paul, Romans 5.12.) and by consequent, where there is no sin, there
can be no death. And indeed, as for eternal death, which the Scriptures call
the second death, you have from it a full and a perfect release by the means
of this faith, which God has given you. Verily (says the Son of God, John
5.24.) I say unto you, that he that hears my Word, and believes in him that
sent me, he has eternal life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is
passed from death unto life.

And as for the death of the body, whereunto we remain still subject, it is
not unto the faithful a testimony of Gods anger upon them, as it is ever such
unto the reprobate, but rather a great and singular favor of his bounty, and
which brings them an infinitenes of excellent commodities. First of all it
delivers and sets us free from all manner of evils, and dangers, putting
an end unto such a number of miseries, vexations and griefs, which exercise and
disquiet us uncessantly both in our bodies and in our minds, during the course
of this miserable life, or rather of this continual death, wherein we languish
here below: and by drawing us out of this corrupt world, imbrued in malignitie;
with the corruption whereof we cannot choose but be infected, as with a
contagious air, to see our selves brought to this unhappy necessity of
offending daily the goodness of our heavenly Father, so many ways as we do.

Secondly, corporal death is an entrance to us into a true life, by the
benefit of Jesus Christ, who has himself passed through this death, to make
the passage happy and dangerlesse unto us: it is a safe bridge unto us, to
pass us and convay us out of the world unto God, from earth to heaven, and out
of the calamities of this transitory life unto the incomprehensible
blessedness of life eternal: unto that fullness of joys, which is (as David
says, Psalm. 16.11.) in beholding the face of the Lord. This is the happiness
which your soul shall enjoy even from your very instant departure out of this
body. And as for your body, which shall be put into the earth, this shall not be
for it, there to perish for ever, but rather there to rest only for a time in
expectation of a blessed resurrection: For this cause is it, that the death of
the faithful is called a sleep in the Scriptures, and they are called, they
that are asleep, in regard of their bodies, which at the last day shall be
awakened, and raised up out of the dust, to possess together with their souls
glorious immortality, being made conformable unto the glorious body of our Lord
Jesus Christ, Philip. 3.21. He is the head, and they are the members: And
therefore it must needs be that the members be made like and conformable to
their head.

What do you then find now in death, which should astonish or affright you,
seeing it will deliver and set you free from all evil, and will mount you up
to the highest pitch of all happiness? But rather you shall find in it
nothing, which makes not f^^ your comfort, and to settle and warrant you, and
which for that cause ought not to make you wait for it with resolution and
repose of spirit, yea to breath and long after it with all your heart, when the
hour thereof shall come. And to say with Saint Paul, My desire tends and
endeavors to go hence, and to be with Christ

Against the fear of the Devil.
AS for the fear you may have of the Devil, you see now how you have no great
subject to fear^ ^im, seeing that death cannot hurt you, but by that death
whereof he has the empire and power thereof. Now the Apostle witnesses that
Jesus Christ has not only by death destroyed death, but also him that had the
power of death, to wit, the Devil, Heb. 2.14.

Our Lord says himself, that the Prince of this world has nothing in him: Nor
then has he ought in those that ^ire his members, of the number of whom (by
the grace of God) you are one. Besides for us, and for our profit it was, that
the Son of God fought with, and has vanquished and overcome him upon the
Cross, upon the which he has (as Saint Paul speaks, Col. 2.15.) dispoiled
the principalities and powers of hell, which he openly led in show, triumphing
over them in the same.

I doubt not but this enemy of our salvation will perform his utmost against
you to astonish and trouble our faith. For as S. Peter says, 1. Pet. 5.8, 9.
Our adversary the Devil goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour. But Saint Peter adds: That we must resist him, being strong in
faith. Resist you the Devil (the same says S. James, chapter 4.7.) and he will
fly from you. Now to resist and overcome him, you must be furnished with the
armor of God, whereof S. Paul speaks to the Ephesians, chap. 6. ver. 16.
Taking above all (as he says) the shield of faith, by the which you may quench
all the fiery darts of the Devil.

Against the apprehension of the judgment of God.
THere remains the fear you may happily take of the judgment of God, before
whom you must appear. But whereon now shall this apprehension be founded?
Seeing your sins shall not be imputed unto you, seeing you shall not be
condemned thereby unto death, seeing it shall be to no purpose for Satan there
to accuse you, you being there absolved and justified by the grace of God. This
is the doctrine which S. Paul affords us, Romans 8.32.33. Who shall lay any thing
to the charge of Gods Elect, it is God that justifies? Who is he that
condemns? it is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again, who is
even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us.

Thus then you must indeed appear before God, but not as before a severe and
rigorous judge, but rather as before a merciful and an appeased Father toward
us in Jesus Christ, By Jesus Christ, I say, whom you have himself for an
Advocat and Intercessor with the Father: Now he shall not be denied by the
Father in his request for you, by Jesus Christ, whose member you are. Now there
is no condemnation to them that are in Jesus Christ, says Saint Paul, Romans
8.1. By Jesus Christ in the end, in whom you believe. Now he that believes in
me (says he) has eternal life, and he shall not come into condemnation, but
rather is passed from death unto life.

Is not this then, Sir, your faith, and firm belief, that by the benefit of
our Lord Jesus Christ you have the remission of your sins, John 5.24. That you
are saved from eternal death, and set free from the rigor of the judgment of
God, and that by consequent Satan cannot prejudice or bring you any hurt by his
accusations and temptations, and that your bodily death cannot but he happy and
profitable to you every way.

One must also draw from the sick a protestation of his charity toward his
neighbor.
FInally, Sir, it being so that faith works by charity, and necessarily
produces it, seeing it has pleased God, that you are at peace with him by
faith, you must also be at one and in peace with all your brethren and
neighbors through true Christian charity. And therefore tell us if you renounce
from your heart all hatred, rancour, and enmity against all men, without any
exception, and do desire the welfare and salvation of all in general, and of
every one in particular, as your very own?

Yes, I do.

Do you not forgive honestly and with a good heart all them who have any way
whatsoever it be offended you, as also reciprocally you do ask forgivenes of
all them whom you have any way offended?

Yes.

Now Sir, must we herewithall address our prayer unto God, to the end it would
please him to strengthen you in the faith, which he has given you, and to make
more and more to abound in you all graces, it is your part to humble your self
with us before him, and to lift up unto him your heart to implore his mercy
from the depth of your soul.

A Prayer for the sick, in whom there shall be likelihood of death.
O Lord our good God, and merciful Father, we are indeed every way unworthy to
lift up our eyes toward thee, for the multitude and grievousnesse of our
sins and transgressions, wherewith we are tainted and blemished before thy
face. But it is not in the confidence of our own worthiness that we dare
presume to present our selves at the feet of thy sacred Majesty, but rather in
the assurance of thy great compassions, and the perfect obedience which thy
dear Son Jesus Christ our Lord has performed unto thee in our name, with
whose righteousness we beseech thee to cover and adorn us with thy grace,
that through him, and in thy favor we may be reconciled and acceptable. But now
we beseech thee, O good God, be pleased particularly to impart this great mercy
unto this thy poor child and servant, cast down under thy mighty hand, a
poor sinner indeed, and such a sinner as should for ever remain overwhelmed
under the heavy weight and rigor of thy sovereign justice, if thou affoordest
not him thy infinite mercy.

Grant him grace more and more to enter into a serious examination and
acknowledgment of his sins, that thereby he may conceive a true detestation
of them, which may beget in him true repentance, and may further him and put
him on forward unto an entire and absolute denial of himself, to have his
whole refuge unto thee, and to thy mercy, in the mean time receive him
graciously, Lord, show unto him a fatherly countenance, establish him, and
comfort him, say unto his soul, I am he that is able to ensafe thee, dispose
his heart to receive patiently and with thankfulness this fatherly correction
which thou sendest him, and to resign up wholly himself into thy hands, to
range himself peaceably unto whatsoever it shall please thee out of thy sacred
wisdom to ordain for him. Lord, thou know better then he himself, or we,
either whether is more expedient for him, that he should live, or die. If thy
good pleasure be he shall live, let it be that he may live wholly unto thee: So
as that having well profited by these thy chastisements; he may learn to love
thee, to honor, and serve thee all the days of his life in the midst of thy
Church, by studying perpetually therein to bring forth the fruits of piety and
holiness worthy of thy Gospel, and beseeming the child of such a Father, and
the service of such a Master: And so thou may be glorified in him, and his
neighbors edified. But if otherwise it be thy will to take him out of this
miserable world, give him assurance that it shall be to put him in possession of
thy heavenly kingdom; which thou have prepared for him before the foundation
of the world, and which thy Son has purchased for him by the merit of his
death. To this end, O Father of light, from whom descends every good and
perfect gift, be pleased to give unto him a true and a lively faith, wherewith
he may seek, find, and lay hold on thy mercy for his sins, and true
righteousness in the obedience of the same thy dear Son Jesus Christ our Lord,
who was delivered up unto death for our sins, and rose again for our
justification: Yea ascended into heaven to take possession thereof in our name,
and by that means give us access and entrance thither, whence sin had
banished us. Imprint in his heart by the Power of thy holy Spirit a full
certainty of all these thy graces, that thereby he may be enabled to repose
himself peaceably in thy mercy, and to overcome happily all temptations and
crosses, which Satan and his own flesh would lay before him, to trouble the
serenitie and cleerenesse of his faith, and the tranquillity of his
conscience. Let not his sins then plunge him into despair, seeing they have
been so fully paid and satisfied unto thy justice, not by gold or silver, but
by the precious blood of thy Christ, as by that Lamb without spot and blemish.
Let not death affright him, seeing that sin being destroyed and abolisht in
him, which is the sting of death* it may remain unto him disarmed, and without
power to hurt him. Yea that his soul being separated from his body by
corporal death, it shall be to go unto thee victorious, and freed from the
captivity of sin, thereby to taste through ye fruition of it that blessed life
which he has not tasted of in this world but by hope: leaving indeed his body
in the earth, but not for ever, but rather to be refined, transformed; and made
(in due time) conformable to the glorious body of his head by the benefit of
his resurrection. Let not Satan daunt him any more, seeing he cannot hurt him,
but by sin and death, the dominion whereof he has lost in his behalf:
Assure him in the end, that in vain that accuser shall lay ought to his charge
at the throne of thy justice, seeing that he being already absolved and
justified by thy grace, there is no Judge that can condemn him. Let it be thy
good pleasure, also O good God, to show thy fatherly mercy unto all other sick
persons, comfort and strengthen them according as thou know they have need
thereof: And above all grant them the grace to embrace evermore with a true
and a lively faith thy mercy in Jesus Christ, that therein they may find all
matter of comfort. Grant also unto us all that grace, Lord, that by this
example we may profit, and learn to renounce the world, and our selves, to
employ those few days we have here below to live, to meditate on thy wisdom,
to walk carefully in thy fear, to weane our hearts from the vanities of this
life, to raise them up to the meditation and expectation of the celestial
life; And to this end to be always prepared and in a readiness to appear
before thee, in assurance to be entertained and received in thy great mercy,
even for thy dear Son Jesus Christ our Lord his sake: In whose Name we beseech
thee, O Father of mercy, to hear us, and in all other, which thou know
better then we our selves to be necessary for us, and this for thy poor
servant, as we pray unto thee in that form of prayer, which he himself has
commanded us to offer up unto thee.

Our Father which art in heaven, etc. Lord increase that faith which thou have
planted in the heart of this thy servant and child: defend him with it as with
a strong shield, wherewith he may be enabled to quench all the fiery darts of
the evil one: And grant that persevering constantly in the same unto the last
gasp of his life, he may evermore (at the least in heart) make thereof unto
thee a pure and Christian confession, as we will presently do both with heart
and mouth: I believe in God the Father Almighty, etc.

Such is his Faith, Lord, as also ours: give the grace to live and die in the
same, thorough Jesus Christ thy Son our Lord, who in the unity of the Holy
Ghost, lives and reigns with thee, God eternally. Amen.

If the sick person continue long time, and yet always with appearance of
danger of death, it shall be good to repeat unto the sick now and then some of
the aforesaid consolations, but especially those which serve to assure him, and
to strengthen him against the temptations and combats of conscience.

And if happily the sick person be troubled with raving and fond
imaginations, or otherwise be not of perfect memory and good understanding, to
hear any long discourse in a continued speech; there shall not be used unto him
other then short sentences, such short questions as these here following, also
such as these, or others the like: And but talking to him by respits, and some
pauses interposed.

SIr, you must take a good heart.

It is the fatherly hand of God which visits you for your good and welfare. For
unto them that love God, all things do work together for their good.

Lift up your heart unto God to confess unto him your sins and offenses, and
to embrace by faith his mercy in Jesus Christ, which he has promised unto all
those that repent and believe in him.

Have you not always a good assurance in the mercy of God, and a steadfast
faith in Jesus Christ your Savior?

Yes.

Do you not believe that Jesus Christ died for your sins, and rose again for
your justification? ( Romans 4.25.)

Yes.

Believe you not that he has been made unto you by the Father, wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption? (1. Cor. 1.30.)

I do.

Do you not believe that you are freely justified by the grace of God, through
the redemption which is in Jesus Christ?

Yes.

According to your faith doubt not but God will free you, and securely protect
you from perdition, and give you everlasting life. For God gave his Son, that
whosoever shall believe in him, shall not perish, but rather have everlasting
life. John 16.

Fear not death, seeing by faith you embrace Jesus Christ, who is your life. I
am (says he) the resurrection and the life: He that believes in me, although
he were dead, he shall live: and whosoever lives and believes in me, he shall
never die. John 11.25.26.

If your sins trouble and disquiet you, have recourse ever by faith unto
Jesus Christ, and you shall find rest for your soul. Come unto me (says he
Matthew. 11.28.) you that labor and are heavy laden and I will ease you.

Fear not the rigor of Gods justice: For there is no condemnation to them
that are in Jesus Christ. So says the Apostle S. Paul, Romans 8.1. And who is he
(says he, Romans 8.32.33.) who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect?
It is God that justifies, who is he that shall condemn? It is Christ which
died, or rather (which is more) which is risen again, who also is at the right
hand of God, and who makes intercession for us.

Be not loath to leave this miserable life: which as S. James says, chap. 4.14
is but a vapor which appears for a short time, and then vanishes away: since
in exchange thereof there shall be given you life eternal, and therein the height
of happiness so transcendent and incomprehensible, that neither eye has seen,
nor ear has heard, nor has entered into the heart of man, that which God has
prepared for them that love him.

When it shall appear that the sick does notoriously draw on unto death, or
seems indeed ready to give up the ghost; there may be yet further added (if
need require) and repeated this brief consolation, with the prayer following.
COurage, Sir, you draw near now unto the end of the combat, which cannot but
be happy for you, as you are assured of the victory, by the means of your
faith, which is the victory which overcommeth the world: and the Prince of the
world Jesus Christ your head and Savior stretches out his arm unto you, and
stays attending you at the end of the fight, to present unto you the
incorruptible Crown of glory, which he has purchased for you by the price of
his blood. Commend and commit your self then unto him with your whole heart:
go unto him with cheerfulness, cast your self into his arms, and say unto
him, my soul into thine hands I come to yield, for thou have redeemed me, o
God of truth, Psa. 31. We will beseech God again, that he will give you grace
so to do.

A Prayer.
O Lord, Father of mercy, and God of all consolation and comfort, unfold
plenteously in this exigencie thy mercies and boundless comforts upon the
person of this thy poor servant and child. Give him to reap now and to apply
unto himself an abundant and excellent fruit and profit from those holy
lessons, which thou have (during the course of his life) taught him in thy
school: Give him an invincible faith in this combat, arm him with thy whole
Spiritual armor, that he may be able to stand against all the temptations and
ambushes of Satan; and having vanquished them all he may abide steadfast. If thy
justice astonish him, let thy mercy establish and comfort him, if his sins
accuse him, let the obedience of thy beloved Son excuse and justify him. If
the apprehension of death trouble him, make him behold the gate of eternal
life. Open unto him, whereunto thou go to give him entrance: Thou have given
him thy Son, make good unto him such a gift, that it may not be vain nor
unprofitable. He is one of the sheepfold of that great shepherd, let none take
him out of thy hands. Thou have begun in him his salvation, let not thine own
work remain unperfect. And seeing thou have led him on forward to the end of a
painful course, receive now his soul into thy hands, and carry it into thy
celestial paradise, to that height and full accomplishment of rest and
blessedness in the company and fellowship of thy blessed Angels, and of all
the holy souls of thine Elect, which thou have already gathered thither, there
jointly to enjoy together for ever the fullness of joy, which stands in the
beholding of thy face. Hear us Father of grace for the sake of thy dear Son
Jesus Christ our Lord; who in the unity of the Holy Ghost lives and reigns
with God eternally. Amen.

A briese consolation to give unto the near friends of the deceased person, of
whether sex soever, especially afther their return from the funeral.
Dear friends, in this exigent it is, that you are to call to mind that holy
and Christian instruction which you have received in the school of Jesus
Christ; to make your profit thereof, by bearing patitiently your affliction,
and resting with humility and with a quiet mind in the will of God, whereunto
evermore ours must conform and submit it self: Our nature indeed in such
accidents carries us to nothing but to tears, to plaints, and sorrows: But
the Spirit of God, the author of all new birth, teaches therein to keep
me^sure, and not to grieve after the manner of those that are without hope: (1 Thessalonians. 4.14.) If we be men in mourning, we must withal show that we are
Christians, adorned with Faith and with Hope, to assure us that this corporal
death is unto the faithful children of God (by the benefit of Jesus Christ)
nothing else but a door to enter by into everlasting life, John 5. verse.
^8.29. and that for the regard even of their bodies themselves, that the earth
receives them but a pledge, they shall hear one day the voice of the Lord,
that shall cause them to come forth of their graves into the resurrection of
life; that the party deceased (he or she) may there be of the number of the
children of God, the witnesses, and the mirks, and badges, that God has given
him thereof by the good profession of piety and integrity which he practiced
in the midst of his Church, unto the last gasp of his life, ought not hereof to
leave any scruple or doubt in us. He lived to the Lord, and he is dead to the
Lord, by consequent he is happy and rests from his labors, Apo. 14.13. by
the heavenly witness of the Spirit of God himself. You have then no subject
matter to weep over him, in regard of his estate, which is not to be bewailed:
he being every way most happy. He has likewise a great advantage above us,
that remain still in the world after him: for he is arrived at the haven of
happiness, whereas we are still tossed under the storm and tempest of the
troublesome and dangerous Sea of this miserable world. And therefore far
better is it for us to breath after our going to him, then to wish him here
again with us. As for the regard of your selves, who, in that which may
concern this life, may receive some inconvenience by his absence, you must
consider that God who gave him you, abides for evermore for you, who is
sufficient for us without all other things, whereas all other things are
nothing without him. He it is who will continue evermore over you the care of
his Fatherly Providence, if you continue always to walk in his fear. I
beseech him to give you the grace so to do, and that he will therein strengthen
you with an holy resolution and with constancy.

Consolation for the sick (extracted out of the holy Scriptures) to prepare
them unto death. F. S. N.
HE that is of God, hears the Word of God, and he not only hears it, but
keeps it, and brings it into practice: For all things shall come to an end,
and shall wax old as a garment: but the Word of God shall abide for ever. Now
seeing it is so that by one man sin came into the world, and by sin death,
and consequently all afflictions and adversities do thereon depend, upon just
occasion the life of man is but a continual battle upon the earth: in like
manner, the flesh fights against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
Devil, the world, and the flesh. Which are the enemies of our souls. But
following the Apostles counsel to obtain the victory in this Spiritual
battle, we must resist constantly by faith: For the victory which overcommeth
the world it is our faith, which is a certain and assured knowledge of the
love of God toward us, according as by his Gospel he declares himself to be
our Father and Savior by the means of Jesus Christ. Having then such a firm
faith for your principal foundation, know ye and confess unfainedly before
the Majesty of God, that you are a poor and a miserable sinner, conceived and
borne ini^niquitie and corruption, prone* unto the doing of evil, unprofitable
unto every good thing, and that by your sins you have transgressed without
end and uncessantly the holy commandments of God. In the committing whereof
you have purchased and brought by his just judgment ruin and destruction upon
your self. Notwithstanding you are sorry and grieved in your selves for having
offended him, and do condemn your selves and your sins with true repentance,
desiring that Gods grace may help and relieve your calamity. Pray then in this
firm faith, if you cannot with mouth, speak it in your heart: that God our most
gracious and most merciful Father enter not into judgment nor into an account
with you; but would be pleased to have pity on you in the name of his Son
Jesus Christ our Lord, and that he would blot out your sins and blemishes by
the merit of the death and passion of the same Jesus Christ, in whose Name
offer up unto him his holy Prayer, which he has taught us, saying from your
heart: Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come,
thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven: give us this day our daily bread,
and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us:
and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. For thine is the
kingdom, the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Ame^.

F. S. N. Acknowledge from the bottom of your heart your unrighteousnes, be
sorry for your sins, repent uncessantly, and the kingdom of God will draw
near unto you: Acknowledge there is no righteousness, no innocence, nor any
good works of yours, nor in you: But rather as the children of wrath, conceived
and born in the sin of old Adam, you deserve death and eternal damnation.
Notwithstanding let not this, nor all the sins of the world, (when you should
have committed them) affright you. For Jesus Christ the true Son of the
eternal God, is made true man, conceived by the Holy Ghost, borne of the holy
Virgin, to sanctify and cleanse you: He suffered under Pontius Pilate many
afflictions, injuries, and outrages, making himself a servant and captive to
set you in full liberty. Jesus Christ was crucified as accursed, upon the tree
of the Cross, to deliver you, from the eternal curse. Jesus Christ died
shedding forth his blood, his precious blood, to wash you, to redeem you, to
deliver and wholly set you free from the death of hell, and from the power of
Satan. Jesus Christ was buried in the grave to bury all your sins, which he
took away and blotted out. Jesus Christ descended into hell, insuffering
extreme sorrows, to free you from all the pains and sorrows of death. Jesus
Christ rose again from the dead, to cause you to rise again in your own
body, and unto glorious immortality. Jesus Christ ascended into heaven, to
make you to ascend up thither after him. Jesus Christ sits at the right hand
of God his Father Almighty, being your Advocate and Intercessor toward him,
and the atonement of all your sins. We look for his coming to judge the
quick and the dead, to render unto every one according to his works. But unto
his faithful ones, that believe in him, he will not impute their sins, but
having entirely justified them by his grace, will make them reign with him in
his heavenly throne for ever.

F. S. N. Such is the great mystery of our redemption, which by the working of
the grace of the Holy Ghost, you m^s^ firmly believe was wrough^ for your
salvation: And doubt not but that by the merit of Jesus Christ the head of his
Church, you are a member incorporated into the same, returning him thanks in
great humility, that he has been so gracious unto you, to have granted you
the happiness to have lived in the communion and company of his faithful ones,
for having fed you with his Word, with his Body and Blood, acknowledging (as
being fully assured) the great mercy of God, in the remission of all your
sins, which is made over unto you in Jesus Christ, who will raise you up
again at the last day, to make you reign with him in life everlasting, which
he has promised unto all those which believe in him, being baptized into his
name.

Now, F. S. N. seeing you have this faith, doubt you not to receive the promise
of Faith: for God is true, he cannot lie as man; Sooner shall heaven and earth
perish: But the Word of God shall abide for ever. God is your Father and
Creator, you are his creature and the work of his hands: He has not made you
to destroy you: for he is the Savior of all men, and will not the death of a
sinner, but rather that he be converted and live. Wherefore I declare unto you
in the Name of God, that out of his great goodness and mercy he gives you full
pardon and forgiveness of all your sins through the sole merit of his Son
Jesus Christ our Lord, in the shedding of his precious blood, for he is the
propitiation, not only for all your sins, but for all the sins of the world.

F. S. N. Jesus Christ says with his own mouth, that all things are possible
unto him that believes. Believe then (without doubting at all) that Jesus
Christ putting on our flesh, was made true man, wherein he died for you, having
taken upon him all your sins in his body, to abolish and blot them out. Set
before and present unto God the precious death of his Son Jesus Christ, and
for the merit of the same death and Passion ask his mercy, in saying from the
bottom of your heart in great humility and repentance.

O Lord God Almighty, be merciful unto me a poor and miserable sinner, for
thy dear Son my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ his sake, and by the merit of
his Death and Passion be graciously pleased to receive my soul, which I
commend into thy hands.

F. S. N. Put your whole assured trust and confidence in God. For seeing he is
for you, none shall be against you: for Jesus Christ, who is the Lamb without
spot or blemish, has overcome all for you: He offered up himself once for
you, and by the same sole oblation has wholly abolished all your sins. He
has abrogated, made void, and forcelesse your folly, unrighteousness,
abomination, and obligation. With this good Lord Jesus Christ God the Father
has given you all things.

F. S. N. Be strong in Jesus Christ, who calls and inuites you by his Prophets,
Apostles, and Evangelists, to resort, and freely to make toward him, saying,
you that thirst, come unto the great fountain, come unto me all you that
travel and are heavy laden, and I will ease you.

F. S. N. Believe steadfastly that Jesus Christ has discharged and set you free
from all your sins, and has reconciled you unto God his Father: Unto whom in
all humility and repentance, say from the bottom of your heart.

LOrd God Almighty, have mercy upon me a poor miserable sinner, for thy Son
Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior his sake: and by the merit of his death and
passion be pleased to receive my soul, which I commend into thy hands.

F. S. N Be of good hope: For assuredly he will receive your soul, as his,
for his Son Jesus Christ our Lords sake, who is the Savior and Redeemer of
all those that believe in him. Moses and all the Prophets have testified, that
all Nations shall receive salvation and blessedness by Jesus Christ. The
Apostles and Evangelists do testify, that Jesus Christ came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance, and to give his life for the redemption
of many: for he has shed his blood for the remission of sins: Believe then,
and doubt not in any wise: for Jesus Christ has made you clean from all your
sins, having promised, that all they that shall believe in him, and in his
Father that sent him, shall have eternal life, and shall not come into
judgment, but shall pass from death unto life.

Well then, F. S. N. take a good courage in Jesus Christ: For he has loved
you, and washed you from your sins in his blood. Have then this steadfast
faith to fight valiantly against the adversary, use no other buckler to defend
your self withal, but this precious blood of Jesus Christ, which by virtue of
his Death and Passion has reconciled you unto God his Father: unto whom in
great humility and repentance offer up this Prayer.

O Lord God Almighty, have mercy upon me a poor miserable sinner, for thy
Son Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior his sake: and by the merit of his Death
and Passion be graciously pleased to receive my soul, which I commend into thy
hands.

F. S. N. Let this be your hope and steadfast faith, that that good God full of
all mercy, will receive your soul, as his, into his hands, for his Son Jesus
Christ's sake. For there is no other Name under heaven given unto men whereby we
must be saved, nor is there salvation in any other but in Jesus Christ. Arm
your self then indeed with this gracious Jesus Christ: for he has done all for
you; he has fulfilled the Law for you, he has overcome all for you.

Well then, F.S.N. cheer up your self in God, be you ever unmooveable in this
lively faith: follow and imitate you the holy Patriarks, Prophets and Apostles,
who are all saved in this faith, who assure you all of them, that the
adversary can no ways hurt you: For your suit is won by Jesus Christ, who is
both your Judge and Advocat together. Wherefore say evermore in this steadfast
faith: that though I should walk through the midst of the shadow of death, yet
would I fear no manner of evil. For thou Lord God art with me. F. S. N. Also
cease not to say from the bottom of your heart in great humility and
repentance.

LOrd God Almighty, have mercy upon me poor miserable sinner for thy Son
Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior his sake: and by the merit of his Death and
Passion let it please thee to receive my soul, which I commend into thy hands.
So be it.

A singular Prayer for a person greatly afflicted with sickness, which seems
to approach nearer to death, then to life. With a short Catechism, purposely
made to instruct the sick, and to make him contemplate by faith the great
mystery of our redemption.
Eccles. c. 18. v. 19.20. Use. Physic ere ever thou be sick, before judgment
examine thy self, and in the day of visitation thou shall find mercy.
NOw the Lord admonishes us to pray continually, especialy when we are touched
with his rods, wherefore all kinsfolks and faithful friends, that visit the
sick person, ought not only to visit and be careful for the body: but withal
to seek and ask for the spiritual physic for his Soul. This must he do by
good prayers, confession of sins, and Christian exhortation according to the
Word of God, without which man cannot live: and to this end that all things may
be done in good order and with zeal. First of all it is meet to cast down
himself before the Majesty of God, and to call upon him by beginning: Our
help is in the Name of the Lord, etc.

Then to present unto him the general confession of sins; and consequently
this present prayer as it follows.

O Lord God Almighty, and Father of mercy, we are here assembled together in
the Name of thy welbeloved Son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, through whom
we are bold to present our selves before thee, to call upon thy holy Name,
having our sole refuge unto thy Sovereign and transcendent goodness, which we
not only desire to be sensible of, and to taste in our selves* but also in the
necessity of thy poor creature here afflicted with corporal sickness, and
with the affliction and calamity of mind. We know Lord, that justly thou
visitest and chastnest him with thyrods to make him to understand thy fatherly
affection. But thy great mercies, which thou have used toward our fathers, are
not extinguished, nor exhausted. For thou art that great eternal God, gracious
and merciful, that never changest, with whom there is no variablenes, nor
shadow of change. Thy holy Word teaches us most evidently that the whole earth
is full of thy mercies, which are far above thy justice. Whe^fore Lord,
mitigate thy rigor toward thy creature, have pity* and compassion on him, for
thy Son Jesus Christ our Lords sake. Look not upon his sins, but look upon
the face of thy Christ, who has fully satisfied thee for him, by offering up
unto thee that great sacrifice of his body upon the Cross. We beseech thee
then; O most gracious God, full of mercy, to make him sensible of thy grace,
which thou have never denied to thy children. And because thou art our eternal
Father well knowing whatsoeve^ is needful and expedient for our salvation. We
pray not unto thee to lengthen unto him his life, or to abridge it: for we
repose our selves upon thy holy will, whereunto only we desire to be
conformable. Thou art wise without counsel, to dispose of thy creature
according to thy good pleasure. That if it shall be thy pleasure to call him
hence, who is he that shall be able to resist thee? But if it be thy good
pleasure to send him health again, who is he that shall reprehend thee? For
all things are in thy hand, and nothing is done without thy will and holy
providence. Yet Lord, if out of thy grace thou prolong unto him his days, thy
rod shall serve him for a chastisement to amend him, and to convert him unto
thee, and we together with him will render unto thee thanks and praises. But if
thy will be determined to make him pass hence into a better life, we beseech
thee for thy Son Jesus Christ his sake to forget all his sins and
transgressions, which thou have been pleased to blot out and towa^^ away by the
effusion of his precious blood, be graciously pleased through the merit of the
Death and Passion of thy Son to receive his soul into thy hands, when as
thou will call him out of this world. Lord God, despise not the work of thine
own hands: for behold here thy poor creature, as it were wholly overwhelmed,
who calls upon thee out of the depth of all these evils, presenting unto
thee his sad and penitent soul, with his dejected and humbled heart, which we
beseech thee to be pleased to accept as well pleasing unto thee, for thy Son
Jesus Christ our Lords sake: in whose Name thou have promised to hear our
requests. Wherefore Lord we beseech thee to receive us into thy holy
protection, to illuminate our hearts and understandings, to address our selves
unto thee, to call upon thy holy Name, as thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord has
taught us to pray unto thee for the relieuing of all our necessities, saying:
Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

Finally, O God, most gracious Father, full of mercy, be pleased evermore to
support us by thy grace and power, that by the infirmity of our flesh we fall
not away. And because that of our selves we are so frail, that we are not able
to continue firm one minute of time, graciously strengthen us by thy Holy
Spirit, and arm us with thy graces, that we may be enabled to persevere
constantly in the faith without which it is not possible to please thee. Be
graciously pleased then to confirm and establish us daily in the same, whereof
we will make confession with heart and mouth.

I believe in God the Father Almighty, etc. Prayers being ended, notice shall be
taken how the sick person does, and he may be asked how he feels himself
touching the state of his health with gracious talk, and Christian Speeches.
But if it appear that he decline, and no token of recoverie appear: a while
after a fit time shallbe chosen to speak unto the said sick person, and to
ask him whether he be not willing to hear talk of God, and to hearken to his
Word: Whilst he is still in perfect memory. So that if he be inclinable to
entertain discourse concerning God, the short Catechism following shall be
begun.

A SHORT Catechism, which is not only to instruct the sick, but also to
refresh his memory with the great mystery of our Redemption. For the better
understanding and retaining whereof, in his latter days he ought to make
confession of his faith, before the assistance of the faithful: whereof one of
them (in the Ministers absence) must question him, as follows.
The Minister. F. S. N. EVery man that rightly knows himself, and is not
ignorant of his own condition and quality: certainly he ought to acknowledge,
that although he was created after the image and likeness of God,
nevertheless he is conceived and borne in the sin of old Adam, whereby he is
made a poor and miserable sinner* ignorant, inconstant, and full of iniquity;
and consequently subject unto all miseries, afflictions, adversities; and
finally unto death: all which sin has caused: which God not willing to leave
unpunished, daily afflicts us for (or to speak more properly) he chastises
us in this world, that he might not condemn us with the world. Wherefore, F.
S. N. be patient in your sickness, and you shall possess your soul in
spiritual joy. Acknowledge your sins, and accuse you your self before the
Majesty of God, whom you must look up unto and behold by faith, making
confession thereof with heart and mouth before this whole assistance: for it is
written, that we believe with the heart unto justification, and confess with
the mouth unto salvation. Hearken then unto the questions, which I will now
propound unto you, and answer them faithfully, according to that understanding
which you have received of the Lord. Which if you cannot answer by reason of
your weakness, and hinderance of your sickness, I will answer for you, and
it shall be sufficient for you to give us to understand your heart, and
constancy of your faith, in which you must live and die.

Go to then, I demand of you, wherefore and to what end were you created in
this world?


The Sick. To know God.


The Minister. Was it necessary for you^^ know God?


The sick. Yes verily: For seeing he is my sovereign good, without the
knowledge of him, I had been more miserable then the bruit beasts.


The Minister. Seeing you know God, you well know that he is power, wisdom,
and infinite goodness, one God alone in three persons, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost. He is that one God, whom Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob worshipped in spirit,
and truth, he is that one God Eternal, who created heaven and earth, and all
things that are therein, not such the knowledge of God which you have?


The Sick. Yes.


The Minister. But can such, and this simple knowledge of God conduct and guide
you straight to eternal life?


The Sick. Very hardly: For it is life eternal, to confess and know one
only God, and him whom he has sent his only eternal Son, our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.


The Minister. Why is it necessary for you to confess and know the Lord Jesus
Christ?


The Sick. Because in Jesus Christ I must recover all that I have lost in my
self, by reason of the sin of old Adam, in whom I am borne and conceived.
Wherefore it has been behooffull for my salvation, that Jesus Christ true God
and true man, being clothed with our flesh, should give unto me of his free
grace all that which I had lost in Adam.


The Minister. It is very well said. Behold why Jesus Christ was conceived by
the Holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary, to purge and sanctify you. For
absolutely contrary hereunto him, you are conceived and borne in sin, and of
sinful parents. Why do you not confess, that without Jesus Christ you had
remained a poor miserable sinner in eternal death?


The Sick. Yes assuredly. But I believe and confess that that good Jesus
Christ has reconciled me unto God his Father.


The Minister. But how has he reconciled you unto God his Father?


The Sick. By his Death and Passion in the shedding forth of his precious
Blood, for to deliver me from all eternal pains. This good Jesus Christ has
suffered for me under Pontius Pilate many afflictions, injuries and troubles:
Jesus Christ it is, that was crucified for me. As accursed upon the tree of the
Cross, to free me from the curse eternal, whereunto Adam had obliged me. This
my Savior Jesus Christ was truly buried, to bury all my sins with him, to
the end they might not be imputed unto me before God. It is my Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ which went down into hell, suffering extreme temporal anguish,
to deliver me from the eternal.


The Minister. All this that you have now confessed of Jesus Christ, was it
sufficient to save you?


The Sick. No: According as the holy Scriptures ought in every thing to be
fulfilled: For what had it profited me, that Jesus Christ was borne, crucified,
dead, buried, and went down into hell for me only, unless he had risen
again. Wherefore I believe and confess, that my Lord, my Head, and Savior
Jesus Christ is risen again from the dead, to make me to rise again with him,
as one of his meaner members unto life eternal.


The Minister. Consequently, it is written, that he ascended up into heaven,
being now set down at the right hand of God his Father. But what does this his
ascension benefit you?


The Sick. My Lord, my Head, and Savior Jesus Christ is ascended up into
heaven, to cause me to ascend thither after him: for where the Head is, there
are the members also. And I believe that being set down at the right hand of
God his Father, he is my Advocat, intereessor, and only Mediator with him,
assuring me exceedingly, that none can hurt me, seeing that Jesus Christ is my
Advocate and Judge both together. Wherefore I have no occasion to fear the day
of his judgment, when he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. For I
believe and confess in steadfast faith, that there is neither judgment nor
condemnation to them that are faithful members of Jesus Christ.


The Minister. Who has given you the grace to understand and know all these
things?


The Sick. It is by the grace of the Holy Ghost, one only God with the Father,
and the Son, by whose means we receive all the goods and gifts which are
offered us in Jesus Christ.


The Minister. Seeing you have already confessed that you are a member of Jesus
Christ, it thence follows that you are withal incorporated into his Church,
which you must believe to be Holy, Catholic, and Universal.


The Sick. I do assuredy believe the Holy Catholic Church, wash^ and
cleansed with the Precious Blood of Jesus Christ, for the which in the greatest
humility I render him thanks, that he has affoorded me the grace to be one of
the meanest members of his Church, being baptized into his Name, he has made
me to live in the communion, unity, and love of the same, by having instructed
me in his holy Word, and fed me with his true Body, steeped in his precious
Blood, into the hope of eternal life.


The Minister. Well, go to, seeing you are so well founded upon the lively
Rock, which is Jesus Christ, in knowing so well your self, you must confess
and acknowledge the principal good which you have received from this good
Jesus Christ.


The Sick. It is very reasonable: for I would not be ungrateful in not
acknowledging the goods and gifts which I have received from God. Wherefore I
confess, that I poor miserable sinner have offended without end and without
ceasing the goodness and justice of God, having transgressed all thy holy
Commandments. In the doing whereof I have deserved death and eternal
damnation. Nevertheless appealing to Gods mercy, I cry him mercy, and do
believe and confess without all manner of doubt or wavering, that full and
perfect forgivenes of all my sins is granted me by the sole merit of the
Death and Passion of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in the effusion of his
precious Blood, wherein I assure my self to be sufficiently and entirely washed
and purged: which is the most transcendent good and contentment that I could
ever have received: and such is my faith, wherein I will live and die by the
help of the grace of Gods Holy Spirit.


The Minister. Seeing you have received so great a good from God by the means
of his Son Jesus Christ, it is fitting also that you do his commandment. For
even as he has pardonned you, and remitted all your sins: in like manner
must you pardon heartily all those which may have offended you. Otherwise you
walk not according to God.


Sick. In this thing I have known the Law of Jesus Christ, to be the singular,
sacred, and perfect Law: commanding us to love our neighbors, friends, and
enemies as our selves. Wherefore I also entreat all those to whom I have done
wrong, or said wrong, to pardon me as heartily, as I pardon all them that have
offended me, desiring to do them all good offices of love and kindness, as to my
good brethren and friends.


The Minister. Now since it is ordained by God that all men shall die, we cannot
resist his ordinance: rather we ought evermore to conform our selves to his
holy will. Wherefore my brother, you must not think it strange, if I declare
unto you the same which the good Prophet Esaias declared unto King Ezechias,
saying unto him from the Lord, Set thy house in order, for thou shall die, and
not live. This good advice ought to stir you up thoroughly to set your self in
good order, spiritually, in your conscience. And that is first of all to
convert and turn you unto God, to bewail your sins, as that good King did:
To implore his mercy, in begging pardon at his hands, and saying always in
your heart, Lord God, be propitious and merciful unto me poor miserable
sinner, for thy Son Jesus Christ his sake my Lord and Savior. And then you
must not forget your house and family, which you ought so well to set in good
order, and so to dispose of by a good testament and last will, that it may
remain in peace and tranquillity after you. But the better to give you to
understand how to dispose aright and to set in order your house, it is, that
you give unto every one what belongs unto him, without defrauding of any man:
that you leave your wife endowed with what is due to her, your children and
kinsfolks in good agreement and charity: that after your decease they may
have no occasion to fall to dissension and division. This being done, you must
quite forget all worldly ears, and affection to the world, which passes away
withal the concupiscence thereof. But he that does the will of God, abides
for ever. Touching your children, you are only their natural father for a
time: but God is perpetually their Spiritual Father, having them in his holy
keeping and protection, to preserve and sustain them, to keep and deliver them
from all evil, whilst they will but walk in his ways. Besides in that you are
a Christian, regenerate in the holy Sacrament of Baptism; long since you knew
that we have not here any City of continuance: for we look for a better then
this; which is eternal. Wherefore I pray you in the Name of God, that you
disquiet not your self for any affection you may have to this world: For here
we are all but strangers, as our fathers, when as then the Lord God shall have
ordained and decreed that you must dislodge, flit, and go before us, will not
you conform your self unto his holy will and ordinance? As on the other side,
if he see it expedient for your salvation to prolong unto you your life, as he
did to that good King Ezekias, would you not content your self with whatsoever
it shall please him to do with you? Yes assuredly: for he is Lord and Master,
you are but his servant. He is your Creator, you are his Creature, and the work
of his hands. For this cause then will he dispose of you according to his will.
Unto the which alone you ought to conform and humble your self, saying from
your heart.


LOrd God, thou know my necessity, if it shall be thy good pleasure to
prolong and lengthen my life, thy will be done, if it be thy good pleasure also
to call me hence unto thee, even thy will be likewise done. For thy creature
(Lord) has no other will but thine.

Now brother, comfort your self with God, who if he has ordained to call you,
your Calling shall be happy: For you must believe and hope in firm faith, that
he will make you rise again in your own body unto glorious immortality, to
make you reign with him in life eternal, which is purchase and given you by
the virtue of the precious Blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: In whose
name the Lord God bless and protect you, and make his face to shine upon you,
and be merciful unto you. The Lord turn his face toward you, and preserve you
in all happiness. Amen.

THis done, if it appear he grows worse and worse, and draws on toward
death, and tending to his appointed end, forthwith in his deadly agony, we
must not fail to repeat with a loud voice before him the Christian
Consolation which is here below promised. This doing, GOD grant him grace
well and and faithfully to die in him. Amen.

HEB. XIII. Remember them that are afflicted, as being your selves of the body
of the Church, and subject to undergo the like afflictions. A PRAYER AGAINST
the Apprehensions of Death.
PSALM. XVIII.IIII. The sorrows of death compassed me round about, and the
floods of the ungodly men made me afraid.
O Lord my gracious Savior, when sorrows press us, and death threatens us,
we look up unto thee, that art our life. Death thought to have daunted thee in
the garden of Geth-semane: in such sort, that thou know well what the
distresses are which it brings unto men. But as thou ha^t vanquished and
overcome it, grant me also the grace to vanquish and overcome it, to bear
patiently affliction, to submit my self to the will of my heavenly Father.
Thou have seen how the wicked did compass thee about, as the floods of
waters. But now thou art in the happy haven of thy celestial glory. But being
there on high, despise not, ^or slight nor thy Church, which is as yet in the
midst of the waves, and storms of the world.

Gather us also unto that happy life: draw us unto that wished port: still the
fury of the winds which trouble the earth: for Lord, thou art our Lord, we are
thy people.

A Continued Sequel, OR, An Vnintermitted Course of Comforts.
MOunsieur d' Ambesaignes a Domestique Gentleman, of the late Mounsieur the
Marquess of Moussay being sick in the Castle of Plouer in Bretagne, Madame
the Marquess of Moussay sent to fetch Mounsieur Pallory of Richelieu, Pastor
and Author of this Book, to be comforted by him: and as they expected from
hour to hour his death, for he was in an agony from Monday evening the ninth
of March, 1626. Until the morning of Thursday the tenth, in that sort, that
he was required after diverse consolations, to redouble (during the space of
that night) prayers hourly and oftener for him.

And because there are but two prayers in this preceding Book to be said when
the Sick is in anguish, the first whereof is in the leaf 231. The other in
the leaf 344. To satisfy the devotion of certain good men, the Author has
caused to be added these prayers following, which he then said, unto this
second Edition, to serve hereafter unto the comforters who shall assist the
Sick.

COMFORTS for the Sick.
1. A Prayer to be said when the sick is in perplexity.
34. O Lord, our good God and gracious Father, the only comfort of our souls,
the gladness of our hearts, our sole solace and refuge, yea our singular
sweetness amidst the sharpest bitternesses and anguishes which oppress us, we
beseech thee to cast thy sweet and merciful eyes upon this sick person, which
has received this honor together with us by thy special favor to be
delivered from the power of darkness; and to be transported unto the Kingdom
of the Son of thy love: having opened his heart, as ours, to receive the Word
of life, which alone can save our souls. And as thou have given him the will to
do well, grant unto him, and unto us also this happiness, to give him to perfect
the same according to thy good pleasure, and to finish his course in thy fear,
that persevering in the confession of thy holy Name, thy light and thy truth
may lead him, and bring him into the mountain of thy holiness. O Heavenly
Shepherd, that have sent thy dear Son to seek the lost sheep, and who
repellest not the languishing soul that casts it self into thy bosom:
accomplish in such sort thy strength in the weakness of this sickness, that he
may say with his whole heart: the Lord is my portion and my succor, therefore
will I hope in him unto the end.

And seeing thou have engraven and imprinted the seal of thine election upon
the soul of this sick person: Yea since thou have sealed him with the seal of
thy Spirit, for the Day of redemption purchased unto the glory of thy Name. And
seeing thy comforts are welcome to good souls, give unto this sick person
amidst the anguishes he suffers in his body, a vigorous and a constant soul,
sweetly bedewd from the springs of sweet comforts, in the midst of the hot fits
of his disease, and the which may make to fly up and to sparkle forth the
flames of a sacred desire, even unto the Sanctuary of thy Holiness, there to
behold with the eyes of his mind, the ineffable love thou bear to thine
Elect, and the glory inestimable which thou keep in heaven for thy children.

And to this end give him a gracious refreshing, repair his enfeebled forces,
wasted and spent by the violence of his disease: quicken his heart by the
sweetness of thy grace: kindle afresh his zeal, inflame his prayers, animate
his sighs, restore unto him the joy of his salvation, and let the bones which
thou have broken, rejoice.

As then thou did that favor unto the Israelites, even then when they were
in the deserts, to make them to taste of the fruits of the terrestrial Canaan,
to the end to encourage them to make them to walk on forward with boldness
toward the Land of Promise. So (Lord) give unto this sick person, and unto us
that are in the wilderness of this world, an assurance of the forgivenes of
our sins in the blood of thy Welbeloved, who was wounded for our trespasses,
and bruised for our iniquities, peace in our consciences, a continual
acknowledgment of thy favors, a firm reliance on thy love, and joy in our
souls, which are the fruits of the Celestial Canaan, to the end that
relishing that sweetness, we may aspire with zeal and courage toward the end
of our Spiritual Calling in Jesus Ch^^st to be filled, not with (...) and
honey, but with (...) beams of thy glorious (...) and with the rivers of the
pleasures with thee for evermore. For in possession of thee (great God) we
shall possess all things: and in thee and through thee we shall be all radiant
with thy glory, and shining as the brightness of the firmament, and as the Sun
which shines in his strength.

And during this small time which remains for us to live in this world, give u^
grace that through good works we may make sure (...) Vocation and Election: to
the end, that thus doing, (...) ^ntrance into the eter^^^^ ^ingdome of our
Savior Jesus Christ may be ab^nd^ntly accommodated unto us, bearing evermore
in ^^nd those words of thy Son Jesus Christ: that he that shall persevere,
and shall overcome, shall be clothed with white garments, and I will not blot his
name out of the book of life: But I will confess his name before my Father,
and before his Angels.

And to the end we may receive death (which is the end of our miseries) in good
part, make us seriously to think on the future resurrection of our bodies, for
as this day (according as thy Prophet Amos teaches) us) shall be a day of
darkness, not of brightness, of heavines, not of joy, of destruction, not of
salvation to the wicked, so shall it be the acceptable day of the Lord for the
good, for (as thy Son our Savior teaches us) we ought to lift up our heads,
and to rejoice in that day, because our redemption is near.

In that day shall it be, (according to thy Prophet Malachie) that the register
or book of remembrance, which is written before thee, of them which think of
thy Name, shall be opened. If King Assuerus had in his Palace a Book of the
worthy exploits of his subjects, wherein he found written the good deeds of
Mardoch^, to recompense it: and shall not thou have, O great King, by whom the
Kings of the earth reign: Thy book of life and retribution, wherein are writ
the names of thy children, whom by a singular prerogative thou have adopted for
such in thy Son Jesus Christ? David surely knew this mystery, when as in his
sorest afflictions he said unto thee: Lord thou tellest my wanderings, my tears
are in thy bottle, are they not in thy Book?

Now to the end we may be acceptable to thee, whilst we are encompassed with
this mortal flesh, grant us the grace to live in this present world soberly,
justly, and religiously, expecting that happy day of the last resurrection, and
appearing of thy dear Son our Savior Jesus Christ, who in the same shall
transform our vile bodies, to the end they may be made like to his glorious
body, according to the effectual power, whereby he is able to subdue all things
unto himself. Unto thee O great God through thy Son Jesus Christ, in the Unity
of the Holy Ghost, be honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

2. Another Prayer when the sick is near unto death.
35. O Lord, our good God and Father, who out of thy great goodness daily
showrest down upon us a sea of bounty and blessings, and who have in thy hand
rest and labor, health and sickness, life and death. We poor sinners, settling
our selves upon the assurance of thy goodness, which is continually ready to
relieve those that resort thereunto in the interim of their grievous assaults:
unto the blessed haven of thy sacred mercy: We are bold in the name of this
sick person, who fights against death, to lift up our hearts and our eyes
toward thee, to the end that thy favor and grace may serve unto him for a
star of light, and a guide, in that voyage which his soul makes from earth
to heaven, and from this mortal life, unto the immortal, to persist firmly in
the faith even unto the end, without being terrified or shaken by temptation,
illusion, or by any other stratageme of the enemy.

Thou art O great God, the light of all them that hope in thee, and who leddest
thy people Israel through the ghastly wilderness by a pillar of fire in the dark
night, therefore we beseech thee to enlighten with thine assistance, and holy
protection this thy child in the darkesome passage of death.

And surely Lord, experience shows us that when humane means seem most to
fail us, then is it that thou keep nearest unto thine to comfort them with
thy right hand, handling them with thy helpful hand, with gentle and
cherishing fomentations: and that thou make them sensible that the point of
their extreme need is the opportunity of thy succors. And therefore is it,
that now the heart of this sick person sobbeth, that his eyes are duskish and
heavy, his ears deaf, his mouth dry and juycelesse, and as the outward man
falls in him, it would please thee to give him strength in his inward man,
and to fill his soul with gladness and joy in that last conflict, making him
powerfully to relish those celestial gifts, which are laid up for us in
heaven, by the merits of thy dear Son our Savior, who to make us to live
again in heaven, after he had by his death reconciled us unto thee, ascended
into heaven, there to prepare a place for us.

In the interim then of this small time, which remains for this thy child to
live in this world, give him grace that his spirit may always acknowledge
thee, that his heart may adore thee whilst he shall breath that he may be
assured steadfastly, that in the end of his mortal sweat he may find
unspeakable happiness with his bridegroom Jesus Christ, unto whom with thee in
the unity of the Holy Ghost, be honor and glory for ever. Amen.

3. Another prayer in distres.
36. LOrd, God and Father of all mercy, that sentest from heaven an Angel to
comfort thy Son, when in the depth of his Passion (bearing our sorrows, and
laden with our griefs, wounded for our offenses, and bruised for our
iniquities) his soul was heavy even unto death. We beseech thee from the
bottom of our hearts to comfort this thy sick child, whom thou have
regenerated and incorporated into thy welbeloved Son: acknowledge (Lord) the
mark of thine adoption in him.

We know, O God of inestimable purity, that our sins drive us back far away
from thee: But thy dear Son, who is made for us (by thee) wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption: not only washes us with his
blood to become acceptable unto thee, but withal makes and gives us entrance
into thy Sanctuary, and boldness by his death to approach with assurance to the
throne of thy grace, to be heard in due time.

Grant grace unto this sick person to free the point of death with an holy and
Christian resolution. Redouble his courage at that present hour, that his
soul is upon the point to behold thy face, wherein is fullness of joy. And
amidst the violent dartings of those sighs which accompany the last acts of
his life, give him perfect clear^esse of judgment, accompanied with calmness
of spirit, evermore to acknowledge his true and only God, that draws him out
of the deserts of this world, to live happy in the Heavenly Jerusalem, and who
withdrawes him out of the bottomless depths of wretchedness, to bring him to
live in heaven, heaped with eternal blessings.

Command thy holy Angels which thou incampest round about those that fear
thee, and which watch for the welfare and safety of thy children, that they
bear the soul of this thy servant up into heaven, the sacred Temple of thy
glory, most gloriously resplendant with happiness and honor, where he shall
clearly see that which his spirit adores here below, and where he shall enjoy
that divine and celestial harmony, which the blessed Spirits make unto thee
uncessantly, and the eternal joys which cannot be valued, and where he shall
live in continual admiration of those incomprehensible bounties in the
presence of his Spouse, thy beloved Son Jesus Christ. To whom with thee and
the Holy Ghost be honor and glory for evermore. So be it.

4. Another Prayer to be said when the Sick is in extremity.
37. O Lord, our good God, and most merciful Father, who being overcome with
the bowels of thy tender mercies have sent down thy beloved Son to save
sinners, and have been pleased that this thy Son was bound to loose us,
condemned to absolve and free us, that he died, to give us life; yea, that he
was made a curse, to the end, that we might be made a blessing of God in him.
We beseech thee to grant this grace unto this sick person, to repose and rely
himself on the certainty of faith, for the full remission of his sins, upon
that entire and perfect satisfaction, which thy dear Son (whose blood was
once offered up to abolish the sins of many) has made unto the^ upon the
Cross. For it is certain that thou will not the death of a sinner, but that
he be converted and live: Thou bruisest not in thy displeasure those that thou
have redeemed by his death thou do not precipitate into that eternal gulf
those whom thou have ingrafted and regenerated in that great Mediator and
Savior of the world, when as (calling upon thy mercy) they shall be converted
with their whole heart unto thee.

That when Satan our adversary (who like a roaring Lion goes about us,
endeavoring to devour us) makes himself a party against this sick person in
this his last conflict, setting before him the checkroule and catologue of his
sins, and thy rigorous judgment to astonish and to precipitate him into
despair, give him grace to shield and ward himself as with a target and
buckler, to repel and beat back the fiery darts of that enemy, with the
truth and assurance, that the blood of thy Son Jesus cleanses from all sin.

Fortify then and animate (O God of invincible power, and our firm hope) this
thy child with the strength of thy Holy Spirit at this present hour, that his
soul being disburdened of the miseries which press him, yea set free from the
captivity of his body, is ready to go unto thee. And in that hour, wherein the
earth claims in his person what we have borrowed of her, have pity Lord on
thine own image, and despise not the works of thy hands.

Behold, Lord, the tears, the plaints, the sighs, the groans, and the
contrition of the heart of this sick person, and our prayers, that we may
acknowledge in his person thy clemency, the mother of our hope, thy succors,
the source of our life: and that indeed thou art our sacred and saving refuge.

And as for us which remain in this vale of misery, grant us this grace,
that as thy people being captive in Babylon, had the comfort to direct and lift
up their eyes toward Jerusalem, the place wherein thou did manifest unto
them thy glorious and gracious presence, that even so amidst the captivity of
this world, where we see nothing but confusion, and where vice reigns, and
thy honor is dis-esteemed, we may have our eyes toward thee, as on the sole
object and subject of our joy and rejoicing, seeing in thy face is the fulness
of joy, and at thy right hand are perfect pleasures for evermore.

Even so, O thou God of inestimable bounty and goodness, and who have chosen us
out of the world to follow thy holy will: we beseech thee that when thou shall
call us out of this world to place our souls in the company of those who by
faith have overcome Kingdoms, have done righteousness, and have obtained the
promises, and who are written in the Book of Life of the Lamb.

In the mean time, O Lord, arm us with patience, and in the midst of our
troubles make us sensible by a lively feeling that our light affliction, which
is transient and soon over, produces in us a weight of glory, wonderfully
excellent, and that leaving by death these visible things, which are but of
small continuance, we shall enjoy those that are now invisible to our eyes,
which are abiding for ever in Jesus Christ, and by Jesus Christ: to whom with
thee and the Holy Ghost be honor and glory for ever. Amen.

5. A Prayer when the sick is in some grievous perplexity.
38. O God, and Father of all mercy, who art wise in thy counsels, true in thy
word, and admirable in thy works: yea who keep thy dear children as the
apple of thine eye. In as much as now we see, that now it is, even at this
time, that it will be thy pleasure to withdraw this thy sick child out of this
mortal world. We beseech thee enter not into account with him to punish him,
nor reprove him in thy displeasure, neither chasten him in thy wrath: But
remember Lord, he has been called in thy Church and in the number of thine
Elect, to be washed and sanctified by thy grace in the name of Jesus Christ,
thy dear Son, who took upon him our griefs, and has undergone the burden of
our sorrows, that by his wounds we might receive health, whereof his baptism
has been the badge. Wash then, Lord, (who art in goodness most complete) his
soul in the innocent blood of thy dear Son, in whose wounds and merits we
enclose our present and future happiness, that being made clean he may keep
thee eternally in his sacred celestial Temple. Gracious Lord, and full of
tender compassion, show not forth thy strength at this time against a
languishing body: arm not thy self unto vengeance against one that can do
nothing. Crush not in thine indignation him whom thou have in thy goodness
created after thine own image: but rather returning thy gracious countenance
toward his sorrows, make him powerfully sensible of thy clemency, the mother
of our hope, and thy love the source of our life.

Drive away Lord, by thy power all dreadfulnesse, all distrustfulnes, and
doubts which Satan our adversary can present unto this sick person, leave not
at random (as prostituted unto that roaring Lion) this thy creature,
regenerated and born anew in that great Savior of the world, but rather
establish and comfort his soul: Strengthen his faith, redouble upon him in
this last hour of his the forces of his Spirit, that with a truly Christian
courage he may repel and beat back (thorough thy strength) all the assaults
and temptations of the enemy, by the merit of thy dear Son, who was made man
to save man, and whose soul was heavy, even unto death, to deliver us from
the hell of eternal fire, and from the horror of the deep. O God of
incomparable bounty, the fountain of joy and of eternal happiness, ravish the
mind of this sick person, even unto the heavens, and show unto him the share of
those inestimable graces which thy Son our Redeemer has purchased for us with
thee, give him grace to die in the hope of the future resurrection of our
bodies, and powerfully to comprehend how the resurrection of thy Son is the
bud of our blessed immortality, yea the special gage of eternal life, and of
our holy glorification.

And unto us that shall yet remain in this world, give grace, that expecting
our last day, which shall be the first of our rest, and the end of our miseries,
that our contentment may not be elsewhere then under the covert of thy grace,
let our souls breath nothing but the sweetness of thy love: and let the
continual desire of living in the admiration of the contemplation of thy
divine beauties, which thou have reserved for thine Elect. Let it be the
fervent desire, and the sole vote of our hearts, that daily dying in Adam by
the mortifying of our flesh, to be borne anew in Jesus Christ, we may feel
more and more by thy grace, our carnal concupiscences repressed, our faith
inflamed, and our hearts cheered by thy singular blessings, which thou powrest
out daily (with a hand more then liberal) upon them that fear thee. Which we
crave of thee in the name of thy dear Son: O our Father which (...) in heaven,
etc.

6. A Prayer directed unto Jesus Christ, the Great and Sovereign Shepherd of
our Souls, for the Sick that is in extremity.
39. LOrd Jesus, our sole and only Redeemer, who love thine with an eternal
love, and who came down from heaven to raise us up to heaven, who tookest
our humane nature upon thee to make us the children of God: Who borest upon thy
back the burden of our sins, to discharge us of them: and who as a celestial.
Pelican, after thou had pierced thy sides with the edge of thy love, to make
thy Vermilian Blood distill forth to heal our mortal wounds, and to drown
our sins in the sea of thy mercies, call us to come unto thee, promising to
ease all those that are heavy laden and travel; assuring them they shall find
rest for their souls.

We beseech thee from the bottom of our hearts O Sovereign Physician of our
souls, who came not for the whole and the righteous, but for the sick, and
for sinners, to strengthen the faith of this thy sick child, redoubling the
strength of his Spirit, to overcome all fears, to vanquish all dangers, and to
repel the Alarums of Satan, and all the assaults of his temptations.

And seeing that the desire of this sick person is before thee, and that his
sorrows are not hid from thee, forsake him not, and be not far from
succouring of him, but turning thy merciful countenance toward his griefs,
make him powerfully sensible of thy succors in joy and in salvation, that he
may dispose himself, and we also, when it shall please thee to call us, to die
to thee, to live again in thee, O God of our deliverance.

We confess O thou Sovereign Redeemer, that our sins were infinite, because
Adam had offended against thee Infinite. We likewise acknowledge that for the
same there was requisite an infinite satisfaction: which neither Angels, nor
men, nor any finite creature could accomplish: But thy blood, O Savior of the
world, who by thy eternal Spirit offered thee unto God thy Father, thy self
without all blemish, and who art of an infinite price, art alone able to
cleanse our consciences from dead works, to serve the living God.

And seeing that by this inestimable redemption thy Name is unto thy faithful
ones a perfume spread forth abroad and powered out: and that thy divinity
joined unto our humanity in one person, is our sole comfort, and the certain
pledge of our union and reconciliation with God: We beseech thee to present
unto thy Father (as a sweet odor for this sick person) the merits of thy
Passion, seeing that thy righteousness wherewith thou justifiest sinners is not
only of inestimable virtue to sanctify us, but also thy death is incomparably
admirable to quicken us.

And in as much as the death of thy beloved ones is precious before thy Father,
when he looks upon thee. We beseech thee to bless the death of this our
brother, covering him with the mantle of thy protection, a mantle far more
excellent then that of Elias: that securely he may pass the torrent and
violent stream of this life, to come unto thy holy mountain, and to drink of
that spiritual sweetness, with thine Elect, of the fountain of life in
heaven.

O Savior of the world, the lively brightness of the eternal glory of the
Father, who came down from the highest pitch of the celestial mountains to
seek the lost sheep, and to enclose him, after thou had found him, in the
parks of thy sacred custody, save now, and protect the soul of this thy sheep,
to the end the infernal wolf devour him not, but accomplish thine own
desire, touching those whom the Father has given thee, seat it and bestow it
with thee in the place of consolation, to the end that with all the happy
spirits, which have embraced the merits of thy Passion, it may behold that
eternal glory, which the Father, who loves thee, and who always hears
thee, has given thee before the foundation of the world. To thee then the
Redeemer of the world, with the Father in the unity of the Holy Ghost, be
honor and glory for evermore. So be it.

7. Another Prayer, wherein supplication is made unto God to assist with his
holy Spirit the Sick in his agony.
40. O Lord God, and most gracious Father when we enter into a serious
consideration of our estate, certain it is, that we are in this world, as upon
a rough and tempestuous sea: and that the winds and storms of temptations
advance themselves and arise every minute against us, and therefore is it that
we humbly beseech thee that in this perilous passage thy Spirit may conduct
and strengthen our brittle vessel, that by the assistance thereof at the last
we may happily arive at the haven of eternal salvation.

And especially we beseech thee for this thy sick child, to the end it may
please thee to imprint by the effectual power of thy Holy Spirit more and more
in his heart charity, and the love of thy Son, in whose name we have
remission of our sins, that Persevering with invincible constancy unto the
end in the faith, and confession of the Name of his Savior he may find
undoubtedly in him whatsoever is requisite unto his assured blessedness.

Let that thy Spirit, which inflameth that which is cold, which erecteth what
is fallen, which gives breath unto that which is weary, cheer up by his
virtue the feeblenes of this sick person, and produce in him ardent sighs,
Which may be dissolved into the sweet rain of tears, fruitful unto his
soul. Let the Same thy Spirit be unto this sick person that which it was unto
Elias, the whirlwind, and the chariot of fire, wherein he may be carried up
to heaven. Let it be the same that was the New Star to the Wisemen of the
East, that by the guiding thereof he may come unto Jesus Christ, not laid in
the manger not any more passible, but glorious and risen again, sitting at thy
right hand, above all powers and principality, victorious over death,
triumphant over hell; and Head, and Consummatour of our faith. And as thou
shewedst unto three of thy Apostles in the mountain, when as thy Son was
transfigured, having his face shining as a radiant Sun, a skantling and
pattern of the glory and celestial beauty, which they should enjoy, whom thou
have chosen and incorporated into thy said Son. So we beseech thee that during
the small time which remains for us to pass the course of this life, it may
please thee to give us a continual taste of that heavenly happiness, and an
holy sense of thy glory, with a firm and an assured peace of conscience,
founded upon thy love, to walk in the strength of this consolation unto thy
holy mountain.

For in as much as this world is but a pilgrimage, and a way wherein there is
nothing to be found firm, and wherein the more that men dig to build in it,
the more do they find unstable sand, and unconstant agitations. Where ought we
Lord, to seek for the true foundation of our expectation and hope, but in
heaven? And seeing that where the body is, thither gather together the Eagles,
We beseech thee to raise up aloft the heart of this sick person, and ours unto
thee, that thy love may be a precious ointment to make us run and aspire after
thee.

If David in the midst of his great riches thought himself a stranger and a
forraigner as his Fathers, if he said that his days were as a shadow upon the
earth, wherein there is no stay, if he looked upon his Royal Palace as upon
an Inn, whereout he was every hour to dislodge: if he looked upon his Throne
as upon a seat which he must leave and resign over to another. And if looking
upon his Crown, as on a thing which was subject to fade in these terrestrial
places, he breathed after an incorruptible Crown of glory, how much more ought
we out of the midst of the dust of this world to desire and to breathe after
that glorious eternal Crown, where our heavines shall be turned into gladness:
our poverty into eternal riches: and our ignominy into incorruptible honors.

Grant us this grace then, O great God, not only to despise the things which
the world admires, but also make us to take patiently the afflictions which
invirone and assault us, whilst we run this our mortal race.

For seeing thou have ordained that they whom thou have chosen should be made
like to the image of thy Son, not only in suffering, but also in glory:
grant us grace firmly to be sensible of in this world, and truly to enjoy in
the other the effect of this holy promise, which thy Son who is holy, and
true, has made unto those that partake in his afflictions, namely that he will
give unto him that shall overcome, to sit with him upon his Throne, so as he
also that has overcome, sits upon the Throne of his Father.

For it is certain, if we bear here below the Cross of his Son, we shall
wear also the Crown of glory with him in heaven. That if we drink gall and
vinegar out of the cup of his Passion, we shall be watered and thoroughly moistened
with the rivers of his pleasures; and if we bear in our bodies the
mortification of the Lord Jesus, even so also the life of ye Lord Jesus shall be
manifested in our mortal flesh: and then al of us casting forth bright beams of
glory, and shining with splendour, we shall be not only like unto Angels, but even
withal we shall be like unto thee, to enjoy through thee and with thee, that thy
glory and felicity, the which (because our words fall far short of our
thoughts yet shorter of the greatness thereof) eye cannot behold, ear cannot
hear, nor heart comprehend.

Grant us these things, O God, who art goodness it self, love it self, and
holiness it self, who give us what ere we have, and wilt give us out of thy
bounty and mercy the fruition of what ere we hope for in all eternity, through
thy dear Son Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost, be
honor and glory.

Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

A prayer to be said after the sick has rendered his soul unto God, for the
comfort of the bystanders.
41. O God and most merciful Father, who have created all things without
necessity, who governest them without labor, and who changest them, thou thy
self being unchangeable, and whose sacred and perfect will is daily done on
earth, as in heaven. We thank thee for this, that it has pleased thee to
withdraw unto thee the soul of our brother, making us to know in his death
what our infirmity is: and making us to behold, as in a glass the
accomplishment of thine irrevocable sentence, by which dust must return to
dust, and the soul go to heaven, to him that gave it.

Grant us this grace, that this death may serve to make a serious impression
in our thoughts, not only how his day is this day to die, ours shall be
tomorrow, and that as the last of our days shall be the first of our rest: Yet,
that the death of the righteous is the sunset of their woes, and the
sunrising of their felicities: but herewithall it may be also unto us an
example to contemn this world where we do but offend thee: to breath after
(with our whole hearts) the celestial Jerusalem, wherein we shall enjoy with
Jesus Christ our Spouse unspeakeable and eternal pleasures, whose excellencies
surpass all understanding, according to that holy promise, which he has made
us, to be gone up thither, there to prepare us a place, to be with him enjoying
eternal glory.

Expecting then that most happy hour, when thou will call us out of this
world, and where our salvation, which is shut up in hope, shall be fully revealed
unto us: Enable us powerfully to comprehend the excellency of our Calling, and
what are the riches of thy glory in that heavenly inheritance of thy Saints:
and what the excellent greatness of that power is to us ward, that believe
through operation of the power of thy strength, which thou have effectually
expressed in thy Son Jesus Christ, when thou raisedst him from the dead, and
made him sit at thy right hand in heavenly places, above all principality
and power, strength, and dominion: and above every name which is named, not
only in this world, but also in that which is to come. To the end, that being
strengthened and corroborated in the inward man, we might walk on as becomes
that Calling whereunto we are called, in all humility and meeknes: and with a
patient mind, bearing with one another in dear love, being careful to keep
the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of peace, seeing we are called into the
hope of our Calling. To thee O great God, Father of all, which art above all,
amongst all, and in us all: with thy Son in the unity of the Holy Ghost, be
honor and glory for ever. Amen.

Unto him that fears God, to die is to be borne. FINIS.
A PRAYER to be said in the Morning at our Vprising.
O Most glorious God, most gracious Father, and most merciful Savior, seeing
it has pleased thee to grant me the gracious favor to have passed this
night, and to come unto this present day, be likewise graciously pleased to
add herewith also unto me the benefit and ability to employ the same wholly
and altogether unto thy service, in such sort that I may neither think, say,
nor do any thing, but what may be well pleasing unto thee: And comply with
the obedience unto thy blessed will and pleasure. That so all my words may tend
to the glory of thy Name, and edification of my neighbors And as it has
pleased thee to make thy Sun to shine upon the earth, to inlighten our
bodies: so likewise be pleased by the bright beams of thy Spirit to illuminate
my understanding, and my heart, to direct and guide me in the saving way of thy
righteousness, so that unto whatsoever I apply my self evermore my principal
end and Intention may be to walk in thy fear, to serve and honor thee,
expecting all my happiness and welfare from thy only blessing, that so I may
take nothing in hand, but what is agreeable to thy blessed Will and
Commandments: As also that so traveling for the body, and this present life,
that I may ever look further, namely unto that heavenly life, which thou have
promised unto thy children. Yet so Lord, that it may please thee, both in body,
and soul, to be my protector, strengthening me against all the temptations of
the Devil, and delivering me from all dangers which may befall me. And
because it is nothing to begin well, unless it be seconded with perseverance*
Re^^^^me not only for this day into thy sacred protection, but even for the
whole course of my life, co^tin^e, and daily augment, and increase in thee thy
Hea^^^ly Grace, ^ntill thou have brought me unto the full fruition of thy Son
Jesus Christ our Lord, who is the true Sun of (...) souls that shines day
and night without end, and for ever. And that I may obtain these graces from
thee, be pleased to forget all my sins past, and by thy infinite mercies to
forgive me them, as thou have promised unto all them, that by faith in Jesus
Christ, the Son of thy love, accompanied with true repentant, sorrow for
their sins heartily seek thy mercy in the pardon of their sins by Jesus
Christ, to whom with thee and thy Holy Spirit, one true and everliving God, be
all honor and glory, now and for evermore. Amen.

A PRAYER TO (...) said before going to bed.
O Lord God, since it has pleased thee to create the night for the rest of man
as thou have ordained him the day for his travel: Grant me the grace so to
take rest this night in body, as that my soul may always watch unto thee, and
that my heart may be raised up in thy love, and that I may so cast off and lay
as^de all earthly cares that I may be refreshed, as mine infirmity shall
require, that I never forget thee: but that the remembrance of thy bounty and
grace may remain evermore so deeply imprinted in my memory, that by that
means my conscience may have as well her spiritual rest, as the body takes
his. And withal let not my sleep be excessive, inordinately to please the
ease of the flesh, but only to satisfy the frailty of nature, the better to
dispose me to thy service. Be also pleased to keep me unpolluted in my body, as
in my mind. And to preserve me against all dangers, that my sleep may be to
the glory of thy Name And seeing there h^th not a day passed, wh^^^ I have not
many ways of^^^^^^ thee, according as I am a poor^ wretched sinner, even as
all a now covered by the darkness which thou sendest upon the earth, grant
likewise all my sins may be buried through thy mercy, that by them I may not
be deprived of the light of thy countenance Heat me most gracious God, and
loving Father, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

THE MANNER of questioning those that are to be received to the Supper of our
LORD JESUS CHRIST.
Question.

IN whom believe thou?

Answer. In God the Father, in Jesus Christ his Son, and in the Holy Ghost.

Q The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost: are they more then one God?

A. No.

Q Must we serve God according to hi^ (...) or according to the traditions of
^^n?

A. We must serve him according to his Commandments, and not according to the
commandments of men.

Q. Can thou fulfill Gods Commandments of thy self?

A No.

Q. Who is it then taht fulfill them in thee?

A. The Holy Ghost.

Q And when God has given thee his Holy Spirit, can tho^ perfectly fulfill
them?

A. No: in no wise.

Q And yet God curses and rejects all those that do not perfectly and
entirely fulfill his Commandments?

A. It is true.

Q By what means then can thou be saved, and delivered from the curse of God?

A. By the Death and Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Q How by the means of his Death and Passion?

A. Because by his Death he has purchased us life, and has reconciled us unto
God his Father.

Q. Unto whom prayest thou?

A. Unto God

Q In whose name prayest thou?

A. In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is our Mediator and Intercessor.

Q. How many Sacraments are there in the Christian Church?

A Two.

Q. Which are they?

A. Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

Q. What is the signification of Baptism?

A. It has two parts For our Lord does therein set forth unto us the remission
of our sins: and then our regeneration or spiritual renewing.

Q. And what signif^^th the S^pper?

A. It sets forth unto us, that by the Communion of the Body and blood of
our Lord Jesus Christ our souls are nourished in the hope of eternal life.

Q What do the Bread and Wine set forth unto us in the Lords Supper?

A. They set forth unto us that the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ have such
virtue and strength unto our souls as Bread and Wine have unto our bodies

Q Conceivest thou that the Body of Jesus christ is enclosed and contained
under the Bread, and his Blo^d under the Wine?

A. No

Q Where then must we seek Jesus Christ to have the fruition of him?

A. In heaven, in the glory of God his Father.

Q What is the means to come unto heaven where Jesus Christ is?

A. It is faith.

Q. We must then have true faith before we can have the right use of this holy
Sacrament?

A. So we must.

Q. And how can we come by this faith?

A We attain unto it by the Holy Ghost, which dwells in our hearts, and
assures us of the Promises of God, which are made unto us in the Gospel.

FINIS.

