THE MIRACLE OF THE PEACE IN FRANCE.

Celebrated by the Ghost of the Divine DV BARTAS.

Translated, By IOSVAH SYLVESTER.

Imprinted at London by Richard Bradocke for John Brown, and are to be sold at
his shop in Fleet street at the sign of the Bible. 1599.

To the most honorable, learned, and religious Gent. M. Anthony Bacone.
BOund by your Bounty and mine own desire,
To tender still new tribute of my zeal
To you (your Countries watchful Sentinel,
Whose wisdom, ours and other States admire)
Lo here I tune upon mine humble Lyre
Our neighbor Kingdoms vn-expected weal,
Through sudden ceasing of Wars enter-deale;
As Celtike Muses to my Muse inspire.
Miraculous the Work: and so his wit
That firstly sung this sacred MIRACLE:
A gracious Theme (if I disgrace not it)
That your grave eyes may daigne for spectacle.
What e're it be, accept it as a due
From him whose all does all belong to You.
Iosuah Syluester.

A Phoneur de la Paix, chantee par Monsieur du NESME, and rechantee en Anglois
par Monsieur SYLVESTRE.
SAns Paix rien ne subsiste: en Paix tout croist and dure,
Dieu maintient par sa Paix le beau grand Universe
Et le petit, bastis de members si diverse,
Tous s'entr^ydans l'un l'autre en commune facture:
Elle unit a son Dieu! human creature:
Elle emplit descitez les Royaumes deseris:
Elle bride les fols, and rendles champs converts
De biens donnans-plaisirs, vesture, and nouriture.
Enuoy-la donc, o Dieu! a nos Princes and Roys,
En nos maisons, en nous; and fay que dvne vois
Nous suyvions les accords de ton Nesme admirable*
(...) a iamais seras love de nos Gaulois
Parses chantstout-divins: and Syluestre, en Anglois
Redoublerace loz dvn style inimitable.
P. CATELLE. ^'atten^ le temps.

SONNET.
HEnry, triumphant though thou were in War,
Though Fate and Fortitude conspired thy glory,
Though thy least conflicts well deserve a Story;
Though Mars his fame by thine be dark'ned far;
Though from thy cradle (infant Conqueror)
Thy martial proofs have dimmed Alcides praise;
And though with garlands of victorious Bays
Thy Royal temples richly crowned are:
Yet (matchles Prince) naught have thou wrought so glorious
As this vn-lookt-for happy PEACE admired;
Whereby thy self art of thy self victorious:
For, while thou might the worlds throne have aspired,
Thou by this Peace thy warlike heart have tamed;
What greater conquest could there the^ be named?


THE MIRACLE OF THE PEACE in France.
But what new Sun does now adorn our Land,
And gives our sky so smooth and smiling cheer?
For it is not Phoebus; else his golden brand
Shines brighter now then 't has done many a year.
Sweet Angel-beauty, sacred PEACE, heavens present;
Is It not the rising of thy new-come star,
Which makes the air more clear, the spring more pleasant;
Zephyre more calm, and Flora merrier?
Ah I perceive the Olive, Dove, and Bow,
Divine presages that the flood abates,
The dismal flood where blood and tears did flow,
And Ianus now lockes-vp his Temple gates:
Justice and Faith do kindly kiss each other,
And Mars appeased sits down by Cupids mother.
SONNET.
Fair fruitful daughter of th'Omnipotent,
Great Vmpire that do either World sustain,
Without whose help all would return again
Like hideous Chaos to confusion bent.
O Mother of the living, second Nature
Of The Elements, Fire, Water, Earth, and Air:
O Grace (whereby me^ climb the heavenly staire)
Whence void, this world harbors no happy creature.
Pillar of Laws, Religions pedestall,
Hope of the godly, glory of The Immortal;
Honor of Cities, Pearl of kingdoms all;
Thou Nource of virtues, Muses chief supportall,
Patron of Arts, of Good the special spring:
All hail (dear Peace) which us all heal do bring.
SONNET.
Come forth (dear France) from thy dark cell of moan,
Come (as newborn) from wars unkindly quarrels,
Turn tragic Cypres to triumphant Laurels;
Change black to green, and make thy grave a Throne,
Let Ceres dwell upon thy desert Plain,
Bacchus, and Diane, on thy hills and groves,
Pomona in gardens, Pan among thy droues,
Secure all Roades, and open all gates again.
Resume (O Cities) Rule and Reverence;
Reuest (ye States) your robes of dignity;
Rise-vp (ye Ruins) in fair Battlements;
Come Muses, Pallas, Themis, Mercury,
Restore us Laws, Learning, and Arts, and Trade,
And let our Age, a golden Age be made.
SONNET.
Most Christian kingdom, thou were never so near
Drowned in the deep gulphes of thy Civil war,
As in the tempest of this later jar,
Which past conceit of calming did appear:
When all the winds aduersly armed were,
(Though selfely-foes) yet friends to work thy wrack:
Thy ship a helm, thy self a heart did lack,
On troubled waters tossed here and there.
When from above (O bounty most admired)
Saint Hermes shined, whose gentle light presageth
That then the anger of the heavens asswageth.
O happy PEACE! less hoped then desired:
O grace much honored, little yet conceived;
O blessed guile, that thus our sense deceived.
SONNET.
Who could expect (but past all expectation)
So sudden order from so sad confusion;
So loyal friendship, from false emulation;
So firm possession from so fierce intrusion?
Who could expect (but past all likelihood)
From such a storm, such and so sweet a calm;
From France her cynders, such a Phoenix-brood;
Pandoras box to yield so rare a balm?
Who could expect (but past all humane thought)
So frank a freedom from a thrall so late,
Or certain Rudder of so rent a State?
True Aesculapius, thou alone have wrought
This MIRACLE, not on Hyppolitus,
But on this kingdom, much more wondrous.
Th'vnlook't-for working of all things almost,
Inconstant-constant, in succession strange,
Amazeth those whose wits we chiefly boast,
To see this sudden vn-expected change.
Each feels the effect, but none the cause discries,
(No, though he have with stars intelligence:)
God to himself reserues such mysteries,
Disposing Kingdoms by his Providence.
O endless Bounty! In the midst of Broils
He gives us PEACE, when war did us inflame,
And reaues the mischief we pursued ere whiles:
But this does most extol his glorious name,
That when most sharply this extremest fit
Strove to be cure-les, soon he cured it.
SONNET.
Some reasoned thus; No violence can last:
Revolted subjects, of themselves will quail:
Just Sovereignty can never be displac't;
And lawful Princes first or last prevail:
But who could think that the conjoined powers
Of Spain and Rome, with an exceeding number
Of rebel Cities and false States of ours,
So weak a King so little should encumber?
Others discoursed in another sort,
While all things sorted to another end
Then their imaginations did purport.
That earth may know, it cannot comprehend
The secret depths of Judgments all-diuine,
No: there is no ground, beginning, midst, nor fine.
SONNET.
Admire we only Gods Omni-potence,
His deep-deepe Wisdom, and his Mercy dear,
For with these three he has surmounted here
Our hateful foes, our hopes, and all our sense:
His power appears upon our Lord and King
As erst on David, for they both attain
By warlike broils their pre-appointed reign
Strangers, and subjects, and selves conquering
His Prudence shines, when to preserve us thus,
All humane wit his wisdom does convince:
His gracious bounty in our bounteous Prince.
O various wonders! mel delicious
Flows from a living Lion, Mars is quiet,
Valor relenting, Conquest void of riot.
SONNET.
This was no action of a humane hand,
But the only work of the great Thunderer,
Who wise-directing all the things that are,
In us divinely works his own command.
Some men, unwilling, benefit their Land,
Or vn-awares their Countries good prefer;
Another motions PEACE, but minds war,
And PEACE succeeds what-euer drifts withstand.
Th'Arch-Architect, the matchles Artizan moves;
All instruments unto good uses proves:
Man's but a wheel which that great Moouer*
Each gracious gist in that first cause began:
Each good's a gleame of that first light alone,
If Ill approach us, only that is our own.
SONNET.
If God dart lightning, soon he dewes down rain
A dreadful Judge, and yet a gentle father:
Whose wrath slow-kindled is soon quenched again,
To move us sinners to repent the rather.)
Against hel-bred- Hydra, heau'n-born Theseus brings
The great Alcides arm and armorie:
Of greatest Ill, a greater goodness springs;
And mercy still does rigor qualify.
Ah France, so many monsters to suppress
Thou had great need of Royal fortitude,
Else had thou been an Affrike wilderness.
O happy lost Realm, for it has ensu'de
That now thy gain is more, in restoration;
Then was thy less in all thy desolation.
SONNET.
But if I sing great Henry's fortitude,
Shall I not then be blamed for ouer-daring?
If ouer-slip it, then be taxt of fearing,
Of silent dread, and dumb ingratitude?
What ere befall, my youth-bold thoughts conclude
Like Icarus my nimble Muse to raise:
And if I fall in such a Sea of praise,
What rarer Mausole may my bones include?
A sacred rage of some sweet furious flame
Will-nill. I raps me boldly to rehearse
Great Henry's Trophies, and his glorious name.
Then roll thou Torrent of my tender verse,
Though this high Theme deserve a co^sort rather
Of all the Muses, and all musickes father.
SONNET.
Great Prince, not pleased with a vain vertu-seeming;
Great Victor, prone to pardon humblenes,
Happy, all hap heavens only gift esteeming;
Warrior, whose wars have wroght his Cuntries PEACE:
Noble by deeds, and noble by descent;
Ancient Achilles, youthful Nestor sage,
Whose ripe-experienc't courage confident,
To knocks knits counsel, and gives rule to rage.
As hard in toil, as in compassion soft,
Inured to that, by nature borne to this;
Who sheds no blood, but sheddeth tears as often,
Who never fights but still the field is his.
So like to Mars, that both in loves and wars,
Bellona and Venus take him still for Mars.
SONNET.
A spirit, to virtues cheerfully addressed;
Apt to all goodness, to no ill inclined;
Quick to conceive, ingenious to digest;
Whose tongue is still true trumpet of the mind:
A body, resting when it has no rest;
A waxen mildnes in a steely mind;
A soul tra-lucent in an open breast
Which others thoughts through banie walls can find;
Whose front reflects majesticall-humilitie,
Whose grave sweet look co^mandingly-intreats,
Which in one instant fear and love begets:
A king still warring to obtain tranquillity,
To save his Country scorning thousand dangers;
Mirror of France, and miracle of strangers.
SONNET.
If that before thee fall rebellious Towers,
If battered walls before thy soldiers, loofe:
If hugest rocks be pierced by thy powers;
If against thine arms, no armor be of proof.
If that our fields flow with Iberian blood,
If that thy camp composde of many a Caesar
Can by no dismal dangers be withstood;
I ousting with Giants, as it were at pleasure.
If lofty mountains to thine homage veil;
If valleys rise to bulwark thee about;
If for thy sake rivers do flow and fail;
'Twas neither Canons, nor our conflicts stout,
Nor strength, nor stomach got these victories:
No, 'twas thy presence Henry, and thine eyes,
SONNET.
They be to blame then that thy boldness blame,
For having put thy self so often in danger,
Since against rebels and against the stranger,
Thy looks, like lightning did thy troops inflame.
France fought before, all bloody, faint, and lame,
Craving thine aid to venge her hateful wrong:
When, like a Lion to preserve her young
Thou layd'st about thee to redeem the same.
Then had thou cause to hazard so thy life,
In extreme perils, extreme remedies.
But spare thee now, thy state is free from strife:
Sovereign, our fafetie in thy safety lies.
Codrus could keep his, only by his death:
Thou thine, alone by thine own living breath.
SONNET.
What wreath were worthy to become thy crown,
What Carr-triumphant equal with thy worth,
What marble statue meet for thy renown,
Thou that have raised the Lilly of the Earth?
What honorable Title of Addition
Do thou deserve, who joining might with mildnes,
Have saved this great ship from a sad perdition,
Nigh lost in The Ocean of wars civil vildnes?
O modern Hercules, thy Countries father,
Hope not of us thy iust-deserued meed,
Earth is too-base, in heaven expect it rather.
Our Laurels are too-pale to crown thy deed,
Who thus have salu'd the universal Ball,
For the health of France imports the health of all*
SONNET.
Pardon me (Henry) if heavens silver rain
Dewing thy Pearls impearle mine humble lays,
And if my verse void both of price and pain,
Presume thy virtues passing-price to praise:
Pardon (great King) if that mine infant Muse
Stutter thy name; and if with skill too-scant
I limne thee here, let zeal my crime excuse;
My steel's attracted by thine Adamant.
For as the Sun, although he do reflect
His golden rays on grosser Elements,
Does never spot his beautiful aspect:
So though the praises of thine Excellence
Do brightly glister in my gloomie style,
They nothing loose of their first grace the while.
SONNET.
Now since as well by conquest as succession
France is thine own; O keep it still therefore:
It Is much to conquer, but to keep possession
Is full as much, and if be not more.
Who well would keep so plentiful a portion,
Must stablish first the heavenly discipline;
Then humane Laws, restraining all extortion;
And princely wealth with public weal co^bine.
A Princes safety lies in loving people;
His Fort is Justice (free from stratagem)
Without the which strong Cittadels are feeble.
The subjects love is won by loving them:
Of loving them, n'-oppression is the trial:
And no oppression makes them ever loyal.
SONNET.
Bold Martialists, brave Impes of noble birth,
Shining in steel for France, and for your king:
Ye sons of those that heretofore did bring
Beneath their yoke, the pride of all the earth.
It is an honor to be high-discended,
But more to have kept ones Country and fidelity;
For our own virtues make us most commended:
And Truth's the title of all true Nobility.
Your shoulders shoard up France, even like to fall;
You were her Atlas, Henry Hercules:
And but for you her shocke had shaken All;
But now she stands steadfast on Civil PEACE:
Wherefore if yet your warlike heat doe-wurke,
With holy arms go hunt the hateful Turk.
SONNET.
But you that vaunt your antique Pettigrees,
So stately tymbring your surcharged shields,
Perking (like Pines above the lower trees)
Over the Farmers of your neighbor fields;
Is It lack of love, or is it lack of courage,
That holds you snaile-like creeping in your houses,
While over all your Countries foes do forage,
And rebel outrage every corner rouses?
If no example of your Anceters,
Nor present instance of bright-armed Lords,
The feeble temper of your stomach stirs,
If in your lives ye never drew your swords
To serve your King, nor quench your Countries flames,
Pardon me Nobles, I mistook your names.
SONNET.
You sacred Order, chargd the Church to watch
And teach the holy mysteries of heaven,
From henceforth all seditious plots dispatch,
And father-like, to all be always even.
Through superstition stir no strife again;
Reuolt's a mischief evermore pernicious:
Pluck up abuses, and the hurtful grain
Sprung from the Ignorant and Auaricious.
Avoid Ambition (common cause of strife)
Your reverend robe be free from stains of blood,
Preach holy doctrine, prove it by your life:
Fly Idleness, choose exercises good;
To wit, all works of lively faith and piety,
So to your fold shall flock the blessed society.
SONNET.
You grave assembly of sage Senators,
Rights, Oracles, ye Ephori of France;
Who for the States and Justice maintenance,
Of Sword and Balance are the Arbitrers:
That from henceforth against all enemies,
Our PEACE may seat her in a settled Throne;
Repress the malice of all mutinies,
Which through the advantage of these times have grown.
At a low tide it is best to mend a breach
Before the flood return with violence:
It Is good in health to counsel with a leach.
So while a People's calm from insolence,
It Is best that Rulers bridle them with awe;
And (for the future) kurbe the lewd with law.
SONNET.
People, less settled then the sliding sand;
More mutable then Proteus, or the Moon;
Turned and returned in turning of a hand,
Like Euripus ebbe-flowing every Noone.
Thou thousand-headed head-les Monster-most,
Often slain like Antheus, and as often new rising,
Who hard as steel, as light as wind art tossed;
Cameleon-like, each objects color prysing.
Vnblind thy blind soul, open thine inward sight,
Be no more tinder of intestine flame,
Of all fantastike humors purge thy spright:
For if past follies urge yet grief and shame,
Lo, like Obliuions law, to cure thy passion,
State-stabling Peace brings froward minds in fashion.
SONNET.
Engines of Vulcan, heaven affrighting wonders.
Like brittle glass the Rocks to cynders breaking;
Deafning the winds, dumbing the loudest thu^ders;
May ye be bound a thousand years from speaking.
Ye hate-peace hacksters flesht in massacres,
Be you for ever banished from our soil;
Ye steeled tools of slaughter, wounds, and wars,
Be you condemned to hang, and rust a while:
Or (not to languish in so fruitles rest)
Be you transformed to husband-furniture,
To plow those fields you have so often deprest:
Or (if you cannot leave your wonted vrc)
Leave (at the least) all mutinous alarmes,
And be from henceforth Justice lawful Arms.
SONNET.
O Paris know thy self, and know thy master
As well thy heavenly as thine earthly guider:
And be not like a horse, who proud of pasture
Breaks bit, and raines, and cast his cunning rider.
Who nill be subjects, shall be slaves in fine:
Who Kings refuse, shall have a Tyrant Lord:
Who are not moved with the mild rods divine,
Shall feel the fury of heavens venging sword.
Thy greatness sta^ds on theirs that wear the crown,
Whereof thou have had now seventy saving seven;
Think one sufficient soon to pull thee down:
Kings greatness stands on the great King of heaven.
Knowing these two, then Paris know thy self,
By wars afflictions, and by PEACES wealth.
SONNET.
Swell not in pride O Paris (princely dame)
To be chief City and thy Sovereigns Throne:
City? nay model of this total Frame,
A mighty kingdom of thy self alone:
The scourge that lately with paternall hand
For thine amendment did so mildly beat-thee,
If any more against thy kings thou stand,
Shall prove that then God did but only threat-thee.
Were thou a hundred thousand fold more mighty,
Who in th'Olympike court commands the thu^ders,
In his lest wrath can wrack thee (most almighty)
Thebes, Babel, Rome, those proud heau'n-daring wonders,
Low under ground in dust and ashes lie,
For earthly kingdoms even as men do die.
SONNET.
But O my sorrows! whither am I tossed?
What? shall I bloody sweet ASTREAS songs?
Re-open wounds that are now heald almost,
And new-remember nigh-forgotten wrongs?
Since storms are calmed by a gentle star,
Forget we (Muse) all former furie-moods,
And all the tempest of our viper-warre;
Drown we those thoughts in deep-deepe Lethe floods.
O but (alas) I cannot not retain
So great, notorious, common miseries.
Nor hide my plaint, nor hold my weeping rain:
But 'mid these hideous hellish outrages,
I Will show and prove by this strange spectacle,
Our civil PEACE, a sacred Miracle.
SONNET.
As he that escaped from ship wrack on a planke,
Doubts of his health, and hardly yet believes
(Still faintly shiuering on the feare-les bank)
That (through that frail help) certainly he lives:
As he that new freed from strange servitude
Returns again to tread his native allies,
Seems still to fear his Patrons rigor rude,
And seems still tugging, chayned in the Galleys.
So always ruth, ruin, and rage, and horror
Of troubles past do haunt me every where,
And still meet furies and ghastly terror;
Then to my self thus rave I, (rapt with fear)
From pleasures past if present sorrow spring,
Why should not past cares present comfort bring?
SONNET.
We must now vpbraid each others crimes,
Committed wrongly in the time of war;
For we have all (alas) too often times
Prouok't the vengeance of the Lord too far:
Some robbing Justice under mask of Reason;
Some blowing coals to kindle-vp Sedition;
Some 'against their King atte^pting open Treason;
Some Godding fortunen (Idol of Ambition)
Alas, we know our cause of malady,
All apt t'accuse, but none to cleanse th'impure;
Each does rebuke, but none does remedy:
To know a grief it is but half a cure:
Is it our sins? let us purge away that bane;
For what helps Physic if it be not taken?
SONNET.
Who cloak their crimes in hoods of holiness,
Are double villains: and the Hypocrite
Is most-most odious in Gods glorious sight,
That takes his name to cover wickedness.
Profane Ambition, blind and irreligious,
Inquest of kingdoms holding nothing holy;
Think thou The Eternal blind (as thou in folly)
Or weak to punish monsters so prodigious?
O execrable vizard, can thou hide thee
From th'All-pierce-eye? are treason, rape, and murder
Effects of faith, or of the Furies-order?
Thy veil is rent, the rudest have descride thee.
It Is now apparent to each plain Opinion,
Thy hot Devotion hunted but Dominion.
SONNET.
It Is strange to see the heat of Civil brands,
For when we arm us brother against brother,
O then how ready are our hearts and hands:
And wits awake to ruin one another!
But come to counter-min against secret treason,
Or force the forces of a stranger foe,
Alas, how shallow are we then in reason,
How cold in courage, and in camping slow?
Franunce only strives to triumph over France:
With selfe-kill swords to cut each others throat,
What swarms of soldiers every where do float,
To spend and spoil a kingdoms maintenance?
But said I soldiers? ah I blush for shame,
To give base the eues the noble soldiers name.
SONNET.
Is It not an endless scandal to our days
(If possible our heirs can credit it)
That the holy name of PEACE so worthy praise,
Has been our watchword for a fault unfit?
That the pure Lilly, our own native flower,
Has been an odious object in our eyes?
That kingly Name, and kings heaun'-stablisht power,
Has been with us a mark of trecheries?
To Have banished hence the godly and the wise,
Whose sound direction kept the State from danger,
Yea, made their bodies bloody sacrifice?
And (to conclude) seeking to serve a stranger,
To Have flab'd our own (but O Muse keep that in,
The fault's so foul, to speak it were a sin.)
SONNET.
I wail not I so much wars wastfull rigours,
Nor all thy ruins make me half so sorry,
As thy lost honor (France) which most disfigures,
Loosing thy loyalty, thy native glory.
From Moors to Moscouites (O cursed change!)
The French are called, Faith-les Parricides:
Th'erst-most-prince-loyall people (o most strange!)
Are now Prince-treachers more then all besides:
With us, massacres pass for Piety;
Theft, rape, and wrong for iust-attaind possessions;
Revolt for Merit, Rage for Equity:
Alas, must we needs borrow the transgressions
And imperfections of all other nations,
Erst only blamed for inconstant fashions?
SONNET.
Not without reason has it often been spoken,
That through fair concord little things augme^t,
And (opposite) that mightiest things are broken
Through th'vgly discord of the discontent
When many tunes do sweetly symphonize
It conquers hearts and kindly them compound;
When many hearts do gently sympathize
In sacred friendship, there all bliss abounds.
Alas, if longer we divide this Realm,
Loosing to every Partizan a part;
Farewell our Lillies and our Diadem.
For though it seem to breath now some what peart,
Our sins I fear will work worse after-claps,
And there is most danger in are-relaps.
SONNET.
O how I hate these partializing words,
Which show how we are in the faith divised:
Is It possible to whet so many swords,
And light such flames among th'In-one-Christ baptizedt
Christians to Christians to be brute and bloody,
Altars to Altars to be opposite,
Parting the limbs of such a perfect Body,
While Turks with Turks do better far unite?
We our Truth find doubts (whence follow scismes)
They, whose fond Law does all of lies consist,
Abide confirmed in their vain Paganismes.
One naught believes, another what him list,
One ouer-creeds, another Creeds too-short;
Each makes his Church (rather his Sect) a part.
SONNET.
Put off (dear French) all secret grudge and gall,
And all keen stings of vengeance on all parts:
For if you would have PEACE proclaimed to all,
It must be first fair printed in your hearts.
Henry, the mildest of all Conquerers,
(Your perfect glass for Princely clemency)
He, to appease and calm the state from iarres,
For his friends sake has sau'de his enemy.
Let Us all be French, all subjects to one Lord;
Let France from henceforth be one only state;
Let Us all (for Gods sake) be of one accord:
So (through true zeal Christ's praise to propagate)
May the most Christian King with prosperous power
On Sion walls be-plant our Lillie-flower.
SONNET.
O Christian corsiue! That the Mahomite
With hundred thousands in Vienna Plain,
His Mooned standards has already pight,
Pressed to join Austrich to his Thracian reign:
Malth, Corfu, Candie, his proud threats disdain;
And all our Europe trembles in disinay;
While striving Christians by each other slain,
Each other weak'ning, make him easy way.
Rhodes, Belgrade, Cyprus, and the Realms of Greece,
Thral'd to his barbarous yoke, yet fresh-declare,
That while two strive a third obtaines the fleece.
Though name of Christian be a title fair,
If but for Earth they all this while have striu'n,
They may have Earth, but others shall have heaven.
SONNET.
May I not one day see in France again
Some new Martellus, full of stout actiuitie,
To snatch the scepter from the Saracen,
That holds the Holy Land in strait captivity?
May I not see the selfe-weale-wounding lance
Of our brave bloods (erst one another goring)
Turned with more valor on the Musulmans,
A higher pitch of happy prowess soaring?
But who (dear France) of all thy men-at-armes
Shall so far hence renew thine ancient Laurels?
Since here they plot thine and their propher harms,
I rather fear that (through these fatal quarrels)
That hate-Christ Tyrant will in time become
The Lord and Sovereign of all Christendom.
SONNET.
'Mid all these mischiefs while the frend-foe strangers
With us, against us, had intelligence;
Henry our King, our father, voides our dangers,
And (O heavens wonder) pla^teth PEACE in France.
Thou Judge that sitt'st on the supernall Throne,
O quench thy fury, keep us from hostility,
With eyes of mercy look thou still upon
Our PEACE, and found it on a firm stabilitie:
Since in despite of discord, thou alone,
Inward and outward have thus salu'd us (Lord)
Keep still our France, (or rather Lord thine own)
Let Princes love, and live in just accord:
Disarme them (Lord) or if arms busy them,
Be it alone for thy Jerusalem.
A Dialogue upon the Troubles past: BETWEEN HERACLITVS and the laughing
Philosophers.
Heraclitus. A Las, thou laugh'st, perhaps not feeling well
The painful torments of this mortal hell:
Ah can thou teare-les in this iron Age,
See men massacred, monsters borne to rage?

Democritus. Ha, but why weep'st thou? wherefore in this sort
Do thou lament amid this merry sport
Ha, can thou choose but laugh to see the state
Of men's now-sollies, and the freakes of fate?

Heraclitus. He has no heart that melts not all in tears,
To see the treasons, murders, massacres,
Sackes, sacriledges, losses, and alarmes
Of those that perish by their proper arms.

Democritus. Who all-dismayed, swoundeth soddainly
To hear or see some fained Tragedy
held in these days on every stage as common,
Is but a heart-les man, or but a woman.

Heraclitus. O would to God our Countries tragic ruth
Were but a fable, no effected truth:
My soul then should not sigh to angry heaven,
Nor for her plagues my tender heart be riu'n.

Democritus. I take the world to be but as a stage,
Where not-maskt men dee play their personage.
It Is but a mummerie, and a pleasant show,
Since over all strange vanities do flow.

Heraclitus. Those vanities I have in detestation,
As cursed causes of Gods indignation:
Which makes me always weep, since on the earth
I see no object for the meanest mirth.

Democritus Thus from one subject sundry sequels spring,
As diversely our wits conceive a thing.
I laughed to see thee weep; thou weep'st to see
Me laugh so much, which more afflicts thee.

Heraclitus. Laugh while thou list at mortal miseries,
I cannot choose but even weep out mine eyes,
Finding more cause for tears in bloody slaughter,
Then for thy sence-lesill-beseeming laughter.

Democritus. Melt thee, distill thee, turn to wax or snow;
Make sad thy gesture, turn thy voice to worcester;
I cannot weep, except sometimes it hap
Through laughing much mine eyes let fall a drop.

Heraclitus. I weep to see thus every thing confused,
Order disordred, and the Laws abused;
Justice reuerst, and Policy perverted;
And this sick state near utterly subverted.

Democritus. I laugh to see how Fortune, like a ball,
Plays with the Globe of this inconstant All:
How she degradeth these, and graceth those;
How whom she lifts-vp, down again she throws.

Heraclitus. I rain down Rivers, when against their King
Cities rebel through subjects bandying:
When Colleges through arms are reft of Art:
When every County kingdoms it apart.

Democritus. I burst with laughter, when confounding state,
I see those rebels hunt their Magistrate.
When I hear Porters prate of State-designes,
And make all common, as in newfound Indes.

Heraclitus. I weep to see Gods glory made a veil
To cover who his glory most assail:
That sacred Faith is made a mask for sin,
And men run headlong to destructions ginne.

Democritus. I laugh with all my heart at the transforming
Of ^^ggling Proteis, to all timaes conforming,
But most I laughed have seen the world so mad
To starve and die, when those damned Atheists bad.

Heraclitus. I weep (alas) to see the people weep,
Oppressed with rest-les weight in dangers deep;
Crying for PEACE, but yet not like to get-her,
Yet her condition is not greatly better.

Democritus. I laugh to see all cause of laughter gone, (thy moan:
Through those which (erst thou said) have caused
Noting the old guise I laugh at al their new;
I laugh at more, but dare not tell it you.

Heraclitus. Some sorrows also I in silence keep,
But in the desert, all my woes shall weep,
And there perhaps the Rocks will help me then;
For in these days they are more mild then men.

Democritus. I'^e dwell in Cities (as my Genius guides)
To laugh my fill, for smiling PEACE prouides
Such plenteous store of laughing stuff to fill me,
That still I Will laugh, unless that laughing kill me

Finis.
AN ODE OF THE love and beauties of ASTREA.
To the most match-les, fair, and virtuous, M. M. H.
TETRASTICON.
Thou for whose sake my freedom I forsake,
Who murdring me, do yet maintain my life:
Here under PEACE, thy beauties type I make,
Fair vvar-like Nymph that keep'st me still in strife.
The Love and Beauties of ASTREA.
Sacred PEACE, if I approve thee,
If more then my life I love thee,
It Is not for thy beauteous eyes:
Though the brightest lamp in skies
In his highest Summer shine
Seems a spark compared with thine,
With thy pair of selfe-like Suns,
Past all else comparisons.
It Is not (dear) the dewes Ambrosiall
Of those pretty lips so Rosiall
Make me humble at thy feet.
Though the purest house sweet
That the Muses birds do bring
To Mount Hybla every spring,
Nothing near so pleasant is
As thy lively loving kiss.
ASTREA.
It Is not (Beauties Emperesse)
Th'amber circlets of thy tresse,
Curled by the wanton winds,
That so fast my freedom binds:
Though the precious glittering sand
Richly strow'd on Tagus strand;
Nor the grains Pactolus told
Never were so fine a gold.
It Is not for the polish't rows
Of those Rocks whence Prudence flows
That I still my suite pursue;
Though that in those Countries new
In the Orient lately found
(Which in precious gemmes abound)
Among all baytes of Avarice
Be no Pearls of such a price.
ASTREA.
It Is not (Sweet) thine yuorie neck
Makes me worship at thy beck;
Nor that pretty double Hill
Of thy bosom panting still:
Though no fairest Laedas swanne,
Nor no sleekest marble can
Be so smooth or white in show,
As thy Lillies, and thy Snow.
It Is not (O my Paradise)
Thy front euener than the ye,
That my yielding heart does tie
With his mild-sweet Majesty:
Though the silver Moon be feign
Still by night to mount her waine,
Fearing to sustain disgrace
If by day she meet thy face.
ASTREA.
It Is not that soft Satin limme,
With blew trailes enameld trim,
Thy hand, handle of perfection,
Keeps my thoughts in thy subjection:
Though it have such curious cunning,
Gentle touch, and nimble running,
That on Lute to hear it warble,
Would move rocks and ravish marble,
It Is not all the rest beside,
Which thy modest veil does hide
From mine eyes (ah too injurious)
Makes me of thy love so curious:
Though Diana being bare,
Nor Leucothoe passing rare,
In the Christall-flowing springs
Never bathed so beauteous things.
ASTREA.
What then (O diuinest Dame)
Fires my soul with burning flame,
If thine eyes be not the matches
Whence my kindling taper catches?
And what Nectar from above
Feeds and feasts my joys (my Love)
If they taste not of the dainties
Of thy sweet lips sugared plenties?
What fell heat of couetize
In my feeble bosom fries;
If my heart no reckoning hold
Of thy tresses purest gold?
What inestimable treasure
Can procure me greater pleasure
Then those Orient Pearls I see
When thou daign'st to smile on me?
ASTREA.
What? what fruit of life delights
My delicious appetites,
If I ouer-passe the mess
Of those apples of thy breasts?
What fresh buddes of scarlet Rose
Are more fragrant sweet than those
Then those twins thy strawberry teates,
Curled-purled cherrielets?
What (to finish) fairer limme,
Or what member yet more trim,
Or what other rarer subject
Makes me make thee all mine object?
If it be not all the rest
By thy modest veil suppressed
(Rather which an envious cloud
From my sight does closely shroud.)
ASTREA.
Ah 't's a thing far more divine,
It Is that Peere-les soul of thine,
Masterpiece of heavens best Art,
Made to maze each mortal heart.
It Is thine all-admired wit,
Thy sweet grace and gesture fit,
Thy mild pleasing courtesy
Makes thee triumph over me.
But, for thy fair souls respect,
I love twinne-flames that reflect
From thy bright tra^lucent eyes.
And thy yellow locks likewise.
And those Orient Pearlie Rocks
Which thy lightning smile vn-lockes.
And the Nectar-passing blisses
Of thy bony-sweeter kisses.
ASTREA.
I love thy fresh rosy cheek
Blushing most Aurora-like,
And the white-exceeding skin
Of thy neck and dimpled chin,
And those yuorie-marble mounts
Either, neither, both at once:
For I dare not touch to know
If they be of flesh or no.
I love thy pure Lilly hand
Soft and smooth, and slender; and
Those five nimble brethren small
Armed with Pearle-shel helmets all.
I love also all the rest
By thy modest veil suppressed
(Rather which an envious cloud
From my longing sight does shroud.)
ASTREA.
Sweet mouth that send'st a muskie rosed breath;
Fountain of Nectar, and delightful Balm;
Eyes cloudy-clere, smile-frowning, stormy-calm;
Whose every glance darts me a liuing-death:
Brows bending quaintly, your round Ebene arkes:
Smile, that then Venus sooner Mars besots;
Locks more then golden, curled in curious knots,
Where in close ambush wanton Cupid lurkes:
Grace Angel-like; fair forehead smooth and high;
Pure white, that dimm'st the Lillies of the vale;
Vermilion rose, that make Aurora pale:
Rare spirit, to rule this beauteous Emperie:
If in your force divine effects I view,
Ah who can blame me if I worship you?
TO ASTREA.
Thou, whose sweet eloquence does make me mute;
Whose sight does blind me; and whose nimblenes
Of feet in dance, and fingers on the Lute,
In deep amazes makes me motion-les.
Whose only presence from my self absents me,
Whose pleasant humors, make me passionate;
Whose sober mood, my follies represents me:
Whose graue-mild graces make me emulate.
My heart, through whom my heart is none of mine:
My All, through whom, I nothing do possess
Save thine Idea, glorious and divine.
O thou my Peace-like war, and warlike PEACE,
So much the wounds that thou have given me, please;
That it is my best case never to have case.
Epigrammes upon War and Peace.
Upon the League.
FRance, without cause thou do complain
Against the League for wronging thee,
Sh'hath made thee large amends again
With more than common usury.
For, for thy one King which she slew,
Sh'hath given thee now a thousand new.
Upon the taking of Paris.
1
When Paris happily was won
With small or no endangering,
Such sudden common joy begun,
That one would say (to have seen the thing)
The King took not Paris, Paris took the King.
2
O rarest sight of joyful woe,
Adorned with delightful dread;
When Henry with one selfsame show,
Conquered at once and triumphed!
3
Since thee from danger and distress to free,
The King thus took, or rather entered thee:
Paris, it was not in stern Mars his month,
But in the month that mild ASTREA owneth.
Upon the fall of the Millars-bridge.
1
The Millars in the river drowned,
While Paris was beleagerd round;
To die were all resolved in mind
Because they had no more to grind.
2
Then was their fittest time to die
Because they might intend it best:
But their intent was contrary,
Because they then lived so at rest.
3
As after long sharp famine, some (forlorn)
Of surfeit die, their greedines is such:
This Mill-bridge having fasted long from corn
Is drow'nd perhaps for having ground too-much.
Upon the recovery of Amiens.
I know not which may seem most admirable;
To take or retake such a Cities force:
But yet I know which is most honorable,
To take by fraud, or to retake by force.
2
Each where they sing a thousand ways
The glory of this enterprise:
But yet of all their merry lays,
The best is still in the Reprise.
3
Hernand was happy by this Enterprise
To take so soon our Amiens without blow:
More happy yet, to die ere the Reprise,
Else had he died for shame to leave it so.
Upon the Reduction of Nantes.
Nantes would not yield so soon (they said)
Nor be recovered so good cheap
And yet for all defense it made,
'Twas made to make the Britton leap.
Upon PEACE.
1.
Soldiers late pressed, are now suppressed;
Crossed and cassierd from further pay,
Yet will they in this time of rest,
Take up their lendings by the Way.
2
This PEACE (it seems) does not sound
To all the world, for every where
More Sergeants now do go the Round,
Then Soldiers carst accustomed were.
Upon Captain Coblar.
A merry Coblar left the wars,
To turn unto his occupation:
And asked by his customers
The reason of his alteration:
'Thath pleased (quoth he) the King t'ordaine
That each his Office take again.
Epitaphes.
Upon War.
1
Here, under (...) huge heap of stones
Lately enterr'd, lies cruel WAR:
Pray God long rest her soul and bones:
Yet there is nothing worse for her.
Upon Rowland Rob-Church.
2
Here lies Rowland, that was lately slain,
In robbing of a wealthy Chapel, spyde:
Yet I believe he does in heaven remain,
Since only for the Churches Good he died.
Upon Captain Catch.
3
Here under, Captain CATCH is laid,
Who six times changed from side to side,
Of neither side (it seemed) afraid:
He wore a white scarf when he died,
Yet some suspect, and so do I,
For his inconstance shown before,
That to the Black-band he did fly.
But now he can revolt no more.
Upon Sir Nequam Neuter.
4
Here lies he, who the more safe to pray
On both sides; Neuter, between both abode:
Whither his Soul is gone, I can not say,
Since he was nor for Devil, nor for God.
Pax omnibus vna.
FINIS.

