THE WATERS OF SILOE.

TO QVENCH THE FIRE OF PVRGATORY and to drown the traditions, Limboes, man's
satisfactions and all Popish Indulgences, against the reasons and allegations
of a Portugal Friar of the order of St. Frances, supported by three treatises.

The one written by the same Franciscan and entitled The fiery torrent, etc.

The other two by two Doctors of Sorbon.

The one entitled The burning furnasse. The other The fire of Helie.

BY PETER DV MOVLIN Minister of Gods word.

Psalm. 118.12. They came about me like Bees, but they shall be quenched like a
fire of thorns.

Faithfully translated out of French by I. E.

Printed at Oxford for John Barnes dwelling near Holborne Conduit. 1612.

TO THE RIGHT WORTHY SIR DVDLY DIGS Knight, true content in this life, with
eternity in the life to come.
SIR if the remembrance of former benefits can move or bounty in more ample
sort extended can prevail, I have reason both to agnise your love showed, and
your bounty showred toward me; least worthy of such immerited affections. Yet
because unthankfulness stops the current of Gods blessings, and makes us
degenerate from that we should be, I resolved with my self to gratify your
love (at least in some sort) by acknowledging that entire duty I owe you, and
consecrating unto your worthy self, some thing that might seem worthy of such
a patronage. May it please you therefore to take surview of this work which by
long Travail I have brought to this perfection: it is the freight of my poor
bark purchased by this years sail; it seems more then an Elephants birth, and
therefore promises satisfaction to the judicious reader. Let it be shadowed
under the wings of your protection, who best deserves it, because you
nourished both me and it, when there was scarce any being to me or it: to
particularise your diverse and sundry affections to which and for which I rest
ever devoted, would crave a tract of it self, which makes me omit them, only I
wish my effects, were answerable to my affects, to accomplish that which I
would. But so fruitless be wishes that their harvest seems scarce worthy the
gleaning. This poor testimony of my love may not only demonstrate what I owe
unto you: but what I owe the Church in the faith I have professed, which I will
ever keep inviolable, not making travail as too many do to the wrack and
ruin of my Religion, but the confirmer of those unsettled intentions which were
but half grounded in me; experience has reduced my wavering thoughts to an
harbor of quiet repose; these be the fruits I reaped, which as my first fruits
are to you tendered, to manifest my love and duty unto you, the sincerity of
my conscience to the Church, and my charitable desire to profit all: much I
should wish you in content, but more I cannot then already you enjoy, and
therefore rest

Ever obliged to your respected self I. B

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
SOON after the meeting betwixt the Franciscan friar and my self, I sent him
in writing a discourse co^taining an examination of Purgatory requesting him
likewise in writing to set down his soundest reasons and strongest proofs. But
either of my writing or request this good Doctor made no account, yet in my
absence after my departure from Paris he sent to challenge me again to a
verbal conference: and before he particularized his departure, he repaired to
the kings Majesty and required reward for his public teaching, Contrary to
the rule of S. Francis, cap. 4. nullo modo denarios vel pecuniam ^e cipiant,
per se vel per personam interpositam.
as also for his particular conference with the Minister Du Moulin. Which
nevertheles could not restrain me from publishing my discourse entitled The
waters of Siloe to quench the fire of Purgatory. This writing wrought a greater
effect then I could have imagined: for attending the Franciscans answer, behold
two Doctors of Sorbone Cayer and Du Val, tried no doubt upon the vollee among
such a multitude as do assault this treatise, as a forlorn hope are the first
that enter the skirmish. Afterward stirred up by their example, comes this
Portugal Monk into the field, as making up the arrier guard of this Roman
army: to whose work the Jesuits of Tournon have contributed, to the end that
after the knocking together of so many exquisite pates, they may need no more
to begin. In me it might be holde^ great presumption to wrestle with so many
men, and so laden with titles, if the word of God stood in awe of multitude.
For he might be holden for a mad man, who in a matter of importance, in liew
of waighing the reasons should fall to numbering of the persons. Truth is of more
force in the mouth of one man only, then untruth in the mouths of many, whose
conspiracies against the truth of the Gospel resembles the humming of a neast
of wasps that in stinging do lose their stinges. how ever it is, it seems
that this treatise has stung some of them to the quick: with so great strife
do they assault it. And indeed the gaul and iniuties that herein they do
spue forth does show them to be vehemently moved. They term me a beast, a
fool, a sot, a deceaver, an heretic, an impious parson, a dolt, execrable,
impudent, etc. They send me quick into hell, yea they rather want words then
stomach. They are sorry that our language is no better stored with injurious
phrases: and God he knows what people they are! But God grant that this
their vomit may be to them a purgation, that God may not judge them with so
great rigor, as they do us with rashness. This is all the revenge that I do
desire: for what other interest have we in this action then the glory of God
and the salvation of such as hate us? Whose stripes and blows when they cannot
penetrate into the truth do reflect upon my person. But herein do I boast
that they be honorable bruises. These barkings I bear as of men starved, and
as some portion of the reproaches of my savior Christ, who was in like manner
outraged, and for our salvation bare more sorrows the^ we ca^ suffer wrongs for
his glory. Now albeit an impudent boldness be the only way to atchieue
reputation of skill, yet am not I determined to practice, that course: neither
to requite these Doctors with such quoine. This attempt I despise and laugh at
such impetuositie: yea I even take compassion of it, as of a disease of the
mind and a convulsion. Neither is it indeed my cause, it is the cause of Jesus
Christ, whom we are not to defend but by imitating of him; for how can we plead
the cause of the Lamb of God with wolvish hearts and poisoned stomachs? Yet
is their wrath in some sort excuseable: for in quenching their Purgatory, what
do you but put these our Masters to an hungry dispute, by stopping the current
of their traffic, cutting their sinews, and breaking the wheels of this
great frame of the Roman hierarchy? For as a beast deadly wounded, springs
forth with an extraordinary force, even so these Doctors do excessiuely
storm, when you touch them in their best feeling: that is in the belly, in
Avarice and in Idleness. Of all the rest this Portugal Monk is the most
ridiculously violent: he speaks with a barbarous impetuositie: with such a
pride as hardly agrees with his habit: yet did I forbear his honor and
abstain from all injuries and bravadoes, albeit I had a large field open
before me, and many proofs of his ignorance. But I seek not to dishonor any
man, only the glory of God do I aim at. To these books thus stuffed with
civilitie have these reverend Doctors imposed Capriccious titles after the
manner of those that hang out scurrilous tables over the forefronts of the
houses where they act their enterludes: or as such as carue Cyclops and Satyrs
upon the frontispice of their buildings. CAYER.
Mark then the title of Cayers book. The burning furnace, or oven of
reverberate etc. And in his book his speech runs all upon Limbecks firing,
evaporating, recalcining, etc. All words of his art, and of all this he makes
an Amalgame co^taining more moon then sun. The other treads the same path
and entituleth his book The fire of Helie to dry up the waters of Siloe. VAL.
Luke. 9.
You wot not by what spirit you be led. The FRIAR
The Friar was loath to be behind his fellows, or to use a less ridiculous
title then his writing is, so to procure an uniformity wherein he proceeded
with great discreation and this is his title. The Torrent of fire proceeding
from the face of God to dry up the waters of Mara enclosed in the causey of
the Mill of Ablon: O frock garnished with elega^cie! Who was able on this side
the Pirinean mountains to attain to such gallant conceptions; and so well
polished? This Friar minor entendeth to have all his pollutions and uncleanness
that he spueth out throughout his whole book to come forth from the face of
God, that is to say, to be expelled out of Gods presence. Which nevertheless
he armeth with authority, entituling himself The Reverend Father James,
Observantin, Doctor, Preacher etc. And in his preface braggeth that he writes
succinctly and strongly: yet had it been good he had expected other men's
commendations: but he had more desire to ease them of that labor.

At the first blush therefore seeing so fiery books, such hot furnaces and
Torrents of fire I feared to come near the^: but plucking up my spirits and
being a little way entered into the reading of the same, I grew into far
greater admiration, considering that these three friars were as far
discordant among themselves as fire and water: and that these Doctors did most
fiercely bang each other, and yet were all signed and approved by the Doctors
of Sorbone. Yea so hot was this contention among them, that one of them, namely
Cayer, after he had been well displaid, and hardly entreated, was finally
disclaimed in all their Pulpits, and blasted with perpetual infamy. All which
they could never have compassed, but they must likewise tax those Doctors that
subscribed and allowed his book.

Well did I know that the opinions of the Romish doctors do agree but badly.
Herein is the Council of Basil contrary to the Counsel of Florence.
One says that the pope cannot teach false doctrine, another that he can. One
that the Pope is above the Council, another that the Council is above the
Pope. Misteria Mislae. lib. 3. cap 9. Causa 15. Ca^. Alius and Can. Nos
sanctoru^ quaest. 7 Extravag. vna^ sanctam de Maiorib. and Oleo.
One that Invocation of Saints is necessary, as Pope Innocent the 3. and Cayer
in his conference advowed and subscribed by the Doctors of Sorbone. The others,
as the Lord of Eureux, that it may well enough be forborne; and it is no matter
of necessity. The Jesuits and such as in their hearts are more soundly nailed
to the Papal sea do advow that the Pope may give and take away kingdoms: and
that he can absolve subjects from their oaths and fidelity and allegance to
their Princes, and this power have the Popes of late assumed to themselves, and
do now put in practice. Others that hold their judgments somewhat more at
liberty do affirm all this to be mere usurpation. The most strictest orders
of Friars and such souls as they have brought into captivity do believe that
the Church of Rome cannot err in any point of doctrine and do defend even the
most gross absurdities: other more smooth tongued, but withal more white
livered do say that there be indeed gross absurdities: That they believe not
any Purgatory. That the Iubile is but a kind of Merchandise: That the
fraternity of the Cord is but superstition: That the hallowed grains are but
profane trumperies: That we might very well forbear the portraying of God:
the taking of the cup in the Supper from the lay people: the baptizing of
bells: the singing of Masses for horses, corn, hogs, etc. Yet for all this
that we must not separate our selves: and the reason that under hand they give
out is this: It is good for us. All this passes smoothly away so long as we
speak not hardly of his holiness and that the Church Profits be not
deminished. To be brief, these people are like twins whose heads being
divided the bellies are nevertheless knit together. Surely this is the course
whereby the unity of the Romish Church is vpholden. Nether were we utterly
ignorant of this discord, yet should I never have imagined that they would have
published their contradictions, or produced these Doctors to the stage, there
to have given them so rude a bastinado. But drink ye together Doctors and
agree among your selves: for surely the same God that confounded the languages
of the builders of Babylon does still suffer divisio^ to molest those that
build it again. Now that which we speak of, concerns not Cayer alone: for
the Friar likewise gainesayeth his two companions, albeit he has both seen
their books and out of them borrowed some part of his writings. So as that
which in the sixteenth of Genesis was spoken of Ismael, His hand shall be
against every man, and every man's hand against him; does very well agree with
every of them: whereof in this Treatise I will show you sundry examples.

These contradictions are somewhat hard of disgestio^, but much more their
slanders wherein they impose upon us most horrible and wicked opinions,
infinitely estranged from our belief. As thus: that we believe five mansions
for the souls: that our drift is to deny the Immortality of the soul: that
we make al sins alike equal: that we hold that the souls do sleep from the
day of their decease to the day of judgment: that we would have I wot not what
Synod [that never was] to pass for an article of faith: that baptism was not
necessary for any but the children of unbelievers: that out of our Kalenders
we have raised the Virgin Mary and the Apostles, and in their places have
inserted Luther and Calvin: that our Ministers do preach liberty of conscience
without any apprehension of divine judgment: that we hold that it suffices us
that Jesus Christ suffered for us, and therefore that we need not do any
more: that at the Funerals of the late Queen of England they sung Mass, had
their offertory and prayed for her soul: that Luther and Calvin in liew of
raising the dead to life did put the living to death, and that they are our
Masters, Patriarchs and Apostles etc. To be brief, they set down even all
the slanders that hatred can devise, or malice can suggest, wherewith they
seduce the people and abuse their simplicity.

What shall I speak of their uprightness in alleging the Scriptures? All the
passages that they produce are for the most part either falsified, or wrested
to a contrary sense, or to no purpose. With a Magisteriall license they force a
number of passages quoined upon the anvill of Avarice, that are not to be found
in the originals, either Greek, or Hebrew: yea and sometimes contrary to the
Roman translations. Of so much negligence or dullness of their reader do they
presume, assuring themselves that the people shall never perceive any thing, or
can so much as co^sult with the Scriptures, which unto them are as sealed
letters and suspected books: albeit, in the mean time they are permitted to
read the monstrous Legends: the Psalters of the Virgin Mary full fraught with
blasphemy: and the frivolous and and fabulous books of the life of Jesus
Christ. O ye souls that long for your salvation, will you still live in such
grievous bondage? What? shall we yet be so vain as to pass the seas to look
upon the relickes of some Saints, and will we not hear Jesus Christ when he
offers himself unto us in the holy Scriptures? Shall we stoop more to
curiosity the^ to necessity? To the content of our eyes then to the salvation
of our souls? Shall we still be so rashly negligent, as in a matter of such
importance to credit the first commer? Contenting our selves with following in
liew of knowing? Placing piety in the knoweledge of nothing; thrusting our
selves into the press and shrowding us among the multitude? Again, when any
man shall say unto us that Jesus Christ or any of his Apostles do in such a
place, or in such a place teach us Purgatory, or the Invocation of saints, etc.
Shall we be so cruelly cowards to our selves, or so unthankful to God, as not
to take so much pains as to look whether the same be truly alleged? And
indeed wherefore should these Doctors cite the places but that we might see
them? For what an absurdity is this, to quote the places to the people and
then to debar them from seeing of them: To refer them to the places and
then to command them not to look in the book? The people of Beroe practiced
this examination of the things that S. Paul taught: Acts. 17.10
for albeit he preached with far more authority and certitude the^ any man
in our age; yet did they examine his preaching by the reading of the Prophets,
far more obscure then the new Testament. Enter therefore in to this
examination I say, and yet I say unto you [especially if you have recourse to
the originals] that you shall enter as it were into a shop where they sell
vizards: yea where they do not only sell them, but where they make the^, so
excessive is their licentious liberty* Of all this will we in this Treatise
produce sundry proofs, according as occasion shall serve. A Treatise whose
principal drift is a defense of the only purging of our sins, which is the
blood of our Savior Jesus Christ against the fire of Purgatory. An argument
that carries with it the confutation of the doctrine of the Limboes, of
Traditions, of Prayer for the dead, of man's satisfactions and of Popish
Indulgences. I plead the cause of Jesus Christ: I confute the reasons and
passages of these Doctors and their burning writings: yet touch not their
persons, neither their furnitures full of Invectiues that concern not the
argument.

Two things there are nevertheless which I cannot overpasse: their folly in
vanting, and their false dealing in answering me.

Fire of Helic, p. 4.
First they paint forth many triumphs great conquests, and an extreme shaking
of our Church: so many goodly souls, such a multitude of notable personages:
namely forty at Diepe revolted to the Romish Church, which now is in travel of
them: If they come to life they shall come forth. These men do pack them very
grossly: for enquiring of any such breach in the Church of Diepe, I cannot
learn of more long time revolted then two, the one a maiden who allured by a
carnal marriage has violated her spiritual marriage with Christ: the other
an English Jesuit, 2. Pet. 5.22.
who upon a fained conversion intruded himself into our company and is now
returned to his vomit. Howbeit let us put the case that the report of these
conversions were as true, as they be forged at pleasure: Is it any mervaile
that some love the world and turn wing to that part that yields most
quietness and worldly promotion? Were it not rather a wonder if there were
none such? Ioh. 6.66.
Jesus Christ was forsaken of his disciples: how much more we, who have
nothing but by his bounty? Men in these days in matter of Religion do follow
the course of the affairs, and do fit their belief to their worldly
commodities. The belly has no ears: And as usually such are deaf as dwell
near the downfall of great waters, even so the word of God pierces not into
the ears that are deafned with the bruit of the world and stopped with the
curra^t of Covetize, of voluptuousness and of ambition: especially at Paris
where me^ are bought and sold, and where rewards are propounded. And God
grant that Idolatry possess none but those who^ she has dearly paid for*
herein are we to acknowledge the work of God: that notwithstanding so many
allurements and discommodities, yet do the flock of Jesus Christ grow and
increase, yea even since these men made their vaunts that our Church was so
sore shaken. But we boast not so much, neither indeed are these victories ours
but our Lord Jesus Christ's.

In their triumphs they paint me forth and make me a party in the proofs of
their sufficiency. The auctor of Helies fire says that in the disputation
against the friar I was twice or thrice at a non plus and so made some of them
merry: but he shows neither when nor whereupon. It might peradventure be when
the friar refused to enter into any orderly disputation, or to propou^d his
reasons in form, saying that he was not permitted so to do: either when he
said that the theft was scourged, Suetonius. Julius in segmento. 73. Plautus in
Aphitruone: aut satisfaciat mihi aut adiuret in super nolle esse dicta quae in
me in sontem protulit.
but not the thief: That excogitatum Commentum signified a Commentary: That
the pardons of four and fifty thousand years are good and receaueable: That
satisfacere signifies not to acknowledge his fault to the party offended, or
to testify that he was sorry for it or when he saying unto me that God should
be unjust if there were no purgatory, I answered that then God should be
unjust to such as should live in the day of judgment: also to the Carmelites
that die upon the friday, who [as themselves report] have a privilege that they
shall remain in purgatory no longer but until the next saturday. But who would
think that untruth could so far exceed? Verily I am one of the least among
the servants of God: yet would I be sorry that my years or want of capacity
should any way prejudice the equity of my cause: but the word of God is mighty
even in the mouths of babes. Besides should I trouble my self with answering
an unlearned man unseen in the Greek and Hebrew, as appeared when we were to
have recourse to the Originals in both those la^guages, where upon the Jesuits
of Turnon took upon them to stuff his book with passages collected out of
profane auctors and the Rabbis, into who^ he never thrust his snowt: which
Jesuits nevertheless were many times mistaken in diverse things, The manner of
these Doctors in answering.
as in place convenient shall appear. But how should they make faithful report
of things spoken, who make no conscience to falsify my writing? See therefore
how they entreat me. They produce not my words: they reverse the order of my
speeches: The friar begins with the last page of my book.
here and there they mangle and snatch at my discourse; one begins at one
end, an other in the midst: If I speak any thing that biteth, they can
quietly pass it over with silence: They object the matter that I answer, but
my answers they suppress, He that seeks the truth ought to produce the very
words of his adversary: he should trace him step by step without
counterfeiting, curtalling, or disse^bling: but these men by a certain
doctoral disposition do skippe, as at their mass, over whole leaves: they
conceal the most forcible: and the sooner to lead the reader that follows us
out of our tracke, they shuffle the course of my reasons, and bring the head
forth last. Then having thus sented my discourse, they proclaim before the
palace their fiery, burning, magnificall, and and ridiculous titles.

Some coulor they might have had for their flight, had my first book been
either tedious or full of words: The chardges of the Impression with the
readers impatiencie might have served them in steed of fig leaves to cover
their shame: but my writing contained few pages and the Arguments lay close:
for I studied to lay the bones bare that the sinews might be the better
seen. Their unfaithful dealing does proceed yet farther: for they forge other
objections then mine: and of mine do they take away the edge by propounding
them in other manner then I did: Thus do they skirmish and sport them in
answering of themselves: much like unto the Bulls in the amphitheater to who^
they cast men made of straw, upon who^, being provoked, they dischardged their
rage. As if they should say unto me: you are too rough: The Church of Rome must
be more gently entreated: Take away your forcible arguments for these reasons
lie to hard upon us, so will we commune with you. Thus and thus must you object
that so we may answer with some coulor: but they forgot to give this warning
before.

I do therefore protest that these writings of these Doctors do not concern
me, for that I never spoke many things that they impute to me: and they have
either fearfully dissembled, or maliciously corrupted my best objections.
Neither can I think my self sufficiently satisfied until I see my own
writing perfect in the writings of my adversaries, and their answer set down
article to article: reason to reason, without cutting of or altering my words,
or disordering the order of my discourse.

Reverend Doctors, I beseech you in courtesy, None of these Doctors have yet
answered, and therefore the victory yet rests with the A^uctor.
yea I adjure you by the relics of your consciences to entreat me with more
equirie: take this book which again I offer unto you increased, amplified and
corroborated with reasons and some passages of Scriptures: and answer it in
such wise as that my reasons may not be mangled, nor thrust out of order: but
that all men may see your answers at the foot of my objections. If your desire
to bring the truth to light fails you not, no more then your leasures,
means, books, and support [albeit all these fail vs] we shall soon perceive
which of us has the word of God to warrant: and from the encounter of our
reasons truly and uprightly reported will proceed the sparks of the truth. The
Lord God vouchsafe to direct our pens, and dispose our hearts to propound
such matters as may be profitable to the salvation of his people, proper to
the glory of God and comfortable to the truth of his word.

THE CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK.
1. A description of the four chambers, or stages which the Church of Rome
places under the earth. Namely of Hell: of the Limboe of Children: of the
Limboe of the fathers: and of Purgatory. Also of the means to get out of
Purgatory. 2. That in this controversy, as in all other that concern faith,
the holy Scripture ought to be judge: also that the same speaks not of
Purgatory, nether of any temporal torment after this life, nether of any
Indulgences wherewith to fetch souls out of this torment. 3. That the holy
Scripture overthrows Purgatory: and that there is no other purgation of our
sins, but the blood and death of Jesus Christ, and consequently, that papal
Indulgences are unprofitable to the deceased. 4. Against man's satisfactions in
general. 5. Against Popish Indulgences and the extraction of souls out of
Purgatory. 6. A confutation of such passages of the holy Scripture as these
Doctors have alleged. 7. What the Doctors of the four first ages after Jesus
Christ did hold and believe concerning this matter, and that they never
believed any Purgatory. Also of prayer for the dead of Indulgences, and of the
satisfactions of the primitive Church.
A CONFVTATION OF PVRGATORY.
CAP. I. A description of the four Chambers or stages which the Church of Rome
places under the earth: and particularly of the place called Purgatory.
THE Doctors of the Church of Rome do hold, that under the earth, there be 4.
several places, which are so many prisons, wherein the fowls are either
broyled, or shutt up. The lowest place.

The auctor of the fire of Helie. p. 44.


The lowest place is hell; the habitation of the damned: and the same is
divided (if we believe our adversaries) into two parts. The one where the
souls are tormented in fire: the other, where they are tormented in snow.
Throughout al^ the word of God can we not find that that ever any came out of
this place* Yet Pope Gregory the first, in the first Book of his Dialogues,
cap. 12. reports that S. Severus raised a dead body whom the Devils had
carried away, Also Damascen, In 4 Did. 45 quest. 2.
and after him Thomas, Durand, and Richard, do tell us that by the prayers of
S. Gregory Traian an heathen Emperor was fetched out of hell Gabriel Biel in
his 56. Lesson upon the Cannon of the Mass, holds the same opinion* And
Ciacconus has written an Apology expressly for this history. Cayer and the
Doctors that subscribed to his book, do approve this history: The second place.
but his companions do reject it. The second place is the Purgatory that
serves for such as are indeed righteous and do not sin: but in their life
time have committed some trespasses for which they have not satisfied. The same
^ope Gregory teaches that so soon as ^ man is deceased his soul is presented
before the Judge, Lib. 4. c. 36.
also that so^time there happens abuse, and they bring before God one that
was not called. As (says he) it chanced to one named Stephen, who being
deceased and his soul presented before God, immediately as God saw him, he
said that was not the man that he had called for: but that it was ^n other
Stephen, a beater of Iron, who thereupon died incontinently, and the former
Stephen revived again and was sent back because he dyed before he was
called. These souls thus presented before the Judge, if they need any purging
are instantly sent to this second place which they term Purgatory. And this
doctrine is grounded upon this principle, which is a third article of their
faith, and taken out of the unwritten word: Read the catechism of the counsel
of Trens in the ch^^ of penna^ce
namely that Jesus Christ by his death and passion has indeed dischardged us
from the fault, and from the pains due to sins committed before baptism:
but from the pain du^^ to sins committed after baptism he has not
discharged us. Therefore that such as have not made full satisfaction in this
life by fastings, scourgings, gifts to the Church, etc: shall be sent to
Purgatory there to finish their satisfaction and to pay [as they say] even to
the last penny.

Herehence grew that penance which the Priest imposes upon the sinner, which
do far differ from the penance used in the primitive Church which was
public, of long continuance and rigorous, thereby to humble the sinner and to
repair the scandal to the Congregation: but at this day in the Church of Rome
they impose for the most part private pennances, and the same either very easy
or ridiculous: and these do they make use of to prevent Purgatory, and yet to
pay and satisfy Gods justice. The forms of these pennances, are to say a set
number of Anees intermixed with Paters upon a pair of beads: to scourge their
bodies: or upon the bare flesh to gird themselves with a^cord: or to go in
pilgrimage to Saint ^^mes in Galicia, N. Giles, an. 768.
etc. Our Annals do inform us of a penance imposed by a ^ope upon one Robert
the Norman, surnamed the Devil, upon sundry his ^ots committed: that is, that
for the space of seven years he should not ^^eake: and that he should all
that time, (...) at a staier foot, and take no other food but the relics of
such bones as a Grayhound should have gnawn. Was i^ meet to abridge the benefit
of Jesus Christ, and to supply the places with such frivolous devises, and in
such cou^terfeit quoine to satisfy the justice of God, which Jesus Christ had
before satisfied to the full? The Friar page 75.
As concerning the torments that the souls do there endure, these our masters
do tell us that all the fires and torments in this life, are ^ut easy in
regard of the heat of the ^te of Purgatory, and that the torment ^hereof
equalleth that of the damned. This doctrine was not yet received in the Church
of Rome, when to the Ca^no^ of the Mass they added these words ensuing, which
the Priest must daily say for the souls in Purgatory. Memento Domine.
Remember Lord thy servants, whose souls do rest in the sleep of peace.
Hereby it appears that they then believed that the pain was easy, or rather
none at all, and that the souls for whom they prayed, did rest in peace as in
a sleep. Hereto accords the saying of the aforenamed Gregory, who advoweth
that the souls of S. Severus and S. Pascasius wrought miracles in the Bathes
where they lay in Purgatory. Lib. 7. Epist. 61.
For it is hard to work any great miracles in such cruel torments. This is
the same Pope Gregory, who does in earnest confess, that the Apostles
celebrating the Lords supper, added unto the consecration nothing but the Lords
prayer, and so consequently prayed not for any souls in Purgatory.

Again, the Church of Rome holds this torment to be of long continuance: for
every sin they must abide there seven years: besides also that we pray for
some that died many hundred years since. And in this regard does the Pope
grant pardons some for fifty, some for an hundred thousand years: and the
Friar may very well remember that when I showed him in the Mass book a
prayer that contained four and fifty thousand years of pardon thereto
adioined, he did not only advow it, but took upon him to defend these so
^iberal indulgences.

In the Church of S. Bibian at Rome upon the day of all Saints they have six
hundred thousand years of very pardon for the space of one whole day. In the
book of Roman Indulgences these six hundred thousand years are written at
large.
The Pope that granted that pardon pre^upposing that a soul may have committed
so many sins [besids those for which the pains of Jesus Christ have
^atisfied] that he must have so many ^eares of torment to purge all his sins,
^nlesse the Masses and suffrages of the ^ving, together with the Popes
indulgences do procure him ease and abbreviation of his pains. At Paris in
the entering into a chapel of the friars Fevillans in the suburbs of S.
Honorat hangs to be seen a long bedrole of pardons: wherein among other is
contained that upon every day of lent there are to be purchased three
thousand eight hundred sixty seven years and two hundred and seven
Quarentines of days of very pardon. In the church of S. Eusebius at Rome they
have seven thousand, four hundred fifty and four Quarenteins of days of
very pardon for such as shall bring thither any honest offering, and as the
words of the Bull do run Manus porrigentibus adiutrices for such as shall put to
their helping hands. In the Church of S. Mary deliver us from the pains of
hell [for that is the Churches name] there are daily granted eleven thousand
years of Indulge^ce to such as shall bring an honest offering, that is to say,
that shall give, not to the poor indeed, but to the rich Moncks: not to those
that weep, but to those that sing: for now alms with the true use thereof has
also altered the signification of the word. In the church of S. Praxede you have
daily twelve thousand years of very pardon and as many Quarentines of
days, with the remission of the third part of your sins: in such manner that
visiting this church three days on a row you shall purchase plenarie pardon of
all your sins and six and thirty thousand years by provision besides the
Quarentines, which the Popes have since increased to sixscore thousand years
for every day: witness the book of Indulgences printed at Rome in the house of
Julius Accolto, an. 1570. see also the book of Roman Indulgences sundry
times printed at Rome, namely in the year 1519 the second of February by
Marcell Franck. Yet are all these pardons but few in regard of those that
belong to the Church of S. John of Lateran, Gab. Biel in his 17. lesson upon
the Cannon of the Mass.
the sum whereof ye shall find either hanging upon tables, or graven in the
walls of diverse churches of Rome. All this do we set down to show that as the
plaster ought to be fitted to the largenes of the wound, so the Popes have
thought it meet to persuade men to believe that the pains of Purgatory are of
long continuance, since they require so long a time to purchase release from the
pains thereof: withal presupposing that in that so fiery and scortching a
country, where the sun has no being, they reckon all by days, and by years.
This long continuance is also to be gathered out of the Revelation of
Venerable Bede in the fifth book of his history cap. 13. That is to say about
some nine hundred years since
where he says that the souls which in his time were in Purgatory should be
delivered in the day of Judgment, except some few that should be redeemed
from thence by the prayers of the living.

Moreover besides all this, the self doctors of the Romish Church do agree,
that even during these so violent torments, the souls nevertheless are
assured of their salvation, and out of the danger of hell: neither do I know
since when this opinion crept into the church of Rome: for in the Mass for the
dead we find a clause after the Gospel that contrariwise does testify that
still they are in danger. These be the words. Libera Domine animas omniu^
fidelium defunctorum de poenis Infernis, and de profundo lacu: libera eos de
ore Leonis ne absorbeat eos Tartarus.
O Lord deliver the souls of all the faithful departed, from the infernal
pains, and from the deep lake: deliver them from the throat of the lyo^,
least the gulf of hell should swallow the^ up, and so they fall into utter
darkness. Terms over bitter to signify Purgatory: and such as may in no case
stand with people assured of their salvation. We have also the ordinary prayers
said ^t burials, yea and used at the funeral of (...) Pope, wherein we find no
mention of Purgatory. Indeed this soul is brought ^n, as praying to be
delivered from hell, and from eternal judgment, in these words. Save me o Lord
from eternal death ^n the terrible day, when the heavens and ^he earth shall
be moved, Sacrar. Cerem. lib. 1. Sect 15.
and when thou halt come to judge the world by fire. I tremble and quake, and
do fear when the examination shall come, and the day of wrath, of calamity
and of misery: that great and wonderful better day. Speeches which cannot
proceed from a soul assured of her salvation. Surely when these prayers were
first penned, these matters were not yet well considered of, and this may we
easily gather from Pope Gregory the first, who in his dialogues places the
Purgatory of some souls in bathes, of some under the leaves, and of some under
the Ice: and this do these three champions that have assaulted my treatise,
both say and defend: for nothing to them is to hard or to hot. Damian speaks
of a soul that had her Purgatory in a river, but whither she swam with the
stream or against it, he says not. The Rosarie of Bernardine has of this
nature many revelations: and the Legend of S. Patricke tells us that in
Ireland there is a cave that openneth into Purgatory: to be brief, albeit many
souls are returned from those parts, which have brought news, yet did the
matter still rest full of doubt, until the Council of Florence, which among
other occasions was assembled to persuade Purgatory to the Greek Churches, who
both before and yet do deny it, albeit their deputies in the Council did agree
unto it in hope of succors against the Turk. True it is that we find some more
ancient Councels, which made mention of prayer for the dead: but hereafter we
shall most evide^tly prove that these prayers make nothing for Purgatory: also
that such prayers as we find among the ancients do plainly show that they
believed no Purgatory. Even to this day do the Greek Churches pray for the
dead: yet do they deny Purgatory. In the last session therefore of this
Council holden in the year 1539. was it defined, that we should believe
Purgatory: In which Counsel, as in all others holden within these five hundred
years, the Pope sat president, and that with such auctority that he grew to
be adored and entitled The Divine Majesty: the spouse of the Church: the
Savior and Lion of Judah: the king and Prince of all the world, having all
power both in heaven and in earth: All which titles were attributed to Pope Leo
the 10. in the Council of Lateran. Thus in all these Councels nothing passed
but by his will, Sess. 1. and 3. and 9. and. 10.
in such wise, that if any did contradict him, he was soon burned, as was
John Husse in the Council of Constance, notwithstanding the safe conduct and
faith given by the Emperor and all the Council. But to return to our Matter.
The souls thus purged in this fire are brought into Paradise. Howbeit because
this purgation will grow somewhat long, the Popes mercy does sometimes abridge
this punishment: For besides that the pains that the living have undergone for
the^, as fastes: alms: whippings, pilgrimages, liberalities to the Church,
etc. also that the Masses founded for the deceased, which leave any rents or
annuities to a convent or abbey, or other religious house [if we may believe
those that sing the^] are of great use to mitigate and allay the heat of
Purgatory, and to diminish the pains thereof, yet have the Popes found out a
more ready and gallant invention to the same end: and this it is. He raketh
together all the superabundant satisfactions as well of Jesus Christ as of all
his Saints which remain in the treasury of the Church, whereof himself does
carry the keys: and these does he distribute among his Indulgences, for the
freeing of souls out of the fire of Purgatory. To the same use does he also
apply his hallowed grains and medals which he distributeth abroad, granting
hundreds and thousands of years of pardon, to all such as shall kiss or
reverently keep them. And these pardons serve not only for this life but also
for Purgatory. The Church of the Fevillants at Paris have this privilege, That
the Masses in that church said for the dead upon the moonday or wednesday, do
every of them deliver one soul out of Purgatory. Many such Churches does Rome
contain. S. Potentian: S. Laurence without the walls, S. Praxede, etc. upon
the 7. of May, anno 1586. did Pope Sixtus the 5. grant to such of the
fraternity of the cord of S. Frances as should say 5 Paternosters and as many
Ave Marias upon the Saturday before palm Sunday: and upon the feast days of
St John Evangelist and St John Port Latin plenary Indulgence for all their
sins: yea and more then then that: for they shall moreover deliver one soul
out of Purgatory, as appears in the book of Indulgences granted to that
reverend Cord, printed at Paris by John le Bouc upon Mount S. Hillary at the
sign of diligence ann. 1597. And these privileges were reconfirmed by other
letters pattents of the same Pope: Given at S. Marks the 9. of August. ann.
1587. But the principal matter that we are herein to note is this. That this
grace is not conferred to any that is not of that fraternity, albeit in the
same places he should say the 5. Paters and as many Avees, yea and fifty more
and that with far greater devotion then that fraternity does. Some Alters
also there be whereto his holiness has conferred such privileges that upon
the saying of a set number of Masses upon them, At Rome in the church of S.
Praxe de and in many other places.
they shall bring a soul out of Purgatory: Some people also there be that
are so privileged that after their deaths either they go not into Purgatory at
all, or if they go in, they stay not there any time, but come forth by and by:
albeit they be as heavy laden with sin as any other: such shall the elect be
that shall live in the day of Judgment, or such as shall die immediately after
the Iubile. Sub auspiciis sapientissimi D.N. Bartholomei Guitart Navarrici.
We have seen certain Theological Theses disputed on at the Carmelites in
Paris upon the eighth of October 1601 by a certain Carmelite named Iacobus de
Rampont Carmelitarum presentatus ac Metensis Carmeli Alumnus: at the end
whereof the said Rampont in good sort and with a good grace makes a brief
Oration in commendatio^ of his order: tearming the Carmelites the first
Anachorites: the Imitators of the Apostolic life, practicing both the life
and wearing the habit of Elyas and Elizeus, brethren to the Virgin Mary: and
among al other preeminences endued with this singular privilege, That
whosoever is entered or shall vow to enter into this fraternity shall no
longer abide in Purgatory, but from his death until the next Saturday
following. A privilege which Cayer with tooth and nail defends in his Oven
of Reverberate, etc. and promises shortly to show us the Bull of that Pope
which granted this privilege, with whom the Carmelites are united who thereto
have set their seals, and among the rest this friar Ra^pont. And this is the
reason that they use so few Masses for the souls of their brethren, especially
if they die upon the Friday. The Pope himself sometimes grants his Bulls, as
our self have seen whereby at the petition of some surviver of the kindred
that craveth it, he fetches the soul out of this fire. Yet for the
expedition of such Bulls, as also of all other Bulls of Absolution or
dispensation the Penitentiaries, That is to say Notaries
dataries and brethren of the lead, etc. Who farm their offices at the Popes
hand, must be greased in the fists: and these our Masters must be paid in
ducats of the chamber, as in the palace of Paris the spices are paid only in
crowns of the sun. Thus do they wrong in subscribing their Bulls Datum Romae
for if they would deal truly they should write Venditum Romae. Hereof did
Aeneas Silvius complain before he was Pope saying, Epist. 66. ad 1. Peregallu^.
Nihil est quod absque argento Romans curia dedat^ nam and ipsae manuu^
impositiones, and Spiritus sancti dona venduntur: nec peccatorum venia nisi
nummatis venditur. That is to say in few words: In the Court of Rome nothing
passes without money, no not the holy Ghost, or remission of sins.

Thus is he named in the fro^t of the book of the conformity of S. Frances
This might suffice for this argument, were it not that I am willing to gratify
our Portugal friar in regard of our friendship. Whose patron the Typical
Jesus, namely S. Frances (in their book of conformities, compared with Jesus)
has greatly contributed to the redeeming of souls out of Purgatory. For the
Rosary of Barnardin, Thomas 2. quaest. vlt. Artic. Eande^ grati. am
consequu^tur Religionem intrantes, quam co^sequuntur Baptizati. Anton. tit. 24
cap. 7 and Rosarium Bernardini. Assisium, a town in the Duchy of Spoletu^
wherein dwelt the first Franciscan Friars.
also Thomas upon the fourth book of Sentences does testify that the taking
of S. Frances habit is of like virtue as Baptism* hereof it must needs ensue
that whosoever dies in this habit does go straight into Paradise. And in hope
hereof there have bin some who in the very agony of death have cauled
themselus to be shrouded in this habit. Or have at the least thrust an arm
into the sleeue thereof. Among others Robert King of Sicill, as Anthoninus
reports. To this Reverend Saint, being at his town of Assisium in Italyano,
1223 appeared an Angel who told him that Jesus Christ, the Virgin Mary, and
the ^ngels attended him in the Church ^alled St Mary of the Angels: wherevpo^
^e being come thither, Jesus Christ said unto him, Frances, Luke 2 22.
demand any thing concerning the salvation of souls: for thou art set to be a
light to the Gentiles. Frances answered, I require thee to grant pardon for all
sins to every one that shall enter into this Church, and I beseech the Virgin
Mary, the advocate of mankind, to assist me in this petition. Then said Jesus
unto him, Brother Frances, thou have desired a great matter: but thou art
worthy of greater: Go therefore to my Vicar, to whom I have given power to
bind and lose upon earth and in heaven, and on my behalf demand of him this
Indulgence: Hereupon this good Saint repaired to Pope Honorat, and at his hands
craved this large Indulgence without offerings. But the Pope answered him that
it might not be: Note this principle.
for it was meet that whosoever would purchase pardons, must also merit them
Ponendo manus adiutrices by putting to his helping hand, id est, by
co^tributing. Being asked for how many years he demanded this pardon, he
answered that he craved no years but souls: and thereupon would none of his
bulls: but said that the Virgin should be his paper, Jesus Christ his Notary,
and the Angels his witnesses. But now is this Indulgence restrained to one day
of the year only, and that is the first of August: It is called Portiuncula or
S. Mary of the Angels
upon which day, whosoever visits the said Church, obtains remission of all
his sins committed since his baptism: as well for the sin as for the
punishment: whereof it ensues that whosoever dies coming from thence shall
never come in Purgatory. This Indulgence is yet in great esteem in Italy, and
is set down in Bernardines Rosary, and Bellarmine defends it in his second
book of Indulgences. Thus do we with grief behold the accomplishment of the
prophecy of S. Paul. 2. These. ^.11
God shall send them strong delusions, that they shall believe lies, and that
for a punishment, because they have accounted Godliness to be a gain: religion
a merchandise for the time: and Gods word a dangerous book: such a one as the
common people may not look into, so long as such ungodly and impious
^nventions are published, as most convenient for the instruction of the
vn^earned.

This is the history of Purgatory: ^hese are her tenants and butteresses: and
herein were matter sufficient to make men merry: had they not a grea^er ground
of sorrow in seeing religion ^urned into fables, and the only clean^ng of our
sins, which is the blood of jesus Christ, be as it were degraded and ^based,
to the end to make a gain to those who in the Temple have again ^aised up
the tables of the money chan^ers; which Jesus Christ did once over^hrowe and
cast down.

Of the Limbo of Children.
The third stage or chamber is the Limbo of children deceased without ^aptisme:
The third place.
who are there without torment, as also without pleasure, Page 9.
or hope ever to come forth: and there do remain [saith our frier] in grief,
for that they cannot attain to beatitude: and this is it that they call poena
damni: but if this grief be also felt, it is poena sensus, and surely it were a
goodly matter to know what they do in this place, where they have no
communication either with God or with the Devils: besides that they are without
remembrance of any thing that they have seen or done, and having no body to
instruct them: since also that they must rise again and what sentence the Judge
shall in the day of judgment pass upon them: For our Lord Jesus Christ in the
25. of Matthew, speaks of no more but sentence against the damned, and for
the elect. But these questions are to be resolved by Doctors: for the word of
God penetrateth not so far. The auctor of The fire of Helie does resolve us,
Page 38.
saying, These children shall not be judged in the last day: For it is written
in the 3. (...) S. John, Whosoever believes not, is already ^udged: But they
never had faith: then be they already fully judged. By this his Maiesteriall
conclusion, he also makes the children that die soon after Baptism to be
already judged and banished into Limbo: for they likewise had no more faith
then the former that died a ^ittle before. Then makes he one step of a Clarke
farther, because he sees not that Not to believe, in this place is spoken of
the rebellious and incredulous: for of those that have not believed John
speaks in the next verse following. Verse 19.
They loved darkness more then light: that is to say, error more then truth;
which cannot be imputed to children new borne.

Thus the Church of Rome by excluding children that die without Baptism from
salvation, commits sundry oversights. 1. First in so doing she tyeth the
Grace of God to the water. 2. Here ^y also she refers the salvation of ^he
child to the power of man, or of a midwife: for if they list to baptize the
child while it is dying, it shall go into Paradise: if they list not to
baptize it it shall not come there. 3. Herein also they accuse God, that he
provided but badly for the salvation of children born under the old Testament,
in that he would not have them to be circumcised before the eighth day. 4.
Neither was it a small point of rashness, mixed with barbarism to bring in
the custom practiced at Paris, where they cast their children headlong into a
gulf that is in our Ladies hospital or Gods house. 5. Again these our
Masters do place this Limbo under the earth: and so what shall become of it
when the earth shall have no more being, but be utterly consumed with fire, as
says S. Peter in hi^ second Epistle, Apoc. 21.1
chap 3. and David Psalm. 102. ver. 26, and 27. At the least they should in time
have chalked out some other lodging for those children in some other place.
This so presumptuous and cruel doctrine against children is grounded upon the
words of Jesus Christ in the third of S. John Except a man be born of water and
the spirit he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. Wherein the church of Rome
is contrary to her self: for she holds that many are saved that were never
baptized in water: as many Martyrs that were never baptized in water: neither
will it serve their turn to say that those Martyrs were baptized in their
blood: for this place of S. John imports, That of necessity they must be
borne again of water: besides that this baptism in blood is contrary to the
ca^nons of the Church of Rome, which says that the Sacrament is no Sacrament
if he that conferreth it has not ^n intent to baptize. But the heathen
executioners had never any intent to baptize. Again since Baptism is
vnre^iterable, what reason is it that the martyrdom of a man not baptized
should be Baptism? Yet will we not deny but that the Martyrs are baptized in
their blood: always provided that this word to baptize be taken simply to
wash, a^ that is the signification of the word: but if we speak of Baptism as
it is a Sacrament of the Church: a scale of the covenant: exhibitiue of the
grace of God in Jesus Christ: the blood of a sinful man cannot be this
washing: for the blood of the son of God is the only washing of our sins. In
answer to this place of the third of S. John, I say that if it be spoken of
Baptism, it cannot be understood but in case of contempt. That is to say, if
any man that may be baptized and has opportunity to cause himself to be
baptized, does notwithstanding in contempt reject it, such a one cannot be
saved: of which baptism, S. Peter in the 3. chapter of his first Epistle
makes mention: likewise of this washing of the soul speaks Zacharias, ca.
13.1. which the Church of Rome calls Baptismus flaminis. Whereas in the 7. of
John Jesus Christ said that Out of his belly that believed in him should flow
rivers of life, S. John adds that by this water he meant the holy Ghost,
which they should receive that believed in him: also as in the 3. of Matthew,
v. 11. It is said, that Jesus Christ baptizeth or washes us with the holy
Ghost and with fire, is meant with the holy ghost warming and purifying our
hearts; so that to be borne of water and the holy Ghost signifies to be
regenerat by the holy Ghost washing and cleansing our hearts which is a phrase
of speech familiar among men, and used in the Gospel, as in S. John the 14.
and 6. verse, I am the way the truth, the life, in liew of saying, I am the
true way to the life.

Of the limbo of the Fathers.
The fourth place is the Limbo of the fathers and mothers, that is to say, The
fourth place.
of such persons as lived before the coming of Christ. There were [say they]
Adam, Eve, Noah, Abraham, etc. until that Jesus Christ upon the day of his
resurrection in his return from hell delivered them out of this prison:
himself also [say our adversaries] by his ascension, brought them into heaven:
For they suppose that the way into heaven was not open, until that Christ by
his ascentio^ entered in. But because Jesus Christ said unto the thief, This
day thou shall be with me in Paradise, whereby it appeared that the thief
passed into Paradise forty days before the ascension of Jesus Christ, our
Monk preventeth him by using his privilege: he will have us hereby Paradise
to understand the lower parts, that is to say, Limbo or Purgatory. For page
95. he says wheresoever the presence of God is there is Paradise, as much as
if he should say, The thief being on the Cross was in Paradise, because Jesus
Christ was there present: and that Jesus Christ did but mock him, in promising
him that he should shortly be in Paradise, since he was there already. Now in
as much as it was forty days between Christ's resurrection and his ascension,
It may be said that these souls being come out of Limbo were set sentinels in
some corner or other: or that peradventure they walked their stations here
below: for of this matter we find no decision of the Popes, Extrav de Constit.
tit. 2. Can. licet.
to whom only it belongs to decide all matters of Religion, as to the^ that
cannot err in faith, and in their Ca^nons do boast that all right rests in
the shrine of their hearts. Our Franciscan and the auctor of Helies fire do say,
that during the forty days those souls were with Jesus Christ: that is to
say, Page 38. 44.
when Jesus Christ was in the chamber with his Apostles, all the souls of the
old Testament were there also with him. That when he went to Emaus they
followed him: That when he was by the sea side, there also they were assembled
and arranged upon the sands.

Into this Limbo entered two sorts of souls: The one sort, such as without need
of purgation came directly in: the other, they that after their purgation and
satisfaction in Purgatory, came nevertheless thither. In those days was the
torment of Purgatory of much longer continuance then in this age it is: For
then the sovereign high Priests gave no Indulgences, neither fetched any
souls out of Purgatory: whereby it appears that God being now more liberal,
they do wrong to call the first age The golden age. Of this Limbo would our
men make Jacob to speak in the 37 of Genesis, where [according to the Roman
translation] he says I shall go down into hell, bewailing my son: whereupon
[say we] that it follows that in the 42 Chapter, where these words are
repeated. Jacob spoke of this Limbo: and yet he there says that his white
hairs shall go down. The souls then are hairy, for these good fathers went
down into Limbo with gray hair: whereof we are also to presuppose that in
that country they have barbers: And all this absurdity grows of this, that
they will not understand that Sheol in Hebrew, namely in these places,
signifies sometimes the state of the dead: and sometime the Sepulcher, albeit
they be driven to it by sundry places of the scripture: as in the 14 Psalm. ver.
7. and in the 30. verse. 4. and in many other places: They also produce the 9.
of Zachary and the 4. of S. Paul to the Ephesians. but they do only quote the
places and so leave the reader to guess at the matter: and good reason: for of
Limbo there is no speech throughout all the scriptures but co^trarywise we find
that Moses and Elias talked with Jesus Christ upon the mountain, whereby it
appears that they were not in a corner under the earth. Again if the death
of Jesus Christ were of force to deliver the fathers of the old Testament out
of hell, why not out of Limbo, which they say is a more easy prison? As
concerning the passage in the ninth of Zachary there is no speech of Limbo, but
of the deliverance from hell, under the figure of the deliverance from the
Captivity of Babylon: The words of the prophet are these. In the blood of thy
covenant thou have delivered thy prisoners out of the lake where is no water.
They also object unto us the 4. of S. Paul to the Ephesians. Where speaking of the
Incarnation and habitation of Jesus Christ upon earth, he says, that he
descended into the lowest parts of the earth, accommodating to our Savior
Christ the words of David in the Psalm. 139. v. 15; where he says that he was
formed in the lowest parts of the earth: that is, in his mothers wo^b and
according to the Greek (...) in the superlatiue: but what community has this
with Limbo? Much less is it meant of the fetching of the Fathers out of Limbo,
which is in the eight verse He led captivity captive, for would he have led
captive the souls of the fathers, considering that they would that he should
have brought them out of captivity? For in the Greek it is (...), which
signifies to lead into captivity those who^ they have taken at the swords
point. These captives the^ are the devils, death, etc. The Auctor of the fire
of Helie gives it us bravely: he makes S. Paul, Heb. 11. v. 39. and 40. to
say that these fathers are not rewarded before us: but neither there nor in any
other place shall we find any word thereof. Thus is this place now empty, if
we cannot find any to lodge in it. And because it is likely that the
Franciscans, according to their rule, do not go into Purgatory single, but by
two and by two. This Limbo, lying in the way to Purgatory, seems a very
convenient place to lodge him, who being departed hence alone, must attend his
companion.

Besides these four places, Bellarmine who lately writ at Rome, The flowred
meddow.
and as it were in the Popes bosom, with the approbation and commendation of
all the Church of Rome, but particularly of al our Doctors, in the 7. Chap. of
his second book of Purgatory, has found out a fifth place: that is to say, a
bright and clear meddow, all diapred with sweet smelling flowers, which he
makes to be a dependence of Purgatory, and as it were a withdrawing chamber,
wherein those do take their rest, who are most kindly entreated and most
gently dealt withal, and groundeth himself upon the authority of venerable
Beda: and Dionise a Charterhouse Monk, an auctor of great credit, who is full
fraught with fantastical revelations: he should have added how these flowers
do spring without sun or rain: and from whence that goodly brightness could
pierce into those deep parts of the earth. Out of this meddow do the souls
immediately pass into Paradise: but before the coming of Jesus Christ, they
went thence into Limbo, a matter of great compassion, that passing out of a
bright meddow full of recreation, they should come to be shut up in a dark
prison.

Such therefore is the building which our Masters have erected under ground,
making, by an order contrary to nature, the lowest chambers to be the hottest:
digging without any authority of the Gospel, sundry compartiments under the
earth, like to mouldwarpes, blinded with the sunshine of Gods word.

In this place I would entreat the reader, throughout all this mystery to take
note of a certain kind of souls, which should have more agilitie and
experience then their fellows: so many walks and turnings are they put unto.
These are those souls, who departing from their bodies under the old
Testament, were first presented before the Judge, and thence sent into
Purgatory: but escaping thence, after a scalding fire entered into a bright
meddow, full of recreation. Afterward from this meadow they passed into Limbo:
and thence came forth with Jesus Christ: then did they follow him 40 days upon
the earth, and finally entered into Paradise. Let us therefore find no farther
fault with Plato or his Metempsychosis: for his revolutions and passages of
souls, are nothing so prodigious: and indeed our Masters do carry away the
bell for invention from all Poets. These matters thus dispatched and set out as
it were in a table, it rests that we now examine this Purgatory, and the
abuses thereupon depending, and prove that the word of God is a spring more
then sufficient to quench this the Popes so profitable a fire. Here may our
Reader, if it please him, note that Purgatory is by our adversaries placed
among the Articles of our belief, so as unless we believe therein, Bellarm.
de Purgat. lib. 2 cap. 12. Haec sunt.
we cannot be saved: that the importance of the matter may tie him to
attention. So shall we break one of the legs of this Colossus, one of the
principal pillars of Babylon.

CAP. 2. That the holy scripture is a sufficient judge for this question, as
also for all other controversies concerning faith: and that therein is no
mention of Purgatory, or of any Indulgence whereby to release souls out of the
torment thereof.
to a judge that bears them so small favor, they many times give it some
gird. Thus says the Auctor of the fire of Helie. Page 61.
Albeit there be no mention of Purgatory in the Scripture, yet cannot Du
Moulins conclusion be but bad, in saying there is no Purgatory. And here he
raketh together a number of things, which (says he) are not in the holy
Scripture. Yea so presumptuous is our Franciscans ignorance, as to say that
throughout the old Testament there is not one express word of the immortality
of the soul. Page 16.
In this regard it is requisite that before we proceed any farther we try
these Doctors in this case to the quick, and defend the perfection of the holy
Scripture. Amid the corruptions of the world, we have yet this honor, that we
be the advocates of Gods cause, and of the worthiness of his word. Which as S.
Paul, 2. Tim. 3. says, is able to instruct us and to make us wise to
salvation: Initio lib. 2. adversus Gentes.
which also (says Athanasius) abundantly suffiseth to instruct us in all
truth. Wherein, as says Chrysostom upon the second Chapter of the 2. to the
Thessalonians, is clearly contained all that is necessary. For was it possible
that aforetime the five books of Moses were sufficient to instruct the Church
to salvation, and that now the same five books, together with the Prophets,
Evangelists and Apostles cannot suffice? has God forbidden to add or diminish
to the books of Moses, Deuteronomy. 4.1.
and now that both in the old and new Testament we have much larger
instruction, shall it be tolerable to add an unwritten word. Other Canonical
books? Other articles of faith? Jf the Gospel be sufficient to save us, who
shall be so bold as to say that the new Testament does contain but part of the
Gospel? To allege either the tyranny of custom, or the antiquity of a
tradition, without the word of God, what is it but to allege the antiquity
of Error: and to arm both Jews and Gentiles with the like reasons? considering
that untruth is very ancient yea it has been even from the beginning: also
that against the truth no prescription of time may take place.

To join therefore to the holy scriptures an unwritten word, and to make the
traditions of the Romish Church equal with the books of the old and new
Testament, is a great disparageme^t to the Majesty of the holy Scripture: It
is as much as to do that which expressly is forbidden in the law of Moses, that
is to plow with an ox and an ass: to yoke together things very unequal: to
make man equal with God, and the lead of the Popes Bulls with the pure steel
of the spiritual sword of the Gospel. True it is that they term these
Traditions the word of God and traditions of the Apostles: but they show not
when or to whom God did first inspire them. They deliver unto us the Canon of
the Mass for an Apostolical tradition, wherein nevertheless they name some
persons that lived three hundred years after the Apostles time. Thus the
Indulgences: the forgiunesse of all sins at the end of every 25. years. The
communion under one kind: The fetching of souls out of Purgatory by Popish
Indulgences: The prohibiting of the lay people from reading of the holy
Scriptures: The custom to pray in a tongue unknown even to him that prays:
The feast of God; The Elevation and walking of their consecrated cake up and
down: The hallowed Grains and Medals: The fraternity of S. Frances Cord
laden with so many pardons and privileges and such like trash, Can. satis
Did. 96. and Gloss. Clem. cum inter. Sacr. Cerem. sect 7. cap. 6. seeds Dei
seeds Apostolica. The last Council of Lateran sess. 9. Divinae Maiestatis tuae
conspectus.
which them selves do confess were brought in long since the Apostles time;
shall by this reckoning be holden for the word of God and the Tradions of the
Apostles: And that with good reason, since the Pope assumeth to himself the
name of God and his holiness: The divine Majesty: and in infinite places in
his Cannons The Spouse of the Church: yea, as says Bellarmine de Pontif. Romans
lib. 1-cap. 9. etiam Christo secluso eve^ Jesus Christ excluded or set aside.
Since that likewise the Pope terms office Apostolat, all his furniture
Apostolical, as his chamber, his letters, his chair: his cloak: his Palace.
And unless God take pity upon us, they will shortly call his hose and points
Apostolical. Now that in all this the drift of our Masters tends only to
shun the holy scriptures which condemn them, it appears in these words:
The unwritten word. For what is the unwritten word but a Chimera in the air:
an imperceptible Idea? For where can we find this unwritten word? If we must
seek it (as they say) at the mouth of the universal Church, when shall I have
gathered together the universal Church to instruct me? Or if the people must
have recourse to their Curat, how shall they know whether their Curate agrees
with the universal Church? What side shall we take where the doctors do
disagree? As do now these three doctors, who are grown to censure and in their
pulpits to disclaim one of the^*

Or if one be borne in an heretical Church: or between two Churches grounded
upon contrary Traditions, as between the Greek and the Romain? But if we
must seek this unwritten word of God in the books of ancient doctors, then it
is written: and albeit these books be subject to error, yet the Traditions of
the Romish Church as the before named and Purgatory are not there to be found,
as hereafter we shall prove.

Moreover in as much as they would make us believe that the Pope has such
letters of credence, that we must therefore do all that he commands, and
believe all that he list to persuade us, albeit this be not found in the holy
scripture, yet when the church of Rome has need of Reformation in capite and
membris: [as it is the ancient co^plaint] what means is there to proceed,
considering that he that is to be reformed is the maker of the laws, and
sovereign Judge in all matters of Religion, and consequently in his own
cause? God forbid that man should be judge over the cause of God: or that all
the Popes inventions for the adva^cing of their Empire, should be holden for
the word of God, and the rule of our faith. But let us here the productio^s of
these doctors and all those things that they say are not contained in the
Scripturs. Our observa^tin Moncke shall march foremost and have the first place.
He says that thorough out all the old Testament there is not one express
word concerning the Immortality of the soul. Admit it were so: yet what
interest had he to search out the defects of the holy scripture? But had he
sought well, he might have found these words in the last of Daniell. Dan. 12.2.
Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to
everlasting life, and some to shame and contempt. What can be spoken more
expressly? And in the 12. of Ecclesiastes, v. 7. And dust return to the earth
as it was, and the spirit return to God that gave it. And in the 23. of
Numbers, Balaam desires to die the death of the righteous. An evident proof
that he held their death to be blessed. But were this friar Minor as well
acquainted with the holy Scriptures as he is with the rule of S. Frances, he
would never have uttered a speech so impertinent and full of impiety: for the
which he deserves to change his order, and from the Observantine fryerie to
be sent to the ignorant friars.

The auctor of the fire of Helie broaceth it much deeper, he dema^deth how by
the holy scriptures we can prove this proposition, That the holy Scripture
contains all that we ought to believe. But this is not our saying: for we may
and ought to believe many things that are not contained in the holy Scripture.
In such manner do we believe that Romulus with a troop of thieves built Rome:
Stella. Platina. The book of Indulge^ces printed at Rome.
we believe the history of Pope Io^e, as a history advowed by many auctors,
both friends and servants to the Popes, and of whom there yet remain many
traces and causes of remembrance: we believe that Alexander. 3. did set his
foot upon the throat of Frederick Barberossa, Volateran. Sabellicus. Martianus
Polonus.
upon the stairs of S. Marks Church at Venice, where this his so heroical
exploit is to this day represented: we believe those histories that record
how the Emperor Henry the 7. was poisoned in their consecrated cake: Their
God poisoned.
with a thousand such like histories, both old and new, whereof the scripture
never made mention. Only we say that the holy scriptures do contain all
documents and instructions necessary to salvation: This do we say with. S.
Paul, who in the 2. to Tim. cap. 3. v. 15. says It is able to make us wise to
salvation: what more can we demand? The same Apostle, 1. Cor. 4, 6. teaches us
Not to presume above that which is written: and toward the end of the new
Testament we find these words. I protest unto every one that hears the
Prophecy of this book, that if any man shall add unto these things, God shall
add unto him the plagues that are written in this book, whereto our
adversaries can frame no other reply, Consilium foro Iulii.
but that this curse extends no farther but to the book of the Revelation.
Yet does the council of Triuly bridle them in these words, The protestation of
the Apostle John in the Revelation, under the title of one book has relation
to the whole course of both the Testaments, saying, if any man add, etc.

Again, he challenges me to prove by the holy Scriptures these 8 things,
which underhand he supposes to be necessary to salvation. In the Index
Biblicus printed at Anwerp by Plantin 1588. p. 5.
1. The baptism of young children: which nevertheless is proved by the
Jesuits and Doctors of the University of Lovaine, also by the Catechism of
the Council of Trent, and by many passages of the holy Scripture. Thus this
Doctor opposes himself against a corporation of Romish Doctors, an
University, and the Council of Trent. 2. The not reiterating of baptism
against the Anabaptists: which is the same with the baptism of young children:
for the Anabaptists do rebaptise those whom we have baptized: as holding
baptism in infancy to be no baptism. 3. Romans 8.9.11. Ioh. 14 26. and 16.14.
The proceeding of the holy Ghost: which is proved by the places where he is
called the spirit of God and the spirit of Christ: and the comforter whom the
father sends in the name of the son: which takes of the son etc. 4. The
consubstantialitie of the father and of the son. Which is proved in this.
That the son is God, Ioh. 1.1. Even our great God, Tit. 2, 13. consequently
one God with the father, for there is but one God. 1. Cor. 8.6. and being one
self God, they are by consequence one self substance. We have also S. John
in his first Epistle cap. 5. who says thus. There be three that bear record in
heaven: the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost, and these three are one. 5.
He would have said Anti-dicomarianites, or Heluidians.
The perpetual virginity of the Virgin Mary against the Anti marianites: but
this is no point necessary to salvation: The seemelinesse, rather then any
necessity induces us to believe it. 6. The translation of the Sabbath to the
Sunday. An article not necessary to salvation: Apoc 1 I was ravished in spirit
upon a sunday.
yet do we see by the Revel. 1.10. and by the 1. Cor. 16.1. and by the Act.
20.7. that this Institution was made in the time of the Apostles. 7. The
celebration of the feast of Easter against the Quarto Decimanis. Which also is
of no greater importance to salvation: witness the censure and reprimendum
sent by Ireneus to Victor Bishop of Rome, who skirmished fiercly in that
quarrel. This Epistle of Ireneus is extant in the Ecclesiastical history of
Eusebius, lib. 5. cap: 23.8. That there are but three persons in the Trinity a
matter which neither the holy Scripture, nor any man that ever had any one drop
of common sense did ever study to persuade: for in a dualitie there can be but
two, in a Trinity three. 9. Lastly he brings in The washing of the Apostle's
feet, which (says he) we cannot prove to be no sacrament, and thereupon he
great lights: De Maiorit. and obed. tit. 33. Can. Solita quanta inter solemn and
lunam, tanta inter Pontif. and Reges differentia. Arist. Phis. li. 4. cap. 4.
the greater is the Pope and the lesser is the Emperor, and kings as says Pope
Innocent the 3. These our Masters, I say, so full of their subtilties and
invention in their explications, which according to the doctrine of A^axagor as
do draw all things out of al things, could they not as well prove these eight
points by the scripture, as we with all our doltishnesse, have found them out
without any difficulty? But the truth is that it was no want of inve^tio^ in
them, but lack of good meaning. And these defects in the Scriptures do they
seek out, the rather that we might not think much, that in the Scriptures
there is no speech of painting of the Trinity: of worshipping of Images: of
fetching souls out of Purgatory by Popish Indulgences: of their Pastors
abstinence from marriage: of th^^ (...) ^ctions of meats: to be brief (...)
their traditions: In these consi^^^^ns it stands them upon to ab^^^ authori^^
of the Scriptures, (...) accus^ (...) of imperfection. Yet is it their sur^^
course to prohibit the people from re^ding of them, and from learning any thing
but at their mouths who have most interest in the suppressing of the^ and do
reap most commodity of the peoples ignorance. I could therefore wish that the
auctors of these torrents, fires and furnaises, would lay their ha^^^ to their
consciences (if they ca^ find any) and upon their doctorall faith tell us
whether this unwritten words and these letters of credence be not a means
prepared by the Pope, thereby to forg^^ new articles for his commodity? A
secret corner wherein to coin false money, and to clip the word of God? The^^
consciences must say yes; they are ove^ wise to be ignorant thereof: but
worldly reasons carry them away: in some hope of gain: in some fear, and in
some worldly devises do speak louder, and have greater voice in the Chapter
house, then conscience.

In as much therefore as the word ^f God contained in the old and new
^estament, is the only and sufficient rule ^f our faith, and that Purgatory (if
we ^eleeue our adversaries) is to be belee^ed as an article of our faith, and
that under pain of damnation; it is strange that God in the old Testament,
having ^rdained sacrifices, and expiations for all ^orts of sins and
pollutions, even to ^he Leprosy: to the bloody flixe, and to the touching of
any dead ^ody, etc. did never ordain any expi^tion, sacrifice, satisfaction or
pray^r for the souls that were in Purgatory. The ancient Patriarchs and good
^ervants of God, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, ^oseph, Moses, Aaron, Joshua, Samuel,
or David, never desired after their deaths ^o be prayed for, neither did
themselves pray for any that was dead, that God would vouchsafe to bring them
out of Purgatory. True it is that they bewai^ed their dead: but among al their
mournings, weepings, fastings, and lamentations, we find no path to purgatory,
neither any one prayer to fetch the souls of the deceased out of Purgatory:
and indeed such lamentations and fastings, were made even for the wicked, and
such as died in Gods displeasure: As for Saul, to whom it was said by the
Pithonesse not many hours before his death, that God was against him, who also
died soon after his consultation with the witch: David likewise bewailed
Absalon, who died in rebellion and treason against his own father: yet for
such [saith the Church of Rome] we must not pray. How grievous were the tears
upon the death of Jacob and Moses, who as holy and rare lights of the Church,
could never be confined into Purgatory? The high Priest of the Law never
granted Indulgences, neither made any intercession to abridge this so scalding
a punishment: neither did they that died make any foundations of services, Page
16.18.
or sacrifices to redeem their souls out of this fire. Here does our friar
seek a starting hole, but the clef^ is to straight for him to creep through.
He complains that In liew of seeking the true light in the law of Grace, that
is to say, the Gospel, we look for it in the dark and obscure law of Moses.
To speak plainly, he refuses the old Testament, as an incompetent Judge, for
the darkness thereof. But to this objection, we do answer, that indeed the
prophecies of things to come, and the ceremonies of the old Testament, are not
so clear and easy as the Gospel yet are Gods Commandments therein laid down
in plain and open terms. We therefore demand what commandment of God he can
find throughout the old Testament, wherein it is commanded to pray for the
dead, or to offer any sacrifice for them, either among them to distribute the
superabundant merits and satisfactions of holy men deceased as Abraham or
Moses, to help them out of Purgatory? Here our adversaries are at a stand and
bite the bit: for were there any commandment that might bear wreasting to that
sense, they that can so cunningly rack the Scriptures to their purposes would
no doubt have produced it. Here does our Friar fry in his grease, and would
feign shift it of with blasphemies, as they that are beset with fires would
gladly leap out at the windows. He does no longer accuse the old Testament of
obscurity, but of omission and impection. How many things (says he) has God
left unmentioned in the old Testament, Page 16.
to the end, to take from the people all occasion of Idolatry? and yet are
necessary to salvation? As invocation of the Trinity: Page 18.
the immortality of the soul, etc Again he says, under the law prayers for
the dead were not so frequent and public, least they should give the Jews
occasion with the Gentiles, to think that they ought to sacrifice to the
infernal powers. Secondly, that in regard that before the redemption of man
kind the estate of the deceased, was not so well known, as after that our
Savior Jesus Christ descended into hell. And thirdly, because they had not so
good means to relieve the dead, as they had after that the merits of the death
and passion of our Lord were committed into the hands of the Church to apply
them: So many words so many monsters and blasphemies.

First in that he denies that in the old Testament there is any mention of
the Immortality of the soul, we have before heard the depositions of Daniell,
Solomon, and the Prophet Balaam prophesying. Let us hereto adioine the taking
up of Enoch and Elias into heaven, proofs of their immortality. The words of
Jacob on his death bed, Lord I have waited for thy salvation: Genesis 49.18 Job.
18.26.
The hope of Job who assured himself that after his skin should be consumed
he should yet see God in his flesh. The words of God himself, who says, I am
the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, Mat. 22.32.
and the God of Jacob: God is not God of the dead [saith Jesus Christ] but of
the living. The only name of Religion imports the Immortality of the soul:
which being taken away, what is Religion but an intolerable yoke: a
scrupelous fear, a superfluous labor? If in this life only (says S. Paul) we
have hope in Christ, we are of all men the most miserable: 1. Cor. 17.19.
and what was the old Testament but the Religion of Gods people? It does
therefore presuppose and as it were in the forehead bear written this title.
The Immortality of the soul. As for Invocation of the Trinity, it is commanded
in the old Testament: for there we are commanded to call upon God, and he that
calls upon God, calls upon the Trinity.

But what shall we say to the discretion of our Moncke, who makes God
marveilous provident, in that he would not speak of the Immortality of the
soul, so to take from the Jews all occasion of Idolatry: alas poor man! God
cures not one evil by an other, much less a smaller evil by a greater:
Idolatry by Atheism: or superstition by Irreligion the mother of all excess.
As if it should be forbidden to speak of God, either good or evil, for fear
of blaspheming him: or as if a man should cut of his head for saving the
wearing of a cap. What discretion! to loose the principal for saving of the
dependant? To sell the horse for saving of the hay? God provideth not against
evils in such manner as the Popes: who will [saie they] prevent heresies by
prohibiting the use of Gods word: the diminishing of Ecclesiastical profits by
prohibiting marriage of the Clergy, Did. 18 Can Sirac vxor and filii per
quos Ecclesiast solet periclitari substantia.
contrary to the doctrine of S. Paul. 1. Tim. 3.2. howbeit if God followed
this precept of discretion in the old Testament, why did he alter his mind in
the new? where with too much simplicity [if we believe this Moncke] he does in
every place inculcate Eternal life? Are men since the days of Jesus Christ
less bent to Idolatry? Nay which is more, The opinion of the death of the
soul and Idolatry do for the most part follow each other, and between them
there is a fraternity. The heathen that had little or no hope of eternal life
were Idolaters: did not Pope John 24. celebrating his Mass kneel to the
bread, yet did he believe that the souls of men died, as the souls of beasts:
for which small sin together with 54. others, Consil Constable. Sess. 11.
the Council of Constance in their eleventh session condemned him.

That which ensues is ferial and smells of the friery. He yields an other
reason why in the old Testament prayers and sacrifices for the dead were so
unfrequented. It was (says he) because before the redemption of mankind ehe
estate of the dead was not so well known, as after that Christ descended into
Hell. He does therefore presuppose that Jesus Christ when he came from hell,
brought assured news: as if that Jesus Christ before his death knew not the
state of the dead as well as after his resurrection: or else that either he
would not, or could not instruct his disciples of the estate of the dead as well
before his death, as after. But now I pray you what be the news that Jesus
Christ brought? undoubtedly even the same that the golden legend and the book
of the life and death of Jesus Christ do report: how he came to hell gates and
the good thief Dinas carrying a Cross before him: how he made the gates to be
opened: how he beat and hampered the Devils: how he entertained the fathers
whom he found in this Limbo with goodly discourses, and a thousand such Jolly
gallant histories after the imitation of the Romans, all which the Evangelists
had forgotten: for either of these, or of any other news that ever Jesus Christ
brought out of Limbo, out of Purgatory or out of Hell we find not one syllable
in all the new Testament. The soldier raised again of whom S. Gregory
Dialogue 4. cap. 36. does make mention, and one Nicholas mentioned in the
legend of S. Patricke who by a Cave that he found in Ireland, entered into
Purgatory, at their return related his things as they had seen below, more
exactly: As that they had seen me^ fried in frying pans: others fluttering
about the chimnies like small flames: a bridge of ice of two fingers broad,
under the which ran a torrent of fire, and over this bridge must they pass
that were to enter into Paradise. Thus grew the world very skillful and a good
boy: but to the detriment of the purity and simplicity of the Gospel. Lastly
he says that Under the old Testament they had no such means to relieve the
dead, as they had after that the merits of Jesus Christ were committed into
the hands of the Church to apply them. These are three principles forged in
the Vatican to underprop the Popes greatness and to bring in the traffic for
souls: first that the dead could not be so well relieved before the coming
of Jesus Christ as now they are Secondly, that the merits of Jesus Christ are
now in the Churches hands to apply the^. Thirdly that these merits of the
death and passion of Jesus Christ were never passed over to the Church until
since the coming of Jesus Christ, since which time the dead have been the
better relieved. And this is to be noted, that by the Church we are to
understand the Pope, who takes upon him to be the Guardian and treasury of
this treasure of the Church, where he shuts up the merits and
supererogatorie satisfactions both of Jesus Christ and of the Saints and Monks.
And this we cannot find very strange: Did. 95. causa satis. and in the last
council of Lateran, sess. 9. Extrav. De facund. Eccl. Can. quonia^.
for having assumed to himself the name of God, and of the divine Majesty: and
the name of Jesus Christ, and tearming himself the Spouse of the church, it is
no great matter for him to take the name of the Spouse of Jesus also. Let us
now therefore proceed to the examination of these three principles.

For the first. That the dead could not be so well relieved before the coming
of Jesus Christ as since: I demand whether he speaks of the relief of man,
or of the relief of God. To say that God has now better means to relieve the
dead then he had before is Blasphemy. His power and goodness are ever infinite
and without increase, and crave no help of any new means: but if he speak of
the relief of man, I ask him who imparted to them now those means that their
forefathers had not? The Monk no doubt will say that God gave them to them:
the^ belike God had the^. If he had then I suppose he would then have bestowed
them as well as men do in these days: whereof it must follow that the faithful
that lived before Jesus Christ, might by prayers and sacrifices have entreated
God to employ those means which since he has committed into hands the of men.
Wherefore did they not? Wherefore was there in the law no sacrifice for the
dead? Nor no public service instituted by God? Thus does this difficulty still
remain vnresolved.

The second principle is, That the merits of Jesus Christ were committed into
the hands of the Church to apply them. 1. Tim. 2.6.
A doctrine as far repugnant from the gospel, as helping to the Popes
commodity. For by the scripture it plainly appears, That Jesus Christ
offered himself (...) ransom to God for us to whom we were endebted and
enthralled to eternal pain and emprisonment. This ransom then did God
receive at his sons hands: If he received it, when did he again dispossess
himself of it, to pass it over into the Popes hands? May it be lawful for us
in a matter of such importance, which concerns the participation in the
merits of Jesus Christ, to speak without the authority of the word of God.
Again, what prodigious dealing is this: that a creditor having received of his
debtors surety the ransom for many prisoners, should deliver the same over
into the hands of some one of his prisoners, to apply it to the rest? It is a
matter not only without example, but even besides all reason. All men do know
that in such a case it is enough that the creditor or detainer receive the
ransom, and that the debtor or prisoner reap and enjoy the benefit. God has
for me received the full ransom by the hands of my surety and redeeme^ Jesus
Christ: God then has it with himself, therefore will I go neither to the Pope
nor to any other to entreat them to distribute it to me, but will rely only
upon Jesus Christ and will trust to his death, and in acknowledgement of so
great a favor, will consecrate my life to his service. The pastors are set
over us to preach this benefit to the penitent sinner, and to let him
understand that he is reconciled to God: also that whosoever believes in Jesus
Christ, shall through his name obtain remission of his sins. Act. 10.43.
If our friar shall yet invent any reason to prove it to be necessary that
the Pope or his Prelates should be the treasurers and dispensers of the merits
of Jesus Christ, he shall but skirmish with him self: for he shall find the same
necessities before the coming of Jesus Christ: considering that both quick and
dead in that age stood in no less necessity of Gods graces then they that
live in these days. Again if the Pope have in his treasury the merits of
Jesus Christ and his Saints, to distribute them to others, how comes it that
he takes none to himself? Or why does he not keep for himself so many as
may serve to keep him out of Purgatory? How is it that after his death they
say so many Masses for his soul? Must silly Priests by their Masses and
suffrages apply and bestow the merits of Jesus Christ and his Saints upon him
who distributing them to others, yea even so far forth as to grant to some
one an hundred thousand year: of plenary pardon, could not reserve enough for
himself, albeit [if we list to believe him] himself continually carried the
keys of this treasure even to his last gasp? Where note withal that if the
distributing and applying of the merits of Jesus Christ to the faithful, be a
part of the Pastors charge, it follows that the dead have no part in this the
Popes liberality, considering that he is no longer their pastor. Now let the
reader judge whether this gay principle be not a butteresse or prop to support
tyranny: that the people may think that they cannot participate in the merits
of Jesus Christ, but by the hands of the Pope, or of such as he does authorize
thereunto.

The third principle is the worst, and as it were upon the highest step of
impiety: and therefore it is our duty to cast it down headlong. The merits
of Jesus Christ (says he) were not in the hands of the Church under the old
Testament, as now they are, and therefore there were not so good means to
relieve the dead. But here we will set down another principle, gathered out of
the word of God. That is, that the merits of Jesus Christ were of power
sufficient to save the faithful even from the beginning of the world, as says
St. Paul, 2. Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ and reconciled the world to himself,
not imputing their sins unto them. Therefore in the Revelation is he called,
The Lamb slain from the beginning of the world. This merit was then with God
and full of efficacy, before the coming of Jesus Christ in the flesh. Let us
then by this rule examine our Doctors principle. Before the coming of Jesus
Christ in the flesh, the merit of Jesus Christ was with God: not in the hands
of the Church. Then [saith this Doctor] the dead had the less help: but since
the Pope and his Prelates had these merits in their hands, the dead have been
much better relieved, the merits therefore of Jesus Christ are in better hands
and more liberal. Is it because God is not so well affected to the dead as the
Pope? Or because the Pope is more liberal of another goods then the true
owner? O spirit of Satan! O dullness of man! O patience of God! And shall not
God revenge such abominable profanation of his glory? Or such evident
corruption of his word? Let us lament and confess that our sins have deserved
a greater blindness. Yet in the mean time we must not forget that our
adversaries do commit the merits of Jesus Christ into the Popes hand, that he
may apply them both to the quick and to the dead: and that they say, that
since he was treasurer the dead have been much better relieved, it must needs
follow that not only the dead before the coming of Jesus Christ were but
slenderly relieved but also the living: so with like reason may we say that
the prayers for the living under the old Testament were nothing so frequent and
public as they have been since the merits of Jesus Christ fell into the
hands of the Church to apply them: but this the friar dare not advow. Thus is
falsehood detected and laid open, and the spirit of blasphemy put to confusion.
Now in all this discourse the Friars drift tends to yield some probable
reason why the prayers and sacrifices for the dead are not so frequent in the
old Testament: wherein he practices two frauds. First in saying they were not
frequent, he underhand leaves it to be presupposed that they were used
sometimes, which is false. For thereof we find neither example, nor commandment
in all the old Testament. Secondly, in seeking to excuse the want in the old
Testament, he gives occasion to the ignorant to think that the same were very
frequent in the new, which also is false. For in the new Testament we hear no
more news thereof then in the old. Only there is one place that instructs us
how the faithful should bear themselves toward the dead, wherein there is
not any speech of suffrages, Purgatory, or Indulgences. The place is in the
Thessalonians, 1.4.13. in these words. I would not brethren have you ignorant
as concerning them that are asleep. That you sorrow not, even as others that
have no hope: for if we believe that Jesus is dead, and is risen again, even
so the^ which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. Herein is nothing that
comes any thing near the traffic and trade of these days.

The whole sum of this Chapter is this, that the holy Scripture is sufficient
to instruct us to salvation: that it ought to decide these controversies: that
the sacrifices and suffrages for the dead, with the fetching of souls out of
Purgatory by Bulls and Indulgences, are neither by God instituted or commanded,
and that even by the confessions of our adversaries; who in all their burning
books cannot produce any commandment of God touching the same; but to shroud
themselves do produce other points, which they pretend to be omitted in the
holy Scriptures. Being deprived of these weapons, which are their surest, they
shelter themselves under others: and wanting the Commandments of God, they
have recourse to examples, allegories, and conjectures, even as men that catch
up stones, when they have no swords. We will show you as it were at high
noone, that their examples are false, their allegories frivolous, their
conjectures vain, and their consequences violent and strained against the
hair. This is it which in the fourth Chapter we will prove. But now let us
quench their Purgatory with the waters of Gods word: for that once extinguished
their Indulgences and Masses for the dead, must needs fall and decay.

CAP. 3. That the holy Scripture subverteth Purgatory: and that there is no
satisfaction or washing away of sins, but only the blood of Jesus Christ, and
consequently, that the Popes Indulgences are of no use to the dead.
IN the 18. Verse. 21.22
of the Prophet Ezechiel God says thus. If the wicked will return from all
the sins that he has committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that
which is lawful and right, he shall surely live and not dy^ I will not
remember all his iniquities. Call ye it not to remember any more, when ye put
the sinner to feel his punishment in a burning fire of so long continuance,
and to keep him in a prison from the which [as our adversaries say] he shall
not be delivered until he has paid the uttermost penny? The Friar could by
no means avoid this place but by corrupting of the text. For instead of these
words return from all his sins, he says, do penance: and by this
penance, he understands to scourge himself: to fast: to run on pilgrimage
to give to the Church, etc. But if he could have read the Hebrew, he should
have found Iashuv, he shall return, or turn aside: As indeed amendment of
life is the true and necessary penance, which is a returning to God, commended
unto us by S. John Baptist, saying, (...), Repent you, or Amend you, and St.
John, Revel. 2. speaking to the Church of Ephesus, which had lost her first
charity, commands her to repent, and to do her first works. But in our
days that penance which the^ was a virtue, is now become a ceremony, and from
a spiritual changing is now become a bodily exercise. Superstition has now
brought religion to the fingers ends, to counterfeitings, to gestures, to
scourgings, to fastings, to pilgrimages, to pecuniary satisfactions, to wear a
haireshirt, to a friars coule, to a walking up and down with a wallet, etc.

Here hence grew the condemnation of Luther in the end of the Council of
Lateran, Bull. Exurge. Domine. Optima paenitentia nova vita.
because among other the heresies to him imputed, he said that of all pennances
Amendment of life was the best, Esa. 58.5.6.
and yet it is the word of God saying to his people, Rent your hearts and not
your clothes: Also that the true fast consisted in losing the bands of
wickedness, and breaking his bread to the hungry. From this fountain proceeds
the use to wear some words of the Gospel about men's necks, when they should
keep the substance of them in their hearts: to wear a cross on the breast or
in the hat, when they should take up the cross of Christ and rejoice in his
sufferingt. Thus our Monk by doing of justice and judgment, which signifies
to deal uprightly, and to give to every man his own, understands it to
chastise a man's self, showing himself a Novice in the phrase of the old
Testament where this word Judgment signifies equity and upright dealing. As
in Deuteronomy. 32 4. Daniel. 4.37. The Auctor of the fire of Helie answers
otherwise: [for they seldom concur in their answers] he will have these
words I will no more remember to signify, Page 6.
I will not punish as an enemy, that is to say, with eternal punishment. By
his account the keeping of a man many thousands of years in a fire for his
sin, signifies not to remember his sin. How often did David pray to God to
remember his sins and wickedness of his enemies: yet not so that he desired
that God should punish them with eternal punishment. After all this the friar
makes a digression, wherein he charge us with sundry slanders, but all
besides the matter.

2 Gods Angel, Revelat. 14.13, says thus, Blessed are the dead that hereafter
die in the Lord, yea truly, the spirit says that they rest from their labors,
and their works follow them. Surely if they rest from their labors, they go
not into a burning fire. This speech concerns not the Martyrs only, as our
adversaries do feign: for throughout that whole chapter there is not any word
of the Martyrs, but of all such as keep the commandments of God, and faith
of Jesus, as it is said one line before. But if the Martyrs only do die in
the Lord, in whom do the rest of the faithful die? Bellarmine says they die
in part in the Lord, and in part not in the Lord: Bellarm. de Purgat. lib. 6.
cap. 1.
he was ashamed to say in part in the Lord, and in part in the devil.

3 Esaias, cap. 57. v. 1. and 2. says, The righteous perishes and is taken away
from the evil, then he adds, He shall enter in peace, or, peace shall come:
they shall rest in their beds, every one that has walked before him. Why did
he not except those that go to Purgatory? or what peace or rest is there in a
burning fire? And this is the point wherein the Friar is brought into such a
straight that his only recourse is to his ordinary boldness, Page 19.
and labors to make this passage a means to establish his Purgatory. He
affirms it to be a prayer of Esaias for the dead, and to make it the more
probable, in liew of these words, Peace shall come, he says, let peace come,
also for They do rest he says, let them rest contrary to the truth of the
original Hebrew, which has Iavo, that is to say, shall come and Ianuchu, they
shall rest. Yet let us thus far yield all this to his ignorance in the Hebrew
tongue: but herein does he show his bad meaning, even in this, that he
affirms it to be a prayer of Esaias: since by the words ensuing it appears
that they be the words of God, who says Ye witches children come hither,
ye seed of the adulterer and of the whore draw near: Whom have ye mocked
etc. and again. Can I be content with all these things, and thou have
discovered thy self behind me? Throughout all this Chapter God opposes the
blessed estate of the righteous against the curse prepared for the wicked.

4 S. Paul to the Corinthians says. 2. Cor. 5.1.
If our earthly habitation be destroyed, we have an eternal building in
heaven. But why did he not add, but that shall be after you are purged with
fire?

5 The Apostle in the 9. to the Hebrews, says. It is ordained that all men
shall once die, and after that the judgment: He forgot Purgatory, that should
have gone between. For throughout the holy Scripture we find not any other
judgment spoken of after death, but the last and universal judgment.

6 In the 20. Matt. the laborers do all receive their promised wages toward
the end of the day, that is to say, in the end of their lives and when their
works is done: but Purgatory can be no part of this labor, as the auctor of
the fire of Helie would have it to be: for in that place they speak only of
laboring in the Lords vinyard, which is his church: which has no community
with any torment in fire. Again, Purgatory cannot be the last hour of the
day, because they make it continue much longer then all the life. Besides that
even in this last hour some laborers are called and hired, but in Purgatory
no man is called to the service of God.

7 In the holy Scriptures we have many examples of men received into Paradise
immediately after their decease, but no example of any soul sent into
Purgatory: Luke 2.26.
Simeon had a promise that he should not see death before he had seen the
Messiah. S. Paul. 2. Tim. 4. says, that after he had fought the good fight
there remained no more but to receive the crown of glory. And S, Luk, cap. 1^
says that the Angels carried the soul of Lazarus into Abraham's bosom: where
he was comforted whiles the ^ich man was tormented, but of any passage to
Purgatory, either to or fro, we hear no news.

8 Jesus Christ said to the good theif This day thou shall be with me in
Paradise. This thief was surely a great sinner, and satisfied civil justice
either for theft or murder. But where had he made satisfaction to God for all
his sins committed all the days of his life? He that was converted to God
in the very article of his death? But God requires no satisfactory pains of
such as do repent: but for them he does accept of the obedience and death of
Jesus Christ who has sufficiently satisfied as well for our sins as for the
punishment due to our sins. The auctor of the fire of Helie, with the rest
will needs have this privilege to be granted to this thief in regard of the
greatness of his faith, of his hope, of his charity, of his zeal, etc.
wherein they do the more accuse themselves. 2. By exalting the faith of the
thief, they do at unawares confess that in case we have a steadfast faith in
Jesus Christ we shall not come in Purgatory. 3. Herein also they do confess
that it stands with the justice of God freely and without imposing any
satisfactory pains to pardon, always provided that the sinner have a steadfast
faith and hope in Jesus Christ. 4. How could this thief at Gods hand merit
this privilege by his faith and hope: considering that God endued him with this
faith? For what kind of merit is this, to receive the gifts and graces of God
with a steadfast faith, which faith also God gave him, who gives not only the
benefits, but also the means to receive them? And the same do I say also of
other virtues which were the gifts and effects of the spirit of God in him: For
it is God that works the will and the deed says S. Paul, Phil. 2.13. 2. Cor.
3.6.
and without him we cannot think any good, says the same Apostle. 5. Let us
step yet farther. We demand how, where, or when the thief bare the
satisfactory pains for his sin toward God? But here in liew of answering
directly they stand upon the magnifying and extolling of the faith, charity,
and zeal of this thief: but to what purpose, seeing virtues are no
satisfactory pains, but rather lenitiues, and proppes to strengthen and
fortify the soul against all the griefs thereof. 6. That which I hold to be
the principal in this case is this. That these our Masters do make the
charity, zeal and patience of this thief in a moment to be of so great merit
as to exempt him from the torments of Purgatory: yet that they will not grant
that the charity of the faithful that are in this burning fire, their zeal,
or any other the virtues which in these souls were in greater perfection then
they were in the thief [in that he was yet a sinner] could have any merit, or
power to draw them out of this fire. But wherefore should they by their
magisterial authority take from these poor souls the power of meriting but
only by prolonging the torments of the dead, the consciences of the living
being the more astonished, might be stirred up to redeem them whiles they may
by masses, anniversaries, and gifts to the Church? yea and that so far forth as
to persuade the people that an offering for the dead being by a surviver
offered, was of power and merit to free the dead from that torment: and yet that
in the dead himself neither his faith, neither his charity, neither his
patience, no not the torments of many years have any merit, or can move God to
abridge this torment? 7. Hereto let us also adioine thus much, that the
punishment that the thief suffered, being deserved, inevitable and by civil
justice imposed upon him, could not be counted for a satisfactorie work to
God: for he ought voluntarily to have undergone it, and by order of the Church,
not by sentence of the Magistrate, especially according to the doctrine of the
Romish Church. ^. Moreover is it not a mere mockage ^o say that the exemption
from ente^ing into Purgatory was a privilege granted to this thief, Bellarm.
lib. 1. cap 8 Privilegia paucorum legem non faciunt.
considering that ^hroughout all the word of God we cannot find the example
of any one that ever went into Purgatory? Privileges are extraordinary; but
here they seek to make that which is ordinary and without exception in the
word of God to pass for a privilege. 9 In this also do they much forget
themselves, that they will here bring in privileges, where the matter concerns
the Justice of God, which [saith these men] after the pardon of the fault, will
nevertheless have us to satisfy for the pain. If then Gods justice has
suffered one man to enter into Paradise without any satisfactory pain for his
sins, why should it not suffer two? If two why not ten? If ten why not a
hundred or a thousand, and so forth infinite.

Our Reverend writers of fires, furnaises and torrents do give way to the
maine body of these reasons as being to great, too strong, and too close set
together, and having hidden themselves, do afterward make semblance to
appear, Page 68,
but far enough of. The auctor of the fire of Helie, no grief to his person,
has made us a little merry, for supposing that he has found some new matter
to make this privilege current says that the blood of Jesus Christ which they
boiled and sprang upon the thief, carried him immediately into eternal
felicity. Where found he this? Did the blood of Jesus Christ spring forth but
on one side, and so the evi^ thief through disgrace could obtain^ no aspersion
of it? Or how could a few drops of blood, moistning the outward parts of the
body bring forth so whol^some an effect? Considering that in the Mass they
hold that the wicked do receive all Jesus Christ inwardly, and y^^ are never
the better, nor more happy But now I remember where he found this fable: he
remembered that blessed S. Longin, who pierced the side of Jesus Christ and so
recovered his sight for of that spear the Church of Rome has made a
speareman, and of that speereman a Saint. And why not? since that of Deucalion
and Pirrhaes casting of stones behind them men and women sprang up? That which
he here produces concerning the baptism of the thief on the Cross is
already confuted in the first Chapter: and this man makes the heathen
Executioners to be baptizers of Christians.

By all this it does appear that together with this thief, Purgatory was
crucified: for I am ashamed to produce the argument of these Doctors, who do
make even this thief an advocate for Purgatory. The sire of Helie p. 67
For (say they) he craved succors, not in this life, for death was even
between his jaws already: but after his death: he therefore believed that
after death the souls stood in need of succors. Hereto do we answer that he
craved indeed no succor for this life, neither for after this death: but even
for the death it self, and for the departure of his soul, which Jesus Christ
entering into Paradise, took and brought with him into the celestial glory.
But who can here forbear laughing at this Portugal, The boldness of this
fire, p. 95.
who would have the word Paradise here to signify hell? Or how can he fai^ of
an answer that suffers himself solice^tiously to interpret the Scriptures?

9 S. John in his first Epistle chap. 1. says The blood of Jesus Christ
purges or cleanses us from all sin. Our sins are the spots and
uncleanness of our souls, and there be no other. Jesus Christ purges and
takes them all away (says S. John) then is there no more to purge so no more
Purgatory. For albeit after all our offenses pardoned there should yet remain
some pain to be endured for the satisfying of the justice of God yet could not
this punishment be called a Purgation, for who did ever here the whip or the
gibbet called a Purgation for theft or murder? Page 69. A stander.
The fire of Helie slandering us answers and makes us to say that it is
enough that Jesus Christ satisfied for us, so as for our parts we need do
nothing at all. An opinion which we abhor and leave to the profane and
Libertines.

Whereas we say that the punishment of a sin cannot be called a Purgation,
the friar affirms the contrary, Page 97.
saying that it is never called otherwise: and to that end he alleges many
places wherein he prete^deth that to purge signifies to punish and chastise.
Passages which I am even ashamed to confute. The first makes clean against
him: all the rest are false. The Apostle to the Hebrews, chap. 1.3. says
Jesus Christ has by himself purged our sins. In this place [if we believe
him] purgation signifies punishment: whereupon it must follow that Jesus Christ
has made the punishment for our sins, whereas he did only bear it. Moreover
since this punishment and passion of Jesus Christ was the cause of the purgation
of our sins, it is not the purgation it self. And indeed himself [though
falsely] makes Jeremy to say, Falsehood Ierem. 11.
The chastisements serve to purge us: Then is the chastisement one thing and
the purgation an other: for the end of a matter is diverse from the means to
attain thereto. Now follow two places out of Ecclesiasticus the 7. Two
falsehood.
Purge thy self by thine own arm: and purge thee of thy negligence. That is
to say (says the Moncke) Chastise thy self. Let us overpasse the folly of
this explication: for both the places are falsely alleged. And in the Gteek
which is the Original of this book we find no one word of all this: neither
in any of the translations but the Roman: with the like falsehood have they
alleged out of the 47. chapter of the same book ver. 11. these words: Christ
purged his sins. But in the Greek it is, The Lord has taken away his
sins. The same likewise is false that they allege out of the third of
Malac. Falsehood.
The Lord shall purge the sons of Levy. For endeavoring to persuade that to
purge signifies to punish, he has suppressed the words following, which do
prove that to purge, in that place signifies to purify, after the manner as
they purge metals. The whole place is this. He shall even fine the sons of
Levy and purify them as gold and silver. He here speaks of purifying and
cleansing the hearts by the efficacy of the spirit of God, as says S. Peter,
Act. 15. God purifieth the hearts by faith.

After so many falsifications our Monk triumphs and croweth like a cock on
his own dunghill saying that we be the spirits of Satan, beasts and in his
judgment fools: Let this pass, for it is the privilege of that Robe: and
this Monk is like his wallet that has nothing but belly and throat.

He therefore runs on his course, and would feign prove that a torment may
justly be called a Purgatory or purgation: These be his words. Is not the
Medicine an affliction of the patient, which serves to evacuat his corrupt
humors? In some he will have the physic to be a punishment, which we deny,
especially considering that in this question of purgatory, we entreat only of
punishment imposed to satisfy the party offended: for who ever took physic
to the end thereby to be punished, unless you will have Socrates poison taken
for physic? Or who ever took physic to be a satisfaction for an offense?
Let us glorify God and acknowledge Gods judgments upon his adversaries, who
after the loss of their consciences, have lost also al common sense. And this
will more manifestly appear if we call to mind that here our question
concerns only that purgation for sin that is performed in Purgatory. We
hear deal only with the purgation of sins past: of a clensing of
uncleanness that does no longer remain: as well because the souls that do
roast in this imaginary fire are already righteous and do sin no more, as
because the sins that are purged in this fire were heretofore committed:
whereof do ensue two evident absurdities: The one that this serves to purge
the uncleanness that is not, and to purify the souls already pure and free
from sin: the other, that the fire does grossly mistake in the examples and
passages before alleged, which speak of the purging of such uncleannesses as
are still remaining in effect: for every physical medicine serves to purge
the humors offending, that actually are in the body. And God says that he
will purge the sons of Levy as men purge gold, that is, from those
uncleannesses that in effect are, not from those that are taken away. Thus is
this merchandise blown up, and this purgatio^ grown ridiculous: and that does
more manifestly appear by the extravagant form of the Monks speech, where he
says: That the pains do serve to purge us from those obligations of sin
whereto it left us subject: for yet was there never man that had his judgment
so far out of joint, as to say that he purges himself of an obligation when
he discharges all that he was bound unto. But to monstrous divinity we must
use monstrous terms. They therefore that reap most profit by this purgatory,
may do wisely to seek it out some other name: because herein we find nothing to
be purged.

10 Saint Paul says, Romans 3.24. that we are FREELY justified by the redemption
that is in Jesus Christ: If it be FREELY then do we pay nothing. The same
Apostle, Colloss. 2.13. says God has forgiven or remitted all our trespasses:
In the Greek it is (...), Gratis largitus est he pardoned freely: for so much
the word imports. The same Apostle also in the second to the Corinthians,
2.10. using the same word, says, that he pardoned the incestuous, to whom he
imposed no satisfactorie pain after the pardon. He says moreover All our
offenses that we may know that God does not pardon to halfes. All our
offenses thus taken away and pardoned, the satisfactory punishment is also
taken away: for there cannot be any such punishment but in regard of the
offense and the cause, which is the offense, that only produced this effect,
being taken away, this effect is also taken away. Here unto also compare the
saying of our adversaries: that in Purgatory venial sins are remitted: for
if this be true, then S. Paul abused the Colossians in telling them that al
their offenses were remitted. Again is this any remission of sins, to punish
the^ in a fire? The friar in liew of answering, sets down some principles,
but so strange as the very propounding of them may serve for a sufficient
Confutation. God, says he, pardons us freely, but there rests an
obligation to his justice, which must of necessity be satisfied. As if he
should have said, God does pardon and acquit us freely, yet not freely, be
cause we are not acquitted of the Obligation to the pain, but that we must
satisfy the same. This is even the like: God, says he, does freely pardon our
offenses, but yet he discharges us not of the Obligation to satisfy to his
justice: Could he more evidently contradict himself? Considering that to
pardon a criminal person. is no more but to free him from the pain where to by
the justice of the Law he stands bound? Thus the auctor of the fire of Helie
says, That God forgiveth al our debts, yet, says he, with some co^tribution
of our parts. Now if that which we contribute be holde^ for payment and
satisfaction, as our Doctors would have it, who perceives not that God
acquitteth us not of all our debts? Thus does the spirit of Contradiction
confound it self. But what need so many by ways, when they might cut it
clean of and franckly say that God does not acquit us freely. As indeed the
Friar in many places says as much: in his 99, page in these words. God
pardons the sin, howbeit for the satisfaction of his justice, he appoints
the chastisement: The ^ing pardons a gentleman for some mur^er committed, yet
condemns him in great ^ines. Since then the pardon, whereby the capital pain
is converted into pecuni^ry, and so is no full pardon, but a diminution of
pain, it manifestly appears that our adversaries do hold that the pardon
which God grants us is no full or free pardon. Hereto come their words. That
God does freely remit the fault but not the pain: the eternal pain, but not the
temporal: for he that freely forgiveth his debtour the one part of his debt,
but not all, cannot be said freely to give or acquit the whole debt. Neither
can the pardon be said to be full when there is a necessity imposed upon the
debtor to pay or suffer punishment for the sin, be it in the whole, or in a
part.

11 Herein also appears the folly of their distinction between the fault and
the pain. The Friar says, Page 75.
that the sin brings with it two things, A faul^ and a pain. Had this good
man been perfect in his natural language, the absurdity of his principle had
been apparent: for the word Culpa, or fault in his language signifies sin;
witness the Priests words when in his Mass lie beats his breast and says,
Mea culpa, it is my sin: also Jacobs words to Laban for what sin of mine?
Genesis 13.36
What fault have I committed? And the like throughout all the holy scripture.
Now let the reader iudg^ whether the friar had dined when he writ or no; when
he says that sin brings with it the fault, that is to say sin.

The examination of the distinction between pain and fault.
Upon this worthy distinction between the pain and the fault is Purgatory
grounded: and this pin once plucked out the whole frame falls out of joint.
They say then that God does indeed acquit us of all the fault, but not of all the pain. A saying not only unjust but even incompatible.

1 The vniustnesse hereof is evide^t: for no man is justly punished but for his
fault: and the fault taken away the offender is no longer guilty: and being no
longer guilty, he cannot justly be punished. These Doctors therefore do
blemish and dry up the righteousness of God.

2 The Incompatibility hereof is likewise manifest, In that they say God does
forgive us all our offenses: yet punishes them in a burning fire: both to
pardon and yet to punish one self offense, are matters incompatible. And when
we forgive our neighbor all his offenses against us we use not to say, I
forgive thee the fault, yet will I punish thee: or I acquit thee of thy debt,
yet shall thou pay me. But as says Tertullian in his fifth book of baptism,
Exemp to reatu, eximitur poena.

3 Again since our sins be debtes to the Justice of God, as Jesus Christ
witnesses where he teaches us to say Forgive us our debts, of which debts the
payment was pain and satisfaction, shall we not sin even against common sense,
if we affirm that God forgiveth all the debt, but not all the payment? Thus do^
our Masters shadow us forth Chimeraes and monsters in the air.

4 Let us proceed. How is it possible that by the death of Jesus Christ we
should be purged, quit, and delivered from all our trespasses, but not from the
punishment due to our trespasses Considering that he did not otherwise bear
our sins and offenses, but by bearing the pain due to them: and if he did
bear the pain, did he not bear it to the end to discharge us from it? Si
tulit, abstulit. He has borne our infirmities and carried our sorrows, says
Esaias 53.4. To what end? Even to discharge us from them. And this is it that S.
Austin says in his 37 sermon upon the words of the Lord. Jesus Christ taking
upon him the punishment but not the sin, has abolished both the sin and
the punishment.

5 Throughout all this discourse this is to be noted, that all our speech
concerns such pains as are paime^ts, redemptions and satisfactions to the
justice of God: for these our Doctors do term Purgatory a payment and
satisfaction to the Justice of God: These be the punishments which we say to be
in compatible with a full pardon. There is an other kind of punishment which
is termed castigatory, and this is inflicted for amendment of the sinner, and
has great affinity with the full pardon: for God does chastise his children,
even after he has pardoned them. Such chastisements are not payments and
satisfactions to content the Justice of God, but fatherly corrections to bring
the sinner to amendment. They are not executions of his justice, but
testimonies of his fatherly love and care: not wounds but salues: and these can
in no wise concur with the tormenrs of Purgatory, wherein it is said that the
souls are already just and can amend no more. As therefore we use to strike a
man fallen into an Apoplexy, not to get any satisfaction at his hands, but to
awaken him: so God smites his children, when they sleep in their sins, to
make them feel their negligence. He that otherwise interprets the afflictions
that God sends and takes them not for corrections, health some to his soul,
but for satisfactions necessary to the justice of God, he makes his
afflictions bitter, and dippeth their edges in gall, taking from them the
spiritual consolations, glory and joy, that supporteth the children of God in
this combat. Necessity is a miserable consolation, It hardneth the sore, but
heals it not: It raises the courage against the pain, but asswageth it not.
For what mitigation is it to the afflicted to tell him that his sore is past
cure: and that of necessity he must satisfy the justice of God? Or how could
S. Paul have so boasted of his tribulations, had he believed they had been
payments which God did exact of him for his sins? This doctrine being so
healthful, so full of consolation, and so evidently laid down in the holy
Scripture, namely that God chastises us for our amendment, yet this friar
Minor with a desperate presumption dares avouch it to be a reason forged in
our own brain without the word of God, without authority, Page 78.
and without reason. Hereupon therefore let us hear the word of God herein.
The Apostle to the Hebrews, cap. 12. says, God chastneth us for our profit, to
the end we may be partakers of his holiness. Again, Discipline brings the
quiet fruit of righteousness to those that are exercised therein. How often
does God say that he chastneth those whom he loves. Apoc. 3.19 Heb. 12.6. Job
5.17. Prove. 3.11.
David in the 119. Psalm confesses that before he was afflicted he went a
stray, but after his afflictions he kept the commandments of God. And again,
It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I may learn thy Statuts.
2. Chro. 33
Was not Manasses for his conversion endebted to his captivity? And are not we
for David's Psalms endebted to Saul and Absalon? For the building of the Church
of God in our days, are not we endebted to the Martyrdom and torments that
our fathers endured for the Gospel? By the word of God and experience we find
other ends of our afflictions then satisfaction and redemption to the justice
of God. Therefore says Chrysostom in his Homely of confession and penance,
that God punishes us not for the sins past, Non exigens supplicium de
peccatis sed ad futura nos corrigens
but corrects us for that that is to come. Here do our adversaries rouse
themselves and seek all means to underprop their so ruinous a cause, and to
persuade that to pardon a sin, and yet to punish it with satisfactory pains:
to acquit a debt and yet to make the debtor pay it are things compatible, and
such as do well agree. This does the Friar prove by a Theological reason.
Among all the works of God [saith he] do equally shine his mercy and his
justice: a proposition that bears many exceptions. Page 75.
As in the punishment of Devils, we find sovereign justice without mercy. And
God does often minister the one without the other, as himself says in the
Epistle of S. James, cap. 2. There shall be judgment merciless to him that
shows no mercy. Only in the work of redemption is this proposition true: his
mind is, that in the Justification of a sinner Gods mercy should be displaied
in conferring unto him the first grace and remission of eternal pains. And to
give some way to his justice, he will have it to take some satisfaction of the
sinner by punishing him with temporal pains as well in this life as in
Purgatory. Wherein I beseech the Reader to consider the nature of the untruth,
which consists in wrangling and iarring with his own principles. The friar
said that among all the works of God his mercy and his justice did shine
equally: but here he makes them altogether unequal: In that mercy reveals
her self in pardoning an infinite pain, but justice shows herself in
making the^ suffer temporal punishments, which nevertheless may be abridged
and redeemed by some fasts, and slight offerings made by the survivers for the
dead. Was it meet to seek place for the justice of God where we might abase
it so low, and dishonor it in paying it in such base coin and clipped mony^
Even this might serve for an evident and most mighty testimony to the truth,
if we prove that according to our belief, gathered out of the word of God,
the Justice of God and his mercy do equally shine in the work of our
redemption and are likewise infinite. For God has showed himself infinitely
just in accepting at the hands of our pledge and redeemer Jesus Christ a
sufficient price for all our offenses: also infinitely merciful, in allowing to
us this payment, as made in our name. His wisdom has united things which
otherwise seemed hardly to agree: having found a means to punish all our sins,
and withal to forgive them all, by giving to us his son, the object of his
justice, for an argument and matter of his mercy. But to pardon a man all his
sins and yet to make the same man to bear one part of the deserved punishment
for satisfaction for the same, are matters contradictory. The fire of Helie
speaks no better to the purpose. Adam [saith he] had pardon for his sin,
and yet both he and his posterity have incurred many calamities. 1. Hereto we
do answer, that to no end he here comes in with the pains and sorrows
that are common to all men, since that in this place we deal only with
punishments proper to the children of God. 2. He deceives himself in thinking
that the evils and pains for all men are punishments for the sin of Adam. For
they are punishments because men do persist in the sin of Adam. God never
punishes one man for another man's sin. The child shall not bear the iniquity
of his father, says Ezechiell. 18.20. True it is that so many Calamities had
never befallen mankind, had not Adam sinned: but yet this stands ever firm,
That God never punishes any before they have thoroughly deserved it. 3. He
presupposes that which is false and yet in question: namely that the pains
whereto the faithful be subjected by the sin of Adam, be satisfactions,
payments and redemptions to the Justice of God. For of this kind of pains do
we now entreat, because they make Purgatory to be of this nature. We say then
that al these evils, labors, diseases, yea even death it self, do alter their
nature in the faithful: and of evils become medicines. Of satisfactorie pains
they are made healthsome exercises to the soul: God by the wounds of the body
heals the wounds of the soul: even in like manner as a triakle composed of
venomous Ingrediences, yet tempered by a skillful Physician becomes a very
healthsome preservatiue. The like do we say of the death of the faithful. It
resembles the passage over the red sea, where Gods enemies are swallowed up:
but his children do find way to the promised inheritance. Farthermore if it
be a punishment to satisfy the justice of God wherefore do the faithful expect
it with Joy, and in their desires even hasten the coming of it, as did the
Apostle S. Paul. Phil. 1.13.

Besides these reasons they allege many examples as of Mary, Moses, David who
were punished after their offenses were forgiven. Namely David whose example
they do urge: 2. Sam. 12. Where God having forgiven him his sin, said
nevertheless unto him, The sword shall not depart from thy house, because thou
have despised me. Again, Because thou have given the Lords enemies cause to
blaspheme his name, thy child shall die. There is not say they, to the end
thou should not cause to blaspheme. Likewise in the 7. of Micheas: I will
bear the wrath of the Lord, because I have sinned against him: wherein their
judgment fails them: for they labor to prove that which we do grant. Who
denies but that the sins of the faithful are the efficient causes of the
chastisementes that God lays upon them? And that they fall upon them because
they have sinned? But our controversy depends not upon the efficient cause
but upon the final. They say that it is to the end that Gods justice may be
satisfied by the punishment of the sin: we say that it is to the end A sinner
may amend. They will have it. That God punishes as a just judge: we that he
punishes us as a loving father: not to exercise his Justice, but correct our
unrighteousness: for as for the satisfaction due to his Justice, the merits of
Jesus Christ are a sufficient satisfaction. The father that punishes his
children to take satisfaction, puts of his natural affections and
corrects them, not for their amendment, but to satisfy his own content. Now
if this be an Inhumane justice in a father, what shall we think of our
heavenly father who is bounty it self? And who in his word assures us that
albeit the mother should forsake the fruit of her womb, yet will he never
forsake us? Never shall we serve God with a filial obedience, unless we be
fully persuaded of his fatherly love toward us. The Friar alleges yet two
examples more, Page 76.
yet both false according to his custom. The one in the 14. of Numbers, where
God having forgiven his people their sin, does nevertheless deprive them from
entering into the land of promise: for by the 4. of the Apostle to the Hebrews
it appears that even they that were excluded from the land of promise, were
also shut out out of the caelestiall rest. The pardon therefore that God
granted, was only the grant of Moses petition, who desired God that he would
not utterly root out the people of Israel. But hear we are not in hand with
any such kind of pardon. In an other place he produces the example of
Baptism and says in Baptism God pardons Original sin, but not the pains
thereof, as subjection to death, the fire of concupiscence, with other
calamities. Concerning the death of the faithful we have spoken before and
proved that it is no calamity unto them, Page 100.
The Counsel of Trent Ses. 5. says that Paul calls concupiscence a sin,
but it is no sin
neither any satisfaction to the Justice of God. And as for the fire of
concupiscence, the friar is mistaken, in bringing that for an example of the
punishment for sin, which in it self is a sin and in the law forbidden.

This maine thus overthrown which made the body and principal of our
adversaries reasons, let us now thrust forward and yield the truth an absolute
victory.

12 God commanding us to pray that he would forgive us our trespasses, as we
forgive them that trespass against us, shows that we are to attend from him
forgiveness in like manner as he wills us to forgive our neighbors, that
is to say, without revenging our selves, or taking any satisfaction or amends
in all or in part. After therefore that he has forgiven us all our offenses,
as S. Paul witnesses, shall he yet draw one payment out of so tedious and
burning a fire?

13 Farther yet to urge this matter presupposing that there is a purgatory, I
demand whether Jesus Christ does in heaven intercede for the souls there
tormented, Romans 8.27.
and pray for their deliverance: for S. Paul teaches us that Jesus Christ
sits at the right hand of God making intercession for us. Dare they say that
he intercedeth no more for those souls, and that in their behalfes he has
given over the office of a mediator? But if he pray for them, no doubt but God
hears him, John. 11.22
and so they come forth at his intercession: to what end then do now serve
those offerings and suffrages of the living, with the Popes Indulgences, but to
that which Jesus Christ has already done?

14 Again since the death of Jesus Christ is sufficient to redeem us, even out
of Purgatory, why may it not serve to that use? Jesus Christ having paid all
the pain and penalty that we did owe will not God receive this payment and
ransom for so much as it is worth? God who saved us when we were his enemies,
envieth not our good, neither abateth any part of the price of the death of his
son neither will he ever permit that Jesus Christ having paid enough wholly
to satisfy his justice and to exempt us from Purgatory, that in this case the
benefit of his son should be shortened unto us. Also the Apostle to the
Hebrews, cap. 7. v. 15. says, He is able perfectly to save them that come to
God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. If he then
can perfectly save us, why will he not do it? and being able fully to acquit
us toward God, shall his power to do it be greater then his willingness? Can
he be content to see his brethren, his members, his spouse for one sin
tormented seven years in a fire like to that of hell? To such forcible
reasons my adversaries do answer very coldly, or rather not at all. For they
answer themselves, not my objections: They labor to show how our
satisfactions and the pains of their Purgatory may no way derogatfro^ the
merits of Jesus Christ: but they answer nothing to my demand; what the reason
is that Jesus Christ having paid enough wholly to satisfy the Justice of God
and to exempt us from Purgatory, they will not suffer that his benefit should
stead us so much? Yet do we show them that they do not only fly, but also in
flying do blaspheame, blemish the brightness, and curtal the perfection of
the merits and satisfaction of Jesus Christ.

Then say they that the merit of Jesus Christ is indeed sufficient: but it must
be applied unto us, and that cannot be but by means: then among other means
they come in with our satisfactions and pains, and the torments of Purgatory.
1. Hereto we say, Romans 10.17 1. Cor 10. Gal. 3.27. Ephesians. 3.17
that it belongs to the word of God and not to them to prescribe unto us the
means to enjoy the benefit of Jesus Christ: and the means that that does set
us down is faith, the word, and the sacraments: but but in no wise any roasting
of souls, of any fire after this life. 2. Next let any man of understanding be
judge whether the means to enjoy the benefit of Jesus Christ, ought to be
contrary to the benefit it self: The means of taking profit by physic
consists not in taking of poison: The means to enjoy the light of the sun
rests not in shutting up the windows of the house or the windows of the
body, that is the eyes. Since therefore that the benefit of Jesus Christ and his
satisfaction is the sovereign pledge of the mercy o^ God: what likelihood is
there that the means to enjoy it can consist in the execution of the justice
of God? An^ since the satisfaction of Jesus Christ i^ our acquittance toward
God: what appearance is there that the means to attain to it, can rest in
forcing us to pay, and tormenting us in a fire some hundreds or thousands of
years? We are not to omit that the means to apprehend the grace offered unto
us in Jesus Christ ought to be active and tending to the enjoying thereof, and
not a passion or torment. 4. That the means to apply to our selves, or to
apprehend a thing ought to be of another kind then the thing apprehended or
applied: as we cannot apply one medicine by another; one plaster by another:
or the satisfaction of Jesus Christ by any other satisfaction. To all this our
adversaries have not a word, and do as meanly acquit themselves as before
they did licentiously triumph.

Thus do these bellows of the fire of Purgatory, these his holiness factors,
chatter about the benefit of Jesus Christ with craft and subtilty, and
pleasantly seek to color their fact, and sweenten the superficies with
poison: for at the shutting up of all they do abase and bring to naught the
benefit of Jesus Christ. And indeed in the fire of Helie it is said that this
principle That Jesus Christ has wholly satisfied, The fire of Helie, p. 75
makes men careless. They also affirm that man can satisfy God Ex Condigno
that is to say, Them. Soto disp. 2. quest. 2. Art. 3. in 4 sententiarum, Nauar.
Notab. 22. Number. 10. de Iubileo.
by equipolle^t satisfactions, and that not for themselves only, but also for
others: as diverse of them do teach. Bellarmine he goes farther: for in his
first book of Purgatory, cap. 10. he says that men are their own redeemers,
and do themselves redeem their sins. Yea he proceeds so far that he will
acknowledge no other actual or real satisfactions but our own: for he
houldeth that the satisfaction of Jesus Christ serves only to make ours of
force: and therefore S. Paul told us an untruth when he said that Jesus
Christ gave himself a ransom for us; 1. Tim. 2.
for he makes us only to pay the ransom, and gives price and weight to our
satisfactions. But these principles do we deny and detest, as new Articles of
faith forged without any testimony of the word of God, as the Cross of the
cross of Jesus Christ, and an alter built out of the ruins of the gospel
whereupon to erect and advance humane satisfactions. Man cannot attribute to
himself any part of his ra^som, neither share out this glory between Jesus
Christ and the sinner without blemishing of Jesus Christ, plucking him from his
cross and treading under foot the blood of the covenant, the only price of our
redemption. There is no salvation in any other, says S. Peter. And Hebrews 10.
With one offering has he for ever consecrated them that are sanctified.
Again, We have one God and one mediator between God and man, which is the
man Jesus Christ who gave himself a ransom for us, says S. Paul. 1. Tim.
2.5.6. how then dare our adversaries say that sinful man is a redeemer of
himself: Bellar. lib. 1. Indulg. c. 4.
or that the saints by their superabundant satisfactions are by any means our
Redeemers, as Bellarmine says? Our enemies do yet bring us one plaster more
to lay upon the wound that they have made in the benefit of Jesus Christ. But
it is a plaster without ointment, besides they lay it besides the wound. They
say that the virtue of our satisfactions [whereof Purgatory is one] does
depend upon the satisfactio^s of Jesus Christ. It is he that makes our
torments to be of any value: it is the grace and mercy of God that makes us to
satisfy: what shall we say to this? Or rather what shall we not say? for the
mockery together with the absurdity is to evident. They say that Jesus Christ
gives us power to pay a debt, which himself has already paid to the full,
and to satisfy for that which is already acquitted: who ca^ without laughing
imagine, or rather who would not spite that a surety, who has set a prisoner
at liberty by paying his debt for him, should after make him pay to the same
creditor the same debt that him has already paid: yea and which is more: that
the same second payment should be accounted a grace and favor? who could ever
have thought that the pains and torments of Purgatory had been counted among
the graces of Jesus Christ? But say they, it is a grace to give power to the
creature to satisfy of him self that is to say, to bear the punishment of
his own sin. Let us learn; for this is a new kind of beneficence, A criminal
person shall hereafter commend the bounty of his judge, who after he has
freely forgiven him, shall of his grace and superabundant mercy, cause him to
be whipped about the town, and to pay excessive amends, that so he may have
the honor to satisfy for himself. Now if Purgatory be a grace of God, why
does the Pope come with his Indulgences, unjustly officious, to diminish this
grace? Again, if it be a favor or a grace that God grants to the creature
to satisfy for himself, the damned shall be his favorites, whom he will make
to pay to the full. Do we now dispute with men? You seraphicall doctors, your
much knowledge makes you mad. S. John Baptist said that of stones God could
raise up children unto Abraham: but these men will bring the children of Abraham
to be stones, insensible and brutish. The falsehood of the friar, p. 79.
Thus do these our Masters abuse our simplicity. To fill up the whole measure
of abuse, the Friar to this purpose cites a passage out of the 52. of Esaias,
saying. I will praise thee O Lord for thou art displeased with me. Let all the
injuries that they lay upon me be true if throughout the whole chapter there be
one word to that purpose: but with him such falshoode is ordinary. Yea and were
this place true, yet makes it nothing against us, who confess that God is to
be praised and lauded for his chastisements, wherewith he corrects and
amendeth us. But what corresponde^ce has this with Purgatory, where none can
amend? And so let this be spoken in answer to all other like passages.

This is the question whereupon him self does in some sort make me an honorable
amends. For in our conference having often said and stiff and sto^tlie
affirmed that Jesus Christ had not satisfied, but for so much as we were not
able to satisfy; for now he denies it and so seems as if he would entreat
Jesus Christ more favorably; wherein in sundry sorts he wrongeth himself: for
first he shows to those that have been his assistants and are not altogether
forget full, that corrupt meaning is with him turned to a habitude; and even
grown into a complexion. Then disadvowing this principle he contradicts the
auctor of the fire of Helie, who mainetaineth it and himself also: for in an
other place he speaks the same thing almost in the same terms. The fire of
Helie page 69. says thus. This which he adds is a slander for we say not
so. Bellarm. de Purgat. lib. 1. cap. 10. page 78.
If Jesus Christ has satisfied for all the faults and punishments, [so as for
our parts there is no more to do] why then after the offense rem^^ted do we
endure so much evil? And this he speaks from Bellarmine. Si Christus
satisfy it pro omni ^ulpa, cur post remissam culpam tam multa mala patimur?
The Friar also says, That for that part for the which we can satisfy the
divine Justice, our Lord has not otherwise satisfied but in applied to us his
merits, by the which our satisfactions do supply that temporal pain: but he
gives us power to satisfy: and to give a man power to bear the deserved
punishment, and to make the satisfaction to be of force, implies not to
satisfy or to be punished for him. But the Friars memory fails him: much
more his respect to the word of God, in that he endeavors to frame us new
articles of faith, yea which is more, even in that that is of greatest
importance, and is as it were the soul and principal part of Religion,
without any auctority of the holy scriptures: saying that Jesus Christ did not
otherwise satisfy for temporal punishment, that is Purgatory, but by applying
to us his merits, whereby we do satisfy.

Thus much for the agreement of Purgatory and man's satisfactions with the
merits of Jesus Christ: from which argument before I depart I cannot forbear
but must of necessity propounde one excellent note that Cardinal Bellarmine
sets down in his book De poenitentia where he labors to show that the
sins committed before baptism are redeemed by the blood of Jesus Christ
without our satisfactions: Bellarm. de poenitent. lib 4. cap. 10.
but the sins after baptism are redeemed by our own satisfactions. He
says, that S. John the Evangelist instructing a young man, who after baptism
had committed many Ryots, he exhorted him to fasting and to prayer, as says
Eusebius. And hereupon the Cardinal sets down this note. Eusebius. Hist.
Eccl. l. 3. c. 17
Johannes non id precepit quod luther anisolent, vt Christi sanguine peccata
sua purgata esse certo crederet, sed preces and Ieiunia indixit: that is, S.
John commanded him not that which the Lutherans do use to command: that is,
that he should certainly believe that his sins were purged by the blood of
Jesus Christ: but he enjoined him to fasting and prayer. In this regard then
are we called Lutherans and Heretics. Thus also shall the Apostle himself
be found a Lutheran and worthy the Inquisitio^, because he says, 1. Ioh. 1.7.
The blood of Jesus Christ purges us from all sins: for he writ to the
faithful and to the baptized, and to those whom he calls his children. These
our Masters matters thus discovered, and themselves convict of profaning the
merits of Jesus Christ: to be reve^ged they use this recrimination. The Friar
says that We do so assure the souls in this blood, Page 91. A slander,
that the only remembrance of baptism once received, is a remedy against all
sin, without need of any other matter. A slander forged in the shop of the
father of Lies* as is also the same which the fire of Helie charge us
withal: namely that It is enough that Jesus Christ suffered, 62. A slander.
and so for our parts we need do nothing: and hereupon they heap up many
passages and proofs for the necessity of penance and good works: but all in
vain, considering we believe nothing of that they accuse us of, but do
affirm that the only way to life is to obey the commandments of God: It is
necessary that we hear his word, and obey him: that we repent us of our sins
and convert unto God: That we subdue the flesh, and quench the heat of the
concupiscence thereof: that we suffer with Jesus Christ and for Jesus Christ, to
the end we may be glorified with Jesus Christ. For albeit our pains and good
works be no sufficient price to purchase salvation, yet are they necessary
for the attaining thereto. In that we extol the excellency of the
satisfaction of Jesus Christ, we do it not to make us negligent, in good
works: but to invite and stir us up to love God and to acknowledge his
graces: God is not good to us to the end we should be wicked to him. His
benefits are to us as bonds. Jesus Christ is unto us not only matter to hope
well, but also a rule to live well. If he have bought us, it is to the end we
should be his, and how his by serving the devil? The pascall Lamb must be all
eaten, for Jesus Christ cannot be divided: we cannot participate in the fruit
of his death if we be not made conformable to his resurrection by newness of
life: neither can we enjoy his promises unless we keep his commandments.
And there fore says David, Psalm. 130.
There is forgiveness with thee that thou may be feared. There by showing us
that the mercy of God toward us must be by us accompanied with his fear.
According to this Franciscans doctrine David should have said There is no full
forgiveness with thee that thou may be feared. He the^ that of Gods mercy
shall make an exemption from well doing, or shall put of his amendme^t from day
today, thinking that it is not yet time to become an honest man, will find
himself deceaved: for repentance is a gift of God which he gives not to
scorners: And ordinarily such as seek to reserve to God the last part of their
days and as it were the lees and dreggs of their lives are surprised by death
before they attain thereto: as being a matter just and equal that they should
have no portion in God, who did so unequally divide with him.

In the mean time to hear these men dispute of the necessity of good works,
you would think them to be saints or petty Gods, and our Church to be a
harbor to all wickedness: and a school of excess: as if sin were a matter
lawful among us. Indeed to our great grief we confess that we have but over
many bad examples among us. We could earnestly wish that as the high Priest
disrobed himself at the entering into the holy place; so that every of us could
put of his old sins and rellicks of wickedness at the entry into the Church
of God: but the perversitie of this age together with the contagion and haunt
that we hold with such as be yet out of the Church do corrupt the manners of
many: yet dare I say thus much, that among us you shall find more examples of
charity, of sobriety, and of diligent reading the word of God then among our
adversaries: that the pillars of the Church of Rome are more polluted then the
pauement of ours: that our spend thrifts are more tolerable then the sobriety
of those that reprove us: that our vices are eve^ virtues in regard of the
riotous excess of the Roman Prelates. The murderers of Kings were not of our
flock. Vices and sins against nature have no place among us. Trading and
Pride have in the Court of Rome put of the habit of vices and are now accounted
for honest carriage, activitie and ordinary occupation ietting up and down in
the cloak of of discretion and wisdom. Bern. ser. 33 super Cant. Ministri
Christi sunt and serviunt Antichristo. Inde is que vides quotidie Meretricius
nitor etc intestina and insanab. est plaga Ecclesiae.
Hereof read the complaints of Petrarch in his Epistles and sonnets. The
Epigrams of Zanazarus: the complaints of St. Bernard, who terms the train
of the Court of Rome, the train of the whore of Babylon and of Antichrist. And
after all this must these people with a Romish Catholic zeal, come and preach
to us the necessity of good works and complain that we open ^he gate to all
vice, Faelicia saecula quaevos ^oribus opponunt, habeas iam Roma pu^orem.

But what if we shall prove that the ^octrine of the Church of Rome is a
^octrine of Licentiousness, and open^th unto men a large gate to escape at.
^ow much people feeling the approach ^f the Iubile do embolde^ themselves under
the assurance of plenary pardon? that a gate of lice^tiousnes do they open ^o
the rich, who assure the^selus that by ^iving to the Church after their deaths
^hey may have masses enough song for them and so abridge the pains of
Pur^atory? And does not the custom of ^uying other men's prayers make a man
^egligent in praying for himself? Yea and which is more, by enioining the sin
^er for his penance to fast and pray do ^hey not make that a punishment which
^ught to be a consolation? Also when ^hey make but seven mortal sins,
cal^ing the rest venial and easy sins, such as may be blotted out with an Aue
o^ a little holy water, do they not entertain the sinner in wickedness: and sow
cushions under his elbowes to lul him the faster a sleep in his vice? Or
terrifying the consciences with the fear o^ Purgatory do they not thereby
corrupt piety under the color of establishing it? Making it not a filial and
voluntary obedience, but a servile fear? Led o^ not for the love of God but
for fear o^ punishment: not for hate to the sin, bu^ for terror of the torment.
Romans 12.
The Apostl^ exhorts us by the mercies of God to consecrate and offer our
selves to God yet not for fear of his justice. Propou^^ to the sinner the love
and excellenci^ of the son of God; showing him that i^ was our sin that
crucified him: that o^^ offenses are the very nails that pie^ced him; what is
there of greater for^^ to plant in his heart both a love of Jesus Christ, and a
hatred of sin, which wa^ the cause of the torments of the son o^ God?
Especially when he shall conside^ that by this death himself shall obtain ^ife,
that from a bondsman of Satan, he is bought to be the son of God: also that
in believing in him he shall not perish, but have life everlasting. Shall he not
feel himself moved to love God and in acknowledgement of so great a grace to
consecrate himself to God, and after the rule of his word to ^spire to the
reward that God has pitched him at the end of his course? these men therefore
by their traficke do but subvert religion, and in the fire of Purgatory, in
liew of true piety, forge an ^dea and fantastical form of the fear of God.

15 The same fire blasteth and aba^eth the mercy of God, as not pardo^ing us at
the full; since our selves must ^n a fire bear part of the punishment.
Wherefore shall we limit the mercies of God in matters wherein he will be
pleased and glorified by doing us good?

16 The justice of God is likewise ^iolated therein, in that they make it to
exact two payments for one debt. The first which it received of Jesus Christ,
and was sufficient for all the punishments due to our sins: what interest
therefore have these people, that they are so willing to enter into this fire
a^^ the charge of the glory of God, who^ could be content freely to pardon th^^
through Jesus Christ?

17 Again, every payment and satisfaction that is acceptable to Go^ must be
voluntary, and not forced, otherwise he accepts it not: But the pain of
Purgatory [say our people] (...) unto those, that have not sufficient^
satisfied in this life, inevitable: and whether they will or no, they must of
nec^^sitie pass that way. Then is it not a pa^ment acceptable with God. And
albe^^ these men say that the poor souls d^ patiently bear those pains, yet
c^^ we hardly believe but that they had other presently be in Paradise, then to
^bide a thousand or two thousand yea^^ broiling in a fire.

18 Hereof arises another reason, namely that those souls do not satisfy
God: but that God rather satisfies him self in punishing them against their
wills.

19 By the same doctrine also the consciences are in perpetual torment through
the apprehension of this fire: for what would not we give to avoid a fire of an
hour long? how much more if it should last a month? Yet what were this in
regard of many hundreds and thousands of years: and that in a fire as hot as
the fire of of hell, says our friar? Ioh. 14.27.
where is that peace promised by Jesus Christ? or how in our death shall we
have these effects of the spirit of God dwelling in the hearts of the
faithful, namely joy and peace as says Saint Paul. Galat. 5.22.

My adversaries do contradict themselves in their answers, which indeed are no
answers but recriminations. Page 106. A slander
The friar says that we do preach liberty of conscience, without apprehension
of the judgments of God, which is false and slanderous. We preach neither
liberty nor licentiousness, but peace of conscience to such as repent and
believe in Jesus Christ: but to the impenitent we denounce the judgments of
God. Thus this friar accuses us of flattering and lulling men's consciences
asleep: But the fire of Helie contrariwise accuses us of holding them in
torment, because we account all sins, both mortal and venial, equal.
Whereto I answer that albeit we should hold those which they term venial
equal with the mortal, yet in as much as we teach, that both mortal and
venial are forgiven by Jesus Christ, A slander
we do no whit astonish the consciences. But in truth it is a slander of our
adversaries. We acknowledge the inequality of sins. In some, God is more
offended and grieved then in other some: yea even among the sins that they
call mortal, some are more heinous then other some. To overskip a leaf or two
at mattins, or under color of shrift to talk of love are smaller sins the^ to
slay his own king. Sacrilege is more heinous then simple theft: Incest then
whoredom: only we smile at their folly in distinguishing sins into venial and
mortal, because this word venial signifies pardonable. And we know that the
sins which they call mortal, as murder and whoredom do grow pardonable in
such as do convert and truly repent, as in David who was defiled in both these
sins. But in the impenitent these sins are indeed mortal and punished with
eternal death. And so through Impenite^cy that sin which is venial and
pardonable in one, is mortal in another. The parts therefore of this
distinction do iustle and encroch each upon other: besides I will say thus
much more, that it is rashness in our adversaries to define that there be but
seven mortal sins: and that all other sins be pardonable: for it is the
office of the judge, not of the offender to determine what pain each sin
deserves, for in the sight of God we be all guilty.

20 Purgatory likewise brings with it many inconveniences: for in that it
teaches that the fasts, offerings, and alms deeds of the living do serve to
bring souls out of Purgatory, the same makes many to be more negligent, and
to rely upon their friends that surviue. Daily examples we have many of people
that buy Masses, and hire men to pray for their souls, whiles in the mean
time they take license to practice all excess, dissolution and rapine. All
Doctor Du Valles answer still rests in recriminations. Page 75. The auctor of
the fire of Helie denies that Jesus Christ has fully satisfied.
He says that we are they that make men careless, in that we teach that Jesus
Christ has fully satisfied, and that on our behalf there is nothing to
satisfy. Hereto I have before fully answered and at large. Yea I do protest
that we hold no such belief. He farther says that the prayers made for such
as are in Purgatory make not men more careless, then the same which in this
world one makes for another: whereto we say that it is true, that the prayers
of the living, one for another make the sinner to be more negligent, when these
prayers are taken for payments, redemptions, and satisfactions. Hereupon the
Auctor of the fire of Helie to shadow his purposes, in liew of speaking of
fasts and offerings, speaks only of prayers, which peradventure he would have
been ashamed to reckon among the redemptions and payments for other men's
offenses and sins.

21 By this gate also came in the traffic, and the exchange was opened in the
Church. The rich do build obits and anniversaries for their souls: for them
are the private Masses song: the poor must be content with the general
prayers, wherein the rich also have their shares. All the Churches shall ring
with peales, prayers and diriges after the decease of a man that has been
extraordinary liberal and bountiful to the Clergy: but for one that has
given nothing ye shall never hear so much as one Mass: neither will the orders
of begging Friars press to a poor man's house. By these means have the church
of Rome heaped together so much goods that one only hospital (entitled of the
Spirit in Rome) may in rents dispende four thousand crowns a day. His
holiness keys are of gold: a metal that opens both heaven and Purgatory:
for this good prelate and his factors and followers are better studied in the
golden number, then in the dominicall letter, which is the holy scripture.
Should a poor beggarly soul participate in those graces which his holiness
has reserved for the greatest Lords? It were a goodly sight to see some porter
or pointmaker or some such base fellow solicit in the Court of Rome for to
purchase bulls of delivery of the soul of some poor kinsman of his out of
Purgatory, and indeed the book of rates in the Popes chancery has sundry
clauses of this nature: Sed hoc ta^tum pro qualificatis, Printed at Paris by
Toussain Denis in S. James street at at the sign of the Cross. 1520. with
privilege of the court.
and istae gratiae non conceduntur pauperibus. By this reckoning Jesus Christ
was deceived when he said Blessed are the poor considering that the rich have
such goodly privileges and by the^ do so soon enter into Paradise. This
traficke also does appear in this, that the Church of Ro^edoth hold that
children dying soon after Baptism do go straight into Paradise, which
notwithstanding, the Priests do not forbear to take money for their Masses for
such children: also in that the Clergy pay least for the souls of their
friends, there by acknowleging the slightnes of their merchandise. Page 76.
The Doctor Du Vall confesses there is abuse: so daintyly does he speak of so
horrible and public abomination. The Friar knowing that this traficke, the
more it is stirred the more it stincketh, says nothing at all of it.

23 The same error makes God more favorable to those that shall live in the
day of Judgment then to others, for they shall not come in Purgatory at all:
to the Carmelite Friars then to the Franciscans: for they pretend a privilege
to abide there but unto the next saturday after their deaths: to those that
have means and friends to procure them Masses, then to others. For why should
a poor man give six pence to be named in the memento of the Mass, if he did
not hope of some good that he should have lost if he had not been therein
named? Yet had he not bin named if he had given nothing: for with the^ No penny
no paternoster. Let us also consider that by this doctrine such as die
immediately after they have ended their Iubile go straight to Paradise and are
exempt from Purgatory: but that man, peradventute not so vicious, neither
oppressed with so many sins, yet dies before the year of Iubile, goes into
Purgatory and is deprived of so great a benefit: likewise that he that is well
horsed and dwells not far from the place where these pardons are to be had,
does much more easily obtain pardon for his sins then he who dwelling three
hundred leagues of, has never a horse. The same abuse also tyeth the mercy of
God to one certain place, as that al sins are remitted at the Fra^ciscans,
but not at the Carmelites, or Iacobins. Yea so far does some pardon stretch
that he that in the Covent of the Franciscans shall say the prayers in the
bull ordained, obtains plenary pardon for all his sins: but though he say
ten times more prayers in an other couvent, yea and that with much greater
devotio^, yet shall he (all this notwithstanding) obtain thereby no remission of
sins. For like a fool he went to seek remission of his sins in places
that the Pope had not appointed.

Hereupon the auctor of the fire of Helie takes us at the first rebound and
says, You say not well, for mercy has regard to the offense and eternal
punishment, but justice has regard only to the temporal. Well spoken of this
doctor. What? has not Gods justice regard likewise to eternal pain? Page 71.
And does he not also show his mercy in remitting the temporal? The same
doctor does also wonder that in all these things I can find any
inconveniencie. And wills us here upon in profound silence to adore the
impenetrable Judgments of the Lord. But I do more marvel that with me he
does not marvel that at our hands he should require adoration with silence:
where he should rather come with lamentation and sorrow, yea even with
execration. What? shall God entreat the wicked with more gentleness? And shall
my horse or my money exe^pt me out of a burning fire of many hundred years
continuance? Shall God show favor to a soul, not after the steadfast faith or
burning charity thereof, but according to the time when it shall depart,
whether in the year 1599 or in the year 1601? And yet we must with silence
adore that which cries for vengeance before God, and which testifies how
far covetise has enchroched upon religion? Shall Romish pollutions be given
us for rellickes? blasphemies for oracles, and the same compared with the
mysteries of God election and healthsome vocation? Indeed if of two wicked ones
God will pardon the worst, no man can accuse him, yet surely he will not pardon
any such before he give him repentance and grace to become an honest man: But
to say that of two elect and children of God he will in a tedious and hot
horrible fire roast him that has been the most virtuous, and bring the worst
strait into Paradise because he had money or a horse to carry him to the
Iubile, or for that he died soon after the Iubile, it is as much as to spit
God in the face, and to paint out profane toies in his temple for God will
judge every man according to his works: not according to his wealth, his
horse, or his aboade.

Now, as one absurdity once set down, a thousand will ensue: so the whole
discourse of the doctor upon this place is even a web of blasphemies. For soon
after he says, The mercy of God is in all places to be found, Page 76.
but not alike: for in the Temple God gives better ear to our prayers then
elsewhere. Is it for that God is nearer to the Temple: or because in those
places God has his hearing better? Mat. 6.6.
How then does Jesus Christ counsel us to enter into our closets to pray, if
God does better hear our prayers in a Temple then in a closet? Yet put the
case it were so, still the inconvenience that we have propounded does remain.
For why should God pardon sins in one Temple rather then in another? When
throughout the world there was but one Temple where the true God was served, it
was no marvail that the faithful were bound to go to it: but in the Gospel
where do we find that ever God subjected us to go to seek remission of
sins in a Temple far of, and to leave those Churches that be at hand? Who
sees not that this is done for gain? because the sum dispearsed in many
places, and passing through many hands, would insensibly vanish and wear away,
and so could not serve those purposes which the Pope and his Prelates had before
set down. In all the premises it appears that the Doctor does but mock, and
believes nothing of all that he has said: neither is this the first tract
wherein he discovers himself: Page 60.
for whereas Beda, Dionise the Charterhouse Monk, Bellarmine and with them
Cayer and the fire of Helie do place a floured and sweet field at the end of
Purgatory. I asked him how these flowers grew under earth without sun or
rain, this venerable Doctor answered that in me it was mere doltishnesse to
ask such a question: for, says he, these flowers are not really under the
earth, but the Lord by an Analogy instructs us of things in the other world.
Let us bear with his rusticall Philosophy: this license to call Purgatory the
other world; which nevertheless he places under earth, sometime in Bathes:
sometime in Rivers: sometime in Ice, and sometime under the leaves of trees.
But who can endure that the dreams of a few Monks should be termed the word
of God? Either that when they tell us these fables it is God that instructs
us? All this the friar passes over without any answer, but merely excuses
himself, saying, that he will speak more thereof the next Lent in his lenten
sermons. The like answer he might have made to the whole book, and never
troubled the Jesuits of Tournon for their help.

23 Finally, admit Purgatory should breed none of these mischiefs, yet surely
it cannot bring any good: for what benefit can grow of being tormented in the
fire? To say, it purges our sins that matter is already answered, and
convicted not only of impiety but of contradiction and impossibility: for
themselves do also say that the sins be not purged, but the pains: And S.
John tells us that the blood of Jesus Christ does purge us from all sin.
And the punishment or torment for a sin is no purgation from that sin:
nether were the whip or gibbet ever termed a purgation.

24 To the same purpose. It seems that all punishment is either for
satisfaction and his revenge that punishes or causes to be punished: Aul.
Gel. lib. 6. cap. 14. Clem. Alexand. lib. 4. stromatum versus finem
or else for the correction and punishment of him that is punished: either else
for an example to others: But the fire of Purgatory yeldeth no satisfaction or
revenge to God: considering that he has already taken satisfaction and
revenge for our sins in the death of his son Jesus Christ? neither for the
amendment or correction of the souls that are in this fire, for they are
already just and without sin: neither for any example to the living: for no
man sees any thing: neither to make us the more honest, by holding us in
fear: for God desires not to be served for fear of punishment, but in love
and voluntary obedience: besides if it were a matter that stood upon fear,
hell were sufficient to terrify us.

Page 80. Page 109.
The fire of Helie and the friar impute to me that I should say that I believe
not Purgatory because I see nothing: but where said I so? but I say I believe
none, because I so find it in the word of God: and therefore the Monks
amplifications to this purpose are cold and grounded upon a slander. Bellarmine
and with him my adversaries do imagine that they have found a commodity in
Purgatory: for [say they] It is profitable to the glory of God that the
secundary causes should work: that is to say, that our souls should
contribute so^ewhat toward the purchasing of salvation: God then belike
honors his creatures in making them to be tormented: since that to be
tormented is the way to contribute toward the purchase of salvation. They
then that do longest abide in torments do co^tribute most: and God shows
more favor to them then to those whom he tormenteth less, or whom by the
Popes Indulgences he fetches soonest out of the fire. As for this principle,
it is a point in natural Philosophy, but not always true in Divinity; wherein
it were better to receive supernatural graces from God then to put forth our
forces and so to work naturally. Howbeit let us accept of this principle,
least our people should overlabour them selves to defend it: for as well it
makes against Purgatory: It were better [say they] that the souls should do:
but in Purgatory they suffer: they are miserably roasted certain hundreds of
years: Admit that to roast were to do, yet were it better to do in heaven and
so to have the action of Angels: As for the Contribution that we shall bring to
the attaining of salvation, the holy scripture prescribes us other means to
attain thereto. It wills us to believe in Jesus Christ: to carry his Cross:
leaving al worldly cogitations, to tend to the aim of supernatural vocation,
and to make perfect our salvation with trembling and with fear. Thus is there
a means to labor for our salvation, yet such as our labor shall not be
accounted a payment or satisfaction, neither our souls be roasted in a fire.

Now albeit I have spoken and inculcated these things the more expressly to cut
of sclanders, and that I have said and do yet say that the faithful ought to
co^tribute and to bring whatsoever their care and labor toward the work of
their salvation, yet is bad dealing so turned into nature with our friar minor
that he dare sclander and impute to me a contrary speech to that which indeed
I spoke. That for our parts we ought to co^tribute nothing, Slander.
and that the holy scripture teaches us to go to Jesus Christ, etc. And
withal he exclaimeth saying, Why do you thus abuse the people? A prodigious
sha^elesnes. Thus is the cause of Jesus Christ handled as some oration over a
box of triakle, or a game at gobelets.

The auctor of the fire of Helie does likewise wrest my words: He makes as he
were abashed [saith he] because we say that the souls in Purgatory do
satisfy by their pains: because they do not, but only they suffer. But I
never spoke it.

25 Upon this fire already quenched, we poor, as a surplussage, this aspersion
taken out of a book indeed Apocriphal, yet such a one as our adversaries do
hold for Canonical. Thus speaks the book of Wisdom cap. 3. v. 1. of the
souls of the faithful. The souls of the righteous are in the hands of God,
and no torment shall touch them: then shall they not go into Purgatory. He
adds, At their departure they enter into peace: then not into a fire.

CAP. 4. Against man's satisfactions in general.
PVrgatory thus razed, which is the forest and most scortching satisfaction,
let us go forward and search it even to the root, reversing in general all
the satisfactory pains that our adversaries do impose upon the sinner. And now
that we are come to the word satisfy you are to understand that there are two
sorts of satisfying: Exposition of the word Satisfy.
the one for debt, the other for offense. Debt we satisfy by paying: offense
by confessing the fault and craving pardon: this in true speech is to make
satisfaction. Now in this question we deal with the means how to satisfy God
for our offenses: which is, not by paying or redemption, but by humbling of our
selves, with amendment and asking forgiveness. As therefore we do admit this
kind of satisfaction; which signifies the confessing of our faults and
humiliation before God, so on the other side we reject such satisfactions as
are holden for redemptions and payments to Gods justice. Page 80.


The Monk bears himself after his ordinary manner in a ridiculous insolent
ignorance. These be his words. In this place I conjure the reader without
passion to consider the grossnesse of the minister: for having brought him into
such terms that he could not unsay himself, he bethought him of the most
notable cavil in the world: namely, that where the ancients do use this word
Satisfy, they use it in this signification to have faulted, as who would say
Nolim factum: A slander.
yea he has presumed to set this down in writing, these last words he adds
that himself might give vent to the slander: for Throughout my writing is
there any mention that Satisfy should signify to have done amiss? But I say
that to Satisfy signifies to confess to have don amiss and to ask
forgiveness. Now let us see whether his coniuratio^s without holy water be not
frivolous, and how he discovers my grossness. What Calepine, says he, did
ever deliver such an interpretation? He underhand confesses that he is well
seen in Calepine: but we need no Calepine in words that little boys are
skillful enough in. Suetonius in Julius Caesar, cap. 73. Valeriu^ Catullum, a
quo sibi vesiculis de Mamurra perpetua stigmata imposita non dissimulaverat,
satisfacientem eadem die admisit cenae. And in Tiberius, cap. 27. Consularem
satisfacientem sibi, ac per genua orare conantem, ita suffugit vt caderet
supinus. And in Claudius, cap. 38. Ostiensibus graviter correptis, cuque cum
invidia, vt in ordinem se coactum scriberet, repent tantu^ non satisfacientis
modo veniam dedit. And read Torrentius upon the first passage, where he says.
Solebant qui verbis aliquem laeserant, Ni^ in te scripsi Bithinice credere non
vis: and iurare iube* Malo satisfacere.
iurare nolle se ea dicta esse, atque ita satisfacere. This is the sense of the
word in Martial. lib. 12. Epigram. 79. In Plautus Amphitruo Alemena iniuried
by her husband, says thus, Aut satisfaciat mihi atque adiuret insuper se nolle
esse dicta quae in me insontem protulit. Tertullian in his book de poenitentia
says, Satisfactio confessione disponitur. Confession
And that which he calls satisfaction in the same book he calls
Exomologesis; Gehennam exomologesis extinguit. But peradventure our Monk will
think these latin auctors to be tainted with heresy, or to be incompetent
judges and of small skill in his latin tongue which now we must learn out of
Scot, Holcot, Bricot, or the rule of S. Frances where it is elegantly said,
Fratres possunt vestimenta repeciare de saccis and alijs pecijs cum
benedictione Dei. It is now therefore mere simplicity in our younger scholars
to offer to speak latin in the presence of the Franciscans: for that which is
said in the tenth chapter of the same rule That friars unlearned, must not care
to learn: is spoken for that time when ignorance was meritory. But because
these witnesses be but of small auctority, let us here Bellarmine in his fourth
book De poenitentia cap. 16. upon these words of S. Ambrose: Ambros. Nomine
satisfactionis excusationem sieve defensionem apertissime designavit.
lachrimas Petri lego, satisfactionem non lego, says that S. Ambrose by this
word satisfaction means excuse or defense: no payment or redemption then, as
our friar would have it, who to mainetaine his speech produces such passages
of the Scripture as make against him, wherein to satisfy signifies not to pay
or redeem. He says, that Pilat meaning to satisfy the Jews delivred Barrabas
and S. Paul defending himself before his Judge Felix says that he will
satisfy for himself, in Greek it is (...) I defend my self. Yet in all this
have we no speech of payment or redemption. What is now become of our
Coniurations, and the demonstrations of my grossness? Learn brother Minor and
thank me.

Now let us wrestle with these humane satisfactions taken for redemptions and
payments to the Justice of God for the payments due to our sins: hereto serves
all that has been spoken against the satisfaction of Purgatory and for the
sufficiency of the only satisfaction of Jesus Christ: now let us thereto
adioine the reasons.

2 By the holy scripture we learn that Salvation is a gift, yea a free gift:
Romans 6.23. Luke 12.32. Ephesians. 2.8. Page 102.
we do not then buy it, neither do we pay any price for it in part or in
whole. Du Val answers not: The friar says that the two first passages are
false, and that there is not such a word, let us therefore look upon the
passages at large. In the 6. to the Romans v. 23. S Paul says, the gift of God
is eternal life through Jesus Christ. In the 12. of S. Luke, v. 32. Jesus
Christ says. Fear not little flock, for it is your fathers pleasure to give
you the kingdom. Am I a falsifier, or he a slanderer? You see it is: his hope
was that the reader would never have searched out the places: for their
prohibition that none shall read the holy scripture emboldeneth him in this
liberty: yet does it not serve his turn: for having so falsely accused me of
falsehood in the next line himself commits a notable falsehood, corrupting
this excellent passage of S. Paul to the Ephesians. cap. 2. For by grace are ye
saved through faith, and that not of your selves, It is the gift of God. Then
NOT BY WORKS, least any man should boast him self: But this Friar to break
the force of this passage, and to enta^gle it, makes the Apostle to speak
thus. The salvation wrought by our Lord, proceeded of the only grace of God,
and of his mercy and love. He perverteth the sense and takes away the words of
most importance, that it is not by works that we are saved, but by the gift
of God. Where is truth and plain dealing become? Where is conscience? O God
how long shall thy advesaries tread thy holy word under foot?

3 Against this so wholesome doctrine, which appeaseth our consciences and
gives to God the glory of our redemption our adversaries do object the
Counsel that Daniell gave to Nabuchadnezar. Redeem thy sins by alms. 1. But
this redemption was not toward God, but toward men whom he had robbed, and
was therefore to recompense them by liberality. 2. Again here the question
concerns satisfactory pains, in which rank Alms has no place, albeit it
is a work commanded to all, and an exercise pleasing to the faithful. Never
will any man exercise charity as he ought, so long as he think it a
punishment or satisfactorie pain. Is that help where one member helps
another, as the hand does the foot, a pain? We all are members of one self
body says Saint Paul. 3. Which is more, our adversaries will have our
satisfactions to serve to redeem from the justice of God not the sins, but
the punishment for the sins. Now here it is, Redeem thy sins. Here
therefore have we need of a gloss after the Romish manner, that Sin here
signifies the punishment of sin as who should call Theft the whip. Murder,
the gallows. For every absurdity is good with these men, provided that ye
believe a Purgatory. 4. The principal point is this, that this king
Nabuchadnezar being a heathen needed no satisfactions, which they say, serve
but to redeem temporal pains, and that after baptism, or after Circumcision,
but this king was never circumcised, and being out of the Church, needed not
these means to avoid eternal pain. The friar produces yet other passages,
as in the Proverbs, cap. 5. v. 29. Alms purges sin: but this place is false
and the whole verse left out of the Hebrew: yea even the Roman translation it
has no speech of Alms. 2. To what purpose speak we of purgation where the
question is of redemption. 3. Finally we confess that amendment of life
purges sin, so far forth as by this means the sinner becomes clean, as
cleanlynes purges the body, succeeding after foulness, as they say in the
schools non efficienter, but formaliter. But where the question concerns
such a purging of sins as by virtue thereof we shall appear clean and
innocent in the day of judgment there the holy Scripture says that The blood
of Jesus Christ purges us from all our sins. 1. Ioh. 1.7.
He also cites the 16. of the Proverbs. Alms redeemeth iniquity: whereto I
have already answered upon the place of Daniel: besides the passage is falsely
set down, for according to the Hebrew it is thus, There shall be propitiation
for iniquity by gratuitie and truth. Yea even in the Roman translation there
is no speech of alms. That which he adds out of the 12. of Toby, That alms
makes us to find eternal life, is not in the greek originals: neither is it
to the purpose: for we do confess that alms and all other good works are the
way to salvation, and consequently to make us find salvation: but here our
question concerns the price of our redemption from the pain due to our
sins: which also may be an answer to that which he has alleged out of the
4 of Tobie: Alms delivers from death, and suffers us not to come into
darkness. For so it is in the greek. Surely no man does deny but that good
works be the way to salvation, and in applying our selves to them, we withdraw
our selves from perdition. Let us go on, and since the old serpent, though cut
asunder knitteth himself again, let us not cease mangling of him with the
word of God and sword of the Gospel.

4 God commanding us to pray that he would forgive our offenses, as we forgive
them that have offended us, does thereby show that we must look for like
forgiveness from him as we do give to our neighbors, that is, without
revenging or exacting satisfactory pains.

5 But what if I should prove to these advocats of man's satisfactions, that man
by satisfactory pains cannot satisfy God for pains due to the least sin?
For if slandering of our neighbor or calling of our brother fool, be in the
Church of Rome venial sins, and yet S. Paul. says in the first to the
Corinthians the 6. that backbiters shall not inherit the kingdom of God: and
Jesus Christ says that he that calls his brother fool, is punishable in hell
fire, when shall we have satisfied for the pain due to such a sin, which many
times eve^ the best do incur? Or when shall we have endured pains
satisfactory for hell fire, or for a sin that deserves deprivation from
eternal life? To the end also that our adversaries should not make cursing a
mortal sin by their glosses and consequences, their own decree distinct.
25. makes a long list of venial sins, among which cursing has his place
saying: Si cum omni facilitate vel temeritate maledicimus, quoniam scriptu^
est, nec Maledici possidebunt regnum Dei. By the judgment therefore of their
own Canons cursing is of two natures: The one that it is venial: the other,
that it is excluded out of the kingdom of heaven, and consequently deserves
eternal death. Whereas our friar does conjecture and grants that the calling
of a man's brother fool, draws with it the sin of wrath consummate, he
shall hold us excused although we admit not his conjectures for rules: besides I
will return him to Cayer, Caier. p. 20
who will have Gehenna here to signify Purgatory, not hell, as the Friar would
have it.

Ioh. 8.11.
6 Our Savior Christ said to the woman taken in adultery, Go and sin no
more. Dismissing her he did not impose upon her any satisfactory pains, no
more then S. Paul when he pardoned the incestuous man. That which particularly
makes against Purgatory is this: That if neither Jesus Christ, not S. Paul
imposed any satisfactory pains upon the sinners, even when in appearance they
might have been profitable for amendment, how much less will God impose
satisfactory pains up on his children in a burning fire, when there is no
farther place for ame^dme^t? Here does our Monk come forth with such an answer
as hitteth himself and his fellows on the knuckles, saying. The grief may ly
so heavy on the sinner, that it may satisfy for the whole obligation of the
pain. For besides that he does thus conjecture of the womans cogitation, he
also evide^tly accuses the Popes and Priests of manifest injustice and
rashness, in that they impose satisfactory pains upon the sinner that
protests sorrow and repentance. For what know they whether the sinner be so
oppressed with sorrow as that heaviness may serve for satisfaction? Or what
know they whether she has sufficiently satisfied, since they wot not how
grievous her sorrow was?

7 Again who has give^ the Pope or his Priests auctority to impose corporal
or pecuniary punishments upon sinners? Let them show us any commandment from
God or his Apostles. The Primitive Church indeed reproved sin, by excluding men
for a time from the communion of the faithful, and that after the example of S.
Paul, who for a time cut of the incestuous person from the Church of Corinth:
but after absolution to impose Corporal or pecuniary punishment: or to enioine
men to pilgrimages or scourgings we find no example. The old Testament does
indeed furnish us of some examples of such as have fasted and wept for their
sins, because weeping proceeds from sorrow and fasting is a help to devotion
and freedom of mind: but as I said, after forgiveness to impose punishments
upon the sinner whereby to redeem the pains of Purgatory and so to satisfy
the Justice of God I find no example.

8 And it seems that these our masters have compounded with God, and that
they are assured that God will be content with any sum of money, or any
pilgrimage, and so will be appeased toward the sinner. But if this seem hard to
be believed, how can men's consciences be at quiet? How shall they be assured
that God will be content with such satisfactions imposed by the Priest?
Whosoever undertakes to pay his debts must first inquire what he owes, as
also consider of the value of coins that he gives to his creditor: but the
sinner knows not how much temporal pain he owes to God, neither the value
of every of his satisfactions. How shall he then know when he has sufficiently
satisfied? What knows he how near every fast brings him to Paradise? every
pilgrimage: every scourging: and indeed we see how these consciences whom they
have captivated are in perpetual disquiet, and so have recourse to the
satisfactions of others: to buy Masses for after their decease, and to depart
hence in marveilous fear and anguish. A just punishment for choosing for the
foundation of their hope other props and stays then the only satisfaction of
Jesus Christ.

9 Again in as much as some condemned to corporal pennances, can exchange them
into pecuniary, how shall we be assured that God, in liew of corporal
punishments, will be content with money. Penitent. To. Tit. 9. c. 29.
The Roman penitential tells us that A rich man may redeem one fasting day
for two shillings, but an extreme poor man must give at the lest four pence.
Thus may the poor man when he has paid his money fast for more.

10 If in absolution they pretend to loosen the sinner, how do they in
loosing his bonds entangle him farther, and by pardoning him, condemn him to
greater pains?

11 I would farther demand whether the satisfactions that they impose be good
works or no. If they be not good why do they enioine the^? If they be good
why does the Pope release them, and by his Indulgences dispense with them? Can
we without horror read that which Bellarmine has written in his book De
poenitentia. Bellar. de Penit l. 4. c. 13. Indulg. faciunt vt pro iis poenis
quae nobis per Indul condonantur non teneamur praecepto illo de faci endis
dignis paenitentiae fructibus. Bellar. de paenit. l. 1. c. 4.
That Indulgences do dispense with obedience to this commandment in the third
of Matthew. Bring forth fruits worthy repentance: for since they will needs
have it so that this saying, Bring forth fruits worthy repentance, to signify
to chastise a man's own self, and the Pope does dispense with this
chastisement, it plainly appears that the Pope dispenses with Gods
Commandments.

12 And here I beseech you consideratly to way how far superstition has
encroached upon the auctority of the Gospel. Our enemies do make a ceremony and
a sacrament of Penance, which indeed is of it self a virtue. Being demanded
whether Penance were a sacrament before the coming of Christ, they say no:
Cons. Trid. Sess. 4. c. 1.
Even the prelates, assembled in the Council of Trent do acknowledge that the
penna^ce which Jesus Christ before his passion and resurrection and John the
Baptist preached, was no sacrament: for they will have it to be made a sacrament
since the resolution of Jesus Christ, and that without any other proof, then
their own authority: for they will be believed upon their own words. But we
have one passage in the Revelation, written since the ascension of Jesus Christ
that expounds unto us the signification of Agere poenitentiam, to do
penance, or to repent. In the second of the Revelation God complaining of the
Ephesians, who were fallen from their first love, commands them to Repent and
to do their first works, thereby showing that Repentance consists in amendment
of life. At the least thus much we have gathered of their own confessions,
that the penance or repentance practiced in the Church of Rome is not the stone
that Jesus Christ and S. John Baptist did preach: for they indeed, when sinners
came to them, imposed no satisfactory pains. Note likewise that the same which
when Jesus Christ preached it, was a virtue is now become a Ceremony; and from
a changing of the soul is come to be an Exercise of the body: and now set down
for the redemption of our souls, as before we heard in Bellarmine, that men
are Redeemers of themselves. Neither may we omit that this their sacrament of
penance serves but for the sins committed after Baptism: whereof it follows
that if an old Pagan should convert to the faith he should be received without
penance or repentance.

13 There is yet more. For as it were Ridiculous to sow a piece of friese upon
a satin garment, so is it a matter that can hardly agree to join our
satisfactions, our fasts, our scourgings, a hair cloth, a cord, a friars
coule, a roasting of souls with the passion of the only son of God, to make up
the total of the redemption of our souls and of satisfaction unto God.

14 In this matter our adversaries do still retire to their withered and old
beaten principle: that is, that God after he has pardoned the sin requires
satisfaction to his justice by the punishment of the sin. We have already
showed that to forgive a sin, and the^ to exact satisfactorie punishment for
the same are things incompatible. That God never required any such satisfaction
of the thief, neither Jesus Christ of the woman taken in adultery: neither S.
Paul of the Incestuous person after he had forgiven him. That Jesus Christ
has satisfied for all the pains due to our sins. That the justice of God
accepts of no payment but such as shall be most exact and to the proof of his
righteousness. But there is no satisfaction sufficient to undergo that examen,
but only the satisfaction of the son of God by Jeremy called The eternal, our
righteousness. And therefore that our travailes and afflictions are profitable
to exercise, prove, amend, and humble us, but not to redeem us, or to satisfy
to Gods Justice, which is already fully satisfied by Jesus Christ, and which
requires not two paymentes for one debt.

15 Yea which is more, themselves do acknowledge that in baptism God forgiveth
both the fault and the punishment and requires not of the sinner any
satisfactory pain: Bellar. de paenit. l. 4. c. 10.
It is not therefore repugnant to the justice of God to forgive without our
satisfactions.

16 But in as much as this is one of the greatest abuses in popery That God by
Baptism does pardon both the fault and the punishment of sins committed
before Baptism: yet that we must satisfy and pay the Justice of God for the
sins committed after Baptism, It is necessary we should a little crush out
this impostume. 1. Conc. Trid. Sess. 24. c. 8.
First who authorized them in matter of remission of sins and redemption to
invent new articles of faith with out warrant of the holy scriptures? If a
heathen murderer or incestuous parson should hypocritically cause himself to
be baptized, shall this baptism blot out all his former sins, or shall his
hypocrisy prove fruitful before God? Tertul. de paenit. cap. 6.
Tertullian indeed in his book de Poenitentia says that it cannot be: yet
does Spain furnish us of many examples thereof, where the Mahumetan Marannes
do cause themselves dissemblingly to be baptized. 2. Again let us represent to
our selves a heathen man, a murderer, a sacrilegious person, etc. One who
sins not of ignorance, or of fear, but of mere malice, and at the last in
his old age repents, frames himself to Christianity and receives baptism:
which as our adversaries do say is of such virtue, that God does simply and
without satisfaction forgive him all his sins committed before his baptism:
but for the sins that he shall afterward commit, albeit small and of in firmity
yet God requires that he bear the punishment as well here as in Purgatory.
Does it stand with the justice of God simply and without satisfaction to
pardon the greater sins committed of malice at one time: and at another time
to impose fiery torments for much lesser offenses committed ignorantly or of
infirmity? Moreover, when by baptism we have put on Christ, as says S.
Paul. Galat. 3.27. have we put him on only for that time, or for all the
days of our life? Or is the benefit of Christ's death of less effect after
baptism then in baptism? 4. Wherein I pray you consists the virtue of
baptism but in this, that thereby we are made partakers in the merits of the
death of Jesus Christ, being by baptism buried with him in his death? Also if
in the holy supper, Romans 6.
and in the gospel apprehended by faith we be also partakers, why should we
not feel the like effects? 5. I would ask again what the reason is that since
in their Masses is applied (as they say) the benefit of Jesus Christ, why their
Mass should be of less efficacy then baptism? or wherefore it cannot exempt
a sinner from satisfactory punishment? Also for what cause, they so highly
extolling the excellency of their Mass, do in this point so clip her wings and
trusse her up so short? Yea and why they stand in need of so many Masses to
fetch one soul out of Purgatoty, considering that if their Masses do apply to
that soul the benefit of Jesus Christ they cannot apply it otherwise then it
is, namely having an infinite power and consequently able to deliver that soul
at the first dash. But the mischief is that if this should be performed by
one Mass only, then should the profits of the Clergy be mightily diminished.
Now albeit all these things be as clear as the day, yet are we in small hope
that those men can take any relish in them that are fed and maintained by the
abasement of the benefit of the death of Jesus Christ. For the documents of
Gods word can never pierce into the understanding until the true zeal of God
be first entered into the heart. Avarice, Idleness, and Incredulity do harden
the minds, exasperate the stomachs, and as rude, barbarous, and ungrateful
porters hinder the entry and from our minds stop up all the ways to the
doctrine of the gospel. The fruits of the Sacrament of penance.
Now if there be any thing that vpholdeth the tyranny, that fostereth the
vices, or that nourishes the idleness of the Clergy, it is this new
sacrament of penance, which is as it were the Palladium of Babylon. First by
their auricular confession (a member of this sacrament) they search into the
secrets of houses, and make themselves terrible to those who after they have
revealed to them their filthiness and faults cannot behold them without fear
and shame. By this they purchase great liberty with Princes and Princesses,
whose most secret affairs they do by shrift discover. By this such as make
any proiects of Civil wars do find the particular affections of the people
and understand of whom and how many they may make account, having the Priests
trusty to them and feed for that purpose. By this do the Priests make way to
their covetous desires: for having by shrift discovered such as be of a good
temper, they can soon know where to find but easy resistance. In this shrift
they also sport themselves with strange questions, for they never ask the
sinner whether he love God withal his heart: whether he prefers the glory
of God before worldly goods: whether he loves his neighbor as himself:
whether he trusts in the promises of the Gospel and has a steadfast faith in
Christ: whether he bestows his time in the daily reading and meditating upon
Gods word, which are the first points of piety: but he asks him whether he
does observe Lent: whether he had the company of his wife in the week before
Easter called the great week: whether he has paid his duties to the Church:
whether he has been troubled with any foul cogitations of licentious
handlings, voluntary or not voluntary pollutions, etc. Look upon their mirror
of confessions: the comment of Anthony Augustine Bishop of Aragon upon the
poenitentiall Canons of the Roman Poenitential: and namely Benedictus Sum of
sins, which is in every shop. Also the 19. book of Burchard Bishop of Worms,
which entreats of confessions, and then call me a deceauer, a beast, the
spirit of Satan, as the Friar does, if you find not all kind of abominatio^s
curiously set forthwith the vices against nature, the secrets of religious
houses, and the subtle sleights of Nuns exactly taught under the shadow of
Reprehension. These matters will I leave to such as are past sha^e: yet can I
not forbear but must of necessity touch some of the most tolerable, that by
them you may judge of the rest. The Roman Penitential demands of the sinner
in his shrift, Fecisti fornicationem cum equa, velasina? If he have so done,
the penance is to fast with bread and water forty days. In Burchard the
Priest says to the woman Fe^isti quod quaedam Multeres facere solent?
Prosternunt se in faciem and discoopertis natibus iubent vt super nudas nates
confiotatur panis, and eo decocto tradunt maritis ad comedendum; hoc ideo
faciunt vt plus in amorem earum exardescantisi fecisti duos annos per legitimas
ferias poeniteas. Again he asks Fecisti quod Mulieres quaedam facere solent?
Tollunt piscem vivum and eum ponunt in etc. Again, Fecisti quod quaedam
Mulieres facere solent? vt cum filiolo tuo parcuulo fornicationem faceres? Let
the reader seek the rest if he list, but by my counsel he shall never go
about it: for if it be lawful to speak of that a man has not seen, I think
the discipline of Tiberius in his secrets of Capreae, the Sibariticall books
and Aretins tables for the which he was surnamed. Il Divino Aretino, are in
regard of these, but modesty and simplicity. But this mischief is not so done:
for after shrift they give absolution and do pardon after the manner of Judges
that pronounce sentence of remission: whereas they ought to pronounce pardon, as
herehaughts of the grace of God, preaching to the penitent sinner that God is
reconciled unto him through the blood of Jesus Christ: and as ministers loosen
the sinner: not as Judges, but as preachers of the grace of God, which is
purchased for them through the death of Jesus Christ: for it lies not in me
to pardon offenses committed against another: but the party against whom they
be committed is to pardon them: much less then can man that is vile and
perverse, pardon sins committed against God, who is righteousness it self. If
a sinner do earnestly and heartily repent, God will forgive him although the
Priest will not: but if he do not repent, God will not forgive him, albeit the
Pope himself should. Now do I leave it to your consideration in what manner
the Pope can give pardons by his letters patents, sealed in form of Decrees,
considering that himself knows not whether his pardons be acceptable with
God and may stand the sinner in any stead: neither is he sure that the sinner
have true repentance, without the which there is no forgiveness, says God in
Esaias cap. 43. for it is God only that can pardon sin, as says St. Cyprian.
Cyprian. ser. de lapsis. Nemo se fallat: Nemo decipiat: solus Dominus miserere
potest. Veniam peccatis soius potestille larg^ riqu^ p^ecata nostra portavit
etc. nec remittere Indulgentia sua potest quod in Dom^num delicto graviori
commissu^ est.
Let no man deceive himself, there is but one God only that can forgive sin.
And Tertullian in his book of shamefastness, cap. 21. says, Who forgiveth
sin but God only?

This absolution thus give^, the priest imposes upon him satisfactory pains
either corporal or pecuniary: herein lies the tyranny: for by this means,
albeit under other titles, they have encroached a civil dominion over al
people: yea even so far forth as to cut the^ off from some sorts of meats: to
enioine them abstinence from the duties of marriage: to condemn them to
pilgrimages: to girt a cord upon their bare flesh: to give some portion of money
to some Church, or religious house. The^ having thus imposed corporal pains,
either upon favor or upon covetize, they convert the same into pecuniary: or
peradventure they will license them to hire some other to perform their
penance, or to be scourged for them: as at Rome in the passion week, which
they call the great week, you may see whole troops of hired persons, who
masked and disguised with their faces hidden do publicly mangle their backs
with scourgings, See Apuleius in his eight book of the golden ass where he
painteth the Priests of Diana the Syrien scourging themselus in the same manner.
with a mercenary cruelty and ambitious penance. But wherefore is not all this
performed in secret? Why still upon one day? Is sorrow and repentance ordered
after the course of the sun? Or is penitent affliction become an ordinary
ceremony? What example in all antiquity of so cruel a jest? And indeed they
are people but of mean calling. If there be any of account undoubtedly they be
frenchmen: for the Italians will never do it without great pay: and as men
better advised, do mock our simplicity. They may peradventure find some lazy
company who can be content that his back should feed his belly like a porter,
but in other manner. Rhenanus a very learned man in his annotations upon
Tertullian ad Martyrs says that this manner of scourging is taken from the
Lacedaemonians who customably used such whippings.

Now as the Pope is the greatest, so does he smite the greatest blows: for by
these means the has encroached a dominion over Emperors, kings and Princes,
whom either in person, or by their Ambassadors he forces to take the stripes
and beatings in his own presence. Baldus. l 5. De. 2. Match. l. 1. Hist. of
Florence. Polid. Virg. Mat. Paris. Io. Mayor. l. 4 c. 3.
Omitting all latter examples let us speak of matters more ancient. Pope
Alexander the third enjoined Henry the second king of England in person to go
into Palestine, and withal to give to his subjects leave to make their appeals
to Rome. Pope Innocent the fourth imposed upon John king of the same land a
yearly satisfaction of a thousand marks: and this tribute continued in force
in England until the Reformation. Pope Alexander the third made the Emperor
Frederick Barbarossa to humble himself at his feet: yea he set his foot upon
his throat: nay more: They have proceeded so far as to deprive kings and
Emperors of their estates: which is a grievous satisfaction, and never
followed by any Indulgence. The more we read, the more abomination. And it
falls out with us in these matters as with such as begin to count the stars
in the beginning of the evening: but after by the multitude that shoot forth
are utterly confounded. Alas! how has Satan won so much from the Church of
God? Had we ever greater cause with the Prophet Jeremy to wish that our eyes
were fountains to bewail these wounds of the church? so great abuse? so heavy
a yoke laid upon men's consciences? O eternal son of God take in hand thine
own cause: deliver so many captived souls: and let the light of thy gospel
shine among us. But least we should stray too far, let us return to our
principal matter, and boldly enter the Bishop of Romes quarters. We purpose to
lay open his merchandise and usurpations in matter of Indulgences where by he
draws the souls out of Purgatory. And as these people have at the confines
of Purgatory placed a field all diapred with flowers, as a dependence or
withdrawing chamber thereof so shall the chapter ensuing be a dependence of the
question of Purgatory. For this fiery prison was purposedly built, that the
Pope might be the Iaylor thereof: and from thence fetch forth the souls by
the hooks of his bulls and Indulgences, which be of more charge to the living
then profit to the dead. Purgatory is the matter whereof, and Indulgences the
cause for which we do dispute.

CAP. 5. Against Indulgences and the fetching of souls out of Purgatory.
THE Pope at the petition of the kindred and friends of the deceased [if they
be of ability and calling] does many times grant Indulgences wherewith to fetch
the soul of the deceased out of Purgatory: yea which is more, he co^ferreth
such grace to certain aulters that whosoever shall procure a stinted number of
Masses to be said thereon, he shall fetch one soul out of Purgatory: himself
has also some times granted to such as been crossed to the holy la^d,
privilege to fetch one or more souls out of Purgatory at their choice. A
grace and favor which is also conferred to the fraternity of the Cord.

Cardinal Caietan in the beginning of the book of Indulgences acknowledges
that in all antiquity there was nothing to be found concerning Indulge^ces.
Durand, Antoninus and Roffensis do say that Indulgences were not known in the
days of S. Jerome, and S. Augustine, or during the first five hundred years:
Bell. de Indul. l. 2. c. 17 Biel. in. Can. Missae lect. 57. tit. 1.7.
as Bellarmine also confesses. Gabriell Byel upon the Canon of the Mass says
as much: and making a question wherefore now a days they should be so
frequent; he answers himself with the words of Jesus Christ: It is not for
you to know the times and seasons which the Lord has put in his own power.
With this bridle he restrains our curiosity. Besides my adversaries who will
use the fathers in despite of their hearts, have not yet produced the example
of any one fetched out of Purgatory under the primitive Church: As for that
which the fire of Helie tells of Silvester and Gregory is false, and has not
the testimony of any ancient author.

Now to furnish so notable a liberality, the Pope has laid a bottomless
foundation, which he names The treasury of the Church: and it is composed of
the superabundance of the merits and sufferings both of Jesus Christ and of his
Saints. This he distributeth among the souls of the dead, to help them out of
Purgatory, and it is manifestly laid down in the Extravagants of Clement the
sixth which begins Vnigenitus. Ad cuius the sauri cumuli^e Beatae Dei
Genetricis and omnia electorum merita adminiculu^ prestare noscuntur.
Wherein it is said that the merits of the mother of God and of all the elect
do help the merit of Jesus Christ: and serve to make up the heap of this
treasure.

To enter therefore into the examination of this new Gospel. 1. We ask who
gave the Pope power to fetch souls out of Purgatory? 2. Let them produce
either commandment or example of any Indulgences given to the dead by the
Apostles or by their first successors. 3. If it be a new benevolence, how
comes it that God is now become more liberal then heretofore? 4. If all the
power that the Pope assumeth to himself were first promised in these words, I
will give thee the kayes, etc. when was it actually conferred? It was [say
they] when Jesus Christ said to Peter, Feed my Lambs. Admit it was spoken to
the Pope, and that S. Peter only had the charge of feeding our Lords Lambs:
must we therefore reckon the dead among these Lambs? Yea, will some say,
because the Pope thereupon sheareth them: be it so: but is the pulling of the^
out of the fire, feeding? 5. Moreover in that the Pope armeth his power with
the words of Jesus Christ, Whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed
in heaven? Does he not condemn him self, in that he goes beyond his
commission? for Christ says All that thou shall loose on earth: he says not,
All that thou shall loose under earth. It must be said that for the avoiding
of this objection, Pope Gregory, and after him our doctors have placed
Purgatory in bathes, in ice, and in the wind. 6. Out of this grows an other
absurdity and this it is, The Pope loses and delivers the souls out of
prison, which nevertheless he could not bind: how comes it that the Popes
power is is half decayed toward these souls, and that he reserved himself no
more power but to loosen? The answer is evident: for by binding of souls and
imposing punishment upon them he could get nothing: for no man will give money
to be tormented, but to be released from torment: he therefore reserved to
himself so much as is profitable. 7. Again if he be able to draw out any
souls out of this fire, how chances it that he draws out no more? What
humanity is this in him that is termed The holy father, and is the head of the
Church, to let his children lie frying in the horrors of a flaming fire, and
yet is able to help them out? And he who says that if by his bad courses he
should carry innumerable troops of souls into hell with him, Can. si Papa
Did. 40.
yet let no man presume to reprove him: for he that is judge of all is not to
be judged of any. Why does he not fetch the^ out of Purgatory by troops? 8.
Neither are we here to allege that the Popes give their pardons to the dead
in form of suffrages and intercession but not of Jurisdiction and absolute
power for in this question that is of no import, because it is holden that in
whatsoever form the Pope gives these pardons, they be always of force, and
the souls be released by the^ out of this fire: there fore our continual
demand is this, why he offers not his Indulgences or suffrages for more
folks and for longer time then he does? 9. At the least this remains: since
the Pope pretends Iuridical power over the living, and gives them pardons
with Jurisdiction and power to absolve from all temporal pain, why does he
not take order that every man may before his death receive full Indulgence? And
that every the souls of the faithful may carry along with it three or four
hundred thousand years of pardon for her better indemnitie? why should the
French or Spanish be in less favor with God then the enhabitants of Rome? of
who^ none go to Purgatory unless he be a very dolt, considering that even at
his door he has so many Churches where in in one day he may purchase two or
three hundred thousand years of pardon? 10. Again, how is it that the Pope
delivers the souls that are not of his charge from so long and grievous a
torment, and yet cannot deliver the living that are (as he says) of his charge
from the smallest pains, diseases and afflictions? Hereto the Friar in liew of
answer says J am a fool, and so overslippeth them with many frivolous demands
to no purpose. 11. Whereof also comes it that our Doctors memories are so
short as to forget that before, having said that of necessity the souls that
have not sufficiently satisfied in this life must be purged in Purgatory so to
satisfy the Justice of God, they can now be content to permit the Pope by his
pardons to fetch the souls out of this fire, and thereby hinder both the
purging of the souls and the satisfaction of Gods justice? But if they reply
that Gods justice is satisfied because the Pope presents for them the
overplus of the merits of Jesus Christ and his Saints, they run themselves on
the pikes: for why did he not present to God the same merits before the souls
departed out of their bodies, so to exempt the^ wholly out of Purgatory? Or
rather why should we go into Purgatory at all, since Jesus Christ sitting at
the right hand of God, and offering to his father his benefit for our
redemption, performs all that the Pope pretends to do?

Against so many such pregnant objections our Doctors do shroud themselves
under a miserable distinction, as under a wet net against the rain. They say
that the Pope delivers no souls out of Purgatory by any Iuridicall
authority, but by suffrages: And the Doctor Du Val expounds this dictinction
by a similitude: he says, If the french King were desirous to redeem out of
Spain a prisoner there detained for debts, he would not offer to fetch him
thence by authority or jurisdiction, but by suffrage and entreatie, offering
his debt to the king of Spain. Here he compares our King to the Pope, the
king of Spain to God, and Spain it self to Purgatory: but that we must say
is in regard of the Inquisition. Now albeit this distinction has no more force
against such maine objections then their holy water against the devils yet must
I open the falsehood and absurdity thereof. Page 41. 48. 75.
For first herevpo^ these Doctors do contradict themselves for Cayer fights
against his companions and maintains that the Pope gives his Indulgences to
the dead by power of absolution: and that he pardons their sins as a king:
and indeed in the tax of the Popes Chancery we find these words. For an
excommunicate person for whom his parents do entreat the letters of
absolution, Pro mortuo excommunicato pro quo supplica^t co^sanguinei litera
absolut. vaenit Duc. 1 Caro. 9. disp 7. c 34. and disp. 6. c. 41. Bielin Can.
Missae, lec. 57
the charge is one duckat and nine Carolus. Also Michael Medina a Doctor of
note among our adversaries, does hold that the souls in Purgatory are under
the Popes jurisdiction. See also the words of Bonaventure alleged by Gabriel
Biel. If any man maintains that the Vicar of Jesus Christ has power of
Jurisdiction over the dead, we must not greatly contradict him. Thus our
people are of contrary minds: but reason and practice are on Cayers side.
Reason, because these words, to pardon inform of suffrage or intercession,
bear no sense, besides that there is contradiction in them: for how is it
possible to pardon a man by entreating for him? to pardon by form of petition
or intercession? he that has interceded to the king for a criminal person,
will never say that he pardoned him: The same does common practice convince:
for what means a pardon given to the soul by bulls and patents sealed in
form of a decree? Do we not also read in Mayor and Wesselus, Mayor in 4.
Did. 20. quaest. 2. Clemens, 6. In Bulla super Iubileo quod revocavit ad
Annos, 50.
that Clement the sixth commanded the Angels to transport into Paradise the
souls of those that died in the voyage to the holy land? Nay more. Toward the
end of the Council of Lateran holden under Innocent the 3 ye shall find a Bull
wherein he promises to all chose that shall go in the expedition to the holy
land, not only plenary remission of all their sins, but also an augmentation
and higher degree of glory in the kingdom of heaven: but to such as would not
go themselves, but send others at their charges, he grants only remission of
sins: yea he proceeds so far, as against the gainesayers of the journey
he denounces that they shall answer him in the day of judgment: as if the
Pope should then be judge. In all this it appears that the Pope pretends to
have power over the dead. But what should we seek for more proof, when Pope
Sixtus the fourth, in a Bull set down in the first book of sacred ceremonies,
in the chapter of the benediction of the sword, vanteth that he has all power
in heaven and in earth? The same degree is also attributed to Pope Leo the
tenth in the last council of Lateran. Sess. 9. and ^0. Now if he assumeth to
himself all power in heaven, where they have nothing to do with him: how much
rather over the souls in Purgatory, which stand in need of his Indulgences?
Finally, if the Pope gives his pardon by suffrage, and in form of petition or
intercession, how can we be assured that God does hear him? wheris the
promise that in this case God will hear him? or how in granting pardons to the
dead [as when he granted to the souls of the Carmelites this privilege, that
they should not stay in Purgatory any longer then until the next Saturday after
their decease] is he assured that God will like of this liberality? Thus much
for this woeful distinction. Now let us continue the course of our objections.
12 Since the Pope affirms that he has in the treasury of the Church the
works and superabundant satisfactions of the Saints and Monkish Friars that
have done and suffered more then they should: who was his Collector to gather
up these works and sufferings? Or who delivered them into the Popes custody?
Either when? Also who gave him the charge to distribute the^? Who taught him to
be a better husband then the high Priest in the old Testament, who [if we
believe these men] suffered the superaboundant satisfactions of Noah, Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, Hilarious in Mat. 27. Alienis operibus and meritis.
Joseph, etc. to be lost? And since the satisfaction of Jesus Christ was more
then sufficient to redeem us, what need we add the satisfactions of Friars,
Monks and Martyrs? Considering that if these Friars, Monks and Martyrs be in
Paradise, they have already received infinitely more glory then ever they could
deserve or merit: and so they are superaboundantly satisfied, and therefore can
have nothing left for the redemption of others.

Hereto the Friar makes no answer, only he says, I rave and am at the last
cast: let us therefore have some hallowed grains, or one of the parts of S.
Frances breeches, that thereby we may die in the state of grace. He also says
that the blood of Jesus Christ is sufficient to redeem a thousand worlds: the
the surplussage therefore of our Saviors merits, is not to be lost, but rather
to be laid up in the treasury of the church. Page 108.
Whereof it follows that the blood of Jesus Christ and his merits, shared
out into a thousand parts, the Pope has remaining in his treasury nine
hundred, ninety and nine, besides the merits of Saints and Martyrs which he
also says are our redeemers: but he took his mark amiss and deceives
himself in thinking that part of the merits of Jesus Christ may serve for one
soul and part for an other, and that so we may find a remainder of the merits
of Jesus Christ: for as the light of the sun shines wholly here and wholly
in an other place, and that there is light enough thereof for ten times so many
as be there where it shines: also that the voice of a man that speaks, does
sound wholly in the ears of every one that hears him: even so every
faithful man is partaker in the whole merits of Jesus Christ: And were there
four faithful, yet should every of the faithful stand in need of the whole
death of Jesus Christ, and of every part that he suffered: as also if there
were ten times as many faithful, yet should every of them find in the death
of Jesus Christ enough for his redemption. Also in as much as we have merited
an infinite and eternal pain, it was requisite we should have a redemption of
an infinite price. In the sufferings of Jesus Christ there was neither want nor
superfluity: and therefore herein the Pope does as much as if he should husband
and lay up the overplus of the sun shine or of the voice. All the rest of my
objections the Friar slippeth behind the ha^gings.

But then comes the Doctor Du Val to the rescue and lays open his
subtleties: yet does he not tell us who raked up these superaboundant
sufferings of the Saints and Monks: who committed them into the Popes
custody: who autorised them to distribute the^ for the redemption of pains
due to others: when he received this authority: or when he began this
distribution. All this he passes over quietly, as indeed it were over much to
enquire of. Mark therefore what he says. Page 80.
The Saints are rewarded in Paradise for their works, so far forth as they
were meritory: but so far forth as they were satisfactorie, if any Saint has
sinned less and satisfied more, this surplussage of satisfaction is not to be
left: for the divine mercy and equity lays it up in the treasury of
Indulgences. Therefore it serves for others merits. He speaks as if he
should say unto me: See here is a house that cost two thousand crowns: also a
prisoner that lies in the Iayle for two thousand crowns: hereupon comes a
man with two thousand crowns, which he will make serve both to buy the house,
and to redeem the prisoner: but you will say: that cannot be: but the fire of
Helie says yes: and he finds this expedient for it: The cross side of the
money shall buy the house, and the pyle side shall redeem the prisoner: so
shall it be acquisitory on the one side, and satisfactory on the other. Even so
[saith the Doctor] the merits of Saints do purchase heaven, [and that is to
buy it at an easy rate] and yet the same merits do stand for the payment and
redemption of others. Thus does he dally with God and man, yet brings no
proof out of the word of God.

The same Doctor produces a passage out of the sixth of Job, to prove that
Saints have suffered more then they needed to satisfy to God for their sins.
Oh that my sins and my miseries were laid together in one balance, False,
my miseries would exceed my sins. By his favor this passage is false and
in the Hebrew Originals it is not so, no neither in the Roman translation. In
the Hebrew thus it is. Oh that that which provokes me were well wayed, and
that my breaking were laid together in the balance, for it would be more
heavy then the sand of the sea. The same doctor defends this treasure
composed of the satisfactions both of Jesus Christ and of the Saints. Page 55.
The Church [saith he] is a kingdom, then has it a treasure. Jesus Christ in
the 12 of Luke shall answer for me lay up your treasure in heaven: the^ not in
the Popes coffers: neither is there in that place, neither in any other, any
speech of Indulgences. Again if this Imaginary treasure belongs to the
Church, why do they sell to her that which is her own? Why do they exhort the
people to purchase the Indulgences, if they belong to them? for no man buyeth
that that is his own. This doctor adds. The Church is a spouse, why then do
they take from her that right that beseems her, which is this treasure
composed of the merits and satisfactions of her master, with the satisfactions
of the Saints? We answer that the church is indeed a spouse: but the spouse of
Jesus Christ, not of Saints: for they also are the spouse: It belongs to God
the father of this spouse and to Jesus Christ her spouse to endow her, and he
has endowed her with celestial and eternal goods: but admit the Saints were
bound to endowe the Church: must the Pope nevertheless be treasurer of this
endowment? it would be dangerous: for in his Cannons he terms himself The
spouse of the Church. And Bellarmin, Bell. l. 1. de Pontif. Romans cap. 9.
who writ at Rome with the Popes approbation, says that The Pope is the spouse
of the Church: etiam Christo secluso: even Jesus Christ being excluded and set
aside.

The same fire of Helie says that in the old law they had a treasury in the
Temple, where upon he infers that the Church of Rome must also have her
treasury composed of the satisfactions of Jesus Christ and his Saints. A
gallant shift. But the Pope who has six and twenty thousand crowns a day to
spend; has he not a treasury of like substance as the temple of Solomon?
Howbeit upon Apostolical simplicity on the day of his coronation he scatters
among the people batocchi and bagatini half pence and farthings: Lib. Cerem.
sacrarum c. Of the Popes Coronation.
saying with S. Peter Act. 3.6 Silver and gold I have none, but such as I have
I give thee. Let us consider likewise what enters into this spiritual
treasury. Stripes, pilgrimages, wallets, labors and travailes, with fasts
superaboundant. What dreams? What husbandry? And all this to be mixed with the
merits of Jesus Christ: so well must they be accompanied. What shall we say of
the prodigious terms of their pardons, amounting even to millions of years?
Yea sometimes with manifest scorn, adding to the years so many months and so
many days, as if this people did very exactly calculat with God? And that this
scorn may the better appear, they grant pardons that give plenary remission
and six thousand years to boot. See the very words of the book of Roman
Indulgences printed at Rome by Julius Accoltus, anno, 1570. In the month of
February upon Quinquagesima Sunday ye shall have the stations at S. Peter's,
with plenary Indulgence and 28 thousand years of Indulgence, and as many
Quarentines. Leo Bishop of Rome, Leo Papa ep. 89.
who lived four hundred years after Christ, had never learned this
Arithmeticke: for he says, Page 52. 53.
let no man prescribe any measure, or define any time to the mercy of God. To
this question the Friar is still, for (says he) he must preach upon it this
next lent. The fire of Helie having acknowledged some abuse in the excessive
length of these Indulgences (as indeed it is but a new invention, and a
testimony how far man's spirit will proceed, when God has given it over) yet
soon after he undertakes their defense: and to that end he alleges the
sin of Adam, the punishment whereof has continued above five thousand
years. This he says to confound himself. For if the Pope neither could,
neither yet can remit to any this punishment, which has continued above five
thousand years, no nor exempt him any one day therefro, how dare he presume
without any authority of the Scriptures to exempt souls for some thousands of
years from a torment infinitely more grievous? Besides we have already showed
that the calamity and miseries of the world are not punishments for Adams
sin, but punishments for that the world ensues the sins of Adam. The same
do we say of the Amalekites destroyed four hundred years after their sins
committed in the wilderness: for albeit God did again call to mind the
offense before committed, yet was there no man rooted out that had not well
deserved it. But to what purpose is all this? What resemblance between the
delaying of a punishment four hundred years, and pardons for six hundred
thousand years?

That which he adds passes all absurdity. He says that the daughter of
the Canaanite was afflicted with a devil in her infancy for the sin of Cham
who died three thousand years before. He ought to have produced his author for
this so lame a fable. By the way let him learn that if Cham died about the
time of his brother Sem it was but eighteen hundred years or a little more,
between his death and the birth of this daughter of Canaan, and thus was he
wide twelve hundred years in his calculation. He farther proceeds and
says, That I mistake if I think that this great number of years should be
for Purgatory, for (says he) they are for the pennances enioined by the
Confessors or that should have been enioined, had they observed the severitie
of the ancient Cannons, etc. Wherein he counterfeiteth the ignorant: for he
knows well enough that in the Church of Rome they do hold that if any man in
his life time has not satisfied the penance enioined, he must afterward
finish this satisfaction in Purgatory: whereof it ensues that the Pope
releasing those pennances, does also exempt from Purgatory him who being by
death preverted, had no time to accomplish them. Moreover if a man should
gather together all the longest penances imposed by the ancient Canons, yet do
I think it impossible to draw them to amount to the sum of six hundred
thousand years, which is the pardon purchased at Rome in the Church of S.
Bibian upon Alhallon day. Surely this so long a term does show that this
pardon is not a release for pains enioined only in this life, but also for the
pains after this life. This does Bellarmine teach in his first book of
Indulgences, Cap. 9. parag. Existit.

Finally he alleges Scripture to prove these Indulgences granted to the
dead. In the 20. of S. John, Page 54.
Jesus Christ says to all his Disciples Whatsoever you shall lose upon earth
shall be losed in heaven. And then he leaves us to conclude that the Pope may
lose under the earth and fetch the souls out of Purgatory. And other as
welfavored. In the first to the Corinthians the third Chapter, Let a man so
think of us as of the ministers of Christ, and disposers of the secrets of
God. Then may the Pope give Indulgences to the dead, as who should say, Masses
for horses are wholesome: then is the Pope God upon earth. Ye subtle Doctors
that have passed by the examen of Logic tell me in kindness, in what figure
are these syllogismes? but they know well enough that these mysteries whereof
S. Paul speaks are the doctrine of the Gospel. He adds that S. Paul 2.
Cor. 2. Released that which he had enjoined to the Incestuous of Corinth. To
what purpose is all this for papal Indulgences and fetching of souls out of
Purgatory? 1. The incestuous lived, these in Purgatory are dead. 2. S. Paul
released that which himself had enioined [saith the doctor] but the Pope
fetching the souls out of Purgatory, released that which he had not enjoined.
3. S. Paul remitted a sin to one whose repentance he knew well. The Pope
gives Indulgences to such as he knows not: as when upon his coronation day
he distributeth pardons for some thousand years to the press of people that
is in S. Peter's street. Cerem. Sacr. lib. 1. Sect. 2. cap. 3.
4. S. Paul never prescribed any term of ten or twenty thousand years: only
after Excommunication he received the penitent sinner into the Church again.
5. S. Paul gave no Indulgences by bulls sealed in Autenticke manner: but to the
penitent sinner he preached remission of his sins through Jesus Christ. 6. S
Paul never added the clauses and cautions that the Pope does: namely that such
a pardon is given Manus porrigentibus adiutrices. To those that shall give and
contribute. ^. S. Paul never tied remission of sins ^o any certain day, to
any certain place, or to any certain year, as the Pope does to the five and
twentieth year, which he calls Iubile. As if God were more merciful in the
year 1600 then he was in the year 1509 8. S. Paul distributed no hallowed
grains, no hal^owed crosses or medalles, with a thousand such bables, as the
Pope does at this day, which wosoever wears or kisseth, he shall obtain
certain hundred years of pardon. 9. S. Paul never consecrated any Agnus Dei
that had virtue to purge sin, as the Pope does from seven years to seven
years. 10. S. Paul never privileged any parsons that they should not go into
Purgatory: or that they should come forth incontinently, as the Pope does to
the Carmelites and the fraternity of the Cord. 11. S. Paul receiving again
the incestuous that was cut of from the Church, never imposed any pains after
his reconciliation, but contented himself with that punishment that he had
undergone before his absolution. The Pope co^trarywise pardoning sins, imposes
pains and in one self action first loses and then binds again. 12. S.
Paul never reserved to himself only the authority to give Indulgences and
pardons, as knowing that Jesus Christ spoke to all the Apostles and pastors,
when he said Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven.
Mat. 18.18. Also whose sins you shall forgive they shall be forgiven. Ioh.
20.23. Therefore also when he forgave he craved no leave nor authority of Peter
or of any other who had the only managing of the treasure of the Church. 13.
Lastly, S. Paul distributed not to the sinner any of the superaboundant merits
or sufferings of the Saints for the redemption of his sin: for all his skill,
and all his hope is in Jesus Christ crucified: neither does he tell us of any
other redeemers. With what conscience then can they bring in the example of S.
Paul to establish their Indulgences and the fetching of souls out of
Purgatory? As for me who by these our Masters am provoked and challenged in
so many places: may not I now challenge them to show me in all these
oppositions that I have exhibited, any correspondence between S Paul and the
Pope? But they will not deal: this they will gently pass over, and in liew of
reasons lay up on me Invectiues and sla^ders enough. Cayer only has bethought
himself of a proof for the fetching of souls out of Purgatory: that is, that
under the law there was an altar of propitiation: as indeed the others are but
dunces to him.

Here we are to note wherein the principal abuse and heap of Impiety does
rest. That is that the Popes Indulgences have no community with the remission
of sins propounded in the Gospel. For the faithful pastors do preach to
the sinner, upon his repentance, remission of sins, and in virtue of their
ministry do pronounce forgiveness of the same, inviting the sinner to
participate in this grace, as herehaughts of the pardon purchased by Jesus
Christ. But the Pope gives his pardons kinglike, in letters patents sealed
with lead in form of decrees, and those letters dispatched in chancery. And
the office of this chamber is farmed out at a very high rate: Poterit pontifex
Indulgentias concedere etia^si nondum sit sacris ordinibus insignitus Sess. 10.
Imperium sanctitatis vestrae, etc. Sess 9. R^gale Rom pont. genus Sess. 3. Papa
Sacerdos and Rex. Sess. 1. Princeps totius Orbis.
neither does the Pope give forth these pardons as he is Bishop, or a preacher
of the Gospel: for he not only preaches not nor instructs: but if a mere
lay man that never received holy orders be chosen Pope, he may confer
Indulgences, as we may see in the first book of sacred ceremonies, and in
Bellarmine, in his first book of Indulgences, cap. 11. Therefore likewise does
he wear three Crowns which he names his Tyare. Il regno: as also in the last
Council of Lateran he is named the king, Emperor and Prince of all the world.

Doctor Du Val goes farther then all this, and says that these be only
fleabitings, and that I trouble my self without any ground in meddling against
the Pope. Thus in liew of vnknitting the knot, he cutteth it asunder: and
holds the encroaching upon the Majesty of God; the establishing of a tyranny
in the Church: and the setting to sale the remission of sins as it were
merchandise, to be but small abuses and fleabitings. The Friar might have done
more wisely if he had imitated his companion: Indeed in his running away he
has followed him and answered nothing to the premises: yet he adds a
childish slander, saying: Du Moulin finds abuses in Indulgences because they
are given forth in writing, for he will have them promulgated verbally. Who did
ever hear such a folly? Or where spoke I such a word? Lift up your cowl
goodman and learn to read, but not to sla^der: his injuries bring me in mind
of Hecuba, who was said together with her estate, to have lost her humane
shape: and changed her speeches into howlings and barkings: for this
Observantine finding the overthrow of his cause cannot cease to bark.

Let us now come out of this matter, as out of a shop (for indeed it is all but
trash and traffic) and let us requite these our masters and Doctors in
questions, such as being handled in schools in Quodlibetary manner, may stand
the^ instead of Purgations. 1. I will ask first where and when the Pope first
gathered together the merits and superabundant satisfactions of Saints, and
Martyrs, and who gave him commission to gather together this treasure, or
commanded them to gather up these supererogatory satisfactions for the
redemption of the punishments due to other men's sins? 2. Secondly, who told
him that God would accept of the ierkes and lashes that a penitent gives
himself, or of the labors of S. Frances, or S. Dominicke, in payment or
satisfaction for others? Will a Judge set a prisoner at liberty because some
friend of his has scourged himself or fasted for him? 3. Whether the pardons
that the Pope gives, without enioining any penance be of any force? as also
those which he gives with condition to work some wickedness as in the years
1587 and 1588. when he gave seven years of pardon to every one that would
join with the holy Union: that is to say, that would rebel against their
king, yet he a Roman Catholic? 4. Again, In as much as these superabundant
satisfactions of Saints are gathered together into the Popes treasury (because
God will have nothing lost) how have the superabundant satisfactions of such
holy men as died under the old Testament, as Moses, Abraham, etc. been
husbanded? be those also in the Popes treasury? But where were they laid up
before the Pope had them? Did they lie lurking in some corner two or three
thousand years, until the Pope gathered them together and found means to
employ the^? It were not amiss also to enquire the reason why the world in the
year of Iubile makes such have to Rome, considering that at Rome they may at
all times obtain millions of years of Indulgences, and full remission of
sins and some six hundred thousand years of plenary pardon. Above all we
would gladly know when a man that needs ten thousand years of pardon does
purchase enough for fifty thousand years, what becomes of the forty
thousand years that remains: Cayer says that they return into the
treasury for the good of others: but because his companions do despise and
disgrace him, we would willingly be taught by some substantial Doctor, the
rather for that at Rome and in one self place a man may obtain, besides the
plenary pardon, certain thousands of years of surplussage: To what end may
that surplussage serve? will the Pope therewith pardon sins, and give
Indulgences by provision?

CAP. 6. That all the passages of holy Scripture by our adversaries quoted for
prayer for the dead and for Purgatory are either false or unprofitable.
IN all the Premises we may see that our enemies fight but faintly and that
they are armed but with strawes against the force of the truth: how much less
shall they be able to do any thing when they shall be quite stripped, and that
little armor that is left them, be clean taken away? This is it which in this
Chapter we will with Gods help perform.

My adversaries therefore whose desire of gain induces them to practice
Pyrotechny, do heap together stubble good store, that is to say, simple
proofs to kindle this fire of Purgatory. Of these proofs, some concern prayer
for the dead, and some Purgatory, some taken out of the old, some out of the
new Testament: we will then without dissimulation propound them all, and for my
part I will deal with the^ with as much equity and sincerity as they have
dealt with me with fraud and injustice, which consists in suppressing my best
objections and corrupting the rest.

Passages produced by these three Doctors to prove prayer for the dead.
All that my adversaries do allege concerning prayer for the dead is grounded
upon a false principle, namely, that who so prays for a dead body,
presupposes that there is a Purgatory: but in the last Chapter we will show
that the prayers for the dead, which some of the ancients did use, were even
against Purgatory. Here might we dispense for answering hereto, the rather for
that albeit they should obtain their desires, yet had they gained nothing
toward the establishment of their Purgatory. Howbeit we will do them thus much
more then right, that now receaving their principle we will lay open the
falsehood and impertinencie of their proofs thereupon. 1. Cayers passages p.
24. A falsehood
Cayer shall have the credit to march foremost, as the most skillful. His words
are these. It is said Numbers 16. v. 47. and. 48. that Aaron reconciled the
people both the quick and the dead. A passage false and by him invented: for as
well in the Hebrew, as in the translations, even in the Roman, it is thus,
Aaron standing upright between the dead and the living, besought God for the
people: and the plague ceased. 2. In the third book of Kings. cap. 8. v. 38.
There is a manner of prayer for the dead (says Cayer) in these words. Every
prayer and supplication made by any man for the wound of his heart in the
Church, it shall be acceptable to God. Also in the 33. verse it is said. If the
people fall before their enemies, in praying to God they shall be heard. Were
not this passage falsified, yet show me one word in it that imports praying
for the dead. 3. Again he says that in the 57. of Esaias the Prophet
complains that they did not pray for the dead. This also is false, neither is
there any such speech throughout all the Chapter. Look also what we have
already said in the third Chapter and third Argument 4. He goes on and says
that in the third Chapter of Baruch it is set down in express words: Hear o
Lord God the prayer of the dead Israelits, and of their children that have
sinned before thee. And soon after, Remember not the iniquity of our Fathers.
First, the book is Apocriphall: secondly, In these words of [Israell] are
comprised all the people of Israel, who in those days through the extremity
of their captivity and misery, were as if they lived not, as it appears in
the eleventh verse, where it is said, Israel is counted with them that go
down to the grave. Tearming those dead, after the ordinary phrase of the
Scripture, that are oppressed with affliction, and as it were within two inches
of death: As David in the 88. Psalm, albeit alive, counts himself among the
dead and those that go down to the pit: so also in the 18. Psalm, v. 5. and
6. and in the 116. Psalm, v. 3. he says that he is environed and surprised
with the snares of death and with the bonds of the sepulcher. Also in the 18.
Psalm v. 19. the faithful do desire of God that he would restore them to
life, as if they had been dead, and already brought to the grave. Thirdly, to
what purpose does he come in with a prayer of the dead, considering that our
question concerns only the prayer of the living for the dead. Fourthly, as
concerning these words Remember not the iniquity of our fathers, he prays
that the threats of the law, which denounce that God will visit the iniquity
of the Fathers upon the children be not executed upon them: he therefore
prays that the sins of the fathers be no cause to prolong their captivity,
as plainly appears in the eight verse. Cayer produces yet another passage
out of the second of the Machabes, but that you shall find among the passages of
the other two. 5. The Friar having discharged all his anger upon M. Calvin, and
charged that good man with infinite slanders, wresting the Interpretion of
sundry his passages, and falsifying others, even so far forth as to make him
say that the souls departed out of the bodies, do not enjoy the beatitude
before the resurrection, albeit that Calvin has beaten down this error in a
treatise which he wrote expressly upon that argument: Calvini Psichopannichia
he lastly in his 17. page, begins his proofs by the holy Scripture. 6. His
words are these. The holy Scripture which teaches us all that is necessary to
salvation does withal forbid us any thing that may be contrary thereto now let
any man show me so much as one place that forbids to pray for the dead. The
fire of Helie says the same: Page 8. 62.
only he denies that the Scripture contains all things necessary to
salvation: and therefore gives examples. The baptism of children: The
consubstantialitie of the father with the son: The Trinity of persons etc.
To all the which we have already answered in the second Chapter. It were good
these doctors could agree among themselves. In the mean time in answer to the
Friar Isay. It is a misshapen argument, and two of the propositions are false:
The first Proposition is this, The holy Scripture commanding that which is
necessary to salvation, does also forbid all that is contrary thereto. Which we
deny, because here the question is of an express prohibition. For the Friar
requires that we should show him such a one: but it is well know that God,
when he has commanded any thing, does not always in express words add the
prohibition of the contrary: he will be prayed unto: but where does he forbid
that we should not pray to him? It suffiseth that this prohibition follow the
commandment, albeit it be not expressed. The second prohibition is also false,
That prayer for the dead is not forbidden. For any addition to the commandment
of God is forbidden Deuteronomy. 4.2. prayer for the dead is an addition to the
commandment of God: it is therefore forbidden, because it is not commanded.
Again, Prayer that is not of faith, cannot be acceptable to God, James, 1.6
Hebrews, 11.6. Prayer for the dead is made without faith, for faith comes of
the word of God and is grounded thereupon, but throughout all the word of God
prayer for the dead is not spoken of: It cannot then be acceptable unto God.
Which is more, by the same argument we may prove al things: we may say that all
that is in Amadis or in the chronicle of S. Frances is true, because we find
not that it is there contradicted. And let this be spoken in answer to Doctor
Du Val, who groundeth his Purgatory upon this, that Jesus Christ did not
condemn prayer for the dead? which [saith hee] was put in practice among the
Jews, and yet Jesus Christ never reproved the^ for it. True it is that the
Jews had their abuses which are not condemned in the Gospel. Joseph. in that
place says that the Esseans in the course of their life observed Pithagoras
rule.
As the sect of the Esseans witness Pliny, lib. 5. cap. 17. and Josephus
Antiquitatum, lib 18. cap. 2. And their opinion was and yet is, That the
Messiah should be a great Prince, that should conquer the nations and subdue
them to the Jews. Josephus also in his 12. book and 2. Chapter. of the wars
of the Jews says that the Pharisees taught the passage of the souls out of
one body into another: yet did not Jesus Christ reprove them for the same. As
concerning the opinion of praying for the dead, if any of the Jews were
tainted therewith, yet was it not universal doctrine received among them:
Eccl. 49.10
besides that it has no affinity with Purgatory. For even to this day such
Jews as pray for the dead know not what Purgatory is: and their ordinary
prayer is that the memory of the dead may be blessed 7. These Doctors having
thus produced their reasons without Sctipture, do now allege Scripture without
reason. Thus says the Friar S. James in his fifth Chapter says, Pray one for
another that ye may be saved. Page 17.
Here S. James tyeth not this to the living only. He also alleges S.
Augustine in his 20. book of the City of God, who says, that the souls of the
dead are not separated from the Church. He farther demands who told us
whether our Lord, teaching us to say, forgive us our trespasses etc. limited
this prayer for the living or for the dead? This also is of the like nature and
full of subteltie. Page 40.
Jesus Christ, says he, taught us to pray for the dead, when he Instituted
the Sacrament of the Eucharist. Where he said, Drink ye all of this, for this
is my blood of the new Testament which shall be shed for MANY, and S. Luke
says, for YOU In saying for you and for many, he means both present, absent,
and to come: therefore it is not for you to limit the will of Jesus Christ only
to the living. To answer all this requires much patience, though small
dexterity: for we are driven to reduce these men, as little children, to the ABC
of reason. 1. First this passage of S. James is falsified: for S. James
speaks of the cure of the body, not of the salvation of the soul, as
appears by the verse next before. Prayer in faith shall save the sick, and
the Lord shall raise him up again. And to the like end also was this vnctio^,
namely to cure the diseased. Thus the Apostle healed many diseased by anointing
them, Mark. 16. 13. Tertullian in his 2. book Scepula c. 4. speaks of one
Proculus, who cured the Emperor Severus by anointing him with oil. 2. I
would ask the subtle doctors to whom S. James writ: whether to the living, or
to the dead, or to both? Surely he writ to the living: for they use to carry no
letters into Purgatory: then they whom he commanded to pray were living. 3.
What kind of proof call you this? S. James excludes not the dead, neither
does he forbid to pray for them: we must therefore pray for them. Surely if
this reason were of force we must also pray for the Angels for the Saints, yea
for the damned: for S. James does not forbid to pray for any of the (...). 4.
The same answer may serve for that which they say That the dead be of the
Church and one body with us: for who denies it? Must we allege S. Augustine
for that which we may learn in the word of God? Apoc. 6 12 Heb 12.23. Ephesians.
3.17
But does it follow that we must pray to God for all that be of the Church?
why the^ does not the Romish Church pray for the Saints and Martyrs. 5. The
members of one self body must help each other, when any one of them stands
in need of help. But here we maintain [and this is the sum of our
difference] that the faithful deceased need not our succors The Friar then
presupposes as granted, that which is the main question. The passage ensuing,
besides the aforesaid absurdities, has yet this particular, that it
presupposes that the Lords prayer is said for the dead also: If so, the^ do we
also pray that God would give them their daily bread: As for bread it is the
less strange because the fire of Purgatory is sufficient to bake it: and since
in the Mass it is said that the souls do sleep in this fire, and rest in a
slumber of peace, it is like when they awake they have a good appetite. But I
cannot comprehend how this bread may be called, Daily, since there they have
neither day nor sun. Hereto let us adioine the same that our doctors have
confessed. That God has already pardoned those roasted souls from all their
offenses, and that he only requires of them the pains due to the sins already
pardoned: how can we the^ desire God to forgive the^ their sins which are
already forgiven them. A liar must have a good memory. The last passage for
subtiety bears away the bell. Jesus Christ, [saith the Monk] shed his blood
for many: therefore for the dead. What need he to seek so far set proofs to
prove that which we confess: who denies but the blood of Jesus Christ was
shed for many: for all the faithful: for all the Saints and Martyrs? How
impertinent also is this collection that the Friar here makes out of the
ancients to prove that the Lords Supper is a sacrifice? What makes it for
Purgatory? Since we grant that it is a sacrifice: but as it is said in the
Mass: A sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving: neither Propitiatory nor
redemptory, but by representation, because the supper is a commemoratio^ of the
death of Jesus Christ the only propitiatory sacrifice: And in regard hereof
this sacrifice was always called Eucharistia that is A tha^ksgiving. As for
the co^memoration of the dead, practiced by some of the ancients in the supper,
I will in the next chapter following prove that it makes against Purgatory:
for therein they also made a commemoration of the Apostles and Martyrs. And in
this place does the Friar prove himself a most ridiculous flatterer, in
spreading abroad such Panegericks and praises of Monsieur Duranti [one that
deserves commendations out of an honester man's mouth] as also of our king, who
is too wise to think that such comme^dations are other then shameless
beginnings. But what is become of those days when men of his coat went in
Procession in arms, the pike in one hand and the portuise in the other, and
were the firebrands of public combustions, encouraging the people against
their king, whilst we as good subjects, even such as we will be to the death,
did shed our blood in his service? Of like substance also is the fable that he
patcheth up of a Mass song in England for the soul of the late Queen, and
the offerings contributed in her funeral: whereupon in full hope he
exclaimeth: At length the truth shall rise out of Democritus well: you deceive
your self, good man, she rose from thence even in the time of the Apostles,
and primitive Church: But the devil has dealt with her as he did with Joseph
when he came out of the well: she has been sold to strange marcha^ts brought
into bondage, and put in subjection, not as Joseph was to an Eunuch, but to the
father of lies marveilous fruitful. (8) This now decided let us into our way
again. In his 19. page he brings in a prayer for the dead, taken out of
Esaias, 57.1. and 2. Cayer also page 24 cites the same place, but contrarieth
the Friar, saying that it is not a prayer for the dead, but a lamentation that
he makes because that in those days in Israel they prayed not for the dead.
The fire of Helie is content to say only that this passage does not condemn
Purgatory. Page 66.
Thus do these our masters agree among themselus: but in the third Chapter we
have showed that the Friar falsifieth this place and that the same quite
quenches Purgatory. (9) Now follows the passage which all the 3 Doctors
make use of, and whereof they form a mighty Bulwark. It is in the 2. of the
Machabes the 12. where [say they] Judas sent 12 thousand drachmes of silver to
Jerusalem to be offered in sacrifice for the dead. Hereto we answer 1. They
falsify the place. The Friar page 10.
2. The book is not Canonical. 3. Were it Canonical, yet makes it nothing for
Purgatory. 4. They sin against the natural principles of the question: For
we never dispute against any but by the principles and autorities that we
receive. Men dispute not with Jews by the authority of the new Testament:
neither will the Gentiles disputing against the Christians, produce the
testimony of Hesiods Theogony. This S. Augustine knowing, in his question
against Maximine, says in his third book and 14. Chapter, that he will use
the Scriptures, non quorumcunque prop^ijs, sed vtrique communibus. Not proper
to such, or to such, but common to both Now let us return over the three first
points. First the falsification is proved by reading over the place. This it
is. Judas sent to Jerusalem the sum of twelve thousand drachmes of silver to
offer sacrifises for the sin, he says, for the sin not as the Friar says
for the dead. Now what these words for the sin does signify shall hereafter
appear. That the book is not Canonical, we have infinite proofs. 1. First,
these books are not in the Hebrewe, 2. Jesus Christ and his Apostles, who upon
every occasion did allege the passages of the old Testament, never named any
of these books, neither out of them cited any passage. 3. The Author himself
cap. 2. v. 19. says that his purpose is to abridge the five books of Jason
the Cirinean into one book: Now if Iasons books were not Canonical, how can
the abstract of them be Canonical? If Trogus or Dyon be profane books, how
can Iustine or Xiphiline be sacred. S. Paul, 2. Tim. 3.16. says All Scripture
is given by inspiration of God: But what inspiration is it to say the same that
another in a profane book has spoken, and only to abridge his words? What
more? The Author doubting whether he had said well, toward the end concludes
thus. If I have said well and as it appertains to the history, it is as much
as I desire. Are the motions of the spirit of God so insensible or doubtful as
to leave the mind in suspense and uncertain, concerning the excellency of such
things as it has suggested; a little after he excuses the simplicity of his
style. Will God who has no interest to be believed, whose naked words do
far exceed the most polished words of man excuse the poverty of his own
phrase? Or shall not he that made the tongue have eloquence enough? yes, for
he inspireth his servants with so much eloquence as he thinks good: neither
is it for us either to distaste it or to bring excuses. But in the reading of
these books how many things do weaken their authority? In the second of the
Machabes, 1.19. it is said that the Jews were led captive into Persia, where
he should have said Babylon or Chaldea: for in the time of Nabuchadnezar, who
transported the^, Persia was not yet united into one kingdom with Chaldea:
Cyrus some seventy years after, upon his taking of Babylon united these two
kingdoms: an error that made Chrysostom to stumble in his sixth homely upon
Matthew, where he says that the Jews were delivered out of the Persian
captivity. 1. Maccab. 1.7. he says that Alexander divided his kingdom among
his friends before he dyed, which is contrary to the general consent of all
historiographers, who all do testify that he dyed in Babylon without disposing
of any thing: which also the wars succeeding between his princes and
domestical servants about the division of his conquests do sufficiently show.
Read Justin, Curtius, Arrian, Plutarch in the beginning of the life of Eumenes,
and toward the end of the life of Alexander. In the eighth chapter of the same
book he speaks like a Clarke at Arms, and says that by great battles the
Romans had conquered the Galatians: yet in those days they had set no foot in
Gaul to conquer it. Neither can he by the Galatians understand the Galatians
or Gallo-greekes of Asia, who were conquered without resista^ce: besides in
that place he also speaks of the conquest of Spain, as near to the Gauls.
In the said place it is also said that they had taken Antiochus the great on
live, Livy, lib. 3^. and 36. Eutrop. lib. 4 Florus, lib. 2 cap. 8.
contrary to the testimony of al historiographers. Read Livy, Florus,
Eutropius, and others. Well do they confess that Antiochus lost three notable
battles: one in Achaia against Accilius Glabrio: another upon the seaes under
the conduct of Anniball: the third near to Magnesia a town in Asia against
Cornelius Scipio, but was never prisoner or captive to the Romans. In the same
Chapter it is said that the Romans gave the Indies to Eumenes, to whom were
given only certain towns to Natolia, before won from Antiochus. For as for
the Indies the Romans never saw them: and when their Empire was at the
highest, they neverwent far beyond Euphrates. But the most notable of all is
that in the 16. verse, it is said that the Romans yearly committed their estat
to one man, considering it is manifest that yearly they created two Consuls,
whereof the proof were superfluous. In the 2. Chap. of the 2. of Machabes it
is said that Jeremy hid the Arc in a chest of the mountain Nebo, that it
might be found after the captivity: and that this place should be unknown
until that God had gathered again the congregation of the people, which is
contrary to the 10. Chap. v. 22. of the 4 of Esdras: by our adversaries
accounted Canonical, which says that the Arc was defaced by the enemy: also
in the sermon of Onction, attributed to S. Cyprian it is said Arca ab
Allophilis capta est: The Arc was taken by strangers. Experience says as
much: for after the return out of captivity we find no mention of the Arc,
neither was there any in the Temple, as all the Rabbis do testify: who
complained that in the second house they wanted five things which the first
house had. 1. Vrim and Thumim. 2. The holy fire. 3. The Arc. Rabbi Schelomo
Iarchi. Initio Proph. Aggei, v. 8.
4. The presence of the divinity. 5. The spirit or Inspiration: which so
tortureth Bellarmine, that he proceeds so far as to say that this Arc is yet
hidden and shall be found the next day before the judgment: hitting the
counterfeiters and forgers of rellicks, a shreud knock over the knuckles: for
the book of Roman Indulgences printed at Rome, says that the Arc is reserved
at Rome among the rellicks of the Church of Lateran. In the 2. of Machabes,
cap. 14. the act of Razias is commended, who slew himself: neither can we say
that his valeancy only is commended: for it is there expressly delivered that
he died virtuously. And I see that this opinion begins to get ground among
some of our adversaries. For Carron the Divine at Bordeaux, otherwise a man of
a good spirit, does stiff and stoutly maintain this opinion in his second
book of wisdom, cap. 12. especially in the 450 page of the impression of
Bordeaux, where he shuts up his discourse with this resolution: That we must
try all means before we come to this extremity: also that it is a point of
wisdom to know the time and take it. And withal he scorneth the cowardlinesse
of many that have outlived their glory. He also says page 405. that the world
has long lived under unjust, ungodly and extravagant laws, which if any man
should endeavor to reform, he should show himself an enemy to the
Commonwealth: withal that turbulent stirrers under pretense of reforming do
mar all. What shall we say of the strange co^tradictions in these books? We
find that Antiochus the noble died three times. In the first book cap. 6. he
died at Babylon in his bed: In the second cap. 1 he dies in the Temple of
Nannea in Persia, where he and his being entrapped and enclosed in the Temple,
he was slain with stones. Afterward in the 9. Chapter following, falling from
his chariot in his return from Persia, the worms issued out of his body and
he died a stranger among the mountains. See the 12. book of Joseph.
Antiquities, where we shall find the trace of the sa^e contradiction.
How a stranger, if he died at Babylon the capital city of his dominions?
How in the mountains, since Babylon stands in a plain, and is situated upon
the river Euphrates? How with a fall from his chariot, if he were stoned in
the Temple? Neither ca^ it be said that they were sundry Antiochus: for all
this is reported in the time of Judas, in whose days there was but one
Antiochus. Yea and in the first book cap. 1. and in the second cap. 9. he is
surnamed the Noble, or Epiphanes, in either place. What more? these books do
reckon the years from the beginning of the reign of the Grecians in Asia. In
the first of the Machabes the 9. it is said that Judas was slain in the year
152. but in the 4. of the second book Judas writ letters bearing date 188.
that is to say, six and thirty years after his death.

Now let us see in what account these books were holden in the primitive
Church. The Council of Laodicea of like antiquity as the Council of Nice,
places not these books in rank with the Canonical, That the primitive
Church never acknowledged the Machabes be Canonical.

The falsehood of the Friar.


wherein I admire the little faith of our Friar minor, who in the 22. page of
his book, dare report that this Council places the Machabes among the
Canonicals: for they are not so much as there named. Afterward the sixth
universal Council approves and confirms all the contents of the Council
of Laodicea. Hereto agrees the Council of Carthage, wherein S. Augustine was
present. True it is that the Latin copies miserably falsified by our
adversaries, do place these books among the Canonical: At Paris by Conrad
Neobarius 1540.
but in the Greek copies printed by themselves they are not once mentioned. As
for the ancient Doctors, Prologus Galeatus.
when shall we have produced their depositions hereupon. S. Hierome in his
Prologue upon the Bible, Machab. lib. inter Scripturas Canonicas Ecclesia non
recipit.
has expressly handled this matter. There he admits no other books of the
old Testament to be Canonical but such as be in the Hebrew Bible, in number
two and twenty: himself in the preface upon the books of Solomon, speaking
of Ecclesiasticus, and the wisdom of Solomon says thus. As the Church indeed
reads the books of Judith, of Toby, and of the Machabes, but not among the
Canonical Scriptures: even so also she reads these two volumes, for the
edification of the people: but not to confirm the doctrine of the Church. S.
Hillary upon the prologue to the Psalms, agrees with S. Hierome, and says
that in the old Testament there be as many books as there be letters in the
Hebrew Alphabet, that is two and twenty. Athanasius in his book entitled
Synopsis S. Scripturae, names all the books of the old Testament unto two
and twenty and says, That the rest of the books of the old Testament are
not Canonical neither read to any but to the Catechumeni: Manethon ^ishop of
Sardis gives us a catologue of the books of the old Testament in the fourth
book of Eusebius, cap. 25. Where in the Macchabees are not named. Eusebius in
his third book and tenth Chapter speaking of the books of the old Testament
says, We have no infinite number of discordant books, but only two and
twenty. And farther he says that whatsoever is written since the time of
Artaxerxes, is not worthy like credit as the former, and of this sort are the
Macchabees. Epiphanius in his book of measures says as much: and names all
the books of the old Testament, but speaks not of the Macchabees. Among the
works of S. Ciprian we find a treatise of the exposition of the Creed, which
seems rather to be of Ruffinus. Therein the author names all the books both
of the old and new testament and then says, These are the books which the
fathers have encloased in the Ca^non and Rule from whence we are to take the
proofs of our faith: yet are we to understand that there be other books not
Canonical, but Ecclesiastical, among which are the books of Tobie, Judith
and the Macchabees, etc. What would we have more? Among all the Bishops of
Rome even Gregory the great in his morals up on Job. lib. 19. cap. 29.
purposing to allege the Macchabees concerning the act of Eleazar excuses
himself in these words. Qua in re non inordinate agimus si ex libris no^
Canonicis, etc. Bell. lib. 1. de verbo Dei. cap. 10.
Wherein we speak not from the purpose albeit we produce testimonies out of
the books not Canonical: but written for the edification of the Church: he
wrote six hundred years after Jesus Christ. Even Bellarmine does confess that
Origin, Athanasius, Nazianzen, Epiphanius and Hierome received not the
Macchabees among the Canonical. Our adversaries make a buckler of S. Augustine
and set him in counterpoize against all antiquity: in this point contemning all
the auctority of the fathers and their own Popes. And yet herein they do him
wrong: for this good father never straied from the universal consent of the
Church in his time. August. ad Gaudent. li. 2. cap. 23.
Unto Gaudentium who used the auctority of the example of Razias that killed
himself, and is mentioned in the second of the Macchabees he answers thus.
The Jews hold not this book in like degree as the law, the Prophets and the
Psalms: to whom Jesus Christ yields testimony, as to those that hear
witness of him: but this book is received by the Church not unprofitably, if
it be read discreetly, especially in regard of the sufferings of certain
Martyrs. Read the whole page, and ye shall see that S. Augustines intent was to
beat down the objection of Gaudentius, who armed himself with the auctority
of this book also to prove that Jesus Christ deferred no auctority to any
other but to the law, to the Prophets and to the Psalms. Yet do our
adversaries produce some passages out of S. Augustine to the contrary, but
manifestly falsified. In his eighteenth book of the city of God, cap. 36. he
says thus. Quoru^ supputatio temporum non in Scrip sanctu quae Canonica
appellant ur sed in aliis invenitur, in quibus sunt and Machab. libri quos non
Iudaei, sed Ecclesia pro Canonicis habet
The supputation of this time, from the new building of the temple is not found
in the holy scriptures which are called Canonical: but in other books: which
are the Macchabees: could he more expressly raze the Macchabees out of the
Canonical scriptures but at the end hereof let us see a tail most botcherly
clapped on by some Mo^k. Which book not the Jews, but the Church holds for
Canonical: O gross Impostor! After he has said that the Macchabees are not
holy scripture, nor Canonical, would he say that the Church receives them for
Canonical? The friar says that sundry fathers have used these books and do
cite passages out of them. To what purpose is this? Whosoever alleges a
book, does he therefore hold it to be Canonical? But we stand now upon much
stronger terms. For this passage well wayed, will be found contrary to
Purgatory. He says that Judas offering sacrifice for sin thought upon the
resurrection: yea he says that otherwise it had been a folly to pray for the
dead: whereby it appears that the auctor never imagined that Judas prayed to
bring these souls out of Purgatory: but that he praid that the sin by the^
committed might not hinder them from rising to glory and salvation: for any man
that is demanded wherefore he prays for the dead, if he answer that it is for
the resurrection, he manifestly shows that he believes no Purgatory.
Otherwise he would not have omitted that which is most urgent, but would have
craved to be released out of such long and horrible torments. Ask all these
our Masters wherefore they pray for the dead. I am sure none of them will say
for the resurrection.

Page 11.
The Friar foreseeing a storm of passages of the fathers conspiring to
overthrow the auctority of this book, shrim king betimes, and as it were
forsaking the place, says, That at the least it cannot not be denied but that
this is a history which assures us that Judas made prayers and sacrifices for
his brethren deceased: and there is no appearance to impute the inventio^ of
this act to him: and therefore it were Impudency to condemn him. And this is
the place where I mean to gratify the friar. For albeit this book may as
well be false in this point as it is in the others that I have laid open, yet
will I admit this history as a truth: Thus it is at large. After the battle
Judas and his men came to gather up the bodies of the slain and to bury them,
but they found under their apparel things consecrated to the Idols that were at
Iannia: a matter forbidden in the law: Then had they recourse to prayer, and
entreated that the sin committed might be forgiven and forgotten. Judas
thereupon having made a collection, sent to Jerusalem twelve thousand drams of
silver to offer in sacrifice for the sin: hitherto the history. That which
ensues is the auctours Judgment, whom we receive for an historiographer, but
not for a judge, or doctor in matters of faith. In this history then, which, I
pray you, is the first word importing prayer for the dead? Or that concerns
Purgatory? Had Judas offered for the dead, he would have prayed for all their
sins, and not for that sin only: and upon this reason did the Friar falsify
this passage and set in for the dead instead of for the sin. Judas therefore
prayed that the sin of some might not pull down the wrath of God upon all the
people, as in the like case the sin of Acham had procured the overthrow of all
the people of Israel. Joshua. 7.

10 The friar adds yet one passage out of Toby, forgiving Alms for the dead:
These [saith he] are the words of Toby. Cast thy bread and thy wine upon the
grave of the righteous and beware thou eat not with sinners. Toby, 4.17
Whereto we say: first the book is Apocriphal, and all the testimonies produced
against the books of the Macchabees are in force against the book of Toby:
for it is in the same Rank: yea this book has this in particular, that it
makes the angel Raphael a liar; who being demanded by Tobyas who he was,
answered, I am Azarias of the kindred of great Ananias, and of thy brethren.
Yet let us admit this book were Canonical, and consider the passage Cast thy
bread and wine upon the graves of the righteous: then [saith the Monke] It must
needs be there were alms for the dead. 1. First this has no such sequence,
neither can we hereof frame any good Argument. 2. Again, no man denies but it
is good to give alms for the dead: that is to say, not only inreme^brance of
the dead, but also for and instead of the dead: giving to the poor that which
the deceased would have given if he had lived: but not for fetching his soul
out of Purgatory: for thereof we find not one word in Toby. The heathen that
prayed not to fetch their dead out of Purgatory yet ceased not from giving
alms, and making funeral feasts, ferales coenas silicernia. Yea even among the
Israelites there was some such matter, not for the redemption of the soul
departed, but for the Consolation of the survivers: as we learn in Jeremy,
Ierem. 167 Tertull. de Resur. carnis c. 5. vnigus defunctos atrocissime
exaurit, quos postmodum Gulosissime nutriunt. Qui in memoriis Martyr se
inebriant quemodo a nobis approbari possunt etc. Cyprianus de duplici Martyrio
An non videmus ad Martyrum memorias Christianum a Christiano cogi ad ebrietatem.
where he places this among the afflictions prepared for the Jews. They
shall not stretch out the hands for the^ in the mourning, to comfort them for
the dead: neither shall they give them the cup of Consolation for to drink for
their father or for their mother. Neither can this custom be reproved in case
there be neither excess nor superstition. 3. The Christians in the primitive
Church on the day of the remembrance of the Martyrs, took their repast near to
the graves; and as abuse does commonly intrude it self, they many times
overdranke themselves and buried their reasons upon the sepulchers. S. Augustine
against Faustus the Manichean, lib. 20. cap. 21. says. How can we allow of
those that drink themselves dru^ken at the memories of the Martyrs?
considering if they should do it in their houses, al true doctrine would
condemn them? Hereby it appears that the meats set upon the sepulchers were
not a price or offering to deliver the souls of the dead: for they were set
upon the sepulchers of those Martyrs for whom the Church of Rome holds that
we must not pray. 4. Consider also I pray you whether this Monk desired to be
believed: and mocketh not himself, when he says that this bread and wine was
for those that were destined to weep for the deceased, and to pray for them,
that they might take some comfort? For what a jest is this, to buy tears with
bread? to have certain persons destined and affected to weeping? and thus to
bring tears to be an occupation? and so of an affliction to erect a trade? A
course indeed practiced by the heathen, and by the Jews imitated, yet by
Chrysostom condemned: which also the Prophet Jeremy mocketh, saying. Call for
the mourning women and let them come. But what appearance is there that these
tears premeditated and hired may be accepted for a payment and satisfaction
to the justice of God, and so enable to redeem a soul out of Purgatory?

Fire of Helie page 12. and 13.
11 The same Monk, as also the fire of Helie do inculcate many examples of
weeping and fasting for the dead as the tears and fastings after the deaths of
Saul, Jonathan, Abner, etc, Yet among all these lamentations we find no mention
of prayer for the dead, or of Purgatory. Besides we have showed that Saul died
in Gods displeasure: that Jacob and Moses were also bewailed, who nevertheless
never descended into Purgatory: and for such the Church of Rome says we must
not pray.

Places out of the new Testament for prayers for the dead.
12 Now follow the Friars places gathered out of the new Testament to the same
purpose. The first is page 39. and is taken out of the Gospel of S. John,
where Martha says to Jesus Christ Lord if thou had been here, my brother
had not died. Yet do I now know that what soever thou ask of the father he
will give it thee. It is very certain [saith hee] that Martha prayed our Lord
Jesus Christ to make some prayer for her brother, for she believed not that
Jesus Christ could of himself raise him again. All conjectures: All false
propositions: and yet not without contradiction. For if Martha believed that
God would grant to Jesus Christ whatsoever he demanded, she believed that
Jesus Christ could raise him again: for he could demand it. In this place the
Friar prates apace, and does imitate Cayer, A slander.
who in the beginning of his book says that we believe neither heaven nor
hell, The intent of the Ministers [saith he] is to deny both Purgatory and
Paradise: for we know that at Geneva in the Italian Church after they had
argued of the means to root out the belief of Purgatory, one of their Deacons
rising up, said: let us do that which we had once determined: let us deny the
Immortality of the soul: so shall we soon see Purgatory laid along. The
fire of Helie says, it was not a Deacon but a Minister: yea and he says
moreover that one Perrat a Minister of Geneva, in his life complained that
among us the beasts are buried with greater honor then men: But he speaks as
if a man already deceased: so truly he is informed: but the man yet lives,
and if the accuser or accusation did deserve it I could easily from himself
procure the confutation of so cold a slander. Hereupon were the Devil our
principal enemy a man to be examined, I would demand of him whether our
fathers that suffered martyrdom for the Gospel, who were so lavish of their
blood, and so sparing of the glory of God, did think that there was no heaven,
or that the souls were mortal? But in as much as we meddle not with
coniurings or making the spirits to appear, as our adversaries do, let the
Friar take his place and be our Judge therein. Dare he say that these persons
did not aspire to eternal life? The two Decij, Curtius, or Empedocles, who
with their deaths did purchase fame and voluntary lost their lives to purchase
commendatio^s after death might have done it without hope of immortality: But
where the death is accompanied with infamy and the ashes overlaid with
reproach, what man will without hope of immortality seek an inglorious death,
and voluntarily lose both his life and his honor? Moreover, who be our
slanderers? Even the props and pillars of the Roman sea: a sea that has been
blemished with Popes that have made profession to teach that there is no
Paradise, and that the souls of men do die together with their bodies as do
the souls of beasts. Let these writers of fires, furnaces, and torrents
acknowledge whether these be not the very words of the Council of Constance,
Sess. 11. John the 23. Often and very often in the presence of sundry prelates
and other good and honest men has said, supported, taught, and obstinately at
the instigation of the devil, maintained that there is no eternal life,
neither any other life after this: yea he has said and obstinately believed
that the soul of man dies with his body and is extinct as those of brute
beasts. He has also said that man once dead shall never rise again at the
last day, etc. And afterward it is said that all this is publicly and well
known. O how the pulpets should have rung of it if any one of us had spoken
but the hundredth part hereof.

12 There rests yet one place taken out of S. Paul. 1. Cor. 15.29. What shall
they do that are baptized for dead? The Friar in liew of these words for dead
has set down for the dead. The fire of Helie commits a notable falsehood
and disguiseth the passage thus. Page 46. Falsehoods.
What shall they do that baptize themselves for the dead? And then expounds
that which he has corrupted in this manner; To baptize ones self signifies to
do laborious and satisfactory works for the dead: and withal we must
understand that it is to fetch them out of Purgatory. Good God what a
troublesome thing lying is? This interpretation is taken from Bellarmine, who
according to his manner, having alleged the explication of a number of the
fathers as Tertullian, Ambrose, Sedulius, Theodoret, Chrysostom, Oecumenius,
Theophilact, etc washes al their heads, and for the establishment of his own
exposition confuteth all their explications. And this does the Friar confirm
with the authority of Turrian the Jesuit, who makes use of this passage. An
excelent testimony, and of great antiquity. But the sense of these words must
be taken of the Apostles intent: This is be seen in Mat. 5.16^ Marc. 1.10.
his intent was to prove the resurrection: here to he imployeth baptism,
which in those days was celebrated by plonging the whole body in water, in
token that we are in death: and the coming forth of the water represents the
resurrection: S. Paul's meaning is that this sign were in vain if there were
no resurrection: and that in vain we are baptized for dead, or as dead, and to
represent unto us that we are in death, if there be no hope of Resurrection.
The explication of Theodoret growe^h much hereupon, which also Caietan does
follow.

The places of scripture whereupon these Doctors do lay the foundations of
their Purgatory. 1. Cayer page 5. proves the multitude of habitations under
the earth by the creed, where it is said Descendit ad Inferos in the plural
number: but his grammar fails him: for in the Greek it is (...) in the
singular, and Inferi in the plural imports no more diversity of chambers, or
habitations then Superi, which signifies those that live upon the earth.
Virgill. Aeneid. 6. Apud superos furto laetatus inani.

2 Again, upon the last of the Revelation where it is written, Page 9.
Out of the throne proceeded a river of water clear as crystal. He foundeth
Purgatory in rivers, in bathes, in ice, under the leaves of trees, etc To the
same end he alleges the 92. Psalm. The righteous shall flourish like a Palm
tree. And this passage does he make to serve for a defense of his flowred
meadow that lies at the end of Purgatory. Let us yield: Peter Victor Palm Cayer
this Doctor takes up the straw, which is not like the palm, albeit he
assumeth that name; but rather like the fig tree which Christ cursed and it
bare no more fruit.

3 Himself defends the altars whereupon the saying of a stinted number of
Masses suffices to fetch a soul out of Purgatory: Page 17.
because in the law there was an altar of propitiation.

4 In page 23. he heapeth up a whole bedroule of passages for Purgatory, as if
they were paternosters. 1. Because there was a flaming sword before the garden
of Eden: and the same passage does the fire of Helie make use of 2. By the fire
of sacrifices after the law of nature for he imagines that the making of
sacrifices by fire is a law of nature, and thus does he confess that he has
lost his humane nature, because he does not sacrifice by fire. 3. Because the
law was given in fire. 4. By the perpetual fire that was upon the altar. 5. By
the judgment of God that must be in fire. 2. Pet. 3. Out of all this he
concludes that there is a purgatory. How many pens and sonnets shall we pin
upon this doctor in reward of his profound subtlety. Some few other passages
there be but they will be found among those of his companions.

The auctor of the fire of Helie affords us as devout ones. He in his 11.
page endeavoring to stall his proofs, which [saith he] are as clear as the
sun, compares me to Senecas maid, but I trust to make him more like to
Plutarches boy who played the Philosopher whiles they be labored him.

5 He cutteth up his reasons with this knife, flourishing at the gate of the
earthly Paradise. This sword is Purgatory and so did S. Ambrose understand it:
but hereafter we shall prove it false.

6 Then comes the ninth of Esaias, Impiety is kindled as fire, and shall
destroy the briars and thorns. This fire is Purgatory, and well it may be
because it is compared to iniquity.

7 Then follows the Prophet Micheas the 7. Rejoice not against me O mine
enemy, though I fall I shall arise: when I shall sit in darkness I will bear
the wrath of God, until he plead my cause, he will bring me to light and I
shall see his righteousness. This darkness and this wrath are Purgatory, and
these be the words of those poor roasted souls speaking to their enemies
that do rejoice to see them tormented. 1. But how do these enemies rejoice if
they be in hell? 2. how do they speak one with another? 3. If these enemies be
living, who ever reioiced in his enemies death, because he was in Purgatory? Or
who told him that he was there? and why does he not rather fear then persist
in his hatred? Why is he not rather sorry that he is not in hell? 4. How comes
it to pass that God has not yet judged the cause of these poor souls against
their enemies? 5. but read the whole chapter and you shall perceive that they
that there speak be the living and not the dead.

8 After comes the ninth of Zachary, In the blood of thy covenant thou haste
delivered thy prisoners out of the pit where is no water. Page 46. Page 68.
This pit without water is Purgatory: why does he fear to put water in
Purgatory, since he has put snow in hell? Therefore also does the friar
contradict him and says, that the most common exposition speaks of
delivering souls out of Limbo. They shall agree, if they list, S. Augustine in
his city of God, lib. 18. cap. 35. shall understand this of the deliverance
from sin and from the miseries of this life. S. Hierome in his co^mentary
upon this place, understands it of hell: yet were it better that Gods word
should be the judge. S. Matthew 21. v. 5. alleging the former verses shows
that this passage is meant of Jesus Christ. Now what is the delivera^ce of the
Church through the blood of Jesus Christ but our redemption from the captivity
of Satan and eternal death? Of this deliverance speaks Zachary, albeit
under the figure of the deliverance from the captivity of Babylon: as also it
were strange that Zachary speaking of the delivera^ce of the Church through the
blood of the covenant should speak only of Purgatory and Limbo, and make
mention of the redemption from hell and eternal death.

9 That which follows is very pleasant. Psalm. 66. We went through fire and
water but thou broughtest out into a refreshing. In the former passage he
would have no water in Purgatory: now he will have both fire and water there.
Besides, the place is falsified. For according to the Hebrew text it is, Thou
haste brought me out into a plentiful place. Other passages he has which are
to be found among the friars passages.

The Friar page 30.
10 The first passage that he alleges is out of Esaias, 30.33. Tophet is
prepared of old, It is even prepared by the king he has made it deep and
large: the burning thereof is fire and much wood: the breath of the Lord
kindling it like a river of brimstone. This he says. p. 34. Page 60.16.
Tophet says the Friar is Purgatory: this king is God: and the breath of the
Lord brings with it consolation, the end and the beatitude, etc. But against
this does Cayer quarrel and say that it concerns the judgment of God
against the iniquity of Assure, and confesses that this king is the king of
Assure. Page 47.
The fire of Helie returns the ball to the Friar and holds this passage to
be a Noli me tangere, but as I have answered so I answer still that we ground no
articles of faith upon Allegories. 2. Secondly, Tophet is a place near to
Jerusalem in the valley of Hynnon, as witnesses Joshua. 15. and 2. King. 23.
where the Idolaters burned their children to Moloch or Baal. Whereupon the
Prophet here takes Tophet for the torment prepared for the wicked. 3. That in
the whole course of the text it appears that Esaias speaks of the wicked, not
of the children of God. 4. That the friar falsifieth the passage in saying by
the king where in the Hebrew it is for the king. 5. The friar takes Assure to
be a ma^s name not of a Country As if I had said the king Assure, but I said the
king of Assure
That this king is the king of Assure, or of Assiria, of who^ we spoke not many
lines before. 6. That this king being an enemy to God and his people, the
torment that is provided for him cannot be Purgatory.

The Friar in all this reproves two things which make nothing to this
question. First he will not have Tophet in this place to be the place where
they made their children to pass through the fire: Genesis 31.27 Exodus 15 10 Ios.
18.34.
but let him then learn what is written. 2. King. 23. Josias defiled Tophet
which was in the valley of the children of Hynnon, that no man should make his
son or his daughter to pass through the fire to Moloch. This word Tophet
comes of Toph which in Hebrewe signifies a drum, because the Priests of
the Idol [so long as the burning of the children lasted] made a noise with
drums and basins after the manner of the Coribantes, Maldonat. and Lyra upon
the 5. of Matthew.
least the parents should hear the cry of their children. Thereupon did Job,
complaining that he was disdained and shouted at, say that he was made
Tophet, a tympanization and a byword or scorn, as also the Greek does so
translate it. The Roman translation turns it and says, He has made me an
example: The Friar will have this tympanization to be Purgatory: or had there
been here any speech of a tub, or of a lantern, he would also have found
some shift to prove that those things signified Purgatory. Job therefore by his
account, albeit alive, yet complains that he was placed in Purgatory.
Secondly he does contest that the children were not burned or consumed in
Tophet, but only purged: this cannot proceed but either of gross ignorance, or
of extreme malice: for the Scripture is full of proofs to the contrary.
Jeremy, 7.31. says, They have built the high place of Tophet in the valley of
the sons of Hynnon, to burn their sons and daughters. Again, They have
built the high places of Baal to burn their sons with fire, for burnt
offerings unto Baal. It is in the Hebrew Baar, which signifies to burn. And
this word Holocaust signifies a sacrifice which they burnt and wholly consumed.
But because of late they begin to prefer the Roman translation before the
Hebrew text, that is to say, a corrupt translation before the original, a
troubled ditch before the clear spring: Let us produce the same text of the
common translation: Aedificaverunt excelsa Baalim ad comburendos filios suos
igni in Holocaustum. Ierem. 19.5
Immolaueru^t filios and filias suas daemonijs. Likewise in the second of
Kings, 3. Accipiensque Rex primogenitum suum, obtulit holocaustum: It is
therefore contrary both to the history and to the language to say that the
self same translation in sundry places turns lustrare filios, for cremare,
purge for burn.

Here the Friar has bethought him of a notable fable, fetched out of the
bottom of his budget. He says that my self being reduced to a shameful
silence, An Englishman whom I had brought for my Gossip, whispered me in the
ear and told me that lustare signified to burn. This is a double untruth:
for on the one part he makes as if all the assistants holp him, and that I was
in a manner alone: on the other part there was never an Englishman in the
company: indeed there was a young Flemming, whom I never saw before: when the
Friar said that Excogitatum commentum signified a Commentary, confirmed this
explication by the authority of Rabelais, who said, weight of larde with a
Comment. As for this word lustrare I maintained that it ought to have been
Cremare, to burn: also that the translation was false, and I suppose I needed
not make many protestations upon a matter so unworthy the meanest scholar. In
vain therefore did he borrow out of Calepin and from the Jesuits of Tournom
those passages where lustrare signifies to purge. Wherein nevertheless he
spitteth nothing but barbarism and blockishnesse. Demost. contra Aristocratem
ait, cum qui aliquem accusavit tactis sacris suovetaurisibus iurare solitum.
I will therefore read him a lesson, therein doing him good for evil. He
alleges a passage out of the third of Livy. Ibi instructum exercitum ove sieve
tauris tribus lustrauit, and then he does expound it. He purified his army by
the sacrifice of one sheep or three bulls. But had he had but a cast of
antiquity, he might have heard of a kind of sacrifice frequent among the
heathen, named Suouetaurilia and he would not have put Oue sieve tauris instead
of Ouesuet auris, but this passed the Monks learning and capacity.

11 They also make use of the first of Samuel, cap. 2. in the song of Hannah
in these words, The Lord kills and makes alive, brings down to the grave
and raises up. Now in liew of grave they put hell, and this hell [if we believe
the] signifies Purgatory: In Hebrew it is Shelo which signifies the state and
condition of the dead, the pit, the Sepulcher. The Roman translation still
translateth it hell. As in the 140. Psalm, Our bones lie scattered along the
hell: In the Hebrew it is the 141.7.
also in the 30 Psalm. Thou have brought my soul out of Hell: Jacob also in
Genesis says, You shall bring my white hairs into hell. Again, Psalm 49.
They shall be laid in hell, or in the sepulcher like sheep. In these and such
like places who sees not that the word hell is evil put instead of death or
the grave. As for the passage in the song of Hannah the Friar confesses that
the same is meant of tribulatitions, but he says, If it be by comparison, who
ever heard of things don, that are not? He says true: and therefore this
comparison must not be taken of Purgatory which is not: as also the chief
interpreters of the Romish Church Caietan, Lyra, and the ordinary Gloss, do
not by this passage mean Purgatory. S. Augustine in his 17. book, and 17.
Chapter of the City of God expounds this Canticle at large, yet speaks
not one word of Purgatory. The Friar speaks as if it had bin himself that
produced this Rabbin. Read Aug. de Civit. Dei, lib. 21 cap. 13.
One of the Assistants upon this passage, meaning to help the Friar, produced
a Rabbin Isaac Alfeci the Arabian, who speaks of two hels: whereunto albeit I
could have answered and proved that that had no community with Purgatory: yet
I thought it better to say That Gods enemies were not to be judges in the
cause of God: That the truth borrowed no weapons of her adversaries: that
Virgil and Plato had also spoken of Purgatory.

12 The Friar says he has a whole sea of witnesses: he might have said a
forest: for that would have served to kindle Purgatory: he thus therefore
enters into this sea, the sixth Psalm, O Lord rebuke me not in thy rage,
neither chasten me in thy wrath. This rage is hell, this wrath Purgatory: with
a law [saith he] of satisfaction and chastisement of the faithful deceased,
but most severe. S. Augustine upon the sixth Psalm and these words Rage and
Wrath says thus. Ego puto vnam rem duobus verbis significatam: I think that
one thing is signified by these two words. As for the purging pains whereof in
some places he speaks, in my next Chapter I will show that my adversaries do
corrupt and wrong him. The like we say of S. Hierom.

13 Then follows an other out of the fourth of Esaias. The Lord shall wash the
filthiness of the daughters of Sion: and purge the blood of Jerusalem out of
the midst thereof by the spirit of judgment, and in the spirit of heat.
This purging and this spirit of judgment and of heat is Purgatory. But note
that this purging is made in the midst of Jerusalem. There then is Purgatory:
not under the earth, not in the rivers, not in the ice: for it is too hot in
Judea.

14 Here comes a brave one out of Malachie the 3. Who may abide the day of
his coming, and who shall endure when he appears? For he is like a blowing
fire and the fullers soap. This blowing fire is Purgatory: for in his bible he
has Ignis conflans, that is, by the explication of this poor doctor, a
blowing fire. What Regent is there that would not whip his scholar for such a
gross fault. Learn doctor that Conflare signifies to forge, or bake in the
furnace. Et curuae rigidum falces conflantur in ensem. Surely it is a shame to
overcome a man so impertinent.

15 In the 7. of Daniel. Page 37.
A fiery stream ran before him. This stream is Purgatory: why did he forget
Gedeons bottels, or Sampsons Iaw bone of an Ass: for in these things cold he
by the subteltie of his brain have found out Purgatory. But to let pass these
toies, let us see whether in the new Testament they can find any proofs more
apparent.

16 The first passage in the new Testament is in Matthew the 5.22. Whosoever is
angry with his brother unadvisedly shall be punishable by judgment: and
whosoever says to his brother Racha shall be punishable by a Counsel, and
who so shall say fool shall be punishable by hell fire. Here see I never a
word of Purgatory. Likewise the principal Interpreters of the Romish Church as
Lyra, Caietan, Maldonat and the ordinary Gloss have otherwise expounded this
passage, as also S. Hierome, S. Chrysostom, S. Hillary and Theophilact, who
writ express Commentaries upon Matthew: but against all these does the Friar
oppose S. Augustine, and says that in this place he has found Purgatory, in
the first book of the words of our Lord upon the mountain, and then he
exclaimeth S. Augustine found it: Falsehood
Du Moulin denies it: I had rather find it with this holy doctor, then so
much as hear the blasphemy of the denial, from this tiercelet of an
heretic. Hereupon I beseech the reader to see the place of S. Augustine wherein
in truth this good doctor expounds this passage, but he speaks not of
Purgatory neither of the torment or purgation of souls separate from the
bodies. Falsehood.
This Monk alleges also his 31. sermon upon the words of the Lord, wherein
this passage is not so much as quoted, so far is it from being expounded. Nay
more, all the fourth sermon is upon this passage, wherein nevertheless there
is not any speech of Purgatory. O frocke! how many untruths do thou cover?
how dearly will thou buy this licentious abusing of the people, unless God be
merciful unto thee? But the weakness of this argument does appear in that
our doctors do contradict them selves in the expounding thereof. Page 33.
The Monk by hell understands Eternal pain: Cayer affirms that this
Gehenna is Purgatory. Page 21.
A cup of theological wine to reconcile our doctors. The author of the fire of
Helie says that these three different punishments are after this life. If
Judgment signify Purgatory and Gehenna hell, what shall become of the
punishment by Counsel? Undoubtedly that is our flowred meadow: or some other
part of Purgatory.

17 This that follows is pleasant and proceeds from the same Evangelist and
the same chapter. and from S. Luke cap. 12. v. 58. who says, When thou go
with thy adversary to the ruler, as thou art on the way labor to be delivered
from him, least he bring thee before the Judge, and the Judge deliver thee to
the Iaylor, and the Iaylor cast thee into prison: I tell thee thou shall not
depart thence until thou have paid the last penny. S. Matthew says, Agree
quickly with thy adversary. Instead of these words, labor to be soon delivered
from him: The allegory pleases them to say the adversary is the devil: the
way is the life: the Magistrate is God: the prison is Purgatory. 1. would they
have us to agree with the Devil: or if the devil shall be the executioner,
who shall be the adverse party? Some weening to speak skilfully, do say that
the adverse party is the law: but it is worse. 2. For S. Luke says that we
must labor to be delivered from this adverse party whiles we be on the way
with him: Are we on the way with the law? Or do we go to the Magistrate with
it? 3. Where shall we labor to deliver our selves and to shake of this yoke?
Rather should she always rule and guide us in this pilgrimage. 4. But if the
Devil be the Iaylor, would they have the Devil to lead the souls into
Purgatory? 5. How dare they say that Purgatory is a prison, from whence none
shall depart before they have paid the last penny, considering that the Pope
fetches forth the souls before the term of the full satisfaction expired?
The sense of this passage is clear. Jesus Christ exhortet us to peace and
atonement with our neighbors that trouble and molest us: so do all the ancients
take it: S. Ambrose upon this place says that Jesus Christ speaks, De
reconcilianda pace dissidentium fratrum: of knitting again of peace between
disagreeing brethren. Maldonat the Jesuit the same. S. Hillarie in his comment
upon this place is more express. Tertul de Anima, c. 35
Tertullian in his book of the soul, of the same. Theophilact rejecting the
allegories expounds it thus. Etiamsi iniuria affectus fueris, ne abeas ad
tribunal, ne ob potentiam adversarij graviora patiaris. Albeit thou have wrong
yet go not to the Judicial seat least it fall out worse with thee through the
power of thy adversary. S. Hierome and S. Chrysostom say the same. Tertul. de
Anima. c. vlt
To all this our men be dumb and champe on the bit. Only the Friar alleges
an heresy of Tertullia^, wherein he says that the last penny implies the
least sins, which are paid by the delaying of the resurrection. And is it our
Master friars will that this resurrection be the issue of Purgatory? But he
maliciously does dissemble the words of Tertullian ensuing: Falsehood.
Hoc etiam paracletus frequentissime commendavit. For he vpholdeth this
doctrine under the auctority of Montanus an Arch-hereticke, who names himself
the paraclete and holy Ghost. The same Friar commits a notable falshoode in
that to defend the explication of this passage he brings the auctority of S.
Cypria^, who throughout all his works has not expounded this place: besides
those words of S. Cyprian which he has alleged, he has wrested and taken
in a contrary sense to kindle Purgatory, as in our last Chapter we will prove.

After all this the friar, as writing the Cock to the Ass, in liew of
answering accuses us that we do believe that the souls shall not enjoy the
glory until the day of judgment: Falsehood.
which is false and most sclanderous: for we al do believe that the souls of
the faithful departed out of the bodies, do enter into the heavenly glory. It
may be that in some places in the writings of our men some of them may say that
they doubt whether the souls in the day of judgment shall receive any increase
of glory: or draw nearer to the contemplatio^ of the face of God, not in
place, but in degree of glory: but this is nothing to salvation, neither
touches the purity of faith: and withal it was the opinion of many of the
ancients, namely of S. Augustine who upon Genesis in his twelfth book, cap. 35.
says, They see not God as the Angels do see him, because they have still a
natural desire to move their bodies, which withhold them, etc. A reason whereto
we will not subscribe: howbeit we see that he did think that after the
resurrection, the Saints shall have an increase of glory. Finally he accuses
us of sclandering Pope John the 22. Note the Monk says Ioh. 22. for 23. so to
omit Pope Johan. Page 35.
of being tainted with this heresy: wherein he shows himself a sclanderer
in print: for how is it possible we should hold that opinion, since we condemn
it in others? As for John the 22. alias 23. the case is to plain to be
dissembled: William Ockam in his work of 53. days, and Adrian in the question
of confirmation, do accuse him to have held that the souls should not see God
before the resurrection: Gerson in his sermon of the passover witnesses the
same and says that the Divines of Paris, with the assistance of Philip the
long, king of France, forced him to unsay it. Neither does it any whit help
the Monk to search whether the time quoted by Calvin be free from error* for
it imports not whether Gerson lived in the time of the said John or after, so
long as the matter is true: as Bellarmine [from whom the Monk borrowed this
Arithmeticall disputation] does confess in his fourth book De Pontifice Romans
in these words. In the behalf of Adrian I answer that this John did indeed
believe that the souls shall not see God until after the resurrection.
Iohannem hunc revera sensisse animas non visuras Deum nisi post resurrectione.
The autorities of the Fathers that he does afterward allege are false, and
hereafter shall be spoken of.

18 They do yet add one passage more out of the 12 of Matthew. v. 32. The fire
of Helie.
Whosoever shall speak against the holy Ghost it shall not be forgiven him in
this world nor in the world to come. This would not Jesus Christ have spoken
[say our masters] if there were not some sins that shall not be forgiven in
this world, but shall in the world to come: and this world to come is
Purgatory: wherein their memory fails them: for they say that Purgatory was
already in the time of Jesus Christ, then could not Jesus Christ call it in the
world to come. But if our men's reply be true, that Purgatory is the world to
come, in regard of every particular living person to whom this punishment is
yet to come, there shall be by that reason a thousand millions of worlds to
come, all differing in beginning and in continuance. This at the least does
remain, that with Jesus Christ [who spake] Purgatory could not be the world to
come. 2. Again Jesus Christ speaks of a world wherein sins are forgiven:
but they say that in Purgatory sins are punished: and that the pardon for all
manner of sins is already granted in the life through Jesus Christ only: In
Purgatory they bear the punishment of the sins already pardoned, Thus do
they run themselves on the Pikes, as also they answer nothing to the matter.
And as for the Friar his answers are ridiculous and have no correspondence with
that which I have said. The author of the fire of Helie does show by the example
of David and Achab that the sinner obtains mercy by the punishment: but he
deceaueth himself: for it is true as concerning such pains of this life as
tend to the amendment of the sinner: but not of Purgatory, where there is no
amendment: neither could this have bin better confuted then by cyting S.
Augustine, who says, Hie ure hic seca, vt in aeternu^ parcas. For he says
Hic, not in purgatorio. 3. Thirdly, what is this world to come then? Let us
learn it, not of these people which transform all things into matches to
kindle their Purgatory, but of Jesus Christ himself and his word. Jesus Christ
Luke, 20.35. tells us that this other world begins by the resurrection.
They [saith he] that shall be counted worthy to obtain that world and the
resurrection of the dead. Neither must we think it strange that it is said that
in that day sins shall be forgiven. 2. Tim. 1.18
1. Since S. Paul desires that God would show mercy to the house of one
Sephorus in that day: which is as much as to pardon the sins. 2. S. Peter
also Act. 3.19.20. says that in that day our sins shall be blotted out Amend
your lives that your sins may be blotted out when the time of refreshing
shall come from the presence of the Lord, and that he shall have sent Jesus
Christ who was before preached unto you. 3. Romans 8.23. Luke 21.28.
For as the holy Scripture calls that day the day of our redemption and
adoption, because that then it shall be fully revealed and consummate, so the
same day upon the same reasons may be called the day of remission of our
sins. And some sins there be which albeit by the judgment of the Church
they may be pardoned in this life, yet they shall not be pardoned in the last
day: such is the sin against the holy Ghost. To all this our adversaries are
as dumb as a fish, and endeavor by a great heap of the Fathers to prove that
sins are also forgiven in the world to come: but to what purpose, since we do
grant it? Shall this people be suffered to pervert our words and turn our
speech contrary to that which we believe? They beat the air and lose their
blows: and our Monk sclandereth me saying that I call the fathers our
adversaries: Sclander.
but where did I so?

19 The passage whereupon they do most insist is taken out of the first to the
Corinth. cap. 3. where S. Paul says Other foundation can no man lay the^
that which is laid which is Jesus Christ. If any man build upon this
foundation, gold, silver, precious stones, timber, hay, stubble, every man's
work shallbe made manifest: for the day shall declare it, because it shall be
revealed by fire: and the fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is:
If the work of any that has built therevpo^ do abide, he shall receive
ways. If any ma^s work burn he shall lose, but he shall be safe himself,
howbeit as by fire. For fire [say my men] is Purgatory, wherein the works are
tried by fire: for it is said, If any man's work burn, and again, He shall
be saved, but as it were by fire. All this is full of impossibilities and
absurdities. 1. First an article of faith must not be grounded upon allegories
says S. Hierom on Mat. lib. 2. Nunque Parobolae and du bia aenigmatum
intelligentia potest ad autoritatem dogmatum proficere. and so says Tertullian
also. But albeit S. Paul, who by revelation received the sense of the
Scriptures, did sometime use the Allegory as in the fourth to the Galathians,
it follows not that it is to be permitted to every new commer: much less to
men that plead for their own profit. Besides, the self same thing that S.
Paul teaches by Allegories is elsewhere proved by evident demonstrations.
Ierem. 30. Heb. 12.9.
But these men produce no manifest passage where it is said that after this
life there is a place wherein the souls of such as have not satisfied to the
full in this life must be purged by fire. They resemble foxes who being hunted
do save themselves in some thick bush: for they seek only thorny and dark
places. 2. It is here spoken of a fire that tries the work, but torme^teth
not the persons. 3. Also even in Purgatory the souls are not tried but
punished: for God needs not their trial to know them. 4. Again here it is
spoken of a fire wherein every man's work shall be manifest. In Purgatory
nothing is manifest to us. 5. Again, of a fire wherein every man's works are
tried: Page 17.18
then also the work of the Virgin Mary and of the Apostles, which moved the
author of the fire of Helie to make them also to pass through Purgatory: But,
he says, this fire shall be to them as the fiery furnace was to the three
children, which seemed a moist wind. Thus does this doctor imagine or mock: but
his companions say nothing. 6. It is here spoken of a fire that burns the
work, but not the souls: and upon this place it was that the Friar being
demanded whether was whipped, the thief, or the theft, answered [with the
mirth of all the assistants] that it was the theft that was whipped. 7. Hereto
adioine that it is said, if it burn the workman shall have loss: but in
Purgatory nothing is lost besides, although the sins were burned, yet in such
burning there should be no loss. 8. This examen and trial by fire is called
Day: but Purgatory [if we list to believe them] is under earth. The fire of
Helie denies that this fire is called Day: but note these words of the
Apostle, Every man's work shall be made manifest: for the day shall declare it,
because it shall be revealed by fire. For he sets this proof in the day
and in sight and therefore the fire of Helie has omitted these words, The day
shall declare it. It is in Greek. (...)
And the Friar has changed them and says The day of the Lord shall declare
them: This day of the Lord [say they] is the day of death: so large is their
liberty to falsify, and to wrest. For who did ever hear death called the day
of the Lord? Yea and admit this explication were receaueable: how is every man's
work then revealed and manifested? But the sense of this word, day, must be
taken from the same Apostle in the 13. verse of the next Chapter, where this
word (...) signifies trial and judgment. 9. Again, S. Paul says as by
fire, it is not then by fire: and to no purpose do they bring us in the words
of S. John Vidimus gloriam quasi vnigeniti: for the barbarism and
incongruities of the vulgar translation must not be admitted for a rule. The
author of the fire of Helie produces yet another passage out of the 125 Psalm,
where this word Quasi imports no similitude: but the truth it self. When
Syon returned out of captivity we were as comforted: but according to the
Hebrew original, We were as they that dream, and so has Pagnine and Arias,
and all good translations. 10. Also throughout all this passage there is not
one word whereby it may appear that this trial is made after this life: I
confess that the reward of the faithful is after this life: and the fire of
Helie need not to admonish us with such exclamations: for the question
concerns not the time of the reward, but the time of the trial. 11. Neither
is there any word that speaks of the torment of the souls: for the said
fire of Helie endeavoring to prove that here it speaks of torments is
deceived in his Logic. For these be his words. Does not S. Paul say, Page 16.
If any man's works burn he shall incur damages? Is not he that is
tormented, endamaged? An argument in the second figure, composed all of
affirmatiues.

He that is tormented endures damage
He whose works burn endures damage
The^ he whose work burns is tormented
Besides the first proposition is many times false and particularly in this
matter, considering that the torment of the souls in Purgatory is [if we
believe these men] without loss and to the good of the souls. Now herein I
must fra^kly confess that the auctor of the fire of Helie has yet some
dexterity in sophistry: Du Val.
but the Friar speaks like an Idiot and a man of a crased brain, for all his
discourse is spent in laying of maxims and principles, whereby he will have
this case decided, as if it were in him to impose laws and principles in this
business. And indeed if you look narrowly into the matter, you shall find
these principles to be the case it self: for they set down as a plain case
and confessed, that in this fire the people are tormented, and do feel the
trial of this fire. Now this is the point of the controversy and that which
we do stiff and steadfastly deny: that S. Paul speaks no such thing.
Howbeit in the end he must have the grace of it, and admireth my slacknesse, as
being incapable to comprehend his so childish principles. As for the
explication of this passage, it must be gathered out of that that goes before.
S. Paul in the 5. verse of this chapter speaks of doctors and pastors, and
of the preaching of the Gospel. And particularly of Doctors, who holding a
good foundation, which is Jesus Christ, do nevertheless add of their
inventions and slight doctrines, which he calls wood, hay and stubble, in
regard of the pure and solid doctrine, which he terms Gold, silver and
precious stones. This wood therefore and this stubble being examined by the
word of God, as metals in fire, can not subsist, but must needs be consumed.
But as concerning the parson of the pastor he shall be saved in regard of the
good foundation that he has holden, yet after trial made as it were by fire.
This explication is natural, and springs of it self: and every one that
knows that S. Paul here speaks of shepherds whom he names Builders,
Hieron. co^tra Iovinian lib. 2.
will easily admit this explication. And hereto do agree Saint Ambrose, S.
Hierome, Sedulius, Tertullian, in his first book against Marcion, cap. 6. yea
even the chief doctors of the Romish Church, Lyra, Thomas, Caietan, and
Bellarmine in his first book of Purgatory. cap. 4. They all hold, I say, that
these builders are the pastors and the preachers, Vtraque Hormildas Pope in
the Tomes of the counsels says that the builders are the doctors and the fire
the Synod. Dial. 4. c. 39.
and the building the preaching of the Gospel: yet does the Friar make a
scorn of all this and says that they be mere fopperies. This also is the
reason that in the front of his book he armeth himself with these titles, The
reverent father Friar James an Observantin Portugal: Doctor of Divinity and
preacher ordinary to the King, that so he may with the greater auctority fight
against his own Doctors and all antiquity. As concerning this fire S.
Augustine and Pope Gregory the first do say that they be the tribulations of
this life: Chrysostom, Nazianze^, Theophilact and Oecumenius do understand it
of hell: and among them there is marvailous discordance: It is also a pleasure
to read Bellarmine and to consider how he gathers the opinions of the
fathers and confuteth them all: for of five or six several opinions sometimes
he allows never a one, but brings in a new: sometime he retains that
which he best likes, or that most favors Purgatory.

20 The Friar also cites this passage out of the 21. of the Revelatio^. And
there shall enter into the city of Jerusalem no unclean thing, how little
soever, wherein we find a double falsehood, for these words how little soever
are his addition: afterward in this passage by the unclean are meant the
profane and reprobate, as appears by that which is added thereto. There shall
not enter therein any thing that is unclean or any that works abomination or
falsehood. This last word might have terrified him and caused him to have
apprehended the punishment denounced against falsifiers. Moreover nothing that
is unclean shall enter into Paradise: for the wicked are excluded, and as for
the good Jesus Christ purges them from all sin.

21 Cayer obstinately armeth himself to make use of the resurrection of
Lazarus in his proof of Purgatory: and yet is this argument trivial among our
adversaries: The soul of Lazarus [saie they] where was it before it did rise
again? It was not in hell: for from thence none comes again: neither in
Paradise: for then Jesus Christ should have done him wrong to fetch him from
thence: the^ must there be a third place, and the tail that they here add is
notable: that is, that this third place is a place of torment, Luke 16.25.
and a fire called Purgatory. Hereto we say, That the soul of Lazarus whom
Christ raised was in the same place with the soul of the other Lazarus
mentioned in the 16. of Luke, that is in Abraham's bosom, which is no place of
torment: for Abraham was there, and Jesus Christ says that Lazarus after the
miseries of this life was comforted. Neither should our adversaries think it
strange that God takes a soul out of the place of rest, to return it for a
short time into a place of combat and affliction, since Jesus Christ in John
11.4. says that it was done to the end the son of God might be glorified: for
the glory of God ought always to take place above all particular interest:
besides that God was able afterward to reward him with greater glory: The best
is that our adversaries at unawares do argue against themselves: for they
believe that Henoch and Elyas men already blessed, shall return down to fight
against Antichrist, and shall suffer persecution, yea and death it self. They
also say that the Pythonesse fetched the soul of Samuel from his rest. If they
hold that God permitted this to a witch and sorceresse for the contenting of
the ungodly curiosity of Saul, why will they not permit as much to Jesus
Christ for the glory of God and the advancement of the Gospel? But if this
Lazarus came forth of a burning fire, why brought he no news? Or could he
conceal a matter of such importance? or had he so soon forgotten so sensible
a torment? There are yet two passages that are common to all these doctors, S.
Paul, Philip. 2.10. says, Like as at the name of Jesus every knee should
bow, both of things in heaven, of things in earth, and of things under the
earth. Also in the fifth of the Revelation. And all the creatures which are in
heaven and on the earth, or under the earth, and in the sea, yea and all things
comprehended in them heard I saying: to him that sits on the throne, and to
the lamb be praise, honor, etc. With these passages they blow their Imaginary
fire, and say that they that are in heaven are the Saints: They that are upon
the earth are the people living. That they are under the earth are the souls
that are tormented in Purgatory. 1. But who shall be the creatures that are in
the sea? The fire of Helie says. They be the inhabitants of the Islands: that
is to say. The English, the Corses: the Candiots, etc. He takes these people
to be creatures that are not upon the earth. Let us not laugh but proceed and
hear how he proves it. He produces the sixth of Esaias in these words. Thy
heart shall rejoice when the whole multitude of the sea shall come unto thee. A
passage for the purpose. But read over all the whole Chapter and I will turn
Munke if you find any such word. 2. But why do they rather say that they be
the souls in Purgatory, then the souls of children that died without
baptism, who they say are under the earth. 3. Withal note that they add a
pretty patch which S. Paul and S. John had forgotten: namely that they that
are under the earth are tormented in fire for a time: for in defense of new
Divinity we must seek new Logic. 4. Neither are we to omit that this
passage is become a pair of bellows to Purgatory. Since they hold that it is
under ground: for according to Pope Gregory, Alcuyne, Peter Damyan, and others,
that place Purgatory in bathes, in Rivers, in the Ice, in the wind, and under
the leaves, this passage is to no use. And surely the fire of Helie who says
that the Church has defined nothing concerning the place where Purgatory
stands, Page 33.
has greatly overshot himself in using this passage and defining that
Purgatory is under the ground.

Now to prove that those that are under the earth are not the devils, they urge
these words of bowing the knee also these words of giving praise and glory
which the Friar falsely accuses me to have omitted. They say then that the
devils never bow their knees before God, neither praise him. For the bowing of
the knee does import a submissio^ and voluntary obedience. 5. In answer I say
that S. Paul himself in this self place shall decide this controversy: For
in saying that every knee shall bow, Sclander
of those that are in earth, he evidently comprehends all men both good and
bad: whereby it appears that bowing the knee does not in this place signify
voluntarily and religiously to serve, but only to be in subjection: or else
they must say that the wicked do voluntarily serve Jesus Christ. 6. Also in
this place S. Paul speaks of the sovereign Empire given to Jesus Christ over
all creatures, then withal over the wicked and devils which have been and
shall be forced to give glory to Jesus Christ. 7. We have another passage of
the same Apostle taken out of the five and forty of Esaias where this word to
bow the knee is plainly expounded: Luk 8.27.28.
for in the 14. to the Romans he speaks thus of the last judgment. We shall
all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, for it is written I live says
the Lord: let every knee bow before me, and every tongue give praise unto God.
In this place S. Paul takes to appear before the judgment seat of God, for
bowing the knee before God. The wicked therefore and the devils shall bow the
knee because they shall appear and be forced to acknowledge the justice of
God. In this regard does Iustine the Martyr in his dialogue against Triphon say
that the Infernal spirits are subject to Jesus Christ bowing their knees at
the bare pronountiation of the Cross. 8. As for the praises spoken of in the
fifth of the Revelation, they are the praises of all creaturs: of whom, even of
the inanimate, as of the heavens, the earth, the son, etc. The Scripture in
above a hundred places says that they praise the eternal: Psalm. 19. Psalm.
140. Psalm. 145.
especially in the Psalm 148. where this is repeated some twenty times.
Neither need we go any further then this passage, namely of the Revelation to
prove it. For he says, I heard EVERT CREATVRE which is in heaven: the^ the
sun, the stars, the Angels, etc. he also says, All that is on the earth,
under the earth, and in the sea, yea even all things that are comprised in
them, etc. It appears then that he speaks of all creatures: and this is it
that made our adversaries to omit these words yea all things that are comprised
in them, with a notable falsehood according to their custom, thereby to abate
the edge of Gods word and to take from him that which pierces the very
untruth. I should wrong the author of the fire of Helie if I should suppress
one inventio^ which he does very gallantly produce to show that the devils do
not bow to Jesus Christ. If [saith he] Du Moulin himself will not put of his
hat when we speak of the name of Jesus how can the devils be forced to do
it? The devils then by this Doctors saying, do wear hats, but they will not
put them of when we speak of Jesus. Is it because they are somewhat surly and
proud, or for that they fear the air? Note also that by this argument taken
from the more to the less, he does us this honor that he holds us less
wicked then the devils: and yet we flee not for his holy water. But in the end
I say this doctor is deceived in one point, and deceives in an other: he is
deceived in that he thinks that by the name of Jesus Saint Paul in this
place meant the word JESUS considering that the scripture by the name of God
ordinarily understands his auctority, his glory, his strength, his power,
etc. and so say we, Our help be in the name of God also hallowed be thy name
and I come against thee in the name of the Eternal. 2. Sam. 17.45. In this
sense we honor the name of Jesus: but our adversaries honor the syllables: and
thereof comes the feast and Mass of the name of Jesus: for as concerning his
parson there is a feast apart. But in this that he falsely accuses us, he
deceives. For if a man hearing the name of Jesus puts of his hat, we like
it well, so as it be done without superstition. But mark what it is. They use
many salutations to the name of Jesus, whiles in the mean time his parson is
wronged and his benefit abused: and they find out other redeemers and an
other purging for our sins: he is entreated as he was by those that buffeted
him saying unto him, All hail: Thus is Religion corrupted, which at this day
hold her hands in rule and gives godliness her pasport. Hereof it comes
that the service of the Church of Rome, namely the Mass consists in
gestures, in a set number of bowings in frisking from one end of the alter to
the other, in Allegorical habites, historied at pleasure, whiles the people
looking on learneth nothing: and is entertained with gestures, when they should
be instructed by the intelligible word. Thence comes also the galla^t
Interpretations of Pope Innocent the 3. of Durands Rationals and others, which
say that the Priest turns his back to the people because God said to Moses,
Thou shall see my back parts. That the miss all is laid upon a Quisheon
because it is written, Mat. 11. My yoke is easy and my burden light. That he
that serves the Priest at Mass moves and steppeth up and down as the Priest
does because Jesus Christ said, Where I am there shall my servant be also. That
the Gospel book is laid upon a deske in form of an Eagle because it was
written in the 18. Psalm, He flies upon the wings of the wind. That the
deakon goes in at one side of the pulpet and comes out at the other, because
it is written, Mat. 2. They were warned from heaven to return an other way.
And he that serves a Bishop at his Mass kisseth his shoulder looking a
scance on his face because it is written, 1. Cor. 13. We see now in part.

Thus is the whole battery of our adversary dismounted, which was not charged
but with stubble and hay against the truth: and here would I shut up this
chapter, did not the falsehoods of the fire of Helie detain me yet a while, so
extremely licentious is he in falsifying. Many of his falsehoods have we
already produced, yet here follow some more.

In the pages 40 and 41. to prove the Limbo of the fathers he alleges the
Apostle in the 11. to the Hebrews, Having been tried by the testimony of
faith, This word salaried is of his own invention.
they received not the promises, that they without us should not be made
perfect and salaried. In the 43. page he says that God by the leaves of the
fig tree closed up Ezechias sore and for that cites the 4. of Kings 26. and
Esaias 38. In page 44. to defend Purgatory in bathes, in ye, in rivers, etc.
he alleges Job. 24. in these words. The wicked that are in hell from a heat
of fire do pass to a coldness as snow. All this is false, and by him devised.
In the same place where S. Peter, Act. 2.24. says that God raised up Jesus
Christ having loosed the sorrows of death, he says the sorrows of Hell. In
page 56. to prove that the Pope may grant Indulgences for the dead, he makes
S. Paul, 1. Cor. 5. say The stewardship of Indulgences was by Jesus Christ
left to the Church, whereof there is not a word in the whole chapter. In page
66. be corrupts this excellent passage of Esaias, 57. Whosoever walks before
God goes in peace, he makes him say Whosoever walks before God walks in
peace.

In pages 69 and 70. he makes S. Paul say to the Colossians, 1.24. I fulfill
in my flesh that which wants in the passion of the Lord for his body, which
is the Church. Whereas it is I fulfill the rest of the afflictions of Jesus
Christ. Let the reader look upon the places and he shall find that almost
every where he corrupts and changes the words of the scripture: for of
many, we deliver but few examples, that so we may be the more brief cal^ing to
mind the commandment that is in the rule of S. Frances, Dominus fecit verbum
abbreviatum super terram, Romans 9.28. And therefore we must study for brevity.

CAP. 7. That the Doctors of the four first ages knew not Purgatory, with the
refutation of the passages alleged by our adversaries. Also the beginning and
progress of Purgatory, of prayer for the dead, of Indulgences and
satisfactions, etc.
OUR controversies do not consist only in co^trariety of opinions but also in
diversity of means to search out the truth. Our adversaries will have the truth
to be judged by antiquity: we will have antiquity judged by truth. They seek to
prove the antiquity of their doctrine by the testimonies of men: we prove the
truth of ours by divine testimonies taken out of the holy Scriptures. The
Antiquity that they pretend requires infinite passages out of diverse auctors:
Tertul. in Marcionem lib. 1. Viva and Germana divinitas nec de novitate, nec de
Vetustate sed de sua veritate censetur.
the truth that we mainetaine may be defended by one only passage of the holy
Scripture. The way that we take is so much the shorter and better assured,
because reasons in disputations are better then years: and the auctority of
God then the testimony of men. And which is more No man can deny but the truth
is more ancient then the lie: for the lie is but a corruption of the truth:
whereof it does ensue that when a man has proved the truth of a doctrine, he
has also proved the antiquity thereof. But contrariwise antiquity proved a
man may nevertheless doubt of the truth. For lying has been even from the
beginning and is in a manner as ancient as the truth: which eve^ since the fall
of Adam has borne the devils contradictions who said, No, you shall not die.
And that we may speak but of Christianity, S. Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. tells
us that in his time the entry of the son of perdition was prepared and the
mystery of iniquity was in working. But if we guide our selves only by the
time, what is there in the Church of Rome whereby she may oppose against
Iudaisme or Paganism? Again, if prescription may have place in Religion, let
them tell us how many years may suffice to auctorise a doctrine? Or how many
testimonies of men shall we need to institute an article of faith? But we say
that lapse of time gives no authority to the gospel: also that the truth is
of as great force alone as in company: That for the decision of doubts we are
to bring the balance of reason, rather then the calculation of years. Yea I
say that he that teaches the truth but vnderproppeth it with the testimonies
of men, in weening to establish it does overthrowe it: Theod hom. Eccl. l. 1. c
7
a lie being no greater fault then such a defense of the truth. For it is as
much as if a man should arm himself with paper and taking up strawes instead
of weapons, should in this furniture expose himself to the power and malice
of the Devil. The word of God naked is of more force then so armed. Synod.
Constantinop. 6 Act. 1. Propositis in medio sacrosanctis Evangeliis.
In that regard did the ancient Church in the beginning of their Synodes lay
nothing upon the table but the books of holy scripture: but our adversaries
have great interest not to be content with this simplicity: for even in the
beginning a number of questions should be decided, considering that in the
Romish Church they confess that they teach many things whereof they have
neither commandment nor example in the holy scripture: As Invocation of
Saints: worshipping of Images: praying in a language unknown to him that
prays: Priests vows and single life: Elevation and adoration of the
Sacrament, etc. Therefore do they seek a farther way about, and having wrested
the holy scripture out of Lay men's hands, they cry out the fathers, nothing
but the fathers: in liew of the sovereign father, which is God: who^
nevertheless they do at every opportunity hit handsomelie over the tho^bs:
and when these ancient doctors do co^tradict each other in the explication of
the scriptures [as many times they do] these our Masters take upon them to be
the moderatours and judges in their contrary opinions: allowing sometime one
and reproving sometimes an other, and sometimes rejecting all and bringing in
some explication more to the Popes avail. They will grant the fathers to be
our judges, but with proviso that the Church of Rome shall judge of the Fathers.
Let any man read the writings of the Jesuits, Maldonat, Gregory of Valentia,
or Bellarmine, and he shall see that I say the truth.

This manner of disputation is to the^ more commodious, as giving the^ means
in their need to find a starting hole: for it is an infinite field, a
bottomless sea, a thick darcknesse wherein to shrowde themselves; as seeking
only how to cavil and delay their plea. For among so many auctors as might
fill a house it is an easy matter to find somewhat to wrest to a man's own
advantage, and never to be perceived, because few me^ have these books, and of
them that have them few do read them, and of those that read them fewest of all
do understand them: for the fathers ordinarily are repugnant among
themselves, and not only among themselves, but every man in himself, and do
retract and confess his ignorance. Yea I dare say there is never an heresy,
howsoever extravagant, for the which we cannot find some especial passages
in some of the doctors: besides these diverse ages have retained the ancient
words, but altered the doctrine: as also the phrase of many of them is obscure
and subject to sundry interpretations: besides that many usual words have
altered their significations. As these, Indulgences, satisfaction, Pope,
Bishopric, altar, oblation, sacrifice, merit, station, sacrament,
excommunication, penance: words extant in many auctors, but in an other sense
then in these days: and yet it is an easy matter to make the^ pass for such,
as at this day we take them, and in regard of the resemblance of the mark,
to persuade men that they are of the same substance. Moreover if any Doctor
has forgotten him self or has used any difficult terms, these will our
adversaries stand upon, and use them to their most adva^tage: therein resembling
such beasts as can live upon serpents, At Paris by Nivel. in S. James Street at
the storcks 1571.

Ex sanctiss. concilii Trid. Decreto veterum patru^ Codices sunt expurgendi Cum
in Catholicis veteribus plurimos feramus erreres, and extenu^mus, excusemas
excogitato per saepe negem^^.


or beetles: or Cham who discovered his fathers shame. But the greatest
inconvenience is that the copies are diverse and discordant, mangled and
falsified, yea and so far as to have some tracts of other men suggested and
inserted into them: whereupon I remember that I propounded to the friar the
preface to the last edition of S. Augustine, wherein our masters the correctors
do confess that they have changed some things and taken forth the errors
intruded by the malice of heretics: that is to say, all that mislike them: and
in plain terms they say that The books of the ancient fathers must be
purged according to the decree of the tridentine Council, and to the same
purpose I alleged the Confession of the doctors of Doway in their Expurgatory
Index in the letter. The Index is printed at Antw. by Plantin 1571. by authority
of K. Phil. and the D Alua.
B. where speaking of the purging of the book of Bertram, they say thus.
Considering that in all other Catholic autors we bear with many errors, which
we do extenuat, shake of, and often times, excogitato commento, deny by some
feigned Invention, and do insert into them some commodious sense, we see no
reason wherefore Bertram deserves not the like equity, and the same diligent
review. And this was the place where the Monk said that Excogitatum Commentum
signified a Commentary. But in this book page 1. He says that it is an
explication devised contrary to the text. Thus does he confess that it is his
occupation to bring in such explications, unless he should shrink from the
union of those purgers auctorised by his holiness.

Here might I allege a great heap of falsifications brought in by these
correctors, albeit we know not the hundred part. Yet are we greatly to praise
God, who has not suffered them to compass their intents: but among the
fathers has yet left us sufficient weapons to fight with the Church of Rome:
And that is it that in this chapter we are to produce: yet with this
protestation, that I allege not the doctors and fathers, as meaning upon
their auctorities to hang the truth of my cause: but to show how our
adversaries do abuse them and make them to speak many things contrary to
their own opinions. I take them not to be advocates in my cause: but am my
self their advocate: For Jesus Christ John. 5.14. tells us that he craveth
not the testimonies of men, neither does his word need their witness. The
truth that those good men have spoken we do believe, not because they spoke it,
but because we find it in the word of God. And this is the reason that I
reserved this tract to the end, least I should mix divine auctority with
humane. This is a chapter rather not superfluous then necessary: which we give
not to the necessity of the matter, but to the stiffneckednesse of the age,
wherein the holy scripture is grown into suspicion: and men open their cares
when we speak of Origin, Ambrose, Tertullian, etc. But stop them when we
speak of the Prophets or Apostles. Bellarm. de verbo Dei. lib. 4. cap. 12
The holy Bible [say they] is a book for heretics: a sword for all hands: a
pecce of a rule: a forest of forraging: yea, says the author of the three
truths It will make a man become an Atheist.

Passages of the ancient Doctors against Purgatory.
Justin Martyr in his 75 question. After the departure of the soul out of the
body there is immediately made a distinction between the good and the bad: for
by the Angels they are brought into the places worthy for them: the souls of
the good into Paradise, where is the haunt and view of the Angels: the souls
of the bad into hell Himself in his 60. question says, that men cannot after
the soul is departed from the body by any provision care, or study, get help
and succor. Cum anima a corpore evellitur, statim aut in Paradiso promeritis
bonis collocatur, aut certe pro peccatis in in ferni tartara praecipitatur.
S. Augustine in his book of the vanity of the world. tom. 9. c. 1. Know ye
that when the soul parts from the body, she is for her good works
instantly placed in Paradise, or for her sins cast headlong into the pit of
hell. And our masters the Expurgators in their last edition at Paris found
themselves so puzzled with this saying that they set down in the margent. Vbi
nunc Purgatorium. Where now Purgatory is. Himself in his first Chapter of his
second sermon of Consolation over the dead says. Recedens anima ab Angelis
suscipitur and collocatur aut in sinu Abrahae etc.

Tertium penitus ignoramus immo nec necesse esse in Scripturis sanctis venimus.


The soul at her departure, if she be faithful, is by the Angels taken and
carried into Abraham's bosom: if a sinner, into the charter of the infernal
prison. Himself in the fifth book of his Hypognostique says The Catholic
faith grounded upon divine authority believes the first place which is the
kingdom of heaven, from whence all that are baptized are excluded: also the
second, which is hell, where every Apostata and such as are estranged from the
faith of Christ shall endure eternal punishments. For any third place we know
none, neither do we find any such place throughout the holy Scriptures. Yea
and which is more: In this place S. Augustine maintains that Children not
baptized are excluded out of the kingdom of heaven, and thereupon gathers
this consequence S^th they are not in Paradise they must of necessity be in
hell and in eternal torment, because there is no third place. Surely he would
never have been so rigorous toward these children, had he known of any place
of punishment more gentle and easy, as Limbo or Purgatory. The fire of Helie
page 37. says that S. Augustine denies any such place as Pelagius does paint
forth. A matter that this Doctor very presumptuously has invented: for he
there does simply deny and says that there is no third place at all neither
does he there speak of any delights, as he would make us believe. In his 14.
sermon upon the words of the Apostle he terms the right hand the kingdom
of heaven and the left damnation with the Devil: and then adds There is no
middle place where thou may put the children. And soon after, Nullum medium
locum in Evangelio novimus. We find not any middle place in the Gospel. In his
18. Sermon he reproves those who taking liberty to do evil, have nevertheles
some hope. Duo enim sunt loci nec tertius est vllus.
He [saith he] that is such a man let him choose where he will dwell whiles yet
be has time to change, for there are but two habitations, the one in the
eternal kingdom, the other in everlasting fire. In his 232. sermon, which is
against drunkenness, Dear brethren, let no man deceive himself for there are
but two places and no third. He that has not deserved to reign with Christ
shall no doubt perish with the devil. In his book of the deserts of sin and
of the forgiveness of the same, cap. 28. There is no middle place, and
therefore he that dwells not with Jesus Christ cannot abide any where but
with the devil. Our adversaries say that S. Augustine speaks of eternal
places and acknowledges but two: wherein they do diversely deceive us. 1. Read
the passages and you shall see that he speaks in general of all the places
whatsoever. 2. Had he known of any place of temporal punishment, when he so
often said that there were but two, and no third at all; he would surely have
added some restriction, as that he meant not to exclude Purgatory, and the
places of temporal torment but spoke this only of the eternal places. 3.
Which is more, we see by these passages that he excludes the childre^s Limbo,
which cannot be eternal: for the Church of Rome places it under the earth,
which also cannot be eternal, but according to the Scriptures, must perish. 4.
But what an absurdity is it to say that he speaks but of the eternal
places? For that is it that we maintain: neither could he speak but of these
two eternal habitations Heaven and Hell, because there is no other. 5. Finally
we have alleged such passages as can in no sort admit this distinction: as
where he says that instantly after death they are carried either into Paradise
or into Hell. But let us again hear the same Father. In quo quecunque
inuenerit suus novissimus dies in hoc cum comprehendet mundi novissimus dies,
quia qualis in die isto quisque moritur, talis iudicatur
In his 80. Epistle which is to Hesichius. In like estate as the last day of
man's life shall find him, in like estate also shall the last day of the world
take hold of him: for such as a man shall die in that day, such shall he be
judged in the last day. Co^ferre this with that which our adversaries do say:
and represent to your selves a man that dies laden with many sins, for the
which he must be a long time tormented and purged in Purgatory: at the end of
which Purgation he shall come forth purged and cleansed: Surely I say that the
soul of such a one cannot in the day of judgment appear such as she came
forth of his body for [say our men] she came forth unclean and in need of
purging, but now she is represented clean and purged in the day of judgment,
and so this saying must be false, Qualis moritur talis in die illo iudicatur.
Such as he dies such shall he be judged in the day of judgment. Himself in
the 9. book of his confessions cap. 3. says that his friend Nebrides deceased
lives in Abraham's bosom, sine fine foelix, for ever happy. Again in the
fifth of his 50. homilies Let us be at one with the word of God while we are in
this life: Posteaquam de hoc saeculo transierimus nulla co^punctio vel
satisfactio remanebit. Index restat and minister and carcer.
for when we are gone out of this world there shall be no more compunction or
satisfaction: there remains no more but the Judge, the serieant and the
prison. But Purgatory is the principal and grievous satisfaction of the church
of Rome. After this life there is no satisfaction says S. Augustine, then no
Purgatory. This is also to be noted that this good Doctor says this in his
exposition upon that passage of Matthewe which our adversaries do make most
use of for their Purgatory. Agree with thy adversary quickly whiles thou art in
the way with him, least thy adversary deliver thee to the Judge, etc. It is
much to be marvailed that throughout all this homely he speaks not of
Purgatory: but how much more is it that eve^ there he overthrows it? Himself
in his 37. sermon upon the words of the Lord, wresteth from our adversaries
their chiefest principle, which is the sole foundation of Purgatory. That Jesus
Christ has indeed discharged and acquitted us from the fault, but not from the
punishment. But he says. Suscipiendo paenam and no^ suscipiendo culpam and
culpam delevit and poena^.
Jesus Christ taking upon him the punishment, but not the fault has there by
blotted out both the fault and the punishment. And this after Tertullian in
the fourth Chapter of his book of baptism. Exempto reatu, eximitur and poena.
Now all these sentences of the doctor should be taken for so many resolutio^s
upon a doubt that sometimes had troubled him: Whether after this life there were
any temporal torment and a purging fire. In his manual to Laurentius cap. 68.
he says that this fire which tries every man's work, and is spoken of by S.
Paul. 1. Cor. 3. is the trial of affliction and he says it is in this life.
In the next chapter following, Tale aliquid post hanc vita^ fieri incredibile
non est, and vtrum sit queri potest. etc.
continuing the same argument, he says, It is not altogether incredible but
that some such matter may happen after this life: and a man may doubt or
enquire whether it be so: whether it may be found, or whether it be a matter
hidden, that some faithful have been saved by some purging fire either sooner
or later according as they have more or less loved the transitory goods.
Again in his first question of his book of Dulitius 8. questions. Be it that
men do suffer such afflictions only in this life, Sive etiam post hanc vita^
talia quaedam iudicia subsequu^tur non abborret quantum arbitror a ratione
veritatis.
or that some such punishments may follow after this life, it is not a matter
as I think altogether estranged from appearance of truth, thus to understand
this sentence.

In this 26. Chapt. of his 21. book of the city of God he is yet in greater
doubt: and having doubted whether me^ are to suffer a fire of transitory
tribulations, whether there only, that is, to say after this life, or both here
and there: or here to the end not there, he lastly concludes without
conclusion, I do not reprove it, for peradventure it may be true. As for some
other passages wherein he seems to speak for Purgatory, we will come to
them hereafter.

Tertullian is so far from believing that the souls after their departure out
of their bodies are sent into any temporal fire, that he does even think
that the soul cannot suffer any torment so long as it is separate from the
body. Neque pati quicquam potest anima sola sine stabili materia, id est carne.
Testes nobis sunt Evangelii dives and pouper, quorum vnum angeli in sedibus
beatarum and in Abrahae sinu locaverunt alium statim poenae regio suscepit.
These be his words in the 48. chapt. of his Apologeticall. The soul alone can
suffer no thing, without some solid matter [that is] without flesh. Hilary
upon the second Psalm toward the end says. Hell receaveth us at the very
instant: and if we have lived so when we depart out of this body we perish from
the right way. Hereof have we for witness the rich man and the poor in the
Gospel of whom the one was by the Angels placed in the seat of the blessed,
and in Abraham's bosom: the other was received into the Region of torments.

Theodoret in the fifth book of his history, cap. 9. Dominus nost^^ humano
generi absolutissimam contulit salutem, vt hominem totuma toto peccato
occupatum a toto peccato liberaret.
cites an Epistle of Damasus which says, Christ the son of God, our Lord has
by his passion conferred to mankind a most accomplished salvation, to the end
to deliver from all sin man wholly possessed with all sin. But this must
be false, if the faithful shall yet endure torments to satisfy to God for
their sins. We have also S. Cyprian, a mighty enemy to Purgatory. In his works
he has an excellent tract of mortality, wherein we are to note that he
therewith comforts his auditory in a time of Contagion, and speaks of the
death, not of the Martyrs, but of such as dyed by sickness. Lord now leauest
thou thy servant in peace, protesting and proving that the servants of God do
the^ enter into peace, Expuncta hac morte ad immortalitatem venimus
yea into a free and quiet rest, when being taken out of the troubles of this
world, they arrive in the haven of Eternal rest, and when from this mortality
they enter into immortality. And again, God does promise thee immortality at
thy departure out of this world, and do thou doubt of it? The^ do thou not
know God. Again wishing the living not to weep over their dead brethren, he
says, accersione dominica de saeculo liberatos. Non exitus sed transitus and
temporali itinere and de cursu ad aeterna transgressus.
That God having called them to him, they are delivered from this world. Non
amitti, sed praemitti. That they be not lost but sent before. That we should
not put on black garments when our friends put on white: that death is the
passage to eternity. How cold would these comfortes be to such as should
think their deceased friends to be tormented in a fire? Surely such have great
cause to lament as think that their friends are in such horrible flames and of
so long continuance: Eius est mortem timere qui ad Christum nolitire Eius est
ad Christum nolle ire quise non credit cum Christo incipere regnare.
who cannot be said to put on white but red robes when they shall be thrown
into such scortching flames and scalding heates. In the same sermon. He may
fear death that will not go to Christ Jesus. It is not for him to be
vvilling to go to Jesus Christ who believes not that he does begin to reign
with Jesus Christ. Aevi temporalis fine co^pleto ad aeternae vel mortis vel
immortalitatis hospitia dividimur. Amplectamur die^ qui assignat singulos
domicilio suo, qui nos laqueis secularibus exutos paradiso restituit and regno
celesti.

Quando istinc excelsu^ fuerit nullus iam locus poenitentiae est, nullus
satisfactionis effectus.

Tusub ipso licet exitu, and vitae temporalis occasu pro delicto roges Deum,
venia confitenti dabitur, and credenti Indulgentia salutaris de divina pietate
conceditur, and ad immortalitatem sub ipsa morte transitur.


In the same place speaking of death, Ad refrigerium iusti vocantur ad
supplicium rapiuntur iniusti. Datur velocius tutela fidelibus, perfidis poena.
That is, the righteous are called to a refreshing: the wicked are haled to
torments. Safety is soon granted to the faithful: and to the transgressors
punishment. The same in his tract against Demetria, This temporal life ended,
we are severed into the habitations either of death or of Eternal life: he
also speaking of the day of death, says. Let us embrace the day that brings
every man into his house, which having drawn us out of the snares of this
world returns us into Paradise and into the kingdom of heaven. Also toward
the end of the same treatise. Being departed hence, there is no farther place
for penance neither any fruit and effect of satisfaction. Then he adds, If at
Gods hand thou cravest pardon for thy sin, were it even at thy end and
departure out of this temporal life, yet upon thy confession it should be
granted thee, and through the Divine goodness salutary forgiveness is given to
all believers: and in death it self we pass to immortality, What could he
have spoken more expressly against Purgatory? Again in his aforesaid sermon of
mortality, Qualem te inuenerit Deus cum vocat, talem iudicabet, such as God
shall find then when he calls such will he judge thee. He there speaks of
the day of judgment. One place of Cyprian do our adversaries allege, but
they corrupt it, as we will hereafter show. Cyrill of Alexandria in his 12.
book upon John cap. 36. says, The souls of the Saints departed from their
bodies remain not upon earth [then not in a fire under the earth, Firmitur
credentes in manibus Dei nos post mortem futuros vitamque multo meliorem ac
perpetuo cum Christo victuros.
not in bathes, not in rivers crept] but are in the hands of God the father.
And then he adds, For Jesus Christ has returned his soul in to the hands of
his father, to the end that the beginning being made by her we may have a
steadfast hope hereof: steadfastly believing that after death we shall be in the
hands of God and shall for ever live with Christ in a far better life. S.
Hierome in his Epistle to Marcella concerning the death of Lea, Scimus
Nepotianum esse cu^ Christo.
also in his Epitaph of Nepotian and Basil, says that their souls do already
enjoy the eternal beatitude, that they are already entered into the light, that
they were received by a quier of Angels. Himself upon the 9. of Amos. When the
soul freed from the bonds of this body has her liberty, Quando anima vinculis
relaxata corporis, volandi quo velit seu quo ire compellitur propter tenuitatem
substantiae habis erit libertate^ aut ad inferna ducetur, aut certe ad sublimia
sublevabitur.
in regard of the thinness or lightness of her substance to fly where she
list, or at the least where she is enforced to go then shall she be led into
the hell whereof it is written: sinners shall be reduced or cast into hell: or
else she shall be exalted into the Celestial heavens. Bellarmin in his first
book of Purgatory cap. 9. alleges this place and falsifieth it both in the
words and in the sense. He says that S. Hierom speaks of the unbinding of
the soul that is made by speculation: not of the transporting of the soul in
her substance, but by imagination: and to set the greater show upon this gloss
and contemplation, he omitteth these words propter tenuitate^ substa^tiae,
which do prove that S. Hierom spoke of the tra^sport of the soul in her
substance: with all that contemplation does not deliver the soul from the
body, neither necessarily tra^sporteth her into Paradise, or into hell: for
Contemplation has infinite other objects. Can. in praesenti.
In the decrees of the Romish Church. Causs. 13. Quest. 2 there is a Canon
taken out of S. Hierom and these be the words. In this present world we know
that we may help one another, either by prayer or by Council: but when we
shall come before the tribunal seat of Christ, neither Job, nor Daniell, nor
Noah can pray for any but every one shall bear his own burden. But the decree
has clowted on a tail and says that S. Hierom spoke of the impenitent. But
how can that be? For S. Hierom puts himself in the number saying, But when
we shall come. Gregory Nazianzen in the Epitaph of his brother Caesarius
says. I believe the words of the wise, namely that every honest soul that
loves God, when it is delivered from this body that is tied thereto, and is
departed away IMMEDIATELY it is admitted to the fruition and contemplation of
that good that attend it, and does rejoice in admirable pleasure. Upon this
principle does he ground his steadfast persuasion that his brother is already
blessed. Now was he neither Martyr nor Saint, nor otherwise qualified then the
ordinary of the faithful. The like he speaks in the Epitaph of his sister
Gorgonia.

S. Ambrose has written an excellent treatise of the benefit of death, De
bono mortis.

Vt corpus resolvatur acquiescat, anima autem co^vertatur in requiem sua^.


which is no other but a refutation of the Purgatory of the Romish Church. And
it is to be noted that he speaks of the death of all the faithful: but
omitteth the Saints and Martyrs more privileged by God. In this third Chapter
he does thus define death: Death is a separation of the soul from the body.
Then he adds, Now what does this separation saving that the body dissolveth
and rests but the soul is set in quiet and free, who if she be faithful
shall be with Christ. In the fourth Chapter he says that Death is a haven
after a storm: and that she reserveth us to judgment, such as she found
us: and adds that by her Transitura corruptione ad incorruptionem: a
mortalitate ad immortalitatem: a perturbatione ad tranquillitate^. We pass
from corruption to incorruption: from mortality to immortality: from trouble
to rest. Again in the 7. Requies post labores, finis malorum. Mors
stipendiorum plenitudo summa mercedis gratia missionis.
Chapter. The fool does fear death as the sovereign evil: the wise man does
desire it as a rest after labor, and the end of all calamities. In the same
place. Death is the fullness of wages: the sum of rewards: the favor or grant
of dispensation or license. In the tenth Chapter he mocketh such as think that
the habitation of souls is upon earth and says Animaru^ superiora esse
habitacula, scripturae testimonijs varijs probatur. It appears by many
testimonies of the scriptures that the habitation of the souls is above. In
the last Chapter speaking of himself and of all that believe in Jesus Christ,
he says, Intrepide ad Abrahamu^ patrem nostrum cum Dies advenerit proficisca
mur, intrepide pergamus ad illum sanctorum coetu^ etc.
When that day shall come let us go boldly to Abraham our father; to the
assembly of Saints: and congregation of the righteous: for we shall go to our
fathers; to the schoolemasters of our faith, to the end that albeit our works
fail us, yet faith may succor us and the inheritance be kept for us. And to
the end no man should think that he speaks only of the most holy and
perfect, he says Etiamsi opera desint, albeit works fail us: and soon after
he says that it does appertain to all the believers in God, and that When the
day of death shall come: to the end the Popes factors should not put of that
day to the issue out of Purgatory. Also that our adversaries may no longer
shroud themselves under this passage in the 12. of Matthew, Blasphemy against
the holy Ghost shall not be forgiven, neither in this world nor in the world to
come: he says in the second Chapter of the same book Qui hic non acceperit
remissionem peccatorum, illic non erit. He that will not here receive
remission of sins shall not be there.

S. Chrysostom hom. 75. in Matthew. If we now do not that we should, when we
come there, we shall have no means to satisfy. Again, hom. 22. ad populum
Antiochenum. Read the Scriptures of our Savior, and learn that none can help
us when we depart hence. Also in his 2. hom. upon Lazarus. Pay all here, that
without trouble thou may come to that tribunal seat, while we are here we
have great hope: but so soon as we are departed to go thither it remains
no longer in our power to do penance, or to blot out, or amend that we have
done amiss. Hereto Bellarmine answers that Chrysostom speaks of the
remission of mortal sins which no man says are remitted in Purgatory. And
all this is false: for Chrysostom speaks of all sins: and in any of all
these places: never makes distinction between mortal and venial sins: and
indeed he speaks of the wicked rich man, who was not punished for one sin
only but for all his sins: withal that our adversaries do hold that in
Purgatory they may bear the punishment for mortal sins: but that by the
mercy of God of eternal they be made te^porall. Yea they proceed so far as to
limit the time of this punishment, namely seven years for every sin, as we
showed in the first Chapter.

Likewise upon the 23. of Matthew, hom. 25. he says that penance after death
is as unprofitable as the Physician, who after death can do no good. The same
he says upon the first of Genes. hom. 5. Also upon the fourth to the Romans,
hom. 8. Where there is grace, there is forgiveness: where there is
forgiveness there is no punishment. Now punishment being taken away and
righteousness through faith granted, nothing may hinder us but that we shall
be made heirs of this promise which is by faith. Himself upon Matthew. hom. 32.
asks of the parents of the deceased these questions: Wherefore after the
death of thy friends, do thou call them poor? Why do thou desire the
Priest to pray for them? I know that thou will answer, it is to the end the
deceased may obtain rest, and find his judge favorable? and thou weenest that
thou must weep for these matters: but see thou not that even in the same
thou do wrong him? For considering that thou think he is gone into the
flowred fields, why do thou yet stir up great storms against him? Again in
his 70. hom. ad populum Antiochenum: speaking of the funerals and the duty that
we perform to the dead with torches and hymns, he says. What is the meaning
of these flaming lamps? No other but that we convey the Champions after the
combat ended? and these hymns, but that in them we glorify God and give him
thanks that he has crowned the dead, and freed him from all sorrows? that he
now keeps him about him having taken from him all uncertainties? all which
are actions of joy. He has almost the same words in the morality of his
fourth homily on the Hebrews. Both there and in his third homily on the
Philippians, he gathers that the duties that we perform to the dead, do
testify that their souls are in rest: for the people say Convertere anima mea
in requiem, My soul return into thy rest.

Again in his 32. homily upon Matthew. Tears and lamentations beseem the
enemy, not thee that go to rest: and surely Death is a quiet haven from all
troubles: Again, There is the spiritual bride bed, and celestial. And he
says that after death there is no more sorrow. To be brief. In Nilus Bishop
of Thessalonica we have an express book against Purgatory, which is an Apology
for the Greek Churches: wherein they say that this temporal fire was
condemned in the fifth Council: as also to this day, the Churches of the Greeks
and Russians, the Abissines and the Armenians know not what this Imaginary
fire means.

There also the Greek Churches do protest that S. Chrysostom never believed
any such matter, nether any of their ancient Doctors: whereof we do gather
that some places of this doctor, which seem to make for Purgatory either must
be understood of an other kind of Purgatory, such as was the purging fire of
Origin and Ambrose, which shall be spoken of hereafter, or else that those
passages are corruptly inserted and suggested: Tunc est tentatio finie^da
quando finitur and pugna and tunc est finienda pugna, quando post hanc vitam
succedet secura victoria: and paulo post, milites Christi labori osa
peregrinatione tra^sacta regnant felices in patria.

Illis omnia remissa sunt delicta, nihil ob delicta puni^is.


for likewise in the counsel of Florence, where the Greeks armed them selves
with the auctority of their Doctors, the Latins would not have forborne to
bring in these passages to convince them.

Prosper in his first book of Contemplative life cap. 1. says, Temptation
shall end, when the Combat is ended: and the Combut shall end when after this
life an assured victory shall succeed. Again soon after he says, The
soldiers of Jesus Christ after they have finished their laborious pilgrimage,
do reign happyly in their Country. Procopius upon Exodus. To those who by
faith are entered into the number of their confederates and brethren, and have
been made partakers of the divine nature by the participation of the holy
Ghost, all their sins are pardoned, and they have received no punishment for
their offenses.

Epiphanius in his second book of heresies, heresy 39, which is the same of
the Catares and Novatians, seems to have taken a smatch in the Confutatio^ of
Purgatory, where he says, In the age to come after a man's death there is no
more help by fasting; no more vocation of penance: no more exhibition of
Alms: he also says, It is as the corn that swells not after it is reaped:
neither can be spoiled with the wind. Finally he concludes, The Garners are
sealed up: the time is past, the combat is finished: the lists are voided, and
the Garlands are given. Now, says he, all this is finished at the departure
out of the body: after which departure our adversaries do impose grievous
penances, and augment the difficulty of the fight and torments, and do defer
the giving of the Crowns until the coming out of Purgatory: that is to say,
many hundreds and thousands of years after death.

Arnobius in his second book against the gentiles says, that Plato after this
life has set down Rivers of fire, in quibus animas asseverat volui, mergi,
exuri: where the souls are tossed, plunged, and burned. But himself
contrariwise does hold that the souls out of the bodies can endure no sorrow.
Quis hominum non videt quod sit immortale, quod simplex, nullu^ posse dolorem
admittere. Wherein albeit he erreth not, yet does it sufficiently show that
he believes not that the souls without bodies can after this life be cast
into a fire. Note also that throughout all antiquity we find no mention of
bulls: of fetching of souls out of Purgatory, of Indulgences for the dead,
aulters, and of fraternities that have privilege to fetch a soul out of
Purgatory: As this is but lately inve^ted, and as old age increases in
covetousness, so hate Avarice been more inventiue in this declining old age
of the world: for it is credible, that the Apostles and their first successors
omitted the fetching of fowls out of this fire by indulgences, for want either
of knowledge, either of ability, either else of good will. Also that together
with their greatness and riches, skill, spiritual power, piety, and charity
have grown up in the Bishops of Rome.

That the Doctors in the primitive Church in this matter had their errors,
which the Church of Rome rejects namely in this, that for the most part they
believed that the souls are detained in dens or corners until the day of
judgment: whereof nevertheless it appears that they knew not Purgatory.

Irineus toward the end of his fourth and last book condemns two opinions:
the one that hell is in the world: the other, that the soul which he calls
the inward man coming out of the body ascended into the region that is above
the heavens. Then he adds, For since our Lord went into the midst of the
shadow of death, where the souls of the dead remained, and is since corporally
risen again, and after his resurrection was received on high: It is evident
therefore that the souls of his disciples, for whom Jesus Christ acted and
suffered these things, shall also go into an invisible place to them appointed
by God, where they shall remain until the resurrection: afterward being
perfectly, that is, corporally raised as Jesus Christ was, they shall appear
in the presence of God: for no disciple is above his master, etc. In sum his
meaning is that herein the condition of the faithful deceased shall be
conformable to that of Jesus Christ, whose soul came not into the presence of
God before his resurrection, but was in darkness and in the shadow of death:
hereupon also does Erasmus in his preface to the fifth book of Irineus note
that Irineus did suppose that the souls dismissed from the bodies did not
immediately enjoy the sight of God, but are reserved in some secret place until
the resurrection The same father in the same book not far from the beginning
says that God has placed man in Paradise, Quapropter dicunt presbyteri
quisu^t Apostolorum discipuli eos qui sunt tra^stati illuc translatos esse.
which is the garden of Eden, from whence for his disobedience he was driven
into the world: and the^ he adds, Therefore the ancient fathers that were the
Apostles disciples, do say that such as are translated from hence, are
translated into that place. He therefore did think that the garden of Eden
from whence Adam was expelled, was the secret corner where the souls are
hidden until the resurrection. A frivolous doctrine, yet such as testifies
that in his time there was yet no speech of purgatory: which Erasmus also has
noted in the same preface.

Origin in his seventh homily upon Leuiticus says thus. Nondum sa^cti
receperu^t laetitiam sua^ etc.
The Saints no not the Apostles themselves have not yet received their joy, but
they expect until I be made participant thereof with them. And in his second
book of his principles toward the end he says with Irineus That the saints
after their decease are transported into the earthly Paradise. Eam Regionem
sinu^ dico Abrahae: et si non coel^stem sublimiocem tamen inferis interim
refrigerium praebituram animabus iustorum, donec comsummatio rerum
resurrectionem omnium plenitudine mercedis expungat.

Quae infra terram iace^t neque ipsa sunt digestis and ordinatis potestatibus
vacua. Locus enim est quo piorum animae and impiorum ducu^tur, etc.




Tertullian in his fourth book against Marcion, cap. 34. I call Abraham's bosom
that region, albeit not celestial, yet higher then the hels: which nevertheles
must give rest to the souls of the righteous, until the consummation of things
accomplish the resurrection through the fulness of reward. The same he repeateth
in his fourth poetical book against Marcion. cap. 6. and in his book of the
soul cap. 55. Constituimus omnem animam apud inferos sequestrari in Diem
Domini. We hold assured that every soul is sequestered into the lower parts
unto the day of the Lord. The same he also says, cap. 56.57.58. Nouatian in
his book of the Trinity and is to be found among the books of Tertullian,
cap. 1. says. The things that are under the earth, are not void of powers
digested and ordered. For it is the place whether the souls both of the
faithful and of the wicked are brought, feeling already the foreiudgement of
the judgment to come. Now were it to no purpose to say that Novatian was an
heretic: for it is well known he was never holden to be an heretic for
this opinion, but because he refused reconciliation to the Church to those
that were once fallen.

Chrysostom on the first to the Corinthians, hom. 39. If the body rises not
again the soul shall not be crowned, but be kept out of the celestial
beatitude. The same he says hom. 28. upon the Epistle to the Hebrews. In the
same father we find some sentences to the contrary: as indeed it was his
fault, to be of small constancy: and yet all that he says does yet make more
against Purgatory. And in his homily upon the Epistle to the Philippians. The
righteous whether it be here, or whether it be there, are ever with the king,
but there much more yea and more near: not as it were by the way: not in faith:
but face to face. And we consequently do say, not in a fire, not in a prison
under earth.

Theophil^ot, a follower of Chrysostom, upon the 11. to the Hebrews. The saints
have not yet obtained the celestial promises

Omnes in vna communi que custodia detinentur, donec temp adveniat quo maximus
iudex meritorum faciat examen.
Lactantius, lib. 7. cap. 11. Let no man think that the souls be judged
immediately after death: for they are all detained in a common prison until the
time come that the great judge takes the examination of what they have
deserved. Victor in Martyr upon the sixth of the Revelation, says that Saint
John saw under the alter the souls of the Martyrs, and those that were slain:
and these words sub ara he does expound sub terra. Thus then he places the
souls of the Martyrs and Saints under earth. S. Hillary upon the 38. Haec
humanae lex necessitatis est vt sepultis corporib. animae ad inferos descendant
etc
Psalm. It is the law of necessity where to man is subject that the souls
should descend into the lower parts, after the dead be buried. Which law Jesus
Christ for the accomplishment of a very perfect man, did not refuse. Neither
may we say that he speaks of the fathers of the old Testament: for in all
that place he has not a word of them: besides he would have said This was the
law: but he says, This is the law: Finally saying it is a humane necessity,
which Jesus Christ underwent, to become very man he shows that it is a
condition imposed upon all man kind, which if Jesus Christ had not undergone,
he had not participated in all that was proper to mankind. He also upon the
second Psalm says. The dai^ of judgment is the eternal retribution of
beatitude, or of punishment: but the hour of death in the mean time, holds
every one under her laws, whiles the bosom of Abraham, or the pain reserveth
every one to judgment.

Euthimius upon Luke. 16. says that the history of Lazarus is a parable,
wherein is described unto us what shall be done in the day of judgment. And
upon the 23. Psalm, he says, None of the righteous have received the
promises, and the kingdom shall be given in the day of the universal
retribution. Whereupon also Io. Hentenius a Monk of the order of S. Hierom
has noted in the margent that Euthimius as a Greek follows the errors of the
Greeks. S. Bernard in his 3. sermon of all Saints makes three habitations for
souls. Primum in Tabernaculis, secundum in Atrijs, tertium in C^^lis. The
first in Tabernacles, that in, this body, the second in Porches, the third in
heaven: these receptacles he terms hals.

As for S. Ambrose and S. Augustine, we find them wavering and unlike to
themselves sometimes speaking according to the truth, sometime carried away
with the common error. Ambrose indeed has before told us that the habitation
of the souls separated is above and in the 11 Chapter he says, Incer^^ supremi
Iudicij non verentur eventum. But in his second book of Abell and Cain, cap.
2. he says thus. The Pilot arrived at the shore, thinks not himself at the
end of his travail: for immediately he seeks a beginning of another
journey. The soul is losed from the body, Solvitur corpere anima ad huc tame^
futuri iudidii ambiguo suspenditur.
but yet abides in suspense upon the doubt and uncertainty of the future
judgment. If this be so, then does she not enjoy felicity before the day of
judgment. S. Augustine is of the same mind for in him we find sundry places,
wherein speaking of the souls of some persons deceased he thinks them to be
translated into heaven, and to be with God: but we find more places where he
holds the contrary and follows the common error, upon the 36. Psalm he
says that the soul departed from the body, shall not be in the kingdom of
heaven: well it may be in Abraham's bosom with Lazarus: for so does he call this
receptacle and to show that this was the common opinion, he says that no man
was ignorant thereof: These be his words. Post vitam islam parvam, nondum eris
vbi erunt sancti, quibus dicetur venite Benedicti, etc. Non dum ibi eris: Quis
nescit?

So in the ninth book of his Confessions cap. 3. he thus speaks to God, Thou
have losed Nebridius out of this flesh, Nebridiu^ carne solvisti and nunc ille
vivit in sinu Abrahae, quicquid illud est quod ille significatur.

Tempusquod inter hominis mortem and vltimam resurrectionem interpositum est
animas abditis receptaculis continet.

Socratis animarum receptaculis sedibusque requiescit.

Secundum apertissimam Domini sententiam etia^ ipse sentit tu^c visuros facie^
Dei, cum in Angelos profecerimus, 1. aequales Angelis facti fuerimus, quod erit
vtique in resurrectione mortuoru^


and now he lives in Abraham's bosom: whatsoever it is that is signified by
this bosom. Here he speaks as doubting. In his manuell to Laurentius cap.
108. The time that is between death and the last resurrection, contains the
souls in secret receptacles, according as every one is worthy of rest, or of
affliction. And in his 17. book of the City of God, cap. 9. This part of the
city of God which is gathered together from among mortal men, and must be
conioined with immortal Angels, is now a traveller upon earth, being subject
to death: whereas for those that are dead, they rest in the hidden receptacles
or seats of souls. In his Epistle to Fortunatianus According to the most
evide^t se^te^ce of our Lord, and S. Paul holds that we shall see the face
of the Lord when we shall be advanced even to the Angels, that is to say, that we
be made equal to the Angels, which shall be in the resurrection of the dead. I
will therefore make any man of understanding judge whether, the words
wherewith at this day they pray in the mass for the souls in Purgatory do
not testify that when this prayer was penned, the belief of the latin Church
was not concordant with it. Qui nos praecesserunt in signo fidei and dormiunt
in somno pacis.
These be the words. Remember O Lord thy servants that are gone before us in
the sign of faith, and do sleep in the slumber of peace: To the^ O LORD and to
all that rest in Christ, we beseech thee to grant place of refreshing, of
light, and of peace. Could this be spoken of souls so long tormented in a
fire, like to hell fire? What rest what quiet sleep in fire seave^ times more
hot then our ordinary fire? A fire that continues hundreds and thousands of
years? Undoubtedly this prayer was made for the souls that they thought to be
in the hidden receptacles, where they rested in expectation of the
resurrection: and felt some refreshing by the prayers of the living: Indeed we
have heard that such was the opinion of Tertullian, who also uses the like
terms in his book of Monogamy and wills the wise to pray for her husband
In refrigerium and adpostulet, vt in prima resurrectione consortium, entreating
some refreshing for him, and that he may accompany her in the first
resurrection. For this doctor believed that all the faithful should not rise
together, as in the last chapter of his book of the soul he does expressly
say, yea eve^ all the Greek Church is yet of that opinion: who denying
Purgatory do nevertheless pray for the dead, Vide Council. Ferrariense seu
Florentinum and Nilu^ de Purgatorio.
as not yet enjoying celestial felicity. And Guido in his sum of heresies
attributes the same error to the Churches of Armenia.

This was it that induced Pope John the 23. to maintain this opinion, and to
prohibit the divines of Paris from teaching otherwise: as witnesses Gerson in
his pascal sermon, and John Villanus in the tenth book of his history. This is
one of the heroical actions of the College of Sorbon and one of her last
gaspes of her dying liberty: for [saith Erasmus in his preface to the fifth
book of Ireneus] Johannes coactus, opere Theologorum Parisiorum, ad palinodiam
coram Galliaru^ Rege Philippo: non sinc buccina.

By all the premises it appears how irresolute the ancients are in this
question: how unfit they are to decide it: and into what Laberinthes they that
send us to the fathers to be directed by them do endeavor to entangle the
consciences. It also appears that the prayers for the dead, that are to be
found in these doctors do make nothing for Purgatory: but were made for their
refreshings in those receptacles, and for their salvation in the day of
Judgment: also for other intents whereof we will speak hereafter. This is one
degree of the bad dealing of my adversaries in their citing of the fathers.

That diverse of the fathers believed that the fire in the last judgment should
purge the souls of all men: even of the Apostles and Saints.
Clement of Alexandria was the first that declined from the purity and
simplicity of the doctrine of the Gospel, intermingling Platonicall Philosophy
there with: also his wheeling and capricious style did blast and corrupt all
that was natural or forcible in the simplicity of Gods word yea he proceeded
so far as to say in the sixth book of his Tapisseryes that the Greeks were
just, by Philosophy: also that Philosophy was give^ unto them in liew of the
Testamentes. By the same vanity was he likewise induced in the same book to
say that Christ and his Apostles descended into hell and there preached the
Gospel to the souls of the Gentiles and Infidels, who [saith he] were by that
preaching converted: he also holds that the souls of Infidels that are in
hell may yet be converted and come to salvation.

Orig hom. 3. in Psalm. 36. Omnes nos necesse est venire ad illu^ ignem etiam si
vel Paulus sit vel Petrus
Origin his disciple succeeded him in time, but outstript him in heresies, and
to this Platonicall humor has added thus much more: The wresting of all the
scriptures into allegories. He held that all must pass through fire, Iste
transit vnam and aliam septimanam immunditia sua and tertia demu^ incipiente ob
oriri septima na purgatur.
and that the Saints and such as were least laden with sin should but pass
through, and be but slightly singed: others not so pure should stay there a
week or two: but the wicked and the devils should abide there a longer time,
yet in the end after a long purgation should come forth of that fire and be
saved: as appears in his homily upon Leviticus: on the 25. of Numbers, and in
the sixth upon Exodus. He is of opinion that this Purgatio^ by fire must begin
at the day of Judgment, and at the entry into the world to come. In many
places, namely in his 8 homily upon Leviticus. Of which purgation S. Augustine
in his book of heresies [wherin he rancketh Origin among the heretickes] in 43
heresy says, Many doctrins has this Orige^ which the Catholic church does
not receive, whereof he is not wrongfully reproved, neither can his defenders
excuse him: but principally in the point of purgation and deliverance. Now let
all men judge with what conscience our adversaries can use the auctority of
Origin to establish their Purgatory. Now albeit this doctrine was rejected by
such as came after, yet the active and quick spirit of Origin drew many to
admire him, and into the minds of some infused the sparks of this purgative
fire: yet such as has no resemblance with the Purgatory of the Church of Rome.
Whereas he limiteth an end to the purgation of the devils, and then will have
them to be saved, therein he is not followed: otherwise he has followers so
far forth as he will have the fire in the last judgment to serve to purge
even the Saints and Apostles, Medico quoque de licto mora resurrectionis
expenso. Iustos cum iudicaverit, Deus igni eos examinabit. Tu^ quorum peccata
vel pondere vel numero praeualuerint, perstringentur atque amburentur.
some more, some less, according to the multitude and weight of their sins.

We have already heard one opinion of Tertullian in his last chapter of his
book of the soul that comes near to this, where he says, They shall pay
eve^ their least sins by the delay of their resurrection. Lactantius in his
seventh book cap. 21. When God shall have judged the righteous, he shall
examine them by fire, tho^ they whose sins shall prevail either in weight or
number shall by the fire be singed and lightly scortched. He speaks of a fire
that is not yet, but shall begin at the day of Judgment. The Friar page 63.
uses this passage for his Purgatory but he does but quote it, for he could
not for shame allege it at large.

S. Ambrose upon the 36 Psalm is as plain as any. Igne purgabuntur filii.
Levi igne Ezechiel, igne Daniel.
The sons of Levy shall be purged by fire, and Ezechiell, and Daniell. And
these, is they shall be examined by fire shall also say, We have passed through
fire and water. Two things he here delivers. The one that even the most holy
must pass by this fire: The other, that this purgation of the Saints, of
Ezechiel and of Daniell, etc. is not yet: for he says, Purgabuntur,
Examinabuntur. Omnes op^rtet transire per flamma^, sive ille Johannes
Evangelista sive ille sit Petrus.
They shall be purged and examined. Again in his 20 sermon upon the 118 Psalm
he says thus, All must of necessity pass through the flames, yea were it John
the Evangelist whom our Lord loved: or were it Peter, to whom he delivered the
keys. And there he still speaks of a fire which is not yet: which also must
be even for the most holy. Again in the same place he uses the Allegory of
the flaming sword placed in the entering into the earthly Paradise, and that
with far more dexterity then our adversaries, who practice to make use of it
for their Purgatory: for Ambrose who refers this purging fire to the day of
judgment has some small color for his Allegory because the last judgment is
the entry and as it were the gate into the Eternal kingdom, as this sword was
in the entry into the terestriall Paradise: But there is no more proportion
between this sword and the roasting of souls after death, then between S.
Peter and the Pope.

S. Hierom takes the same course, and as he was a great imitator of Origin, so
does he follow him in this: excepting so much as concerns the purging of
devils and Infidels. He therefore in the last lines of his Commentary upon Esaias
sets down two sorts of Impious and wicked persons. The one that are
Christians: the other that are not. Peccatorum, atque impioru^ and tamen
Christianorum quoru^ operae igne probanda sunt atque purganda, moderatam
arbitramur and mixtam clementiam sententium Iudicis.
He holds that the torments of the devils and of the wicked that are no
Christians shall be Eternal: but as for the wicked and ungodly Christians,
their works shall be purged by fire: and that the sentence of the judge shall
be moderated and mixed with mercy. The Friar according to his usual fidelity
page 36. cites this place for his Purgatory: as also he makes use of the
auctority of Origin.

The same father upon the 46. of Ezechiell terms the last day, which is the
day of the Resurrection, Omnis creatura ad comparationem creatoris immunda est
ac divino igne parganda.
The Sabbath and the seventh day, and says, Every creature in comparison of
the Creator is unclean, and must be purged by divine fire. He the^ here
tells us two things: one that this fire is for every creature, and
consequently for the Saints and Martyrs: the other, that this fire is not yet,
for he says purganda and expreslie he specifieth that it shall be in the last
day which he terms The Sabbath and the seventh day. Emundatio que nos S.
spiritus sanctificet ad^^entu, iudicii igne no^ decoquat. Hilar. Can. 2. In
Matt. Baptisatis in spiritu sancto reliquum est ^^^summari igna iudicii
S. Hilary upon the 119. Psalm, in the pause Gimel expounds how many things
are to be used in the purging of us from our sins, besides Baptism: and
there he brings in the holy Ghost sanctifying of us, and the fire of
Judgment that does purify us. And in the same pause or section he does more
plainly deliver his opinion: which is, that the fire in the day of judgment
must bake and burn the faithful, yea even the Virgin Mary. These be his
words. An cum ex omni otioso verbo rationeu^ simus praestituri, diem Iudicij
concupiscimus in quo nobis est indefessus ille ignis obeandus in quo subcunda
sunt gravia illa expiandae a peccatis animae supplicia. Again soon after. Si
in Iudicij severitatem capax illa Dei virgo ventura est, desiderare quis a Deo
audebit Iudicari? To be brief, his fear of the heat of this fire, which
must burn even the Virgin Mary does keep him [saith he] from desiring the day
of judgment. Of this fire then does Gregory Nazian speak in the passage
alleged by the Friar page 84. Whereout I gather two things. First how easily
man's spirit is misled, when it strayeth from the word of God: secondly that my
adversaries do abuse the people and persuade them that these Doctors do speak
of Purgatory. They do indeed speak of the fire of the last judgment: likewise
that they make mention of a torment reserved to those only that have not
sufficiently satisfied in this life when they speak but of a torment or
purgation common to all the faithful, to the saints, to the Martyrs and to the
Virgin Mary. And this is a second degree of their unfaithfulness in their
allegations.

S. Augustine, who throughout the whole course of this question, has showed
himself inconstant in his 20. book of the City of God, cap. 25. says well
that in the day of judgment the fire shall to some only stand instead of the
pains of Purgatory. Ex his quae dicta sunt videtur evidentius ap parere in
illo Iudicio quasdam quorundam poenas purgatorias futuras. The Friar page 37.
cites this passage, but to dissemble that S. Augustine spoke of the day of
judgment, he concealeth these words, In illo Iudicio. Again in his 16. book
of the city of God. cap. 24. Significatur isto igne dies Iudicij dir imens
carnales salvandos per ignem and igne damnandos. This day signifies the day of
judgment, which must discern the carnal men who are to be saved by the
fire, and who to be condemned into the fire. There is nothing so evident. This
error is condemned then by the Church of Rome, which could not fit it self to
this Purgatory that begins not until the day of the resurrection: very well
foreseeing that the Popes Indulgences and dispensations could have no color,
if they should dispense with this purging: whereto the fathers subjected the
Apostles, yea even the blessed Virgin, which also is of so short continuance.
And therefore it was requisite to make a Purgatory that should begin immediately
after death, and a torment equal with the torments of hell, long and horrible,
from whence the Pope might exempt and fetch forth by his Indulgences such as it
pleased him.

That the Fathers do speak of another purgation by fire, which is in this life
The ancients do often use the Allegorical words of S. Paul, 1. Corin. 3.
namely of stubble, hay, wood, of trial by fire, and they term the
afflictions and penance of this life a fire, or a trial or purgation by fire,
S. Hierom upon the 3. of Matthew speaking of this fire says that when the
children of Levi shall be purged, they shall offer sacrifices acceptable to God
for Judah and for Jerusalem, which cannot be done but in this life and that by
fire.

S. Augustine in the 21. book of the city of God, cap. 13. We confess that
in this life there be Purgatory pains: Nos in hac mortali vita esse quasdam
purgatorias poenas confitemur.
but such as are purging to those who being exercised in them, do amend their
lives. And in cap. 26. Such delights and carnal loves shall be burned by the
fire of tribulation. To this fire do belong the loss of kindred and all sorts
of calamity.

Mark this Canon of Pope Siricius which is to be seen in Luityrandus and
others. Vt in suis ergastulis detrusi Purgatorio possiat poenitud nis igne
decoqui.
He commanded that the Monks should immediately be driven out of the
Monasteries: to the end that being shut up in their workehouses they might be
baked in the Purgatory fire of penance. He terms the labor of a Monk shut
up in a shop and tied to travail [as it was the custom of the first Monks to
have an occupation and to labor with their hands] a Purgatory fire. S. Gregory
in his fourth dialogue, cap. 39. speaking of the fire whereby men be saved,
says, It may be meant of the fire of the tribulations of this life. And S.
Augustine in his Manuel to Laurentius cap. 68. Est ignis tribulatio
tentationis, This fire is the temptation of afflictions. Again soon after he
says that This fire is in this life.

S. Cyprian in his fourth book and 2. Epistle speaking of Ecclesiastical
penance imposed upon such as for fear had revolted to Idolatry, compares
the condition of those penitents, which he says are to be purged by fire, with
the condition of such as never shrunk, but suffered martyrdom: And he
holds the condition of such Martyrs to be more blessed then the condition of
those penitents: mark his comparison. It is one thing standing up, to ask
forgiunesse [as did these penitents after their revolt] another thing to
attain to the glory [as they did that persevering received Martyrdome] One
thing it is, being cast into prison, not to come forth until thou have paid
the uttermost farthing, another thing immediately to receive the reward of thy
faith and virtue. One thing it is being afflicted by a long sorrow for sin,
to be corrected and purged a long time by fire: and another to be cleansed from
all sin by passion and martyrdom. To be brief One thing it is long to hang
in suspense concerning the sentence that the Lord shall give in the day of
judgment: and another to be incontinently crowned by the Lord. According to
the manner of the ancients, he terms penance and long affliction after
sin, a purging fire, and opposes it against the present and assured glory of
the Martyrs, as against a condition more assured and far more blessed. And
this said he to the end that such as were prisoners for Christ, should not
revolt upon this persuasion that afterward repenting they should enjoy like
bliss and assurance as others that suffered martyrdom. But of temporal
torment after this life, or of any purgation of souls separated from the
bodies, there is not one word throughout that Epistle, neither elsewhere
throughout all Cyprian, who in purity gives place to none of the Ancients.
And indeed we need not to seek farther then the same Epistle, wherein he
wills that the penitents [confessing their fault] should be received. For,
says he, Apud inferos confessio non est, nec Exomologests illic fieri potest.
Which is more none of the words uttered in this passage can in any wise stand
with our adversaries Purgatory. 1. For he says Longo dolor cruciatum emendari
and purgari diu igne. The penitent long time tormented is amended and purged by
the fire: Now our adversaries say that the souls do not or cannot amend
themselves in their Purgatory. 2. It is also said that he that is thus purged
rests in suspense and doubt of the Lords sentence in the day of judgment.
The Friars falsehood.
But our adversaries say that the souls in Purgatory are assured of their
salvation, and therefore the Friar page 56. omitteth these last words of S.
Cyprian. 3. Finally since he speaks of such as do penance after their
revolt, it is not possible he should speak of souls separated from their
bodies, either of Purgatory. Wrongfully therefore do my adversaries make so
many brags of this passage for it is most unjustly and fraudulently alleged.
As also the Friar, page 63. cites S. Hierom upon the fourth of Jeremy and in
his second book against Iovinian: also Nazianze^ in his 39. oration, and Basil
in his oration upon the 9. of Esaias, where he speaks of purging torments and
afflictions, and of a fire that tries the faithful: but in this life, or at
the day of judgment. And here do our adversaries show the third degree of
their bad consciences in their allegations of the Doctors.

Of Commemoration and prayer for the dead, practiced by diverse of the ancients:
and that it makes nothing for their Purgatory.
Throughout the books of my adversaries there is nothing more gross the^
their false presuppositio^s that they make above an hundred times: whereby so
soon as they have alleged any father that speaks of Commemoratio^, Alms,
Oblations, or Sacrifice for the dead, they strait conclude, Then is there a
Purgatory. A matter false, and that for sundry reasons. 1. Wherefore did Saint
Augustine in writing a whole tract of the care for the dead set down never a
word therein of Purgatory? 2. Why did they offer for the Apostles, Prophets and
Martyrs, and made sacrifices for them? As witnesses Cyprian in his third book
Epist. 6. and in his fifth book Epist. 4. dare my adversaries thereupon
infer that the primitive Church believed that the Apostles were in Purgatory?
3. Epiphanius accuses Arrius of heresy because he rejected prayer for the
dead, and brings many reasons to prove that this prayer made for the
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles and all the faithful is profitable and to be
received: yet speaks he not one word of Purgatory: albeit that was the place
where to speak of it, or not at all. 4. Denis [falsly tearmed] Areopagite
disputing of the commodity of prayer for the dead, still presupposes that
those for whom we pray, are blessed and propounded for examples to the living,
and for matter of thanksgiving: but of Purgatory, or of any fire that purges
souls he has not a word. 5. We have heard in the second of the Macchabees
that to pray for the dead is but mere madness: unless we have regard to the
Resurrection: so not to the torment of Purgatory. 6. The Greek churches do
pray for the dead: yet do they deny Purgatory. 7. We heard before by
Chrysostom in his 32. homily upon Matthew that such as procured prayers for
their dead parents, did believe that they were in flowred meddowes: and in that
homily in above twenty places, he says, that Death is the entry to rest and
an end of sorrow. S. Augustine in the ninth book of his Co^fessions prays for
his mother Monica: and S. Ambrose for the Emperor Vale^tinian, yet do they
protest that they believe that these parsons deceased are with God, and do
enjoy the pleasures of Eternal life. But the matter of greatest consideration
is that S. Ambrose says that Valentinian dyed without Baptism. Oratione de
obitu Valentiniani.
Valentinian I say who was a great Emperor and a Christian even from his
birth, having so many clergy men at his command, at whose hands to have
received Baptism: who then did better deserve to be confined into Limbo or
Purgatory then he? yet says Ambrose, He is in celestial felicity. 9. We
have heard that most of the ancients shut up the souls of all men in certain
hidden receptacles, where they desired refreshing: thereupon had they some
ground to pray for the dead, albeit they did not believe Purgatory: wherein
appears the corrupt faith of the Friar: for he sets a brag upon the words of
S. Augustine in the 110. chapter of his Manual. We must not deny but that the
souls of the dead are relieved by the piety of the living: but he was wiser
then to allege the words going before, namely The souls are in hidden
receptacles even from their decease until the resurrection. For so it would
have appeared that the opinion of S. Augustine touching prayer for the dead, was
grounded upon an error which the Church of Rome rejects, also that from an
error will soon spring an abuse. 10. We have already heard the opinion of
Origin and his followers touching the fire of the day of Judgment, that
should scortch and burn the souls eve^ of the most holy and perfect. Also we
have showed how fearful S. Hillary was of this fire. All this therefore might
have ministered unto the^ argument sufficient to have prayed for the dead, as
trembling at the punishment to come. 11. What more can we desire? Let us make
our adversaries our judges in this case. Do not the Priests many times receive
money for saying Masses for the young children that dyed soon after Baptism,
who nevertheless [as they beleeved] were neither in Limbo, nor in Purgatory?
Let them now choose whether they will confess their error, or acknowledge
their Avarice; their want of knowledge, or their bad consciences. 12. Do they
not in their daily Mass pray for the souls that sleep in a slumber of peace
and therefore are not in the horror of flames. 13. Let us therefore hear the
form of the ordinary prayers of the Church of Rome for the dead. This book of
sacred cerem. sect 5. c. 1. libera domine a morte aeterna in die illo tremendo
Save them O Lord from Eternal death in that terrible day when the heave^s
and the earth shall be moved: when thou shall come to judge the world by fire:
I tremble and fear when the trial shall come: and the wrath to come, that day
of wrath, of calamity, of misery; that great and mervailous bitter day. They
pray that the souls of the dead may be saved from eternal death and the last
judgment: and which is more. Throughout all the public prayers of the Church
of Rome for the dead we find not one word of Purgatory: which proves that it
was not yet established in the Church at that time, when they prayed only for
the refreshing of souls in their hidden receptacles: or for the last judgment,
or to eschew Eternal death. 14. Finally, is it not a matter mervailous notable
that among such a multitude of the passages of the fathers, by our adversaries
quoted for prayer for the dead, there is not one that says that these prayers
were made to redeem souls out of Purgatory? This the^ is the fourth degree of
the deceipts and fraudulent allegations that our adversaries do make, when at
every speech they still inculcate prayer for the dead for proof of their
Purgatory: and there upon have they spent at the least three quarters of their
allegations.

Now as concerning this prayer for the dead, the truth is that the Apostles in
the celebration of the Lords Supper retained the institution of Jesus Christ:
and Pope Gregory has before testified unto us that to that Institution that
is set down in the holy Gospel they added only the Lords prayer, which
argues an untruth in Chrysostom, who says that the Commemoration of the dead
in the Eucharist is an Apostolical tradition. Soon after Martyrdom
increasing, for the better encouragement of the Christians, they brought in a
custom in the celebration of the sacrament, to name the Martyrs with the
Prophets and Apostles, and in every. Church they had a list or double tables
called Diptiches, wherein were writ ten the names of all such deceased as were
to be mentioned in Commemoration, and so far there was no harm.

The custom increasing, the parents and friends of the deceased began to
give alms upon the day of the Co^memoration of the deceased. The alms
together with the commemorations they called oblations of the dead: also
sacrifices for the dead: as we may see in the sixth epistle of the third book of
S. Cyprian, speaking of the Martyrs deceased in prison Celebrentur a nobis
oblationes et Sacrificia in Commemorationem eorum. Let us celebrate sacrifices
and oblations in commemoration of them. Likewise in the fifth Epistle of his
fourth book, speaking of Laurence, Heb. 13.16 Phil 4 18.
Celerine and Ignatius Martyrs, Sacrificia pro eis offerimus quoties Martyrum
passiones and dies Aniuersariae Commemoratione celebramus. That is to say, We
do offer sacrifice for them always, and so often as from year to year we
do celebrate the days and passions of the Martyrs. In sum this is it. The
alms called in the Scripture sacrifices, were offered for the dead, that is to
say in remembrance of them, and in their steed, as if the dead gave them. Thus
in the eight book of the Institutions of Clement, cap. 18. The Bishop or
minister prays, We do offer unto thee for all those that have pleased thee
from the beginning of the world, for the Saints, Patriarchs, Prophets,
righteous men, Apostles, Martyrs. etc. For such does the Church of Rome hold
that we ought not to pray or to offer. That these oblations and sacrifices
were alms it appears by two Canons: Vases, Can. qui oblationes, and can.
Clerici.
one of the Council of Vases, the other of the Council of Agatha. Which are
in Can. 13. quest. 2 The Council of Vases says thus. Can. Qui oblatione and
can. clerici.
Such as detain the oblations of the dead, and are slack in bringing them to
the Churches, are to be cut of from the Church as Infidels, because they do
deprive the faithful of the accomplishment of their vows, and the poor of
their food and substance. That of Agatha condemns those that detain the
oblations of their deceased parents, as murderers of the poor. Burchard in his
fifth book alleges many examples. Now because part of these offerings were
employed in the Communion of the holy supper, S. Cyprian in his sermon of Alms
complains that the rich offering nothing, yet came to take part of the
sacrifices offered by the poor. Domini cum sine sacrificio venis, partem de
sacrificio quod pau per obtulit sumis. Now that this nomination of the dead in
the administration of the sacrament tended not to fetch him out of Purgatory it
appears eve^ by the same that our adversaries allege out of Cyprian, namely
for that he would not permit any nomination of of a certain deceased person,
who had charged a clarke with a tutorship: for surely it had been excessive
inhumanitie to deprive a soul tormented in fire from ordinary relief for so
slight an offense, and where it was rather want of consideration then of piety:
as also to hold such a one for that sin to be damned were a rash and
precipitat judgment. It was therefore a deprivation of honor among the
living, not a prohibition from succouring of the soul of the deceased. And yet
in all this there is no harm.

In those days sprang up the error of the receptacles of souls, and of the
fire of the last judgment, that should purge even the Virgin Mary and the
Apostles, and began to take footing in the church. Hereby men's minds growing
into fear and being perplexed concerning the estate of the dead, prayers for
the succor of the dead soon after came to be adioined to the oblations,
sacrifices, and alms. And thus error begat abuse, which sprang from the love
of friends, yet without any conceit of Purgatory: and without any foresight of
such abuses as might ensue, and did befall in the days of Gregory Bishop of
Rome, who lived in the year of Jesus Christ six hundred. For then learning
being smothered by the inundation of the barbarous nations, the Goths, the
Hunnes, the French, the Vandales, etc. And these lights of the primitive Church
extinct, whiles there were no more Basils, Cyprians, or Augustins etc. The
devil taking his time, and making use of the covetise of the Clergy, cosened
the world with visions and aparitions of souls returning from Purgatory, as we
see in Gregory's dialogues, and Beda his works: who made report of a soul that
appeared musled in a cloak of fire: of an other that had been a master of the
bathes, and being there in Purgatory, offered to pull of a man's hose. They also
tell us a fable of one Nocholas who getting forth of Purgatory by a hole that
is in Ireland, reported that he had seen souls, some broiled, some fried,
get-some roasted, etc. Gregory in the fourth of his dialogues cap. 41. puts
to him self this question. Quid hoc est quaeso, quod in his extremis
temporibus tam multa de animabus clarescunt, quae ante latuerant? And
ordinarily these souls in their appearance showed the cause of their torment:
either that they had not paid the Church what they ought, or had vowed: and so
entreated the living to satisfy for them: or that they had withstood the
Bishop of Rome etc. Then began these great donations to the Church: especially
after the stations and Indulgences of Rome were added, which are of the
topgallant, and the last and supreme top of all Babylon.

Against this progress of abuse what better remedy then to reduce the people
to the spring head, which is the holy Scripture? And to say as Jesus Christ
said to the Saduces Mat. 22. You err, not knowing the scriptures: but from the
beginning it was not so. For throughout the old Testament, that is, for the
full space of four hundred years there was no prayer either for the dead, or
to fetch any soul out of Purgatory: neither in the days of Jesus Christ or
his Apostles, nor of a long time after. Thus shall we attribute the glory to
God and to his word, and clear the peoples minds from all doubts or
difficulties, and withal cut of the paths that lead to this traffic.

How unjustly the Friar and his fellows do make use of the example of the
primitive Church, in matter of Indulgences.
In the times of persecutions, the primitive Church sought all means possible
to honor martyrdom and to encourage the Christians thereto. Among other
means they had taken up a custom that such as for any notorious offense were
cut of from the Church for some long time did resort to the prisons wherein
such as suffered for the gospel were detained, and there besought these
Martyrs to make intercession to the Church that the time of their penance and
excommunication might be abridged: and thus did the Bishops use at the
intercessions of these prisoners appointed to martyrdom, to readmit the
penitent into the Congregation.

S. Cyprian in his sermon of the fallen, also in the second Epistle of his
fourth book, and Tertullian in his book De pudicitia, do disallow this
custom, and think they they yield too much to these imprisoned Martyrs. Yea
Tertullian speaks thereof in his book of the Martyrs. cap. 1. Our
adversaries, like the Israelites that gathered straw under the bondage of
Pharao, for want of more substantial proofs, do make use of this custom in
their establishing of the Popes Indulgences, and in the distribution of the
overplus works and superabundant satisfactions of the Saints collected into
the Popes treasury and converted into paimentes for others: Tertullian calls
the^ appointed Martyrs
wherein I suppose they have no intent that men should believe them: so far
from all appearance do they speak. 1. These Martyrs that S. Cyprian spak of,
were yet alive those that our adversaries spoke of are dead. 2. We cannot
find that ever the pain of any sinner was abridged by the merits and
superabundant sufferings of these Martyrs, who would never have undergone those
torments, had they not believed that God called them thereto, and consequently
that they were bound to endure them, and so it follows that they neither did,
nor suffered any thing supererogatory. for they could not do otherwise,
unless they would have denied the Gospel. 3. These imprisoned Martyrs
commended to the Church this or that penitent, and besought that they might be
received into the Communion: but they neither paid for them nor redeemed them:
as our adversaries do say that the Saints by their sufferings are in some sort
our redeemers. 4. These Martyrs entreated only that the sinner might be
admitted to the Communion: not that he might be exempt from Purgatory. 5. In
those days there was no speech of this worthy treasure of the Church,
composed of the superabundant satisfactions of Jesus Christ and his Saints. 6.
Every Bishop imposed or abridged the pains or excommunications in his own
flock without expecting either advice or bulls from the Bishop of Rome. 7. In
those days men knew not the meaning of pardons hanged upon certain Churches by
his holiness authority. O what a goodly sight it would have been in those
days to have seen such bulls set up and fixed upon the Church doors, or some
one that might have instructed the people in this new Gospel: namely that his
Papal holiness, having in his treasury all the superabundant satisfactions of
Jesus Christ and his Saints, does give ten thousand or fifty thousand years
of plenary pardon, and as many quarentines, with the third of all their sins,
or even full Indulgence to every one that shall say a stinted number of Paters
or Avees, or his rosary or beads, or wear or kiss some hallowed grains: or
contribute some piece of money; or that shall join himself to the fraternity
of the Cord: likewise that such a stinted number of Masses said upon a
certain privileged altar shall fetch out of Purgatory any one soul, even such
a one as he shall choose that must pay for it: also that such venerable pardons
are to be purchased in such a Church and upon such a day, even until sun set:
besides that he that shall buy these pardons may choose him a ghostly father,
such a one as in the hour of death shall absolve him from all his sins, both
from the pain and from the fault? Surely I say if any man in the primitive
Church should shave preached so prodigious a doctrine, even the little children
would have hissed after him or the Physicians would have felt his pulse, so to
have learned the cause of his frensey, and to purge his hypochondriall humor:
for as yet it was not the custom to burn any man for heresy. Now in our
enterview the Friar alleged unto me this intercession of the Martyrs for the
penitent to defend papal Indulgences: I answered that that intercession had no
resemblance with the Popes Indulgences besides that that custom did Tertullian
condemn. Then did he take me up in a most impudent manner, saying that I was
deceived: also that I took Tertullian for S. Cyprian: but I told him that both
the one and the other condemned this custom: howbeit we wanted books to
satisfy the assistants upon this point. This did not the Friar forget in his
book, and therefore mark his words, page 12. The Minister should remember
what a Novice be showed himself in the reading of the fathers, how he mistook
himself in citing them, quoting Tertullian for S. Cyprian. But let him now
learn that which he yet knew not, and so confess himself to be the Novice.
Tertullian in his book de Pudicitia, cap. 22, complains of this custom at
large, even so far forth as to say That diverse procured their own
imprisonment, that so they might be Intercessors for some of their friends: or
that they might commit folly with women detained in the same prison Violantur
viri and feminae in tenebris plane ex vsu libidinum notis. Et pacem ab his
quaerunt paenitentes, qui de sua periclitantur. In the end he concludes thus.
Sufficiat Martyri propria delicta purgasse. Ingrati vel superbi est in alios
quoque spargere quod pro magno fuerit consequutus. Quis alienam mortem sua
soluit, nisi solus Dei filius, etc. that is to say, Let it suffice the Martyr
that he has purged his own sins. It is the part of an unthankful and
proud person to seek to impart to others that which has been granted to
himself for a great grace. What man did ever by his own death satisfy for
another death, but the only son of God. In all this appears both the Monks
ignorance in common matters; as also his assurance in speaking that which he
knows not; besides his childish waunting of prevailing in so slight a cause.
For had I named Tertullian for Cyprian, can the weakness of my brain amend
his cause? but it is memory that fails him; or rather knowledge: but
especially conscience. Note in the mean time how well these Indulgences are
underpropped with antiquity: for my adversaries in all their three burning
books do not bring from the Fathers any other proofs, but this custom, to
support their Indulgences: Indeed the fire of Helie says that Sylvester Bishop
of Rome gave Indulgences: but that is false: neither can he hereof produce any
good author that lived in the time of the said Sylvester, or a long time after.
I know that this word Indulgence is to be found in sundry ancients: yea, it
is to be found in Cicero. But the point is to prove whether the Bishop of Rome
in the first ages of the Christian Church gave any pardons throughout
Christendom: and the same tied to some one Church and some one day: and upon
condition to contribute, or to say a set number of Paters or Aves, or to wear
some hallowed grains: also whether by Indulgences he fetched souls out of
Purgatory, or distributed to others the surplussage of the sufferings of
Saints, laid up in his treasury? Here are they all quiet: for never an ancient
will depose for a matter so frivolous.

That our adversaries for the establishing of their satisfactions, do corrupt
the Fathers.
The ancient Christians found them selves much troubled in preventing such
fainthearted people as to avoid persecution did for the time fit themselves to
Paganism, and the storm once over, returned to Christianisme. To those they
enioined many years of penance, and quartered them apart by the^ selves in the
Church, so as they were a long time excluded from the Communion. Hereof read
Zozomenus, lib. 7. c. 16. where he describes the form of public penance in
his time.

Their behaviors and testimonies of repentance are many times termed
Satisfactions, of which word we have before spoken, and showed that it
signifies confession of the fault, or humiliation, and asking of forgiveness.
Read the sermon of S. Cyprian concerning the fallen, where this word is common:
he inviteth the sinners ad precem satisfactionis, to a prayer of
acknowledgement of their fault. Again, According to our adversaries
exposition, we should turn it.

A prayer of payment, which bears no sense


Dominus orandus. Dominus nostra satisfactione placandus. We must pray to God:
we must appease God with our satisfactions. In the same sermon. Let not the
sinner cease from doing penance, and entreating for the mercy of God, least
sin that seems small, grow great through contempt of satisfaction. Who
sees not that he here takes entreating for the mercy of God, and satisfaction
for one only thing? And again, Illi se anima prosternat; illi maestitia
satisfaciat. He says that humiliation and sorrow do satisfy God and appease
him. Fraudulently then do they allege the Fathers for the laying of the
foundation of their satisfactions, which they say to be payments, redemptions
and purchases toward the justice of God: and endeavor out of a bad grammar to
gather as bad divinity: by the corruption of one latin word, a perverting of
Christian faith. If Origin, or any man after him has said that our good
works, or that Repentance does redeem our sins, it is to be understood in the
same manner as we say, to redeem a man's peace by prayer: or to redeem the
time by diligence: in which form of speech this word to redeem imports
neither payment nor redemption. We must therefore mollify whatsoever the
ancients have spoken over harsh: and beat with the impropriety of their words.
If nevertheless any of them, were he in never so great estimation with us,
did ever mean that there was any other redemption from the pain due to our
sins, but the blood of the so^ of God: or that has believed that a sinful man
may be the redeemer either of himself or of any other, The friar page 108.
falsely says that it is the opinion of the fathers, yet cites none but Origin.
as my adversaries do hold, we say freely with S. Paul, Gal. 1. If an Angel
from heaven shall preach any other Gospel the^ the Apostles have preached unto
us, let him be to thee accursed. Now would I wish the curious reader to examine
the passages of the fathers quoted by these doctors, so shall he find that
still they do pervert the passages in some one of the six forms that we
have represented: so it be not in passages vainly alleged to no purpose, or
upon matters by us granted: besides that a great part of their allegations are
false and the passages either maimed or changed. And hereof have we set down
many examples as a taste, thereby to judge of the rest.

The confession of the Portugal Friar page 40. where in he acknowledges that
in the old Testament there is no speech of Purgatory. His words be these The
old Testament has not proved the immortality of the soul: neither Paradise:
neither the creation of Angels, neither many other like things; as well for the
reasons before alleged, as because the Doctors of the law, that taught others,
never doubted of the^. In like sort must we understand it of Purgatory.

The Reasons that he alleges, are the same that are contained page 18. and 19
1. First for that it was for fear of giving occasion to the Jews together
with the Gentiles to think that we should sacrifice to the Infernal powers.
2. Secondly by reason that before the redemption of mankind the estat of the
dead was not so well known, as after that our Lord descended into hell. 3.
Thirdly because men had not so great means to succor them before, as they had
after that the merits of the death and passion of our Lord were committed into
the hands of the Church to apply them.

FINIS.

