THE Time Triumphant

Declaring in brief, the ariual of our S^^^raigne liege Lord, King JAMES into
Engl^^^ His Coronation at Westminster: Together with his late roya^ ^^^gresse,
from the Tower of London through the City, to (...) Highness manor of
WhiteHall.

Showing also, the Varieties and Rarieti^^ ^^^al the sundry Trophies or
Pageants, erected a^ (...) by the worthy Citizens of the honorable City of
London: a (...) by certain of other Nations, Namely, Italians, Dutch a^^
French. With a rehearsal of the King and Queens late (...) coming to the
Exchange in London.

By Gilbert Dugdale.

IN DOMINO CONFIDO.



At London printed by R. B. 1604.

A Dedicatorie poem to the Trium^^ of our most dread and Sovereign Lord,
King James.
HONOR attend thy gracious Majesty,
Bliss be her Partner, in thy Sovereignty:
Though Days are yet young, old Joys will have*
When fearful times, are dateles, dead and gone*
Thy governing hand, that never yet knew other*
Then a Rulers equal sucked from thy fair Mother.
Whose careful thoughts, in thee by Gods command,
Have from thy Childe-hoode, held a happy hand.
By which fair hand, Gods grace has led thee hither,
To plant thy peace, plenty and grace together:
So as our Tryumphs, glorious be in show,
So Tryumph-like, Joy may with quiet go.
That both in one, and one both ways may be,
A double Joy, in this Solempnitie.
So Triumph sings this song of Joy and Mirth,
King JAMES live happy, happiest on the Earth:
That God all seeing, may so bless thy Land,
That seeing all, may all thy evils withstand.
Death Spurneth,
Life starteth:
By Eliza. Life returns,
Death departs:
By K. Ia: The time Triumphant.
The refayners, inhabitants, both young and old of that excellent order and
government, nothing of that giddie rashness as in times before they were
accustomed to be, but all in one, and one in all, most worthily received the
Imperial name of King James, and freely consented to his Titles, as by the
grace of God, of England Scotland, France and Irelande, King Defender of etc.
The Day then generally known of his coming forwarte to the possession of the
Regal seat: let me tell you by the way the joy was not so great in England,
by the English to fetch him, as the sorrow was in Scotland of the Scots to
leave him, and that was more confounding to their Joys then the rest, the
parting betwixt his Queen and him in the open street, in the full eye of all
his subjects, who spent tears in abundance to behold it, hear English and
Scottish in one simpathy: Joined first in hearty affected love, in sign
whereof the floods of their eyes drawn from their kind hearts, conjoined there
Amity, and no doubt they that in kindness being possessed with one joy: can
weep together, they will now and at all times live and die together: but to
make have to the principal whereof this is part, toward England he comes, his
Royal entertainment in Barwicke I need not set down both of the train of
England and Soldiers there, yet I will tell you of a wise answer of the King
to a question propounded, when he entered in the town it rayned small drops,
whereby some things had hinderance, which should have Royalizd, the time but
his Grace graciously being attended in his Chamber, on the sudden, looking from
his window, might see the sun shine, one by of no small account began to
question thus, I muse why the temperate season was so quickly ouercast by a
shower of rain, and now that rain so overthrown by this sunshine, it
presages somewhat sure, the King smiling, no great matter quoth he, only this
imagine, the first fair show of Weather, my prosperous setting forwards by
Gods sufferance. The latter shower, the universal tears of my Country, to
leave their King: and this sudden Sunshine the Joy of England for my
approach, which undoubtedly it was so as it appeared, for the Cost, Pains and
love of his Subjects was such all the way from Barwicke to York, from thence
to Stamforde, from thence to Theobals, and so to the Charter House in London:
where he remained for certain days, and then he went to the Tower of London,
and so seating his most royal Person here, as the like has seldom binne, or
(...) ever will be again to the worlds end to any man's immaginat^^^

Well here he is happily planted and heartily welcome, what (...) then? but his
blessed Corronation, at which was no small (...) For had you seen him in
progress to it, as many did, when (...) Barge at White Hall, on S. James his
day, such was his salu^^^^ the people, and theirs to him: but anon comes forth
England ^^^umph, the worth of women, Anne Queen of England, an^ (...) Wife to
our most gracious King, whose father was a King, ^^^ther no less, he a King,
and whose husband four Kings in (...) companied with lovely Ladies the only
wed stars of the w^^^^ beautye and good graces following her dear Husband to
^^^^tion, with her seemly hair down trailing on her princely (...) shoulders
on which was a crownet of Gold she so mildely sal^^^^^ Subjects that the women
weeping ripe cried all in one vo^^^blesse the Royal Queen, welcome to England
long to live and (...) so, to Westminster they went and took on them the
Royalty (...) the complete order of Coronation, and by a general and fre^^^^^
enjoyed the rights of Royaltye and were insest in honor, (...) Majesty, owners
of Royalty, and made the only Commau^^^^ principality, the Triumph of that
time I omit, but let me London whose hearts were wild Fire, and burned
vnque^^^^ in love, to this Royal couple, and expressing her desires (...)
heads together, to solemnize in Triumph: that happy day wh^^^er of glory was
dashed by the omnipotency of Gods power, v^^^^tally visitting the City and
land with a general visitation: h^ (...) that time, taking thousands to his
mercy and laid their head (...) that else in thiese actions would have held
them hie, yet see a^^^^ new love of his Majesty, he nobly regarding the cost
toget^^^ there loves, and that there expectations should go current, a^ (...)
when the full possession of their Joys should be, that was (...) ^^^angery
hand of God had workt the will of his, all commaund^ ^^^er when the Infection
ceased, then should the Triumph of t^^ (...) solemnized to this consent, cost
prepared and the City with ^^^^^gers Merchants and others, erected Trophies
of glory, Pag^^^^^ that magnificence the like was never well the time
appoin^^^^ his highness would set forward, should be in the holy time in (...)
^oyfull sp^ing time, when the ground in Triumph of the time should ^ike wise
flourish in ample equipage, and she no niggard of her pomp attires, hers in a
green livery Imbrodered with flowers of a thousand ^ullers diverse and sundry,
thus heaven and earth applaudes the Triumph of King James, and mortals, al
agree to make that hour famous. In the mean time, his grace together with his
Queen and children, progrest in the country, and dealt honors as freely to
our Nation as their hearts would, wish, as creating Knights of gentlemen, Lords
of Knights and Earls of Lords and no doubt hereafter Dukes of Earls, I, and
raised up an honor to England, that to this day have bin long in oblivion,
which as now it is honorably living, so it will never die, I mean our noble
knights of the Bath, young and gallant, worthy and valiant, nay see the beauty
of our all kind Sovereign, not only to the indifferent of worth, and the
worthy of honor, did he freely deal about thiese causes: but to the mean gave
grace, as taking to him the late Lord ch^mberlaines servants now the Kings
acters: the Queen taking to her the Earl of Worsters servants that are now
her acters, the Prince their son Henry Prince of Wales full of hope, took to
him the Earl of Nottingham his servants who are now his acters, so that of
Lords servants they are now the servants of the King Queen and Prince.

But to return again to our time Triumphant, now the hour is come, and the
day appointed the preperation of which is mighty, I and so great, as neither
can my tongue tell or my pen set down, yet to make a flourish of a flourish
thus it was: our heretjcke King, hearing of the preparation to be great, as well
to note the other things as that was desirous privately at his own pleasure
to visit them, and accompanied with his Queen in his Coach, be came to the
Exchange, there ^o see for their recreation, and thinkeing to pass unknown,
the wily Multitude perceiving something, began with such hurly burly, to run
up and down with such vnreuerent rashness, as the people of the Exchange were
glad to shut the staire doors to keep them out, hear they ^ost the pleasing
sight they might have enioyde but for their rashness. when his Highness had
beheld the Marchantes from a Window all below in the walks not thinking of
his coming, whose presence else would have binne more, they like so many
pictures ciuilly seeming all ^are; stood silent, modesty commanding them so to
do, which sight so delighted the King that he greatly commended them saying:
(...) never more delighted then seeing so many of diverse and sundry ons so well
ordered and so civil one with the other, but with all (...) mended the rudenes
of the Multitude, who regardles of time (...) person will be so troublesome.

And contrymen let me tell you this, if you hard what I h^^^ concerning that
you would stake your feet to the Earth at such (...) ere you would run so
regardles up and down, say it is highne^^ sure to be private, as you may note
by the order of his comming^^ you then be public and proclaim that which
love and duty c^lence too? this she was his love to you, but your open
ignorance (...) you will say perchance it is your love, will you in love prease
(...) your Sovereign thereby to offend him, your Sovereign per^^ mistake your
love, and punnish it as an offense, but hear m^^ hereafter comes by you, do
as they do in Scotland stand still (...) and use silence, so shall you cherish
his visitation and see him, th^^ once amongst you, but I fear my counsel is
but water turnd^^^ Tems it helps not.

But to our Solempnitie they covet the City and country, and (...) preparation
to they day, the covet the order for the Kings pers^^ in the City his welcome
to it, and his quiet pass through the^^ the country they post up to attend so
that all are bussed to thi^^^ nity and reason I trow being the day of Triumph
so long (...) The Tower was emptye of his prisoners, and I beheld the (...)
Walter Rawly, the late Lord Cobham, the late Lord Gray: M^^ with others:
convaid some to the Marshalsies, others to the g^^^ and others appointed
paisonres ye Tower it self, prepared v^^ pomp as eye never saw, such glory
in the hangings, such M^^ the Ornaments of the chambers, and such necessary
prouiston (...) I beheld it I could no less then say.

God gives KING JAMES the place,
And glory of the day:
As never King possessed like place,
That came the Northen way:
And since the heavens will have it so,
what living soul dares answer no.
Upon the Thames the water works for his entertainm Mirraculus, and the Fire
works on the water passed pleasing, as a Castle or fortress builded on two
barges seeing as a settled Forte in of an Island, planted with much munition of
defense: and two pinnases ready rigde armd likewise to assault the Castle that
had you beheld the mannaging of that fight with onset on the Castle, repulse
from the Castle and then the taking of it in, it was a show worthy the sight of
many Princes: being there plast at ye cost of the Sincke-ports: whereat the
King all pleased made answer that their love was like the wild Fire
unquenchable. And I pray God it may ever be so.

Well from the Tower he came: hear cost was quite careless, desire that was
fearelesse, and content flourisht in abundance: but so Royally attended as if
the Gods had summond a Parliament and were all in their steps of Triumph to
Jove's high court. This worthy train ending so Maiestique a presence and the
companies of London, in their liueries, plast in street double raild for them,
and the passingers, the Whiflers they in their costly suites and Chains of
Gold walking up and down not a conduit betwixt the Tower and Westminster: but
runs Wine, drink who will, coming thus with his Royal assembly all so
gallantly mounted, as the eye of man was amazed at ye pomp. In Fanchurch street
was erected a stately Trophie or Pageant, at the Cities Charge, on which stood
such a show of workmanship and glory as I never saw the like? top and top
gallant whereon were shows so imbrodered and set out, as the cost was
incomparable who speaking speeches to the King of that excellent eloquence and
as while I live I commend. The City of London very rarely and artificially
made, where no church, house nor place of note, but your eye might easilye find
out, as the Exchange, Coleharber, Powles, Bow Church, etc.

There also Saint George, and Saint Andrew, in complete Armor, not in one
combat and fought for the victory. but an old hermitt passing by, in an
Dration: joined them hand in hand, and so for ever has made them as one heart,
to the joy of the King, the delight of the Lords, and the unspeakable comfort
of the comminallty: Our gracious Queen Ann, mild and courteous plaste in a
Chariot, of exceeding beauty, did all the way so humbly and with mildenes,
salute her subjects, never ^eauing to bend her body to them, this way and that,
that women and men in my sight wept with joy? The young hopeful Henry
Frederick, or Frederick Henry? Prince of Wales, smiling as ouer-ioyde to the
peoples eternal comfort, salute them with many a bend, before the Lord Mayor
of the City, in a Crimson Velnet gown, (...) his in amiled golden Mace upon
his sho^lder, vsherd the King and Prince, who bringing them to Temple-barre,
^^ke his le^^ received many thanks, of the King and Queen, who was af^^ by
the Aldermen and Sheriffs, who came to guard him home, (...) glory of that
show past, the King and his train past on throng^ ^^^ous street, but their
let me tell you I was not very near, b^^ eye it was super excellent Justice as
I take it, attired in beat^ holding a crown in her hand guarded with Shalmes
and C^^ whose noise was such as if the Triumph had been endless, th^^ wise were
on both sides speeches spoken, shows appointed w^^ ^^^rall harmonies, of
drums, trumpets, and music of all sort (...) Italians spared no spending in
that behalf, at whose charge th^^ ^^^ous prospect was so pompous and full of
show to the wonder (...) beholder: both for the height. strength and quallitie,
through it (...) and his train past, and at the corner of the street stood me
on^^ man with a white beard, of the age of threescore and 19. who (...) the
change of 4. Kings and Queens, and now behold the Triump^ 5. which by his
report exceeded all the rest, wherefore as hope (...) to behold the like, yet
he would of his own accord, do yt which show his duty, and old love, that was
to speak a five lines, yt h^^ had made him, which lines were to this purpose,
he himself a green.

Peereles of honor, hear me speak a word,
Thy welcomed glory, and inthroan'd renown:
Being in peace, of earthly pomp and State,
To furnish forth, the beauties of thy crown.
Age thus salutes thee, with a dawny pate,
Threescore and nineteen, is thy servants years,
That has beheld, thy predissestors four,
All flourishing green, whose deaths the Subjects
Mingled with mine, did many times deplore:
But now again, since that our joys are five,
Five hundredth welcomes, I do give my King,
And may thy change, to us that be alive,
Never be known, a fifth extreme to bring,
My honest heart, be pattern of the rest.
Who ever praide, for them before now thee,
Both them and thine, of all joy be possessed,
Whos^ lively presence, we all bless to see,
And so pass on God guide thee on thy way,
Old Hind concludes, having no more to say.
But the narrow way, and the preasing multitude, so ouershadowd him, and the
noise of the show, that oppertunitie was not favorable to him, so that the
King past by, yet noting his zeal I have publicly imprinted it, that all his
fellow Subjects may see this old man's forwardnes, who mist of his purpose by
the concourse of people, beside ye King appointed no such thing but at several
stays and appointed places.

Along Cornehill they trooped with great Matestie, but his highness being right
over the Exchange, smilde looking toward it, belike remembering his last being
there, the grace of the Merchants, and the rudenes of the multitude, and
casting his eye up to the third Trophie or Pagant, admirde it greatly, it was
so goodly top and top many stories, and so hie as it seemd to fall forward: On
the top you might behold the sea Dolphins as droping from the clouds on the
earth, or looking to be hold the King? pictures of great art cost and glory as
a double ship that being two: was so cunningly made as it seem'de but one,
which figured Scotland and England in one, with the arms of both in one
Scutchin, sailing on two seas at once, hear was a speech of wonder delivered
too: but the glory of this show, was in my eye as a dream, pleasing to the
affection, gorgeous and full of joy, and so full of show* and variety, that
when I held down my head as wearyed with looking so hie, me thought it was a
griete to me to awaken so soon, but thus the Dutch and French spared for no
cost, to gratify our King, stll ye streets stood raild, and the Liueries of al
ye companies on both sides guarding the way, and the strong stream of people
violently running in ye midst toward Cheap Side, there our Triumphant rides
garnisht with troops of royalty, and gallant personages, and passing by the
great cundyt on the top thereof, stood a prentise in a black coat, a flat cap
servant like, as walking before his Masters shop, now whether he spoke this or
no, I heard not it, but ye manner of his speech was this, coming to me at the
3. or second hand.

What lack yon gentleman? what will you buy? Silks, Sattens, Taffaties etc

But stay bold tongue, stand at a giddie gaze,
Be dim mine eyes, what gallant train are hear:
That strikes minds mute, and puts good wits in maz^
O it is our KING, Royal KING JAMES I say:
Pass on in peace, and happy be thy way,
Live long on Earth, Englands great Crown to sw^^
Thy City gracious King, admires thy fame,
And on their knees, prays for thy happy state:
Our women for thy Queen ANN whose rich name,
Is their created bliss, and sprung of late:
If women's wishes, may prevail thus being.
They wish you both long lives, and good agreeit
Children for Children, pray before they eat,
At their vprising, and their lying down:
Thy sons and daughters, princely all complete,
Roy all in blood, children of high Renown.
But generally, together they incline,
Praying in one, great King for thee and thine.
Whether he were appointed, or of his own accord I know howsoever forward love
is acceptable, and I would the King h^ them, but the sight of the Trophie at
Soper-lane end, made (...) more forward: there was cost both curious and
comely, but the (...) of that a far off I could not conjecture: but by report
it was ex^^^ it made no huge high show like the other, but as pompous both
(...) rye and matter a stage standing by, on which were enacted strang^ after
which an Oration delivered of great wisdom, both the (...) this Pagant were
decked gallantly, and furnished as all the bro^^ as the King past showed like a
paradise but hear his grace mi^^^ love of his Subjects, who at that time are
exceeding in the sho^ing by the cross beutifully gilded and adorned, there
the recor^^ Aldermen on a scaffold, delivered him a gallant Oration: and a cup
of beaten gold, so he past on to ye pagant at ye little conduit ^^tificial
indeed, of no exceeding height, but pretty and pleasing in ye (...) of an
arbor, wherein were placed all manner of wood inhabita^^ uers shows of
Admiration, as Pompions, Poungarnets, and all fruit, which ye Lords highly
commended where after strange mu^^ has given plenty of harmony: he passed
toward Fleete-street (...) Ludgat^ where the cunduits dealt so plenteously
both before and after he was past, as many were shipped to the I Will of sleep,
that had no leasurs for snorting to behold ye days Triumph: when he came to ye
Trophie in Fleetestreete ye Lords considered yt the same for Royalty was so
richly beautified, and so plenteous of show, that with the breadth of the
street it seemed to them to have gone back again, and where but then at the
cross in Cheap but otherwise saluted, as with varietye of speeches, and all
sundry sorts of Mvsiques by ye City, appoinied two as yt at ye little
Cunduit, and all else but ye Exchange and gracious street, on ye top of this
pageant was placed a Globe, of a goodly preperation this whil wondering at ye
glory of it, setting on unawares were they on ye Pageant at Templebarre,
neither great nor small but finely furnished, some compared it to an Exchange
shop, it shined so in ye dark place and was so pleasing to ye eye: where one a
yongman an Acter of ye City so delivered his mind and the manner of all in an
Oration yt a thousand give him his due deserving commendations.

In ye Strand was also an other of small motion, a piramides fitly beseeming
time and place, but ye day far spent and the King and States I am sure wearied
with ye shows as the stomach may glutto^, the daintiest courts staid not long,
but passed forward to ye place appointed: when I leave them to Gods protection
and their own pleasures. Thus you have hard a short description of this days
progress, in which all the Pears and Lords of England and part of Scotland
were assembled, to beautify the Triumphs of their most gracious King. The
multitude of people at this present were innumerable: but to conclude God be
thanked, for it, such was the great care of the worshipful Citizens of
London, and al things so prouidently foreseen, by them, that little or no hurt
or danger ensued to any: which was greatly feared of many, to have happened: by
reason of the great multitudes that were in the City, being come both far
and near thither, to see this most glorious and happy show. And I beseech the
Almighty God of his infinite mercy and goodness, so keep our King Queen and
Prince, and all their princely progeny, yt no harm never come near them, nor
touch the^, but yt they may ever live to his great glory and to maintain his
must glorious Gospel for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

