A Breife and true report of the Proceedings of the Earl of Leycester for the
relief of the Town of Sluice, from his artiuall at Vlisshing, about the end of
June 1587. until the surrendrie thereof 26. Iulij next ensuing.

Whereby it shall plainly appear his Excellency was not in any fault for
the loss of that Town.

Imprinted at London. 1590.



To the Reader Concerning this Addition of the honorable endeavors of the Earl
of Leycester, for the relief of Sluice, upon her Majesty's most gracious and
great charges, in favor of the States of the united Provinces.
IF it be tolerable for private men to deliver in print, Apologies of their
own doings while they are alive: mutch more reasonable I think it for the
trothe of such matters to be published, as being concealed or misconceaued, may
any way touch the honor of so Public a person as the Earl of Leycester, her
Majesty's General, and Governor of the united Provinces, by their own free
election, now deceased, and not alive to answer for himself. Seeing therefore
it pleased God so well to bless his former Actions even from his entrance into
that Country til his first return to England, that he had cleared both the
Vellow and Bettowe (two rich, pleasant, and most fertile countries) of al
Enemies, razed and defaced al their Sconces and Castles, or left the^ possessed
with soldiers of our own, and so greatly enlarged the Territories and
contribucions of the States, besides the taking in and assuring of Deuxburgh
and Deuenter: thereby also diuerting or removing the great siedge from Berke in
Ghelderland, besides the winning of Axell in Flaunders, without the loosing of
any one Town, Sconce, or Castle, either commanded by the English, or wherein
any one English band was garry soned, til after his Excellencies departure:
some private pikes and particular ambitious grudges (grown between Stanley,
York and others in those provinces,) caused these bad persons for their
particular passions (in the absence of his Excellency) so much to forget their
duties, as traitorously to deliver into the Enemies hands that Town and
Sconce, by Zutphen. God having I say so exceedingly always prospered his
Excellency during his abode there, to the great honor and renown of her
Majesty, as his most malicious Enemies had cause rather to envy his Fortune,
than backbite his Government; and no one Town, Forte, Castle or Sconce lost, or
foil received any way by our nation under him, till the loss of Sluyce; that
being the only thing wherein either his dispiteful Enemies, or ingrate friends
or folowers (strangers or English) can find any coullor to calumniate his
militare actions. Finding yet in my hands a brief and true relation of his
Excellencies honorable endeavors upon her Majesty's gracious great and
extraordinary charges to relieve that Town (by me even at that time committed
to writing, when these matters were in Action, and my self present both at the
Consultations and Executions:) J have thought it my duty likewise herewith to
Print and publish the same, that neither the Honorable Patron of this Treatise
now dead, by injurious imputations be unjustly wronged, nor for ignorance of
the truth the world seduced, to think the Swanne a Crow, or the Dawe an
Eagle. But conceiving matters (as they are in deed) guided by Gods providence,
we may learn in all things to give him all glory, and modestly acknowledging
truly our own private Errors and infirmities, to endeavor hereafter to amend
them.

A true report of his Excellencies careful proceedings, for the relief of
Sluice, as it was briefly set down while the matter was in action.
HIS Excellency arriving at Vlisshing toward the end of June, bringing with
him about 30. Ensigns of new levied English soldiers, found the Town of
Sluice beseiged by the Duke of Parma: his chief forces remaining in the I Will of
Cassand, where himself was for the most part in person: the rest in St Anns
Land under the commandment of La Mote, salve that his horsemen, with some
bands of foot, were dispersed upon the Coast, and upon Straites, for guard of
Dikes and passages in sundry places.

These forces of the Duke of Parma, were lodged in such a sort, that there was
no access unto them, but upon narrow banks: the which were in many places
retrenched and cut off in such sort, as (in respect of the advantage of the
situation) they were well able to have answered, treble their forces that
should by land have invaded them.

By sea they had also by Piles, Ships and boats in show crossed the haven,
and planted certain platformes of Ordinance, to beat such ships as should
attempt to enter to succor the Town.

Nevertheless, in the judgment of the best Military men, this was found the
only way to relieve the Town, and to that end preparation made of ships of
war to enter, and one or two shipes especially of purpose framed with fire
works very artificially, to have broken any Bridge and opened a passage,
although it had been much more forcibly closed than indeed that was.

True it is that the Admiral Nassau and his sea captains made the matter
very dangerous, and required that the forces by land might be also attempted
at the same time: and at the first it was by his Excellency meant that the Camp
should have been assailed 3. ways. viz, from Isendick Sconce toward Coxey, on
Cassand, and from Ostend. But upon more deliberate consideration of the
situation of these places: it was found, that after we should have surprised
the Sconce of Isendick there was no possibility to martch toward Sluice, or
toward the Enemies Camp, but upon straight Dikes, with sundry abrupt passages
by them fortified in such sort: that a very few might have made head on that
side to any great Army, and not to be passed without great slaughter of our
people: and long time before we could approach to any blows with the Enemy.
On the otherside of Cassand the coast so flat and far out into the Sea, as
there was no landing, but as men must wade a great distance in the water,
subject to all the shot of the Enemy that might lie covered under the marsh
banks, and then no way to approach the Camp, but upon fortified straights as
before. It was therefore concluded, that the only way to approach the Camp by
land, was, from Ostend, where his Excellency might in safety land his forces,
and so march to seek the Enemy on firm ground in military order not
confusedly with so great disadvantage as on the other parts. In the mean time
diverse Burgers of Vlisshing (that mistrusted the coldness of the Admiraltie
and States) made offer to his Excellency, that if they might have shipping
they would undertake to enter the Haven: and put into the Town both men and
munition without attending any attempt to be made upon the Enemy by land,
which they saw to be a matter of great hazard and not possible in reason to
take any effect, the strong situation of the Enemies Camp considered.

The reasons that moved them to doubt the coldenesse of the Admiraltie were
these. They knew them to be persons wholly at the devotion of the States:
how small care the States took of Sluice, Ostend, or any other Towns in
Flaunders was they say apparent long before, when their soldiers by their
Evil pay and provisions, were many times reduced to such extremities, as it
was greatly doubted that necessity should constrain them to deliver up the
towns to the Enemy. And the year 1586. when his Excellency was moved to
have employed his forces into Flaunders, (where no doubt he might have won
immortal honor, and reduced again the most part of that Country to the
united provinces) the States generally ever disliked of any Enterprise that
way: and persuaded his Excellency wholly to that other course of Ghelderland,
OuerYsell. etc.

The reasons that moved the States thereto, some suppose were these.

First, if Flaunders should be regained, then a great number of wealthy men
(that were now in Holland settled) would return thither, and so impouerish
greatly the wealth of Holland; and the States of Holland carrieng now the
whole or chief swaye, would none of that.

Another reason was, that they found those garrisons of Sluice, Axell, Ostend,
etc. to exhaust much of the Holland contributions, and not to yield any
commodity again.

But the third and most forcible of all, was, that they had as it was thought
conceived a certain icalousie that Flaunders lying so near England, her
Majesty might seize to her own use all such Ports, Towns, and places of
strength as should be gained there, and having convenient Ports so near her
Realm for convenient receipt and succor of her Shipping, should by that
means be able to rule them, and not be ruled by them. These iealousies and
conceits are supposed to be the causes that have made the Estates so cold
and backward in the relieuing this Town of Sluice, albeit the These insolent
speeches of the people were repressed by a sharp penal ^dict of the States
made and proclaimed at Middleburgh, immediately after the loss of Sluice.
common people in many places, speak more broadly, and say plainly that the
States from time to time have victualled the enemy, making to them of Holland,
thereby an infinite gain, and that the enemy had good assurance from some of
them before his Siedge of Sluice, that he should not be impeached by them.

Whereunto they ad many shrewde Presumptions: First, that the Enemy was
continually victualled by their sufferance and Licenses: Secondly, that even a
little before Sluice was besiedged, the States sent for certain of the best
bands out of the Town, which the Governor would not consent unto: Thirdly,
that certain Ships were of purpose run a ground before Sluice in such sort as
the enemies horsemen might take them: without which it was not possible to have
made any show of stopping up the channel. Last of all their strange
backwardness in giving aid any way by men or munition, when Captain Heart
and others of Vlisshing offered them to enter before his Excellencies arrival.
So that if Sir William Russell Lord Governor of Vlisshing, had not very
prouidentlie and earnestly travailed to send in such provisions as upon the
sudden he provided: the Town had been much more destitute of all means to
hold out than it was.

But albeit I am not carried so far as to belecue all the people speak
(though vox populi be many times for truth termed vox Dei: especially when it
is grounded upon long trial and experience:) yet that by fruits the tree may
be discerned, and so a right estimate made of these conjectures; I will report
as near as I can the certain truth how matters have passed, and what
assistance his Excellency has received from the States for this important
enterprise for the ^eleife of Sluice.

First his Excellency upon his arrival, finding in his absence strange
effects wrought by bad practizes of his Enemies, who (perhaps aspiring to
advance themselves, or to blemish his Honor) did in the mean time foster the
seeds of most seditious discord, tending to the Ruin of these Provinces, and
great hinderance of her Majesty's service here: His Excellency (I say) found
it very convenient, first to do all his best endeavors to reduce this infected
body to health: And to effect the same, forgiving all injuries done to
himself, laboring nothing but the safety of these Provinces committed to his
charge, immediately upon his la^ding wrote for an assembly of the States at
Middleburgh: where after he had too long time (in respect of his vrge^t
affairs) attended them in vain, he went in person to Berghen up zome, and
after to Dort, to effect only his first purpose: to recure all seditious
wounds, and to draw all in one line to the relief of this beseiged Town: Not
omitting in the mean time to bestow in several Garrisons his new levied
unarmed Soldiers, with order for their speedy arming; and in steed of them
calling together from Garrisons far and wide dispersed, four thousand or
there abouts of the old bands in her Majesty's pay, and such as being armed
and furnished were before the fifteenth of Iulie in case to be employed in
service. In the mean time his Excellency being desirous to know what
assistance he might expect from the States of the Country Forces, a book was
del^uered to the L. Marshall, of twenty four thousand soldiers in their pay,
besides two thousand horse or thereabouts, and besides her Majesty's aids. Of
all these their Forces for so important a service, if they would only have
deliuerd four thousand soldiers, his Excellency was determined with them and
the rest of his English bands without regard of any perrill to have assalted
the Camp. But notwithstanding the importunate solicitations of his
Excellency, and pressing also of his authority (albeit Count Hollock had at
that time as it is said six thousand men in Brabant in Arms) before the loss
of the Town, he was never able to get from them any one band of theirs: and
with great difficulty could obtain to have the English which were with him.

True it is, that the Burgers of Middlebrough and Vlisshing did very willingly
offer their assistance; but they were but few: and that was done utterly
without aid or assistance of the States.

With these small forces of thirty English Ensigns, with four Cornets of
horse; his Excellency sent Sir William Pelham the L. Marshall accompanied with
the Lord Willoughby, Sir William Russell, and many other persons of Honor and
account, into Flaunders: having besides some few Companies of this Country,
that he had raised upon her Majesty's charge; and that volu^tarily from
Middleburgh and Vlisshing, offered themselves for the guard of his person, part
whereof were also left to accompany Collo: Morgan, who was by his Excellency
appointed to join with the Admiral Nassau to enter the Haven.

In the mean time, the L. Marshall thus accompanied the twenty of July arrived
at Ostend: and being ready the xxij. to have marched; his Excellency arrived
there, and resting the xxiij which was Sunday, the four and twenty day in the
morning, we marched toward the This 23. day in Ostend his Excellency was like
to have been slain with a bullet that struck into a Iawme of his window
right before him, and the Lord Wentworth with the splinters thereof hurt in the
face.
Enemy; his Excellency being the same night returned toward the Fleet, which
lay in readiness at the mouth of the Harbor, to take the advantage of the spring
tides; and to have entered the Haven: as well ^o have divided the Forces,
wherewith they of Cassand should have succored them of Saint Anns Land when we
should charge them, as also to put in men and Munition into the Town.

With this small Army of 30. or 32. Ensigns of Foot, and four Cornets of
horse, we marched on the plain sands of Flaunders, 10 or 12. miles toward
Sluice Town, and rested not till we came to Blankenburgh Sluice where we found
a strong Sconce made to stop up the passage: guarded with five or six Ensigns
of Wallons. The Sconce reached from the Marshes down to the Sea, and closed up
the passage in such sort that without taking in of that Sconce; there was no
passage for our Army to set on their Camp, but only at very dead low water,
and that with many difficulties and extreme discommodities too long to be
particularly set down. Nevertheless it was resolved by the Lord Marshall, and
the Military council that without farther delay an attempt should be made to
hew down the Pallizado and by scale to enter: and if that took not effect,
then in the Evening at dead low water without sarder delay to march by it. And
albeit the Army came weary to that place about noone, yet was it resolved the
assault should be given before four of the clock. In the mean time the Fort
was viewed round by sundry persons of judgment, and 30. or 40. s^^ine and
hurt in the approaches and view thereof with the shot both great and small, that
played continually out of the Fort among us.

In the mean time the Duke of Parma, being advertised how nere our Army was
come to his Camp, and our Resolution perceived by our discoueries and nere
approaches, the Prince rose as we were informed after with a choice Regiment to
stay vsthere, which in deed he might full easelie have done to an Army five
times as great as ours was, the situation of the fort considered. But his
Excellency being in the mean time by contrariety of wind stayed, could not
reach the Floate but lay before Blankenburgh Sl^ce, and beholding the strength
of the place, and the impossibility for us to pass or to get so strong a plat
in any convenient time to relieve the siedged Town, sent Sir Harry Goodyere a
land unto us with commandment immediately without loss of time to return to
Ostend, there to Imbarque the Army again, and speedely to return to the
Floate before the best spring tides should pass to enter the Haven, and also
to land our Army there upon them, with resolution to put it to any fortune,
rather than to loose that Town.

The 25. at night we embarked again at Ostend, and T^esday the Duke of
Par^^seeing the return of our Army yielded to any condition of honorable
parting, that our besiedged could dem^nd. ^^che denying them a^ie delay, or
liberty to advertise the Earl of L^ycester, being this day with his Army
within one League of their Camp before the H^uen ^outh, and ready at the
highest spring to enter.
the 26. being Wednesday being arrived at the Float, we found his Excellency
in consultation with Count Maurice, the Admiral, and the rest of the Sea
Captains for entering the Haven: who alleging many di^ficulties and perrils,
delivering many reasons (such as they were) why they entered not the Haven
according to agreement: At that time his Excellency plainly and openly
charged both Count Maurice and his brother Nassau, that when the Burgers of
Vlisshing made him the offer long before to have performed it: that they
answered, they had the best Pilots, Captains and shipping ready in their
hands, and could and would perform it themselves, which they could not well
deny: and yet would not plainly confess, but that it was with certain
conditions, Craving that his Excellency would first appoint some with the^ to
view the Haven. In the The Enemy very politiquelie made the Commanders in
Sluice, belecue our Army was fled at midnight from Blankenburgh whereas we
marched a way in the day before sunneset, in order of Battle, and no charge
or attempt made by any one horse or foot upon our rereward, nor shot
dis^harged after us, but only out of the Sconce.
mean time by these their former dalliances: the Town being before grown
desperate of succor, the very same day while these things were thus in
debating, Sir Roger Williams (not knowing upon what resolution we were called
back from Blankenburgh, entered into Parley; and the Duke denying no demands
they could set down of Honorable parting) only denying them any time of
respite to aduertize his Excellency, because he knew they might and of
likelihood feared they should have been succored by sea before the best spring
tides were past. The co^maunders of the Town being of like out of hope of any
aid by sea,) as well in respect of the small comfort, returned from the States
by Captain Heart, as also by the strange news and aduertisements they received
continually as they say from their Enemies, being greatly distressed by their
unhappy loss of the west Dike. And seeing how hard a matter, it should be
with far greater Forces than ours in any short time to defeat the Camp, being
so strongly lodged, having most honorable conditions of Surrendrie yielded unto
by the Duke of Parma, they concluded, and the same day after our Army arrived
at the Floate, whilst his Excellency was in consultation for entry of the
Haven, (viz.) on the 26. day of Iulie. 1587 they sent away Master Sentliger to
his Excellency with This surrendry was made two or three days before the
spring tides were past, and the day before the highest spring was come.
notice of their surrendrie already made: and this is the plain and naked
truth of this action.

I may not omit, that, albeit his Excellency was furnished out of England with
Powder, Munition, and Money: So as there was nothing then from the States
required but for Money, to have victuals and boats and Skiffes to land our
Army, and Carriages to convey, Munition, Victuals, etc. For boats and Skiffes
to land our men, on those flat Coasts we had not sufficient to disbarke our
little Army in one whole day. And for Wagons his Excellency could not get
enough to carry two days victuals with us to Blankenburgh, and yet diverse
chief persons and officers of our small Army for want of Carriage forced to
leave their Tents behind them: So that for this Action I know not what the
States could do more to make the world believe the common voice of the people
(for their correspondence with the Enemy; or small care for the loss of any
Town in Flaunders) to be to true: neither can I imagine what was possible for
any General (either for travel of his own body both by Land and Sea, or for
contempt of all perrill to his own person, or by careful Providence, and
singular Patience being so ingratefully and maliciously crossed, to do more
than his Excellency has done: whatsoever common opinion (led only with bare
events) may conceive of it.

Another Addition concerning certain chief Officers of an Army. Wherein by
conference of the repugnant conditions in the Good and Bad, both the Officers
themselves may the better know and endeavor to perso^rme their duties: and
all others also thereby discerning clecreliect what Rank they be, may yield
them Honor or Reproof, according to their merits.
Having both by reading, conference and experience found before I bare office
in her Majesty's Army commanded by that right honorable Earl of Leycester in
the Low Countries, how many dangerous Inconveniences ensue, where true
militare Discipline is either contempned, neglected or unknown, as I had more
than 10. years since published this Militare Treatize concerning the duties
and Offices of most degrees even from the private soldier to the General; so
did I also during that my employment, labor to my utmost power to have such
good Laws and Ordinances established, as might advance the honor and service
of God, our sacred Queen and Country. But as a body possessed with a
pestilent fever, does many times abhor not only the curing medicine, but
also the best and most wholesome meat, and affect the worst and most
pernicious: so found I all these good Laws and Ordinances then established, so
odious and intolerable unto some such men of war as had been bred up in
those licentious civil Dissentions, that they not only detested those good
Ordinances, but also mortally or rather immortally hated such Officers, as
(according to their duty) took care to see them duly and indiffeiently put
in execution; laboring also to make them odious even to the common soldiers
and whole body of the Army, (who were indeed their best friends and the only
means to relieve them in their wrongs and unjust oppressions. But because I
know those Laws and Ordinances then established by the Earl, to be such as
agree with all right Martial Discipline and cannot be oppugned or disliked by
any, but such as deserve rather to be corrected for their faults, than
tolerated in their insolent lawless presumptions: I have not doubted to
commit them to public judgment, as matters worthy to remain for Precedents
to posterity. And because all wars are manadged and maigntaigned chiefly by
Arms and Money, it is clear that the good or bad choice of chief Commanders
and other chief Officers for Militare Accounts, is the very chiefest cause of
the good or bad success of any wars: For as by the Good the Forces are
maintaigned strong, well armed, trained, governed, conducted, paid and
contented: so by the Bad demeanor of these Officers, the Princes Treasure
(being the very sinews of the wars) may be unduly wasted, the Bands
neither complete, well armed, nor trained, the valiant soldiers for want of
their due wages, discouraged, or starued, Honest creditors and alied friends
for want of due paiments discontented, and the Princes most honorable pay
slaundered and dishonored. The consideration of these important causes
(impressed deeply into my conceit, not by superficial Contemplations, but by
actual Experience) has provoked or rather enforced me (in discharge of my
duty to God almighty and her Majesty my most gracious Sovereign Lady and
Mistress, upon the new Aedition of my Stratiaticos) to enlarge it with these
Additious: That all Commanders and such other Officers Military (seeing
before their eyes proponed the Good and Bad, Light and Darcknes, Heaven and
Hell, and knowing that thereby the world also cannot but see which course they
hold) may resolve to leave the l^crous, base, wicked, and dishonorable path,
whose end will be confusion, shame, and endless torments in Hell, and to
choose theright wai^ of Virtue that leads unto true honorable Fame, and
finalli^ shall be crowned with immortal joys in Heaven.

A Conference of a good and bad Mustermaster, with his inferior Commissaries of
Musters: by the fruits to discern the Tree.
The Good. The Bad. THis officer will not willingly serve but with such a
competent and convenient enterteignment both for himself and his inferior
Commissaries, Clarks and Substitutes, as he need not take Bribe or
Benevolence: or depend on the favor of any but the General alone. THis
officer cares not how little Enterteignment certain he have for himself, or
his Substitutes: presuming he can make what gain he list of his Office: and
make such friends thereby also, as may bear him out in his lewdness, etc. This
officer will be in his Expenses temperate, rather sparing than wasting: that he
be not by want enforced to straigne his conscience and deceive his Prince. Such
an officer having so good means to get immeasurablie by playing the good
fellow: will spend infinitlie, espectally in keeping company with such as must
join with him in deceiving the Prince. This officer seeks by all means to
cause the General to establish laws and ordinances whereby orderly entrances
and discharges of soldiers may be registered: and thereby neither her Majesty,
nor the Soldier abused. Such an officer can no more abide laws and ordinances
in Musters, than lucrous Captain: saying, it barreth the officer of his
discretion, whereby the office ought to be directed, and brave men gratified.
This officer delivers these laws to his inferior commissaries with other
straight particular Instructions, and calls them to account, how they have
discharged their duties. Such an Officer likes none of these strict courses,
saying, among Martial men a man must play the good fellow: and not to be too
pinching of a Princes purse. This officer will not set down any penny checque
certain upon any Captain or band, without apparent proose: and for such as
cannot be decided, will respite them to farther trial: that neither Prince,
Captain, nor souidier be defrauded or injured. Such an officer calls this
examination, nice curiosity, and says, so there be some checkes for fashion
sake, it is no matter, make them little enough, that the Captains be not
angry and all is well: O^^ good Fellow must pleasure another. This officer,
if any such doubtarise in the checks as he cannot determine by the laws
established, he either desires the Resolution of the General, or that it may
be determined by a Council at Wa^re, or some Commissioners, especially
authorized to assist him. Such an Officer says, it is great Folly to loose
that Prerogative of his Office, to resolve these doubts as he sees cause, and
to subject himself to Commissioners, that is Master of the Musters himself.
This officer (if the Captains show any reasonable cause to be relieved out
of the checks, either in respect of the loss of horse, or Armor in sernice or
such like that deserves consideration, he presents his proofs thereof,
together with his check to the Lord General, desiring his Lordshippe to have
honorable consideration thereof. Such an Officer will be Chancellor himself,
and never trouble the Lord General with these matters, who has matters of
greater importance to think upon: Saying, Princes purses must not be spared,
and brave men must be rewarded, and Officers must get Love and Honor by
dealing bountifully. This Officer (if he see overmuch familiarity between
any of his Co^missa^ies and the Captains) is presently jealous of them, and
calls them to account: And if he find them ^onniuent or faulty, presently
displaceth them: or if he find no other proof but vehement suspicion, yet
remooueth the^ to an other Ga^riso^, and places such others in their rooms as
may sift and examine their former behavior. Such an Officer likes none of
these severe Iealosies, but likes well such Officers as be plausible and
grateful to the Captains: knowing the Captains be liberal, and will not be
ungrateful to him, seeing he minds and has good means to requite their
courtesy ten ^^lde out of the Princes purse. This Officer as he would not (to
gain a Million) do any Captain a penie wrong. So will he not for the favor
of the greatest persons in the Army, ^^ ^^^ ^erest kin or Friends straigne
his conscience to abute his Prince one penny: and therefore presents the
Checque t^ulie, as he undes it: and leaves all favor to be showed by the Lord
General only. Such an Officer being of another mould will none of these
melancholy courses, he will pleasure his Friends and cross his Enemies, and
make them ^^^o he is an Officer can please or displease them. But (...) he
will not for all that, and for his excuse alledg^th, that P^in^es Cooks may
give a good follow a piece of biese, and the Butlers or (...) a cup of of Wine
or Beer, and that he will show his friends a cast of his Office. This officer
procures orders also to be established for training of the Soldiers, and
himself requires the Captains to perform them: and to encourage men to do
well, will not spare out of his own purse to give rewards to such shot as by
proof he finds the best marck men. Such an Officer will none of this, saying,
it is but a t^^ moyling of Captains and Soldiers, and ^^ruding on the
Captains Offices to ^ssend and discontent them, and that brave men should not
be controlled, or the imperfection of their Soldiers disc^uered by such open
exercises, and that such expenses are foolish, and make more Enemies than
Friends. This officer will not accept penny nor penny worth of any Captain
or Soldier more than the Fee due to his office, and that not as a benevolence
secretly, but as his due openly. Such an Officer will accept any thing,
Money or ware, so it come secretly: and like a good fellow will (on the
Princes purse) requite it ten fold, as easily he may do, and none but his
Fellow Thieves able to accuse him. This officer reposing himself only on God
and his clear conscience, laboreth not to make other friends but his Prince
and General: And for the General himself, will not straigne his conscience
any way, though he be sure of many Enemies and small backing: and even to
his Prince for faithful service store of false backbi^ings: yea the Swanne
must be made a Crow, and the Faulcon a Bussard. Such an Officer will not only
for the General, but for ante other person of authority strain his
Conscience any way, and to all other Captains also so kind and liberal of
her Majesty purse as he is generally extolled for a brave man, an honorable
Officer, an honorable mind: yea, and his Prince also whom he deceaues
horribly shall be persuaded the Dawe is an ^agle, and the Cuckee a Nightingale.
This officer, as he is thus precise himself, as neither to give pen^i^ for
such an Office, nor to receive ^^ibe or benevolence more then dew fees: So
makes hea matter of conscience whilst he carries such office to give to any
of his honorable friends any present: least they or others should have cause
to suspect he did it to be borne out in a nie lewd action. Such an Officer
has no such ^^lancholie conceit, but as he will take (...), so will he give
sran^elie to them can bear him ^^^: and such a one as Captains, C^llwells
great Officers, and all shall extol, how shall his Prince but like of to,
considering the more he robbes her, the more Friends he makes, and the more
he shall be praised. So, as if there were no God, the honest were in deed to
be begged for a right natural Fool.

A Brief conference of two Pagadores, or Military Threasurers.
The one a man just and honest, content with his stipend: yealding both to the
Prince and subject their dew.

The other unduly exacting. and by device meaning to abuse (if it be not
prevented) may defraud both Prince, subject, soldier, and allies of there due.

For distinction sake expressed by the several names of Threasurer, and
Pagadore.
The Good. The bad. THis Treasurer lives modestly, rather sparing then
spending: that he may have no need to abuse his Sovereign, nor crush the
Soldier. THis Pagadore lives prodigalli^, spending in vanities immeasurablie:
so that it is not possible for him to continue, unless he abuse both
Sovereign, Subjects, and allies exceedingly. This Treasurer will desire
yearly, yea quarterlie to make his accounts that all may be clear and
liquide. Such a Padagore shu^neth by almeans clear accounts, and would neither
quarterly nor yearly, nor once in 7. year make an orderly liquid account of
he could by friends or device delay it. This Treasurer will not by a^i means
accept from any Captain, Victualler, Merchant or Soldier, Bill or
Acquittance for a penny more than he truly paies him ready coin. Such a
Padagore will have both warrat and acquittance for the whole, and then give a
private attestation of the due to the Captain, clear about all desalcations.
This Treasurer will have a special care to see the Soldiers first paid their
dew. Such a Pagadore cares not whether any Soldier be paid or no so he have
the Captains warrant and acquittance to account with an absent Auditor, etc.
This Treasurer when he ^eccons with a captain, and defaulkes bills of debt
to Victuallers, Armorers, and other creditors, he will not desire any
acquaintance of the Captain for those defalcations, unless he have in deed
paid them: and then will he also deliver up to the Captain those bills, when
he takes the Captains general Acquittance. Such a Pagadore (after he has
defaulked all bilis and debts he can get or hear of, for Victuallers, Mercers,
Tailors, Merchants, etc.) takes the Captains quittance for all, and gives him
an attestation of the surplusage dew to him (if any be) and so recconeth with
the absent Auditor of the press with his warrant and quittance, as though all
these defalcations were truly paid, when the most part in truth are unpaid,
and hereby the Princes pay injuriously slandered, when this Pagadore has it in
his hands allowed him. This Treasurer will always deliver unto the Captain a
bill, particularly expressing how much he has paid in ready money to the
Captain, and how much in defalcatious: expressing every defalcation, for
what, to whom, and how much particularly, taking a double thereof signed by the
Captain, and this particular double will he leave in the Auditors hands to be
examined. Such a Pagadore will hardly deliver under his hand to the Cattaine
any such particular of his defalcations, nor yet by any means any coppie or
double thereof to the Auditor to be examined: but rather seek all devices to
huddle up things in confusion: knowing, it is good Fishing in pudled water,
according to the old Proverb. This Treasurer having delivered his Accounts in
this plain particular manner to the Auditor, desires him to let all men see
his Account that demand it, and to give copies of ani^ part thereof to any
man that will pay the Auditors clerks for it: w^sturgit it may be si^ted
whether any de^eleation contained in the so^me of the ^^^ptaines acqui^tance,
be not sust by him truly paid: For ver^t^^s w^nq^ar^t Angulos. Such a
Pagadore having reckoned with the warrant and Captains acquittance in gross,
without expressing any particularities of the defalcations, desires the
Aaditor to ^^^ them safely up in a Chest with two locks and keys whereof the
Treasurer to have one. So as these accomptes that all men ought to see) must
be kept, tanquam Eleusina Mysteria: and ^o part be seen of any griened
person: till he can get the Treasurer and Auditor together: a matter as easy
as to catch an hare with a Taber. This Treasurer deals thus plainly to a^oyd
all suspicion of srand. meaning neither to abuse the Prince nor Subject of a
penny, and to keep himself not only void of Faul^e, but of all suspicion
of Fraud and deceit. Such a Pagadore having many thousands of the Princes
Treasure in his hands of these defalcations pretended to be paid by these
former subtilties (keeping all in dark confusion) cares not what the world
thinks of him, or how they exclaim or slander the Queens pay, nor how many
perish for want of that he has in his hands of theirs. This Treasurer dealing
justly in the sight of God, labors not to get him many friends or favorers,
by Banqucting, Presents, or otherwise: reposing his trust in God, and his just
dealing. Such a Pagadore bends all his wits to use almeanes to make friends
knowing that Justice and right is his Confusion, and therefore Per fas atque
nefas hunteth for Favor to keep him from accounts liquid, and to keep all in
darkness by delays: Qui male agit, odit lucem. This Treasurerif he have not
treasure sufficient to pay all defalcations, setreth down plainly to the
Auditor which are paid, and which are unpaid: ^olding it a burden of conscience
that any man should die unpaid by his default. Such a Pagadore cares not how
many creditors dye after he has made his obscure defalcations: knowing that
by their death it is clearly gained to himself: Neither forcing how the
Princes honorable pay be slandered, nor how many die for want of their dew by
him wasted prodigally. This Treasurer thinks it a matter of conscience while
he is Officer, to make any presents, even to his honorable good friends:
least either they or other, should think he did it to be fauor^d in some unjust
actions Such a Pagadore has no such melancholy conceit, but will give or
lend lustely to any that will take, if he see any means how they may protract
his account, yea to such honorable persons as he knows will not be induced
to farther his corruptions if they see the^, yet will he offer presents, knowing
Salomons wise saying, that Dona coecant oculos ctiam Prudentum and Iustorum.
This Treasurer desires nothing more than to have a Muster-master and Auditor
resident in the Army: to assist him in examination of frauds, and to do both
the Prince and Soldier right: knowing the more they si^t his doings, the more
for his credit and reputation. Such a Pagadore can by no means endure an
Auditor or Mustermaster in the Army, but only such inferior Co^missaries as
dare not offend him or look into his doings. And in this he will make all his
Friends and spare no devise, etc. to have these two Officers lifted out, that
then he may without comptrolement do what he list, the very eyes of the
Army being put out. This Treasurer will never desire the Captains warrants,
till he have truly paid not only defalcations, but also all due upon the
said warrants: contenting himself with his warrants for Imprests in the mean
time. Such a Pagadore if he cannot get the Captains own warrants, he will by
device seek to get coppies under the Lord Generals or the Mustermasters hands
which are good constants to reccon with the Auditor. And if the Mustermaster
will not consent unto it he^ will become his secret dangerous Enemy and labor
all means to remove him. This Treasurer desires to have the truth of all
matters plainly laid open to the Lords of the Counsel, and is not jealous of
any man that shall exhibit writings for the service unto any of their
Lordships. Such a Pagadore broyleth like Enceladus in Actna when he hears of
any thing delivered, till by some of his means he can get the sight of it to
countermine, etc. and persuades other Officers not to open matters plainly
unto their Honors, saying, it is no wisdom to make the^ too cunning. This
Treasurer contenteth himself with a competent pay., because his Expenses be
moderate, and needs not give or present extraordinarily to purchase friends,
and will not exact a Penny unduly from poor or rich. Such a Pagadore cannot
content himself with most honorable or excessive entertainment, but exacteth
hundreths and thousands, and not only from the rich, but even from the most
poor and needy of the Army, besides al trafiks, chafferings, secret
beneuolences, and other Engines to angle Money, quoru^ non est Numerus.

A Conference of two Auditors.
The one honest and Skillful.

The other either corrupt or unskillful.

The Good. The Bad. THis Auditor will demand competent Enterteignment for him
self and Clerks, that he need not straigne his conscience. THis Auditor
forces not much of Entertainment, knowing means enough by collusion (if the
Treasurer be bad also) to help himself. This Auditor will not take a penny of
the Treasurer, though he would give it utterly without condition, Such an
Auditor will not spare to take without condition and with condition too, so he
offer like a C^atesman This Auditor knowing he that will no ill do, must do
nothing that longs thereto, will as much shun familiarity with the Treasurer,
as all dutiful Muster-masters ought overmuch familiarity with Captains. Such
an Auditor will be as great with a corrupt Treasurer, as lewds Muster masters
or Commissaries will be with lucrous Captains. This Auditor will have as
diligent an eye and especially over the Treasurer and his deputies, as a good
Muster Master will have over lucrous Captains or Clarks of Bands. Such an
Officer will none of these Melancholy Conceits, but make good cheer with the
Treasurer and play the good Fellow. This Auditor keeps perfect records of all
bills of debt, for Munition, Powder, Arms, and other defalcations, and will
see the auncientst bills first paid before latter, if they be of one nature.
Such an Auditor has no regard to antiquity, but to such as M Treasurer and he
shall agree upon: they must be first paid, and the rest tarry a second
marks. This Auditor being resident in the Army, vil have an care to the poor
Soldiers greeues and see their debts paid before any bills of Captains
Creditors, for silks, gold lace, or such Vanities. Such an Auditor will not
offend the Captains, but knowing the sweet of their liberalities will see
such bills first satisfied as best like the^, saying, he will not offend brave
men for beggerli^ knaves. This Auditor (if a Treasurer offer him Bribes,
willnot only reject him but also look the more narrowly to him in all his
doings afterward, knowing thereby (only) he is a corrupt person. Such an
Auditor is of no such sour^ or Melancholy humor, knowing the Poet not without
cause says: Placatur donis Jupiter ipse datis. This Auditor has a vigilant
eye to the Princes profit and honor, to sift all particular defalcations
whether they be paid indeed, or only pretended to be paid by collusion bet
ween the Treasurer and Captains, or their Acomptant Clarks or Officers, that
the Princes pay be not slandered and her Majesty dishonored by such
Corruptions. Such an Officer looks no farther but to warrant and quittance,
not caring how the Princes pay be dishonored and slandered, so long as he may
have appearance of matter to discharge himself, knowing the more the Treasurer
by such sleights robbes the Prince and Soldiers, the greater his share, for
Manus manum fricat. This Auditor will diligently see, that if any defalcation
be made for any person indebted to her Majesty, that the same be stayed in
the Treasurers hand to her Majesty's use: and not cunningly conuaied to other
uses by Assignation or other like devices to defraud hi^ Majesty. Such an
Auditor cares not how these defalcations be iugled by assignations or other
practizes, to deceive the Prince and enritch pri^at persons, so as the
Treasurer and he may have their Fleeces of the spoil: for these Officers must
accord, or else when thee^^es fall out, true men come by their goods after the
old Preuerbe. This Auditor will set down orders that the Treasurer shall keep
in his account: viz not to exhibit only the Captains quittances in grosle,
but to show particularly, how much paid to the Captains hands in money, how
much in victual, how much in munition: and so particularly every other
Defaulcation: wherefore, how much, to whom, and when paid, that it be not by
c^llusion double charged. Such an Auditor will none of these plain courses,
saying they are Curiosities that will make him odious both to the Treasurer and
Captains: And that if he should deal thus plainly, Officers cannot gain:
Yea they shall make so many Enemies, as the Prince (whom they best deserve of)
shall be made to dislike them. In briefs that this honesty for want of Friends
shall starve, or die in the Hospital. This Auditor reposing him self on God
only and his good conscience, laboreth not to make Friends, but thinks his
honest courses shall protect him against his lewd Enemies, and make him
acceptable to his Prince. Such an Auditor perhapps by the calamity of other
honest Officers (learning that Parum valet probitas quam nulla potentia fulcit)
will not offend rich or great persons, but join with them in plowing the
golden soil, and see no more than that which he knows shall not offend them.
This Auditor (after he perceiues that a Captain has received so much on his
warrant, that there will not remain more than may pay his soldiers, and due
debts of his Band, for Arms, Powder, apparel, and such necessaries as ought
to be first paid) gives Caveat to the Treasurer thereof, that he deliver not
the Captain that money which should pay the Soldier and these honest
Creditors. Such an Auditor knowing that these honest Creditors cannot give the
Treasurer 10. pro 100. to have their Money, whereas other Creditors of silks,
Gold lace or such like vanities, or others (that by collusion have bills made
of purpose to draw out Money) may give and will give the Treasurer 30. 40. or
50. pro 100. he will not be curious to search, which are true and honest debts,
and which contrary: but meeting with a bountiful Treasurer will allow such as
he likes, and he has reason to like those best that offer most bountifully.
This Auditor will not set down in his Account a penny paid either of money to
the Captains or defalcations to the Creditors then he seeeth in truth, is
indeed issued of her Majesty's Treasure, albeit the Treasurer perhaps show his
warrant and acquitance to prove he has issued all, when he has indeed
Forty thousand pounds in his hands, and thereby causes the Treasurer to pay
truly, and that Vitualers, Armorers, and honest Creditors shall not exclaim
and slander the Princes honorable pay when the Treasurer has it in his own
hands to make his profit by it. But such an Auditor seeing by his honest
plain course neither Treasurer nor Captains can abuse either Prince or
Soldiers, that consequently they neither can nor will deal bountifully with
him, he will none of this, but rather without more curiosity Secundum vsum
Sarum make his reckonings with Warranto and Acquittancia and pro forma: to
excuse himself, if his account should be ^i^ted: will not directly say it is
all issued, but issuing and issued, or some parcel not issued: when perhaps
that parcel well examined, may prove many ten thousand pounds. Finally this
Auditor being resident in the Army will hold so plain and precise a course as
he will be able at all times to say how much treasure is Issued indeed, and
what remains in the Treasurers hands: which Creditors, etc. are paid indeed,
and which are not paid: So that no Iugling can be used to defeat honest men
of their due, but he will comptroll it, and by conference with the Muster
Master also will see how the Soldiers are satisfied. But such an Auditor
knowing such an Officer is intolerable to a corrupt Pagadore, etc. and that he
having his Princes purse to make friends: is likely to disgrace or lift out any
honest Officers that shall not cons^rt with him. This Auditor says, I will
leave that thanklesse honest course, and play the good Fellow, and fill my
purse with Crowns, when honest Officers may go to the Hospital for any
Comfort or Countenance they shall receive.

CONTRARIA IVXTA SE POSIT A MAGIS ELVCESCVNT.
BY WISDOM PEACE BY PEACE PLENTY
printer's or publisher's device TO


Abuses that may be practiced to the great dishonor of the Prince, the
defrauding of Soldiers and honest Creditours: and utter ruin and confusion of
an Army, where they shall be continued, and not prevented.
IT is a thing too well known, that if al Captains bills should be paid and
defalked upon the warrants for their bands, that both Soldiers many times
should utterly lose a great part of their wages dew, and the honest Creditors
also their debts, by reason of such practices as ensue.

Inprimis, if any Captains take up Silks, Gold lace, Jewels, or other like
matters for their own use amounting to treble their own entertainment: This
being defalked on the warrant for the band, must needs unjustly take from the
poor Soldier part of his pay.

If a Captain borrowe Money of the Treasurer or any other for his own private
expenses, or give his bill to the Treasurer to pay his losses in play, or
charges in wastfull houses, the Bills must always be made in one form viz.
Received of Master Treasurer so much for the use of the Company, etc. albeit
the poor Company may very well plead not guilty of any part thereof. The
same being defaulked by the Treasurer on the warrant for the band, the poor
Soldier is defeated, how trewly soever her Majesty pay.

Or when such multitude of bills signed with any Captains hand shall be
brought unto the Treasurer, as the whole warrant, both Captains pay, Officers
pay, and Soldiers pay is not able to discharge, he must needs choose some,
and reject others. In which choice if the Treasurer be a man that regardes his
own benefit and the choice left in him, he must needs reject the honest
Creditors, who upon reasonable prizes and small gain having served the
Company, can offer little to have their dew, and choose such as by their
excessive gaynes vndewly made, may offer most, and so the lewd only gain,
and the honest Creditors utterly defeated.

Again if any Captain have once taken up and given his bills for more than
his own wages, and the warrant of his whole Company is able to pay, then to
get notwithstanding some more Money to be defalked on the same warrant, he may
with gain be content to give 60 pro 100. or give his bill of debt for 100. to
the Treasurer, to be defaulked on his warrant to receive 40, or less. And this
bill must be made as formably as any other, viz. for Arms or apparel for the
use of the Company, and perhaps dated before any of the rest. And such a one
being able with gain to give 30. or 40. in the 100. to be paid his bill, may
be as likely to speed as any of the honest Creditors, who perhaps are not
able to give 10. pro 100 without their loss, if the Treasurer be a man that
will be moved with gain and have no Commissioners to guide him.

But seeing the frauds and practizes are infinite, whereby the honest
Creditors and poor Soldiers may be defeated utterly of their due: and her
Majesty's pay slau^dred and exclaimed on, (how justly soever her Highness pa^e)
if great discretion and Justice be not used in the examination and allowance
of suitors bills, with due trial, which were in deed to the use of the
Company, and which fraudulent, or to the Captains or Treasurers pri^ate
gain. They ought to be persons of great sincerity and uprightness, that
should make choice which bills should be first allowed: and which rejected as
the Captains own debt, and not defalcable on the Company.

For, this cause I suppose in Ireland it has been accustomed, that the
Auditor only (who has no handling of the Treasure) was the setter down of
all defalcations, and the Treasurer only to pay according to his Debentur.

For surely when in one pay, a man (in favoring of unjust bills) may gain ten
thousand pounds or more, and by dealing justly can hardly gain the twentieth
part, it is a great temptation to misdrawe an indifferent honest mind:
especially when the Raynes shall be left wholly in his own hands. Or if the
Treasurer were never so honest a man, yet if his Officers under him be men that
will be temp^ed; he may easily be seduced, even to the Ruin of an Army.

The only mean therefore to redress so great Inco^ueniences, and to rid both
hit Majesty of exclamations, her Officers of slanders; and do both Captains
and soldiers right, is to appoint some such choice honest Commisioners, as
(having no fingring of the Treasure) may sit in some public place, where
openly the Captains and Creditors may be heard; and also the complaints of
the soldiers. And these Commisioners after they have heard, and also the
complaint of the Soldiers: And these Commissioners after they have heard what
is alleged on all parts, to set down a public order: which Bills shall be
defaulked on the warrant for the Company, and which set on the Captains own
head as debts of his own.

But there may be also another greater mischief than all this, practiced in the
military acco^ptes of this time: whereby, albeit the best Auditors in England
have the examination of a Treasurers account: her Majesty may be found still
in the Treasurers debt, albeit he have forty thousand pounds of her Majesty's
in his hands; and both Soldiers and Creditors defrauded, and her Majesty's pay
slaundered by means of this course ensuing.

If the Treasurer (when he accompteth with any Captain upon his warrant)
first shows him a note of all defaulcations, viz. Bills of impressed,
Victuallers bills, Armorers bills, defaulcations certified by the States, and
other his Creditors or Soldiers bills: his own new found hundred penny, etc.
All this being defaulked, he sets down the overplus as a debt due to the
Captain. For this clear debt, the Treasurer gives to the Captain an
Attestation, and for all the rest of the warrant takes an Acquittance from the
Captain together with his warrant. If upon these conditions (as perhaps on
these and none other the Captains must take their accounts) see then what is
likely to ensue.

In this course, lightly if the warrant be for 2 thousand pounds, the
defalcations shall be 1700. or more, and the clear debt to the Captain 300.
or less. Now when the Treasurer shall be called to his account, as is
commonly used before an Auditor of the press in England: he produces his
warrant for 2000 pounds, and this Quittance signed by the Captain for 1700.
pounds In this case, the precisest absent Auditor can allow the Treasurer no
less then the 1700. pounds upon his Accounts, whereas commonly the greater
part of all these defalcations are unpaid. And in this manner in an Account of
an hundred thousand pounds, the Treasurer may have thirty or sortie thousand
pounds in his own hands, and yet the Auditor by Warrant and Quittance shall
find all paid, and perhaps some surplusage from the Queen to the Treasurer:
So that this kind of Account before a strange Auditor by Warrant and Quittance
is frivolous, and no possibility for the best Auditor in the World in that
sort to discover Frauds, or determine any certainty, but both her Majesty,
the Souldierie, the Creditors, and all may be extremely abused, and yet the
Treasurer and his Associats go clear away with an infinite gain. And this
kind of Account before an absent Auditor per Warrantum and Acquittanciam
without farther examination is in deed as ridiculous, and as impossible
thereby to discover the abuses of a Pagadores Account, and the wrongs done to
Captains, Soldiers, honest Creditors and chiefelie to the Prince, as
particular Musters (taken in several Garrisons on several days) is able to
discover the Frauds and deceipts usually practiced by Clerks of Bands or
such Captains as value, lucour above Honor, or Honesty, and therefore this
course ensuing for examination of Military Treasurers Accounts fit to be
established.

The only or best salve to recure such vlcerous soars.
The only mean therefore to unrip and discover frauds in such accomptes of
military Pagadores, and to do both Captains, Soldiers and Creditors right,
and to maintain the honer of her Majesty's pay, and to provide that her
Majesty's Treasure be not misconueied and vndewly wasted, is

FIrst not to suffer such Military Money Officers to run on 1. 2. or 3. years
without Account, but quarterly or every half year at the farthest to deliver
up to the Auditor at Wars his Accounts perfited, as he will stand to it upon
his credit or discredit, to receive trial, at his perrill.

Secondly, that for all such sums of Money as he auerres paid, he deliver
in together with the Captains acquittance, a bill under his hand, particularly
declaring how much was paid him in ready Money, and how much in defalcations
for Armorers, Victuallers, or other Creditors bills, expressing particularly,
to whom, when, and for what the same was paid, that it be not after cunningly
double charged on her Majesty.

Thirdly, that these Accounts of Treasurers may not ly so closed up under
locks, but that any man (paying the Auditors Clerks for their pains) may take
coppies of any part: that if any Soldier or Creditor find himself grieved,
he may have redress by the Auditor, or a ground to complain of his wrong.

Lastly, that if any Account have run on, many quarters or years without such
orderly setting down of all Defalcations and public notice vt supra: that it
be the more diligently sifted by Officers of experience and skill, and that
(after it is particularly set down as the Treasurer will stand to it) it may
be open to all men to view as aforesaid: and so to remain as long time as the
Account has been differred, before the Treasurer at Wars have his allowance
or Quietus est.

By this means it will come to pass that as he^ Majesty's pay has been ever
the most honorable of any King or State in Christendom, and most honorable
courses already taken, by her Majesty and her honorable Council for the
redress of many abuses, whereby the poor Soldiers had received hard
measure: So by such dew and orderly Examination of Accounts, all persons
agreeued shall receive due satisfaction, or know where, and of whom to demannd
their duties, and neither exclaim on Officers without just cause, nor yet her
Majesty's most honorable pay slaundred and defamed, for that which perhaps
may be vndewly detaigned by such inferior persons. And these Military
Officers knowing that by these Tutchstones their Actions shall plainly
appear whether they be Gold or Brass, will happily amend all that is
amiss, and do that hereafter shall most agree with their own reputations, and
the service of GOD, their Prince and Country. To which end I have published
these brief Collections.

A Brief conference of two Commanders of different properties and Conditions.
The one honorably trained in Royal Wars, governed by right Martial
Discipline.

The other bred up in disorderly civil dissentio^s among Freebooters, guided by
lawless indiscretion.

The Good. The Bad. THIS Commander establishes martial laws full of
Equity, and causes them to be inuiolablic observed. THis Comma^der skoffeth
at true Martial Discipline and would have all guided by his own discretion,
or rather lawless in discretion. This Commander selecteth a Council
military, with whom to confer before he resolve of any important
enterprise. Such a Commander partly to cover his own ignorance, and partly
for vain glory to have all the praise himselse shunneth conference, and will
giude or rather misguide al by his own vain fantasy. This Commander will
not take upon him any enterprise, but he will be assured to be provided of
all things necessary to perform it Honorably. Such a Commander will
undertake any thing how absurd soever, so he may finger the Treasure, let the
success be what it will. This Commander will also see such convenient
allowance of pay, as his soldiers may live without spoil of their freindes,
or committing outradge. Such a Commander eareth not what outrage, they commit,
or how they crush their Friends, so as they crave no pay of him, but can live
by shifting otherwise, and such he calls brave men, as by right Martial law
should be disarmed under a gallows. This Co^maunder imployeth his Princes
Treasure in the true payment of his Cap aines and Soldiers, and such
provisions only as may aduan^e the pulique service. Such a Commander wastes
it either in his own pomp and vaineglorp, or oath silthie and base pleasures,
neither seeking to pay his Captains nor carin gwhether they pay their
Soldiers. This Commander will see at the first general muster all his
Captains and Officers well chosen: and his soldiers well armed, and well
appointed. Such a Commander after he has fingered the Treasure neither cares
whether his Soldiers be armed or naked, and for Captains and Officers takes
such as will serve for least impressed. This Commander establishes such order
in his Musters and Discipline in his Army, as every Captain may be truly
paid and cheequed according to their strength and weakenesle of his Band: and
being truly paid himself, shall accordingly truelic pay his Soudliers. Such
a Co^mannder cannot endure such orders in Musters as are agreeable to true
Martial Discipline, but will have all ordered by his own indiscretion: and if
his Captains will be contributorie, they shall be paid Poule Ioule, without
difference or check, and for their Soldiers, let them use them as they list.
This Commander as he will see his Captains have their due, so will he hear
the Soldiers greeues: being offered in supplication duetilullie, and without
assembling in arms. Such a Commander (if a few poor Soldiers by supplication
without Arms complain they cannot receive their pay,) will have it a Mutenie
and hang some of them in terrorem, for the Captains cannot contribute largely
to him, unless they may crush the poor Soldier Impune. This Commander will
by conference examine the ability of his Captains, and Officers: to remove
such as he finds insufficient and place sufficient in their room. Such a
Co^maunder reiects none but such as will not be contributory, or importunes him
for their Soldiers pay and cannot live by crushing of their Friends and poor
Soldiers as his other brave men will. This Commander will see his Captains
and Officers of enerie particular Band, train their Soldiers, and exercise
them in the use of every kind of weapon. Such a Commander being both ignorant
himself and having many like Captains, will none of this: alleging it is a
needles tyring of the poor Soldiers, and scoff at them that do^ it. This
Commander being in the field, will also before he see the Enemies: cause his
Soldiers to be imbettailed in several sorts: and teach them how to answer
every charge of horse or other attempt of their Enemies. And this will he
often do, as well to train hts Soldiers: as to know the sufficiency of his
superior Officers. Such a Commander wanting judgment to do these things
himself, does not only seldom or never use any of these right Martial
exercises, but to cover the disabilitie of himself and his followers will
jest and scoff at them that do it, and call them Saint Georges Knights, or
such like. This Commander knows he should be rather a Butcher then a
Commander: if he should bring his Soldiers to fight before they are thus
trained and exercised. Such a Commander will not be ashamed to maintain this
butcherly opinion, that men are best trained in blood, and that other
Traynings are ridiculous. This Commander if his charge be of Footmen, will
be ashamed to be mounted at any time on a horse of force, or any other than
some little nagge only for his case. Such a Commander will be mounted on such
a horse, as he may out run the whole Field, and escape when he list. This
commander will never see his Fantry in perrill, but if he happen to be
mounted, he will disinount: and if he have never so principal horses offered
him to save himself, will rather choose to die or take their Fortune, than by
horse or flight to save himself: as the famous Roman Generales in old time,
and Mounsier La Noue in our age has done. Such a Commander so soon as he
sees his Fantery pressed by the Enemy, if he be not already mounted on a
choice horse, has one always ready to run away with such other folowers like
himself when his valiant men are cut in pieces, and then must these Runawaies
by letters or Pamphlets magnify him, and by device disgrace these va^ant men
that resolutely dyed in the place. This Commander when he deuiseth any
Enterprise upon the Enemy, does it only upon matters of importance likely
to be effected: and for the benefit public and reliese of his Soldiers.
Such a Commander ca^th not how vnseazible the enterprise be, so by pretense
thereof he may get Money into his hands, regarding only his own^ profit,
neither caring for the publiqu^ nor relief of the Soldiers. This Commander
if upon any such enter^rize he receive Treasure, he imployeth it presently
on the well arming and furnishing of his Soldiers and supplying of their
needful wants, that they may assail their Enemies courageously, and attain
Victoris. Such a Commander when he has received their pay, will not pay them a
penie till the service be past, no not so much as to supply them with arms and
needful furniture, knowing, the more of them are killed the more his gain,
who having their Money in his hand, means, according to such corrupt
Freebooters laws, To be himself their Heir or Exequutor. This Commander
seeks by all means to spare his Princes purse and public Treasure: and not
to have it wasted vnduelie, but employed in matt^rs of importance: and for
relief of the Soldiers that truly serve, and deserve. Such a Commander
cares not how his Princes purse be picked, so he may have his share of the
spoil: and so that be large enough he cares neither for Captain nor
Soldier. This Commander wins the love of his Captains and Soldiers by
doing Justice to both, by procuring their due to both, and seeing the one do
right to the other. Such a Commander currieth Favor with the Captains only
of his own humor, by suffering them to crush and oppress the Soldiers: and
on his Soldiers he takes no more compassion then on Dogs: his gain growing
chie^elie by their staruing or killing. This Commander using Justice and right
Martial Discipline, God commonly prospers and blesses his Enterprises. Such
a Commander using the contrary, God seldom or never blesses him with any
good success: but with shame and confusion, if by right Martial law he might
rece^ue his due. This Commander (to gain a world of Treasure to himself)
would not consent to the defrauding of his valient Soldiers of their due: or
to the crushing or oppressing of friends or duetifull Subjects. Such a
Commander (to currie Favor with the great ones, and gain Treasure to
maintain his own vicious prodegalitie) cares not how the p^ore Soldiers are
abused, or the Friends, allies, and dutiful Subjects oppressed. This
Commander (by his justice and good Discipline) wins the hearts even of
Enemies, and increases his Princes Dominions and Territories. Such a Commander
by his wicked life and bad Discipline alienateth the hearts even of Friends and
allies, and loses by peecemeale great Proui^ces where he maintatneth his
^itious Prodegalitie upon their robbery and spoil. This Co^maunder seeks no
dishonest or indirect means by false surmises or lewd practizes to disgrace
othermen of value to advance himself: but reposing himself on true virtue,
enuieth not the good service of other. Such a Commander (being v^ide of all
true virtue) enuieth the same extremely in others, and engineth by all false
and dishonest practizes (by disgrace of his betters) to purchase a vain fame
among the ignorant that are blind, and not able to judge aright of Colors.
This Commander being sufficiently honored by his own true virtue and value,
contenteth himself therewith, and laboreth not by any indirect means to have
untrue fames bruted of him. This other committing many shameful and
reproachful errors (des^ruing in right Martial Discipline ignominious
disarming, by running away when his Soldiers are butchered, or staruing them
for want of their pay by him received, etc) is nevertheless so far past
shame by bad education in corrupt Discipline, that he will triumph of these
shames: and cause Pamphlets to he published of his praise, and the blind
multitude (many times missed by these toys) extol the Cuckowe for a Faulcon,
and make an Eagle of the Dawe. Where these kind of Commanders are chosen and
honored, God will bless, increase and amplify the State and confound their
Enemies, and the glory of that state shall not be blemished but protected by
the omnipotent hand of the Lord of Hosts. Where these kind of Commanders are
suffered and not corrected or suppressed, the just Judgments of God are to be
feared: who never permits such Iniquity to flourish at any time but for their
greater Ruin.

This brief Conference of Good and Bad Officers and Commanders may serve as a
Glass or Toutchstone for men to behold and try one sort from another, and by
the Fruits to Judge aright of the Trees, especially for chief Magistrates to
discern by sound reason aright, and not to be abused by vain Fame and
uncertain Opinion in a matter of so great Consequence: And if any guilty
Conscience wintch at this, it is not I but themselves bewray their Galled
Backs.

TO Conclude, least my meaning should maliciously be misconstrued, I must
protest, that albeit I have in many parts of this treatize severely inueighed
against many abuses and Corruptions bred and fostered in civil dissentions,
yet is it far from my meaning to inueigh generally against all such
Captains, Commanders, or Generals as have borne charge or sway in these
Intestine Wars, for I have my self known many Captains and great
Commanders in those Wars that highly esteemed of right Martial Discipline,
and by experience feelinglye, seeing the Inconveniences, that ensue by such
Corruptions, have the more detested and abhorred them. As likewise that famous
Prince of Orange (I am able to say of mine own knowledge, and from his own
mouth) mutch disliked many of those horrible disorders, which nevertheless
necessity for want of means to pay, enforced him to tolerate in some of his
Mercenarie Commanders. The like appears by the Discipline before published by
that worthy Prince of Coundy, and right Militare Admiral Shattilion, who
notwithstanding were enforced to suffer many of these things themselves
condemned. But my meaning indeed is with Reproach to noate all such men of
War as contemning all ancient and true Martial Discipline, either ignorantly
think all they see done in these Wars fit to be imitated, or Rauenously for
their own gain and particular profit will not only themselves be the
Exequutioners of so foul Abuses, but shamelesly maintaigne such bad new
Customs to be good and Laudible: and knowing their skill utterly unable with
any Eloquence or Cunning to defend so impious and bad a cause, will either by
Mutinous factions violently endeavor to oppress, or by false flaunders
Malitiouslie seek to disgrace such persons as they know able to discern and
willing to make their Prince and Country trewlie understand, see, and abhor
such horrible Abuses. Neither do I hate the person of a^ie one or other
Militare man alive for any respect whatsoever, but only such Extortions and
Corruptions in some of them, as I should likewise detest (if I should find the
same) in mine own Brother. And therefore no particular or private respect, but
only the great Inconvenience I doubt may ensue, and the faithful zeal, love,
and dewtie I bear to my most gracious Sovereign and Country, has moved and
induced me (as well while I bare Office of Comptroleme^t in Militare causes as
now also, being happily disburdened of that thankelesse place) so plainly to
declare a truth, not fearing to incur or irritate the malice of so viperous
and pestilent slanderous Enemies, as both myself have, and all other honest
Officers shall find such to be, as have vowed their service to Madam Picorea
so lively with detestation painted out in her colors by that worthy and
famous Soldier Mounsieur de La Noue.

MAGNA EST VERITAS ET PRAEVALET.
FINIS.
PRO LEGE REGE, ET GREGE
^LOVE KEPYTHE THE LAW, OBEYS THE KING, AND IS GOOD TO THE COMMEN WELTHE^



