THE ACCOMPLISHMENT OF THE PROPHECIES; OR THE THIRD BOOK IN defense of the
Catholic faith, contained in the book of the high and mighty KING JAMES. I.
by the grace of God King of Great Britain and Ireland.

AGAINST THE ALLEGATIONS of R. Bellarmine; and F. N. Coeffeteau and other
Doctors of the Romish Church: BY PETER DV MOVLIN Minister of the word of God in
the Church of Paris.

Translated into English by I. HEATH, Fellow of New College in Oxford.

Printed at Oxford by Joseph Barnes and are to be sold by John Barnes dwelling
near Holborne Conduit. 1613.

THE PREFACE TO the Reader.
I wrote my two first books being diversely distracted, and my spirit
surseized with fear, foresaw the dismal chance that is now come upon us. The
seditious sermons, the impairing of a dutiful respect to the king, the common
reports that were spread abroad of his death, before his death, the increase of
the Jesuits, and by a consequent the establishment of their maxims, made many
to suspect shrewdly, and it was no great praise to be a prophet. We have
therefore foreseen, and foretold the future calamity that was like to betide
us to our great loss, and spoke more true in it, then we could wish to have
done; Upon the downfall of this so great a Prince many have powered out the
torrents of their eloquence, and have bewailed him with so much art, that
nature has no more left to say. And to speak the truth words are too weak and
feeble signs to express such a grief; light afflictions speak, when the
greater are dumb, and with the veil of silence cover that which cannot be
uttered. O miserable age! The murdering therefore of kings will ere long turn
into a custom; and the natural respect that the French were wont to have of
their Sovereign be choked by superstition. We see it to our great grief.
For whosoever shall hereafter take upon him to attempt the life his king, shall
be underpropped by many examples, and, which is more, shall not want for rules:
and if this growing evil be not by time prevented, it will at last be held a
punishment to reign, and the coronation of our kings, shall be as it were a
consecration of sacrifices marked out for the slaughter. For howbeit the
singular wisdom, and vigilant care of our Queen his Majesty's spowse has
served us as a prop to sustain our ruinous estate, yet may we say that in him
France has lost the worthyest king it has had these many years, and the
manner of whose death is a fatal example, and a grand caveat to posterity.

This wound did so smart, that I could never get my fingers of from it, nor
for a long time together settle my self about finishing the remainder of this
work. Grief which of its own nature is idle, is then so most especially, when
the thing grieved at is past all remedy. Hereunto add that this third book,
which entreats of the accomplishment of prophecies, together with the
interpretation of them, requires a more composed spirit then the two former
did: For as God intending to reveal future events to his prophets, withdrew
them aside, and carried them either to the desert, or else to the sea shore,
that so having plucked them from amidst the press, he might setle their minds
in a quiet repose; So think I, that to diue into their prophecies a man need
be free from all cares, and to partake of their rest, that he may partake of
the cleerenesse of their spirit. And, indeed, what by reason of the public
grief, the greatest part whereof has fallen upon us, and what by reason of
many interruptions, I had never dared to have set upon this matter, had not the
excellent spirit of the King of Great Britain enlightened me, and if in the
unfolding of these prophecies I had not been assisted by experience, which is
the cause, that I have more need of a memory herein, then any extraordinary
revelation. God also, whom I here invoke to mine aid, will by his spirit
sharpen the dullness of mine, and as he has given this property to the
sea-cards needle to stand firm in the most violent tempests, so is he able to
give his servants a piercing wit, and a settled mind amidst this confusion. He
reveals his secrets to those which fear him, and makes them to understand his
will. Now that no man may accuse me of rashness herein, as though I did too
curiously pry into after ages, or presumptuously gave mine own interpretations
for rules; the reader shall do well to consider, that it is one thing to
prophecy, another thing to speak of the fulfilling of prophecies: the one is
done by revelation, the other by experience; for the one we need to be inspired
from above, for the other we need nothing but a memory together with some
insight in the present times. The Prophets drew their prophecies from the
counsel of God, but we find the accomplishment of their prophecies in
histories, by conferring the predictions with the events; for the predictions
after the events become histories, and the promises performances.

This is the reason why his Majesty of England says (and that most truly)
that the fathers of the first ages, spoke of this matter but only by
conjectures, whereas we speak of it by experience; For the prophecies which
foretell of an evil to come, may easily be interpreted by those upon whom it
is come. Even as the Jews being led captives into Babylon did easily
understand the prophecy of Jeremy; so Christians held under the second
captivity of Babylon, may soon know the meaning of the prophecies in the
Revelation, which foretell of it; I would to God we were not the interpreters
of our own miseries, and that we had not learned the meaning of these
prophecies by experience. Which makes me to wonder at our adversaries who to
entangle this point the more, do nothing but quote passages out of the
fathers, whenas they speak only but by conjecture, or else say such things as
our adversaries themselves do deride, and which experience has confuted.
Lactantius in the 25. chap. of his 7. book says that the world should not
last above 200 years more at the most, and yet notwithstanding it is well
near 1300. years past since Lactantius wrote. Sulpitius Severus in the second
book of his history tells us that it was generally thought in his time that
Nero was not dead, but that he was cured of the wound that was given him,
and that his wound being cured, he is reserved alive for the last day, to the
end that he may exercise the mystery of iniquity. S. Austin in the 19. Chap.
of the 20. book of the city of God, expounding S. Paul's prophecy, in the 2.
Chap. of his 2. Epist. to the These. speaks thus, I confess that I understand
no thing of all that which he has said; only I will relate the diverse
surmises of men, that I could ever hear of, or read upon this subject; Then he
alleages diverse opinions, which he calls conjectures. Compare the book of
Antichrist fathered upon S. Austin, with the expositions of Andrew Archbishop
of Cesarea, and Bedaes, and S. Ieromes Commentaries upon Daniell, and you shall
see but little agreement between them. Wherefore the Jesuits writing upon this
subject are often times troubled about confuting the Fathers opinions. If we
then speak with more certainty the^ they, it is not our sufficiency that is
the cause thereof, but rather our misfortune to be reserved till the last
days, that we might see the execution of the plagues foretold in these
prophecies.

This notwithstanding their praise remains whole unto them still: for he which
expoundes prophecies not yet accomplished, ought to be more admired, if amongst
ten false expositions he hit upon one or two true, then if after they were
fulfilled he should expound them all truly. Now the Fathers do happily light
upon the true meaning in many of these points, and bring diverse expositions,
which the experience of succeeding ages has confirmed, which we will produce
in their place.

But here before we venture upon this matter, the faithful reader must be
advised to avoid two extremes; the one is, that he tie not himself too
religiously to these things; the other, that he set not too little by them. As
for the former, his Majesty of England plainly affirms, that in this
doctrine there are obscure things which he would not urge as necessary to
salvation for every one. And that with good reason. For I am persuaded that in
Christian religion, there is no one article of faith, which may be necessary
to salvation at one time, and yet not necessary at another. Now all confess
that the understanding of these prophecies was not necessary before they were
fulfilled. It follows therefore that even after their accomplishment a man may
be saved without the knowledge of them. And I find not that the reading of
civil and ecclesiastical histories is recommended unto us in the holy
Scriptures as necessary to salvation. But so it is that partly out of them,
partly out of the present evils, we draw the meaning of these prophecies. The
articles of the doctrine of salvation, are no prophecies, but Commandments, or
simple and bare promises; or if it please any one to call the articles of the
resurrection of the flesh, and of the life everlasting, by the names of
prophecies; yet are they coucht in such clear terms, that they have no need
of any interpretation. For God which has covered future events with a thick
darkness, does propose the things simply necessary to salvation with great
perspicuitie.

The other extremity, which is the setting too little by these prophecies,
has no less danger. For as when the ruin of Jerusalem by Nabuchadnezar did
fulfill the Prophecy of Jeremy: or when the birth of our Savior, made the
prophecies of Jacob, Esaias, and Micheas, plain, and perspicuous; if any one
were so obstinate that he would not understand these prophecies, he had
rejected the grace of God. So now adays when God has made us to see the
accomplishment of matters foretold by Daniel, S. Paul, and S. John, whosoever
shall hereupon close his eyes of set purpose, that man does resist the wisdom
of God, and frustrates the holy Ghost of his intent, making (as much as lies in
him) these prophecies to be unprofitable. For God revealed these things to his
Prophets and Apostles to no other end but to profit us. That so the
deliverances, which they foretell of, taking effect, we might not attribute it
to our own wisdom or force, but to his providence, and determination, which
he declared long before to his Prophets: as also that we might know, that
these calamities, being foretold of, come not upon us by hap hazard, but by his
fixed counsel, resolved upon from everlasting, and to the end that we might
keep our selves from being amongst the number of those upon whom he will
power out the vials of his wrath because of their unbelief. For whosoever
shall labor to prevent the judgments of God denounced by his Prophets will
never style the study of knowing the^, by the name of curiosity. But on the
contrary even as the faithful which lived a little before the birth of our
Savior, comforted themselves under the Roman yoke by meditating upon the
coming of Christ promised by his Prophets which they called, Luc. 2.
the co^solatio^ of Israel, so ought we under this Romish bondage, which
tyrannizeth over our consciences, comfort up our selves by these prophecies,
part of which being already finished, assure us that the rest too shall in
their due time be put in execution. Otherwise the reproach wherewith the Jews
were vpbraided by Jeremy shall also be cast in our teeth, to wit, Ierem. 8.7
that the Storke, the Turtle, the Crane and the Swallow knew their seasons, but
the people of God knew not theirs. For he justly sends them to the school of
beasts, that will not be scholars in the house of God. But if these
prophecies be not necessary as articles of our faith, yet at the least are they
necessary as Gods forewarnings to us ward, which we cannot reject without
hurting our selves, and displeasing him. For is it no fault, trow we, if that
after he has painted out the son of perdition unto us long time before his
coming, we will nor know him then when he is come, and when we are within his
clumbs? The holy Prophets, should they ever have foreseen these evils so long
time before hand, to the end that we should not see them when they ariue? And
if we demonstrate, that according to the predictions of the Prophets, that man
of sin must needs be already come; what carelessness is it not to harken
out his habitation, and not so much as vouchsafe to look whether it may not be
that we our selves serve him without thinking of it. I omit to tell how the
understanding of these prophecies, are of great force to give weight and
authority to the Gospel. For the mystery of godliness is made more clear
by being opposed to the mystery of iniquity. Because we are soon induced to
believe that the Prophets are true in their doctrines, when we find by effect
that they speak truth in their prophecies. We do not therefore herein serve
our own curiosity, but the good of the Church, and the commandment of God.
Let others read the events of things to come in the Stars, or study
Chiromancy, or Meteoposcopie; the best Prognosticke that a man can have, is the
fear of God, and his word, the best book of predictions, wherein God speaks,
as if he did stretch out his finger from heaven, and point out the Sea of Rome
unto us, saying, behold her here of who^ my Prophets spoke, and which I marked
out unto you in my word.

It remains that I speak of the subject of this book, and of the end that I
proposed to my self therein. I do not here dispute who that Antichrist should
be, nor whether the Pope should be so called. And I refrain from doing this
for two reasons, The one is, because I would not willingly contest about
words, but rather tie my self to the things. For since all the fathers and
our adversaries agree with us in this, that in the 2. Chap. of the 2. to the
Thessal. and in the 13. of the Apocal. and other places, Antichrist is pointed
out, it shall suffice if we search the meaning of these chapters. For if it be
found that they speak of the Pope, the difficulty touching the name will be
taken away. We will make the propositions, let who so will draw the
conclusion. The other reason is, because this very name does exasperate the
simpler sort who thinking this an odious word, condemn the book for the
titles sake. They think that other controversies prick his Holiness at the
throat, but that this cuts his wind pipe. To whose quaint stomachs, and
impatient delicacie I thought good to fit my self at this time; being content
only to show the meaning of these holy prophecies, and to confirm my
exposition with proofs: which I hope to deliver so clearly, and make them so
agreeable, that I am persuaded that he which is resolved not to believe any of
them, shall at the least wonder by what chance it could come to pass, that
so many things foretold by Daniel, by S. Paul, and S. John should all meet
jointly together in one man. Or how they could draw a picture so like the Pope,
and never think upon him.

Now, this being a difficult point, and a matter of importance, I must of
necessity (to handle it with order and care) speak a great deal more in it
then Mounsieur Coeffeteau binds me to do. For seeing he does but flourish
the matter over superficially being content to cast some light difficulties
here and there in the way, it had been impossible for me to sound the depth
of it in following him. Nevertheles he has said nothing, to which I do not
answer, as it crosses my course. God, of his mercy, fill us with his grace from
above, and after the accomplishment of these prophecies which threaten us, give
us the accomplishment of his promises.

A TABLE OF THE MATters contained in this third book.
A Preface. An exposition of the 4 first verses of the fourth Chapter, of the
first Epistle to Timothy. Chap. 1. An exposition of the second Chapter of the
second to the Thessalonians. Chap. 2. An exposition of the 12 Chapter of the
Revelation. Chap. 3. An exposition of the 13 Chapter of the Revelation. Chap.
4, An exposition of the 14 Chapter of the Revelation. Chap. 5. An exposition of
the 17 Chapter of the Revelation. Chap. 6. An exposition of the 18 Chapter of
the Revelation. Chap. 7. An exposition of the 7 Chapter of Daniel. Chap. 8. An
exposition of the 11 Chapter of the Revelation. Chap. 9. The conclusion with
the clozure of the king of Great Britains Preface. Cha. 10.
THE THIRD BOOK OF THE accomplishment of the Prophecies.
THE PROPHECY OF THE Apostle S. PAVL in the first to TIMOTHY, and fourth
Chapter. CHAP. I.
1 Now the spirit speaks evidently, that in the latter times some shall
depart from the faith, and shall give heed unto spirits of error, and doctrines
of Devils.

2 Which speak lies through hypocrisy, and have their consciences burned with
an hot yro^.

3 Forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which God has
created to be received with giving thanks of them which believe and know the
truth.

4 For every creature of God is good, and nothing ought to be refused, if it be
received with thankesgiving, etc.


The accomplishment of this Prophecy.
THis prediction of the Apostle, being not wrapped in riddles, nor shadowed under
figurative words, need no subtle explication, nor laborious conjectures to be
understood, we need not speak by guess, when we feel the evil, and I would
to God we saw it less clear then we do.

The Apostle speaks of an evil that must happen in the last times; these last
times be gunne from the Apostles times, as he himself tells us in the 10. Chap.
of his first epistle to the Corinthians: whence it follows that these last
times are now much nearer, and that this present age is more the last times,
then that was wherein S. Paul lived.

In these last times therefore he foretells of a departing from the faith, of
spirits of error, which shall teach the doctrine of devils through hypocrisy
against their own conscience.

This being spoken in general would have a thousand faces, and be subject to
diverse interpretations, were it not that the Apostle himself did put his
finger upon the evil, and specify some examples thereof; not the worst but the
most sensible, not the most wicked, but the most easy to be known. These are
the errors. 1. A forbidding to marry. 2. A commanding to abstain from meats.
Both which are the errors of Papistry, and the ordinances of the church of
Rome, more religiously observed then the commandments of God: We will speak
of each of them severally.

Of the single life of the Clergy, and Monks in the Church of Rome.
MArriage is an holy bond between man and woman, whereby they are made one
body, and one flesh. If antiquity give authority to things? it was from the
beginning of the creation? If the author, God did first institute it; If the
place where it began? it was established in Paradise; If the witnesses? Jesus
Christ himself did authorize it by his presence; If sanctity? God co^pares it
to his holy covenant, promising in Hosea. 2.19.20.
O see, that he will marry us unto himself for ever in righteousness and
mercy; It is an assistance given unto man; a lenitiue of all afflictions, a
remedy against in co^tinency; and amongst faithful persons it is a spiritual
harmony, to join their prayers, to comfort them up in their miseries, to
encourage them on to good works, and in slipperie places to reach out their
helping hands to each other. This is that which preserues mankind from
perishing, it is the seed-plot of the Church, the fountain and original of al
kindred and affinity that is in the world; without this men would live
dispersed like savage beasts, without making up families, which are the first
and principal parts of a Common wealth.

Where is the man this day living, whose virginity may be compared with
Abraham's marriage, in whom all the nations of the world were blessed? Whereupon
Lib. de bono coniugali cap. 21.
S. Austin also opposes it to the virginity of S. John. But there is nothing
that does add more authority unto marriage, then that comparison so often
Ephesians. 5. Psalm. 45. Rev. 19.
reiterated in the holy Scripture, whereby the union of Jesus Christ with his
Church is compared unto marriage. The bond whereof is the holy Ghost, the
contract the Gospel, the Apostles were the Registers of this contract, and
Jesus Christ himself sealed it with his blood: the betrothing is here below in
the Church, but the wedding it self shall be solemnized in heaven. God
clothing this spiritual union with these borrowed terms to the end that no man
might condemn marriage, but he should withal despise his covenant. The
Prophets, Levits, yea and the High Priests entered this holy course of life,
which before the division made by David, were to serve every day at morning and
evening sacrifice. But if God had thought that there had been any pollution in
marriage, he would have found some other means to continue the succession of
his Priests, then by the hereditary succession of children after their fathers.
Especially seeing that then in outward things, and bodily cleanness, God
required a great deal more purity under the law then he does now adays. The
Apostles also were married: for in the first of S. Mark there is mention made
of the mother of S. Peter's wife. And S. Ambrose upon the 11. Chap. of the 2. to
the Corinthians, All the Apostles, says he, except John and Paul had wives.
Ignatius in his Epistle to the Philadelphians, does not except Saint Paul; but
says, that Peter and Paul, and the other Apostles were married. And Clemens
Alexandrinus in the 3. book of his Stromes, after a long reprehension of those
which despise marriage under the show of a more strict sanctititie, adds. Do
they reject the Apostles? For Peter and Philip begat children. Philip married
his daughters to husbands, and Paul sticks not to speak unto his wife in one
of his Epistles. Now it is to be noted that in these places, the Fathers speak
of marriage as it is a remedy against incontinencie, and as it was thought by
some to be less holy then virginity; to the end that none should think that
they thought the Apostles had wives, but never lay with them. They tell Christ
truly in the 9. Chap. of S. Matthew, Behold we have forsaken all and followed
thee, And Jesus answers them; Whosoever shall forsake houses, or brethren, or
sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my names
sake, he shall receive an hundredth fold more, and shall inherit everlasting
life. But we must know that this promise is made unto all the faithful, and
not only to the Pastors of the Church. For he says Whosoever shall leave etc.
and yet nevertheless no man would infer out of this place that all the
faithful must abstain from their wives, or forsake their children for Christ's
sake; only our Savior would that all the faithful should leave all that is
most near and dear unto them, when it shall hinder them from following him,
and when it cannot stand together with the profession of the Gospel. Moreover
Christ here places the wife, and the children, and the lands, and the houses
in the same rank. If a Bishop therefore may be suffered to enjoy his lands, or
houses, in the same fashion that he did enjoy them before he was a Bishop or
Priest, what reason is there but that he should enjoy his wife in the same
manner that he did before he was a Priest? And if a father that is afterward
made a Priest shall not for all this be less a father the^ he was before, why
should he become less an husband? Especially seeing that there is an express
commandment of our Lord in the 19. of S. Matt. which does not permit a man to
leave his wife for any other cause but adultery. And which says, that they
are no more two but one flesh, Let no man therefore put that asunder which God
has coupled together; Now it is manifest that the separation which he speaks
of, is a separation of the bed, seeing that he opposes it against that
conjunction by which man and woman are made one body.

This doctrine being sound divinity, and built upon the word of God, as we
will show it yet more manifestly; it is not without just cause that the
contrary doctrine is called the doctrine of Devils. The first that ever spoke
against marriage were the Tatians, Marcionites, and Manichees, after who^
Papistrie succeeded, a religion patched up together out of the diverse shrids of
ancient heresies. For the Popes have set themselves directly to contradict the
Apostles St 1. Tim. 3.2.4.
Paul who says, that a Bishop should be unreprovable, the husband of one wife,
having his children under obedience with all honesty. On the contrary Pope
Pelagius in the 61. Distinction commandes, that there should be no bishop
chosen, but such a one that has neither wife, nor children, nor any other
crime contrary to the canons. There is nothing more opposite. But yet in this
contrariety there is no question to be made, but of the two the Pope must
rather be believed, since that in his Tit. 80 de concessione praebendaru^.
Canons he vaunts that he can dispense above the law. And that the glosses of
the Church of Rome tell us hereupon, that he can dispense against the Apostle,
and that he does dispense with the gospel in giving it what interpretation he
please, and that the Apostle had nothing else but certain Revelations; marry
his holiness Can. licet Tit. 2. de co^stit. in Sexto.
brags that he has all the law close locked up within the clozet of his breast.
We have therefore plainly seen the accomplishment of this prophecy.

It is true that our adversaries to obscure this truth, say that S. Paul
speaks of heretics which forbad marriage not only to Clarckes and
Ministers, but to the lay people too, and that as a wicked and unclean thing
in its own nature; That the Church of Rome forbids marriage only to Clarckes,
and Monks, and such as have made a vow of continency, and forbids it them not
as an unclean thing, but as a counsel of perfection, and as a more strict and
sanctified profession.

1 I answer that they delude themselves in seeking to delude us. For the
Apostle calls those false teachers in general that forbid marriage without
specifying any cause for which they forbid it: the rule being general, it is
not for us to put in I know not what exceptions which the word of God shall
not put in. By diverse lines we may well come to the same point, and by
diverse ways run to the same precipice. The self same error is formed in
the spirit of men by diverse reasons, yet all the causes of error, and contrary
to the holy Scriptures.

2 Besides I say that they deceive themselves if they think that the Manichees
for bad marriage unto all, they forbad it them only whom they called their
chosen or elect; For so did they name their pastors, and such as made
profession of a more exact and sanctified kind of life amongst them. S. Austin
is a witness fit to be believed for this, because himself was a Manichee at
first for a long time: who in the second book, of the manners of the Church,
and the Manichees, and 18. Chapt. brings in the Manichees speaking as our
adversaries do at this day. Here, says he, I know that you will exclaim for
to make us odious, that you do not forbid marriage at all, since that is not
forbidden to your hearers (which are in the 2 rank amongst you) to marry, and
to have wives. And in his 74. Epist. They which are called the hearers amongst
them, eat flesh, plough their fields, and have wives too if they will, none of
which are done by those whom they call their elect. Whence it also appears
that they did not take marriage to be simply bad, since they did permit it to
their people. No more true is that which our adversaries say that the Church of
Rome does not maintain that marriage is a wicked and unclean thing in its own
nature. For see how the Popes speak of it. Pope Innocent in his 82.
Distinction, does forbid Can. Proposuit.
that they which dwell with their wives should be received to any holy charge,
because it is written, Be ye holy as I am holy, says the Lord. This Pope it
seems thought that marriage could not stand together with sanctity. And by
consequence that it was a profane thing. And note the abuse; For when God
says, Be ye holy, he speaks to all men: but if by this commandment God did
require that men should abstain from their wives, what remains there more but
that there should no man be married? To the same purpose does he produce the
passage of the Apostle to Titus Chap. 1. Unto the pure al things are pure, but
to them that are defiled and unbelieving, is nothing pure. Upon this place does
he ground the single life of Priests to the end they may be pure, otherwise
he thinks them defiled and vnbeleiuing. Also wickedly wresting that saying of
the Apostle Romans 8. v 8.9. against married persons. He speaks thus to the
Clarks. They which are in the flesh cannot please God; Now ye are not in the
flesh but in the spirit. Could he more disgrace married men then to say they
cannot please God. For note that the Apostle in this place speaks to all the
faithful in general.

Pope Syricius in the same Distinction speaks yet more disgracefully of
marriage; for first he ranckes the Priests which beget children upon their
own wives, with those that commit adultery. We have understood, says he,
that many Priests and Deacons, have a long time after their consecration,
gotten children both in marriage, as also by fornication; A little after he
speaks unto them both equally; Let them which are given to fornication, and
which teach these sins tell me etc. And we have heard above how Pope Pelagius
accounts the marriage of Clerks for a sin. So in the 31. Cause, 1. Quest.
Canon. Hac ratione, the Romish decree says, that howbeit the Apostle S. Paul
have commanded second marriages, yet according to truth, and in reason it is
fornication. And the vow of single life is by them called the vow of chastity,
as though there were no chastity in marriage. Bellarmine in his 34. Chapter of the
book of Monks, styles the marriage of Clerks and Monks by the name of
sacrilege, and affirms that they sin less which commit fornication, after
they have once taken a vow, then they do which marry. And in the 19. Chap. of
the 1. book of Clerks, he says that the marriage of Saints is not without
some pollution and uncleanness. And indeed should this people hold their peace,
yet experience would tell as much. For who is there but knows, that to see a
Priest keep a pretty wench in his house, or to go into a Stews, is thought
but a laughing matter, and held to be a venial slip? But if a Priest should be
married in the sight of the Church, this would be held for a prodigy; They
would say that this were the cause of the plague or the dearth that lay upon
them; that the eclipse of the sun did prognosticate this: and out of question
it should be recorded in their Chronicles. The former is but simple
fornication, but the other is sacrilege. For 500. public brothell* houses to
be in the city of Rome is thought nothing so heinous a crime, as that one of
the Cordiliers should be seen to be married. Moses, Samuel, the Prophet Esaias,
and the Apostle S. Peter, which were all married, would be thought monsters now
a days; and a man might get money by leading them about to be seen for
strange sightes. By this therefore we see that this prophecy is fulfilled
every kind of way.

They excuse it by their vow, and say that the marriage of clarks and monks is
therefore sacrilege because in being married they break their vow. To which I
answer that if the marriage of clarcks were therefore only to be condemned,
they should call it by the name of faithlesnesse only, or infidelity, and not
of pollution as Pope Syricius does; nor yet of sacrilege as Bellarmine. And in
truth why is it that before they receive any to be clarckes they exact this
vow of them so severely without any exception, but that they think that
marriage in it self is not lawful for them although they took no vow.

As for the necessity of keeping vows, I say, that the first vows when they
are good and necessary, may not be broken by those we take after, and I am
persuaded they will grant me this. But a clarcke before ever he were a clarcke
did he not make a vow and promise to God to keep his commandments? This is
that which we all promise at our first entrance into the Church, and although
we did not promise it, yet for all that were we bound to keep it. Now amongst
the commandments of God this is one. Hieron. ad Eustochium.
To avoid fornication, let every man have his wife, and every woman her
husband. If therefore any Monk be lustful, and it fare with him as it did
with S. Jerome, who after all his prayers and fastings, did yet still dream of
women and burn with incontinencie, I demand to which vow he is most bound,
either to that which he made to obey God, who commands all such to marry, or
to that which he made to the Church that he would never marry? Can they
without impiety affirm that he must rather keep the vow made to the Church
whereunto he is not tied by God, then that which he made to God, and which he
were bound to keep although he had not made it? Especially seeing that Tho.
in 22. qu. 88. art. 2.
Tho. Aquinas, and Cardinal Bell. lib. de Clericis. c. 18
Bellarmine confess that the single life of Priests is but by the law of man,
but to abstain from fornication, is inioined by the law of God, why then is
the law of man observed more religiously then the law of God? Why are humane
institutions more strictly kept the^ Gods commandments? insomuch that a Priest
which shall commit fornication against the law of God, is thought to have
sinned a great deal less then if he were married against the promise made to
the Church without the commandment of God? the one being called but
fornication, but the other held to be sacrilege. To abstain from fornication
is nothing but to obey the law of God, but never to marry is a counsel of
perfection, and a work of supererogation* which sets the Monks in Paradise in
a far higher degree of glory, then Abraham, Moses, and all the Prophets that
were married could ever attain unto.

But I would yet further be informed, if when a man take upon him to be a Monk
and promise to live chastely, whether by this promise he do not withal promise
to abstain from fornication: they would blush to deny this. It follows
therefore that he sins far more in committing fornication then in marrying,
seeing that by fornication (besides the violating of the general vow which all
men are bound to make to God, he also breaks his very monastical vow which
he took upon him over and above the commandment of God. To all these things
our adversaries never answer directly, nor speak they ought to the purpose.
They make digressions in the praise of Virginity; But this concerns not us,
who acknowledge that virginity is the most commodious state of life to serve
God in without straying, that marriage has its discommodities, and as the
Apostle says, 1. Cor. 7. troubles in the flesh, especially in time of
persecution. But these praises agree only to chaste virginity, which does not
consist only in keeping the body from uncleanness, but in withholding the
mind too from lust. Whosoever has this perfection, and besides has
discretion enough to guide his family, that man does wisely to live single. But
if he be set upon by wicked desires, and yet notwithstanding does still affect
a single life, he provokes God, exposes himself to temptations, ensnares his
conscience, and digs a pit for himself to fall in. Chaste marriage will never
be liable to so many discommodities as incontinent virginity, for what do
they which live in this state, but chew the bit it secret, thinking that
condition of life most sweet and happy which they are denied to live, desiring
that which they fly, having their thoughts defiled with unchaste imaginations,
and yet notwithstanding all this resolved not to follow the counsel of God,
and to abstain from using the remedies which he has prescribed. This is a
vice for which Philosophy could never find a name, to burn with lust, and
whilst we are in this taking, to vow to God that we will fly from the
remedies that he has ordained against it; which is all one as if a man were
sick, and should promise God that he would take no Physic, there is
rashness in this mixed together with obdurat superstition.

To urge this yet further we ask if this continent virginity be the gift of
God, or whether it be in our own power, Bellarmine answers that it is truly
the gift of God and yet nevertheless that it is in our own power. Lib. 2. de
Mon. cap. 31
Which is a plain contradiction; for if God give it us then is it not in our
power, seeing that we do not carry the key of his gifts, and that his goods
are not at our disposal. It is true indeed that we ask the grace of God
freely; and use it with out constraint, but it is God that makes us disposed
to ask it, and gives us the will to use it. Phil. 2.13.
It is he which works both the will and deed in us, even of his good
pleasure. Seeing then it is the gift of God, when any man does ask the gift of
continuing in a single life without desire of marying, does God still hear him?
And where is then the promise that God will hear him as concerning this. For
confidence of prayer must be grounded on some promise of God. Bellarmine
cannot produce any promise, only he brings us, as his fashion is, a ridiculous
distinction; Cap. 34. lib. 2. de Mon.
saying, that God gives all men a possibility of containing themselves, but
that he gives not unto all men actually to contain themselves, but only to
such as he thinks good. As who should say, that God gave one power to be an
Emperor, but yet did not grant that he should be an Emperor; that God gave a
man power to be wise, but yet did not grant that he should be wise. But to
what end serves that power, that is never reduced in to act? For our question
was not, whether God gave the power or the act; but whether he gave the act of
being continent to all men? He confesses therefore that he gives not this
but to some particulars; and that to be actually continent is a gift of god
that is not given to all. If then there be a Monk, to whom God has not give^
the gift of continency, and which burns with inward lust, who shall tell you
himself, that after so many Pater Nosters said, and often fastings, he is yet
still tempted with the spirit of fornication; I would know whether such a one
be to follow the Apostles counsel, that is to marry, or else to continue in
his former incontinencie? But it ill befits these fellows to talk of such
things. For as it ill beseems a slave to discourse of liberty, or a man with
his belly full to preach fasting and penance: so also is it ill beseeming these
squires that live so unchastly, to dispute of chastity. For their lives speak
against them, and their rules are refuted by their actions. Hardly would a man
believe them since they do not believe themselves, and since they make a vow
of chastity, that so they may live the more dissolutely. They speak against
nature, whilst they are most given to nature; (to say nothing of their
pleasures contrary to nature.) Let them therefore first learn to live, before
they go about to dispute; and let the Covent go no more to the Stews, nor the
Stews be kept any more in the Cove^t, if they would not have us believe that
continency is a gift, which God gives not to such as correct his word. Or if
every one may have it that will, the more to blame they for refusing it, since
it was in their power to have had it.

Nor let them speak any more to us of these vows, which are a yoke of iron,
and a snare to entangle weak souls. For they omit the first point, which is,
that they should know before they take any vow, whether it be good and
lawful; seeing that if it be not lawful to make, it is unlawful to keep.
Things which are bad to promise, are worse yet to perform. Virginity is a good
thing, and honest, but for a man to tie himself thereto, is a token of
rashness and ignorance of his own infirmity.

For vows are the^ good when they have these 3 conditions, 1. If the things
vowed be good. 2. If they be such as we know to be in our own power. 3. If we
vow them willingly and wittingly. None of al which are found in the vows of
chastity which the Monckes and Clarckes take; For to live single is good, but
not for all, but only for such as have the gift of continency: it is good, but
not in that degree of goodness as they would have it, making it a kind of
perfection above the law, and a work of supererogation whereby we render God
more then we owe him. It is hard that that which is the occasion of so much
uncleanness should be a work of more worth the^ to love God with all our
hearts. Or that that should be a work of supererogation, which if every one
kept, the church would ere long be abolisht from the face of the earth, 2.
That it is not in our power we have showed already, and their lives which make
this vow, show their unableness to perform it. 3. The monastical vow is not
always made wittingly, and willingly. Many there be that enter into it through
choler, some through despair, and others out of ignorance, and in their tender
age when they do not know what the motions of lust mean. A father will say,
how shall I marry all my daughters, how shall I devide my goods amongst so many
sons? I must needs place my lame son in a monastery, and since he is fit
for no other calling, make him a man of the church. It is a rare thing and
seldom seen to offer a lamb without spot to God. And these poor children
being come to years they find themselves taken in the net, into which they
entered at first as it were reioicing, but live therein sorrowing, seeing
themselves caught, with out all hope of ever being set at liberty.

Seeing then it is better for the government of our life to follow sacred and
sure rules, then rash and indiscreet vows; and not so much to keep that to
which we have bound our selves, as that to which we are bound by God, we will
conclude this discourse, with the rule of the Apostle. 1. Tim. chap. 3. Let a
bishop therefore be unreprovable, the husband of one wife, ruling his own
house honestly, having his children under obedience with all reverence.

The common evasion is, that S. Paul means only that a Bishop must not have
had but one wife before his election into that charge, but that after his
election he is to have none. Hierome a professed enemy of marriage
understands it thus. They interpret these words therefore, Let a Bishop be, by
these, Let a Bishop have been. By their reckoning the Apostle should speak
thus. Let such a one be chosen to be a Bishop that has been irreproueable,
the husbvnde of one wife, watching, temperate, modest; or, but let him now be
so no longer; so do they make the Apostle the teacher of vices, and the
entrance into a Bishopric to be a ceasing from virtue. But though it were
hard for S. Paul to foresee that any should wrest his words so strangely, yet,
as it seems, he meant purposely to put the matter out of controversy, by that
which he annexeth in the 12 verse. Let the deacons be the husbands of one wife,
and such as can rule their children well, and their own households; where these
words Let them be, go immediately before, and are joined only to the word,
husbands. And, which is more, in the 11. verse, he ordains that their wives
be honest, not evil speakers, but sober, and faithful in all things. Who would
think that S. Paul did instruct the women that had been the wives of Bishops,
but not such as were* His meaning therefore is that Bishops, and Deacons should
not be Digamists, and that they should neither in former times have had, nor at
the present have but one wife at once; because then it was the custom that man
and wife were often separated by divorce for other causes besides adultery,
and upon light occasions, and afterward married again as they thought best,
which the Apostle S. Paul does forbid, not only to Bishops and Deacons, but
to such 1. Tim. 5 9
widows also as served in the church, to the end no man might say that they
had two husbands, the one with them, and the other divorced.

Wherein the truth is so clear, and the liberty of expounding being, by having
been, so intolerable, that Bellarmine himself, (howsoever he threaten as
though he would contest) is feign to yield unto it, in the 21. chap. of his 1.
book of Clerckes, in these words, Chrysostom and the other fathers upon this
place teach that Paul made no law that bishops should have wives, but only
that they should not have, nor have had but one. Agreeable to Pope Leos
exposition in his 85. Epistle. The Apostle bids us t^ choose a bishop that is
known to have been married, or to be married but to one wife.

This so manifest a truth, and so forcible an evidence, has by force extorted
confessions from our adversaries which are inserted in the Romish decrees. In
the 23. Distinction about the government of Clerckes, it is said, Let them
labor to preserve the chastity of their bodies inviolable, or at the most let
them marry but once; and in the 26. cause quaest. 2. The marriage of Priests,
and of cousens, is forbidden neither by the Legal, nor Evangelical, nor
Apostocall authority, nevertheless it is absolutely forbidden by the
authority of the Church. Where by the Church he understands the Romish church.
For in the Ethiopian Church, which contains 17. realms, the Monckes are
married, and are laboring and handy crafts men; and in the Greek Church the
Priests and Deacons are married once. Witness the Canon Aliter in the 32.
Distinction. The tradition of the East church is diverse from this of the church
of Rome. For their Priests, Deacons, and Subdeaco^s are married: But in this
church no priest from a subdeacon to a bishop has any liberty to marry. In the
very same Distinction is the judgment of the council of Nice set down in
these words, concerning the resistance made by Paphnutius bishop of Thebais.
Now Paphnutius the confessor withstood this, showing that marriage was
honorable, and saying that it was chastity for a man to live with his own
wife. Wherefore he advised the council not to establish such a law; affirming
that it was a matter of importance, and that it would be an occasion either to
them or their wives of fornication. And this was Paphnutius his opinion
although himself were not married, whose advise was approved of by the Synod.
The like is reported by Socrates in his 1. book and 8. Chap. and by Sozomene
in his 1. book 23. Chap. and by Nicephorus Callistus in the 8. book of his
history, Chap. 19. and by the acts of the council of Nice written by Gelasius
Cysicensus, all which do not only speak of suffering Priests to have wives,
but grant them the enioining of the marriage bed, as honest and lawful. Which
I have therefore the longer insisted upon, because there be some that have mard
this history, and that tell it otherwise. In the 56. Distinction, in the Canon
Osius, there is a great bedroll of bishops reckoned up, which were the sons
of bishops, Priests, or Deacons; And least a man should think that they were
begotten before their fathers had taken holy orders, a little after in the same
Distinction, the exposition is annexed in these words. When we read above
that Priests children have been made Popes, we must not think that they were
begot by fornication, but by lawful marriage, which, before this prohibition,
was permitted unto all, and is at this day (as all know) suffered in the East
Church.

Hence come these Canons of the ancient Councels. The 4 Canon of the counsel
of Gangres is this. If any one shall put a difference between a Priest that is
married, as though it were not lawful to receive the sacrament at his hands
when he shall serve it, Let him be an Anathema. A Canon which Bellarmine has
falsified in the 21. Chap. of his first book of Clerks, having turned (...),
by Qui vxorem habuit, which had a wife, whereas it signifies, Qui vxorem
duxit, which has married a wife, that is as much to say, which is married.
Witness the vulgar translation allowed of by the Council of Trent, which
translates the 10. verse of the 7. Chap. of the 1 to the Corinthians; (...),
ijs autem qui matrionio iuncti sunt, to those which are married, and not as
Bellarmine, Iis qui vxorem habuerunt, to those which have been married.

The 6. General council assembled at Trulla to make Canons has an express
ordinance hereupon in the 13. Canon in these words. For as much as we have
understood, that it has been ordained for a rule in the Church of Rome, that
whosoever will be a Deacon or Priect, must first protest that he will never
any more after that have to do with his wife: we, following the Apostolical
order and discipline, will that the lawful marriages of Clergy men be for ever
availeable, by no means separating them from their wives, nor forbidding them
to come together at convenient times. Wherefore if any one shall be thought
worthy to be chosen a subdeacon, deacon, or a Priest, let him not be hindered
from mounting to this degree because he dwells together with his lawful wife,
and let it not be exacted of him in the day of his election to renounce the
company of his lawful spowse. Least by this we be constrained to disgrace
marriage, which was first instituted by God, and blessed by his presence,
seeing that the Gospel cries out that no man should separate that which God
has joined together; This, under the pain of excommunication and deposition:
and all against the Church of Rome, expressly named in the Canon. It is true
indeed that Bellarmine incensed against the Council, calls it profane, in his
1. book of Clerks 19. Chap. so defaming and disgracing these ancient councils
as often as they shall speak against the Church of Rome. But he did not mark
how withal he condemned Pope Adrian, which allows of this 6. Council
together with all the Canons thereof: which approbation is inserted in the
Decretals in the third Distinction of Consecration.

To this council does Justinians constitution agree in the Code, and 2. law De
Episcopis and Clericis: the words whereof are these. Let not clergy men be
compelled to find post horses, nor carts for common carriages, and let not
their goods and substance be taxed for this purpose. Let all Clarcks enjoy this
privilege, so that neither their wives nor their children be subject to this
burden.

We have heard a multitude of ancient authors hereupon, which teach that the
Apostles were married. If we believe Platina in the life of Cletus the 1. S.
Luke was married, and had his wife in Bythynia. Athanasius toward the end of
his epistle to Draco^tius, shows the custom in his days. Many bishops, says
he, are not married, on the contrary there be Monckes that are the fathers of
children; as on the other side we have known bishops that have had children,
and Moncks that have had none: as who should say, that in this there was no law
nor necessity imposed.

Socrates in the 22. chap. of his 5. book. Many (says he) whilst they were
bishops have had children of their lawful wives. St. Gregory of Nysse,
brother to Basilius, was married; of whom Nicephorus speaks thus in the 11.
Chap. of his 11. book. Although he had a wife, in other things he was not
inferior to his brother. Sozomene in the 11. Chap. of his 1. book speaks
thus of Saint Spiridion. He was a plain man having wife and children, but
this made him never the worse for his divine function. Mantuan speaks after
this manner of S. Hilarie in the first book of his Fasti.

Non nocuit tibi progenies, non obstitit vxor
Legitimo coniuncta thoro, non horruit illa
Tempestate Deus thalamos, cunabula, taedas
Thy children did not mar thy course of life,
Nor wast thou made the worser for thy wife,
God likt the marriage bed well till of late,
But what he the^ did like, he now does hate
And Synesius Bishop of Cyrene, was admitted Bishop, although he told them
plainly that he would not therefore depart from his wife, and would have as
many children by her as he could. S. Hierome himself a mortal enemy of
marriage, yet nevertheless (when he is out of collar against Iovinian)
allows of the marriage of Bishops. For in his Epistle to Oceanus, he defendes
Carterius a Bishop of Spain which had a second wife, against a certain lewd
fellow, which being a fornicator spoke il of Carterius his marriage. He says
therefore. Carterius has desired to have children by his wife; but thou by
giving thy body to a queen have destroyed thy race. He hid himself in the
secret corners of his chamber, whilst he served nature, and the blessing of
God, saying, increase and multiply, and fill the earth; but thou serving thy
beastly lust in open places were detested by the beholders. He concealed a
lawful action by an honest modesty; but thou have exposed thy unlawful
actions to the sight of all men. For him it is written, that marriage is
honorable, and the bed undefiled; but for thee, that God shall judge
fornicators and adulterers. And the same Hierome against Iovinian, where he
speaks so disgracefully of marriage, does yet acknowledge that in his time
Priests were married. If it be said (says he) that Samuel, which was brought
up at the Tabernacle, had a wife, how does this prejudice virginity? As if
there were not at this day many Priests that are married: seeing that the
Apostle describes a Bishop to be the husband of one wife, etc. Leo the 1.
Bishop of Rome in his 85. Epistle speaking of the Apostles Commandment of
choosing a Bishop, which either is, or has been the husband but of one wife,
says that this Commandment was always observed so religiously that the same
condition was held fit to be kept in choosing the wife of a Priest.

Yet (notwithstanding all this) I do not deny, but that many holy men in times
past, have devoted themselves to a single life; thinking marriage a state of
life not so agreeable with a Bishops calling as virginity. We may see many
examples for this in Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Hierome, and Ambrose. And which
is more, Origin that he might live chastely did utterly disable himself for
being fit for the act of generation; whether it were that he did geld himself,
or use some other means to mortify his members. And indeed, as the Councils
before mentioned do permit a Priest to take a wife, and to enjoy her as he
did before he was a Priest; so I confess it was the most usual custom for
Priests to marry before they took orders, it being the common fashion at this
day in Greece for their Priests to take wives some few days before their
ordination, and those once dead, never to marry again; but to be married
after their ordination this was unusual. Until at last the Council of
Neocaesarea which is but provincial, did in the 1. Canon forbid Priests ever
to marry after their admission. These were yet but the seeds of error; to
which, that they might not increase, the Councels held in the East, have made
Canons clean contrary. But in the West, that is to say, in the Latin Church,
which is called the Roman, the Romish Bishops having found by experience, that
virginity was the fittest state for the preserving of Church goods, and of
maintaining their authority over the Clergy, did willingly admit of it, and by
all means seek to uphold it. And this evil, being increast amongst the
Gauls, Salvian a Bishop of Marsilia, which lived in the time of Clowis as then
an heathen, co^plaineth much of it, toward the later end of his 5. book of
providence; where he speaks after this wise unto such as did refrain from
marriage that they might enter into some holy order of religion. This is a new
kind of change. They do not that which they may, and do that which they may
not. They abstain from marrying, but do not abstain from rapine. O foolish
persuasion! what do thou? God has forbidden sins, and not marriages.

Gregory the 1. bishop of Rome did maintain this error to the utmost of his
power, about the year of our Lord, 600. and yet notwithstanding in Boniface
his questions, and 4 book of dialogues, 11. chap. he speaks of Priests wives
whom he calls Presbyteras, and makes mention of a Priest of Narsia, that did
abstain from lying with his wife, For (says Gregory) holy men have this
property, sometimes to abstain from lawful things, that so they may always
estrange themselves from the things that are unlawful. In his judgment
therefore, if this priest had dwelt with his wife, he had done no more then
what he might do lawfully.

To be short, what care and diligence so ever the bishops of Rome and their
substitutes did use, they could not effect what they intended, but slowly:
there being not as yet above 500. years past, since that Priests were married
in France, England and Germany. For the proof whereof I could produce many
good witnesses, which report of the great oppositio^s that the Popes have had
in this matter, and the general outcries of the whole clergy.

It remains that we make good this clause of the Apostles prophecy, wherein
he foretells us that lying spirits shall teach this error through
hypocrisy, having cauterized consciences, that is to say, having lost all
sense and feeling of conscience, as a tooth or other part of the body that is
seared with an hot iron to dead it.

Now that this doctrine was first planted by the Doctors of the Romish church
even against their own consciences it is easy to prove by unanswerable
arguments.

1 For they call marriage a sacrament, and yet they say that in Monks and
Priests it is sacrilege. Can they possibly imagine that one and the selfsame
action should be a sacrament in one, and sacrilege in an other? Or that any
one may be said to commit sacrilege in using a sacrament?

2 Again, this is against their conscience, when they feign that they
establish this decree of virginity for no other end but that Clerks should be
the more holy, when the true cause thereof indeed, is the preservation of
church goods, for fear a bishop or Priest should pare away some thing from
them, and employ it to the use of his wife and children; as Pope Gregory
witnesses in the 28. Distinction, and Canon De Syracusanis, where he says
that the reason why he did refuse to admit of a certain bishop, was, because he
had a wife, and children, by whom the church goods do use to be endangered.
And yet notwithstanding, at the urgent request of the people of Syracusa he did
receive him, on condition that his wife and children should not meddle at all
with the church revenewes.

3 It is also against their own conscience, that having once confessed, that
the single life of priests and monks, is not by the commandment of God, but
only by the law of man; yet they labor to prove it out of the scripture. For
if their proofs be good, then is it by the law of God.

4 It is likewise against their conscience, that after they have acknowledged
that fornication is unlawful by the law of God, and that the single life of
priests is established only by the law of man, yet notwithstanding they
mainetaine that it is a less sin for a Priest to commit fornication, then to
marry.

5 It is not with a good conscience that whilst they exact a vow of chastity
of their priests, they should in the mean space excuse their lasciviousness,
as the * Canonists do, which have made this gloss on the Decree in the 11.
cause quest. 3. But if a priest embrace a woman, it is to be presumed that he
does it to no other end, but to give her a fatherly benediction.

6 They go against their conscience, when they say, that they do not forbid
marriage, and yet will not suffer a priest, that is a known fornicatour, to
be married.

7 They speak against their conscience, when they say that they are no enemies
of such marriages as are approved of in the Scripture, and yet never the less
in their Decrees (which are the laws of the church of Rome) they suffer Can.
hac ratione cause. 31. quaest. 1a.
Canons to be, which say that S. Paul commanding such as are widows to
marry again, spoke against truth and reason, seeing that such marriage is
fornication.

8 With the like dissimulation they speak of chastity, and yet for all this,
suffer unchaste laws and Canons in their decrees. As in the Canon. Is qui, in
the 34. Distinction. Where of behold the inscription. He that has no wife, let
him in steed of a wife have a concubine. The Canon following is not much
better. It is not lawful for a Christian to have. I do not say many wives, but
not so much as two wives, but only one wife, or in defect thereof a Co^cubine.
Likewise the Cano^, Dilectissimis in the 12. cause, and 1 quest. which does
commend and approve Platoes opinion the wisest amongst the Greeks* which says
that all things should be common amongst friends, now under this name of all
things (says this Canon) questionless men's, wives too are comprehended.

9 It cannot be with a good conscience that they exact the vow of continency,
and yet take away the remedy against incontinency: that they tie men to
chastity and yet wincke at fornication: forbidding marriage, and opening the
Stews: whereby they say that they avoid a greater evil, contrary to the rule
of the Romans 1.
Apostle, who bids us that we should not do evil that good may come thereby.
And yet let a man but note how this is a remedy against other evils. For there
are many towns where true religion is established, where there are no Stews,
and yet fornication is not freque^tly practiced, nor the name of Sodomie scarce
known. But the Pope by establishing Stews in Rome, has he thereby
extinguished the sin of Sodomie, or diminished the number of adulterers?

10 This is also against their conscience that confessing many of the Apostles
to have been married, they do yet call the forbidding of marriage an
Apostolical tradition.

11 Finally to know what subtle devises the Pope has used in these matters of
marriage, we are to understand that he has removed all causes concerning
matrimony from the secular Courts of Princes, and taken order for them to be
decided at Rome. Now to the end that he might hereby tyrannize over men's
consciences, he has inve^te^ a thousand scruples. He has found o^^ new
degrees of spiritual kindred: forbidding marriage between Godfathers, and
Godmothers, or their children. Also, the Lev. 18.20
word of God not forbidding marriage any further then between the Uncle and
the niece, or the Nephew and the Aunt, which are in the first or second degree,
the Pope going lower has forbidden it between Cosen germans, and their
children, and those which are remote even to the fourth degree. He has
likewise made it unlawful to marry in Lent. For look how many the more
prohibitions there are, so many the more dispensations must there be, which
are bought at a dear rate, and by so much the more is he repaired unto. And
note that he does not only dispense with prohibitions of his own making, but
with those which God has made too; suffering Uncles to marry their Neeces,
especially in the families of Princes: to the end that the children borne of
such that are thus married, should for their own ease be glad to uphold his
authority. The counting book of the fees belonging to the Romish court of
Chauncerie, imprinted at Paris by Tousains Denis, in S. James his street, near
S. Yuoes. in the year 1520. has these words. The penitentiarie may dispense
with the first degree of affinity in the Court of conscience, and such a
dispensation is sold for 9 Ducats and six groats. That is to say, that the Pope
may give permission to a woman to marry the brother of her dead husband, or to
a man to marry his dead wives sister, a thing forbidden by the word of God.
Levit. 18. 16. and 20.21.

We have therefore in this point also plainly seen the Apostles prophecy
fulfilled.

The second part of this prophecy, concerning the forbidding of meats.
THe Apostle S. Peter commanding us to watch, and be sober presupposes that
sobriety is a help to vigilancie. For it is hard to watch with a full belly:
one that is drunk is no fit man to be a sentinel. This watchfulness is
requisite to foresee the assaults of Satan, and to avoid his temptations, and
to make us lift up our hearts directly unto God. For as a man cannot well study
in the kitchen, so neither can one easily meditate of heavenly things whilst
his delight is set upon meat. The belly must hold his peace, when the spirit
speaks to God, and the desire of eating be as it were mortified by this
spiritual hunger, whereof our Savior speaks in the 4. of John, saying, My
meat is to do the will of my father that sent me; hardly can the love of God
live together with the pa^pring of the body. Hardly can a man ever imprint any
mark of godliness in his heart, whose palate is more skillful then his
understanding: or which enthralleth his mind to his belly, nourishing this not
so much for necessity, as curiosity: but if this evil be pernicious at all
times, it follows that sobriety is always necessary, and that a Christians
life ought to be a continual fast; yea, I dare affirm, that in this, piety
may learn of superstition: For if the superstitious do fast the eve^s of holy
days, why should not we fast all our life long, since it is nothing else but
the vigill of that great holyday which is the everlasting sabbath?

Fasting therefore is an holy exercise, and in the word of God ordinarily
joined together with prayer. So our Lord Jesus in the 17. chap. of S. Matthew
and 21 verse, speaks of certain stubborn spirits, that could not be cast out
but by prayer and fasting. And S. Paul in the 1. to the Corinthians, and 7.
chap. Defraud not one an other, except it be with consent for a time, that ye
may give your selves to fasting and prayer. For they knew that there was a
mutual accord between prayer and fasting. Fasting enflames prayer, and prayer
sanctifies fasting; Fasting remoues negligence from prayer, and prayer remoues
pride and superstition from fasting. For as prayer without fasting is but slow,
so fasting without prayer is but a bodily diet, and no spiritual exercise. God
is more angry then pleased with this service, if that whilst a man has an
empty stomach, he be dru^ken with wrath, or glutted with lewd lusts. For he
reckons of both alike, both of the surfets of the wicked, and the fasts of
hypocrites, which change virtue into foolery, and christian sobriety into a
distinction of meats, and into scrupulous observations, with (I know not) what
opinion of merit, and satisfaction. As though fasting could satisfy God, or as
though he were bound more to pleasure him which has lost his dinner. For
true fasting is to make us more fit for to serve God, but not for to merit any
thing at his hands, or for to lay down a payment for our sins, for which
Jesus Christ has already fully satisfied.

But it is not so now a days; so has superstition overrun true devotion, and
marred this holy exercise. This abuse began in the Apostles time; and is
reprehended by the Apostle S. Paul in the 2. chap. of his Epistle to the
Colossians, where he rebukes those which said, taste not, touch not, handle not,
doing this, not because they thought any kind of meat more unclean then
other, but (says he) by a voluntary religion, and humblenes of mind, that
they might not spare their bodies, nor have any regard to pampring of their
flesh. Some 150 years after came the Tatians and Montanists, the^ the
Manichees, and after them Eustacius bishop of Sebastia (whom Sozomen takes to
be the author of the Asceticks of Basil) taught certain superstitious fasts
and distinctions of meats; all which were condemned for heretical by the
ancient Church.

Last of all came the Church of Rome, which now is so far transported with this
error, that the greatest part of their religion consists in these petty
observatio^s of days, and distinctions of meats, which are so many in number,
that the bondage of the legal Ceremonies might be called liberty in respect of
these; For whosoever will reckon up all their fasting days in a year, shall
find that they come to more then 5 months yearly. In some of these days
flesh only is forbidden; in others butter also and eggs. In Spain they are
suffered on fasting days to eat the inwardes of calves, and sheep, which
they call morsillos and menudillos. A good and religious christian is now a
days discerned by this, to wit, if he keep Lent, and the four Ember weeks,
and the vigils of Festival days; that which was craftily imposed at first. For
in taking away the holy scripture from the people, and giving them divine
service in an unknown tongue, he must needs think on some think to busy
their bodies withal, whilst he did blind their minds, and give them some
corporal exercise, whilst he robbed them of spiritual instruction. Hence
comes it that the poor people do to a day know all the fasting days exactly,
and how many holy day evens there be to be fasted; but know nothing at all in
the scripture. Hence also comes it that the priest in confession does carefully
enquire of the sinner, whether he has kept Lent or no, and the 4 fasts: but
never asks if he have confirmed his faith in the promises of the gospel, if
he be instructed in the holy scripture, if he understand the mysteries of our
redemption: if he love God with all his heart, and his neighbor as himself: But
if it be found that the sinner have broken the ordinance of the Church by
eating flesh in Lent, especially in the week which they call, the holy week;
the Priest then has no power to absolve him, but sendes him to the
penitentiarie. As for murder, and adultery, and other less sins which are
but against the law of God, the Priest can easily absolve him from such crimes;
On the contrary, if he have fulfilled the commandment of the Church, and
fasted according to the laws thereof, why, this is a meritorious work, not
only for his sins that shall thus have fasted, but for the sins of others too.
And this fasting is not measured by the quantity of meat, but he is said to
keep Lent, that eats no flesh, nor eggs, although he drink that which is
better, and feed on the best fish that can be got: for as for their
after-suppers of comfits, and dry suckats, they are not reckoned, because they
take these as Physic, and for to follow the Apostles counsel who advised
Timothy to comfort himself by drinking wine against the weakness of the
stomach. So have they been more careful to fulfill the Apostles prophecy
then the commandment of God.

Their ordinary excuse is, that S. Paul in this prophecy speaks of the
Montanists and Manichees, which held some meats to be unclean and profane: But
that the Church of Rome thinks no meat unclean, but only forbids certain
kinds thereof for some few days, to take down the flesh by using it the more
coursly, and by withholding such meats from the body, as do most provoke lust.

1 But against this, we have seen above, how the Apostle S. Paul in his
Epistle to the Colosians, condemns those by name which by refraining from set
kinds of meat (being led thereunto by a voluntary religion and humbleness of
mind, thought to use their bodies hardly, and had no regard to the pampring of
their flesh. And he speaks not to the Jews, for the Jews did not abstain
from certain kinds of meats for to subdue their bodies, but to obey Moses
law. Besides S. Paul calls these observations the commandments of men, but
the Jews kept theirs as the commandments of God. Hereunto add that the
Apostle speaks of such who besides the error of distinguishing of meats did
worship Angels withal. An error wherewith as then the Jews were not branded.

2 Moreover the Apostle speaks generally, and reckons the forbidding of meat,
amongst the errors and doctrines of Devils, without specifying any reason for
which it is done; The Church of Rome does do that which heretics do,
although it be for another reason.

3 But what matter is it whether we know for what cause they of the Church of
Rome do abstain from certain meats, since in effect they make a conscience to
eat of them, and that the Apostle does forbid us to make a conscience of this;
For behold his words in the 10. of the 1. to the Corinthians. If any of them
which believe not, call you to a feast, and if you will go, what soever is set
before you, eat, asking no question for conscience sake. This rule likes not
the Church of Rome, the people whereof are instructed, when they shall be
invited by such as they call heretics and infidels, to make a conscience of
not eating all things indifferently that are set before the^. Behold therefore
a forbidding of meats condemned by the Apostle, and by consequence the
fulfilling of this prophecy.

But what if we show that the Church of Rome does count flesh and the like
meats to be unclean in their own nature? For if it forbid the eating of flesh
for no other reason but only because it provokes to lust, it should far rather
have forbidden, wine, and sauce, and sweet meats, which inflame the blood, and
do far more provoke lust then any thing else whatsoever. 2 But what means
that custom of carrying their meat after Lent to the Priest for him to say his
exorcismes over it, and bless it, if they did not think that some wicked
spirits lay lurking in it all the Lent long, and that it had some pollutio^
whereof it had need to be purged? For if it were otherwise, and if that the
intent of the Priest were only to bless the meat, as we do ours usually at
meals before we feed upon it, this blessing would be as good at any other
times, as after Lent, and there would need no coniuration. This is likewise
confirmed by this, that the religious which make profession of a greater
sanctity then others, as the Benedictins, and Chartrians, do altogether
abstain from flesh all their life long, and eschew the touching or tasting of
it, as of a profane thing: Doing in this worse then they who^ the Apostle
condemns in the 2. to the Colosians which say, taste not, touch not, being
moved thereunto only with a voluntary religion, for to humble themselves and
bring down the flesh. But if you read the disputations of our school Doctors,
as of Durandus, and Alensis, and others, you shall find that the reasons which
they give, why flesh is forbidden and not fish, do presuppose some uncleanness
in flesh. For there be some of them say, that the reason is, because the
creatures of flesh were cursed and drowned in the general deluge, and not the
fish: by which reason it should follow, that neither duckes, nor any other
water foul should be forbidden to be eaten in Lent. Others of them there be
that say that the reason is, because Jesus Christ never did eat any thing but
fish after his resurrection. They cannot deny but that he did eat his part of
the paschall lamb the last week in Lent before Easter: but I imagine these
Masters will presuppose that he did dispe^se with his own sanctity in this.
Finally if of two impure actions committed by any one, the one be more
grievously punished then the other, is it not because it is more impure? When
therefore the Church of Rome does inflict a greater punishment on him that does
eat flesh in Lent, then on him that has committed fornication; does it not
thereby show that it takes flesh in Lent to be more unclean then fornication?

Nevertheless, for to pleasure them, let us suppose that the forbidding of
certain meats in the Church of Rome, be not built upon any impuritie conceited
to be in the meat; and having granted them this, let us see, if herein our
adversaries differ from ancient heretics. Sozomene in his 3. book, and 31.
Chapter. witnesses that Eustacius Bishop of Sebastia in Armenia, was the first
that ever brought the monastical profession into Armenia, Pontus, and
Paphlagonia, putting a difference between meats, and inventing a strange kind
of habits, and other absurd things contrary to the ordinance of the Church. He
tells us also how that many women being ruled by the Disciples of that sect,
shaved their heads under the show of religion: that the Council of Gangres
declared them to be cut of from the Church, if they did not renounce their
opinions. In this Council Sozomene says that Eustacius protested how he did
not bring up this as a necessary doctrine, but only for discipline sake, or as
a devout exercise and acceptable unto God. This at that time was the excuse of
heretics, whereby they did excuse their forbidding of meats, just after the
same manner that the Church of Rome does now adays.

The Montanists likewise were generally condemned by the ancient church
because they forbad flesh to be eaten. Whether they did this out of an opinion
they had, that flesh was defiled and polluted, or for exercise sake, to beat
down the flesh, and curb in their lust, no man can better resolve us then
Tertullian, the captain of that band; who himself was stained with this
heresy, and has purposely written a book of this matter, entitled, Adversus
Psychicos, against fleshly men: For so is it his pleasure to style the
catholics. Whose objections against the Montanists, he produces in the second
chapter, which are al one with ours against the church of Rome. For in the 2.
chap. the Catholics tell the Montanists. That the law and the prophets
lasted but till John, after what time me^ fasted as they thought best, not for
that they were so commanded by the imposition of a new discipline, but
accordingly as every man saw his occasion. That the Apostles used to do thus,
imposing no other burden of solemn and set fasts. They do yet farther allege
the saying of the Apostle rebuking the Gal 4. v. 10
Galathians, because they observed days and months. They do also object that
God himself in the 58 of Esaias approues not of that fast that is an abstaining
from meat, but of that which is an exercise of the works of righteousness. And
that Jesus Christ has in a word answered all these scrupulous observations of
eating and drinking, by saying, That which goes into the mouth defiles not
the man, Mat. 15. v. 11
but that which comes out of the mouth, that defiles the man. Wherefore he
himself made no scruple to eat and drink, till at last he was reprehended
for it, and called a glutton. That the Apostle teaches that it is not meat
that makes us the more acceptable unto God, etc. To be brief, the faithful
in times past did dispute against the Montanists as we do now a days against
the church of Rome, and the Montanists likewise did defend themselus by the
same shifts and excuses that the Church of Rome now does. For see how they
answer in the 15. chap. of the same book. The Apostle, say they, condemns
such, as did command men to refrain from meat; But the holy Ghost by his
prescience, condemned such heretics, before they came, as should enioine a
perpetual fast, for to destroy and vilify the works of the Creator.
Hereunto add, that this error of refusing Gods creatures, may well be found
amongst the Marcionits, Talians, and Pythagoreans but not in the school of
Montanus, which he calls the Paraclet. And a little after; we abstain from
meats, which we do not reject, but only forbear to use them for a time. And a
few lines above. The Apostles intent was, to reprehend such as did abstain
from meat, out of a kind of loathing disdainfulness, and not out of duty,
that is to say, out of a voluntary devotion. So did these heretics excuse
themselves, whose forbearing of meat; was not yet left vnreckoned amongst
their heresies, what protestations soever they made, that they did not think
them to be unclean or unlawful in their own nature. Whence it also appears
that Ep. 1. Her.
Epiphanius knew not their tenent, when he accuses them for mainetaining,
that certain meats were unclean and profane.

Now although the ancient church began to increase the number of fasts, yet
were they nothing like those which are now a days practiced in the church of
Rome. For they did abstain not only from flesh, but also from wine, and all
other delicacies. Witness S. Austin in the 1. book of the customs of the
church 33. chap. Let those that can, abstain from flesh and wine for two
causes, either because of the weakness of their brethren, or else for their own
liberties sake herein. And in the book of Faith to Peter the Deacon. 42. chap.
Hold this for certain, that the servants of God, which abstain from flesh and
wine, do not reject the^ as unclean things, but they refrain from stronger
meats and drinks for to chastise their bodies. Chrysostom in the 4. of his
Homilies made at Antioch upon the breaking down of the Emperors statues.
There be some (says he) that go two whole days without eating a bit, and
again there be some, which cutting of not only wine and oil from their
table, but all sort of flesh and fish too, feed all the Lent upon nothing but
bread and water.

Basil in his 1. sermon of fasting, would that in fasting there be nether
flesh nor wine used, nor any thing else that they like, which serve their
bellies; and that we should feed on nothing but bread only. And a little
after. Thou do eat no flesh, but thou do eat thy brother; thou do
abstain from wine but thou do not abstain from doing outrage, and bearing
thy self insolently, thou stayest for thy meat till night, but thou art all
day wrangling at the bar; Woe be unto those that are drunk, but not with wine.

Also the Fastes of the Ancient, were made partly by the will of some
particulars which fasted more or less, as they thought best: and partly by the
directions of Bishops, and Pastors of every church, and not by the ordinance
of the Bish: of Rome, which had no power in prescribing rules in these matters
out of the precincts of his own bishopric. This appears by the diverse
customs in the Church. In the time of S. Ambrose they fasted at Rome upon
Saturdaie, but at Millan they did not fast then, as S. Austin witnesses in his
118. epist. to Ianuaries. The church of Millan herein did follow the custom of
the Gre^ke church, which fasted neither saturday, nor su^day in Lent; and did
for this very cause excommunicate the church of Rome, and denounce it Anathema
in the 6. general counsel, and the 55. Canon, in these words. Because we have
understood that in the city of Rome they use to fast on the Saturdaies in
Lent, against the custom left to the Church: This holy Synod has therefore
decreed, that they shall likewise in the church of Rome keep that Canon, which
says; If a Clarke be found to fast on saturday or sunday, let him be
degraded; if a lay man, let him be excommunicated. But this fell out a long
time after, this Council being not assembled before the 674. year of our
Lord. But at the first these things were more free, and the rules for them,
less strict. S. Austin in his 86. Epistle, says, I see well, that fasting is
commanded, in the Evangelicall, and Apostolical writings, and throughout all
the new Testament, but upon what days we should fast or not fast, I see no
commandment for this, neither of Christ, nor his Apostles: and a little before
he said that the diverse observations of Fasts, did not trouble the truth of
Faith: and that these things are the plaits of the kings daughters Robe. So did
he call the different customs of the Church.

Eusebius in the 5. book of his history, recites an Epistles of Ireneus, to
Victor Bishop of Rome, wherein he speaks of the diverse manners of fastings
before Easter. There be some, says he, which think they must not fast but one
day, others there be that fast 2, and some that fast more, some measure their
fasting days by 40. hours, day and night. And this diversity between the
observers of the Easter fast, began not from our time, but long before, from
their time (as it is credible) which governing the Church without observing any
exact rule, did, a little after, turn that into a custom, which was done in
simplicity, and by particular observation. Nevertheless they had all peace
amongst themselves, and we yet live in peace together, Agreeably to this in the
passage of Tertullian above alleged, the Catholic Church maintains against
the Montanists, that since John Baptists time, fasts have been free, and that
there is no rule which binds us to certain fasts that we must keep in
common. S. Basil in his two sermons of fasting, speaking of the fast before
Easter, tells us, I know not how often, that this Fast lasted not above 5
days. Let the belly, (says he in his first Sermon) give us some time of
truce, and let that, which is ever a craving, be at peace with us for five
days. And toward the end of the homily, he sharply rebukes such, as did use
before the five days came, to stuff their guts with meat and wine, to the
end they might fast the more easily, and have their bellies filled with
provision. And in the second Sermon. This is an ill mind, because we hear of a
fast to come of 5 days, therefore to make our selves drunk before hand.

We may not omit the history of Alcibiades, recited by Eusebius in the 3.
chapt. and 5. book of his history. This Alcibiades did macerate his body by
fasting, living only upon bread and water, even whilst he was in the prison:
But it was told the Martyr Attalus by revelation, that Alcibiades did ill in
abstaining from Gods creatures, and did thereby scandalize his brethren;
Alcibiades being told hereof, believed it, and did ever after that time eat of
all meats indifferently, and without fear, and gave God thanks for it.

The history of Spiridion, related by Sozomen, in the 1. book, 11. chap.
witneseth that S. Spiridion, and his household, did eat no bread upon fasting
days, and that commanding his daughter to cover the table for a stranger,
which came suddenly upon him, she answered him that there was no bread in the
house, for (it being as then a time of fast) it would have been superfluous.
Notwithstanding all this Spiridion made her serve in a piece of porcke that he
had left. But the stranger (brought up belike in some superstitious place) told
him that he would not eat of it, because he was a Christian. Then Spiridion
replied, But for this very reason thou should the rather eat of it, for God
says, al things are clean to the clean, and did eat thereof himself. He
did not say, eat of it, for I have nothing else in the house, necessity may
excuse thee; But he alleages the Apostles rule, which had not been less
true, although he had had never* so much variety of meat in the house: and
he himself in eating thereof without any necessity, and only to give him an
example, shows that there was no necessity in this kind of abstinencie.

S. Austin in his 33. chap. of the 1. book of the customs of the Church
(speaking of the fasts of Romish and Eastern Monks. which were all artizans,
every one getting his living by his trade) says that none amongst them were
put to any hard thing that they were not able to bear: There is no man which
puts a burden upon any one that he shall refuse to carry; and he is not
condemned by others because he confesses himself too weak to follow them,
for they have not forgot, how that all things are clean to the clean, etc.
And the whole Chapter is spent about this, to show that when a faithful man
well informed, does refrain from certain meats, he does do this for fear
of offending the weak, although he know well enough that it is a thing
lawful and indifferent in it self.

This diversity of customs in diverse countries, grounded upon Christian
liberty, is set down at large by Socrates in the 22. chap. of the 5 book of
his history. He says that they did not fast at Rome but 3 weeks before
Easter excepting Saturday and Sunday. That in Sclavonia, and Greece and
Alexandria, they fasted 6. that in other places they fasted 3 times 5 days, at
3 several times, and yet that nevertheless they did call this Lent, every one
alleging a diverse reason. That there was the like difference in their fasting
from meat. Some of them abstaining from all living creatures, others feeding
upon fish only, others eating foul together with fish, as which (according to
Moses testimony) were made out of the water. There be some (says he) which
abstain from the fruits of trees, and from eggs. And there be some that tie
rhemselues to eat nothing but bread. And again, there be some, that eat no
bread at all. Whence he collects, that since no man can show any express
commandment as concerning this, it is evident that the Apostles did remit it
to every man's will and pleasure, to the end every one might do good, but not
through fear, or by constraint. Neither can it be said, that this which he
says of Rome, is contrary to S. Austin. in his 86. and 11. Epistles. where he
says, that they fast at Rome upon Saturday. For Austin speaks of the
Saturdaies all the year long, but Sozomene speaks only of the 3 last
Saterdaies before Easter. And, say he were mistaken in this, yet is it not
likely, but that he told the truth of other Churches, which he himself saw.
Especially seeing that his testimony is agreeable to so many witnesses above
cited. To whom we will join S. Ambrose, in his 34. Sermon, saying that in his
time there were some which made their Lent to last 20 days, others 30. by
interchangeable weeks. Now as touching the fast before Easter, the ancients do
not rank it in the same degree, as they do the other fasts of the year. For
the Catholic Church disputing against the Montanists in the 10. Chapter of
Tertullians book of Fasts, says, that those days in the Gospel are marked
out for fasting, in which the bridegroom was taken away, that is to say, the
days in which Jesus Christ suffered, and was in his grave; that all other
days are in a man's own liberty. And S. Austin gives the selfsame reason for
it in his 86. Epistle to Casulan. Because Jesus Christ said in the 9. of Saint
Matthew, that the day would come wherein the bridegroom should be taken away,
and then they should fast. This reason (joined together with the ancient
custom, witnessed by Irenaeus concerning this, to wit, that many did fast 40
continual hours before Easter) does discover the very head spring and first
beginning of Lent. That is, that they thought themselves bound to fast 40
hours, because Jesus Christ was for so long together kept under death, and
that this was the time wherein the bridegroom was wanting. Which is likewise
confirmed, by that ancient custom of forbidding them to fast after Easter,
till whitsontide were past: because this was the time wherein the bridegroom
was restored, and did converse here on earth after his resurrection. But by
little and little this fast began to be enlarged, and men used to fast many
days before Easter, some more, some less. Till at last those 40 hours, were
turned into 40 days.

During this diversity of customs in diverse countries, we never read that the
bishop of Rome did take upon him to correct other churches, or ever labored to
bring the Greek Church, or that of Millan, to the fashions of the church of
Rome.

But I cannot deny but that some of the ancient were excessive in the praise of
fasting. As Ambrose and Basil, which killed himself with fasting, making his
body, for a long time, feeble, and unfit for his vocation by emulating
Xerophagies a Monk of the desert. In their Homilies of Fasts, they say that
Adam fell because he did not fast. That it was fasting that hardened the bodies
of the three children thrown into the furnace, and made them not to be burnt.
That fasting gave Daniels body a temper of steel so that the teeth of the
Lions could not bite him.

And in S. Austins time these and such like scrupulous observations taking
place, this good servaunt of God complained of it. Behold what he says in his
119. Epistle. That which is brought up besides the common custom, as though it
were the observation of some sacrament, I cannot approve of it, although I dare
not freely to reprehend it, for fear of offending some persons; either holy,
or turbulent. But I am much grieved at this that we set little by many wholesome
doctrines contained in holy writ, and all things are so full of presumption,
that he shall be more grievously reprehe^ded, which during the Octaues shall
touch the earth with his bare foot, then he that shall have buried his
understanding in drunkenness. And a little after speaking of such as did
charge the church, with many were observations, and particularly with that of
abstaining from flesh, he says. Although it cannot be found that these things
are contrary to the faith, nevertheless they lade religion with servile
burdens (which God would have to be free, he himself laying nothing upon it,
but the observations of the Sacraments, which are but few, neither yet obscure)
in such sort, that the condition of the Jews is more tolerable. For although
they knew not the time of liberty, so it is, that they were subject only to
the burdens of the law, and not to humane inv^ntions. But the Church of God,
mingled with much chaff and many tares, suffers many things. But she approues
not of that which is against the faith, or a good life, neither does she
conceal it, nor yet do it. Wherefore, that which thou wrotest unto me, that
there be some which do abstain from flesh, thinking those to be unclean
which eat of it, is manifestly against the faith, and sound doctrine. So did
this good servant of God, suffer that with grief, which he could not amend.
Although the slaverie and burdens of which he complains, were nothing in
respect of ours now adays. He himself in the 118 Epistle, tells us that he
follows the counsel of Ambrose, as of an oracle, which is this. When I am at
Rome I fast the saturday, when I am here, I do not fast. So thou, to what
Church soever thou shall come by chance, conform thy self to the customs
thereof, if thou will not be a scandal to any body, nor have any one to be a
scandal unto thee.

The abuses which follow, are more gross yet, and farther remote from the
ancient simplicity. For the Ancients did not think that their fasts were
payments to God, to satisfy for the pain due to our sins. This is a strange
kind of fashion, for a man to pay his debts with fasting, as if a creditour
should abate his debtour 10 crowns for every day he should fast. He that
thinks that God is contented with this, dreams of an easy composition, and
pays him but in light money. I confess that God has wrought many deliverances
for them that have fasted: but our adversaries do wrong to attribute that to
the virtue of fasting, which was meant by God to faith and prayer, that do
sanctify fasting. And they may do well to remember the Luke 11.
Pharisee, who was sent away, although he fasted twice a week, and gave God to
understand of his works of supererogation.

Above all, they have a good grace, to make one man fast for another, and they
would have me believe, that God will pardon my sins, because my neighbor has
fasted for me. There is no judge so foolishly connivent, that will pardon a
crime to any one, in consideration that his brother has not dined. But that
which we would judge an intolerable sottishness in a man, shall we think this
fitting for God? For the Pope would have him to rest contented with this. And
they that are not in the humor of fasting, love rather to borrowe it of
others, and to change their bodily fast, into a pecuniarie mulct. They will say
therefore to some religious person, fast for me, and I will content thee. And
that which is thus given to Monks shall be called an alms, although they be
never so rich. This pretty doctrine is taught in the Canon, Presbyter, in the
82 distinction. He may redeem the moonday fast, if need be, by singing a
Psalm, or giving a penny to the poor. And the gloss of the Doctors hereupon.
He may free himself from fast by giving a penny; wherefore by a greater reason
he may be freed by others fasting for him. Because also that the fasting of
the living is availeable for the dead. Agreeable to the Canon. Animae, in the
13. Cause, and 2. Question. The souls of the dead are delivered by 4 means;
either by the oblation of Priests, or by the prayers of the Saints, or by the
alms of their friends, or else by the fastings of their kindred and allies. It
is Pope Gregory which speaks this, who believed that the souls were in
Purgatory, some in hot houses, others under the leaves of trees, others in
rivers, and he was much troubled how to get them out thence. Now I say that if
the fasting of the living do refresh them, their feasting also must burn and
torment the^. Track me but any footing of al these opinions in the 3 or 4
first ages.

Or else of that proper custom, whereby the Prelates that enioine fasts do
dispense with them, giving these dispensations not to the poor but to their
friends, and such as are gracious with them. At Rome ye shall get letters of a
perpetual dispensation. In the book of the Taxation of the Romish Chancerie,
formerly alleged, this article is found in the 6. leaf. For that a lay man is
not tied to fast on the days which are enjoined him by the Church, and may
eat cheese, this letter costs twenty groats. If a poor man pay it, he shall
for all that fast after he has paid it.

This being so, it is no wonder; if he which gives dispensations to others,
do take one for himself, and if the Pope and Cardinals do often dispense
with themselves in these matters. For we are to know that in the 25 cause, 1.
quest. in the Canon Ideo. upon a question which some made, whether the Church
of Rome were subject to the Statuts of Counsels, Pope Leo the fourth, makes
this answer. The holy Church of Rome gives all power, and authority to the
holy Canons, but she for her own part is not bound, nor tied to keep them.
And a little after he says that as Jesus did submit himself unto the law,
and sometimes withstand it, to show that he was master of the law. So, says
he, the Bishops of the chief see, respect the Canons made by themselves, or
others under their authority, and do yield to keep them, that they might make
them to be kept of others; but sometimes too, either in commanding or
decreeing, or by oppugning them, they show that they are Lords over the
decrees, and the makers of them. And a little after he says, that the Church
of Rome gives it self special privileges, against general decrees.

Hereunto add the custom, of making the people to go in procession to our
Lady in the beginning of Lent, that they may have leave to eat butter. As also
the trick, whereby they delude the ancient custom, of eating nothing in Lent
before evening. For now a days they make the evening service to be song
before noone, and afterward eat, saying, that evening is past: And a thousand
such like shifts, which betraie not only abuse, but mockery too; to the end
that the prophecy of the Apostle might be fulfilled, when he says, that this
error shall be taught thorough hypocrisy, and by such as have their
consciences seared with an hot iron. And doubt not, but, if that we had not
opposed our selves against the tyranny of the Pope, which did daily increase
like a swelling torrent, there had been worse things seen. After that he had
once got the kitchins and shambles under his dominion; he took upon him to
make other laws for attire, and household stuff, so that a man might not lie
upon a matteresse, nor wear silk, nor presume to bath himself without some
special dispe^sation. And their book of dispensation fees, made a hundred
years since, does sufficiently show, that they did even then begin to encroach
upon these things. For as then, letters of dispensatio^ for a Nun to bath her
self, were prized at a certain rate And letters of dispensation for a lay man,
to study in the schools; and letters of dispensation for to bury a body in two
sepulchers: and letters of dispensation for a man to keep that which he had got
unjustly. To conclude, they amongst this people which do most hate us, may
know, that they are bound to us, for that little liberty which they do yet
enjoy.

THE SECOND Prophecy contained in the 2. Epistle of S. Paul to the
Thessalonians. CHAP. 2.
3 Let no man deceive you by any means: for that day shall not come, except
there come a departing first, and that the man of sin be disclosed, even the
son of perdition.

4 Which is an adversary, and exalts himself against all that is called God,
or that is worshipped: so that he does sit as God in the temple of God.

5 Remember ye not, that when I was yet with you, I told you these things?

6 And now ye know what withholdeth, that he might be revealed in his time.

7 For the mystery of iniquity does already work, only he which now
withholdeth, shall let till he be taken out of the way.

8 And then shall that wicked man be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with
the spirit of his mouth, and shall abolish with the brightness of his coming.

9 Even him whose coming is by the effectual working of Satan, with all
power, and signs, and lying wonders.

10 And in all deceiueablenesse of unrighteousness among them that perish,
because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved.

11 And therefore God shall send them strong delusions, that they should
believe lies.


The unfolding of this prophecy in manner of a Paraphrase.
3 LET no man by any means seduce you, by seeking to persuade you that the day
of judgment is near at han^. For this day shall not come, till there be a
general backsliding, whereby men shall fall from the true doctrine; and that man
of sin, which is marked out to perdition, to wit, the bishop of Rome, be
disclosed.

4 Who^ ye shall know by these marks He shall oppose himself against all that
is called God, and which is worshipped; to wit against the true and highest
God, and against Emperors, and Kings, and Magistrates, whom the holy scripture
calls Gods. Nay, which is more, he shall exalt himself above God, and
especially above that which is called God by Idolators, till he shall have got
to be absolute commander over the church, and be called the head thereof,
usurping both the name and authority of God.

5 Remember you not, that when I was yet with you, I told you these things?

6 And now ye know what it is that staieth his coming, which shall come to
pass, at the time appointed, and foreordained by God.

7 For the foundations of this son of perditions dominion are already laid. And
Satan does eve^ now draw out the threeds, and spinne the beginnings of his
doctrine, which shall be woven together by an abominable art, and full of wicked
craft. There is nothing but one that hinders the disclosing hereof: that is,
the Roman Empire (which does now oversway the whole world) must remain yet
for a time, and afterward be abolished.

8 And when this Roman Empire shall be destroyed, then shall this bishop be
fully disclosed, and the Papal See shall be exalted by the ruins of the
Empire; which bishop, God shall beat down, and weaken by the preaching of his
word, but shall not destroy him utterly til the last day of judgment, then when
Jesus Christ shall come in glory.

9 Which Pope shall come fortified with the might and efficacy of Satan, with
power, and signs, and false miracles, serving to establish lies.

10 Whereby such as are marked out to perdition, shall be lewdly seduced, because
they have not loved the truth of the Gospel, which might have saved them.

11 And therefore God will suffer the^ to be seduced, and to be driven into
strong delusions, and that they may believe lies.

The proof of this exposition.
He that in the texture of this whole discourse shall not see the Popes image,
and his doctrine, and the means of his rising, all set out in their true
colors, does willingly err, and is blind at noone day. For we bring no bold
conjectures; and our explications are not violent or forced, but natural, and
such as do of their own accord offer themselves to our hands: such as do not
depart from the words of the Apostle, and are taught us by experience.
Whosoever will co^test about some particulars, shall not thereby endammage the
whole body of this Prophecy. For though he move some difficulties upon
certain verses here and there, yet it is enough to stagger the most strongly
opinionated, when they shall see that all the pieces of this so long a
Prophecy do agree upon one only man, and that there is so good a
correspondency between all the parts thereof: which shall appear yet more
manifestly by the proofs and by the difficulties which our adversaries move to
the contrary; let us therefore once more again run over this Prophecy from the
beginning, and examine every particular thereof.

The first part of this Prophecy.
3 LEt no man deceive you by any means; for that day shall not come except
there be a departing first, and that the man of sin^^ be disclosed, even the
son of perdition.

The Exposition.
3 LEt no man by any means seduce you, by seeking to persuade you that the day
of judgment is near at hand. For this day shall not come till there be a
general departing, whereby men shall fall from the true doctrine, and that man
of sin which is marked out to perdition, to wit, the Bishop of Rome, be
disclosed.

The proof of this Exposition.
MAny, being either led by curiosity, or spurred on by impatience, affirmed
that the day of the Lord was hard at hand. Whose over rash and headlong
forwardnes, is here stayed by the Apostle, telling them that this day shall not
come till there be a falling away. What manner of falling away this is, he
himself tells us in that 1. Tim. 4.1.
Prophecy of his, which we have formerly touched; telling us before hand, that
in the latter time many shall fall away from the faith. And so did some of the
Ancient understand it; Primasius, Chrysostom and Theodoret, whom, his Majesty
of England, follows. There be some that understand it, of the peoples falling
away, from under the Roman Empire. And so do some of the Ancient: which also
agrees with the event. For we shall see anon how that the papacy increased by
the decreasing of the Empire, and that the greatness thereof was built upon
the ruins of the Empire.

The head and chief cause of this falling away from the faith, is by the
Apostle S. Paul, called the man of sin, and son of perdition, according to
the usual form of speech in Scripture, which calls a bloody man, a man of
blood. And those the children of hell, which are marked out for hell. So the man
of sin, and the son of perdition, signify, a man that is a notorious
sinner, and such a one as is marked out unto perdition.

That these qualities, some ages since, were fitting the Bishop of Rome, no man
can doubt that has read the writings, not of their enemies, but even of their
own servants that have most respected them. Never was there man that did more
prostitute himself to uphold the Popes power then Baronius did. And yet see
his own words in the year 912. and 8. article. With what face did the Church
of Rome then look, and how ilfavoredly? then, when famous queanes, and lewd
strumpets did domineere at Rome? at whose pleasure Church livings were
bestowsd, Bishoprics given, and that which is horrible to hear, and not to
be spoken, their lovers, false Popes, thrust into the seat of Peter. It would
be long to repeat the whole passage; till at last he breaks out, and
asks, What Priests, and Deacons Cardinals do ye think were chosen by these
monsters? And he complains that Jesus Christ did sleep, Now he speaks of
such a great number of wicked and vicious Popes that it should seem by his
reckoning, that Jesus Christ slept a long time. Platina in the life of Benedict
the 4. says, The liberty of sinning has begot us these monsters, and
prodigies, which by ambition and corruption, have rather usurped, the^ possessed
the holy chair of Peter, no Prince repressing the wickedness of these men.
Nay I dare affirm, that the histories of Emperors, and Pagan kings, written
by their enemies, or by strangers, do not speak so ill of them, as the
histories of the Popes, written by their own servants, and flatterers, do
speak ill of Popes. From the year 870. to the year 1050. You see none but
Necromancers, but Adulterers, and Murderers, and infamous persons preferred to
the Papacy: Every one knows the complaints of Bernard, of Petrarke, of
Mantuan, bewailing the corruption, and bad report of the Court of Rome. If
these witnesses be not of authority enough, at least I hope Popes themselves
shall be believed herein. Aeneas Sylvius otherwise called Pius secundus in the
66. Epist to John Peregall, speaks thus. The court of Rome gives nothing
without money; yea the imposition of hands, and the gifts of the holy Ghost are
sold; and the remission of sins is communicated unto none, that have not
wherewithal to pay for it. Where is the man that durst now adays speak so
boldly as S. Bernard did in his 125. Epistle. The beast (says he) of the
Apocalypse, to whom a mouth was given speaking blasphemy, and to make war
upon the Saints, does possess the Chair of S. Peter, as a Lion prepared for
the pray. I will annex one passage out of the Canonists, which have glozed the
decretals, in the title of Election, and 6. Chap. Their words are. Rome built
at first by thieves, does yet retain the smacke of her first religion, being
called Roma quasi rodens manus. It must needs be that this evil was great,
seeing that in a book so public and authentical, which contains all the
laws and Statuts of the Church of Rome, these doctors did insert such things to
their own shame. To be brief, if this be humanity, to cause 70000 persons,
within a few days to be murdered in a massacre in France; If this be
chastity, to establish Stews at Rome: If this be humility, to make
Emperors and Kings kiss his feet: If this be fidelity, to dispense with
vows and oaths; If this be religion, to wear the cross of Christ upon his
Pantophle: If this be liberality, to set the absolutions from sin, and Taxa
Cancellaria A. post fol. 11.
dispensations for ill doing, at a certain price of money, and to make
express books thereof; I am then content that we be said to have done his
Holiness wrong by calling him the man of sin.

As for the title of the son of perdition, it is not our parts to give
judgment upon any body, or positiuely to define what men are damned: but we
pray to God to show mercy to these Popes, which have bathed their hands in our
blood. Howbeit * Platina the Popes servant and Secretary, speaking of their
vices, does as it were despair of their salvation, saying. Our vices are
grown to that height, that they will hardly ever find mercy in the sight of
God.

Now here. least our adversaries should perplex us, we are to know that the
Apostle does not say, that there must of necessity be a general departure,
before the son of perdition be revealed, so that when he shall once come,
there shall no more faithful men be left in the world: It is enough for the
fulfilling of his Prophecy, that this departure be begun, and have already
gathered some little strength, then, when the son of perdition shall be
disclosed; of which departure he shall make himself the head, and seek to
increase it with all his power; which yet shall never be so great, but that
there shall be some faithful men in the world, left hid amidst this great
corruption.

Moreover, we need not wonder that the Bishop of Rome, is called the man of
sin, in the singular, though there be many of them, one after another. For we
speak so commonly, and say that the Emperor goes before kings, although there
be many successiue Emperors. So our adversaries say that the Pope is the head
of the Church, and not the Popes, because there is but one at a time. In France
we use to say that the king dies not, because that by the king, we do not
understand Henry, or Lewis, but a continual descent of kings, one succeding
the other So in the 7. and 8. chapter of Daniell a continual succession of
kings, is represented by one only beast, which appears yet more plainly in
the 8. chapter 20. verse. The ram which thou saw having two horns, are
the kings of the Medes and Persians. And in the verse following, the kings of
Greece are figured by a Goat, the horn of which signifies the first king. The
Greek article (...) which is singular, does most usually signify an
indefinite person: as in the 2. to Timothy, and 3. chap. where it is also,
(...), etc. that the man of God may be absolute, where this word, The man, is
as well, as in this prophecy, taken indefinitely, and applied to diverse men a
part. And so Matthew the 18. verse 17. Let him be unto thee, as the heathen
man, or publican, although there were a great number of this sort; and so shall
we find it often. But if the son of perdition were but one only man that
were yet to come, how shall the saying of the Apostle stand, who presently upon
this tells us, that the mystery of iniquity did even then in his time begin
to work, for to prepare his way? Is it credible that 5. or 700. years should
be employed about the producing one only man, which should not last above 3.
years, and some few months? Or that the mystery of iniquity should even
then begin to work, and that this man should not yet be revealed? Especially
seeing that our adversaries make Antichrist to be ^ Jew, of the tribe of Dan,
and which shall build up Jerusalem again, whereas we see no preparations for
all this, so that by their reckoning the mystery of iniquity should be less
prepared now then it was in the Apostles time. But if any one think it
strange, that Antiochus Epiphanes which was but one person, should be a figure
of diverse successiue persons, Let him remember that many high Priests one
succeeding the other, were the figures of Jesus Christ, which yet nevertheless
was but one person. And yet the reason is alike on both sides. Besides,
Antiochus is not the figure of many at a time, seeing there is never but one
Pope at the same time.

Neither, can so great a dominion over so many nations (got, not by any
exploite of war, but by guile, as the Apocalypse foretells us in the 17. ch.) be
the work of one only man, much less of such a one, that shall reign but 3.
years and an half; this is a work of many ages; that which follows, suits
with this, and is full of perspicuity.

The second part of this prophecy.
4 Which is an adversary, and exalts himself against all that is called
God, or that is worshipped: so that he does sit as God in the temple of God,
showing himself that he is God.

5 Remember ye not that when I was yet with you, I told you these things?

The exposition.
4 Whom ye shall know by these marks. He shall oppose himself against all
that is called God, and which is worshipped, to wit, against the true, and
highest God, and against Emperors, and kings, and magistrates, whom the holy
scripture calls Gods. Nay, which is more, he shall exalt himself above God,
and especially above that which is called God by Idolatours, till he shall have
got to be absolute commander over the Church, and be called the head thereof,
usurping both the name and authority of God.

5 Remember ye not that when I was yet with you, I told you these things.

The proof of this exposition.
The proof of this exposition consists in five points.

1 To show that the Pope calls himself God, and takes the authority of God
upon him.

2 That he does exalt himself above God, and especially above that which is
called God by Idolatours.

3 That he does oppose himself against God.

4 That he does oppose himself against kings, and princes, and magistrates.

5 That he calls himself the head of the church universal.

The first point.
That the Pope names himself God, and is so called by his favorites, this is
a common thing, whereof the Popes Decrees, and the councils where he sat as
chief, are full. The Canon. Satis, in the 96. Distinction, speaks thus. It is
manifestly seen that the Pope can in no wise, neither be unbound, nor bound by
any secular power; who is known to have bin called God, by the religious
Prince Constantine before mentioned: now it is apparent, that God cannot be
judged by men. He excludes princes therefore from the title of God, that he may
reserve it to himself; and approving of Constantines saying which calls him
God, thence infers that the Pope may not be judged by any person. Where we
are to note by the way, that Constantine in the council of Nice, speaking to
all the bishops present, said unto them, Ye are Gods, but never spoke this in
particular to the bishop of Rome.

The gloss of the extrauagant, cum inter of John the 22. has these words. To
think that our Lord God the Pope, the author of the aforesaid Decretall, and
of this, had no power to decree as he has decreed, would be judged an heresy.
Where we must note that the Cardinals, and Doctors appointed by Pope Gregory
the 13. for the correcting of the Canons, Decretals, Clementines, and,
Extravagants, having corrected many other glosses, do not touch this at all,
and were willing to have it remain as it is.

In the last council of Lateran, and 9. Session in the year 1514. one of the
secretaries of the Popes chamber speaks thus to Leo the 10. The looks of your
divine majesty, with the beame-darting splendour of which, my weak eyes are
dimmed, which was inserted in the council, as good, and warrantable; For there
must never any impieties be put into councels, without being found fault with.
Nay which is more, after that the said counsel was written out, Pope Leo
approved of it, and his approbation is set in the frontispice thereof: in the
same Page 510. edit. Colon. tom. 4.
page the papal dignity, is called, Divinu^ imperium, the kingdom of God.

In the 2. book of holy ceremonies 7. section, and 6. chapter. There are these
words, The seat of God, That is to say, the Apostolical seat. And Steuchus
likewise the Popes library keeper, in his book of the donation of Constantine,
says that Constantine held Pope Sylvester for a God (and adoravit vt Deum) and
worshipped him as God.

In Italy upon the gate of Tolentu^ there is this inscriptio^. to Paul the 3.
the most high and mighty God upon earth. Upon the triumphall arch, erected to
Pope Sixtus the 4. as he entered in state into Rome, there was this written
Oraclo vocis mundi moderaris habenas
Et merito in terris crederis esse Deus.
This lower world thy sacred words do sway,
Style thee an earthly God we rightly may.
Stapleton an English Jesuit in the preface of his book, of the principles, of
the doctrine of faith calls Gregory the 13. Supremum, plane supremum in terris
numen. The supreme, the most absolute supreme God upon earth.

And Coeffeteau denies not this, but says that the Pope is God in the same
sense that the scripture calls kings, and other powers by the name of Gods:
an idle excuse, and against the intent of his Holiness For in the old testament,
this word of Gods is indeed attributed to Princes in the plural. But for a
man's self to attribute the name of God unto himself in the singular; this is
a thing which no christian prince nor prelate ever did. The bishop of Rome is
the first, who some ages since began to usurp this title.

We are also to note, that the word Jehovah in the old testament is never
attributed to any creature: but well the word of Elohim may in the plural,
which signifies Gods, and Lords. As for the new testament, wherein the
head-springs of all christian religion are contained, and which should rule our
fashion of speaking, ye shall never there find the name of God in the
singular attributed to any but God himself, or to Satan whom the Apostle
calls, The God of this world, because in this world he seeks by all means to
encroach upon Gods right. Heathen Emperors also have taken upon them the title
of God, as Bassian Caracalla, and before him Domitian, who^ Sues. in Dom cap.
13 Mart. lib. 5. ep. 8.
Sueton, and Sues. in Dom cap. 13 Mart. lib. 5. ep. 8.
Martial call Dominus Deus noster, the Lord our God, which are the very same
words with those which I have formerly cited out of the gloss. But this name
was ever reputed odious amongst the Christians, when it was once attributed to
man, because they have no more excellent or reverent name then this; not as the
Hebrews, who are of opinion that the name of Iehova is more holy and
incommunicable.

But for to know in what sense the Pope is called God, the Pope himself can
best resolve us. For out of this title, he gathers by consequence that he
should be adored; The last council of Lateran, in the 3. and 10. sessions
says. The Pope ought to be worshipped of all people, and is most like unto
God: and that a man might not imagine that it speaks of a civil kind of
worship, it is there told us what manner of adoration this must be, wherewith he
is to be adored; to wit, that it must be with that kind of adoration that is
mentioned in the 72. Psalm. Adorabunt eum omnes reges terrae, All the kings of
the earth shall worship him. Where by worship, the highest kind of worship
is meant, which is due to the son of God; as Tertullian teaches us in his 5,
book 7. chap. against Marcion. So does Mantuan understand it, which speaks
of the Pope: Ense potens gemino, cuius vestigia adora^t
Caesar, and aurato vestiti murice reges,
He has 2 swords within his power to draw,
Caesar adores him with an humble awe:
And kings with Caesar too in this do meet,
Bowing their necks down for to kiss his feet.
The histories of these last ages are full with examples of this adoration of
the Pope. In the 2. Tome of councels they do highly magnify Justinian because
he did adore Pope Agapet^. But the most remarkable worship that is given him,
is that which they do unto him within the conclaue, immediately after his
election. As soon as ever he is pronounced Pope by the Cardinals shut up in
the conclaue, they presently run unto him, and pulling of his own apparel,
put on other instead thereof, read hose, and red shoes with a cross of gold,
a red girdle with buckles of Gold, a red cap, and a rochet, and answerably
fitting him with a red mantle, and a triple crown glittering with Diamonds,
they mount him up upon their shoulders aloft, as it were some glorified body,
and set him upon the Altar. This amongst the Italians is commonly called
adoration: and is therefore the more worth the noting, because the Pope is set
upon the Altar, which is a place where they set their Masse-god, and which is
appointed for divine worship: so that this worship, cannot be taken for a
civil worship. Hereunto add that in civil affairs kings have more
authority then Popes, and should therefore by a consequent rather be worshipped
with civil honor. But they do not only not worship Kings, but exact of kings
themselves to worship the Popes. But if a King called himself God, he might
seem to have some show for it, by alleging the passage out of the old
Testament wherein kings are said to be Gods, yet should a king so do he would
be thought by Christians to be little less then a blasphemer, and I am
persuaded that the Pope himself would not like it, being that he vsurps the
name of God excclusiuely from al other Princes unto himself, by reason that it
is a holy word, and imports as much as adoration. Neither will he be woone to
grant, that kings, because they are called Gods by David, should therefore deny
to be judged; seeing that he takes upon him to be their judge. And yet we
have seen before, how the Pope out of this very saying of David, concludes
that no man may be his judge, although in that place there be no mention made
of Bishops or Pastors, but of Princes: It is easy to be known in what sense
he calls himself God, since he usually calls his decrees, and Canons by the
name of Extra. D^ Mai^rit* and obed titulo. 33. cap. Perpetuas.
Oracles. Now an oracle signifies an heavenly answer, proceeding from the
mouth of God. Romans 3. verse 2. and chap. 11. v. 4. with the like modesty does
he call his decretall Epistles Canonical scriptures in the 19 Distinction, in
the Canon In Canonicis, the inscription whereof is this. Inter Canonicas
scripturas Decretales Epistolae connumerantur. The decretall Epistles are
reckoned amongst the Canonical scriptures. That is to say, that the Popes
Decrees are equal to the holy scripture, and by a consequent are the word of
God.

What can one say more of God then that which the above cited council of
Lateran, in the 9. and 10. Sessions speaks of the Pope, to wit, that he has
all power above all powers, both of heaven and earth? And he himself speaks
as much of himself in the 1. book of holy ceremonies. 7. sect. 6. chap. where
Pope Sixtus the 4. speaks thus. This Pontifical sword represents the
Sovereign temporal power that Christ has given the Pope his vicar upon
earth, as it is written. All power is given me both in heaven, and in earth,
and Ps. 72. v. 8.
elsewhere. His dominion shall be from sea to sea, and from the river unto the
ends of the land. Which power is also signified by the velvet cap which Popes
wear. Of which power even over heaven it self, Innocent the 3. was bold to
make use in the bull* Ad liberandum: where he grants unto Pilgrims, that die in
their pilgrimage, to enjoy a greater degree of glory in Paradise above others.

Besides I say, that to call himself his Holiness exclusiuely to al others, is
to take a name upon him that is proper to God alone, who is not only the most
holy Father, (a name which the Pope does also assume) but Holiness it self.
As also for to attribute all power unto himself as Paul the 5. does in this
holy register, where he calls himself a Vice-God, the Monarch of the Christian
world: the vpholder of the papal omnipotency.

Next in order comes our Savior Jesus Christ, adorned with titles, names and
qualities, all which the Pope applies unto himself. He calls himself at
least a hundred times in his Canons and Decrees, The spowse of the universal
Church; Bellarmine goes yet farther, Etiam Christo secluso, (that is) that he
is so indeed, Christ being set apart, in the 9. Chapt. and 1. book of the
Pope; And although Christ were not excluded, yet so it is that in matter of
marriage, men do not lightly admit of a companion, much less will this be
endured in that holy conjunction with Christ, concerning which S. 2 Cor. 11. v.
2.
Paul says. I have prepared you for one husband, to present you as a pure
virgin to Christ. And that he might leave him nothing proper, Leo the 10. in
the Council of Lateran formerly cited, is called the Lion of the tribe of
Judah, the root of David, the Savior of Sion. And Bellarmine in the preface of
his book of the pope, calls the pope the corner stone, a tried stone, a
precious stone, whereof Esaias speaks in his 28. Chap. 16. verse. Which is
therefore the more to be noted, because the Apostle in the 9. Chap. of the
Epistle to the Romans, says, that none that believe in this stone shall be put
to confusion.

After that he has once seized upon the names and titles of the Father, and of
his son our Savior, it is no wonder that he equalleth himself with the holy
Ghost, saying in the 25 cause, 1. quest. that to violate his Canons and
ordinances is to blaspheame against the holy Ghost, to the end we should know,
that such an offense shall never be pardoned, neither in this world nor in the
world to come.

The second point. That the Pope does exalt himself above God.
THE Apostle will tell us in the 10. verse of this Chap. that the son of
perdition shall use all guile and deceitfulness. Whence it follows that we
must not think that this man of sin, this son of perdition, shall openly
proclaim unto us, and say. I am more great and powerful the^ the eternal
God, which created the world. For who would follow him if he should speak
thus? Or how could any one be seduced therewithal? but rather he must
insinuate himself through deceit, and under the show of sanctity. He shall
have (says the holy Ghost in the 13. of the Apocalypse) two horns like the
lamb, but he shall speak like the Dragon: making a show of Christianity,
and professing the name of Christ, but teaching divelish doctrine, As S.
Hilarie says against Auxentius; under the color of preaching the Gospel he
shall be contrary unto Christ, so that the Lord Jesus shall be denied, whilst
men think he is preached. It is sufficient therefore for the fulfilling of
this prophecy, that the son of perdition does in effect lift himself above
God, although he profess that he is beneath him. And it will be no great labor
to prove this.

1 Whosoever shall quit a servant from the obedience due to his master, must
needs be greater then his master: But the popes dispense with the setvants of
God for obaying of God: Whence it follows that they are greater then God. A
horrible thing, yet that which is necessarily inferred out of their doctrine,
No man will deny the mayor, the minor is verified by a thousand examples.

1 It is Gods will that we should keep our oaths and vows, but the pope uses
to dispense with them. Say that a man have vowed and promised to God to go on
pilgrimage; the pope if it please him, will dispense with him for it, teaching
him how to be perjured with a good conscience. And how know I whether God also
will free me, or whether he will condescend to his Holiness his will.

2 God has knit man and wife together with a knot, that may not be losed for
any thing but adultery. But the pope breaks of marriages in many other cases,
frustrating the rule of the Gospel, which says, That which God has joined
let no man sever.

3 God has expressly commanded the obedience and fidelity of subjects toward
their Prince, although he be an infidel: But the Pope will free subjects from
this obedience and fealty toward their Prince, although this Prince be no
infidel, nor tainted with any other crime, nor one that shall withstand the
Romish religion, but only if the pope be of opinion that he is not fit for
governeme^t, as pope Zachary boasted that he dealt with Childericke, and
Sixtus the 5 a little after with our K. Henry the 3.

4 God says in the gospel, Do works worthy of repentance, This commandment
is express and general, with which yet the Pope will dispense by his
Indulgences as Cardinal Bellarmin says in the 13. cha. of his 4. book of
penance; Indulgences cause that for the pains which are pardoned us by the
Indulgences, we be not bound to this commandment of bringing forth fruits
worthy of repentance.

5 God in his law does formally forbid marriage in the 1. degree of affinity,
that is for a man to marry the sister of his dead wife, or for a woman to
marry the brother of her dead husband. Levit. 18. and 20. And yet for all this,
the tax of the Popes Chancery fees in the 40. leaf, gives a dispensation and
permission for this at a certain price. The Penitentiarie in the Court of
Chancerie may dispense in the first degree of affinity, and such a letter is
sold for 9. ducats, and six groates.

6 As for a man to marry his Aunt or his niece, a thing which God also has
expressly forbidden in the 18. and 20. chap. of Levit. The Popes dispe^sations
are frequent in this kind; especially in great families.

7 In all these things, and more such like, the Pope does exalt himself above
God, since he dispenses with men not to obey his commandments. And he
himself and his Doctors do not dissemble this. For in the 8. Title of the
grant of Prebe^ds, he boasts that by the fullness of that power which he
has, he can dispense with the law, and above the law. And the Gloss of the
Canonists upon this place makes it clear, where it is said. Papa contra
Apostolum dispensat, and contra Canones Apostolorum. Item contra vetus
testamentum, Ite^ in iuramento. The Pope dispenses against the Apostle, and
against the Canons of the Apostles, and against the new Testament, and with
oaths. And upon the Canon, Lector, in the 34. Distinction. The Pope can
dispense against the Apostle; and upon the 25. cause, 1. Question. The Pope
does dispe^se with the Gospel, by giving it what interpretation he list.

8 How many dispensations for age does he give contrary to the Apostles will?
Who 1. Tim. 3.6
forbids that a bishop should be a young scholar. He bestows bishoprics
upon children; yea, the very Popedom it self (into which none are now a
days invested, but old men) has in times past bin given to children. Benedict
the 6. was not above 9. years old when he was chosen pope, as Baronius
witnesses in the year, 1033. 6. Article. He which as yet knew not what faith
meant, could not err in the faith.

2 To this proof we may annex an other, which is a demonstration, built upon
these maxims, that, those faults are greater which are committed against a
greater person; so it is a greater injury for a man to wrong his king, then
his neighbor, and for to strike his father, then his companion, as also upon
this, that the more grievous the faults be, they are punished the more
grievously: If therefore an offense committed against the Pope, be more
severely punished then an offense committed against God; if the Popes Decrees
be more authorized, the^ the commandments God: if a man be thought to have
sinned more hainously in disobaying the Pope, then in disobaying God; how can
we but confess, that this sin of the two is thought to be the greater, and by
a co^sequent that the Pope does exalt himself above God? Experience confirms
this; swear, and blaspheame in Italy, no man is moved at it. Oaths are
thought to be but the flowers of eloquence. But should a man go to Rome, and
there say, that the pope is not head of the Church, it is not the intercession
of a king that could deliver him from the stake, or free him from the clumbs of
the Inquisition. The Jews say that Christ was a deceiver, and yet they are
suffered to live quietly at Rome, but should a man once dare open his mouth to
dispute of purgatory, he would presently be had to the house of Inquisition.
There be certain sins which they call reserved cases, from which no bishop can
absolve a man, except it be only upon the point of death. You will imagine
perhaps, that these cases are either murder, or parricide, or incest, or
atheism, or sodomie; no such matter. But these great sins from which none
can absolve a man except the pope only, are, the stopping of a man upon the way
as he is going to Rome to purchase him great pardons, the intruding ones self
in a benefice, the stealing of church goods, to have spoken ill of, or done
ill, unto the Apostolical seat, etc: such sins as these cannot be pardoned on
this side the Alps, except it be by a special permission, and that upon the
point of death. If you have committed either murder or fornication, the priest
will absolve you from this. But if you have eaten flesh the week before
Easter, the priest cannot pardon this but must send you to the penitenciarie:
and yet notwithstanding, one is the ordinance of God, the other a commandment
but of man. In the Tax of the popes Chancerie, in the chapter of pardons, 36.
leaf. Incest with ones mother is fined at five groates, but in the page
following, the falsifying of the Apostolical letters are set at ten groates.

2 Again, the pope exalts himself above God, when he takes upon him to be
the chief judge in controversies of religion, in steed of deferring this
sovereign judgment to the holy scripture, which is the word of God. It is
said, that it is the church, which does give force and authority to the
scripture, and that the pope is above the church: so he is two degrees above
the word of God, seeing that he is above the church, and the church above the
Scripture.

3 But especially the pope exalts himself above that, which is called God
in the church of Rome, for so do papists at this time, call the bread of the
Eucharist; they say, that they hold up God in the Mass, when they hold up the
bread, that they carry God to the sick when they carry the bread, that they
eat God and take their creator, when they take* and eat the bread. Many kind
of ways does the pope exalt himself above this God. For in the procession
upon the day of his coronation, and at other solemn times, they make this God
go before him, carried upon a white horse, having a Sansbell about his neck,
and a lantherne before, being covered all over with a Canopy, which is carried
up by the citizens of Rome. But the pope comes after being carried upon men's
shoulders, under a Canopie held up by princes or princes ambassadors, the
Emperor to (if he be there) putting to his helping hand, or if his Holiness
be on horse back holding his horses bridle, after that he has first held
the stirrup for him to mount; as it is described at large in the 1. book of
holy Ceremonies, 2. Section, and 3. cha. compare the popes manner of furniture
with that of his God, and ye shall see the Apostles prophecy fulfilled, where
it is said, that he shall exalt himself above that which is called God, and is
worshipped.

4 You shall see the like example to this, in the 1. Section of the 2. book in
the 14. cha. where it is set down, with what solemnity the pope does
celebrate the mass in his own person. As he is going up to the Altar, the
greatest prince, or the Emperor himself (if he be present) holds up his
train: there is a Canopy carried over his head, borne up by 8. princes, or
princes ambassadors: being before the Altar, whilst he is singing of the
mass, the prelates come, and kneeling down kiss his right knee: others kiss
his feet. He does bow himself, I confess, before the host; but the standers
by do him ten times more reverence, then they do God. The greatest prince in
the company gives him water 4. times to wash, serving it to him upon his knee,
as Charles the 8. did to Alexander the 6. He is capt, and vncapt, shod, and
unshod; gloued, and vngloued; ringed, and vnringed, I know not how often. There
is his taster by him, as they use to have at princes tables. There stands one
by his side, that points at the words in the book with his finger, as we use
to serve little children. He sucks wine out of the chalice with a reed. So that
all well considered, this whole sole^nitie, under a show of worshipping the
Host, is done far more for the honor of the pope, then for the honor of his
God.

3 Let us annex one proof more; he that gives authority to the holy scripture
has more authority the^ the scripture. But Bishops of Rome take upon them to
give authority to the holy scripture, and say that we are to receive it,
because the pope has so ordained He attributs more authority therefore to
himself, then to the holy scripture. The minor is proved by the words of pope
Nicholas in the 19. Distinction, and Canon. Si Romanorum, where he approves of
their saying which said, That the old and new Testament are to be received,
not because they are annexed to the Canons, but because holy Pope Innocent has
pronounced that they must be received, For there, he does not only not
reprehe^d those that speak thus profanely, but does hereupon ground the
establishment of the popes Decretals, which are not inserted in the Canons. By
this reckoning then, we must believe; that God created the world; that Cain
killed Abell; that Noah built the Arc; that God made a covenant with Abraham;
that God gave his law unto Moses; we must believe all this I say, not because
the holy scripture witnesses as much, but because the pope and the church of
Rome do say that it is true, and that these books ought to be received; And
for to make us rely more upon the authority of the Church of Rome, then of
the scripture, they use commonly to speak thus unto us. How would you know
that this were the scripture, if the Church had not told you of it? whence they
conclude that the church is above the scripture. As if I should say, I should
not have known that this was the king, but that such a man showed him to me,
therefore this man is above the king. A wicked church may inform us that this
is the scripture. The Jews made the old Testament known to the Apostles, and
yet notwithstanding they persecuted our Savior.

4 Briefly, to take such words out of the common form of Gods law, as do
forbid us to make images, or to fall down before them, what is this but to
correct God, and by a consequent to exalt himself above God.

The third point. That the Pope does set himself against God.
This needs no long proof, and it does follow out of the two precedent
points. For it is impossible, that he should call himself God, and exalt
himself above God, without being contrary unto him, and withstanding his will:
yet behold some formal proofs for the confirming of this too.

1 God in the 4. of Deuteronomy. 2. verse, does forbid us to add any thing to, or
take any thing from his word. And at the end of the new Testament, God does
denounce a curse against him that shall add any thing to the things contained
in that book. A passage, which the Council of Friuli approved by the Church
of Rome does thus expound. The Apostle S. John in the Apocalypse, under the name
of one book, does protest of all the books, both of the old and new
Testament, If any one, etc. On the contrary the pope does presume to make new
articles of faith, and to add to the Creed. At the end of the last Council
of Lateran, there is a Bull of Leo the 10, wherein all Luthers heresies are
reckoned up. The 26. heresy is, that he said, That out of doubt it lay not in
the hands either of the Church or Pope to make new articles of faith. And in
the Council of Florence, in the last session it is defined, that the Church of
Rome may add unto the Creed. Of all the articles of faith which the pope has
added, I am persuaded that this is the worst. That Jesus Christ did not
satisfy for the pain due to sins after Baptism.

2 God says, Drink ye all of this, the Pope on the contrary, Ye shall not
all drink of this, but this is the privilege of Priests, and kings, If in the
line going before, the commandment of eating be made unto the people, as well
as unto the Priest, why not the commandment of drinking as well?

3 God says in his law. six days shall thou labor. The Pope says, Ye
shall not labor six days, but ye shall keep a great many other resting
festival days in the week.

4 God says, Deuter. 4.16. Take heed that ye corrupt not your selves, and
make you a graven image or representation of any figure, whether it be the
likeness of male or female. On the contrary the Pope suffers images of God
to be made in stone, and in painting, of the Trinity in wood, and of God the
Father in papal habiliments.

5 God says in his law, thou shall not lust; whence it follows, that to
lust, is to sin, and so S. Paul calls it, Romans 7. v. 7. The Church of Rome
on the contrary says, that to lust is not to sin. And the Council of Trent
in the 5 Session says, that this lust, which the Apostle calls sin, to
speak properly is no sin, but only that it springs from sin, and makes us
prone* to (...).

6 God says, Thou shall worship God only, where he speaks of a religious
kind of worship. On the contrary, the Church of Rome does with a religious
worship* worship the virgin Mary, the Saints, their Images, their relics, and
the Pope takes upon him to be thus worshipped, as we have above showed by many
witnesses, and by experiences, where we have also refelled their evasions.

7 God says in the 2 of Chron. 6. cha. 30. ver. That God only knows the
hearts of men. On the contrary the Romish Church says, that the Saints know
our hearts, and our thoughts.

8 God says in the 1. of the Apocalypse 3. v. Blessed is he that reads, and
they that hear the words of this prophecy. And S. Paul wrote unto the people of
Rome, Corinth, etc. unto the end that they should read that which he wrote.
On the contrary the pope forbids the people to read the scriptures, to find a
Spanish or Italian Bible, in Spain, or Italy, is held for a capital offense
and thought to be a note of heresy.

9 God by his Apostle in the 1. to the Corinth. 14. Chap. does beat altogether
upon this, that we ought not to speak in the Church with an unknown tongue;
On the contrary, the pope does make all his public service to be read in a
tongue, which the people understand not, and accustometh women to pray in
Latin, as though they were afraid to be understood

10 God says by his Apostle. 1. Tim. 3, v. 12. Let a Deacon be the husband of
one wife. The pope on the contrary, Let him not be married at all; and so of
Bishops.

11 God says by his Apostle. 1. Cor. 10. If any of them which believe not call
you to a feast, whatsoever is set before you, eat, asking no question for
conscience sake. On the contrary the pope says. If heretics invite you to a
feast, eat not of flesh upon a fish day although they carne it unto you, for
it is a case of conscience.

12 God commands kings expressly to read in his law; which is the holy
scripture, all the days of their life, that they may learn to fear him. On
the contrary the popish Doctors, Bishops and Confessors, which are about
Kings, never recommend the reading of the scripture unto them; for they are
afraid, that by this reading they might chance to learn the truth, and come to
know that their Crowns are not subject to the pope.

Finally, The holy scripture says that life everlasting is the gift of God;
Rom 6.23. Ephesians. 2 8. Romans 8.17. 1 Ioh 1.3. i. Cor. 10 11 Heb. 2.4. Heb. 9.10.
and an inheritance, which we have as we are the children of God. That the
blood of Jesus Christ does purge us from all our sins. That we eat and break
bread in the Lords Supper; That Jesus as he was man, was like unto us in all
things, sin only excepted. That Jesus Christ was offered up for a sacrifice
but one only time. All which doctrines are clean overthrown by merits, by
purgatory, by transubstantiation, by the sacrifice of the Mass, as we have
formerly showed.

In all these things the pope does oppose himself against God, and resist his
word. In so much that he suffers a C^n Hac (...). causa 31. quaest 1
Canon to be in his book of Decretals, which says, that the Apostle S. Paul
spoke against truth and reason.

The fourth point. That the Pope does set himself against Kings and
Magistrates, and exalt himself above them.
This fourth point has been proved sufficiently in my first book. To degrade
kings and thrust them out of their kingdoms. and after that he has denounced
them deposed, to expose them to the mercy of their subjects, in saying with
Con. Barclaium. c. 7.
Bellarmine, that, Executio ad alios pertinet, the execution belongs to others:
To tread upon Emperors necks, and when they come to kiss his pantofle, to
strike of the imperial crown with his foot: To make them hold the stirrup and
the bridle of his horse; To whip Kings or their Ambassadors in their place with
rods by way of penance, making them to fall down before him; for which we
have fresh examples, and they themselves brag of it: to raise infinite sums of
money upon their Kingdoms under the color of first fruits, bulls,
dispensations, absolutions; and to withhold the fifth part of their subjects
from them, and the third part of their kingdom; are things that cannot be
taken for any great good turns, or testimonies of his love toward Princes.
As for the exalting himself above them, pope Innocent the 3. in the Decretall
that begins with, Solitae, puts as great a difference between the pope, and
the Emperor, as there is between the sun and the moon. Which according to
the rules of Astronomy. is 6539 times less then the sun; and we have seen
before how Bellarmine makes Kings as much inferior to popes as artificers are
to Kings.

The fifth point. That the Pope does call himself head of the Church.
WE need plaints rather them proofs upon this point. For the pope does not
only take the title of the head of the Church upon him, but makes us to feel
the effects of it. Neither, when we say that the pope calls himself head of
the universal church, do our adversaries say that we wrong them, but they
take it hardly, that we do not believe them. And I must needs condemn our
selves of blockishnesse in offering to dispute about this title with him,
seeing that pope Anaclet in his 3 Decretall Epistle, has proved it so well out
of the Gospel; saying, that Peter is called Cephas, that is to say, the head.
For this Etymology must needs stand for good, since the pope has approved of
it. With the like soliditie, Extrau. v^m sancta^.
does pope Boniface the 8 ground this superiority upon the very first line of
scripture. In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.

It is true, that to shift of the matter, they use to say that the pope is but
a ministerial head. But herein me thinks they do delude themselves, because
these words of a ministerial head, are merely contradictory, for it is as if
one should say, a kingly subject, or a masterly servant. And there is no king
in the world, which having sent his Vicegerent into a Province, would endure
that he should call himself king, although he should excuse it, and say that
he were but a ministerial king, And do we think that Jesus Christ, whom the
holy scripture calls the head of the church, will be well pleased that a man
should take this title upon him, under the pretext that some do excuse it by,,
saying that he is an inferior, or ministerial head? And yet for all this, not
forbear to rule like the chief head, as it often falls out, that under the
title of the Kings Lieutenant many, do vsurp the authority of the King.

But this is an other question. It is sufficient for us if it appear that the
Pope names himself head of the church, for this is enough for the fulfilling
of the prophecy contained in these words, that the son of perdition shall sit
in the temple of God. For it is not without cause, that the holy ghost does use
this word of sitting, in steed of reigning. Because this is a word whereby
the dignity, and papal authority is commonly expressed. It is said, that he
sits in the chair of S. Peter, the common fashion of speech is to say that
Boniface or Clement sat so many years, instead of saying they governed the
church so long. And so does the whore speak in the 18. of the Apocal. I sit as
Queen, that is to say, I rule, she the sa^e sat upon many waters, which are
the people and nations, Apoc. 17. ver. 15. To sit therefore in the temple of
God, signifies to take upon him to rule in the temple of God.

This temple of God, is the church of God: according to the style of the new
Testament, S. 2. Cor. 6.19
Paul speaks thus to the church of Corinth, What agreement has the temple of
God with Idols? For ye are* the temple of the living God. So likewise it is
said in the Apocalypse chap. 3. Him that overcommeth will I make a pillar in the
temple of my God. And in the 11. c. the Angel of God commands S. Ioh. to mete
the temple of God, which is not a building of stones, but the church of God,
called by S. Paul the house of God.

I am not ignorant that some of the Ancient by the Temple of God, have
understood the temple of Jerusalem, 1. Tim. 3.15
with the like conjecture, as they have said that Antichrist should be Nero,
raised up again from the dead. But there be some others of the Ancient which
contradict them. Chrysostom upon this place. He shall sit in the temple of
God, not in that of Jerusalem, but in the church Theophylact, and Oecumenius,
using lightly to follow him, say the same. Authors, who^ Bellar. has thus
falsified; He shall sit in the temple of God, not only in that of Jerusalem.
This Only is of his own, falsely put in contrary to the reading of all copies.
S. Hierome shows himself clearly to be of this opinion. He shall sit in the
Temple of God, that is either in Jerusalem, or in the church, which later
exposition I take to be the truer of the two.

Others think to catch us with a subtilty, and say. If the son of perdition
be sat in the church, and the Pope be that son of perdition, it follows
that the church of Rome is the church, since the Pope is sat there. The
Apostle lends us a helping hand to get out of this difficulty. For every one
knows that it is one thing to sit, and another thing to be sat; the one
notes a moving, the other a resting; the one signifies to take a place, and the
other to keep it. This is the reason why the Apostle has set it down in the
accusative, (...), to represent a moving unto us. His meaning then is that the
Pope shall sit in the temple of God, and take place there, but he does not deny
that after he is entered into the temple, and is sat there, he shall drive
the service of God thence. The temple of Salomo^, was it not the house of God?
And yet the Priests which were sat there changed it into a den of thieves: how
much more if they had brought Idolatry into it? They therefore which knowing
the abuses of the Church of Rome, say that they must not go out of it because
Antichrist is there, suffer themselves (as it seems to me) to be bound with a
straw, and to be held with a slight reason* and I cannot sufficiently wonder at
their foolishness: for they speak as if they should say. We may not go out of
this house, for the plague is here; or thus, that we may not be the children of
perdition, we must be subject to the son of perdition. We confess that the
Church of Rome was the true church, when the Pope was first established therein,
as well as the Greek church, the Syrian, or Armenian, but when he was once
established there, by little, and little he overthrew religion, so that they,
which look to be saved, must of necessity go out of her; And he that shall go
out of her, goes not out of the universal Church, but out of a particular
corrupted church.

The fourth part of the Prophecy of S. Paul.
6 And now ye know what withholdeth, that he might be revealed in his time.

7 For the mystery of iniquity does already work.

The exposition of this prophecy.
6 And now ye know what it is that staieth his coming, which shall come to
pass, at the time appointed, and foreordained by God.

7 For the foundations of this son of perditions dominion are already laid.
And Satan does even now draw out the thre^des, and spin the beginnings of his
doctrine, which shall be woven together by an abominable art, and full of
wicked craft.

The proof of this exposition.
For to prove this exposition, we are to show two things. 1. That there were
some seeds of Papistry sown even in S. Paul's time. 2. That Papistry is built
with artificial mysteries, and fraudulent devises.

The first point. That there were some seeds of Papistry sown even in S.
Paul's time.
1 THe affectation of preheminencie in the church. 2. The religious service
done to creatures. 3. The Distinction of meats, and of days. 4. The
allurements of philosophy. 5. The traditions of men; all these are the maladies
of the Papacy, and vices of the church of Rome.

There were some seeds of these vices sown in the Apostle S. Paul's time. For
even at that time, one called himself the disciple of Peter, another of Paul,
and a third of Apollos; which were enflamed with emulation about chiefdome. The
increase of which disorders was for the present hindered by the humility, and
union of the Apostles. And it may well seem not to be without great
consideration, that the same Apostle has advertised the Romans not to be
high-minded, under the pain of being cut of. Romans 11. For although the same
instruction be given in general to the gentiles, yet does he mean it more in
special to the Romans; foreseeing that their fall would come by pride; and
gives them this information, which they should take instead of a prophecy.

2 There were some of them too which were given to worship Angels, whom he
reprehendeth in his epistle to the Colossians, 2. chap. Let no man (says he)
bear rule over you, by humbleness of mind, and worshipping of Angels.

3 There were even in those days these words heard, Eat not, taste not, touch
not. Col. 2. and many made a conscience of eating certain meats. 1. Cor. 10.
Romans 14. and this for a religious exercise, and out of a voluntary devotion,
and for no other end but to keep down the flesh. Then did some begin to make
a distinction between days, as if one had been better then another, Romans
15.5. Gal. 4.10.

4 Then were there some, that sought to seduce the simple by philosophy; where
of S. Paul does also admonish the faithful. Beware that no man spoil you
through philosophy, and vain deceit.

5 In the same place he forbids the Colossians to stick to the traditions
of me^; and he touches the corruption, that was growing amongst the^. Out of
these sparks, through continuance of time, there arose a great flame: Satan
endeavoring at that time to beat upon this iron with as little noise as might
be, which he could not bring to that perfect form as he desired, till many
ages were past; There were many years to be employed about the licking of this
bear, before it could be brought to any handsome shape. The authority of the
Apostles, the zeal of their disciples, the violence of persecutions, did stop
him from going forwards in his work; but if from the very infancy of the
christian church, and in the sight of the Apostles, he did begin to set about
this mystery of iniquity; what did he do after these lights were extinguished,
after this zeal was waxen cold; is it likely that he would forget his former
work, or begin it so early to cast it off at last? Seeing that if Antichrist
must be such a one, as our adversaries describe him to be, to wit, a Jew, one
that must build up Jerusalem again, and be a sovereign monarch over the whole
world, we see no beginnings yet of all this, nor nothing more unlikely to come
to pass.

The second point. With what cunning the prophecy is built and of the diverse
sorts of guile that are therein.
AS the Apostle calls the doctrine of our redemption, a secret or mystery of
godliness, because of the height, and depth thereof: so does he call the
doctrine, which is framed with deceit, and continued by deep policy, a secret
or mystery of iniquity: which is the selfsame with that, which the spirit of
God in the 2. of the Apocalypse calls the deepnesse of Satan.

The policies employed about the building of Popery, and establishment of the
papal dignity, are of 4. sorts. 1. There be some of them, which serve to
blind the people, and to dark their understandings. 2. There be others that
serve to heap up riches; 3. There be others that serve to exalt the pope, and
his clergy to honor, and dignity. 4. There be others which serve for the
preservation of that which is gotten.

The first sort of Policy serving to blind, and inveigle the people.
THat the people therefore might be blinded, and deceived without
understanding so much; the pope has wrested the scriptures out of their hands,
and taken order that they should not be translated into a known tongue.
Within these few years, the scriptures were no more known to the people of
France, then the Alcoran was: There were only some Latin Bibles in Monasteries,
and in clergy men's houses. And eve^ at this very time in Spain, Italy,
Sicilie, etc. to see an Italian or Spanish Bible, would be deemed to be a
prodigy, and thought a matter sufficient to fetch one under the inquisition. To
the same end it is that he will have the common service read in a strange
tongue, and the women and children are taught to pray in Latin, for fear they
should understand themselus. This once effected, it was easy for the Pope to
draw religion to his own profit, and to disguise it as he thought best; the
poor people suffering themselus perforce to be led along by these guides,
which have hoodwinckt their eyes. Nevertheless because it is the nature of the
people to be busy about some thing; having taken away the scripture from them,
instead thereof he gave them images, together with many outward ceremonies, and
gay ornaments, to the end that whilst they stood gazing upon these he might the
easier display his nets to ensnare them; Some pretty recreations they have for
to occupy their minds, whilst he in the Interim builds a strong fort round
about them, for to keep them in slavish bondage.

2 But because, be you never so careful herein, yet there will ever be some
curious spirits that will escape and get out, and that it is hard, but that
some one or other will be desirous to see the head spring and know upon what
authority Christian religion is founded; for fear least such a man as this,
having gotten the sight of the scripture by stealth, should be offended for to
see it so little agreeing with the doctrine of the Romish Church, they have
sought to prevent this inconvenience, by an impudent shift. That is, they use
to revile the scripture, saying that it does not contain all things necessary
to salvation, that it is but a piece of a rule, that it is obscure, and
ambiguous, that the devil himself makes use of it, that it is not the chief
judge of controversies; but that from thence we must appeal to the Church of
Rome, which cannot be deceived, and to the Pope which cannot err in the
faith; By these means they have made the rule of religion subject unto
themselves, since that they themselves, are the rule of religion: and have made
themselves, both judges and parties, since that in the accusatio^s against the
Church of Rome, they will have the Church to be judge, and acknowledge no other
true Church but the Church of Rome.

3 To the same end is it that they bind and tie the belief of the people, with
an ignorant respect, making them to follow without understanding, and to
believe without knowledge, whereas the Job. 10 4.17.8.6.69.
Scripture would have us first know and then believe. So do they fold the
faith of an ignorant man within the faith of his curate; but take away the
means from him, where by he might know whether his Curate taught the truth or
no.

This also serves to detain men's minds, to wit, that the Church of Rome by
variety of recreations has studied to fit it self to all sorts of humors,
and to content all kind of persons; There is not so distasting a spirit, but
may find something here to please his palate. Do you love pomp and
magnificence? where is the like to that of the Cardinals, and Prelates? or set
out with that stately furniture, as their most solemn Masses are? But if a
sordid life be more pleasing to any one, you have the Capuchins, and
Fevillants; do you love to live at your ease? you have your Abbays, and
Priories, together with richly landed places for Canons and Monckes: who enjoy
their hearts desires, and have the world at will; but if you like rather to live
like a beggar, you have the 4. orders of begging Friars; if you affect
solitariness, you have the Hermits; if to keep company, you have the
Conve^tuall Mo^ks; are you desirous of knowledge, behold the Jesuits that take
upon them to profess it; or if ignorance? you have the ignorant Friars, which
have made a virtue of ignorance; Does insolency, and lasciviousnes, like any
one, there is shrouetide, a time appointed to dance, and revell in, which
sportes if any chance to distaste, presently thereupon ensues ash wednesday,
which cha^geth their countenances, and turns all their lewd mirth into a
sudden devotion. At Rome you have covents of cloystered Monckes wonderful
for their austerity, and stricktnesse of life; and hard by, the common stews:
liberal alms bestowed on the hospital of the holy Ghost; but withal selling
of benefices, dispensations, absolutions, and Church offices.

All this is done in diverse places, and by diverse men, but behold contrary
things in one and the self same person. The Pope makes Emperors to kiss his
feet, but he himself on Maundie Thursday washes poor men's feet; he calls
himself a Monarch and God upon earth, but ye shall hear him at another time,
say that he is the servant of servants. Pretty diversity, and delightful; a
witty people, to cloth religion with this variety of colors. There are none
there, even to little children of 6. and 7. years old, but shall have some
thing or other that will content them; there are certain feasts of purpose for
them, as the feast of S. Catharin, and S. Nicholas, when they are clad in gay
apparel, when they are led about in procession, and have little painted
pictures given them to bear in their hands. When they are 9. or 10. years old
they have their heads bound about with fillets, and little crosses laid upon
them of beaten gold, the^ the bishop strokes their crowns, and this is that
which they call confirmation.

The second Policy serving to gain.
IN the second place, Popery has made religion serve, as a means to gather up
riches;

1 This is the reason why they have made a new article of faith, which
overthrowes the whole gospel: to wit; that Jesus Christ by his passion has not
satisfied for the pain due to our sins which we commit after Baptism, but
that it lies up on us to satisfy for them, by doing penance in this life,
and after this life by being in the fire of Purgatory; a fire, seven times
more hot then common fire is, and wherein a man shall fry for many ages
together. But such is the mercy of his Holiness, that he pardons a great
deal of this time to some, whither it be by jurisdiction, or else by way of
suffrage.

2 To the same end is it, that they tie their pardons to certain churches, and
hang them on certain altars; to which this privilege is granted, that
whosoever shall cause a Mass to be said there, on such a day, shall have his
choice to free what soul he will out of Purgatory; but this is never done
without paying; And in the bulls of Indulgence there is this clause ordinarily
inserted, that this privilege is for none, but Manus porrigentibus adiutrices,
for such as shall put to their helping hands, that is to say, for such as
shall give some thing to the Church, or which shall put some thing into the
poor man's box, which for this purpose is set before the church door where the
pardons are hanged. Wherein we may note a notable point of subtilty, for the
Pope sending his Iubilee into France, sends it but only into two or three
places of the Realm, and not thorough the whole Country, for so it would be
hard for him to gather in the co^tributions; and the sums of money being
dispersed must needs be much diminished in passing through so many men's hands.

3 With the like cunning is it, that they use to make the people institute
obits, and yearly masses to be said for their souls, which are bought at a
dear rate. For to hope to have Masses without money, were but a folly; it is no
reason that a man should die cheap; yet this is one commodity that in this
happy age, every one is received into paradise for his money; it cannot be
imagined what profit they reap hereby: seeing that there is no man which would
not gladly give all (...) he were worth, to be delivered from a fire that
should torment him but for half an hour, how much more to be freed from a
fire wherein he should lie burning I know not how many hundredth years; these
were the means by which this shameful gain began first to increase,
whereby bodyly penance, is turned into a pecuniarie mulct; they cannot have
the earth broken up for them to be buried in, nor the bells rung out, nor be
named in the Memento without money; yea and the masses are sold for more and
less according to the degree of the solemnity that they are set out in; there
are none but the poor in a bad taking when they die. The 4. orders of the
Friars Mendicant never come to visit them upon their death beds, never
accompany them to church at their funerals, nor do them any other service. For
the Tax book in the chapter of matrimonial dispensations, in the 23. leaf,
does put for an undoubted maxim, that Hae gratiae non co^ceduntur paup ribus,
quia non sunt, ideo non possunt consolari. These favors are not granted to the
poor, because they are not, therefore they cannot be comforted. For as the^
they thought themselves to stand on so sure ground, that they might scoff at
the people without any danger, and brag how they had abused them.

4 The invocation of Saints, and miracles, and supposed relics, have, and
still do serve to the same end; for if one Saint be in credit, every one
carries his offerings to him; The Curate lives by this, and the village fares
the better for it; And when the people come to kiss the relics, the basen is
never far of. To go away without casting any thing into it, would be thought
to have been done in contempt, and be censured for an uncivil part; Their
solemn feasts are days of collection, which for this reason, have been so
much the more multiplied; On such times as these, the Saints are better clothed
then they use to be ordinarily, and the Virgin Mary does change her attire.

5 To the same end is it that the Pope has invented a thousand inhibitions for
certain meats, As also that he has forbidden marriage in the third and
fourth degree, and in spiritual parentage, and in Lent, etc. Because look how
many the more inhibitions there are, by so much the greater need have we to
seek for more dispensations, which do always bring some profit.

6 The Clergy it self is not exempted hence, upon whom the Pope does raise
yearly payments, and contributions, and makes every Archbishop amongst them to
buy his Pall at a dear rate, which is a white Pall; 4 fingers broad, with
buttons of lead, covered over with black silk, made of the wool of certain
Lambs which are bread at S. Agnes in Rome, according as it is related in the 1
book of holy (...) vate designs of princes; If any one be intended to
trouble a state, and to make the people take arms against their King, his next
way is to fall in with the Father confessors, that so he may know how they
are inclined, and by confession egg them on to rebellion.

5 Absolution after confession does add no less authority unto them; For by
this it is that they have usurped a temporal dominion, yea over kings and
princes; The pope will absolve a King, but upon some tyrannical conditions; to
wit, if he will submit himself to be ierkt, and to take a certain number of
lashes by the hands of Monks; or go in pilgrimage, or make his land
tributary to the pope, holding it as from S. Peter, or send so many soldiers
to such or such a country, for the service of his Holiness; whereof we have
produced many examples above.

6 In public ceremonies, in Masses, in Sittings, and Feasts, they have taken
upon them to be princes superiors, and exact slavish submission at their
hands; The Kings must serve popes at the Mass upon their knees; They must hold
his stirrup as he is getting up to horse; They must hold his horse by the
bridle as he is going; or else help to bear up his chair with their
shoulders; they must wait upon him at the table. And at the popes feast the
chief Cardinal Bishop, is to sit above the highest prince of Christendom;
and it is a notable maxim, and infallible rule, which is mentioned in the 3
book 1. sect. and 2. chap. of popish ceremonies; to wit; Note that the Pope
does never do reverence to any man.

7 If there be any fountain that is good against the stone, or to comfort the
stomach, and strengthen the sinnewes, presently there is the statue of some
Saint or other sent, and erected hard by it; as if this were done by some
miracle and by virtue of the Saint, that so they may the more confirm
superstition.

8 They have also yet more exalted themselves by their works of supererogation,
by virtue of which, they obtain a degree of glory in Paradise above the common
Saints, which had no other sanctity but to obey God; whereas these squires do
more then God has commanded; their superabou^dant satisfactions serve for
others, and the Monckes which have suffered more pains their sins deserved,
are in a manner our redeemers, as Bellarmin says in the 4. chapter of his 1.
book of Indulgences.

9 The cases of marriage also have bin a great help to increase their power;
for they have removed all matters of this nature from the courts of civil
Magistrates. Whence it comes to pass that men repair to Rome from all parts
of Europe, for the disanulling of marriages, and for dispensations to marry in
forbidden degrees; the children that are borne out of which marriages, are
bound of necessity to defend the Popes authority, seeing that such marriages as
these, depend altogether upon his permission.

10 Of the same rank is their common service which they cause to be said in
the Latin tongue. For as the Romans did plant their language in the countries
which they conquered, and the king of Spain uses the Indians to speak
spanish, because it is a mark of sovereignty, and a means to make them the
more his own. So the Pope has made all the churches which are under him glad
to yield their necks to this yoke, and has given the^ the Roman tongue, for a
mark of subjection to the bishop of Rome.

The fourth Policy. The means how to keep that which they have gotten.
THe Popes being thus enriched, and exalted to this height of honor, did
wisely consider, that it was to little purpose to get, if they were not able to
keep that which they had gotten; and this is the maine point above others in
which they have beaten their brains, and labored to the utmost of their power.

1 The first means, to preserve that which they had gotten, was to forbid men
of the church to marry, for fear lest bishops and Curates, should encroach
upon church goods, and least they should turn little streams out of the
common channel to their private families; Gregory the 1. has told us as much
above, saying, that he was therefore unwilling to admit of a married bishop,
because a wife and children, do use commonly to consume the church goods.

2 And for fear that Princes might come to finger their substance, and that
their lands (for treason or other such like crimes) might chance to be
confiscate to the crown, they have got to have their judges, their officers,
and their prisons apart yea they have so far forth prevailed with our ancient
kings, (which were intent to nothing else but to draw the sword, and follow
the game) that their civil causes were altogether decided at Rome; they did
also obtain that the church should ever be held to be under age, that so they
might not be bound to stand to any bargain, if it were their luck at any time
to be overtaken.

3 And to the end that kings and princes should not put their noses in their
affairs, by meddling with the choosing of De electione Papae vide 1. sect. 1.
lib. sacr. Ceremon.
Popes, as they did heretofore, they have not only confined this election to
the suffrages of a few Cardinals, but they shut them up also within the
Conclaue, damme up the windows, put in their meat unto them at a little hole;
give them their bread cut in small pieces, their wine in clear glasses, for
fear least there should be any ticket enclosed, whereby they might receive some
information from without; They dine every one apart, without helping one
another. And to make them dispatch their business the sooner, their commons
are diminished, and their ordinary made less from day to day; yea Princes now
adays think themselves highly favored if they can buy the Cardinals voices
for huge sums of money, to the end they may have a Pope that will not handle
them too rigorously; And there is scarce ever a Pope made but by such means as
these.

4. The same politic wisdom of theirs has suggested this maxim unto them,
that for the strengthening of their state they must of necessity oblige great
families, and let them have a share in the pray. Wherefore if a Prince or Lord
have a house overcharged with children, they will bestow a Cardinallship on the
youngest, and make him an Abbot, or a Prior, this makes the house the lighter.
A father having put his daughter into some religious order, is not troubled to
provide her a dowry against her marriage day. They give civil magistrates
leave, and make them capable of holding benefices, although they be married, so
to make them obliged.

5 The chiefest point of their policy, is their thrusting of Prelates, and
other churchmen into Councels, and into Courts of Parliament, to the end they
may know all the affairs of a Realm; which is more; Cardinals promoted to
this honor by Popes, sit in the Councels of kings, against all the rules of
state, that a king should admit such into his Council, as are the creatures of
a stranger; By the like reason, kings should also for their parts have some lay
men in all Ecclesiastical assemblies, and general Councels, which should have
an eye over their actions, and know what they did; but they are to wise to
suffer this.

6 This is not sufficient: For because amongst Prelates, Bishops, Abbots, and
the most quallified men of the clergy, there are ever a great many honest, and
well minded persons, which do love their country and the liberty of their
Kings, the Pope has therefore here and there dispersed a great rabblement of
petty Monks which should preach the obedience due to him; who meriting for
themselves, and others, have received certain prerogatives of holiness from
the Pope, which others have not; The fraternity of the Cordeliers have the
privilege to draw a soul out of Purgatory upon certain days. The Carmelites
have the prerogative not to be in purgatory beyond the Saturday after their
deaths. To wear the cowle, and make the vow of S. Francis and S. Dominick,
does confer the same grace that baptism does as Bernardine tells us in his
Rosarie, and Thomas of Aquine, in his 4. book of Sentences, and fourth
Distinction.

7 But above all, their greatest policy, and all the depths of the mystery of
iniquity have been discovered in their inventing the order of the Jesuits;
which leave the honor of keeping the vow of poverty, and chastity to other
orders, binding themselves chiefly to the vow of obedience, being tied in
particular by an oath to the pope, whom they swear to obey, In omnibus, and
per omnia, with an obedience, which they call a blind obedience, such as does
execute the commandments of a superior, without inquiring why; which are sent
to run over the whole earth even to the Indies, which have a permissito go in
Lay men's apparel, and to use equivocation in judgment, and not to reveal the
confessions of traitors, and conspiratours against the life of their Kings:
which take nothing from any by parcels, but catch by gross, and swallow up
whole families together.

All these tricks, and devises, tend chiefly to the ruin and reproach of
kings, who^ his Holiness does cause to be whipped most shamefully, and with
whose crowns he dispenses at his pleasure.

8 It is true indeed that the pope does recompense them; For he gives them of
his spiritual graces, an Holy Rose, a Standard, or a sacred sword, a Box full
of holy Grains, of little crosses, and beads, which in kissing and carrying
about them, they shall gain an hundred years of pardon. As also the
privilege of communicating under both kinds. Who will not stand amazed to
behold these things? Or who will be so obstinate as not to be forced by the
evidence of the truth? Although all this which I have said is little, or
nothing; I had need of better eyes to look down in to the bottom of this so
deep a mystery. We have produced nothing of this but what we have known by
experience. But how much more is that which lies hid, and which we do not
know? All other policy is but blockishnesse in respect of this, and I am of
opinion that they which are the contrivers of it, can hardly look upon one
another without laughing. Finally this is altogether such a subject, as God
does demand for to show that he does confound the wisdoms of men, and take the
subtle in their own devises. But the Apostle calls unto us, intending to make
the matter more clear yet.

The fourth part of this prophecy.
7 Only he which now withholdeth, shall let till he be taken out of the way.

8 And then shall that wicked man be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume
with the spirit of his mouth, and shall abolish with the brightness of his
coming.

The explication of this prophecy.
7 There is nothing but one that hinders the disclosing of this Bishop. That
is, that the Roman Empire (which does now oversway the whole world) must
remain yet for a time, and afterward be abolished.

8 And when this Roman Empire shall be destroyed, then shall this Bishop be
fully disclosed, and the Papal see shall be exalted by the ruins of the
Empire, which Bishop God shall beat down, and weaken by the preaching of his
word, but shall not destroy him utterly till the last day of judgment, then
when Jesus Christ shall come in his glory.

The proof of this exposition.
FOr the proof of this interpretation, we are to show, 1. That the papacy is
increased, and exalted by the ruins of the Empire, 2. That God has weakened
the papacy by the preaching of his word.

The first point. That the Papacy is increased by the ruin of the Roman
Empire.
THe Apostle says, That he which does obtain shall obtain, or that he
which boldeth must hold; By him which holds he understands him, which
possesses, or holds rule; which cannot be understood but of the Roman
Empire, which did as then bear rule over a great part of the world. For the
word (...) which he uses, does signify to possess. as in the 1. to the Cor.
chap. 7. v. 30. He foretells us therefore that the Empire which did bear
rule must be abolished, and that out of the ruins of the Empire the son of
perdition must exalt himself, and be made manifest. The same word signifies
also to withhold, or hinder; which also agrees to our purpose. For the Roman
Empire while it was in force did hinder the pope from rising, and kept him
under, by punishing him, driving him to corners, degrading him, if at any time
he failed to do his duty. But this Empire being decayed in the West, and
diminished in the East by the Sarasins, The popes found means to seize upon the
chief city of the Empire, together with a great part of Italy, and to
devour the neighboring Churches, and Realms at his pleasure.

Now although the Fathers have spoken nothing concerning these things, but only
by guess, and conjectures; because they were not as yet come to pass,
nevertheles I know not how it has come to pass to be a general received
opinion amongst them, and a common prophecy, that this son of perdition whom
they call Antichrist, should rise out of the destruction of the Empire, and be
exalted upon the ruins thereof: And they apply this passage to that purpose,
wherein they al hold that Antichrist is spoken of: Tertullian in his book of the
resurrection of the flesh, chapter 24 Only (says he) he which now holds,
must hold till he be abolished; what is this but the Roman Empire, the
scattered parts whereof being divided amongst ten kings shall produce
Antichrist, and then shall that wicked man be revealed, etc. Chrysostom in his
4. sermon upon the second to the Thessalonians, What is it therefore that
withholdeth, that he be not made manifest, that is to say, what is it that
hinders him from being revealed: some say that it is the grace of the holy
Ghost, others say that it is the Roman Empire, of whose opinion I am
altogether. The Greek scholiast gathered out of diverse interpreters, says
the same. By him which holds, he understands him which hinders; And what
is this? some say that it is the holy Ghost, others that it is the Roman
Empire, and this opinion is the best; S. Austin in his 20. book and 19. chap.
of the city of God: Whereas the Apostle says, that only he which now
holds, must hold till he be abolished, this is thought by some and that not
absurdly to be spoken of the Roman Empire, as if it had been said, Only he
which now bears rule, must rule, till he be put from it. Primasius; The Roman
Empire shall be destroyed before that Antichrist be revealed; S. Jerome says
the same in the 11. quest. to Algasia where he does expound this place, If the
Roman Empire be not first destroyed, and Antichrist go before, Christ shall
not come. And a little after, having said that the name of blasphemy written in
the forehead of the harlot clad in skarlet, is, Roma aeterna, he adds, that
the Apostle durst not say in express terms that the Roman Empire should be
abolished, for fear of drawing persecution upon the Church.

Since therefore that the destruction of the Roman Empire must go before the
manifestation of the son of perdition which is called Antichrist, we are to
look whether this Empire be destroyed. For if it be found that it was long
since ruinated, there is no question but the son of perdition is made
manifest.

Here upon there is a question moved whether the Empire of Germany be the
true Roman Empire, and the same Empire which was in the Apostles time. There be
some that affirm this, building upon this ground, that the Emperor of
Germany is called King of the Romans. Others say that we are not to stand on
words, but things: And that the Roman Empire, whereof S. Paul speaks, is no
more, as Machiavell says in his 1. book of the Florentine history: that, L'
Imperio e tutto in terra. the Empire is all fallen flat upon the ground. That
the Empire of Germany came not by succession from the ancient Roman
Emperors; but that Charles the Great, King of France was the first founder of
it. That the Emperor of Germany holds nothing neither in Rome nor in
Italy. That Germany for the most part is out of the ancient Roman Empire.
That it is unlikely that he should be the Roman Emperor, which is not only
not Emperor of Rome, but sends to Rome to tender his submission, and to take
an oath of allegiance and obedience to him that bears sway there, to wit, to
the Pope of Rome. And indeed Lypsius who has spent his whole study in an
exact knowledge of the Roman Empire, and which in this point yields to no man
living, affirms boldly that the Pope holds the remainder of this Empire;
wherefore he says that this Pope and Roman Dictatour does sustain the parts
of this ruined edifice. That he has his Senate clad in purple, whom we may
compare to Kings; That he has imposts, and Ambassadors from far countries.
That Kings themselves, and Princes do bend before him, and bow down their
heads in token of subjection. Whereupon also he says that this sacred Empire
at Rome, has been, and is, instead of an ankor to floating Europe: And in my
opinion the Pope and his Parasites do but plainly scof at the Emperor, in
calling him king of the Romans, since that they have taken away all Rome and
Italy from him. But we need not here go about to decide this difference; for it
is is sufficient that all confess the Roman Empire long since to have been so
decayed, that one may say truly that it is ruinated, and destroyed; as say that
our Kings should be thrust out of al France, except it were a little Corner in
Brittany, one might say that their kingdom were destroyed, and abolished.
Besides, Bellarmine does not see how he does contradict himself, in affirming
that the Roman Empire whereof S. Paul speaks is not yet abolished: For he
says by a consequent that the Empire of Germany does hinder the coming of
Antichrist: which being granted, there is no likelihood that Antichrist must be
a Jew which shall take up his seat in the kingdom of Jerusalem, for the
Emperor of Germany has no means to hinder this.

This then being out of question, to wit, that the Roman Empire, whereof S.
Paul speaks, is already ruinated, it must needs also be that the son of
perdition is already made manifest; since that he is to rise out of the ruins
of the Empire, and be made manifest by the abolishment thereof. We are
therefore to find out some state that did raise it self by the fall of the
Roman Empire: the head whereof must call himself God, and take upon him to
rule in the house of God, which is his Church, and boast of signs and
miracles: Doubtless the Turk never took such titles: and there shall no man
but the Pope be found to whom all these things will agree: who has also made
the seat of his Pontifical Empire in the same town, which in the Apostle S.
Paul's time was the seat of the Roman Empire, and which for many ages together
was the chief city of the Empire: so that it cannot be denied but that he
holds the same place which the Roman Emperors did of old: And this is so
known a thing that our adversaries themselves are forced to confess it, some
of whose testimonies we will cite. Nicholas Machiavell dedicateth his
Florentine history to Pope Clement the 7: And yet for all that, in the 1. book
there of he is not afraid to speak in this manner: The Emperor therefore
becoming a Christian, and withdrawing himself to Constantinople, it followed
thereupon that the Roman Empire came to decay, and the church of Rome to
increase the more: nevertheless till the coming of the Lombards (all Italy
being under the rule of Emperors or Kings) the Popes never took any other
authority upon them at that time, but to look into men's manners, and their
doctrine: In other matters they obayed the Emperors or Kings, which sometimes
did put them to death, and employ them as their servants in what business they
pleased: but that which woone them the more honor, and made them to be the
more respected in Italy, was King Theodoricks laying siege to Ravenna: because
Rome remaining without a Prince, the Romans to have the more refuge, were
compelled to yield the Pope the more obedience. Yet they did not gain much
authority by this, only the Church of Rome got to be preferred before that of
Ravenna. But the coming of the Lumbards, and the division of Italy into so
many parts, were the occasions of the Popes rising. Because he (being as it
were the head at Rome) the Emperor of Constantinople, and the Lumbards did so
far forth respect him, that the Romans by the Popes means did enter a league
of friendship with the Lombards, and with Longinus, not as subjects but as
friends. And so the Popes continuing to be friends both with the Lombards, and
with the Graecians, did increase their dignity; but a little after ensued the
downfall of the East Empire, which happened about that time under the Emperor
Heraclius, by the Sclavonians, Persians, Sarasins, etc. He adds farther that
the Pope being not able to obtain succor from the Emperor against the
Lombards, sought to the kings of France for aid, and that all the wars which
were in Italy after that time were raised by the Popes, which made Barbarians
come to succor them, under which word of Barbarians he does also comprehend
the French, who were the only men that did uphold the Papacy as it was
falling, and which gave the Pope whatsoever he does possess in Italy. Finally
he concludes this whole narration with these words. Wherefore to describe that
which followed after this time, we need no more to tell of the ruin of the
Empire which is utterly decayed, but how the Pope came to increase.

He that would see more particularly how the bishop of Rome has made his
commodity by the ruin of the Empire, let him read Sigonius his history of the
kingdom of Italy. In the beginning of his 3. book he relates how (the
Emperor Philippicus Bardanes, opposing himself against the receiving of
images into churches) Pope Gregory the 2. did for bid the Italians to receive
any letters from the Emperor, to pay him any tribute out of their money, to
place his statue in their temples, or so much as once to name him in their
public service. This was the first time that the Popes did rebel against the
Emperors, being much enfeebled by the Sarasins in the East, and spoiled of the
Empire of the West. Before then they took heed not to raise any mutinies. Now
this first attempt of the Popes fell out in the year of our Lord, 712. yet
this stroke drew no blood, for no man did for all this withdraw himself from
being subject to the Emperor. And Sigonius tells us plainly that eleven years
after, the Emperor Leo gave Marin, an Esquire of his body, the government of
the city of Rome, which place they that held were called Dukes of Rome, to
whom he gave in commission to put Pope Gregory to death: which he being not
able to effect (the authority of Emperors as then decreasing from day to day,
he commanded his Lieutenant in Italy who was called the Exarch, to spoil him
of his Popedom, and to degrade him; But Gregory sued to the usurpers of
Lombardie for aid, against the Emperor his natural Prince: And his dispute
concerning the service of images served him for this purpose, wherein under the
color of devotion he did oppose himself against the Emperors, which did beat
down images in all places; and having persuaded the Italians that to overthrow
images was to overturne Christian religion, he made the Emperors odious to
the people of Italy. Till at last in the year 725. he wrought them of Rome,
of Campania, of Ravenna and Pentapolis to revolt from the Emperor, with a
thousand cruelties practiced upon those that took the Emperors part;
Whereupon Sigonius concludes thus; By these means Rome and the Dukedom of
Rome came to be in the Popes power, being taken from the Grecians by reason of
their wicked heresy; that is to say, that the Popes did take away the chiefest
part of the Empire from under the Emperors government, because they would not
yield to worship images. This was the pretext; but the true cause was, because
the Emperor was poor and weak so that one might offend him without much
danger. This notwithstanding was nothing in respect of the greatness to which
Pepin king of France did exalt the Pope in the year 755. which is the time
wherein the Pope did first begin to be an earthly Prince under any title. Now
even as when a great tree does fall, every man runs with his hatchet to get
some branch or other: Even so in the ruin of the Roman Empire, diverse
Princes, and people ^an to the wrack thereof, and every one snatched a part of
it. But the Bishop of Rome over and above the possession of the head city of
the Empire, and of the country round about, did by little and little take the
marks and dignity of the Empire upon him, to wit, his habit, and shoes of
skarlet; his senate clad in skarlet, the power of enrolling some for Gods, and
Canonizing them for Saints: the obeisance, and submission of all the Princes
which do agnize him* the Canon law in imitation of the civil: Ambassadors
called Legates, as those of Emperors. Papal injunctions in imitation of the
imperial. Imposts, and tributs under the title of Annates and contributions.
The imperial crown; but triple. So that becoming of a Bishop to be a King,
he did labor tooth and nail to make a monarchy of the church, and a
Temporal Empire of a mystical and spiritual body: For which purpose he made
use of our ancient kings (especially after Jews surnamed the Debonnayre) which
being plain meaning men, not seen in points of religion, thinking that to
study was a disgrace for a King, suffered themselves to be led by an idle
respect, under color of the keys, and S. Peter's chair, till a last they did
cease to be their own masters, seeing that their crown is at the popes
disposal, who takes it and gives it to who^ he thinks good* These things have
been noted by Guicciardine that famous Historian in the fourth book of his
history, where after a long discourse of the rising and advancements of the
popes, he shuts up all with these words. The Popes upon these foundations,
and by these means being exalted to an earthly dominion, having by little and
little neglected the salvation of souls, and cast aside the remembrance of
divine instructions, bending their studies how to attain to worldly
greatness, and using spiritual authority no farther, but as it was an
instrument, and help for the temporal, did begin to show more like secular
Princes then Bishops; A Out of the Venice edition printed in the year 1514. in
page 125. after these words Il Ba glidi Digiuno.
passage, which together with others the Expurgators have razed clean out of
the last editions of Guicciardine. To be brief he must be very little read in
history, that can be ignorant of the accomplishme^t of the Apostles prophecy,
which says that when he which bore rule should be abolished, then the son of
perdition should be exalted and made manifest.

The second point. That God hoth staggered the Papacy by the preaching of his
word, and shall destroy it finally by his last coming.
IN the year of our Lord 1513. the popedom being in the height of worldly
glory, and covering all the earth over with a darkness more thick then that of
Egypt, pope Leo the 10 began a most shameful traffic: sending messengers to
carry his pardons into all places, who sold the remission of sins at a set
price, and for two crowns would draw a soul out of Purgatory. These
Babylonish merchants went from town to town venting their ware, and gathering
infinite sums of money, which as they made show was to be employed in war
against the Turk, but the devil a soldier was ever pressed for this purpose;
but all was converted by these Collectours to the buying of Cardinals caps, and
the maintaining of pride and insolency, as if one should take a sack full of
crowns, and throw it into a deep quagmire. The holy scripture as then was no
more known to the people then the history of the new Guinie. The subject of
their sermons was only to speak of the miracles of Saints, and virtues of
relics: Jesus Christ could scarce be known from their common sort of Saints,
and it was a long time before he could get a feastiuall day to be assigned unto
him. The common fashion was to wrap men, as they lay a dying, in a Monks gown,
that so they might die in the state of grace; this was thought to be of no
less virtue then a second baptism. Amidst this so gross ignorance which was
scarce two fingers breadth from paganism, yet for all, even at that time, this
merchandise did seem so odious, that every one cried after a reformation, and
many had a desire to see the fountains and headsprings of christian religion,
and to consult with the scripture that was kept hid from them. Luther did
translate it into the German tongue, and being assisted by others did by urgent
persuasions exhort the people to follow the Ioh. 5. v. 3^
counsel of Jesus Christ, who wills them to search the scriptures that they
may have eternal life: These abuses being by these means discovered, the
Gospel was made open unto all, and infinite sorts of people came flocking unto
the doctrine of salvation. England, Scotland, Denmark, Suethland, the greatest
part of Germany, and of Swizzerland, a great part of the low Countries, of
France, of Hungary, Bohemia, Polonia, Morauia, and Transsyluania, acknowledged
their error, opened their eyes, gave the glory to God, and shook off the
Romish tyranny, not to speak of those which even in Italy and Spain it self
do groan under the yoke, and earne after liberty. To these churches newly
reformed in many places, we may add others which before Luthers time held the
same doctrine that he did, which were in Hungaria, in Province, in the valleys
of the Alps, in Bohemia, and in diverse other places, being the remainder of
that horrible persecution, which the pope practiced amongst them some four or
five hundred years since. Since what time, even in the Countries over which
the pope is absolute commander, the relics are not visited so often as they
were wont, and may be seen for less money, then they used to be formerly:
The gifts and offerings of our Lady of Loretta, and of S. James in Gallizia,
are by two thirds less then they were: The badges of the They bore crosses on
their breasts which waged war for the Pope against the Turk, or any other
infidels.
cross, by which the pope in turning of his hand could levy whole armies; are
now no more in use. And there be some states and commonwealths, eue^ in Italy
it self, which dare argue the case, and dispute with what right he holds
one of his swords, to wit, the temporal. And out of doubt popery had been
abolished ere this, if Kings and Princes had not vpheld it by their power, and
if their cruelty had not compelled men to yield unto it for fear; and if the
great revenews which the Clergy possess did not hold many people fast bound
by the bellies, and obliged to maintain this error. Now this so sudden and
so great a change does evidently show, that before ever Luther taught, many
did distaste this abuse, and watched for nothing but an occasion to cast of the
yoke of tyrannical superstition, we have therefore by the events which fell
out in our fathers time seen a great part of the acco^plishment of the
Apostles prophecy, which is, that Jesus Christ should consume the son of
perdition by the spirit of his mouth, which is a fashion of speech used by
Isaiah in the 11. chap. and 4. ver. where speaking of Jesus Christ he says,
that he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and slay the wicked
with the breath of his lips. so, that which the Prophet calls the breath of
his lips, S. Paul calls the spirit, or breath of his mouth; wherefore also in
the 1. of the Apoc. it is said that a sharp two-edged sword went out of his
mouth: which signifies the peircing virtue of his word. And out of question if
the kingdom of the son of perdition must be established through the doctrine of
lies, it must needs be that he must be overthrown by the word of truth. Nor
does S. Ieromes interpretation, in the 11. quest. to Algazia, co^tradict this,
which will have the spirit of his mouth to signify the power and ordinance of
his majesty: For what is the word of God but his ordinance? And preaching,
which makes the foundations of Babylon to totter, could it have this virtue
without the power and efficacy of God for to quicken it?

Now to show that this final destruction of the son of Perdition must not be
wrought all at one blow, but by little and little, the Apostle uses the word
(...), which signifies to wast and consume, and not to kill as the common
translation of the church of Rome turns it, as if it were (...); I do not here
dispute whether S. Paul by this discomfiture or consuming, do understand an
utter abolishment, or only a weakening of the Papacy: only this I say, that
the Apostle uses such words as signify that this destruction shall not be
effected but in process of time, and by degrees. I say moreover that God has
already put his hand to the work, and made us see the accomplishment of this
prophecy well onward.

For as for the final destruction of the son of perdition, S. Paul has
told us before hand that it shall not be till the day of judgment, saying,
that God shall abolish him with the brightness of his coming; Agreeable to
the prophecy of Daniel, which makes him to last, till the thrones were erected,
and the ancient of days sat, Dan. 7. v. 8.9.10.
and that the sessions were held, and the books were opened. Which we are
therefore the more to note for fear least any one to delicatly impatient
should flatter himself in his hopes and promise to himself that he shall live
to see the Pope utterly abolished: for fear also least being too hasty in our
desires, we come at length to murmur, and complain as if the time were
prorogued.

This point were at an end, but that I cannot pass by Apol. contra Regem. c.
9. parag. At inq^^unt.
Bellarmines allegation of Chrysostom, taken out of his 4, sermon upon the 2.
to the Thessalonians, which place (as it seems) he did not understand.
Chrysostom speaks thus, (...). Bellarmine in the 9. chapt. of his book
against the king turns it thus. Quemadmodum irruens ignis passim minuta
animalia etiam antequam plane adveniat procul adhuc situs terrefacit and
consumit. He thought that (...) signified, passim irruere, whereas it signifies,
illabi, or supervenire, and that (...) signified, terrefacere. Whereas it
signifies sopire or soporare; but let us come to that which follows.

The fifth part of this Prophecy.
3 Which wicked man's coming is by the effectual working of Satan, with all
power and signs, and lying wonders.

10 And in all deceiueablenesse of unrighteousness, among them that perish,
because they received not the love of the truth that they might be saved.

11 And therefore God shall send them strong delusion that they should believe
lies.

The explication of this prophecy.
9 The Pope shall come fortified with the might and efficacy of Satan, with
power, and signs, and false miracles, and serving to establish lies.

10 Whereby such as are marked out to perdition shall be lewdly seduced, because
they have not loved the truth of the gospel which might have saved them.

11 And therefore God shall suffer the^ to be seduced, and to be driven into
strong delusions, and that they may believe lies.

The proof of this Exposition.
ALthough the ordinary works of God deserve most to be admired, yet men never
wonder at these, but are still desirous to see some extraordinary thing: Few
are there that take notice of the suns moving, but what a wonderment would it
be to see the sun stand still? And yet notwithstanding the motion thereof is
the more wonderful of the two. Man is naturally inclined to look after
extraordinary eventes, but to to careless to better himself by them. So the
Jews resorted to Christ: because of the miracle of the five loaves, but not to
receive instruction. This is the reason why God, being willing to direct men's
understandings by natural means, did annex miracles to the publication of his
law and his gospel: that so he might plant a dutiful respect in our hearts,
before he did engraue his will in them. Yet for fear that miracles by being
made to common should cease to be miracles, he thought it not fit to satisfy
every man's curiosity in this, but sends us back to the hearing of his word:
which being once confirmed by miracles in the first publication thereof, to
ask any more for miracles is manifest incredulity. Hereunto add that Satan
does sometimes imitate the miracles of God, but never his truth, whence it
happens that he which will not believe except he see miracles, does thereby
(without thinking of it) solicit Satan to work some miraculous feats, and to
sport himself in deluding him. This is the reason why our Lord in the 13. of
Deuteronomie does forbid us to judge of the doctrine by the miracles, and
would that we should rather judge of the miracles by the doctrine, saying that
if any one shall give us a sign, or wonder, and the sign or wonder which he
told of should come to pass, yet we must not harke^ unto him if he once say,
Come and let us go serve other Gods; that is to say, if he shall teach false
doctrine. Such were the miracles of the magicians of Egypt, which counterfaited
the power of God. Such were the miracles of the ancient heretics, who
disputing against the Catholics did allege their miracles, as Tertullian
reports in 44. chapt. of the book of prescriptions. They will moreover
(says he) speak much concerning the authority of every heretic, that they
have more then any others confirmed the certainty of their doctrine that they
have raised the dead, healed the sick, foretold of events to come, that they
might be reputed for Apostles: as though this also were not written, that many
shall come doing great miracles, for to strengthen the deceitfulness of their
wicked preaching. And in the 3. cha. of his 3. book against Marcian, he
says, that the false Christ's do work miracles very easily. For Jesus Christ
tells us that in the last day many shall say unto him, have not we cast forth
devils in thy name? To whom he shall answer, I know ye not, depart from me
ye workers of iniquity. And in an other Mat. 24 ver 24. Marc. 13 v. 22.
place he says, that false Christ's; and false prophets shall arise, and shall
show great signs, and wonders, so that if it were possible they should deceive
the very elect. And S. Paul yet more in particular says of the son of
perdition which is called Antichrist, that his coming shall be with signs,
and lying wonders, so called, both because they shall be deceitful miracles,
and mere illusions, as also because they shall serve to establish a lie.

Which made me not a little wonder how Bellarmine and others came to put
miracles amongst the notes of the true church, since the spirit of God has
given it us in these last days for a mark of the false. And that after the
miracles of the Apostles, and their disciples, we hear of no miracles foretold,
but only those of false teachers, and the son of perdition, as the author of
the commentary upon S. Matthew (commonly fathered upon Chrysostom) says in
the 49. sermon. We do not now acknowledge ani^ to be the ministers of Christ
because they do profitable miracles, but because they do no^^ of these
miracles. It is an evil and adulterous generation that seeks signs, says
Christ in the 12. of Matthew; But the faithful rest the contented with the will
of God revealed in his word: For if we teach no other doctrine then that of the
Apostles, their miracles are ours, and confirm our religion. It is for them
that forge new articles of faith, to work new miracles, that they may be
believed.

Now for to find the accomplishment of S. Paul's prophecy in the miracles of
Popery, we are of necessity to rippe up the whole matter from the beginning,
and to see by what miracles the Papacy began first to be advanced.

The Apostles and their Disciples having wrought many excellent and saving
miracles, this virtue did insensibly diminish by little and little. This
notwithstanding in the third and fourth ages there were some miracles done. But
wheresoever God has his Church, the devil will be sure to build him a
chapel not far of: and where he cannot overthrowe the work of God by
co^tradicting it, he will obscure it by counterfeiting the like thereunto. He
did therefore do many miracles by the hands of heretics, as S. Austin does
confess in his 13 tract upon S. John, and in the 16. chapt. of his book of
the unity of the Church, where he says that Donat and Portius did miracles,
of whom and of all those which pray toward the sepulchers of the dead, and
which see visions, he says, that they are either the fictions of lying men, or
prodigies of deceitful spirits.

Satan has for this purpose made use of another more subtle device. For he
has raised up historians, which in rehearsing the true miracles of the good
servants of God, do add some of their own, and mingle the true with the
false. Or else he himself has wrought some absurd and ridiculous miracles,
which he has patcht in among the actions of the Saints, so to make the true
miracles suspected, being thought to come out of the same shop.

S. Martin did do God great service in winning the Gauls from Paganism, and
advancing Christian religion, and was a man full of zeal, and mighty in
works; but Severus Sulpitius, which tells us that he saw him, reports many
things of him which turn to his disgrace, and make the whole history
ridiculous. He says that Martin healed one that was possessed of a devil by
giving him something to purge, and that he made him void the devil out at his
back parts. Tractain de trans^^^ Martini.
He, the same relates how Martin did inioine a company of wild foul not to
catch any more fish, commanding them to fly thence into a desert country. A
certain man coming into one of Martins cells, and finding a fire there sat
him down, tuckt up his clothes about his knees, so to warm him the better,
which Martin (who as then was in another room) knowing by revelation, cried
out from far. Quis nudato inguine nostru^ incestat habitaculum? These tales
which follow here are worse. He says that Martin promised the mercy of Jesus
Christ unto the devil, if he would but repent, as if Jesus Christ had died
for the devils also. The brother of Martin being dead, his soul was presented
before God, and for his sins sent to hell, there to be grievously tormented:
But two Angels, came, and signified to God (for God himself knew not of it)
that this was the man for which Martin prayed, whereupon God commanded that he
should be releast, sent back again into the world; and restored to Martin.
After his death a dog barked incessantly at certain men as they passed by, one
of which turning back, said unto the dog, In the name of Martin I command thee
to be quiet. What was this but to place Martin in the room of Jesus Christ,
and to make use of his power in a matter of no importance? whereby you may see,
that Satan did even then begin to cast his proiects, how he might establish the
worship of Saints in the Church, and make them which had abandoned the false
Gods, change the true Saints into Idols. Now this was about the 400. year of
our Lord.

But these things began daily to grow worse and worse; for two hundred years
after came Gregory the 1. Bishop of Rome, surnamed the Great, for what reason I
know not; who in his dialogues does furnish us with other examples of this
kind. In the 1. book and 4. chap. an Angel geldeth S. Nocte quadam
assistente Angelo Eunuchizavi sevidit.
Equitius in his sleep. In the same place a maid coming into a garden, and
taking a lettice to eat it, crushed the devil between her teeth in the
lettice: and this poor devil (whom belike she swallowed down together with
the lettice (being commanded to go out and chekt by Equitius, excuses
himself, saying. Ego quid feci? sedebam ibi super lactuc^m venit illa and
m^mordit me.
Alas what hurt did I, I was sitting quietly upon the lettice, and she came and
bit me. The fault was in her for not making the sign of the cross when she
gathered the lettice: and it may be the devil would have vanished from out
the leaves, if she had but dipped her lettice in vinegar. In the 19. chapter.
S. Boniface makes a fox, with all gentleness that may be, to bring back a
chicke which he had taken away. And in the 10. chap. a Lady of good fashion is
possessed with a devil because she lay with her husband the day before the
dedication of a certain church. In the first chapter of the 2. book, the
devil breaks S. Bennets bell with a stone, which he did use to ring, when
he would have meat brought unto him. A little after, the same Saint burning
with the fits of love, did (for to correct the outrageous insolency of his
flesh) roll his naked body upon thorns, and nettles, till the blood sprang out
again. In the 20. chap. a Monk holds a candle to S. Bennet all supper time,
as though it had been a sin for him to set it down upon the table. In the
22. chap. the Deacon saying, as the fashion is, Si quis non communicate det
locum.
If there be any one here that does not communicate, let him depart, two maids
being buried in the church, which died without ever receiving the Communion,
rose out of their graves, went out of the church, and returned again after the
communion was ended. In the 14 chap. of the 3. book, S. Eutiche calls a Bear
his brother, giving him a charge to lead his flock to feeding, and to bring
them home still at night. In the 15. chap. some of the clothes of this Saint,
being hanged out, have the virtue to procure rain. In the 4. book and 21.
chap. two Monks that were hanged, do sing most melodiously upon the gibbet
after their deaths. And this fourth book is spent wholly in mentioning of
souls, that say they are in Purgatory, not in a fire under the earth, that the
Pope might draw them out by his Indulgences (for this invention was not yet
thought upon) but in bathes, in the wind, under the leaves of trees, or in the
cold water. And these souls being asked why they suffered these pains,
answered, because they had wronged some Monk or other, or had not given that to
the Church which they had promised. Whereupon Gregory stands amazed at the so
frequent visions of souls, never heard of before. Saying in the 41. chap.
Whence comes it to pass I pray you, that in these latter days we have so many
things revealed concerning the souls of the departed, which lay hid from us
before?

Behold two abuses, even in those days, crept into the Church of Rome, and
both confirmed by miracles, to wit, the Adoration of Saints, and the opinion of
Purgatory; although this were another kind of Purgatory, the^ that, which we
have in the church of Rome now adays. And this was not above 600. years after
Christ.

But in the two next ages following, Satan holding on his old course, did much
advance the mystery of iniquity, having raised up a new heresy, to wit, the
Adoration of images, which was no small help to the exalting of the Papacy.
For in the controversy concerning Prioritie between the Patriarch of
Constantinople, and the Bishop of Rome, the Emperor Phocas deciding it on the
Bishop of Romes side, and a little after the Emperors forces decaying in
Italy, the pope after he had usurped the title of the head of the church,
began to cast about how he might shake of the yoke of the Empire: and the
Bell. lib. ^ Imag cap. 1^ parag Arg^^mentum. E^ adem occas^^one amisit them Leo
^ successor es ius imperi^^ Italiae.
the question concerning images falling fit to his purpose for to withstand the
Emperor, which did persecute the worshippers of images, he made himself Prince
of Rome, and of a great part of Italy, by such means and degrees, as we have
formerly related. Miracles were made serve to this end, which as then were so
frequent, that it was held for a miracle, not to work a miracle. Baronius in
his Annals, in the 870. year parag. 63. names certain witnesses which report
that three miles of from the town of Damas, there was in former times a table
or image of the virgin Mary in painting, the painting whereof came to be flesh
incarnate within the wood, and sent forth a more odoriferous oil then balm.
Luitprandus, and Platina in the life of Sergius the third, reports that when
the body of pope Formosus was carried into S. Peter's church, all the images of
the Saints that stood there did him obeisance. Bellarmine in the 12. chapter.
of his book of images, speaks of an Hermit that was tempted with fornication,
to whom Satan promised that he would tempt him no more, that is to say, that
he would give him the gift of continency, on condition that he should ever
after that adore the image of the virgin Mary. This was a means rather to
incite him on to it afresh. There are images showed at Burgo in Spain, which
are reported to have fallen from heaven, and to be made by S. Luke, and images
of a crucifix the hair and nails of which do grow out new every month.
Caesarius and others recite infinite miracles done by images, which did sweat,
or weep, or speak, or wag the head, and it is certain that (if at leastwise we
may believe these people) the image of the virgin Mary has wrought a thousand
times more miracles, then Jesus Christ himself ever did in his own person.
Which holy virgin they have profanely dishonored, by attributing such miracles
unto her as are scarsely honest. There is an Italian book sufficiently known,
entitled, Miracoli d' ella gloriosa virgin Maria printed at Milan in the
year 1547. which says that a certain Abbess being great with child, the
holy virgin willing to cover her crime, did in her steed present herself
before the Bishop in form of an Abbess, and showed him by an ocular
demonstration that she was not great with child. The same book relates that
an honest woman snatched the virgin Mary's son from between the arms of her
image, saying unto her, Give me my son which is kept prisoner, or I will not
give thee thine, and that the virgin Mary for to have her own son did free
the other woman's son out of prison. Caesarius in his 7. book 35. chap.
reports that the virgin Mary for 12. whole years together, did supply the
place of a certain Nun called Beatrice, whilst she lay in the Stews, till
at last she came back again to take her place, and freed the Virgin from
standing sentinel any longer. And God being enraged against the rebellion of
men, has given to these miracles a powerfulnes of deluding, that so the
Apostles prophecy might be fulfilled.

Now look after what manner Satan went about at first to establish the
worship of Images, the same way did he go to lay the foundation of
transubstantiation, and did also for the authorizing of this, serve his own
turn with a new sort of false miracles. For many faithful servants of God
opposing themselves against this error in the rising thereof, the
foster-fathers of this abuse, began to invent a kind of miracles never heard
of before. A certain Monk reports that he saw Jesus Christ in form of a
child sitting upon the Altar; another says, that Albertus Krantzius in Metrop
lib. 1 cap 9. Wernerius Role uingius de laud Westph cap 7. Sigon. de reg. Ital.
ad annum 1264. Platina in Leone 3. Onuphr. in Platinae Vrbanum 4. Meierus
annal. Flandri. lib. 33.
Wittikind King of the Saxons, entering disguised into a church, and diligently
observing the Christians fashion of receiving the communion, saw them put a
little pretty smiling boy into their mouths. Others report that they have seen
the host make the sign of the Cross: others that they saw Angels which held a
little child upon the altar, and afterward cut him into a thousand small
pieces. Iodocus Coccius Canon of Iuliers does produce 35. such like examples as
these, and yet does not allege the one moyty of them. All these miraculous
apparitions of flesh, and blood, began in the year 785, for before that time
they were never heard of, nor do our adversaries allege any one example of
them: nevertheless to give color to these new fables, by the testimony of
some ancient witness, one (I know what manner of man) Amphylochius by name,
has written the life of S. Basil, many ages after Basil was dead, altogether
different from that which Nazianzen has written of the same subject, where he
says that a Jew saw an infant torn in many pieces between S. Basils hands.
The like fable is related by Simeon the Metaphrast, a new author, in the life
of Arsenius the Hermit. For it shall never be found that any author, as ancient
as Basil, or Arsenius, or those which came long after, did ever speak of
this. The 8. age began first to bring forth these prodigies, and impostures:
Jesus Christ as then beginning to make himself known in the Mass, and to show
himself in his proper shape, being a perfect complete man in heaven, and but
a child upon earth, wholly entire in heaven, but here cut and mangled into
small pieces between the hands of the Priest. Wherefore they do yet keep some
blood and flesh in many churches, for fear least the people suspect that these
were illusions. For Satan even in those days did secretly begin to weaue the
web of the mystery of Transubstantiation: which having confirmed by these
miracles, he got it at last to pass in an article of a council, the Lat^ran
Council I mean, held under Innocent the 3. in the year of our Lord, 1215.
To these apparitions they annexe the testimoines of beasts. There were an hiue
of Bees seen in S, Gervays his monastery in Paris which builte a chapel of
wax in honor of the Host; but above all, the miracle of the Ass that left his
provender to worship the host, seems most ridiculous to the king of Great
Britain: and that with good reason: howsoever Apol. in Regem cap. 9.
Bellarmine in his answer to the king seek to color it with other miracles
mentioned in the Scripture, which, as he says, seem no less absurd to him.
We are therefore now come to that pass, that it is held impiety not to think
that foolish legends forged but of late, must have all one authority to bind
our belief, as the word of God, besides, no miracles of the scripture do pla^t
Christian virtues in brute beasts: for it must needs be (by their reckoning)
that this Ass (going of his own accord to worship the host) had some zeal in
him and knowledge of God, which was not to be seen in the Kine that drew the
Arc, nor in Balaams Ass. The miracles that are done now a days are of no
more worth, and are al reducible to one miracle, which is to drive away devils,
who make as though they were afraid of holy water, and the sign of cross, so
to detain the people still in error: and as thieves are thought to give life
when they do not take it away, so the devils are said to do good when they
cease to hurt. Whereunto they do willingly co^descend, for to make men think
that the Mass or these co^iurations have some virtue in them. The Pharisees
accused Jesus Christ for casting out devils by Beelzebub Prince of the devils,
thinking that Beelzebub did cast out others as being more powerful then they.
But we speak not as the Pharisees: for we say not that these coniurers of
spirits in this age, do cast out devils by any superiority or predominancie
that they have over them, but by collusion, and by the voluntary departing of
the devils themselves. Wherefore they cannot answer us as our Lord did the
Pharisees, that if Satan cast out Satan his kingdom cannot endure, because he
is divided against himself, for in all their exorcismes we presuppose that the
devils are to well agreed. Yea and I say, that if Christ could have done no
other miracle but to heal those which were possessed with devils, the
Pharisees had had some reason to doubt of his power: but he gave sight to such
as were borne blind, raised the dead that lay stinking in their graves,
multiplied the bread, things which the devils cannot do, and which our
adversaries (though never so foole-hardy in imitating) do not yet dare to
counterfeit: for they have been many times taken tardy in less matters, and
punished for such pranckes by judges of the same religion that they are. In the
year 1509 there were four Iacobin Friars executed at Berne, for raising
ulcers, in the feet, in the hands, and in the side of a simple man, of whom
they would have made another S. Frauncis, and given him the marks, as Langii
Chron. Citizense ad annum. 1509.
Langius witnesses in his chronicle, and it is a thing commonly practiced to
this day in Swizerla^d. In the year S^e^dan l* 9
1534 the Cordeliers of Orleans did put a Novice of their profession over the
vault of the church, which with pitiful sighs and great lamentation did
faigne that he was the soul the Provosts wife of Orleans, that died without
giving them any thing, and gave them to understand that she was damned, and
that her body must be dug up again out of the earth. This point of knavery
being detected by the Official, the two principal authors of it, to wit,
Colima^ and Steven of Arras, were sent to Paris, and after judgment past, were
forthwith led back again to Orleans, and there in an open place (where
malefactors use to suffer) were made to confess their imposture. Papon in the
sixth edition of his Reports, 1. title, and 6. Judgment. does relate many
sentences that have past in the high Courts against these false, and abusiue
miracles. The miracles of Martha Brossiere, which was possessed with a devil,
have lately been found to be false, and she condemned in judgment, Mounsieur
Marescot a Physitia^ that was sent for to visit her, has written an express
book of this. Mounsieur Boutiller that famous advocate at Paris has written a
set tract against the fable of Gargoville of Roane, slain by S. Roman, wherein
it is said, that for a requital of this good turn, God has done him this
favor that whosoever does but lift up his coffin (be it that he be a parricide
or have committed incest) is forthwith absolved both from the punishment, and
the guilt of these crimes. Read the miracles of our Lady of Halls in Flaunders,
published by Lipsius, and you shall see that the good man has spent 40 years
in gathering choice flowers of Grammar Latin to throw them down at the feet
of an image, and made use of all his philosophy upon an idle toy: there shall
you see how he does often call the Virgin Deam, and Divam, Pagan-like
substituting femall Gods. S. Ignatius Loyola the father and patron of the
Jesuits had not for a long time done any miracles: but his opening virtue began
of late to show it self, by vnstopping the obstructions of a wench troubled
with the stone and making her to leake. This is the first sign of any
powerful virtue that was in this Saint, and this goodly miracle was newly
printed of late at Liege and at S. Omers, and is proclaimed by the common crier
to be sold at Paris.

To go about here to reckon up a thousand false miracles wherewith the legends
are stuffed, were nothing else but to rake up heaps of dunge. S. Dominicke
heales a wenches thigh, by rubbing it over with the oil of Love, as his Legend
reports. That of S. Frauncis says, that he preached to the Pyes, and
Swallows, and called the^ his sisters: that he gave his hand to a wolf
calling him his brother, and that the wolf gave him his paw. The book
entitled Fasciculus temporum, composed by a religious Carmelite, upon the
year 754, reports of S. Gingolfs wife, that she used to sing with her lower
mouth, which was inflicted upon her for a punishment, because she scoffed at
her husbands miracles. In all this, the greatest miracle is the patience of
God* and the blockishnesse of the people, that are thus led. But it must needs
be that the Apostles prophecy, must be fulfilled; which says, that the
coming of the son of Perdition should be in all power, and signs, and lying
wonders: and that God should send the powerfulness of delusion for a
punishment unto such as would not love his truth, On whom (says the Apostle)
God has sent strong delusions, that they should believe lies.

THE PROPHECY CONtained in the 12. Chapter of the Apocalypse. CHAP. 3.
1 AND there appeared a great wonder in heaven: a woman clothed with the sun,
and the moon was under her feet, and upon her head a crown of 12. stars.

2 And she was with child, and cried travailing in birth, and was pained ready
to be delivered.

3 And there appeared another wonder in heaven: for behold a great red dragon
having 7. heads, and 10. horns, and 7 crowns upon his heads:

4 And his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and cast them to
the earth. And the dragon stood before the woman which was ready to be
delivered, to devour her child, when she had brought it forth.

5 So she brought forth a man child, which should rule all nations with a rod
of iron: and that her child was taken up unto God, and to his throne.

6 And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she has a place prepared of
God, that they should feed her there a thousand, two hundredth, and three score
days.

7 And there was a great battle in heaven, Michael and his Angels fought
against the Dragon, and the Dragon fought and his Angels;

8 But they prevailed not, neither was their place any more found in heaven.

9 And the great Dragon, that old serpent, called the devil and Satan, was
cast out, which deceives all the world; he was even cast into the earth, and
his Angels were cast out with him.

10 Then I heard a loud voice in heaven, saying, Now is salvation, and
strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ: for the
accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God day
and night.

11 But they overcame him by that blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their
testimony, and they loved not their lives unto the death.

12 Therefore rejoice ye heavens, and ye that dwell in them. Woe to the
inhabitants of the earth, and of the sea: for the devil is come down unto you,
which has great wrath knowing that he has but a short time.

13 And when the Dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, he persecuted the
woman, which had brought forth the man child.

14 But to the woman were given two wings of a great Eagle, that she might fly
into the wilderness, into her place where she is nourished for a time, and
times, and half a time, from the presence of the serpent.

15 And the serpent cast out of his mouth water after the woman like a flood,
that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood

16 But the earth help the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and
swallowed up the flood which the Dragon had cast out of his mouth.

17 Then the Dragon was wroth with the woman, and went and made war with the
remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments of God, and have the
testimony of Jesus Christ

18 And I stood on the sea sand.


The Exposition of this Prophecy.
1 A Great sign appeared in heaven, to wit, a woman which was the type of the
Church of Israel. And this Church was illightned with the brightness of the
knoweledge of God and did tread under her feet the mutable instabilitie of
worldly things, which is like to the change of the moon. And was crowned with
a douzen stars, which are the twelve Patriarchs, the fathers of the twelve
tribes of Israel.

2 And of this Church must there a child be borne, to wit, the Messiah, in
expectation of whom she did suffer, and was in anguish, looking for the
manifestation of this Messiah.

3 But behold on the other side the devil like a red dragon, having 7 heads,
and ten horns, and 7 crowns upon his heads.

4 Whose venomous temptations have used to make the third part of those that
are in the visible Church, to fall away, whom he turns aside from heavenly
things to earthly. And this devil did watch with all diligence for the time
when Jesus Christ should be born of the Church of Israel, that he might make
him to perish as soon as ever he was borne, having raised up a persecution
against him in his cradle, then when Herod would have put him to death.

5 Now of this Church of Israel was a man-child borne, to wit, Jesus Christ,
which must rule all the world with a strong and mighty scepter. And this Jesus
was lifted up from earth to heaven by his ascension.

6 And after the ascensio^ of Jesus Christ Satan having raised up a persecution
against the Jews, so to enwrap the Christian Jewish Church in the same ruin,
this Church did retire aside into a place called Pella, where she lay hid 1260.
days, which are three years and a half.

7 Now after this ascension, there was a great battle fought in heaven, Jesus
Christ and his Angels fighting against the Prince of the devils, and the wicked
spirits that took his part.

8 But Satan was overcome, and cast out of heaven.

9 So was this old serpent, called the devil and satan (which thought to have
seduced all men) put to flight; And was thrown down from heaven to earth, and
all wicked spirits together with him.

10 Then I heard a great voice in heaven, saying; Now by the ascension of Jesus
Christ (which has taken possession of the kingdom of God, being sat at his
right hand) is salvation purchased unto the Church, and the mighty kingdom of
our God is established, and the power of his Christ. For the devil which did
accuse the faithful incessantly before God, is cast out of heaven, and put by
from his trade of accusation.

11 But in virtue of the death of Jesus Christ, which by his death has subdued
him that had the power over death, to wit, the devil, they have overcome him,
being armed with the word of the Gospel, to which they have given testimony
by their sufferings, and by their preaching, having willingly exposed their
lives to the death, for the justifying of their faith in Jesus Christ.

12 Wherefore rejoice O ye Saints which dwell in heaven, but tremble ye
inhabitants of the earth, which dwell in the continent, and in the Islands; for
the devil is come down unto you, for to vvreake his anger upon you, knowing
that he shall ere long be cast into the bottomless pit, and that all his
power to do hurt, shall shortly be taken away from him.

13 When the devil therefore savv that he was casseered of his kingdom, and
that he was thrown out of heaven, he did set himself to persecute the
Church of which Jesus Christ was borne, that is, the Church of the faithful
Jews, amongst whom were the Apostles, and Disciples of Jesus.

14 But God showed this Church a way to escape the persecution which the
devil had raised, by flying away, and hiding herself in the above named town
of Pella, on this side Jordan, where God did nourish and defend her, for a
year, two years, and a half an year; that is, for three years and a half.

15 This persecution then of the Christian Church, being no ways advantageous
to Satan, he moved Pagan and heathen people to rise up against the Church of
the Apostles, and their Disciples, so to oppress them and work their
overthrow.

16 But these people stirred up by Satan were swallowed up in the bottomless
pit, and were cast down into hell.

17 Satan therefore being enraged that he could not work the overthrowe of
the Christian Jewish Church, labored by all means to persecute the Churches of
the Gentiles, which the Church of the Jews had planted and begotten, which
Churches of the Gentiles do keep the Commandments of God, and lay up the
doctrine of the Gospel in their hearts.

18 And in this vision that I saw I was not transported out of my body, but,
being only ravished in spirit, I remained on the sea shore.

The clearing of this prophecy, together with the proof of this exposition.
ALbeit this chapter make no mention of the bishop of Rome, yet I must of
necessity expound it, because it serves for the unfolding of the chapters
following, and because they depend upon this. Now the exposition which I give
of it is so clear and natural, that it may be thought a labor spent in vain
to go about to prove it.

By this woman I understand the church of Israel, after Abraham and the
patriarchs, which were the fathers of the 12 tribes of Israel, till the
Jewish church began to be mixed together with that of the Gentiles, which came
to pass presently upon the time of the Apostles. This is the reason, that
(although the church of the Jews before the preaching of the gospel, and
before the ascension of Jesus Christ be the self same Church with that of the
faithful Jews, which from the Apostles time did believe in Jesus Christ) yet
so it is, that for the more perspicuities sake I call the church of the Jews
after the ascension of our Savior Jesus Christ the Iewish-Christian church,
for to distinguish it from the Jews that were the enemies of the gospel: and
yet notwithstanding it is still the Church of Israel.

There be 2 reasons that enforce me not to understand the church in general by
this woman, but only the church of Israel. The first is because Jesus Christ
is borne of the church here mentioned. For least any man should understand this
of a metaphorical birth, the holy Ghost does there make express mention of a
birth that goes before his ascension: which cannot agree to regeneration,
whereby Christ is formed a new in us. The second reason is because in the 17.
verse this church is manifestly distinguished from that of the Ge^tils; as the
mother from the daughter. Besides the whole course of the chapter shows us
that this is the meaning.

In the third verse the devil is represented in the form of a beast having 7.
heads and ten horns, which is the form under which the Roman Empire is
represented in the 7. of Daniell: and in the 1. verse of the chapter which we
come next to handle; where we will examine the reason why the Empire is
described in this manner. And the devil and the Empire are both represented
under the same form, because the devil did as then make use of this mighty
Empire for to persecute the church.

In the 4. verse their revolting, which held some place in the Church, is
compared to the falling of stars thrown down from heaven upon earth. For as
the church is often called the kingdom of heaven, so by the same reason they
which are placed therein are compared to stars: whose apostacy is as the
falling of one from heaven to earth, both because they are shut out of heaven,
as also because they deiect and debase their desires and affections from
heavenly to earthly things. Which will also serve us to expound the 10. verse
of the 8. chapter of this book, where it is said that a great star fell from
heaven, which did infect the third part of the waters of the earth, the
meaning whereof is nothing else, but that a great man of note in the Church
should fall from the faith, and by his example corrupt many others.

That which is said in the fifth verse, that the child (which is the Messiah)
shall govern all nations with a scepter of iron, is taken out of the 2.
Psalm, ver. 9. Thou shall crush them with a scepter of iron, that is to say,
thou shall keep them under with a mighty scepter, and with a powerful
dominion: in which Psalm the extent of the absolute Empire of Christ Jesus is
described unto us.

The flight and retiring of the Jewish church, and the three years and an
half wherein she lay hid, as it is in the 6. and 14. verses, are proved to be
true by history. Eusebius in the 2. book of his history, and 5. chapter says;
The people of the church of Jerusalem were before the war began by an oracle
revealed to some of the chief amongst them, commanded to depart out of that
city, and to dwell in a town on this side Iordano called Pella, whether as
many as believed in Jesus Christ fled having left Jerusalem. Now this war
lasted 3. years and a half, as we may gather out of Dion, and Josephus, from
the third book of his Judicial history to the 6. In the 67. year of our
Lord, in the month of April, 4. months after the death of Nero, Vespasian
sent at first by Nero began to lay his siedge to Gadara, and Iotapata, and to
subdue Galilee. In the 70. year of our Lord on the 8. of December Titus the
son of Vespasian took Jerusalem, and razed it to the ground, afterward
departed thence to triumph at Rome, leaving some few forces to finish that
which he had left undone, which was effected with little or no resistance.

The Prince of the Angels Michaell which is spoken of in the 7. verse, is Jesus
Christ our Lord. For this is he which is the head of the Angels; this is Heb.
2.14. Col 2.15. Ps. 68.19. Ephesians. 4.8.
he which has overcome the devil; this is he to whom alone the name of
Michael agrees, which signifies, Who is as God? for he has thought it no
robbery to be equal to God his father. Phil. 2.6.

Now the battle that was fought in heaven must be understood to have been
fought after the death or ascension of our Lord, and not after the retiring
aside of the Jews into Pella, although there be mention made of this before
the fighting of the battle in heaven: for S. John having first related what
befell the church upon earth, mounts up again to the things that were done in
heaven: and indeed in the 14. this very flight of the church is set after the
fighting of the battle in heaven: which I do not think was so in effect,
but that hereby God did in a vision represent to S. John, that Satan was cast
out of heaven by Jesus Christ.

To this purpose we are to note that in the 1. of Job, the 6. verse, it is
said, that the children of God (which are the Angels) came and stood before the
Lord, and that Satan also thrust in amongst them. And in the 22. chapt. of the
1. of Kings 21. verse, it is said, that a wicked spirit came and stood before
the Lord, offering his service to seduce the Prophets, and to be a lying spirit
in their mouths. By which places it appears, that Satan in that time had as
yet free access into heaven, and that he was found amongst the Angels. But in
the 10. chap. of S. Luke, and 18. verse, Jesus speaks thus, I saw Satan like
lightning fall down from heaven. And in this 12. chapter of the Apocalypse,
Satan is described unto us falling from heaven to earth presently after the
ascensio^ of Jesus Christ. By which passages of scripture it seems that the
ascension of our Lord did wholly exclude Satan out of heaven, and barred him al
entrance there again for ever after that time, tumbling him down into this
lower region. Whereupon S. Paul also in the 2. chapt. to the Ephesians, calls
the wicked spirits, the powers that rule in the air, and the prince of the
devils, the Prince of the powers that rule in the air. Which region of the
air is in infinite places of holy writ called by the name of heaven: in which
sense I am persuaded that must be understood which the same Apostle speaks
in the 6. chap. of the same epistle, where he says, that the spiritual
wickednesses are in the high, or heavenly places.

Now that Satan being in heaven did accuse and calumniate the faithful to God,
it appears by the example of Job, whom he accused to God, as if al his zeal
and innocence had been mercenary, and led by profit. Wherefore also he is
called the devil, that is to say, a slanderer.

The waters which Satan did power out after the church for to hurt her, are the
people, and nations. The meaning whereof would have been hard for us to have
found out, if the holy Ghost himself had not expounded it in the 15. verse of
the 17. chap. The waters which thou saw, are people, and multitudes, and
nations.

THE PROPHECY CONtained in the 13. Chapter of the Apocalypse. CHAP. 4.
1 And I saw a beast rising out of the sea having seven heads and ten horns,
and upon his horns were ten crowns, and upon his head the name of blasphemy.

2 And the beast which I saw was like a Leopard, and his feet like a bears,
and his mouth as the mouth of a Lion: and the dragon gave him his power and his
throne and great authority.

3 And I saw one of his heads as it were wounded to death, but his deadly wound
was healed, and all the world wondered and followed the beast.

4 And they worshipped the dragon, which gave power unto the beast, and they
worshipped the beast, saying, who is he like unto the beast? who is able to
war with him?

5 And there was given unto him a mouth, that spoke great things and
blasphemies, and power was given unto him to do 42. months.

6 And he opened his mouth unto blasphemy against God to blaspheme his name,
and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven.

7 And it was given to him to make war with the Saints, and to overcome them,
and power was given him over every kindred, and tongue, and nation.

8 Therefore all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names are not
written in the book of life of (...), which was slain from the beginning of
the world.

9 If any man have an ear let him hear.

10 If any man lead into captivity, he shall go into captivity: If any man
kill with a sword, he must be killed by a sword: here is the patience, and the
faith of the Saints.

11 And I beheld another beast coming up out of the earth, which had two horns
like the Lamb, but he spoke like the Dragon.

12 And he did all that the first beast could do before him, and he caused the
earth and them which dwell therein, to worship the first beast, whose deadly
wound was healed.

13 And he did great wonders, so that he made fire to come down from heaven on
the earth, in the sight of men.

14 And he deceived them that dwell on the earth by the signs which were
permitted him to do in the sight of the beast, saying to them that dwell on the
earth, that they should make the image of the beast, which had the wound with a
sword, and did live.

15 And it was permitted unto him to give a spirit unto the image of the
beast, so that the image of the beast should speak, and should cause that as
many as would not worship the image of the beast, should be killed.

16 And he made all both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to
receive a mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads.

17 And that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the mark, or the name
of the beast, or the number of his name.

18 Here is wisdom. Let him that has wit, count the number of the beast: for
it is the number of a man, and his number is six hundredth threescore and six.


The exposition of this Prophecy.
1 Then I saw the Roman Empire to raise it self up from amongst the people and
nations, having its seat in the town which has 7. hills, and which must be
governed with 7. kinds of principal governments, to wit, by kings, by Consuls,
by military Tribunes, by Decemvirs, by Dictatours, by Emperors, and last of
all by Popes. Which Empire is composed of 10. principal parts, which are so
many kingdoms. And this city seated upon 7. hills bore a wicked, and
blasphemous name, to wit, Rome the Everlasting.

2 And this Empire looked like a Leopard, by reason of the speedy atchieuements
of its conquests. And held fast the substance of the people as a bear, which
keeps that which he has gotten under his paws, and devoured the nations as a
Lion deuoureth his pray. And the devil (which is the Ioh. 16.11.
Prince of this world, and which Luke 4.6.
takes upon him to dispose of kingdoms at his pleasure, gave him his power and
rule, and great glory.

3 And it came pass that one of these governments, to wit the 6, which is that
of the Emperors, was overthrown, then when (the Lombards having chased the
Lieutenants of the Empire out of Italy) Rome did cease to be under subjection
to the Emperors; wherefore to say truth, the Empire did even at that time
leave to be the Roman Empire. But not long after this mortal blow by which
the Empire of Rome was laid on the ground, this monarchy began to grow up
afresh, and to reviue again by the Roman Hierarchy, which did reerect a new
Monarchy at Rome, and raise up the Empire that was fallen: And all the people
submitted themselves under the government of this Romish church,

4. And did serve Idols; which who so serve, do serve the devil, the author
and aduancer of this Papal Hierarchy, and did attribute that unto this
Hierarchy which did appertain unto God, saying who is there that is like unto
this Empire, and who is able to resist it?

5 And God has suffered this Empire to take proud and blasphemous titles, 1.
Cor. 10.^^
and it must endure 1260. years.

6 And this papal Hierarchy does set it self to belch forth horrible
blasphemies against God, and to wrong his name and his Church, and his Saints.

7 Yea God has suffered it to persecute the faithful, and to overcome them,
and power was given unto it over infinite people, and tongues, and nations.

8 In so much that all men shall fall down to worship it, whose names are not
found in the book of life of Jesus Christ which died for us, written before
the fou^dations of the world were laid.

9 If any man have an understanding to conceive this, let him conceive it.

10 For they which persecute, shall be dealt with after the same manner*
whosoever leads the faithful into captivity, shall himself at length be
made a captive; whosoever slays them shall be slain. Herein appears the
faith and patience of the Saints.

11 I saw also a Monarch of another name and fashion then the former Roman
Emperors, to wit, the Pope, which wore a miter with two horns upon his head,
and which seemed in outward show to profess Christ, and his doctrine, but whose
doctrine indeed was diabolical.

12 And he took all the power of the Roman Empire upon him at Rome being the
seat of the Empire: and exhorted all people to submit themselves to this Roman
Empire, which being destroyed by the Lombards in Italy, was brought to life
again, and reestablished by the Papacy.

13 And this Pope wrought miracles; insomuch that he sent forth the
thunderbolts and lightnings of his excommunications against Kings and their
people: and caused S. Anthonies fire to come down from heaven, and made it to
thunder and lighten by a miracle.

14 And the people were seduced by the miracles which God gave him power to
effect, for to establish this Roman Papal (...), commanding the people to make
up the image of the ancient Roman Empire again; that is to say, to serve the
Papal Empire with the same manner of obedience as they did the old Roman
Empire, which being demolished was built up again by the Papacy.

15 And God did suffer him to give force and strength to this Papal Empire,
which did resemble the ancient Empire, for the spiritual power that it did
usurp gave life and strength to its temporal power. Which Papal Empire being
nothing but an imaginary Empire, and which consists only in opinion,
nevertheless speaks proudly, and makes such to be massacred, and burnt, as do
refuse to submit themselves to this imaginary Empire.

16 And he made all, both small and great, rich and poor, bond and free, to
give him their hands, and take an oath to be faithful unto him, and to be
marked by their actions. And their foreheads were marked with the mark of
Confirmation, and they made profession of his religion, which profession of
religion is often in the holy scripture, called by the name of a mark in the
forehead.

17 And he took order that no man might traffic nor sell, nor buy, nor
exchange benefices: nor be suffered to purchase an Archbishops Pall, nor have
a License, nor any part in the Church goods, no nor yet buy an estate, if he
had not the name, and profession of a Papist: and were not of the number of
those which are marked with the figures or numbers of the letters of his name.

18 In which number they which think themselves the wisest may find some thing
worth their search. Whosoever has understanding let him diligently calculate
the sum, to which these greek ciphers or numbers of the pope of Rome do
amount, for it is an usual number amongst men, and therefore easy to be
understood. And this number to which the greek letters of his name do amou^t,
is six hundredth sixty six. For this word (Latin) (which is the ordinary name,
by which the Greek church does call those of the Roman church and their head)
being written in Greek and after calculated, makes up just 666. Which number
also by an admirable occurrence, does admonish you that 666. years after the
revealing of this Prophecy, this 2. beast, to wit, the Pope shall begin to
heal the wound of the ancient Empire, and place the Roman Empire again in its
former seat.

The proof of this exposition.
BEfore we go about to prove this exposition, we are to note five things.

1 That all the ancient, and our adversaries themselves do understand the
Roman Empire by the first beast, and Antichrist by the second.

2 That the holy Ghost in this prophecy does not speak according to custom,
but according to the truth; and therefore holds him to be the Roman Emperor
which reigns at Rome, and not him which does not rule there, howbeit he bear
the title thereof.

3 That in the year of our Lord 752. the Lieutenancie of the Empire being
destroyed by Aistulphus king of the Lombards, the Emperor of Constantinople
did utterly loose all his dominion over Italy, and the city of Rome, so that
he could never after recover it: whence it follows that the Emperor of
Constantinople, did at that time cease to be the Roman Emperor.

4 That the holy Ghost in this Prophecy makes the Hierarchicall Roman Empire,
to be a continuation of the Roman Empire, as which did succeed in the rome, and
vsurp the rights thereof, and makes but one Empire of them both, having changed
the head, that is to say, the form of government.

5 That the holy Ghost in this prophecy puts a difference between the Roman
Hierarchy and the Pope. Seeing that the Pope is but one person at once: but
the Hierarchy is the whole body of the Prelates and Clergy, that do uphold
his authority.

This being premised for the better opening of the matter in hand, we will now
come to prove, and demonstrate the several parts thereof.

The first part of this Prophecy.
1. THen I saw a beast rising out of the sea, having seven heads and ten
horns, and upon his horns were ten Crowns, and upon his head the name of
blasphemy.

The Exposition of this Prophecy.
1 THen I saw the Roman Empire to raise it self up from amongst the people and
nations, having its seat in the town which has 7 hills, and which must be
governed with 7 kinds of maine governements, to wit, by kings, by Consuls, by
military Tribunes, by Decemvirs, by Dictatours, by Emperors, and last of all
by Popes. Which Empire is composed of 10. principal parts, which are so many
kingdoms. And this city seated upon 7. hills bore a wicked and blasphemous
name to wit, Rome the Everlasting.

The proof of this Exposition.
By the sea, the people and nations are understood; according to the exposition
of the Angel in the 17. chap. and 15. verse of this book. The waters which
thou saw, are people, and multitudes, and nations. A fashion of speech used
by Daniell, in the 7. chap. and 3. verse; Where in steed of saying that he saw
4 great Empires rise up from amongst the nations, he says that 4 great beasts
did rise up out of the sea. So speaks Esaias in his 8. chap. and 7. verse; and
David in the Psalms, 46. verse 4. and 65. verse. 8.

That by the 7. heads, 7. hills are understood, upon which the city of Rome was
situate, the Angel witnesses in the 17. chap. of this book, and 9. verse.
The seven heads are seave^ mountains whereon the woman sits. Afterward he
adds in the 18. verse, That woman which thou saw is the great city which
reigns over the kings of the earth. This cannot be understood of any other
city but of Rome, which in the time of S. John reigned over realms, and was
the seat of the Empire, and there was no other city at that time which had
seven hills, wherefore also it is called in greek (...), Septicollis. And there
was a solemn feast, called Septimontium, in honor of the town, as Varro lib.
5 Dies Septimentium no^inatu^ ab ^is 7. moati^^^ in queis ^rbs sita est
Varro witnesses in his 5. book of the Latin tongue. And Varro lib. 5 Dies
Septimentium no^inatu^ ab ^is 7. moati^^^ in queis ^rbs sita est
Martial says that he could see the 7. hills of Rome from his house: and
Propertius in the 10. elegy of his 3. book,

Septe vrbs alta iugis toti quae prasidetorbi. Also our adversaries themselves
do not deny but that this city whereof S. John speaks is Rome: but they
would have it to be heathnish Rome. We will show in the 17. chapt. that S. John
did speak of Rome also after Paganism was abolished: but in this chapt. it is
sufficient for us that by the 7. heads the 7. hills of Rome are understood,
taken in that sense as our adversaries would have it.

By these 7. hills we do understand 7. diverse successiue governments, which have
borne sovereign rule over the city of Rome: to wit, the Kings, who^ the
Consuls succeeded, whose form of government was interrupted 3 several times
by the Military Tribunes which were endued with consular authority. Afterward
by the Decemvirs; and by the Dictatous, at diverse times, but most especially
under the Dictatorship of Sylla, and Julius Caesar. After whom Octavius
Augustus established the Monarchical state of Emperors, whose government
over Rome and Italy being interrupted by the Herules and Goths, nevertheless
they made a shift a little after to recover it again: until the Lombards at
last having destroyed the Empire in Italy, opened a way unto the Pope to make
himself Lord of Rome, and to build up the Roman Monarchy to that height as
we see it is come to at this day. And this exposition is not of our own
inuenting, but grounded upon the 17. of the Revelation the 10. verse, where he
says that the 7. heads are 7. kings (so doth-he call all sovereign power)
five of which were fallen, and the 6. was, and the 7. was not yet come. There
is nothing so clear and evident. For at the time when S. John had this
Revelation the 5. first of these 7. sovereign gouernements were abolished, to
wit, the kings, the Consuls, the Military Tribunes, the Decemvirs, and the
Dictatours, the sixth did flourish, to wit, the Emperors, and the 7. to wit,
the Popes were not as yet come. I am not ignorant that even then there were
Consuls still remaining, and Military Tribunes, but they had no sovereignty.
The Consulship was a place more of dignity, then any authority, and served for
nothing else but to distinguish the years in their Fasti. And the Military
Tribunes were but the Captains of one Legion, which are at this day called the
Colonels of a band. It is not therefore an interpretation of our own
invention, when we say that these 7 heads do signify 7. several forms of
sovereign government ruling Rome one after an other, and not all at the same
time: seeing that S. John says that 5. of these 7. heads were fallen, that one
was, and that the 7. was not as yet come. This doubtless is an admirable
exposition, and was suggested to his Majesty of England by the spirit of God.

S. John does add further, that this beast which is the Roman Empire had 10.
diademes, or crowns; the meaning is plain: we use to say that our King,
besides the crown of France has also the crown of Navarre: and that the
kings of England and Spain, are kings of more crowns the^ one, that is to say
of more Realms or Provinces; The like is here to be understood. The 10.
crowns of the Roman Empire are 10. great Provinces and principal parts,
whereof the Empire did as then consist; Italy, Spain, the Gauls, Germany,
Hungary and Bulgarie, Greece, Natolia or Asia minor, Syria and Assyria, Egypt,
and Affricke. The Isles are dependances of the next contine^t. And under every
one of these great parts are comprehended the next small provinces which were
kept in subjection by the same armies: as Dacia and Moldavia by the Legions
appointed for Hungary. If there were any other Provinces, as Armenia, and
Arabia, they were never held but weakly, and in part, and were often lost, and
they are reckoned for dependences of Asia minor, and of Syria.

And although the Roman Emperor be here compared to a beast, yet this does
not deny but that there were some good Roman Emperors: and we may not think it
strange that the holy Ghost does represent this Empire unto us by a Beast,
which was not only governed by Neroes, Domitians, and Heliogabales: but by
Theodosies also, and Valentinians, Christian and religious Princes. For Empires
are called beasts in the Prophecy of Daniel, and in the Apocalypse, because of
the manner by which they did first rise and increase, to wit, by violence and
cruelty. For no man can deny that the Romans at first were nothing else but
thieves, and common robbers, which heretofore having nothing but only one
walled town, had no right over Italy less yet over Greece, over the Gauls,
over Spain, Afric, or Asia; but it is possible enough to govern that with
order and equity, which was first laid hold on by injustice.

It remains that we see what these names of blasphemy are, which this city and
Empire of Rome did bear. S. Hierome in the 11. question to Algasia, expounds
this place thus. There is (says S. John in the Revelation,) a name of
blasphemy written in the forehead of the queen clad in skarlet, and this name
is, Rome The Everlasting. The same city is likewise called Dea, Goddess, And
so does Julius Frontinus call her in his book of water works. The queen and
Empress of the world, which is the Goddess of the earth, and all the nations.
And Martial speaks after the same manner, in the 8. Epigram of his 12 book.
Terrarum Dea gentiumque Roma
Cui par est nihil and nihil secundum.
Queen of the earth, Goddess of this worlds round,
Whose like or second may no where be found.
The Emperors also were not without Virg. Ecl. 1. O Melibae^ Deus. and paulo
post, Bissenos cui nostra dies altaria fumant. Martial. Epig. 8. l. 5 Edictum
domini deique nostri. Horat. Epist. 1. l. 2. Praesenti tibi maturos largimur
honores, Iurandasque tuum per nomen ponimus aras Codicis lib. 1. tit. 2. de
sacrosanctia Ecclesiis, Capitationis modum beneficio nostri nominis sublevandum*
blasphemous titles. For they were called Gods, not only after their death, but
whilst they were living too: There were altars built in honor of them, They had
sacrifice offered unto them; The common fashion of swearing was to swear by
the Genius of the Emperor, their statues were places of refuge for offenders,
as for example, to the servants of Julius Sabinus, of whom for this fact there
is mention made in the 8. chapt. of the 1. book of Justinians Institutioos.
There offenders might rest more secure then in a Temple, as Philostratus says
in the life of Apollonius; and Tertullian in his Apologeticke oration against
the heathen affirms that it was less danger, for a man to swear falsely by
Jupiter, then to periute himself by the name of the Prince. And Pliny the
younger in the 97. Epistle of his 10. book says, that he made al such, as
renounced christianity, to kneel down before the image of the Empeorur, and
to offer incense and wine unto him for sacrifice. Which impiety being
abolished by the Christian Emperors, yet nevertheless (that this prophecy
might be fulfilled, there were still some names of blasphemy abiding, for
retaining of which they cannot be excused. In the year of our Lord 314.
Petronius Arrianus, and Julian being commanded to look to the safety of many
bishops that were returning into Affricke, and to defraie the charges of their
journey, writ thus to Domitius Celsus the Emperors Lieutenant in Affricke,
Many bishops of Affricke are come to the country of the Gauls by the heavenly
commandment of our Lord Constantine. And a little after; Following the
commandment of the Eternity of that thrice gracious Prince, as Baronius does
relate it upon the 314. year of our Lord. The self same title is given by
Symmachus to Valentinian, Theodosius, and Arcadius in the 54 Epistle of the
tenth book. Multa victoriae debet Aeternitas vestra, and adhuc plura debebit.
In the second Apology of Athanasius, there is an Epistle of Colluthas, wherein
he says, that the Godhead of Augustus had taken order for a Church to be
built in the village of Secontaururus with all speed possible, and commands
them to fall about it as soon as ever they should receive the Divine letters
patent. Ausonius speaks thus to the Emperor Theodosius in the beginning of
his Poems. Nil dubites authore bono, mortalia quaerunt
Consilium, certus iussa capesse Dei.
and a little after. Non tutum renuisse Deo. According to this manner of
speaking did the Emperors use to call their Institutions, Divine Institutions,
and their Edicts, the Edicts of God. In the 1. book of Iustitinians Code, and
2. title, the Constitutions of the Emperors are called heavenly Oracles, and
divine Sanctions; that is to say the word of God.

The second part of this Prophecy.
2 ANd the beast which I saw was like a Leopard, and his feet like a bears;
and his mouth as the mouth of a Lion; and the Dragon gave him his power, and
his throne, and great authority.

The Explication.
2 AND this Empire looked like a Leopard, by reason of the speedy atchieuements
of its Conquests. And held fast the substance of the people as a Bear, which
keeps that which he has gotten under his paws, and devoured the nations as a
Lion devoureth his pray. And the devil (which is the Ioh 16.11.
Prince of this world) and which Luke 4.6.
takes upon him to dispose of kingdoms at his pleasure, gave him his power,
and rule, and great (...).

The proof of this Exposition.
THis interpretation needs not much proof; every man knows the speedy
atchieuements of the Romans conquests, especially after the 2 Punick war. Then
(as Florus says) the conquest of Macedon followed that of Afric, then, that
of Greece, and of Syria, and of all the rest in a huddle, carried away by the
irresistable tide, and rushing torrent of Fortune. It is said of Pompey that he
ouerran the world by his conquests in less time, then one could have run it
over a foot. And Caesar in the war against Pharnaces does boast, that he no
sooner came and saw him, but he over came him. Whosoever shall but consider the
exploits of this Empire, will think that more then twice the time was employed
about the performance of them.

As for the shedding of blood, Plutarch in the life of Caesar reports, that
in the conquest but of the Gauls only which was 10 years a working, there were
a millio^ of men slain. And Josephus tells us that in the siege of Jerusalem
undertaken by Titus and Vespasian there died 11000000 men: and yet
nevertheless these Princes have been noted for examples of clemency. What
might Marius and Sylla those bloody minded men do? and how much blood may we
think, was shed in all the rest of Europe, Asia, and Africa? The Amphitheater
where the people were entertained to pass away the time, where murder was a
common sport, where men went to see Lions and Tigers tear men asunder, so to
solace themselves, what else was this but a discipline of cruelty, and a means
to accustom the people to murder, and to drink in blood at their eyes by way
of recreation?

As for the wealth of this Empire, it is an incredible thing: the riches of our
Kings are but poverty being compared to these. Some of the citizens that were
enfranchised by the Emperors, have not yielded to kings in this respect, a
great many examples whereof are found noted by Lipsius in his last chap. and 2.
book of the greatness of the Roman Empire. Lucullus and Apicius did spend
more at one supper, then a Prince does in a month. Caligula in one year did
consume all that which the covetousness of Tiberius had scraped together,
which did amount to six hundredth and fifty millions, and 4 hundredth fifty
four thousand crowns, as it is summed up by Hadrianus Iunius.

These great riches came upon them by the robbing and pilling of the Provinces
of the Empire, whereby they did suck away all their substance from the
Provincials, and spoiled the^ of their goods as much in time of peace, as of
war. -- Referebant navibus altis
Occulta spolia, and plures ex pace triumphos.
Read, to be informed in this, the life of Antonie in Plutarch. He levied two
hundredth thousand talents out of Asia yearly, every talent being worth 6
hundredth crowns. But this being not enough to content his greedy mind, he
doubled the sum. Whereupon the people seeing themselves not able to hold out,
sent Deputies unto him, one amongst which told him. If thou will raise a double
yearly Tax upon us, give us also double harvests, two summers and two autumes
in one year. Hence arose the great hatred against Publicans, which is often
mentioned in the scripture, and witnessed by Cicero in the first Epistle to his
brother Quintus.

Now albeit some of the Romans did excel in moral virtues, and that we take
many examples of justice, continency, clemency, and sobriety from them,
especially before the time that Attalus bequeathed his mooueables and treasures
to the people of Rome, yet so it is that all these did nothing but assist
injustice, and their upright dealing was like that of thieves, which when they
have robbed a man will go aad divide the pray equally. For what were the
Romans, but common robbers, and forragers of all habitable countries? If they
did sometimes manage that with order, or were liberal of that which they did
take from others wrongfully, or if out of a theeuish mercy, they did suffer
them to live whom they might have killed, I say that these virtues are no
virtues; since they serve to uphold vices, and are employed either to color
injustice, or to establish tyranny.

Finally, no man may think it strange that the holy Ghost says, that the
Devil gave this power to the Roman Empire. For howsoever Monarchies be of God,
and the Roman Empire was established by his providence, for secret reasons
reserved to himself, yet it was not he that did urge on the Roman to invade
others countries, but Satan, to whom also they have attributed all the glory
of their victories, as Symmachus says in his 54. Epist. where he brings in the
city of Rome speaking after this manner in favor of the heathenish
superstition. This religious service has brought the world under my laws:
these sacrifices have driven Hannibal from my walls, and forced the Gauls to
remove their siege from the Capitol. Whenever a Captain had slain another
Captain of the adverse army with his own hands, he hung up his armor to
Jupiter Feretius. Because the army of the Romans as they were flying away did
take courage again and turn back upon their enemies, therefore did Romulus
erect a temple to Jupiter Stator. In orat. de aruspice resp.
Cicero reports that the Captains of an host after a conquest obtained did
use to go to Pessinunte, there to perform their vows to the mother of the
Gods. And we never read that they undertook any business of moment without
consulting their Augurs and Soothsayers, and without observing the flying, the
eating, the singing, the going of birds. To conclude, Plutarch in a set tract
of his brings in the Fortune of the Romans contesting with their virtue,
wherein they dispute whether of the two did confer more to the founding of
this Empire, so that on whether of the^ it light, God shall be sure to go
without his honor.

The third part of this prophecy.
3 And I saw one of his heads as it were wounded to death, but his deadly wound
was healed, and all the world wondered and followed the beast.

The Explication.
3 And it came to pass that one of these governments, to wit, the sixth, which
is that of the Emperors, was overthrown, then, when the Lombards having
chased the Lieuetenants of the Empire out of Italy, Rome did cease to be under
subjection to the Emperors. Wherefore (to say truth) the Empire did eve^ at
that time leave to be the Roman Empire: But not long after that mortal blow by
which the Empire of Rome was laid on the ground, this Monarchy began to grow
up a fresh, and to reviue again by the Roman Hierarchy, which did reerect a
new monarchy at Rome, and raise up the Empire that was fallen, and all the
people submitted themselves under the government of this Romish Church.

The Proof.
THere is nothing more agreeable to the event then this interpretation. In the
year 752. Aistulphus king of the Lombards destroyed the Exarchat of Ravenna,
and put down the Exarchs, which 200. whole years after Narses had been the
Emperors Lieutenants in Italy. This is the deadly wound which the beasts did
receive. Now because Rome was a part of the Exarchat, Aistulphus did pretend
that being Lord of the Exarchat, he was also to be Lord over Rome, and began to
wast the territories of the Duchy of Rome. Stephen the second was then Pope,
who in this extremity sought to his sovereign Lord the Emperor for succor,
to wit, to the Roman Emperor, but being not able to get any aid from him,
because he was weak, and elsewhere occupied, the foresaid Pope had recourse
to Pepin king of France, which not long before had got to be king by deposing
Childericke his Master and lawful Soveraihne. At his request Pepin came down
into Italy in the year of our Lord.754. And having compelled Aistulphus to
receive conditions of peace, returned into France. But in the year following
Aistulphus broke the agreement, and did forage the Roman territory again:
This drew Pepin the second time into Italy, where having overcome Aistulphus
he took the Exarchat from him, and bestowed it on the bishop of Rome, and made
him Lord over Rome, and a great part of Italy, 666. years after the time that
the Apocalypse was revealed to Saint John. So the Popes became Princes by the
inconsiderat liberality of our kings, and began even then, to show their good
wills to cut of Monarchs, to imitate their actions, and to encroach upon the
rightes of the Roman Empire. Hereby the Church of Rome became to be Queen
over other Churches, and in her Prelates and Hierarchicall orders did reerect
the Empire that was fallen: tyrannising over the goods and consciences of men,
using her temporal riches as a means to augment her spiritual power, and to
establish a Monarchy at Rome over the Church, bearing rule over the
Temporaltie, and Spiritualty in Christian kingdoms; For how be it the
successors of Charlemaine were and are as yet styled the kings of the Romans,
and that the Othons had a Regent at Rome, and handled the Popes as their
subjects, yet this did not last long: and the Pope found a means so to free
himself from being under their dominion, that at length he made them to be
his vassals and bondmen, and to receive their crown by his benefit, and under
his permissio^, till it should please his Holiness to take it from them, and
bestow it on whom he thought good: to to kiss his feet, to lay down great
sums of gold at his feet for tribute; and even then when the German Emperors
did curb the Popes, yet they did still acknowledge themselves subject to the
Church of Rome. This once obtained it is no marvel if he name himself a King
and Monarch, and call his Bishopric an Empire, and so have reestablished the
Roman Empire in its former seat, as Austin Steuchus the Popes library keeper
says, Page 3.
in his first book of Constantines donation, in such terms as may seem to
be made of purpose for the unfolding of this prophecy. After the destruction of
the Roman Empire (says he) caused by the lewd lives of the Emperors, if God
had not raised up the Papacy, in which the Roman majesty did reviue, it would
have happened, that Rome being succored by no man, had been inhabitable, or
made astinking oxe-stall or pigstie. But in the Pope there arose, if not the
greatness of the Ancient Empire, at least a form not much unlike unto that,
whereby all nations did heretofore obey the Emperors. And this is that which
S. John adds, that all the earth went after the beast wondering. A little
after the same Steuchus calls the Papacy an Empire, and maiesticall Royalty:
And so does Lipsius speak of it, and others formerly cited, all which do
acknowledge, that the Popes are the true possessours of the Empire, and do
hold the place of the ancient Roman Emperors, that is to say, that they are
Caesar's successors more the^ the Apostles. Now by these words of S. John, to
wit, that all the earth wondering at the healing of this wound went after the
beast, it appears that the wou^d which the Empire did receive by the Herules,
Goths, Vandals, was not the wound here spoken of: For the healing of this
wound by Belisarius and Marses, drew no people or nations to the obedience of
the Empire, no country moved with admiration, did for this submit it self
voluntarily. The fruit of this conquest over the Goths was the establishment
only of the Exarchat in a part of Italy. But the restoring of the Roman Empire
by the Roman Hierarchy drew infinite sorts of people to the obedience of this
Empire; And we may say that all the earth moved with admiration, out of a
voluntary respect ran after the beast, which shall be proved more fully yet
by the 12. and 14. verse.

The 4. part of this Prophecy.
4 And they worshipped the dragon which gave power unto the beast, and they
worshipped the beast, saying, who is like unto the beast? who is able to war
with him?

The Explication.
4 And did serve Idols; which, who so serve, do serve the devil, the Author
and advancer of this Papal Hierarchy; and did attribute that that unto this
Hierarchy which did appertain unto God, saying who is there that is like unto
this Empire, and who is able to resist it?

The proof of this exposition.
This is a rare prediction, and such as gives light to this whole prophecy.
For here the holy Ghost makes idolatry to be borne just at the same time that
the Roman Hierarchy did begin to possess an earthly Empire, and to imitate
the Roman Empire that was decayed. Which was manifestly verified in this, that
when the Roman Empire went to ruin in Italy then was the question about the
worship of images most hot. To which worship the people of the East did not
yield then, when the Popes first of all became Monarchs at Rome, but they were
won unto it by little and little, after the imitatio^, and by the authority of
the Church of Rome. The other kind of Idolatry, to wit, the worshipping the
bread of the Eucharist, grounded upon transubstantion, began also to grow up in
the Church just at the same time that the Pope grew to be a Prince and earthly
Monarch; for we may see some small seeds of this in Damascene which lived in
the 750 year of our Lord, and as this error did increase by little and
little, Bertram a Priest that lived in France under Charles the bald in the
year 870. writ an excellent book in confutation thereof, which is to be
seen at this day. And at the same time John Erigen surnamed the Scot a Monk
of S. Benedicts order wrote another book against the self same error. But the
Bishops of Rome which had erected the service of images, did also establish the
worship of bread: and condemned the writings of the said Scot, especially Leo
the 9. in the year 1055 having assembled a Council at Rome, and another at
Verseil in Piemont for the confirmation of this Idolatry, against which many of
the faithful did oppose themselves, and amongst others Berenger Archdeacon of
Angers, a man of great knowledge and holy conversation. At last truth was
overborne by falsehoode, our kings lending a helping hand to the Pope. And that
this prophecy might be fulfilled in all points, look how Idolatry did
increase, so did the greatness of the Roman Hierarchy increase; in so much that
all did dread the power thereof, thinking that none was able to resist it. As
for the peoples worshipping of this Hierarchy, and giving it that which did
appertain unto God, we will speak of this in the verse following.

The fifth part of this Prophecy.
5 And there was given unto him a mouth that spoke great things, and
blasphemies; and power was given unto him to do 42 months.

6 And he opened his mouth unto blasphemy against God to blaspheme his name,
and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven,

And it was given unto him to make war with the Saints, and to overcome them,
and power was given him over every kindred, and tongue, and nation.

8 Therefore all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names are
not written in the book of life of that Lamb which was slain from the
beginning of the

9 If any man have an ear let him hear.

If any lead into captivity he shall go into captivity, if any man kill with
a sword he must be killed by a sword: here is the patience and the faith of the
Saints.

The Explication.
5 And God has suffered this Hierarchy, and Roman Church, to assume proud,
and blasphemous titles, and it must endure 1260 years.

6 And this Papal Hierarchy does set it self to belch forth horrible
blasphemies against God, and to wrong his name, and his Church and his Saints.

7 Yea God has suffered it to persecute the faithful, and to overcome them,
and power was given unto it over infinite people, and tongues, and nations.

8 In so much that all me^ shall fall down to worship it, whose names are not
found in the book of life of Jesus Christ that dyed for us, which book was
written before the foundations of the world were laid.

9 If any man have an understanding to conceive this let him conceive it.

10 For they which persecute, shall be dealt with after the same manner;
whosoever leads the faithful into captivity shall him self at length be
made a captive; whosoever slaieth shall be slain: herein appears the faith
and patience of the Saints.

The proof.
The proof of this exposition does consist in 5. points.

1 To show what blasphemous titles the Roman Hierarchy does assume, and how
she does attribute that unto her self which does of right appertain unto God.

2 How she does blaspheme against the Saints and against the Church of God.

3 To show how she has persecuted them and overcome them.

4 To speak of the time that she must last.

5 And of the obedience that the people yield unto her.

The first point is easy to prove, whether you respect the head of this
Hierarchy, or else consider the whole body. The head is called God, the Divine
Majesty, the universal Bishop, the head and Spowse of the Church, the corner
stone, the Lion of Judah, and Savior of Sion, the most holy Father, and his
Holiness, and does arrogate many more such like proud titles, as we have
formerly showed by a great number of examples. The body of this Hierarchy
under the name of the Church does vsurp that which appertains to God, saying
that the Church cannot err, and that it is the supreme judge in matters of
religion: And that it is this church which gives authority to the scripture,
and is the only infallible Judge of the interpretation thereof. They call this
Church the Roma^-Catholick church, not in that sense as the Ancient did take
Catholic for Orthodox, but by Catholic they understand universal,
exclusiuely to all other churches, as if there were no other church but the
Roman. Leo x in the Bull exurge, which is at the end of the last Lateran
counsel, does condemn Luther for saying that the Church or the Pope could not
make new articles of faith and the power of adding to the Creed is given to the
Pope in the last session of the Council of Florence.
They say that this Church has authority to make new articles of faith, and
to add to the Creed: That she is the mother and mistress of all other
Christian Churches: So the French and Spanish Church are become the handemaides
of the Roman, and if any one being asked of what church he were, should
answer, I am of the French church, he would be thought ridiculous, or scarce
well in his wits, because the French church is now reckoned for nothing, or for
some small dependence of the Roman. Al which positions, are as so many
blasphemies. 1. For, to take upon ones self not to be able to err, and to be
supreme judge in matters of religion, is to intrude into Gods place, and to
take away this dignity of being highest Judge from Gods word. 2. To boast that
they give authority to the holy Scripture which is the word of God, this is to
exalt themselus above the word of God: For he which gives authority is more
great then he which receives it. For if we consider well of the matter, we
shall find that it is not the characters, nor the book, which are understood
by the name of the holy Scripture, but God speaking in his word: the church of
Rome therefore in this does exalt her self above God. 3. Likewise the Church of
Rome does make her self equal with God, when she does challenge the
authority of giving an infallible interpretation of the scripture, and which
shall be of equal authority with the scripture it self, for none ca^ give
interpretation of a law, which shall be of equal authority with the law, but
only he which made the law: the church of Rome therefore is God, and does
usurp Gods seat, since she gives interpretatio^s to Gods law, which are of
equal authority with the law. Nay, which is more, I say that to interpret the
law after this manner, is a great deal more the^ to make it, since that the
people are not bound to follow the letter of the law and of Gods word, but
the interpretation which the Church of Rome shall give of it. 4. The Church of
Rome also does make her self as God, when in steed of instructing the people
to believe in the word of God, she teaches them to believe in the Church. For
if you ask the simple people why they believe this or that, they will answer
you because the church believes it, and by the Church they understand the Roman
Church, as if to believe in the Roman Church, and to believe in God were all
one. Now it is to be noted, that in all these errors by the word Church, the
people art not meant, for they are no judges, they give no authority to the
scripture: but by the church the Hierarchy is understood, and the body of
Prelates which being dispersed thorough diverse nations does depend upon Rome,
that is to say on the Roman consistory, and the Popes chair. It was never
heard of, before the Pope came to rule, that for to be saved, a man must needs
be a Roman, and that the words, Universal and Roman were coincident; whereas
the Apostle wrote to the Church of the Romans after the same manner as he did
to the Church of the Corinthians, or Ephesians, and gave her not any title of
superiority: without doubt he should have spoke thus unto them. Although your
Church be the Mistress of all other Churches, and my admonitions may seem
needless for you, because ye cannot possibly err in the faith, and because S.
Peter your bishop is the head of the Church, to who^ I my self also am
subject, yet notwithstanding I thought good to write unto you for these and
these reasons. Not a word of all this, but in the 11. chap. he threatens the^
with being cut off, if they grow to be high minded, or disesteeme the grace of
God.

The holy Ghost adds that this Hierarchy does blaspheme against the church
of God, 2. Point how the Romish Church does revise the Saints.
and against those which dwell in heaven: If by heaven he understand the
Church, as in the 9. chapt. and 1. verse, and in the 12. chapt. and 4. verse,
or if the falling away of those which went out of the visible church be
represented by the stars which fell from heaven, it is easy to prove how
the Church of Rome does diffame those which did, and still do, serve God in
purity, fastening odious names upon them, and calling them Heretics,
Schismatics, Infidels, Vaudians, Albigeans, Huguenots, Calvinists: persuading
the simpler sort, that we hold good works to be unprofitable: that we
approve all kind of dissoluteness, that we are enemies of the Virgin Marie
and the Saints; that we make God the author of sin: and such like things as
we detest, and which are clean contrary to our belief.

But if by those which are in heaven the Saints in Paradise be understood,
the Church of Rome does wrong these no less; For is it not an injury to the
Saints to change them into Idols? and to make the^ the instruments of
dishonouring God worshipping and adoring them with a religious kind of worship
that is due only to God? who ca^ doubt but that the Saints do hate such as
honor them thus? To omit how the Romish church does ty the Sts to a block,
employing the^ about base offices, commending the keeping of their hogs to one,
of their horses to another, the curing of the scurfe to a third; and that the
Legends of the Saints do disgrace them, in so much that they make the Virgin
Mary to converse with Queanes, and to favor them in their uncleanness as we
have showed above.

3. point. that the Church of Rome does persecute the faithful.
As for the persecutions which this Hirarchie has raised against the faithful,
and the victories which it has had over the Church; It is never found that the
Orthodox Church did make any massacres of the ancient heretics. Cruelty is
most suitable with falsehood. To burn a Christian because he would not obey the
Pope, is a thing which had never been seen: but began after the Pope grew to
be an earthly Monarch. It is well near 400. years since Innocent the 3.
within the space of a few months, made more then 200000 of the faithful to
be slain, who^ they called Albigeans, after the same manner as they do us
Hugenots now adays. It is not above a hundred years since, that all Europe did
stream with blood, and that the Pope and his adherents thought by slaughter
and torments to have rooted us out utterly. In S. Bartholomewes massacre, in
the year 1572, more then 80000 men were slain in cold blood. At Lions 150.
persons put into prison were drawn out all one after another, and stabbed at
the gate of the prison. At Orleans 400 persons shut up in a house (which was
called the house with 4 corners) were burnt al together. The Duke of Alua
played the butcher at Flaunders, and under the shadow of a Catholic zeal slew
millions of me^. In recompense whereof the Pope sent him an holy sword, and
consecrated gloves. The punishments of the Inquisition surpass all cruelty.
The bull of Phalaris is nothing in respect of this. A man is carried to prison
not knowing wherefore: after he has been cubd up in solitariness, and never
seen one glympse of light for a whole year together, at last there coms one
unto him, and questions with him about certain interrogatories; if he say
that he is a good Catholic, and do renounce his former heresy, he shall
have this favor to die a more gentle death. For recant never so much, the very
once being accused of heresy is thought enough to condemn a man. If he
persevere in defense of the truth, and triumph in martyrdom, after a thousond
torments endured in private, he is brought forth in public, wrapped about the
head with an ougly coife which they call S. Bennet, having a vizard on his face
with a yawning mouth, and a long tail made fast behind at his back, as they
use to paint the devil; and so burnt by little and little, being put in and
taken from the fire I know not how often, to the end he might not die as some
do without feeling that they die. Tyranny, which the Turks and Mahometans
(though the sworn enemies of Christ's name) do detest: for they never
practiced any thing upon Christians, that came near to this cruelty.

We are also to speak of the continuance of time that this Hierarchicall
Empire shall endure. The 4. point of the continuance of the Empire.
The holy Ghost says that it shall last 1260. days, where we must take each
day for a year: For this Prophecy does every where almost borrow the terms
of Daniel, and use his fashion of speech, who by a week understands 7. years,
and who foretells that from the permission of returning, and building up
Jerusalem again, (granted by Darius, Nothus) until the final destruction
thereof, there should be 70 weeks, that is to say 70 times 7 years, to take a
day for a year, which make 490 years which afterward came to pass; and this
wonderful prophecy was fulfilled at the time appointed. So likewise in
Ezechiel in the 4. chap. and 6. verse. Thou shall bear the iniquity of the
house of Judah 40 days: I have appointed thee a day for a year. And in the 14
chap. of Numbers.34. verse. After the number of the days in which ye searched
out the land, even 40. days every day for a year, etc. It is no new thing
therefore in Scripture to take a day for a year; but it is the style of the
prophecies. Now here is a mystery, and an admirable correspondency: for herein
the Iewish-christian Church which lay hid 1260 days, flying the persecution of
the heathenish Roman Empire, was a figure of the flight and persecution of the
Christian Church under the Papal Roman Empire, which persecution must last
1260 mistical days, which amount to so many years.

Since it is so that the holy Ghost throughout this whole chap. speaks of the
succession and establishment of this Roman Hierarchy, instead of the Roman
Empire, and that we have showed that the Pope began to lay the foundations of
this temporal Empire in the year of our Lord 755. if thereunto ye ad these
1260 years of the continuance of this Hierarchicall Empire, it must needs
last to the 2015. year of our Lord: according to which reckoning it has 404.
years yet to continue. Whereunto if ye join the prediction of the Apostle,
who has told us that Christ shall abolish this son of perdition by the
brightness of his coming, ye may well near guess the time of the coming
of the Lord. Hereunto add that amongst the Jews this was an usual prophecy,
that as the world was made in 6. days, and after came the day of rest, so the
world must endure six thousand years, and afterward there shall be an
everlasting time of rest: That is to say, that there must be so many thousand
years in the worlds duration, as there were days in the creation. For as the
Apostle S. 2. Pet. 3.8.
Peter says: One day with the Lord is as a thousand years, and a thousand
years as one day. According to this calculation, this present year of our
Lord, 1611. being the 5560 year of the world. If the papal Empire must yet
continue 404 years, its end must be in the 5964. year of the world, which is
nor far of from 6000 years. Astrology also does lend us some light in this
matter: for in the year of the world 3665. Ptolomie Philadelph raigneing in
Egypt, some 469 years after the building of Rome, there lived one Hipparchus a
famous Astrologer, who reports that in his time the star commonly called,
stella polaris, which is in the tail of the lesser bear, was 12 degrees and
two fifths distant from the poles of the Equator. This star from age to age
has insensibly still crept nearer to the Pole, whence it appears that the
poles of the Equator are moveable; it is not now past 3 degrees distant from
the poles of the Equator: when this star therefore shall come to touch the
Pole there being no farther space left for it to go forward (which may well
enough come to pass within five or six hundredth years) it seems that the^
there shall be a great change of things, and that this time is the period which
God has prefixed to nature. All these observations put together make us
presume that the Roman Hierarchicall Empire must endure till the 2015 year of
our Lord. And that this Empire being abolisht, the Pope yet shall remain
still, but without power and authority, til that Jesus Christ shall destroy him
by his last coming, which (as it should seem by the evide^ces formerly cited)
shall be some one, or two and twenty ages, after our Saviors incarnation, who
is God over all, blessed for ever. Yet I would not have any think that I speak
this as though I went about to pry into such secrets as God himself would
have to be hid, or as though I meant to define any thing absolutely concerning
the last day, but only that I might not seem to neglect the Revelations which
the holy Ghost has laid open unto us in this prophecy: seeing that here he
tells us how long the Papal Empire shall last, and that S. Paul and Of this
place of Daniel see the 9. Chapt.
Daniell in his 7. chap. do stretch the term of time, wherein the son of
Perdition shall last, to the day of judgment.

Our adversaries go more boldly to work. For taking these 1260 days simply
for 3 years and a half, they say that Antichrist must not reign above 3
years and a half, and that 45. days after the last Judgment shall be. If
this be true, the^ the faithful that shall live under the dominion of
Antichrist, shall know the day of judgment exactly, and Christ's speech shall
not be verified of them, wherein he says, Of that day and hour knows no
man no not the Angels in heaven, as the king of great Britain has learnedly
observed: who notes also that our Lord Jesus has foretold that at this time
men shall be eating and drinking, and making merry; which shows evidently
that this shall be a time of rest, and not of troubles and persecutions, and
that the coming of Jesus Christ shall not be looked for. Besides, that such an
Empire, which (as they say) shall subdue all the world, should in 3. years and
a half rise, increase, and fall, is a thing altogether impossible: a man
cannot in that time ride over a quarter of the countries in post, how much more
time had he need ask to conquer them? Or who can imagine that the mystery of
iniquity should in Saint Paul's time begin to prepare the way for the son of
perdition to enter, and that now, that is to say, some 1550. years after,
there should be no preparation at all. 5. Point of the religious service done
to the Popes seat.


It remains that we speak of the obedience and religious service which the
people shall give to this Roman Hierarchy: The holy Ghost says that all me^
that inhabit the earth shall adore it: He says, All men, although there be
many countries which never did acknowledge it: for the Scripture lightly
speaks after this manner of great Empires, which hold a great number of people
and many realms under their dominion: especially the Prophet Daniel (to whose
style the holy ghost does conform himself in the Apocalypse) in the 2. chap.
37. and 38 verses, speaking to Nabuchadnezar. O King thou art a king of kings,
and in all places where the children of men dwell he has given them into
thine hand, and has made thee ruler over them all; although he had nothing at
all in Europe, and but little in Affricke. There is the like form of speech in
the 7. chapter, verse 23. So in speaking of the Pope we use to say that all
the word is under him, although the Turk and Mores disclaim him: but by so
saying we mean that he has a large dominion. And our adversaries themselves
do not deny this, since they are of opinion that the heathenish Roman Empire
is meant in this prophecy, which yet notwithstanding, was never absolute
co^mander over one fourth part of the world: And I cannot imagine that there
shall or can be such a Monarchy to which all the world (without excepting any
place) shall be subject. It is not three years and an half, no nor 3 ages
that will be sufficient for the obtaining of such a conquest. And there is not
the man to be found with a brain strong enough, to govern an Empire of this
nature. The most politic head in the world would in the government of such a
state be distracted with the multiplicitie of business and fall into shivers.

The dutiful respect therefore and obedience, which the people must yield to
this Roman Hierarchy, is called Adoration: Not only because the head of this
Empire shall cause himself to be adored, and make men kiss his feet, but also
because of the strange kind of soveraigntie that the body of this Hierarchy
has attained unto. The Cardinals in all their meetings, and solemn feasts,
go, and fit before kings, as we have already 1. Lib. 3. cap.
showed. In Spain a man may offend the king with less danger then the least
of the Inquisition. From Gregory the 7. surnamed Hildebra^d, which was made
Pope, in the year of our Lord 1073, to Leo the 10. who died in the year 1521.
there are 448. years, during which time we may say that the Papacy was at
the height of her power and glory. Then Moncks were highly honored, and the
Popes Legates took their places before kings: then the Pope could command all
the nobles, and all the men of arms, to come out of France or England, or any
other quarter of Europe, and make the^ trot from far through I know not how
many places to join their forces against the Sarrasins, and filled all France
with widows and Orphans: to him that chanced to die in this war, the Pope
gave a degree of glory in Paradise above the common sort of Saints. Then he
which wore the badge of the cross did cease to be the kings subject, and no
Magistrate might touch him what offense soever he had committed, because he
was the Popes soldier. At that time he made kings to be ierkt, and stroke of
the Emperors crown with his foot, and trod upon his neck. His power now a
days is much diminished over that it was, and yet even at this time, he makes
men come from far and near to seek at Rome for the remission of their sins.
And an offense committed against his own person is a reserved case, whence
none in France may absolve a man, but the least Priest that is, has authority
to pardon a sin committed against the Majesty of God. Nay which is more, they
take upon them to make God, and to create their creator with the repeating of
certain words; No mervaile therefore if they be so much honored and
respected. So we have seen this prophecy fulfilled on every side: whence
also we may assure our selves of the accomplishment of the other part of this
prophecy. That they which kill shall be killed, and that they which persecute
us shall be dealt withal accordingly. Which yet we do not desire, having
learn^ of our Savior to bless those that curse us, and to pray for their
amendment.

The 6. part of this prophecy.
11 And I beheld an other beast coming up out of the earth, which had two
horns like the lamb, but he spoke like the Dragon.

12 And he did all that the first beast could do before him, and he caused the
earth, and the^ that dwell therein to worship the first beast, whose deadly
wound was healed.

The Explication.
11 I saw also a Monarch to rise up from a low estate, being of another name
and nature then the former Roman Emperors, to wit, the Pope, which wore a
miter with two horns upon his head, and which seemed in outward show to
profess Christ, but whose doctrine was diabolical.

12 And he took all the power of the Roman Empire upon him, at Rome, being the
seat of the Empire, and exhorted all the people to submit themselves to this
Roman Empire, which being destroyed by the Lombards in Italy, was brought to
life again, and reestablished by the Papacy.

The proof.
S. John does here speak of two beasts, the former of which is the Roman
Empire as all confess, and the prophecy is clear. This Empire being excluded
out of Rome and Italy by the Lombards, was recovered by little and little, and
restored again by the Roman Hierarchy, which is held by S. John for the same
beast with the Roman Empire, because it is still one Empire reigning at Rome,
though under an other title. The second beast is a lively representation of the
bishop of Rome.

1 For Saint John says that this beast came up out of the earth, that is to
say, rose from a small beginning, and mean estate, according as the Latins call
such as get up from a little, Terrae filios, as mushromes, or toadstooles that
grow up out of the earth in a night: a fashion of speech usual in Scripture,
as in the 2. chapt. of the 1. of Samuel. He raises up the poor out of the
dust, that is to say, out of a base condition of life. Now who is there but
knows how mean and poor the state of the bishops of Rome was before they came
to be earthly Monarchs? Then when they had not one foot of ground, and that the
Emperors made them be whipped, emprisoned, and banished them? Then when the
Theod. hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 16 Imperator imperavit Liberium relegari Beroeam
quae est in Thracia: Liberi^ abeunti misit imperator s^lid^s 500. in s^mptus.
Emperor Constantius having exiled Liberius bishop of Rome, gave him 500
crowns for pity sake to relieve him. As the grain of mustard seed, which our
Savior speaks of Luke the 13. ve. 19. which is but little, brought forth a
tree, within which the birds of the air built their nests, so out of this
smalnesse of bishops, did the greatness of the Pope arise, within the which
infinite companies of beneficed men do nestle themselves, which live under his
shadow.

2 S. John also says that he shall have horns like the Lamb, but shall
speak like the dragon, as if he should have said, ye will say when ye see him
that he resembles Christ Jesus, which is the Lamb of God; and looks like a
Christian, but his doctrine is Diabolical. This also agrees to the Pope which
calls himself the Vicar of Jesus Christ, but whose doctrine is contrary to
Jesus Christ; for proof whereof read my second book, in that place, where I
defend his Majesty's of Englands confession of the faith, It may be that the
two horns of his ordinary miter, do serve also for the accomplishment of this
prophecy.

3 In the third place S. John says that he shall exercise the authority of
the first beast, which is the Roman Empire, for as much as he shall counterfeit
the actions, and vsurp the rights of the Roman Empire: That this also agrees
to the Pope we may prove by infinite examples. 1. He has taken a crown
having cast away his Bishops crosier staff. 2. He has taken the Emperors
Eutrop. l. 9 Carausius purpuram sumpsit and paulo post Galerius pur puratus
traditur ad vehiculum decurrisse. S. Ambrosius Theodosio dixit purpura
imperatorem non sacerdotem facit.
habit which was of skarlet, together with shoes of skarlet, which were proper
to the Emperors. 3. The Emperors had a Senate clad in skarlet, and he has a
Senate of Cardinals clad in cloth of the same color. 4. In the Senate there
were Apotheoses, or Canonizations of Gods practiced, as there are Canonizations
of Saints in the Popes consistory. 5. The Emperors caused themselves to be
adored, and were Aurel. vict in Diocletiano* Passus adorari se appellarique
deum Lamprid. idem ait de Heliogabalo in vita Alexandri Severi.
called Gods. So the Popes call themselves God, and take upon them to be
adored. 6. The Emperors brought up the right of fiefs and other duties to be
paid to the Lord Paramont in case that the tenants were changed. In imitation
whereof the Pope has established his Annates, by which all Church livings are
made fiefs to the Papal See, and pay the first years revenewes in case of a
new election. 7. The Emperors did receive the submissions and acknowledgements
of subjection, from foreign Princes by their Ambassadors: so the Pope does
receive the submissions of kings, and their oaths of fealty, which are all
bound as soon as ever there is a new Pope chosen to send their Ambassadors to
kiss his feet, and to tender him an oath of allegiance. 8. The Emperors had
their Imposts, and Tributes; and the Pope has his S. Peter pence, levied in
many Countries upon the head of every particular man: as also petty
co^tributions, and a thousand diverse commodities that arise out of
dispensations, absolutions, provisions, advouzons, indulgences, erections,
derogations, exchange of vows, matrimonial causes, etc. which are the
tributs, and imposts of this Roman Empire. 9. The Emperors had their civil
law, and he has his Canon law. 10. The Emperors had their Indictions of 15.
years, and he has his Roman Indictions of the like time. 11. The Emperors
had their Publicans, and tole-gatherers, which did farm the revenewes of the
Empire. So the Pope has his Dataries and Bullists which rent the commodities
of this spiritual merchandise. 12. The Emperors had their Trapezites, or
exchangers at Rome: and the Pope has his Banckers in Lions, and diverse other
places of Europe, which will procure dispensations and absolutions from Rome at
a certain price, and help you to obtain the remission of your sins by
letters of exchange. 13. The Roman Emperors having conquered a country,
labored to plant the Latin tongue in it: in imitation of which policy, the
Pope has so prevailed, that he has brought all the countries which are under
him to pray to God, Sucton. Caligula ex capturis prostibul^um vectigal
instituit, quantum quaeque vno concubitis mereret. Lamprid. i^ Alexandr^*
Severo. Lenonum vecctigal and m^retricum, and exoletorum in sacrum oerarium
vetuit inferri and ad ins^^rationem theatri, amphitheatri, and Circi deputavit.
and say their service in the Latin tongue, and it is not long since that in
France the law acts, and public instruments were made in Latin; in doing this,
he has stamped the print of his government upon us, and made us wear the
badges of his Empire. 14. The Roman Emperors took an yearly rent to suffer the
Stews; The Pope which did succeed in this Empire, has also succeeded in the
honesty of this action.

4 For to make the matter more clear, S. John having said that this second
beast does resemble the first beast, and exercise his power, adds that it is
in the presence of the first beast, and in the very place where the seat of the
Roman Empire is, that is to say, at Rome it self: or at leastwise in the
presence of this Hierarchicall Roman Empire.

Let the reader therefore put all this together, to wit, that we are foretold of
a man 1. which shall rise up from a mean estate. 2. Which shall be a Christian
by profession, but yet shall teach wicked doctrine. 3. Which shall usurp the
rights, and imitate the actions of the Roman Empire. 4. which shall have his
seat in the same place, where the seat of the Empire was. And after that he
has run overall histories, and drawed his brains dry with long seeking
after another besides the Pope, to whom all these things may agree: yet shall
he never be able to show us such another: The verses following will tell us of
other marks no less clear, and evident.

Nevertheless (since it appears by the 12. verse, that the second beast
which we prove to be the Pope, shall make use of this healing and
reestablishment of the Roman Empire, for the authorizing of this Empire
reestablished by the Papacy) it is manifest that this wound here spoken of
cannot be the death of Julius Caesar, nor of Domitius Nero, nor yet the stroke
received by the Herules, and Goths, because the healing of these wounds did no
way increase the dignity of the Pope, nor did he gain any thing by them. Who
can imagine that the people were moved to yield themselves subject to the
Papacy, by wondering at the Empire which being fallen was set up again by
Augustus Caesar, or by Vespasian, or by Narses? But well may it be that the
wound received by the Lumbards being healed by the advancement of the Roman
Hierarchy, the Pope did hereby come to be an earthly Monarch, and by this
means advance his spiritual power. So did he make the people to submit
themselves to the Roman Empire that was healed of the deadly wound in as much
as the state of the Roman Monarch, which he took upon him after the
destruction of the Roman Empire by the Lombards, made him to be highly
respected of the people, and did infinitely exalt his authority.

The 6. part of this prophecy.
13 And he did great wonders, so that he made fire to come down from heaven on
the earth in the sight of men.

14 And deceived them that dwell on the earth by the signs which were
permitted him to do in the sight of the beast, saying to the^ that dwell on the
earth, that they should make the image of the beast which had the wound of a
sword, and did live.

15 And it was permitted to him to give a spirit unto the image of the beast;
so that the image of the beast should speak, and should cause that as many as
would not worship the image of the beast should be killed.

The Explication.
13 And this Pope wrought miracles, in so much that he sent forth the
lightnings, and thunderbolts of his excommunications against Kings, and their
people: and caused S. Anthonies fire to come down from heaven and made it
thunder and lighten by a miracle.

14 And the people were seduced because of the miracles which God did suffer
him to do, for the authorizing of this Roman Papal Empire, commanding the
people to make up the image of the ancient Roman Empire again, that is to say,
to serve the Roman Papal Empire with the same manner of obedience as they did
the ancient Roman Empire, which being demolished was built up again by the
Roman Hierarchy.

15 And God did suffer him to give force and strength to this Papal Empire, or
Hierarchy, made after the image of the ancient Empire, for the spiritual
power that it did usurp gave soul and life to its temporal power. Which
Papal Empire being nothing else but an imaginary Empire, and which consists
only in the opinion of such as yield obedience unto it, nevertheless speaks
proud things, and makes all such to be massacred and burnt, that shall refuse
to subject themselves to this imaginary Empire, made according to the image of
the ancient Roman Empire.

The Proof of the exposition.
The Holy Ghost giu^^ one more mark yet to know the (...) by, to wit, that he
shall work great sig^^s, and miracles. As for the miracles of paperie we have
spoken sufficiently of them already. Amongst other signs, S. John says that
he shall make fire fall down from heaven. Whether it be that we are to
understand this of S. You have an example of this engraued over the Portall of
S. Anthonies Abbey were Paris. read also the Legend of S. Anthony.
Anthonies fire which the begging friars in times past made to fall upon such
as offended them; or whether it be to understood of the diverse shrines, and
popish relics, which when a man pul^ down, the heaven straight ways is on
fire, and there is nothing but rain, and lightning; or whether it be that S.
John speaks this of spiritual thunderbolts such as are the Popes
exco^munications, under which Christian realms some 600 or 700. years since
did tremble.

These things are done (says S. John) by the second beast in the presence of
the first, that is to say by the Pope in the presence of the Roman Hierarchical
Empire, in the same place where the seat of the Empire is, and for the
authorizing thereof. Which Hierarchical Empire* the holy Ghost by an admirable
kind of speech, and full of weight, calls the image of the first beast: because
that although the Roman Hierarchy, be a continuation, and succession of the
ancient Roman Monarchy, and is (...) in this book by the same beast.
Nevertheless, if we consider the point somewhat better, and look a little
nearer into the matter, we shall find that it is rather an image and
imitation of the ancient Roman Empire, and a kind of part that is acted upon
the seat of the ancient Empire. So the Roman Hierarchy is called the image of
the beast, both because it is built in imitation of the Roman Empire, as we
have showed above by 14 examples, as also because it is an imaginary Empire,
which does consist only in the opinion of the subjects. Since the power thereof
hurts none but such as fear it. Its dispensations are worth as much, as we
esteem them to be worth; set light by the Popes thunderbolts, and you shall
sleep the better. The price of his holy Grains, Agnus Dei, Beads, holy roses,
and consecrated mantles, co^sists only in the opinion of the buyers. And his
trading of late begins not to be so good as it was. Should a Prince or. common
wealth but a hundredth years since have done but a quarter of that which the
Venetians have within these few years, he (being bound hand and foot) had been
cast down into hell and given to the Devil without all remission. The
Croysade had been preached against him in all places, by virtue of which
millions of men would have assembled themselves together from all parts of
Europe. to fall upon the heretics, that so they might gain Paradise. But the
King of great Britain, which has stripped the whore, and laid open her
mysteries, does even to this day stand still vnexcommunicated. The gunpowder
threatenings, are more dangerous then the Popes excommunications.

Now albeit this Hierarchy be an image of the ancient Empire, yet Saint John
says that this image does live and speak, and that this second beast which is
the Pope, gives life unto it, and makes it speak; words wonderfully express,
and significant. For the temporal power of the Popes Hierarchicall Empire
would be nothing else but a dead image of the ancient Roman Empire, were it not
that the spiritual power, did quicken the temporal, and give strength unto
it. For it is his spiritual power, that accumulates such great store of goods,
and riches upon the temporal; which opens the peoples purses unto him which
forces kings necks to bow, which makes his thunderbolts so dreadful, which
compels men to repair from all quarters to Rome, for to share of the
spiritual liberalities of his Holiness. Yet he is ever a gainer hereby, and
his spiritual power, serves for nothing but to uphold his temporal, as
Guicciardine formerly alleged, affirms. It is the same spiritual power,
that makes this image of the beast to speak, that is to say, which causes
that this Papal Empire (formed according to the pourtraiture of the Roman
Empire) should speak so big, give laws, pronounce decrees, decide questions
of faith with a final resolution, and command all such to be put to death as
shall refuse to obey him: sounding the trumpet from an high place, thereby to
encourage kings and people to exercise cruelty.

This notwithstanding we are to note one general doctrine, that as they are
not the carvers, nor founders, that make Idols but they which serve them, so
also in this place, that the Pope which is the founder of this image, and
principal promoter of this Hierarchy resembling the Roman Empire, is not he
for all that which has made it to be an image, but the opinion of the people.
Wherefore S. John says that this second beast, which is the Pope caused the
inhabitants of the earth to make an image of the first beast, and to erect an
Empire like to the Roman Empire that was decayed* For it is not the subtlety
of the Popes that has made this Papal Empire, but the stupiditie of the
people.

The 7. part of this Prophecy.
16 And he made all, both small and great rich and poore^, free and bond, to
receive a mark in their right hand or in their foreheads.

17 And that no man might buy or sell save he that had the mark, or the name of
the beast, or the number of his name.

The Explication.
16 And he made all both small and great, rich and poor, bond and free, to
give him their hands, and to take an oath to be faithful unto him, and to be
marked by their actions. And their foreheads were marked with the mark of
confirmation; and they made profession of his religion, which profession of
religion is often in holy Scripture, called by the name of a mark in the
forehead.

17 And he took order that no man might traffic, nor sell, nor buy, nor
exchange benefices, nor be suffered to purchase an Archbishops pall, nor have a
license, nor any part in the Church goods, no nor yet buy an estate, if he had
not the name and profession of a Romanist.

The Proof.
By the right hand is meant the outward actions. This is a fashion of speech
usual with the holy Ghost. As in the 144. Psalm, ver. 8. Whose right hand is
a right hand of falsehood, that is to say, that they are disloyal in their
actions. And there is nothing more common in scripture, then by the
cleanenesse, or uncleanness of the hands, to understand the justice or
injustice of the actions, as Psalm. 18. ver. 25. and Psalm. 24. ver. 4. By the
right hand we may likewise understand the promise of fidelity, as S. Paul in
the second to the Galath. v. 9. says that James, Peter, and John, (...), gave
him and Barnabas their right hands. So in the last chap. of the 1. book of
Chronicles, all the sons of king David, gave their hands to be under king
Solomon. That is to say, took an oath of alleagiance to be true subjects unto
him.

As for the mark in the forehead, the Apocalypse it self shows us, what the
meaning of this is. For in the 9. chap. and 4. ver. the Locusts are commanded,
not to hurt the grass of the earth, neither any green thing, neither any
tree, but only those men which have not the seal of God in their foreheads.
And in the 7. cha. God does mark his faithful servants in their foreheads. As
therefore the truly faithful are not marked in the forehead with any visible
mark but this mark in the foreheade is the unfeigned profession of a true
Christian, so likewise the mark of a beast in the forehead of a man, is the
profession of being faithful unto the beast, as Thomas also does expound it
in the 3. P. of his sums 63. quest. and 3. Art. Character bestiae intelligi
potest vel ^bstinata malicia qua aliqui deputa^tur ad poenam aeterna^ vel
professio illiciti cult^^.
By the Character of the beast we may understand either an obstinate malice, by
reason of which some are adjudged to everlasting punishment, or the profession
of an unlawful religion. This mark therefore is the profession of Popery. But
if any one be desirous rather to know of a mark really imprinted in the
forehead, there is the mark of confirmation may satisfy him, with which the
Bishop does mark children in the forehead, without which mark the Can. vt.
Ieiune Did. 5. de consecrat.
decrees of the Church of Rome pronounce that a man is but half a Christian.

Without this mark, and profession of Popery S. John says that no man is
admitted to sell or buy, for all the goods of this Papal Empire are bought and
sold. It is nothing else but a bare traffic. Benefices are exchanged upon
certain considerations; He that has but a lean bishopric lays about him
how he might scorce it for a fatter. As soon as ever an Abbotship or
benefice is vacant, many may sue, but he shall be sure to carry it away that
can bribe best, and give the greatest presents. There are Abbotships conferred
upon Captains, and illiterat men, Bishoprics, and Cardinalships bestowed on
little children; and sometimes in way of recompense for dishonest services. To
be brief it is a most shameful merchandise. And how should not these things
be sold, since that God himself is sold, and that we have heard above how Pope
Pius the 2. complains that the holy Ghost is sold at Rome, and the
forgiveness of sins? Now I am of opinion that it is easier for them to sell
him, then to deliver him after they have sold him.

No man (according to the rules of the Church of Rome) may have a share in the
emoluments of this merchandise, but only he which shall profess himself to be
a Roman, and to be of the church of Rome, and a true subject to the Pope. The
forms of the admission of Bishops, Archbishops Cardinals, Knights of Malta,
yea and of kings themselves, have this article inserted expressly in them, of
fidelity and obedience to the Papal See.

The 8. part of this prophecy.
17 And he took order that no man might buy or sell; save he that had the
mark or the name of the beast or the number of his name.

18 Here is wisdom. Let him that has wit, count the number of the beast: for
it is the number of a man, and his number is 666.

The Explication.
17 And he took order that no man might traffic, nor sell, nor buy, nor
excha^ge benefices, nor be suffered to purchase an Archbishops Pall, nor have
a License, nor any part in the Church goods, no nor yet buy an estate, if he
had not the name and profession of a Romanist: and were not of the number of
those which are marked with the figures, or numbers of the letters of his name.

18 In which number they which think themselves the wisest may find some thing
worth their search. Whosoever has understanding let him diligently calculate
the sum, to which these Greek Cyphars or numbers of the Pope of Rome do
amount; for it is an usual number amongst men, and therefore easy to be
understood. And this number to which the Greek letters of his name do amount,
is 666. For this word, Latin, which is the ordinary name by which the Greek
church does call those of the Roman Church, and their head) being written in
Greek, and after calculated makes up just 666. Which number also by an
admirable occurrence, does admonish you that 666. years after the revealing of
this prophecy, this 2 beast, to wit the Pope, shall begin to heal the wound
of the ancient Empire, and place the Roman Empire again in its former seat.

The Proof.
Of the traffic, and the mark, we have said enough already. But concerning
the number of the name of the second beast there is more difficulty: There be
two things that give us some light in this matter, the one is, that S. John
says, that the number is the number of a man, that is to say, a number usual
amongst men; So he puts us out of the labor of seeking after mystical
numbers, as when a day is taken for a year. The other is, that since the
question is of numbering or cyphring the Letters of this name, this name must of
necessity be in a tongue, the letters of which are ciphers or Arithmeticall
numbers. Now this is proper to the Greek and Hebrew tongues, to have no other
ciphers but the letters of their Alphabet. But being that S. John wrote in
Greek, and that to the Greek churches too, this name cannot but be Greek. S.
Irenee following these rules, noted (two hundredth years after the birth of our
Savior, that the letters of cyphars of this word ^ -- 30 ^ -- 1 ^ -- 300 ^ --
5 ^ -- 10 ^ -- 50 ^ -- 70 ^ -- 200 666.

(...), that is to say, Latin, being added together make up just 666. Now to
know whether this name be the true name or no of the Bishop of Rome, we are
not to look to the fashion of speech that is in use with us now adays in
France or Italy, but to the Greeks manner of speaking, seeing that S. John
wrote in Greek and to the Greeks; and into the nature of the thing.

We are therefore to know that after the Empire was translated, the City of
Constantinople was called new Rome, and the Country about commonly called
Thracia was called Romania likewise, and is so called to this day. But as for
the churches of Italy, France, and Spain, which are reckoned under the Roman
Patriarchat, the Greeks do commonly call the^ the Latin churches. When the
Greeks see a french man or German in their country, they ask him, (...)? Are
you a Latin? that is to say, as we use to speak here with us, are you of the
Romish Church? So at the end of the Council of Florence, there is a long list
of the names and subscriptions of the Greek Bishops, and in the second place
the subscriptions of the Bishops of the Romish Church, amongst which there be
some French men, and Spaniardes, and Flemmings, and yet nevertheless over the
head of all these subscriptions is written, Subscriptiones Latinorum patrum; So
Nilus Bishop of Thessalonica wrote two books in greek one against Purgatory,
the other against the Primacie of the Bishop of Rome, where he speaks (I know
not how often) of the Latins, and of the Latin Church, without ever calling it
the Roman church. Let this therefore be taken for certain, that then when the
Bishop of Rome became a Monarch, and erected an earthly Empire at Rome (for
this is the time of which S. John does prophecy) the Roman Church was commonly
called the Latin Church, and by a consequent, the head thereof was called Latin.

As for the nature of the thing, there is no name that is more agreeing unto
it; seeing that the Latin tongue only is received in Popish churches; all their
service is said in Latin, the people are taught to pray in Latin; the Bulls, and
Indulgences, and letters of absolution are all made in Latin, the holy
scripture is not allowed of but in Latin, and the Latin translation is
preferred before the original. And it is not long since that in the court of
Parliament, and seats of Justice, all the decrees, and sentences, acts, and
public instruments were set down in Latin. To conclude, all that is there is
Latin. I am verily persuaded that Irenaeus speaking this had no reference to
the bishop of Rome, for although he take up Victor bishop of Rome somewhat
short, for his sharpness and violence, yet the bishops of Rome in his time
were so poor and feeble, that no man could possibly imagine that they should
ever have come to this height. And indeed Irenaeus was rather led away by the
conjecture of other names, where the self same number is found. But the
experience of succeeding ages has refuted his other conjectures, and ratified
this, by which he has opened a way unto us to know the truth, which he could
not live to know by experience, as we have.

But if besides this we show that not only the number of 666. is found within
this word Latin: but also that this very number does point out the time unto us
exactly in which the Pope became to be a Monarch, and began to lift up the
Roman Empire into its former seat, then I hope that they which are most set
against this doctrine, will wonder at this interpretation, and by an amazed
silence give the glory to God.

We must understand therefore, that the first persecution of Christians (raised
up by Nero in the last year of his reign) fell out in the year of our Lord,
69. Fourteen years after, that is, in the year 83. Domitian began an other
persecution, in which S. John was cited to Rome, and thence banished into the
Isle of Pathmos, as S. Hierome witnesses in his Quartode (...) anno secundam
post Nerone^ persecutione^ movente Domitiano in Patmon insula^ relegatus
scripsit Apocalypsin.
Catalogue. This persecution was more gentle then the others, and the Emperor
went not so far as blood, as he did afterward toward the end of his
reign. In this Isle, did this Revelation appear to S. John, Apoc. 1. ver. 9.
which afterward he committed to writing, toward the end of Domitians reign as
Irenaeus witnesses in his fifth book. For he remained in this Island until
the time that Nerva came to rule, which began his reign in the year 97.
Seeing therefore that the Pope began to be a commander and temporal Prince in
Rome and Italy in the year of our Lord, 755. by the indiscreete liberality of
Pepin king of France: if ye go 666. years higher, ye shall light upon the
year of our Lord, 89. In which year S. John was yet in the Isle of Pathmos,
where he continued some few years after, at what time he had leisure to commit
that to writing, which he had received from God by Revelation. It is true that
Pepin, and Charles the Great his son, and Lewis the Debonnayre his grandchild
which gave this donation, did yet reserve the right of sovereignty unto
themselves. But for all this the Pope did not spare to labor the best he could
to make himself a monarch, and did even at that time lay his proiects for the
compassing of a Monarchy, taking upon him to bestow the dignity of a
Patrician upon Pepin, which none but the Emperors could confer, and
presuming to set the Imperial Crown upon the head of Charles the Great, and
that by a slight, the said Charles the great not marking so much, and after
being angry with him for so doing, and saying as he went out, that if he had
thought the Pope would have used him so, he would not have come into the
Church, as Eginard witnesses in his history. So the Pope increasing daily more
and more, did in fine drive the successors of Pepin, and Charles the great his
benefactours out of all Italy: and has brought them to kiss his feet, and to
hold their crowns at his mercy and discretion, calling himself Lord
commander over the Empire, and bragging that he has received the dominion of
heaven and earth from God.

Now here I cannot but wonder at the rashness of some which dare accuse Irenee
for writing this word, (...), falsely with an (...), as if a Grecian, and one
of the learned amongst them, knew not how to write true orthography in his
own tongue. For although this word be also written without an Iota, yet they
which have any skill in the tongue, do know that the Graecians did use to write
an (...) where the Latins wrote an I. So Nilus, and Epirus, and Mithras, are
written in Greek (...). Joseph Scaliger in his notes upon Eusebius Chronicle,
page 106. marks how the Graecians do often turn the I, of the Latins into
(...) when it is long, and that an N comes after, as in these words, (...). Not
that they did write it so still, for this was left indifferent. Nor will any
man wonder here at, which knows that the Latins did pronounce their I long
like (...), whence that inscription Capteiuei of a Comedy in Plautus comes,
and the verse of Lucilius cited by Quintilian in the first book of his
oratoricall instructions, Iam pueret venere, e postremum facito atque I, for
he held that it should be written puerei, mendacei, furei. The importunity of
our adversaries have forced me to play the school boy, and to rub up my old
Grammar learning, in steed of admiring the secrets of the wisdom of God, who
under the transparent veil of this prophecy, has made us to see, and feel
his truth.

But here I am to admonish the reader that when I lay the accomplishment of of
these 666. years upon the 755 year of our Lord, I do not thereby understand
that Antichrist did but then begin to be made manifest. He was made known
before by many effects, nevertheless nothing like so manifestly as after when
he came to be an earthly Monarch: For he had before this time taken the title
of Head of the Church upon him, under a show that in the contention between him
and the bishop of Constantinople, the Parricide Phocas had adjudged the
Primacie to the bishop of Rome, just 666. years after that Pompey had taken
Jerusalem, and subdued the nation of the Jews which as then was the only
church of God. For Pompey wrought this exploite 61 years after the birth of
our Savior in the consulship of Cicero and Antonie, and Phocas gave the
Primacie to Boniface the 3. in the year of our Lord, 606. so that to count
from this exploite of Pompey there are 666. years: By this means between the
subduing of the church of the old Testament by the Roman Empire, and between
the bondage of the church of the new Testament by the bishop of Rome there are
666. years, which is an excellent observation, and which his Majesty of
England has faithfully noted. But this 13. chap. speaks not of the time in
which Antichrist began to appear, but of the time in which he began to
establish a worldly Empire, and encroach upon the rights, and imitate the
actions of the Roman Emperor. Which he began 666. years after this Revelation.

THE PROPHECY CONTAIned in the 14. Chap. of the Apocalypse. CHAP. 5.
1 Then I looked, and lo, a Lamb stood on mount Sion, and with him an hundredth,
forty, and four thousand, having his fathers name written in their foreheads.

2 And I heard a voice from heaven as the sound of many waters, and as the
sound of a great thunder: and I heard the voice of harpers, harping with their
harps.

3 And they sung as it were a new song before the throne, and before the 4.
beasts, and the elders: and no man could learn that song, but the hundredth
forty and four thousand, which were bought from the earth.

4 These are they which are not defiled with women: for they are Virgins: these
follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes: these are bought from men being the
first fruits unto God and unto the Lamb.

5 And in their mouths was found no guile: for they are without spot before
the throne of God.

6 Then I saw another Angel fly in the midst of heaven, having an everlasting
Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and
kindred, and tongue, and people.

7 Saying with a loud voice, fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour
of his Judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the
sea, and the fountains of waters.

8 And there followed an other Angel saying Babylon that great city is
fallen, it is fallen: for she made all nations to drink of the wine of the
wrath of her fornication.

9 And the third Angel followed the^ saying with a loud voice, If any man
worship the beast, and his image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or on
his hands;

10 The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God yea of the pure wine,
which is powered into the cup of his wrath, and he shall be tormented in fire
and brimstone before the holy Angels, and before the Lamb.

11 And the smoke of their torment shall ascend ever more: and they shall have
no rest day nor night, which worship the beast and his image, and whosoever
receives the print of his name.

12 Here is the patience of Saints: here are they that keep the commandments
of God, and the faith of Jesus.

13 Then I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, write, The dead which die
in the Lord are fully blessed. Even so says the spirit: For they rest from
their labors and their works follow them.

14 And I looked, and behold a white cloud, and upon the cloud one sitting
like to the son of man, having on his head a golden crown, and in his hand a
sharp sickle.

15 And an other Angel came out of the Temple, crying with a loud voice to him
that sat on the cloud, Thrust in thy sickle and reap: for the time is come
to reap; for the harvest of the earth is ripe.

16 And he that sat on the clowd, thrust in his sickle on the earth, and the
earth was reaped.

17 Then an other Angel came out of the the temple, which is in heaven, having
also a sharp sickle.

18 And another Angel came out from the altar, which had power over fire, and
cried with a loud cry to him that had the sharp sickle, and said, Thrust in
thy sharp sickle, and gather the clusters of the vineyard of the earth: for
her grapes are ripe.

19 And the Angel thrust in his sharp sickle on the earth and cut down the
vines of the vineyard of the earth, and cast them in to that great wine press
of the wrath of God

20 And the wine press was trodden without the city, and blood came out of the
wine press unto the horse bridles, by the space of a thousand and six
hundredth furlongs.


The Exposition.
1 After that God had made me to see the dominion of the Bishop of Rome figured
by the second beast, he showed Jesus Christ unto me having the government of
his Church: and with him a great multitude of the faithful of every tribe, and
people, which had the mark of the people of God, which is the true profession
of the faith, and Christianity.

2 And I heard a voice from heaven as the sound of many waters, and like a
clash of thunder, and to mix pleasantnes with this majesty, after this voice,
I heard a melodious comfort, as it were of harpers playing upon harps, and a
heavenly harmony.

3 And they sang a new thanksgiving containing the redemption manifested by the
new covenant, in the presence of God and his Angels, and the Patriarchs, and
Apostles. And no man can conceive what this thanksgiving was, and how God
ought to be praised for this redemption, but only the truly faithful, chosen
out of every tribe, and nation; which were saved, and redeemed by Jesus Christ,
out of the whole Mass of mankind, that was lost and corrupted.

4 These faithful did abstain from al fleshly fornication, and from
spiritual too, which is Idolatry; for they are chaste. They follow the
commandment of Jesus Christ, and suffer themselves to be led whither it shall
seem good to him. They were redeemed out of the whole stock of mankind for to
be consecrated unto God, and to Jesus Christ, as the first fruits of his
creatures.

5 And there was no guile found in their mouths, nor no dissembling words, for
they did appear pure and innocent before the throne of God.

6 After that I saw a faithful Minister of the Gospel rise out of the
corruption of this papal kingdom, and passing through the midst of the church
to preach conformity to the everlasting Gospel; and God raised him up to
preach unto the me^ that dwell upon the earth, and to every nation.

7 And he cried out saying, Fear God and give him the glory, for the hour of
the last judgment is at hand; worship no creatures any more, nor the relics
of Saints nor their images, nor the Pope, nor the Host, nor any other creature;
but worship him which has made heaven and earth, and the bottomless deep,
whence the rivers arise.

8 And another faithful minister of the Gospel came after him saying, for
certain Rome is fallen, because she made all nations drunk with her furious
Idolatry.

9 And a third minister came after these two saying stoutly, if any one worship
the Pope, or yield himself subject to the Empire, which he has formed anew,
according to the image of the ancient Roman Empire, professing himself to be a
Roman, or of the Latin Church, or give him a hand of fealty, and obedience;

10 This man shall also drink of the wine of the wrath of God, yea of the pure
wine, powered into the cup of his wrath, that is to say, he shall taste of Gods
displeasure to the end, and shall be cast into hell in the presence of Jesus
Christ, and the Angels there to be burnt everlastingly.

11 And the smoke of their torment shall ascend evermore. And they shall enjoy
no rest, which do worship the Pope, and the Empire which he has formed anew
according to the image of the Roman Empire, and whosoever does profess
himself to be a Roman, or of the Latin Church.

12 Here is the patience of the faithful to be seen, in this it is that they
appear which keep the commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus.

13 Then I heard a voice from heaven saying, happy are they which die in the
faith of our Lord Jesus. From that time, of a truth (says the spirit) they
rest from their labors, and they shall receive the reward of their good works.

14 Afterward I looked, and behold, a white cloud appeared unto me, and upon
this cloud there sat an Angel, like to a man: which had a crown of gold upon
his head, as who had the dignity of an Archangel, and power over many
spirits, and in his hand a sharp sickle, for to execute the judgments of God.

15 And another Angel came out of the assembly, and Church of the Saints,
which speaking unto the Angel that was upon the cloud, gave him commandment
from God saying: Exercise justice now upon the earth; for the hour of
displaying Gods judgments is come, because the causes which draw the
judgments of God down (to wit the sins of men) are come to their full
measure.

16 Then the Angel that sat upon the cloud, threw down the chastisements
ordained of God upon the earth, and a multitude of men were destroyed, and many
of the wicked cut of, as ears of corn which is reaped.

17 And after this Angel God sent out another from amongst the company of his
Saints, and of his heavenly Church, having also a sharp sickle for to do the
like execution, and to exercise the judgments of God upon the earth.

18 And after this second Angel, there went a third Angel out from before the
presence of Jesus Christ (whose cross is the only altar) to whom God did use
to commi^ the executions of his judgments by fire. This Angel cried with a
loud voice to him which had the sharp sickle, saying unto him, reveal the
judgments of God forthwith, and punish the sins of men; for their sins are
grown to maturitie.

19 Then the Angel did that which was commanded him, and did exercise judgment
upon the earth, and slew the nations of the earth, and ^rod upon them as we
use to tread grapes in a wine press.

20 And this judgment of God was executed without the Church of God, which is
the holy Jerusalem: which was exempted from this Judgment. And the blood of
this slaughter was so great, that there ran a river of blood from the place for
the space of twenty leagues, and so deep that the horses stood up in it even
to the bridles.

The proof and cle^ring of this Exposition.
THis Chapter is an admonition of the evils and afflictions represented in the
13. Chap. and a consolation to temper the hardness of the Churches servitude
under the Papal kingdom, under which although the Church lie hid, yet the
holy Ghost says in the first verse of this chapter, that God had an hundredth,
forty, and four thousand faithful remaining still amidst this corruption;
according as when Elias in the kingdom of Israel thought that he only had
been left, ^9.
God told him that he had 7000 men more which never bowed the knee to Baal.
Now the number of a hundredth forty and four thousand is not without a
mystery. For besides that this number is a cubicall number consisting of
twelve times twelve, (God thereby intending to signify that the number of his
elect is perfect, and prescribed with great wisdom, and which may not be
diminished) there is yet more in it, to wit, that God does hereby show that
this number shall be taken indifferently out of all people and nations: like
as in the 7. chapt. this very number is taken equally out of the twelve tribes
of Israel. For that by the 144000. all the Church of the Elect is here
understood, it appears by that in the third verse, where it is said, that
these were bought from the earth.

The four beasts, which are mentioned by the way in the 3. verse, are
described exactly in the 4. Chapter of this book. And this vision is taken out
of the first of Ezekiel, which makes me to understand these 4 beasts in the
same sense as they are understood by Ezekiel, to wit, for the Angelical
virtues standing before the thron of God: Wherefore Ezekiel gives them wings
also which signify their readiness to ob^y. And they have diverse faces for
to show the diversity of their virtues. The one has the face of a Lion* for
to show their courage, the other of an ox, for to show their strength, the
other the face of a man, for to show their wisdom, the other resembles and
eagle, which witnesses their speech, and readiness.

The 24 beasts are the twelve Patriarks of the old Testament, and the twelve of
the new, which are the 12 Apostles, by whom we are to understand all the church
of the glorified Saints. Which we may easily know by the 9 verse of the fifth
chapt. where these 24 Elders do praise the Lamb because he redeemed them unto
God by his blood, out of every kindred, and people and tongue, and nation. Now
if the 24 Elders do represent the whole Church of the glorified Saints, and
speak in their name, by the like reason is it also agreeable, that these 4
beasts should represent the whole company of Angelical spirits.

The praises wherewith they did extol God for revealing the mysteries of our
redemption, cannot be understood by fleshly and sensual men, to whom the
Gospel seems folly, as our Savior says to Peter. Mat. 16. Flesh and blood
has not revealed this unto thee, but my father which is in heaven. Of these
144000. which represent the whole company of the faithful, S. John says that
they are not defiled with women, for they are virgins. Doubtless a continent,
and chaste virginity both of body and mind is a great perfection: it keeps out
all wicked thoughts from entrance; it frees the soul from care, and gives much
liberty to the service of God. Yet for all this I cannot be persuaded that S.
John does here speak of bodily virginity, or of continuing in a single state
of life: For the^ we should exclude the Prophets, and the Apostles out of the
number of the faithful which follow the Lamb, and which were redeemed from
amongst the inhabitants of the earth. This makes me think that as Idolatry
is infinite times called fornication, and adultery in holy scripture, so this
chastity and virginity here spoken of is nothing else but an abstaining from
the service of Idols, which are as it were the Concubines with whom Idolatours
do commit fornication, and break the spiritual bond with which they had tied
themselves unto Christ.

They which are thus chaste and continent, are by the judgment of the spirit
of God in the fifth verse pronounced to be without spot; I confess that in the
most holy whilst they are in this flesh there is ever some infirmity remaining,
and the remainders of sin abiding. David acknowledges himself to be a sinner,
Psa. 51. and 130. and 143. and his life confirms it. The Apostle S. Paul
confesses that sin dwells in him, and that he does the evil which he
would not do. Romans 7. We all of us fail in most things as S, James says.
Nevertheless the faithful are said to be just, and without spot, because the
blood of Jesus Christ does wash them from all their sins, 1. Ioh. 1. and
because the righteousness of Jesus Christ is ours, wherefore he is also called
the Lord our righteousness, Ier. 23. ver. 6. and 1. Cor. 1. v. 30. and 2. Cor.
5. ver. 21. He is also said to be without deceit, whose repentance is
serious, and his heart without hypocrisy, as Nathanael in the 1. chap. of S.
Ioh. v. 47. And they whose charity and faith is without counterfaiting, Romans
12.9. and 1. Tim. ver. 5. albeit their charity and faith be weak and
imperfect.

In the 6.8. and 9. verses the Angels sent for to preach the gospel, are
Ministers and Pastors of the Church. For God sends not his Angels to preach
in the church but his Ministers, which are often called Angels, in the second
and third Chapters of this very book. Which is also usual in the old
Testament; especially in the 5. of Ecclesiastes, v. 6. And the Prophet Malachie
seems to have taken his name from this. For Malachie signifies The Angel of
the Lord.

From the 6. verse, to the end of the cha. the spirit of God does reveal an
admirable history, and discovers many secrets unto us, for he describes at
large what the condition of the poor Church shall be under the government of
Popery, till the time that the day of judgment shall be at hand. From the 6.
verse to the 13. he tells of 3. Angels that went before, which one after another
at diverse times did preach the gospel, seeking to turn men from Idolatry,
and to make them cast of the Romish bondage. The rest of the chapter is spent
in describing the punishments which God inflicteth upon men because they did
not obey their preaching, and because they did conspire against God: and
therefore as he does produce 3. Angels which at diverse times did preach the
gospel in the midst of Papistry, so does he send 3. Angels to execute Gods
judgments, which at several times do punish the rebellion of men. And as
the third Angel that preached the gospel, did preach it with more
perspicuitie, and greater ferve^cie then the two former, so the third Angel
sent to revenge the hardness of men's hearts, does exercise more dreadful
judgments, and does mow down men as ears of corn, and tread on them like
grapes in the wine press.

Whosoever will open his eyes, and dispell the clowd of hatred, and passion,
which dazels the judgment, shall find (by that which has fallen out within
these few ages, and by that which we see at this day) the acco^plishment of
this admirable prophecy: that is to say, 3 several publications of the
gospel amidst the darkness of Papistrie, and these publications backed by
exemplarie judgments, men still persevering in their obstinacy.

The 1 Angel
In the year of our Lord, 1039. Idolatry being much increased, and the Papal
Empire greatly exalted, God raised up Berenger Archdeacon of Angers, for to
oppose himself against the abuse of the Papacy, especially against the error
of Transubstantiation, and the Popes Supremacy: who taught so powerfully that
France, Spain, Italy, and Germany, were full of men holding the same
confession with Berenger: as Gulielmus Neobrige^sis witnesses in the 2. book
and 13. chap. of his English In the year of our Lord. 1063.
history, where he says that their number was as the sand of the sea. And this
Berenger, was a holy man, and of great learning. The Archbishop Antoni^ in the
2. part of his Chronicle and 16. book does commend him for his honesty, and
humility, and for distributing his goods amongst the poor. Which is confirmed
by Platina in the life of John the 15. It appears (says he) that at that time
there was Oder Abbot of Clunie, and Berenger of Tours, in estimation noted men
both for their learning and religion. A little after he says that after he had
given all his goods to the poor, he got his own living by the labor of his
hands. It is true indeed that appearing at Rome in a council there assembled,
he was constrained for fear of loosing his life, to subscribe to that which
the Pope would have him. But being returned into France he protested that he
did this by compulsion, and perseuered in maintenance of his former doctrine
even to his dying day: upon whom the Bishop of Ments named Hildebert, made an
Epitaph, wherein he bewailes him as a great light that was extinguished, and as
a man of incomparable zeal, and learning. The Popes to suppress this truth,
did spare for no subtletie nor cruelty, and did stir up kings to persecute
these poor religious men. Whereat God also being enraged, sent out great
plagues, and did execute rigorous judgments upon the people of the Church of
Rome. For in the year 1076 (which is about the time of Berenger's death) there
arose a quarrel between the Emperor Henry the fourth, and Pope Gregory the 7
surnamed Hildebrand, who brought many divisions into the Roman Church, and
Empire, during which there were more then 40. bloody battles fought insomuch
that every place did stream with blood, to speak nothing of the pestilence,
inroads, and pillages, that did wast Christendom. Behold here the first
preaching of the Gospel, which God did raise up even in the midst of Popery,
and after this preaching the Angel throwing down the sickle of Gods judgments
upon men.

The 2. Angel
But this darkness still thickning more and more, and the truth being oppressed
as it were by force: Behold about the year 1130 God made this truth to grow up
a fresh again, by the industry of certain servants of his which were the
Disciples of Berenger, amongst which was Peter de Bruis, and Henry de
Thoulouse, and a little after the^, Johannes de Waldo of Lions, which began to
show himself in the year 1158 and translated the holy Scripture into the
vulgar tongue, whose life was an example of sanctity. In hatred of whom they
began to call the truly faithful the Waldenses. These faithful spok just as
this 2. Angel does in the eight verse of this chapter calling the Church of
Rome Babylon, and exhorting every one to go out of her. Against whom Pope
Innocent the 3. caused the Croisadoe to be preached, and within a few months
made above 200000 of them to be slain in Provence, Languedoe, and Guyenna; as
it is reported in the history of John Chassanion translated out of the Albigean
tongue; and all the Authors both of that time, and of after ages stick not to
affirm as much. So God for to punish the rebellion of men threw down his
sickle the second time; and did execute more grievous punishments upon them
then the former. For then the quarrels between the Empire, and the Papacy
(which had slept for a long time) began afresh, under Frederick Barbarossa that
generous Emperor, and pattern of virtue: who was constrained to keep many
armies afoot, to defend himself against the enemies which the Pope had
incensed against him. What man is able to express the horrible slaughters, the
sackings of towns, the pight battles, greater and more in number then those
under the Henry's, till the year 1177. When Pope Alexander the third, trod
upon this Emperors neck on the steps of S. Marks Church in Venice? and in the
mean space the Moors and the Sarrasins wasted Spain, massacring all the
Christians thereabout, and the Saladin destroyed the Kingdom of Jerusalem,
that had cost us more then twelve hundredth thousand men to conquer: which was
brought to ruin in the year 1187, not without an unutterable desolation; for
the repairing whereof all the nobility, and men of courage that were in
France, Germany, Flaunders, England, and Italy, took the Cross upon them in
the time of Philip Augustus, and Lewis the 9. But of all this innumerable
multitude, there came not the tenth part back again, so that in France, and
all the neighboring Countries, there was nothing as it were to be seen, but
widows and orphans. Amidst these confusions, and this general disaster, the
Church of God did subsist miraculously, and notwithstanding all the Popes
persecutions against it, did, and still does continue to this day, and in the
year 1508. the Churches wrongfully called the Waldenses wrote their confession,
and sent it to Ladislaus king of Hungary, which confession is like unto ours:
and when God in this last age did readvance the standard of his truth, these
Churches joined themselves with ours, and suffered persecutions together with
us for the faith of Jesus Christ. So behold the second Angel preaching the
Gospel in the midst of Popery, and at the same time the destroying Angel
sent, for ^o punish the rebellion of men the second time, which did obstinatly
withstand the word of God.

Last of all the third preaching Angel is come in our days, The 3. Angel
opposing himself against the Papal Empire. That is to say, that God for
this third time has raised up certain faithful preachers of the gospel, for
to withstand the Papacy. This has happened in our time, wherein God has raised
up certain faithful Ministers, which have lighted the taper of truth again,
and drawn this candle from under a bushel: Hence come the great breaches that
we have seen to be made in Papistrie, and the gaping creuises in the temple of
the Idol thorough which a man may discern Idolatry from without. Hence come
so many churches to be planted in Germany, England, Scotland, France,
Flaunders, Denmark, Switzerland, Poland, and Hungary, with which when God
shall have bin sufficiently served by their giving testimony to his truth, and
that the malice of the contradicting shall begin to oppress the truth, then
shall the third Angel throw down his sickle, to reap and ^ut down the
enemies of God, and to execute the last effects of his wrath, which are here
represented by a river of blood* an hundred leagues large, and so deep* that
the horses of the enemies ranged in battle against God shall has themselves
in the blood of their Mast^rs, and stand in it up to their bridles; for as this
third preaching Angel spoke more clearly, and boldly, then the two former
did, so the obstinacy of men against this so great a light, shall be punished
with a more fearful punishment. They have persecuted us by massacrings and
burnings: They have disgraced us with odious titles, calling us Huguenots,
Zuinglians, Lutherans, and Calvinists, although our relligion be the ancient
Christian religion, and the religion of the Apostles* and that we are vrge^t,
that the people might have the sight of the scripture, and that the fashion of
saying the common service in a strange tongue might be abolished: complaining of
this that we cannot have a free council, where we might be heard, and where
our adversaries might not be our judges: In steed of the Council of Trent,
where the Pope condemned us without ever hearing us speak for our selves: and
whether we could not have gone safely, by reason of that rule mainetained in
the church of Rome, that me^ are not to stand to those promises, though
ratified by oaths, which they plight to Heretics; a rule practiced upon John
Hus and Hierome of Prague, which were burnt notwithstanding the faithful
promise that they had of a safe conduct. For these, and such like causes we
doubt not (and we speak it with fear, not desiring the ruin but the
conversio^ of our adversaries) that the third destroying Angel shall ere long
throw down his fickle upon the earth, and display the judgments of God upon
the Church of Rome, for the third time.

Hereby it appears that the prophecy of this chapt. is accomplished as
touching the 3 Angels that were sent to preach the Gospel, but as for the 3
destroying Angels which were sent to execute the judgments of God, that the two
former of the is already come, and that the third is not yet come, but is near
at hand.

That which has been said already may suffice for the exposition of this
prophecy. But upon the 6. verse where there is mention made of an Angel
holding the everlasting Gospel, I cannot omit that which Matthew Paris
relates in the year 1256. and Platinae in the life of Alexander the 4. Matthew
Paris reports that William de S. Amore with other choice men of the
University of Paris were cited to Rome for complaining of a book that was
made by the Iacobin preaching Friars the which was entitled the Everlasting
Gospel. And Platinae in the life of Alexander the fourth says that this book
did teach, that the state of grace did proceed, non a lege Evangelis, sed a
lege spiritus, not from the law of the Gospel but from the law of the spirit,
for so did they call their dreams and revelations. The mark at which this book
did aim, was to suppress the Gospel of Christ. A sin so heinous, as might
deservedly have made their whole order to have been rooted out, Precepit Papa
vt novus ille liber que^ Evangelium aeternu^ nominant secreto and si possit
fieri sine fratrum scandalo combureretur.
, nevertheless Matthew Paris tells us that Pope Alevander did content
himself with only commanding the book to be secretly burnt, and (if it might
be) without offending the fraternity. And not long after he made it manifest
that he condemned the^ by co^straint, and because it was a shame for him to do
otherwise, for he drove away the said William de S. Amore, and made him to be
banished, who has written a book of this matter for the justification of
himself.

The third verse is read diversely in the Greek text. For there be some
copies which have the point before the word (...), others put it after. The
translation of the Church of Rome turns it as if the point were before,
tra^slating it thus, Beat^mort^^ qui in domino moriuntur. A modo iam dicit
spiritus vt requiescant a laboribus suis, which seems more smooth to me and
more suitable to the Greek phrase, then if the point were put after the word
A modo. Beda expounds this place thus, As he said that the wicked should
never have any rest: so on the contrary he teaches that the faithful being
assisted by their good works, do rest from hence forth, that is to say, from
the time of their death. For this word (...) does not only signify hereafter,
but also from henceforth, as in the 13. chapt. of S. John, v. 19. and in the
14. chap. v. 7. Howsoever it be, and in whether sense of the two you take this
word, or understand this verse, it does utterly extinguish the imaginary fire
of Purgatory.

In the 14. verse he which sits upon the cloud having the shape of a man,
cannot be Jesus Christ seeing that in the verses following the Angels command
him, and declare the will of God unto him.

In the 16. verse and those which follow the judgments of God are compared to
an harvest, and a vintage. A fashion of speech usual in Scripture; as in the
13. of S. Matthew, the harvest is the end of the world, and the reapers are
the Angels. And in the 76. Psalm, it is said that God does vintage, or cut of
the spirits of Princes, and that he is torrible to the Kings of the earth.

THE PROPHECY CONTAIned in the 17. Chap. of the Apocalypse. CHAP. 6.
1 Then there came one of the 7. Angels which had the 7. Vials, and talked with
me, saying unto me, Come; I will show thee the damnation of the great Where
that sits upon many waters.

2 With who^ the kings of the earth have committed fornication, and the
inhabitants of the earth are drunk with the wine of her fornication.

3 So he carried me away into the wilderness in the spirit, and I saw a woman
sit upon a scarlet colored beast, full of names of blasphemy which had 7.
heads and ten horns.

4 And the woman was araied in purple and scarlet, and gilded with gold, and
precious stones, and pearls, and had a cup of gold in her hand, full of the
abomination, and filthiness of her fornication.

5 And in her forehead was a name written, A mystery, that great Babylon, that
mother of whoredoms, and abominations of the earth.

6 And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of Saints, and with the blood of
the Martyrs of Jesus, and when I saw her, I wo^dred with great marvel.

7 Then the Angel said unto me. Wherefore marveilest thou? I will show thee the
mystery of that woman, and of that beast that bears her, which has seven
heads and ten horns.

8 The beast that thou haste seen, was, and is not, and shall ascend out of
the bottomless pit, and shall go into perdition, and they that dwell on the
earth shall wonder (whose names are not written in the book of life from the
foundation of the world) when they behold the beast that was, and is not, and
yet is.

9 Here is the mind that has wisdom. The 7. heads are 7. mountaine^, whereon
the woman sits: they are also 7. kings.

10 Five (...), fallen, and one is, and an other is not yet (...): and when he
comes he must continue a long space.

11 And the beast that was and is not, is even the eighth, and is one of the 7.
and shall go into destruction.

12 And the 10. horns which thou saw, are 10 kings, which yet have not
received a kingdom, but shall receive power as kings at one hour, with the
beast.

13 These have one mind, and shall give their power, and authority unto the
beast.

14 These shall fight with the Lamb. and the Lamb shall overcome them; for he
is Lord of Lords, and king of kings: and they that are on his side are called
faithful, and chosen.

15 And he said unto me, The waters which thou saw, where the whore sits,
are people, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues.

16 And the 10 horns which thou saw upon the beast, are they that shall
hate the whore, and shall make her desolate, and naked, and shall eat her
flesh, and burn her with fire.

17 For God has put in their hearts to fulfill his will, and to do with one
consent for to give their kingdom unto the beast, until the words of God be
fulfilled.

18 And that woman which thou saw is that great city which reigned over the
kings of the earth.


The Explication.
1 Then came one of the 7. Angels to me which were sent from God to power
down 7 sorts of his judgments upon me^; and this Angel spoke unto me saying,
Come I will show thee the damnation of Rome that great Idolatrous city, which
rules over many people; For by the city, not the buildings, but they which
bear sway therein, are understood.

2 By whose suggestion the kings of the earth have played the Idolatours, and
she has made the inahbitants of the earth drunken with her Idolatry.

3 So then the Angel took me, and carried me aside into a secret place, and I
saw the city of Rome represented under the form of a woman, which bore rule
over an Empire, the chief governors where of were clad in scarlet, and did
assume many blasphemous titles, and prerogatives. And this Empire seated upon
7. hills had 7 sorts of diverse successiue governments, and was composed of ten
realms, and principal parts.

4 And this city (that is to say the rulers of it) was clad in purple and
scarlet, having a crown of gold upon her head, and a cross of gold upon her
feet, and upon her crown, and on her hands, many precious stones, with a
mantle embrodered with pearl; and through her great magnificence she made all
the people to drink of the puddle of her Idolatry,

5 And made profession of great mysteries in her doctrine, being indeed the
great Babylon, the headspring of Idolatry; and of the abominations of the
world.

6 And I saw this city glutted with the blood of the faithful, raising up
persecutions, and making the martyrs to be massacred, and having seen this, I
was stricken with fear, and stood amazed.

7 Then the Angel said unto me, why do thou wonder? I will show thee the
interpretation of the vision, and will tell thee what the beast represented by
a woman means, and what the Empire is, that is figured by a beast having 7.
heads, and ten horns.

8 The beast which thou saw is the Empire of Rome, which did continue for a
long time, but now is no more, being va^quisht, and driven from Rome, and
Italy by the Lumbards: but shall rise up again from a low place, and be
restored by the Papacy, till the time that God at last shall destroy it. And
the inhabitants of the earth, which have not been enrolled from the foundation
of the world amongst the number of the Elect, shall wonder seeing the Empire of
Rome, which was at Rome but was driven thence by the Lumbards, and
nevertheless does now grow up again, and is reerected by the Papacy, so
that a man may say that the Roman Empire is, and is not; that it is not because
the Roman Emperors are no more; that it is because the Pope does in a manner
set up the Empire again although it be under another name and form.

9 Here is need of wisdom to understand this matter. In this vision of the
beast which has 7 heads and 10 horns, by the 7. heads we are to understand
7. hills, upon which the city of Rome is situate.

10 As also 7. sorts of soueraintie or government which must bear rule at
Rome one after another, to wit, the kings the Consuls, the military Tribunes,
the Decemvirs, the Dictatours, the Emperors and the Popes. The 6. is now, to
wit, the Emperors: And the 7, (to wit, the Popes those Pontifical earthly
monarchs) is not yet come, and when it shall come, it shall continue for a
certain time.

11 And also by the Roman Empire, which was and is now no more, the Empire of
Charlemaigne, and his successors, is to be understood, which did govern at
Rome for a time before the Monarchy of the Popes was fully perfected; which
Emperors although they be an 8 head, do yet nevertheless bear the name of
one of the 7. to wit of the Emperors.

12 But by the 10 horns of this beast which is the Roman Papal Empire, are
understood 10 kings which have not as yet begun to reign, but shall reign
together with the Roman Papal Empire.

13 The counsels of these kings are ruled by the council of the Papal Empire,
and they lend assistance unto this Empire with their power.

14 They shall fight against Jesus Christ, but Jesus Christ shall overcome them
because he is Lord of Lords, and king of kings, and they which are his, are
called elect and faithful.

15 After he said unto me, the waters which thou saw, over which Rome the
Idolatresse has dominion, do signify people, and multitudes, and nations of
diverse languages.

16 And the 10 horns which thou sawst this Empire to have, are the same 10
kings, which in the end shall conspire against it, and consume it, and burn
it.

17 For God has inclined their hearts that they should do his will in executing
his judgments, and that they should lay their heads together, and should aid
this Papal Empire with their forces, only until the time of its continuance
appointed by God be accomplished.

18 And this woman which thou sawst is Rome that great city, which commands the
realms of the earth.

The first part of this Prophecy.
1 Then there came one of the 7 Angels which had the 7 viols, and talked with
me saying unto me; come I will show thee the damnation of the great where that
sits upon many waters.

The Exposition.
Then came one of the 7 Angels to me were sent from God to power down 7 sorts
of his judgments upon men, and this Angel spoke unto me saying; Come I will
show thee the damnation of Rome that great Idolatrous city, which rules over
many people, for by the city not the buildings, but they that bear sway
there^^ are understood.

The Proof.
This Chapter is easy to be understood, for the 6. first verses are expounded
by those which follow, and all the terms which the Angel uses are suitable to
the style of the Prophets. They compare the Church to a woman, calling her the
daughter of Sion, the spowse of our God: and so in the Apocalypse, chap. 12. he
has represented the Church under the form of a woman: it is no marvel
therefore, if the enemy of the Church, and the head of the Church opposite to
God, be figured by a woman.

The same Prophets do call our covenant with God a marriage, and the purity of
our service to God by the name of chastity, and by a consequent they call
Idolatry which does violate this marriage, adultery, and spiritual
fornication. Ier. 3.9.
Jeremy says, that Judah has committed fornication with stones and stooks.
According to this manner of speech do they use to call the people, and cities
that are given to Idolatry, by the name of harlots, and strumpets. Isaiah in
his 1. Chap. v. 21. How is the faithful city become an harlot? The 16. of
Ezechiel is full of examples in this kind. Nahum speaks thus of Niniuie, The
harlot that sells the people through her whordome, Nahum 3.4.
which words are as it were all one with the words of S. John here in this
prophecy.

Where we are diligently to note that the Prophets and S. John by the cities
do not understand their walls, but those which dwell in them, and more
especially such as are in authority, and are set over them. For S. John says
that this city reigns over many people, and that she does seduce the kings
of the earth, which cannot agree to the walls, and houses, nor yet to the
people of the city of Rome, but only to such as govern there.

Now that this city of which S. John speaks is Rome, there is no man that
doubts, and our adversaries themselves acknowledge it. For what city can
there be which has 7 hills, which reigns over kings, which is an
Idolatresse, whose governors are clothed in skarlet; doubtless there is no
other of this nature but Rome; And from S. John's time there has been no other
city having 7 hills that did reign over the earth. Bellarmine in his 3 book
De Pontifice Romano, and 13 Chap. Secund^ dici potest and meo iudicio melius
per meretricem intelligi Romam.
We may say, and that better in my judgment, that by the whore Rome is
understood. The Jesuits Ribera, and Viega say the same in their expositions of
this Chap. Tertullian in his book against the Jews, Babylon apud Iohanne^
nostrum Romanae vrbis figuram portat, proinde and magnae, and regno superbae,
and sanctorum debellatricis.
Babylon in S. John does represent Rome, being as great, and as proud of her
dominions, and as tyrannising over the Saints as ever Babylon was. The like
unto which he says in his 3 book and 8. chap. against Marcion. S. Hierome in
the 11. question to Algasia, According to the Revelation of S. John in the
forehead of the queen clad in purple there was a name of blasphemy written, to
wit, Rome the everlasting, and in his 17. Epist. to Marcella, Et hic puto locus
sanctior est Tarpeia rupe quae de coelo saepius fulminata ostendit quod domine
displiceret. Lege Apocalypsin Johan. and quod de muliere purpurata cantetur
contuere.
This place of Bethlehem* I am persuaded is more holy then that Tarpeian rock
(that is to say then the Capitol of Rome) which by being often struck with
thunder from heaven did show that it did not please God. Read the Revelation of
S. John, and see that which is there foretold of the whore clad in purple, and
of the blasphemy written in her forehead, and of the 7. hills, and of many
waters, and the destruction of Babylon. Bellarmine does confess this, but
says that S. John speaks of heatbenish Rome, and not of Christian Rome, such
as it is now adays. Which is altogether incoherent; 1. For heathnish Rome did
not reign over kings, seeing that it did put down kings. 2. Heathnish Rome
did not seduce the kings by flattery, and persuasion, seeing that it went
down rightly to work, and conquered the^ by open force. 3. Moreover here is
mention made of the final ruin of Rome, so that it shall never be built up
again, which yet never befell heathenish Rome; when therefore this destruction
foretold of shall arrive, it shall not light upon the city whilst it is
heathenish, but after that Paganism is abolished. And indeed S. Hierom in the
Epistle to Marcella formerly alleged, albeit he say that Rome by the
confession of Christ has defaced the name of blasphemy; nevertheless he
spares not in the same place to recite the threatenings in the Apocalypse against
it as not yet come, and does exhort Marcella to go out of Babylon, which were
absurd if these threatenings had been pronounced only against heathnish Rome.

I would also know what sins should be the cause of the final destruction of
Rome. Is it likely that it shall be destroyed for the sins committed by Nero
or Domitian 1500 years since? So it is clear that it shall be destroyed for
the sins found in it upon the time of its destruction. Nor may we omit that
which the King notes as very fitting to this purpose, to wit, that S. John
gives us to understand that his intent is to speak of things to come, but
heathnish Rome and the idolatry thereof were present in S. John's time. To
conclude, the truth is so clear on our side, that the Jesuits themselves which
have written commentaries upon the Apocalypse, to wit, Ribera, and Viega, take
our parts, and speak for us. Ribera in Apoc. ca. 14. number. 42 De Roma
intelligendum non solum qualis sub Ethnici^ imperatori^us olim suit sedetia^
qualis in fine seculi futura est.
Ribera says, We are to understand this not only of Rome as it was heretofore
under the Emperors, but also as it shall be a^ the end of the world. Viega
after the same manner. Viega in 17. Apoc. com. 1. Sec. 3 omnia quae in his
capitibus commemora^tur in Romanam vrb^m apertissime quadrant.
All that which is spoken in these chapters does manifestly agree to Rome. As
for the name of Babylon it is to be applied to Rome which served Idols before
ever it did receive the faith of Christ, and to Rome as it shall be a little
before the time of Antichrist.

De praescriptione adversus Hermogenem Foelix ecclesia cui t^tam doctrinam
Apostoli cum sanguine suo pro suderunt.
Tertullian (I must confess) says that the Church of Rome is happy, to which
the Prophets did power out their doctrine together with their blood. But he
speaks this to the church and not to the city, that is, to a few of the
faithful which lay hid amidst the corruption of this great city, which
seems to be never the purer now a days for all its outward profession of
christianity: but if the preaching of Jesus Christ in Capernaum* and in
Jerusalem did not exempt these towns from the curse of God, why should the
presence of Saint Peter at Rome be able to exempt it for ever from malediction.

Some of the ancient were of opinion that this great whore did signify the
whole body and assembly of the wicked, and the city of the devil: which is
refelled hereby, because S. John says, that she reigns over the nations:
for if this exposition were true, then she must needs reign over her self;
she that reigns cannot be the same thing with those over whom she reigns.
Hereunto add that the 7 hills and the 7 kings, and the habit of scarlet, cannot
be applied to this meaning.

That to sit upon many waters, does signify to reign over many people, S.
John himself does say in the 15 verse, and we have proved it in an other
place more at large.

The second part of this prophecy.
2 With who^ the kings of the earth have committed fornication, and the
inhabitants of the earth are drunk with the wine of her fornication.

The Exposition.
By whose suggestion the kings of the earth have played the Idolatours, and she
has made the inhabitants of the earth drunken with her Idolatry.

The Proof.
The Papal Empire being not of strength sufficient to abolish the kings, does
make them drunk, and lay them asleep. It is the Pope that does abuse the
bounty of our kings, and ungratefully forgetting what benefactours they have
been unto him has taken the third part of their land from them, and the fifth
part of their subjects, over whom he boasts that he has absolute power, to
give and take away their crowns at his pleasure, and receives homage, and an
oath of allegiance from them, and in way of recompense paies the^ with
trifles, sending the^ some holy Beads, some Indulgences, or certain supposed
relics: and gives them the privilege of communicating under both kinds, that
is to say, he permits them, by a special favor, to obey Jesus Christ, and
gives them that by way of a privilege, which Jesus Christ did grant to al
Christians. Likewise it is to gratify kings that he does suffer them to hold
his horses bridle, and when his Holiness is reading the Mass in his own
person, to hold the basin unto him on their knees, as if they were subdeacons.

It is the Pope that has taken from our kings the divine service in the
language of their native countries; and has given them the Roman language in
token of subjection; Which has taken the French liturgy from them, and given
them another to be sung after the Romish fashion; which has taken away wives
from priests: which has brought up images, and established transubstantiation,
the feast God, the adoration of the Sacrament, and which has wrested the holy
scripture out of the hands of the people.

The third part of this prophecy.
3 So he carried me away into the wilderness in the spirit, and I saw a woman
sit upon a scarlet colored beast, full of names of blasphemy which had seven
heads, and ten horns.

The Exposition.
3 So then the Angel took me, and carried me aside into a secret place, and I
saw the city of Rome represented under the form of a woman, which bore rule
over an Empire, the chief governors where of were clad in scarlet, and did
assume many blasphemous titles, and prerogatives. And this Empire seated upon
7. hills had 7 sorts of diverse successiue governments, and was composed of ten
realms, and principal parts.

The Proof.
By the woman (says S. John) verse 18 the city is to be understood having
seaue^ hills, that is to say, Rome. Now by the city we are not to understand
the walls, seeing that he says that this city does reign over the people,
and uses flattery to make the kings of the earth drunk: which cannot agree
to the buildings, but only to the governors of the city, that is to say, to
the Pope and his consistory. This woman therefore is mounted on a beast having
7 heads and 10 horns, that is to say, she does reign over the Roman Empire,
which is fained to have 7 heads because of the 7 hills on which Rome is
situate, and because of the 7 sorts of sovereignty which have borne rule over
that place successively, as the Angel does expound it in the 9 and 10 verses,
and we have showed it at large in the exposition of the 13. chap. and 1. verse.
She is also clad in skarlet, for this is the Popes habit, not only by custom,
but by express rule: as the third book of holy ceremonies says in the 3
sect. and 5. chap. Ruber color proprie ad Papam pertinet; The red color does
properly appertain to the Pope. and in the Planum totum cu^ magno scabell^
coopertum e^it panno ^occin^o.
1. book, 1. chap. and 9. sect. it is said that the Popes chair, and the
place upon which it stands must be covered al over with cloth of skarlet. There
is none of his apparel, even down to his stockings, and shoes, that is not
of skarlet, as it is said in the Caligis rubei^, sandaleis rubeis aurea cruce
orna^is
Chap. of the 1. section of the first book. this is also the color of the
Cardinals habit, as every man sees. Nay which is more, by the ordinance of
Pope Paulus the 2. the Cardinals mules must be covered over with skarlet, as
Platina reports in his life. Being willing it seems that this prophecy which
represents the head of this Empire mounted upon a beast covered with skarlet,
should also agree to every Cardinal apart.

As for the names of blasphemy which this Papal Empire does assume, see that
which has been said of this upon the 5. verse of the 13. chap.

The 4 part of this Prophecy.
4 And the woman was araied in purple and scarlet, and gilded with gold, and
precious stones, and pearls, and had a cup of gold in her hand, full of the
abomination, and filthiness of her fornication.

The Exposition.
4 And this city (that is to say the rulers of it) was clad in purple and
scarlet, having a crown of gold upon her head, and a cross of gold upon her
feet, and upon her crown, and on her hands many precious stones, with a mantle
embrodered with pearl; and through her great magnificence she made all the
people to drink of the puddle of her Idolatry,

The Proof.
This proposition is drawn from experience known to every man, and from the
rules of the Church of Rome published by our adversaries. The 6. Chap. and
first section of the first book of holy ceremonies has these words; They put
red stockings on his legs, and red shoes upon his feet adorned with a cross
of gold; and a little after, He is apparelled with a long Albe, a girdle,
Stolam orn^tam cum per lis pendent^ a collo.
and a stole hanging upon his neck all embost with pearl.

Whereas it is added that this whore does give her false doctrines unto men in
a cup of gold, the meaning thereof is that she gives them with pomp, and
outward magnificence.

The capital letters of these words, Poculum Aureum Plenum Abominationum,
being put together make up Papa: Whether it be that it falls out so by chance,
or rather that God would hereby give us an advertisement. And that which makes
this observation the better worthy the noting, is that it is found in Latin,
which is the language of the Church of Rome.

What these abominations are of which Rome makes the people to drink I have
already showed throughout my whole second book.

The 5. part of this prophecy.
5 And in her forehead was a name written, A mystery, that great Babylon, that
mother of whoredoms, and abominations of the earth.

6 And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of Saints, and with the blood of
the Martyrs of Jesus, and when I saw her, I wo^dred with great marvel.

The Exposition.
5 And made profession of great mysteries in her doctrine, being indeed the
great Babylon, the headspring of Idolatry, and of the abominations of the
world.

6 And I saw this city glutted with the blood of the faithful, raising up
persecutions, and making the martyrs to be massacred, and having seen this, I
was stricken with fear, and stood amazed.

The Proof.
We have showed in the exposition of the 13. chap. and 16. verse that
according to the style of the Prophets and the Apocalypse, the mark in the
forehead signifies the profession of religion; in this place therefore, to have
the name, Mystery, written in the forehead, signifies to make profession of
abstruse, and hidden mysteries, such as all the mysteries of the Mass are* of
which Pope Innocent has written 6. books, wherein he finds great mysteries in
all the attire, and every action of the Priest; The several habits of the
Priest are enigmaticall, and all his gestures allegorical, the priest turns
his back to the people, because God said unto Moses Ex. 33 23
thou shall see my back parts. He which reads the Epistle, goes in at one
side of the pulpit, and out at another, because it is written, Mat. 2.12
They were warned from God to turn another way. He which serves the priest
and bears up his train, does turn and apply his body to every motion of the
priest, because it is written, Where I am there shall my servant be. In the
Episcopal Mass they kiss the Bishop on his shoulder looking upon his face
backward, because it is written, Videmus in aenigmate. The Priests follow the
cross being clothed in white surplisses, because it is written, They shall
follow the Lamb being clothed in white roabes. And all is done is a strange
language, in words mumbled out softly, for fear (says Pope Innocent) least
the flies should taste the sweetness of this ointment. But the greatest mystery
of all others is the doctrine of transubstantiation which makes God with five
words, and restraines a human body within a point, that is to say, does
enclude that which is long, within that which has no length, and places all
the parts of a man's body under one only point, and does at the same time make
length to be in the host, and no length breadth, and no breadth.

There is a mystery also in their saying over the same prayer, 7, or 50 times
precisely, according to the number of the beads of their bracelet, and in their
making virtue to be in a number, so that if a man fail in reckoning, all the
grace of the prayer is gone, and the fruit thereof lost. Besides we have showed
in our exposition of of the 2. chapt. of the 2. to the Thessalonians, that
Popery is wholly wouen together with a profound mystery, and wonderful craft.

Now although this be the meaning of this prophecy, yet this lets not but
that the holy Ghost may have a reference to the secret and mystical name of
the city of Rome which she uses in her ceremonies, and most secret mysteries.
Which name being on a time uttered by Valerius Soranus, he was forthwith
punnisht, as Pliny reports in his 3. book and 5. chap. and Julius Solinus
in the first chapter of his first book.

Joseph Scaliger a man no less faithful and honest, then learned, has often
told me that being at Rome with Mounsieur de Abin Ambassador for the king,
amongst diverse other things of S. Angeloes Castle, that were showed them, they
saw old plain miters, which had the word Mysterium engraued on their front.
And Brocard witnesses as much in his notes upon this place. If it be so, we
need seek no farther for any other interpretation.

This same Rome, in regard of those which reign there, is called Babylon,
because of the resemblance between these two. Babylon did destroy the Temple,
and this does destroy the Church which is the Temple of God; Babylon did lead
men into Captivity, and this does detain the Church captive under the yoke of
the Inquisition, and of tyranny; Babylon did gather all the riches of the
earth under herself, and this does enrich herself by the spoils of
christianity; Babylon was given to Idolatry, and so is this too; Both cities
were first built by thieves. The captivity of Babylon was a forerunning sign
of the first coming of our Lord, and the captivity of the Church under the
Romish bo^dags, is a forerunning sign of the second coming of the son of
God. The Fathers understood it so. Tertullian has told us above that S. John's
Babylon is Rome, and St Augustine in the 18 book of the city of God. chap.
2.22. says, Babylon is the first Rome, and Rome is the second Babylon.

As for the cruelties and persecutions, we which have suffered them and in
whose families the wounds are yet to be seen, believe them without farther
proofs. See what we have said of this upon the 7 verse of the 13 Chapter.

The 6. part of this prophecy.
7 Then the Angel said unto me. Wherefore marveilest thou? I will show thee the
mystery of that woman, and of that beast that bears her, which has seven
heads and ten horns.

8 The beast that thou haste seen, was, and is not, and shall ascend out of
the bottomless pit, and shall go into perdition, and they that dwell on the
earth shall wonder (whose names are not written in the book of life from the
foundation of the world) when they behold the beast that was, and is not, and
yet is.

The Exposition.
7 Then the Angel said unto me, why do thou wonder? I will show thee the
interpretation of the vision, and will tell thee what the beast represented by
a woman means, and what the Empire is, that is figured by a beast having 7.
heads, and ten horns.

8 The beast which thou saw is the Empire of Rome, which did continue for a
long time, but now is no more, being va^quisht, and driven from Rome, and
Italy by the Lumbards: but shall rise up again from a low place, and be
restored by the Papacy, till the time that God at last shall destroy it. And
the inhabitants of the earth, which have not been enrolled from the foundation
of the world amongst the number of the Elect, shall wonder seeing the Empire of
Rome, which was at Rome but was driven thence by the Lumbards, and
nevertheless does now grow up again, and is reerected by the Papacy, so
that a man may say that the Roman Empire is, and is not; that it is not because
the Roman Emperors are no more; that it is because the Pope does in a manner
set up the Empire again although it be under another name and form.

The Proof.
For the understanding of this prophecy we are to note that S. John in this 8.
v. does follow the style of the Prophets, which is to speak of things to come
as if they were present, or past; and to transport his spirit beyond future
ages, as if they were already gone. For S. John in this place does speak as if
he were living at the time wherein (the Roman Empire being ruinated by the
Lumbards) the Pope did cast about to compass a temporal Monarchy, and to
reerect the Empire in his own person: The understanding of this cleereth the
prophecy, for larger proofs whereof turn back to that which we have said
upon the 1 and 3 verses of the 13 Chapter.

That which is said at the end is plain enough of it self, to wit, that the
Pope is Emperor under another title, and another form of Empire. For we have
showed, how he has drawn the rights, and dignities of Emperors unto
himself; Although the form of his government be diverse from theirs. For the
Emperors did reign by force, but he by fraud; In the ancient Empire the
spiritual power was only a dependence of the temporal, but in the papacy the
Temporal power does depend upon the spiritual.

The 7. part of this prophecy.
9 Here is the mind that has wisdom. The 7. heads are 7. mountains, whereon
the woman sits* they are also 7. kings.

10 Five are fallen, and one is, and an other is not yet come: and when he
comes he must continue a long space.

11 And the beast that was and is not* is even the eighth, and is one of the 7.
and shall go into destruction.

The Exposition.
9 Here is need of wisdom to understand this matter. In this vision of the
beast which has 7 heads and 10 horns, by the 7* heads we are to understand
7. hills, upon which the city of Rome is situate.

10 As also 7. sorts of sovereignty or government which must bear rule at
Rome one after another, to wit* the kings the Consuls, the military Tribunes,
the Decemvirs, the Dictatours, the Emperors and the Popes. The 6. is now, to
wit* the Emperors: And the 7* (to wit, the Popes those Pontifical earthly
monarchs) is not yet come, and when it shall come, it shall continue for a
certain time.

11 And also by the Roman Empire, which was and is now no more, the Empire of
Charlemaigne, and his successors, is to be understood, which did govern at
Rome for a time before the Monarchy of the Popes was fully perfected; which
Emperors although they be an 8 head, do yet nevertheless bear the name of
one of the 7. to wit of the Emperors.

This exposition does prove it self, and experience speaks for it without any
proof. Besides as concerning the 7* hills; and 7 sorts of soveraigntie, we
have spoken of them at large in the 13 chap. and 1. verse.

The 8 part of this Prophecy.
12 and the 10. horns which thou saw, are 10 kings, which yet have not
received a kingdom, but shall receive power as kings at one hour, with the
beast.

13 These have one mind, and shall give their power, and authority unto the
beast.

14 These shall fight with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them; for he
is Lord of Lords* and king of kings: and they that are on his side are called
faithful, and chosen.

The Exposition.
12 But by the 10 horns of this beast which is the Roman Papal Empire, are
understood 10 kings which have not as yet begun to reign, but shall reign
together with the Roman Papal Empire.

13 The counsels of these kings are ruled by the counsel of the Papal Empire,
and they lend assistance unto this Empire with their power.

14 They shall fight against Jesus Christ, but Jesus Christ shall overcome them
because he is Lord of Lords, and king of kings, and they which are his, are
called elect and faithful.

The Proof.
In this number of 10 kings does the evidence of this prophecy principally
appear. We shall see anon in the exposition of the 7 chap. of Daniel, how that
a little before the Pope came to be an earthly Monarch, the ancient Roman
Empire was divided into 10 kingdoms, and cut out into 10 pieces. We have also
seen upon the 1 verse of the 13 chap. that the Roman Empire, whilst it was in
its flourishing estate, did consist of 10 provinces and principal parts. But
here mention is made of Kings that the Pope shall subject unto himself and
which shall unite themselves ^n a bond of amity with the Pope. Gregory the 7
surnamed Hildebrand was he that did first exalt the Papacy to the An. 107^.
height of glory, and worldly greatness: Now at the same time 10 kingdoms did
serve Papisme, first The Empire of Germany, 2. France, 3. England, 4.
Scotland, 5. Denmark, 6. Polonie, 7. the kingdom of Spain 8. the kingdom of
Navarre. 9. The kingdom of Hungary, 10. the kingdom of Naples, and Sicilie.
Yea and in the memory of our forefathers Pope Leo the 10, being as yet in his
full force, a little before the wound which he received, Papistrie held 10
kingdoms in possession. 1. The Empire of Germany. 2. France. 3. England, 4.
Scotland, 5. Denmark. 6. Polonie, 7. Hungary. 8. The realm of Arragon,
Naples, and Sicilie. 9. The realm of Castile. 10. The realm of Portugal. For
the realm of Bohemia is a fiefe of the Empire of Germany, and an Electorate
of the Empire. Moreover it is said that these kings shall begin to reign
together with the beast, because (as the King of great Britain has truly
noted) all the realms as it were of Christendom, as well as the Papal Monarch
(if we look back to their first original) took their beginning from the
division of the Roman Empire. Since therefore by this so clear an exposition
it is evident that the King of England is one of those which S. John speaks of,
and that his predecessors of England and Scotland did make up two horns of
this beast what pleasure is it unto this so great a King to read himself
mentioned in these divine revelations? or who ca^ better diue into the meaning
of this prophecy, then he which makes up a part of the prophecy

The 9 part of this prophecy.
15 And he said unto me, The waters which thou saw, where the whore sits,
are people, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues.

16 And the 10 horns which thou saw upon the beast, are they that shall
hate the whore, and shall make her desolate, and naked, and shall eat her
flesh, and burn her with fire.

17 For God has put in their hearts to fulfill his will, and to do with one
consent for to give their kingdom unto the beast, until the words of God be
fulfilled.

18 And that woman which thou saw is that great city which reigned over the
kings of the earth.

The Exposition.
15 After he said unto me, the waters which thou saw, over which Rome the
Idolatresse has dominion, do signify people, and multitudes, and nations of
diverse languages.

16 And the 10 horns which thou sawst this Empire to have, are the same 10
kings, which in the end shall conspire against it, and consume it, and burn
it.

17 For God has inclined their hearts that they should do his will in executing
his judgments, and that they should lay their heads together, and should aid
this Papal Empire with their forces, only until the time of its continuance
appointed by God be accomplished.

18 And this woman which thou sawst is Rome that great city, which commands the
realms of the earth.

The Proof.
That which is prophetical in these 4. verses is not yet accomplished, but the
accomplishment of the prophecies precede^t, does make us presume of the
certainty of this, and is a token that it shall be accomplished ere long. It
lies kings upon to set themselves forward to serve God in this so great a
work. Blessed shall he be (says the Ps. 137
Psamist) which shall dash the children of Babell against the stones. These
children of Babell are the false doctrines. This stone is Jesus Christ, a
chosen, tried stone, the foundation stone of the Church Es. 28.16. and 8 14.
Mat. 21.
upon which stone whosoever falls shall be broken.

THE PROPHECY CONTAIned in the 18. Chap. of the Apocalypse. CHAP. 7.
1 And after these things I saw another Angel come down from heaven, having
great power, so that the earth was lightened with his glory.

2 And he cried out mightily with a loud voice, saying, it is fallen it is
fallen, Babylon that great city, and is become the habitation of devils, and
the hold of foul spirits, and a cage of every unclean, and hateful bird.

3 For all nations have drunken of the wine of the wrath af her fornication,
and the kings of the earth have committed fornication with her, and the
merchants of the earth are waxed rich of the abundance of her pleasures.

4 And I heard an other voice from heaven saying go out of her my people, that
ye be not partakers of her sins: and that ye receive not of her plagues.

5 For her sins are come up into heaven, and God has remembered her
iniquities.

6 Reward her even as she has rewarded you, and give her double according to
her works: and in the cup that she has filled to you, fill her the double.

7 In as much as she glorified her self, and lived in pleasure, so much give
ye to her torment and sorrow: for she says in her heart I sit being a queen,
and am no widow, and shall see no mourning.

8 Therefore shall her plagues come at one day, death, and sorrow, and famine,
she shall be burnt with fire: for that God which condemns her, is a strong
Lord.

9 And the kings of the earth shall bewail her, and lament for her, which have
committed fornication and lived in pleasure with her, when they shall see that
smoke of that her burning.

10 And shall stand a far of for fear of her torment, saying, Alas, alas
that great city Babylon, that mighty city, for in one hour is thy judgment
come.

11 And the merchants of the earth shall weep, and wail over her: for no man
buyeth their ware any more.

12 The ware of gold, and silver, and of precious stones, and of pearls, and
of fine linen, and of purple, and of silk, and of skarlet* and of all manner
of sweet wood, and of all vessels of yvorie, and of all vessels of most
precious wood, and of brass, and of iron, and of marble.

13 And of cinnamon, and odours, and ointments, and frankincense, and wine, and
oil, and fine flower, and wheat, and beasts, and sheep, and horses, and
chariots, and servants and souls of men.

14 And the apples that thy soul lusted after are departed from thee, and all
things which were fat and excellent are departed from thee, and thou shall find
them no more.

15 The merchants of these things which were waxed rich, shall stand a far of
from her, for fear of her torment, weeping and wailing.

16 And saying alas, alas, that great city, that was clothed in fine linen,
and purple, and skarlet, and gilded with gold, and precious stones, and
pearls. How could so great riches come to desolation in one hour?

17 And every shipmaster, and all the people that occupy ships, and ship men,
and whosoever traffic on the sea shall stand a far off,

18 And cry, when they see that smoke of that her burning, saying, what city
was like unto this great city?

19 And they shall cast dust on their heads, and cry, weeping and wailing, and
say, Alas, alas, that great city, wherein were made rich all that had ships on
the sea by her costlinesse: for in one hour she is made desolate.

20 O heaven rejoice of her, and the holy Apostles, and Prophets: for God has
punnished her, to be revenged on her for your sakes.

21 Then a mighty Angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and cast it
into the sea, saying, with such violence shall that great city Babylon be
cast, and shall be found no more.

22 And the voice of harpers, and musicians, and of pipers, and trumpeters
shall be heard no more in thee, and no crafts-man of what craft soever he be,
shall be found any more in thee: and the sound of a millstone shall be heard no
more in thee.

23 And the light of a candle shall shine no more in thee: and the voice of the
bridegroom, and of the bride shall be heard no more in thee: for thy
merchants were the great men of the earth: and with thine enchantments were all
nations deceaved.

24 And in her was found the blood of the Prophets, and of the Saints, and of
all that were slain upon the earth.


The Explication.
1 Afterward I saw another Angel come down from heaven, to wit, the son of
God, being armed with sovereign power.

2 Who cried out with a loud voice, saying, she is fallen, she is fallen, that
great city of Rome, because she is become the habitation of devils, and the
hold of deceitful spirits, and of all sorts of orders distinguished by their
habits, as of strange birds.

3 For all nations have been made drunk with the intoxicating wine of her
Idolatry, and the kings of the earth did cleave unto her Idolatry: and the
merchandise of benefices, pardons, annates, taxes, dispensations, indulgences,
and absolutions, did enrich an infinite number of persons that did live by her
traffic.

4 Afterward I heard the voice of God from heaven saying, ye my people go out
from the Church of Rome, and from Popery; for fear least ye be defiled in
her superstition, and perish together with her.

5 For her sins being linckt together in a long chain have raught up to the
heavenly throne of God, there to be judged of him, and God is resolved to
pu^nish her iniquities.

6 Ye people and kings whom she has tyrannized over, and held captives,
revenge your selves upon her, and give her double: and serve her as she has
served you, even to the double.

7 Give her as much affliction as she has had glory, that she may weep as
much as she has ioyed in her delicious sportes and dissoluteness. For she
said in her heart. I rule, and am queen, and mother of all churches, which
cannot be judged of any. I am the spowse of Christ, and shall never fall. For I
cannot err in the faith, nor ever be cast of, nor left by Christ.

8 For these causes shall these plagues come upon her at once, to wit, death,
and sorrow, and famine, and she shall be burnt with fire, for God is able to
do her justice.

9 And there shall be To wit, the Kings that will not ioin themselves with
others which shall conspire against her.
kings of the earth, which having committed Idolatry with her, and having had a
part in her dissoluteness, shall lament and take on, seeing her consumed by
fire.

10 And they shall stand a far of, without lending her any succor, saying,
Alas; Rome, thou great and mighty city, how is thy destruction come upon thee
so suddenly?

11 Likewise the Prelates, great penitentiaries, bullists, dataries, notaries,
and protonotaries Apostolical, Factours, and Banckers, which help men to the
remission of their sins by letters of exchange, all these shall bewail the
destruction of Rome, and not they only but all sorts of merchants too shall
take on, because no man thencefoorth shall buy any more of their wares.

12 Because no man shall buy any more gold, nor silver, for to make crucifixes,
chalices, covers for cups, candlesticks, and other moueables of the Church: Nor
precious stones, to set them in the Popes triple crown, and in Bishops rings,
and for an ornament of the caskets that contain relics; Nor pearls to hang
about the Popes mantle, and to adorn^ the Roman Courtizans: Nor silk, nor
skarlet, nor any kind of rich stuff, for to cloth their images, and their
Cardinals, and to make Copes for priests, and Banners for processions: Nor
other precious things, for to embellish the palaces of Cardinals, and other
Prelates, and officers of the Pope, as marble and precious wood; Nor brass, nor
yuorie, to make deskes, boxes, and.

13 Nor odours and perfumes, to perfume the Church, or for the private delights
of Prelates, and officers of the Ecclesiastical court. Nor wines and choice
fruits for their tables. Nor riding horses, nor coach horses, for the Popes
train and his Cardinals. Nor captives and servile consciences, nor men's
souls, which were bought and sold, but this traffic shall be abolisht, by the
destruction of Rome.

14 (For o wretched city, all this worldly prosperity, all this riot of
luxury shall be taken away from thee, and thou shall enjoy them no longer)

15 All such therefore as shall be enricht by this traffic, and which have
preyed upon the people under the show of Religion, shall forsake her in her
need, fearing to be wrapped in the same ruin, and shall bewail her with great
lamentation.

16 Saying, alas Rome, thou so mighty and stately a city! whose governors
were clothed in silk, and purple, and skarlet, and crowned with gold, and
precious stones, how could thou fall from al these riches in so short a space?

17 The Pilots themselves, and the mariners, which did serve to carry the
foresaid merchandise, shall withdraw themselves without lending her any aid.

18 And seeing the smoke of her burning shall cry out saying, what city was
like unto the city of Rome?

19 And shall cast dust upon their heads, and shall cry out weeping, and
lamenting, and say, alas, alas! that great city in which all those that did
traffic were made rich by her wealth, how she is become desolate in an
instant!

20 O ye heavenly spirits, which do rejoice at the conversion of one only
sinner, rejoice at her ruin; ye holy Apostles also and Prophets: For it is
for your sakes that God has taken vengeance of her.

21 Then I saw a mighty Angel take up a great stone like a millstone, and cast
it into the sea, saying. So shall Rome be cast into the deep, and abolisht
everlastingly and shall apeare no more then a millstone cast into the sea, which
never rises up again to the top of the water.

22 23 And all sorts of delights, and pleasures, of ornaments, commodities, and
recreations, are past from thee. Whereas before the factours of Rome did live
like Princes, and the people and nations were (...) the Latin Church is nothing
else but a shop, with a table of money changers standing in the midst of it,
which Christ shall overturne the second time, when the prophecy contained in
this chapter shall be accomplished.

THE PROPHECY CONtained in the 7. chapter of Daniell. CHAP. 8.
1 In the first year of Belshazzar king of Babell Daniel saw a dream, and
there were visions in his head, upon his bed: then he wrote the dream, and
declared the sum of the matter.

2 Daniel spoke and said, I saw in my vision by night, and behold the 4 winds
of heaven strove upon the great sea.

3 And 4 great beasts came up from the sea one diverse from an other.

4 The 1 was a Lion and had Eagles wings: I beheld till the wings thereof were
plucked off, and it was lifted up from the earth and set upon his feet as a
man, and a man's heart was given him.

5 And behold, another beast which was the second, was like a Bear, and stood
upon the one side: and he had three tuskes in his mouth amongst his teeth, and
they said thus unto him, Arise and devour much flesh.

6 After this I beheld, and lo there was an other like a Leopard, which had
upon his back 4 wings of a foul: the beast had also 4 heads and dominion was
given him.

7 After this I saw in the visions by night, and behold the fourth beast was
fearful, and terrible, and very strong. It had great iron teeth, it devoured,
and brake in pieces, and stamped the residue under his feet: and it was unlike
to the beasts that were before it, for it had 10 horns.

8 As I considered the horns, behold there came up among the^ another little
horn, before whom there were 3 of the first horns plucked away: and behold in
his throne there were eyes like the eyes of man, and a mouth speaking
presumptuous things.

I beheld till the thrones were set up, and the ancient of days did sit, whose
garment was as white as snow, and the hair of his head like the pure wool:
his throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels like burning fire.

10 A fiery stream issued, and came forth from before him: thousand thousands
ministered unto him,, and ten thousand thousands stood before him: the judgment
was set, and the books opened.

11 Then I beheld, because of the voice of the presumptuous words which the
horn spoke: I beheld even till the beast was slain, and his body destroyed,
and given to the burning fire.

12 As concerning the other beasts, they had their dominion taken away: yet
their lives were prolonged for a certain time and season.

13 As I beheld the visions by night, behold one like the son of man came in
the clouds of heaven, and approached unto the ancient of days, and they
brought him before him.

14 And he gave him dominion and honor, and a kingdom: that all people,
nations and languages should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting
dominion, which shall never be taken away, and his kingdom shall never be
destroyed.

15 I Daniel was troubled in my spirit in the midst of my body, and the visions
of mine head made me afraid.

16 Therefore I came unto one of them that stood by, and asked him the truth of
all this: so he told me, and showed me the interpretation of all these things,
saying,

17 These 4 great beasts, are 4 kings which shall arise out of the earth.

18 And the Saints of the most high shall receive their kingdom, which they
shall possess for ever, even for ever and ever.

19 After this I would know the truth of the fourth beast, which was so unlike
to all the others, very fearful, whose teeth were of iron, and his nails of
brass: which devoured, brake in pieces, and stamped the residue under his feet.

20 Also to know of the 10 horns that were in his head, and of the other
which came up, before whom three fell, and of the horn that had eyes, and of
the mouth that spoke presumptuous things; whose look was more stout then his
fellows.

21 I beheld, and the same horn made battle against the Saints, yea and
prevailed against them.

22 Until the ancient of days came, and judgment was given to the Saints of
the most high: and the time approached that the Saints possessed the kingdom.

23 Then he said, the fourth beast shall be the fourth kingdom in the earth,
which shall be unlike to all the kingdoms, and shall devour the whole earth
and shall tread it down, and break it in pieces.

24 And the 10 horns are 10 kings that shall rise out of this kingdom, and
another shall rise after them, and he shall be unlike to the first, and he
shall subdue 3 kings.

25 And shall speak words against the most high, and shall consume the Saints
of the most high, and think that he may change times and laws, and they shall
be given into his hand until a time, and times, and half a time.

26 But the judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his dominion, to
consume and destroy it unto the end.

27 And the kingdom, and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdoms under
the whole earth shall be given to the holy people of the most high, whose
kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all power shall serve and obey them.


The Exposition.
1 In the first year of Belshazzar king of Babel Daniel saw a dream, and
lying upon his bed, had his head troubled with visions, the matter of which
dream he did afterward commit to writing.

2 And behold here what he has written of it. I had a vision by night, and it
seemed unto me that the winds coming from the four quarters of the world
blew upon the sea, that is to say, that the people and nations (whom the holy
scripture does often compare to the sea) had many diverse and contrary tumults
to disturb them.

3 And out of the midst of these people, and nations came four great beasts
of different shapes, figuring 4 great diverse Empires, which should reign in
the world.

4 The first beast which did represent the first Empire, to wit, that of
Babylon, was like unto a Lion, to note his nobleness, and valor, and had the
wings of an Eagle, to note the speedy atchieuements of his conquests. And I
beheld till this active vigor was taken from him, and that being spoiled of
his bestiall fierceness, he learned the lesson of obedience, and was taught to
abstain from blood, that so he might live with humanity like a man, and not
with cruelty like a beast.

5 After this Empire succeeded the Empire of Persia, figured by a bear, which
lay along upon one side, either because his co^quests did stretch from east to
west, or else because he was like a bear resting himself, which never lies
far of from the prey which he has seized upon. And this bear amongst many
other teeth had 3 great teeth or tuskes, signifying that amongst many other
kingdoms which this Empire should possess, he should have 3 great and mighty
kingdoms: that of Persia, that of Media, and that of Babylon. And God being
incensed against men sent out this bear to make them dye.

6 After the fall of this Empire, behold a third Empire rose up, to wit, that
of the Macedonians, figured by a Leopard, because of its cruelty, subtlety,
and celerity, represented by the 4 wings. And this Empire was forthwith divided
into four kingdoms, which are the kingdoms of the Seleucidae in Asia mayor,
the kingdom of Antigonus in Asia minor, the kingdom of the Ptolomies in
Egypt, and the kingdom of Greece, and God gave unto this Empire to reign over
the earth.

7 After this Empire there arose another Empire figured by a most dreadful and
mighty strong beast. It had mighty kingdoms and provinces under it; it did
scatter and ruinate, tyrannizing over those whom it did not slay. And this
Empire was differing in force and power from the Empires that went before, and
had 10 parts and principal provinces under it, and as it fell to decay, ten
kingdoms also did arise out of the division thereof.

8 As I stood wondering at the greatness of this Empire from which 10 kingdoms
did arise, behold a Monarch growing like a little horn amidst the other, that
sprang up from between these kingdoms, which for his share did possess such
a portion of this Roman Empire, as there is of 3 to 10, that is to say, well
near the third part, and had the eyes of humane understanding, having contrived
the building of his kingdom by wonderful policy, and spoke prowdly and
arrogantly, boasting that he could not err, that he was the supreme judge in
matters of faith and religion, that he was a vice-God, and God upon earth, King
of kings, the head and spowse of the Church, his holiness, and a disposer of
kingdoms.

9 I considered with my self how this Bishop did advance himself, and
continue, until the thrones mounted upon wheels, were set in their proper
places, that is to say, until the day of judgment were well onward, and hard
at hand, and the Lord God sat down upon these thrones who is called the Ancient
of days, because he is from before all time, and from before all antiquity,
and he was clothed with the light, and had a head all hoary gray, to signify
his age, his throne was like the flame, and the wheels of his throne were as
burning fire.

10 His judgments like a fiery stream went from before his presence. An
infinite number of Angels stood before him, waiting his pleasure. So he sat
him down to judge the world: and that he might proceed with equity, all his
books were opened. To wit, the book of the sins of men mentioned in the 65
chap. of Esa. 65. v. 6 Behold it is written before me: I will not keep silence.
Esaias, and in the 20. of the Apocalypse; as also the book of the afflictions of
the faithful, mentioned in the Ps. 56. v* 8 Thou purest my tears in ^o thy
bottle, are they not in thy regi^^er?
56 Psalm; and the book of life wherein the elect are registered, mentioned in
the 13 of the Apocalypse, and 17.

11 And I beheld with admiration, how this son of perdition spoke proud
words, till at last his Empire was destroyed, and the body of this Roman
Monarchy abolisht, and the keys thereof thrown into everlasting fire.

12 And al dominion was taken from the other beasts, albeit they had continued
for a long time in the world.

13 As I was ravished by night with the contemplation of this vision, I saw the
son of God our Lord Jesus, which came down from heaven, carried upon the
clouds, and he approached unto God his father which sat upon the throne. And
his father made him sit on his right hand to judge the world.

14 Giving him a name above all names, and all power both in heaven and in
earth, so that every knee should bow before him, and all people should give
him glory, and praise. His dominion is an everlasting dominion which shall not
pass away, and his kingdom shall not be destroyed.

This was the vision of Daniel, the meaning whereof when he required, it was
given him by one of the Angels that stood by in these words,

17 These 4 great beasts are four kings that shall arise out of the earth.

18 And the Saints of the most high shall receive the kingdom, which they
shall possess for ever, even for ever and ever.

The Exposition.
17 These 4 great beasts signify four Realms or Monarchs, that shall arise
out of the earth.

18 Who being once abolisht, God shall give his faithful servants the kingdom
of heaven, which they shall enjoy everlastingly. This exposition having not
satisfied Daniel concerning that which he desired most to know, to wit, what
was meant by the fourth beast that had ten heads, and the little horn that
grew out, the same Angel does expound it more at large unto him, saying,

23 The fourth beast shall be the fourth kingdom in the earth, which shall be
unlike to all the kingdoms, and shall devour the whole earth, and shall tread
it down, and break it in pieces.

24 But the 10 horns are 10 kings that shall rise out of this kingdom, and
another shall rise after them, which shall be unlike to the first, and he shall
subdue 3 Kings.

25 He shall speak words against the most high, and shall consume the Saints
of the most high, and think that he may change times and laws, and the Saints
shall be given into his hand until a time, and times, and half a time.

26 But the judgment shall be held, and they shall take away his dominion to
consume and destroy it unto the end.

27 That the kingdom, and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdoms under
the whole heaven, may be given to the holy people of the most high; the
kingdom of which people is an everlasting kingdom, and all the powers shall
serve and obey them.

The Exposition.
23 The fourth beast signifies the fourth Empire on the earth, which shall
differ from the other Empires in greatness and violence, and shall conquer all
the earth, and subject it, and wast it.

24 But the 10 horns which shall arise out of it, are 10 kingdoms which shall
spring up from the dissipation of this Empire, and shall divide it into 10
pieces. But after that these kingdoms shall be erected amongst them, whose
Empire shall be altogether diverse from the others, to wit, the Bishop of Rome:
for he shall ^ule under the show of religion, and spiritual power; and shall
possess well near the third part of the provinces of the ancient Empire, and
keep them under him.

25 He shall speak blasphemy against God, and persecute the Church, and take
upon him to change the course of the year and make the days holy or profane
at his pleasure: he shall take upon him also to change the law in cutting off
the second commandment, and denying that it is sin to transgress the last,
and dispensing with other commandments, and prescribing laws of equal
authority with the law of God, yea and of more authority, and the Church shall
be held captive under him for the space of 1260 years.

26 But the day of judgment shall come: and Jesus Christ coming into the
world shall take his dominion from him, and shall destroy him utterly.

27 To the end, that a sovereign dominion over all worldly greatness may be
given to the Church of God, which is the asse^bly of the Saints, to which
church God has given an everlasting kingdom and all power both of men and
devils shall be subject unto it.

The Proof.
Albeit this exposition do explain it self, and be full of perspicuitie: yet
to remove all difficulties, I will clear 6. points in which the whole proof
of our exposition does consist, and will show.

1 That the Roman Empire falling to decay in the West, and the East, was
divided into parts or kingdoms, which Dan. v.7. and 24. says are understood
by the 10 horns of the fourth beast. II. That the Bishop of Rome does possess
well near the third part of the ancient Roman Empire. III. That the Bishop of
Rome does change times and the law. IV. What the meaning of a time, times, and
half a time is, during which term, the Saints shall be made slaves, and the
church kept in bondage. V. What this Empire and dominion is that is given to
the Saints. VI. That upon good reason by the fourth beast we understand the
Roman Empire, and by the little horn the son of perdition, which is called
Antichrist by the Ancient, as likewise by our adversaries.

1 The division of the ancient Empire into ten parts is most evident. Danie^
makes 10 kingdoms to be borne out o^ the dispersing of the Roman Empire, and
amidst this a little horn to spring up and grow out. To find the accomplishme^t
therefore of this prophecy, we are to look whether a little before the Pope
became an earthly Monarch (for Daniel says that these horns here do signify
Realms) the Roman Empire were not divided into ten Realms. We have showed
already that in the year 755 the Pope began to lay the foundation of his
earthly Empire, and of a Bishop to become a Monarch. Now a little before,
(that is to say in the seventh age) the Roman Empire was divided into 10
pieces or kingdoms. 1, There was the kingdom of the French, which held France
and a part of Germany. 2. The kingdom of the English Saxons, which held great
Britain. 3 The kingdom of the Visigots which held Spain. 4. The kingdom of
the Lumbards in Italy. 5. The kingdom of the Sclavonians which held Illyria,
and the countries thereabout* 6. The kingdom of the Huns and the Avarians in
Hungary and Austrich. 7. The kingdom of the Bulgarians reigning in Bulgaria
and Seruia, etc. 8. The kingdom of the Sarasens of Damascus that held Syria,
and reigned in the East. 9. The kingdom of the Sarasens of Barbary that
reigned in Affricke, which about this very age did invade Spain and pass into
France. 10. To which if ye ad that which as yet was held in possession by the
Emperor of Constantinople, ye shall find 10 Realms, every one possessing his
part of the ancient Roman Empire: and this, a little before that this little
horn showed himself, that is to say, before the Pope began to take his place
amongst Princes, and to lay the foundations of his Roman Monarchy.

2 That the portion of the Roman Empire, which the Pope has under him, has
such a proportion in respect of the whole extent of the Empire, as there is of
three to ten, that is to say, that he does possess little less the^ the
third part thereof: this is easily proved to be true, if it please any to take
but a map, and a pair of compasses, or else only to measure the countries of
the Empire with his eyes. The Pope did never possess any thing, nor never had
any dominion over Greece, Asia, Syria, Arabia, Egypt, or Afric. For as for
the incursions of our French into Syria, Egypt and Constantinople, they were
nothing else but violent motions, which lasted but for a small time, and did
rather show the^ plant the Popes dominion in the East. Now all these countries
being put together make up a little more then two thirds of the Roman Empire,
the rest has been under the Pope, wherein he has planted his Monarchy:
whereunto moreover he has added certain provinces that were never subject to
the Ancient Roman Empire, as Polonie, the north part of Germany, Denmarck, and
Swethland, and now of late a part of the Indies. But Daniel looked not to these
adiunctions, for he speaks only of the division of the Roman Empire.

3 As for the changing of times, and the law, it is the Pope that takes upon
him to make the years shorter or longer. It is not long since that Gregory
the 13 did contract the year by 10 days: it is the Pope that makes holy days
of common days, which can if it please him, transport the month of July into
January; taking the authority upon him of the ancient priests of Rome
instituted by Numa, who proclaimed the holy days, and thrust in odd days into
the year at their pleasure. It were a needless labor for me to show more
particularly how he changes the law, seeing that my whole second book is
spent in declaring how the Pope does oppose himself against the word of God.
Seeing also that he boasts that he can dispense with oaths and vows made
to God, that he can dissolve complete marriages, although they be not violated
by adultery: that he can dispense with children for obaying their parents in
honest things, and with subjects for being faithful to their Prince. That he
can give a man leave to marry his own niece contrary to the commandment of
God. That he can keep Princes from reading the holy scripture, contrary to an
express commandment that is given them in the 17 of Deuteronomy. v. 18. Whereupon
his Doctors also say and write in their glosses upon the Decrees of the Church
of Rome, and in their books of controversies, that the Pope ca^ dispense
against the Apostle, and against the old Testament. And that he can dispense
with the commandment of the Lord wherein he says, Do works worthy of
repentance: as he does indeed dispense with it by his Indulgences.

4 Next follows the exposition of these words, A time, times, and half a
time, which is the term during which, Daniel says, the Saints shall be kept
in bondage, and the church held captive. These words at the first seem
strange, but being compared with other places where there is mention made of
the continuance of the dominion of Antichrist, are easy to be understood. We
have seen in the 13 Chapt. of the Apocalypse, v. 5. that the Roman Empire after
the healing of its wound by the Papacy, must continue 42 months, which make 3
years and a half, that is to say, 1260 mystical days, which amount to so
many years, according to the style of the Scripture: as we have showed by many
examples in the exposition of the said passage of the Apocalypse. Now 3 years
and a half, are one year, two years, and half an year, so that the spirit
of God by an admirable correspondency of the Prophecies does say the same thing
in diverse words, and does tell us before hand that the kingdom of Antichrist
and the bondage of the Church under his dominion must continue 1260 years,
which as we have showed by undoubted proofs, must begin in the year of our
Lord, 755.

5 As concerning the kingdom, and dominion over all things which God gives to
his Saints, and the faithful, although they seem servants and strangers in
this world, Daniel herein speaks according to the style of the Scripture,
which calls them Kings, Apoc. 1. v. 6. and 5. v. 10 He has made us kings and
priests unto God his father. And in the 1. Epistle of S. Peter Chap. 2. the
faithful are called a Royal Priesthood. Now they are kings, both because they
reign already in Christ, which is one body with us, so that the kingdom which
he now possesses over all things is ours: as also because that in the last day
of judgment, the faithful shall judge the world, and the Angels; as the
Apostle S. Paul says in the 1. to the Corinth. Chapter 6. That is to say, that
they shall be the assessours of the son of God, and approuers of the
judgment which he shall pronounce against the wicked, and against the devils.
As also because that in the glory to come after the last day, they shall be
above those which reigned over them, and shall be kings whilst the mighty
ones of this world, which were enemies to the church, shall be made slaves.

6 It remains that we see, whether they that hold that there is no mention at
all made in this Chap. of the Roman Empire, nor of Antichrist, but only of the
kingdom of the Seleucidae: and of Antiochus Epiphanes, can be excused.

The ancient Doctors hold with us, that in this chapter Antichrist is spoken
of, as Hierome, and Theodoret upon this place, S. Cyprian in his book of
exhortation to martyrdom. S. Austin in the 23. chap. 20. book of the city of
God. And our adversaries are of the same opinion. They of the Ancient which by
a little horn understand Antiochus Epiphanes, do withal understand
Antichrist by the same horn, for they hold that Antiochus was a figure of
Antichrist* and that which is said of the one, agrees also to the other.

As for mine own part I find this Prophecy so clear, that it is hard to
doubt of the meaning; and indeed amongst all the chapters of holy scripture,
this did ever seem excellent unto me, and I could never satisfy my self with
admiring it. What deepnesse of wisdom there is in it! what cleerenesse of
Prophecies! how many remarkable circumstances! what excellent accord with the
revelation of S. John! ye shall find the same style in both places in the same
matter. Whosoever shall take this prophecy from Christians to appropriate it
unto the Jews only, goes about as it seems to me, to stop up a great window,
at which God does let in his light unto us, and to take away no small stay and
comfort from our faith: besides that they do shut their eyes of set purpose,
and contest against experience. Yet let us hear what they allege.

They lay for a foundation, that the 2. chap. and the 7. speak both of one and
the same thing, and that the vision of the four beasts has the same
signification with the image that had his head of gold, his breast of silver,
his belly and his thighs of brass, his legs part of iron and part of clay.
That is to say, that both of these visions do signify four Monarchies, under
which the Jewish Church was held in captivity; I do not deny but that the 3
first Monarchies are the same, in the 2. and 7. chap. But the fourth Empire
here called the fourth beast, is altogether diverse from the feet of the image
in the second chapter.

1 For this fourth beast is described here as more able and strong then the 3.
former, and his looks are said to be more stout then his fellows, v. 20. On
the contrary the fourth kingdom in the 2. chapt. is made to be far weaker
then the other. For Daniel in the 42. verse says, that it shall be partly
strong, and partly broken, and makes it so far inferior to the former
monarchies, as iron and clay are in respect of gold and silver.

2 Likewise when Daniel says that the third Monarchy (which is that of the
Macedonians) had 4 heads, who sees not that hereby he understands, that the
Empire should be divided into 4 kingdoms? As Daniel himself also does
expound himself in the 8. chapt. v. 22. The kingdom of the Seleucidae being
one of the 4 kingdoms into which the Empire of Alexander is divided, what
probability is there that in the verse following he should make these very
Seleucidae a diverse beast, which but in the verse going before, he had made
to be one of the heads of the beast? To salve the matter, they tell us of
diverse confusions within the kingdom of Aridaeus, Antipater, and Cassander,
where they seek for 4 kings opposing one an other at the same time, but cannot
find them; and say they should, yet is it likely that Daniel should rather
speak of the divisions that fell out in a little corner of Alexanders Empire,
then of those that fell out in the whole Empire, being that these were the
greater of the two without all comparison? Or who will think that Daniel in
this place does speak only of the divisions of the country of Macedon, which
had nothing common with the Jews, and omit those of Syria where the church
dwelt?

3 Nor are they less troubled, if not more, to find 10 Seleucidian kings,
after whom they will have Antiochus Epiphanes to rise. For they are feign to
thrust in the Ptolomies to make up this number, which did invade or ouerrun
Syria. But Daniel says that these 10 kings shall arise out of the decayed
Empire, and it cannot be said that the Ptolomies did rise out of the kingdom
of the Seleucidae, seeing that they did rise against the Seleucidae. They
speak therefore* as if I should say, that Brennus did rise out of the
kingdom of Romulus, or the Tarquins, whereas he did rise up against their
state, and posterity. And last of all, should we grant them that which they
would have, yet can they not make up their number. For they make this Antiochus
to be the tenth of these kings, contrary to the express words of Daniel,
which says that this little horn shall rise up after the ten kings: he is
none of the ten therefore.

4 And they are as much out in the acceptio^ of the word, kings, which
throughout this whole chapt. does not signify the person of kings, but the
kingdoms, or Monarchies. As it appears by the 17. verse in these words, the
4 beasts are four kings, where they themselves confess that by the word
kings, we are to understand Monarchies.

5 Besides, I know not how they can find that fulfilled in Antiochus, which
Daniel says in the 22. verse, to wit, That he shall subdue 3 kings; for
histories report no such thing of this man.

6 Hereunto add that, if (as they would have it) the third beast do signify
the Empire of Alexander only, and not that of the Seleucidae; too, then this
Empire must continue but 6. years, which is manifestly opposite to that which
Daniel says verse 12. That the lives of these beasts were prolongued, for a
certain time and season.

7 Nor can it be said, with what violence they wrest the words of the 13 ver.
where Jesus Christ is described coming in the clouds of heaven. They would
have this not to be spoke of his coming at the last day, but would have it to
be understood of his incarnation, when nevertheless it cannot be said without
absurdity, that he came down from heaven upon the clouds.

8 But to what end should Daniel speak so often of the glorification of the
Saints, and of their heavenly kingdom, if he spoke but only of the
humiliation of Jesus Christ, and not of the last judgment?

9 The space also of three years and an half, expressed by a time, two times,
and half a time, can not agree to Antiochus. For in the 8. chapt. ver. 14.
where this Antiochus is manifestly spoken off, it is said that he shall wast
the Sanctuary for the space of two thousand* three hundredth mornings and
evenings, which amount to more then 6 years. And note that these words,
mornings, and euenings, are purposely added, to show that he speaks of common
and ordinary days, and to distinguish the^ from the three mystical years,
and an half, spoken of in this chapt.

10. On the other side all their obiectio^s against this explication, aim at
this chiefly, to show that the Roman Empire is not spoken off in the 2. chap.
of Daniel, which we do not deny; but this lets not but that it may be spoken
off in this chapt.

11 And, to say truth, they presuppose without reason that Daniel speaks this
here but only for the Church of the Jews. For what inconvenience is there if we
say that God did reveal something to his prophet concerning the Christian
church? Seeing that in the 12 chapt. he does apparently prophecy of the
resurrection, and everlasting life; And do not they contradict themselves,
being that they would have Daniel in the 6. verse speak of the confusions
that happened in Macedo^, where the Jews had no interest, and which did not
concern them at all?

12 Last of all I say, that the vision mentioned in the 2. chapt. had been
repeated in vain in the 7. if there were no diversity in them, and if the
second apparition of the same vision did not teach us some thing that was not
contained in the former.

THE PROPHECY CONtained in the 11. chapter of the Apocalypse. CHAP. 9.
1 Then was given me a reed like unto a rod, and there stood an Angel by,
which said unto me, Rise, and mete the temple of God, and the altar, and them
that worship therein.

2 But the court that is without the temple cast out, and mete it not: for it
is given unto the Gentiles, and the holy city shall they tread under foot 42
months.

3 But I will give her unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophecy a
thousand 3 hundredth, and threescore days clothed in sackcloth.

4 These are two olive trees, and two candlestickes standing before the God of
the earth.

5 And if any man will hurt them, fire proceeds out of their mouth, and
devoureth their enemies: for if any man will hurt them, thus must he be killed.

6 These have power to shut heaven, that it may not rain in the days of their
prophesying, and have power over the waters to turn them into blood, to smite
the earth with all manner of plagus as often as they will.

7 And when they shall have finished their testimony, the beast that comes
out of the bottomless pit, shall make war against them and shall overcome
them, and kill them.

8 And their dead bodies shall lie in the streets of the great city, which
spirituallie is called Sodom, and Egypt, where our Lord also was crucified.

9 And they of the tribes, and people, and tongues, and nations, shall see
their dead bodies three days and an half, and shall not suffer their
carcasses to be buried in graves.

10 And they that dwell upon the earth shall rejoice over them, and be glad,
and shall send gifts one to an other: because that these two prophets vexed
them that dwelt upon the earth.

11 But after these 3 days, and an half, the spirit of life coming from God,
shall enter into them, and they shall stand upon their feet, and great fear
shall come upon them, which saw them.

12 After this they shall hear a great voice from heaven; saying, Come up
hither. And they shall ascend up to heaven in a cloud, and their enemies
shall see them.

13 And at the same hour there shall be a great earthquake, and the tenth part
of the city shall fall, and in the earthquake shall be slain 7000 men in
number, and they which remain shall be sore afraid, and give the glory to God
of heaven.

14 The second w^ is past, and behold the third woe will come anon.

15 And the seventh Angel blew the Trumpet, and there were great voices in
heaven, saying, The kingdoms of the world, are our Lords, and his Christ's, and
he shall reign for evermore.

16 Then the 24 elders which sat before God on their seats, fell upon their
faces, and worshipped God.

17 Saying, we give thee thanks o Lo^^ God Almighty, which art, and which wa^
and which art to come, for thou have received thy great might, and have begun
the reign.

18 And the Gentiles were angry, (...) thy wrath is come, and the time of the
dead that they should be judged, and that th^^ should give the reward unto
thy servants the Prophets, and to the Saints, and to them that fear thy name,
to small and great, and should destroy the^ which destroy the earth.

19 Then the Temple of God was opened in heaven, and there was seen in his
Temple the Arc of his covenant: and there were lightnings, and voices, and
thundrings, and earthquakes, and much hayle.


The Explication.
1 It seemed unto me in a vision, that God put a long reed into my hand like a
measure. Afterward an Angel sent from God said unto me; with this measure,
which is Faith, measure, and learn to know the greatness of the Church of God
exactly, the excellency of the sacrifice of Jesus Christ, and the state of the
faithful, which serve God in his Church.

2 But measure not that which is without the Church, neither make any reckoning
of it. For these are the nations, and people, which are out of the covenant of
God, which shall tread upon, and tyrannize over the Church of God, for the
space of a thousand, two hundredth and sixty years.

3 But I will give place in my house to some few faithful pastors, which shall
give witness to the truth, during the 1260 years, all which time the enemies of
the Church shall bear sway, which faithful Pastors shall preach the truth
with humility, and strictness of life, and much affliction.

4 These Pastors are like to olive trees which bring tidings of peace, and
yield that comfortable oil, which is the word of God, that glads the soul,
and like two candlesticks, that give light in the church in the presence of God.

5 But if any one resist them, or persecute them, the word shall be like a
fire, which shall consume their adversaries, and turn them into condemnation.

6 These faithful witnesses shall (...) a drought to be upon the earth, and
(...) the waters to be corrupted, and raise up mortality, as often as they
shall prea^^ the truth, and shall not be heard. For Go^ for their sakes shall
visit men with diverse plagues.

7 And when they shall have continued preaching the full time which God has
prescribed unto them in his secret counsel, then the beast which is the son
of perdition, shall raise up a great persecution against them, and shall have
the upper hand and make them to die.

8 And their martyrdomes shall be seen through all places, and quarters of
the Popish Church, which is called Sodom by a mystical term, because of the
vice which reigns in the most eminent place of that Church; and Egypt because
of the bondage of Gods people, which are kept in captivity under Popery.
Where Christ also has been, and still is persecuted in his members.

9 And the people and nations that are kept in error shall see their
persecutions and their martyrdomes, for the space of half the time of the
continuance of Popery, and shall cast their bodies out in^o the streets, and
shall let them be dried up upon Gibbets, without ever being buried.

10 This persecution enduring, the enemies of the Church shall rejoice at the
death of the faithful witnesses of the truth and be glad thereof, and send
presents one to another, because they shall see themselves delivered from the
solicitations and reprehensions of the faithful ministers, which would not
let them to be quiet.

11 But this time being once expired, they shall reviue in their successors,
God raising up others in their place having the same spirit, which shall stand
upright, that they may speak the more courageously. Whereat the people that
are their enemies shall be greatly astonished.

12 After this, a voice shall come from heaven, which shall say unto these
faithful servants of God, come up into heaven: And God shall take them up into
heaven, with evident testimonies of his favor, as their very enimes shall
acknowledge.

13 At this very hour, the people of the earth shall be smitten with a
trembling fear. And God shall send out a plague, which shall kill the tenth
part of the people of the Church of Rome: and this sudden fear shall swallow
up a great number of them; they which remain shall stand amazed, and give the
glory to God.

14 This woe shall be the second after that of the Locusts, after which there
is a third also to come.

Apoc. 9. v. 12 One woe is past, and behold yet two woes to come after this.
15 For after this, comes the time wherein God will display his judgments, for
the seventh and last time. So there were voices heard in heaven, saying, Now
the kingdom of God is established, and of Jesus Christ his son over every
creature for to reign everlastingly.

16 Then the Patriarchs and Apostles representing the whole Church of the
Saints, which stand before God, and reign with him, fell down upon their
faces, and worshipped him.

17 Saying, we give thee thanks, Lord God Almighty, and everlasting, because
thou have made known thy great might, and have begun to establish thy
kingdom.

18 It is true that the nations and people were incensed against thy church,
but thou have punnisht them in thy wrath, and at length the time of the last
judgment is come, wherein thou will give a reward unto thy servants, the
ministers of the Gospel, and to all the faithful which fear thy name, both
great and small, and wilt destroy the destroyers of thy Church which is upon
earth.

19 Then was the entrance into Paradise fully laid open, and God heretofore
figured by the Arcke, called the Lord, was manifested in heaven. But he let
loose his choler upon earth, with glory and great power.

The Proof, and clearing.
The three first chapt. of this book, contain nothing, but familiar
instructions, with certain representations of the majesty of God and Jesus
Christ, without any predictio^. In the sixth chap. S. John begins to foretell
of future events, and to draw out his prophetical revelations, in which he
follows the order of the time, beginning at the nativitie of Jesus Christ, and
holding on till the approaching of the last judgment, which is spoken of at
the end of this 11. chapt.

All this time is first of all divided into the opening of the 7. seals, which
are as so many revelations of the hidden counsel of God a little after into the
7. soundings of the trumpets, which signify seven several executions of the
judgments of God upon the earth, which are also signified by the 7. viols of
Gods wrath thrown upon men.

How many years every seal must last, and how many, every trumpet, this is
another question; and which does not appertain directly to the Sea of Rome.
Only we are to note, that the two witnesses must be slain by the beast under
the sixth trumpet, and afterward be brought to life again by the power of God,
and at last be called from heaven, to come up thither, and that after this the
7 trumpet must sound, as it appears by the 13. verse of the ninth chapter, and
by the 15 verse of the 11 chap. Whence it is manifest that unto us (which live
now under the sixth trumpet) as we will demonstrate, one part of these things
is accomplished: but that the whole is not yet accomplished. Which is the cause
of the obscurity of this prophecy, that troubled many men's heads, whilst they
sought for the fulfilling of things to come in ages past.

And this does not only show me a way to the clearing of this prophecy, but
also gives me a reason why I should expound this chapt. out of his order, and
put it last. For whosoever shall read the Revelation diligently, shall find
that from the beginning of the sixth chapter to the end of the eleauenth, S.
John does follow a continual course of prophetical history from time to time,
until the day of judgment. But that the 12. chapt. he does begin the same
history again after another fashion, beginning at the birth of our Savior,
and following the history of the church even to the end of the book, which
he concludes with the last judgment, and with the heavenly glory, of the
church of God. Wherefore we could not choose but expound this 12 chapt. and
those which follow, before the 11. chapt. that we might follow the order of
the time. Moreover there being but one part of this chapt. accomplished, reason
bids that we should end with that which is not as yet come to pass; But as for
that which is come to pass, the exposition which I give of it, seems in my
opinion, to be easy and natural.

The meting of the holy City, which is the Church, seems to be taken out of
the 40. chap. of Ezekiel, where by a reed, or cane to measure, the holy Ghost
gives Ezechiel to understand, that he would learn him an exact knowledge of his
Church. In the 2. verse, in saying that the Court which is out of the Temple,
is given to the Gentiles, he does glaunce at the mystical reason of the
building of the Tabernacle, which had three parts. 1, The court where the
people stood. 2. The holy place, into which the Levits and priests entered,
where the candlestick was, the show bread, and the altar of perfumes. 3. The
Sanctuary where the Arc surnamed the Lord stood, whither none might enter but
the high Priests: The way to go into the holy place was through the Court, and
into the Sanctuary through the holy place. The Court represented the nations
which are out of the Church. The holy place represented the Church, where the
word of God does illighten and nourish us, and where the benefit of Jesus
Christ is a continual perfume before God. The Sanctuary figured heaven, where
our high Priest is gone in alone by his own power, to bring us thither also. So
the Court was a figure of the state of nature, the holy place of the state of
grace, the Sanctuary of the state of glory. And none ever entered into the
second but through the first, nor into the last but through the second. Upon
good reason therefore is it that the Court here is assigned unto the nations,
which do not know God, seeing that it was out of the holy place, which was a
figure of the church of God. And this is farther confirmed by the renting of
the veil, (which did divide the holy place from the Court) at the death of our
Savior, whereby there was an open passage laid open, for the nations that were
strangers from his covenant, to enter into the Church.

Now here by the nations, not only the heathen are to be understood, but all
people that are enemies to the church of God. The term of time, for which they
must oppress the church of God, is 42 months which make 3 years and a half,
which amount to 1260 years, to take a day for a year: as we have showed in
the exposition of the fifth verse of the 13. chapter. This is the time that is
allotted to the Papal Empire to trample upon the Church of God.

As for the two witnesses, I take it that they signify nothing else but a few
witnesses, but yet sufficient enough to bear witness of the truth: whether it
be that the holy scripture does use these words of two or three, instead of
saying, very few; as when Christ does promise, that where there shall be two or
three gathered together in his name, he will be in the midst of them: and in
the 32. of Deuteronomy. v. 30. two shall put ten thousand to flight, that is to say, a
small number shall make a great multitude to turn their backs: and there is
the like fashion of speech to be found in the 17 of Esaias, verse 6. Or whether
it be that in the matter of witnesses, the number of two is put down in
Scripture, as sufficient, according as Christ says that Deuteronomy. 17. v. 6. and
19. v. 15. Mat. 18. v. 16.
by the mouth of two or three witnesses every word is confirmed. Or whether it
be, that what number soever there be of Pastors, yet all their testimonies
being taken from the two testaments, which are the true witnesses of the will
of God, it is not without good reason, that their testimony is reduced to the
number of two, to the end that they should not look within the authority of
men, nor seek after customs for a third testimony. For it is not likely that
God should have but 2 faithful pastors to oppose themselves against the
Empire of the son of perdition, which shall be so powerful, and last for so
many ages. Now, as S. John said, that the oppression of the Church must
continue 42 months, which are three years and a half, so likewise does he
say that the faithful witnesses shall preach 1260 days which make up also
three years and a half that is to say, that the dominion of the son of
perdition shall never be without being contradicted by some few faithful
servants of God, and that the government of the one, and the reluctance of the
other, are of the same continuance. We have In the exposition of the 5. verse
of the 13. Chap.
showed how in this mystical number a day is taken for a year, according to
the style of the Scripture, and that the Papal Monarchy must last 1260 years.

These two witnesses are compared to two olive trees, and to two Candlesticks:
in imitation of the vision that appeared to Zachary chapt. 4. who saw a
Candlestick of gold between two olive trees, of which it is said at the end
of the Chapter. These are the two olive branches that stand before the Lord
of the whole earth. Both because the olive is a sign of peace, witness the
dove, which carried an olive branch to Noah in his mouth in token of peace. As
also, because the scripture does attribute a property unto oil of making glad.
Psa. 104. Whence it is called the oil of gladness, that is to say, that makes
glad, Psalm. 45. ver. 8. Now the word is the gospel of peace; Ephesians. 6.15. and
makes glad the heart, Psalm. 19.9. that we may rejoice in the light thereof,
John 5.35.

But as this preaching is the savor of life unto such as believe, so is it the
savor of death unto the rebellious, and does wound them mortally. Whence God
also says that this word kills, and that his prophets, and faithful Ministers
smite the earth with wounds by their preaching. It is said in ^ Hosea that he
did cut down those of Ephraim by his prophets, and slaie them by the words of
his mouth, and in Jeremy chapt. 5. v. 14. I will put my words into thy mouth
like a fire, and this people shall be as wood, and it shall devour them. In this
sense it is, that these faithful witnesses are said to shut heaven, and hinder
the rain, and turn the water into blood; For they are thought to do that,
which God does do for their sakes. Notwithstanding there is a manifest
allusion in this to the example of Elias, King. 1.17. which shut the floodgates
of heaven, and made it not to rain for the space of 3* whole years, and to
the example of Moses, which turned the waters of Egypt into blood. These two
appeared to Jesus Christ in the mountain; and these also are they, that must
return into the world (as Hilarious thinks) to fight with Antichrist.

After that the beast (which the Ancient, and our adversaries themselves
confess to be Antichrist) shall have slain the two faithful witnesses, S.
John says that their bodies shall lie in the streets of the great city. He
opposes the great City, to the holy City, which is the Church of God, of
which he speaks in the second verse, to show that the false church, which is
at enmity with God, shall be very great in respect of the church of God. For
that by this word, city, we are not to understand one only town, it appears
by this, that it is not only called Sodom, but Egypt also which is the name of
a great Country. For as in this chapt. by the holy city we do not understand
one town, but the whole Church, so neither by the city that is at enmity with
the Church are we to understand one only town, but the whole body of the
nations united against the Church of God.

Now it is not without cause, that the Popish church is called Sodom, seeing
that in the places where Papistrie is established without Contradiction, and
especially at Rome, whence all this great body of the Romish church does depend,
this vice is familiar, and has ever been so even from the time of the Romans
1.27.
Apostle S. Paul. The Roman authors of this time, boast of it, and glory in it.
Plutarch a Grecian borne, but one that lived at the court of Rome, a grave
author and full of good instructions, in his book of the education of
children, says that he dares not to condemn this kind of love, and thinks it
to befit philosophy. And it is not without a mystery that this word Amor being
written backward makes Roma, because that there is the seat, and place of
residence, of this unnatural and preposterous love, or if it fell out so by
chance, it hits so happily that it may seem to have been intended purposely.
Nor is it without example, that a town or country should be called by the
name of Sodom, because of their conformity in manners. Esaias in his v. 10.
first chapt. speaks thus to the princes and people of Jerusalem; Hear the
word of the Lord O ye princes of Sodom, harke^ unto the law of God O people
of Gomorah.

In this Sodom and Egypt, the holy Ghost says (in the 8. v.) that Jesus
Christ was crucified, either because Jesus Christ was and is persecuted there
in his members; which is confirmed by the last verse of the 18. chap. where
speaking of Rome (as our adversaries confess) it is said that in her was found
the bloods of the Saints and of all that were slain upon the earth, not
because all were slain within the City, but by her persuasion, and counsel:
or else because that Rome (as the King has very well noted to the purpose) did
crucify Jesus Christ in his own person, for as much as it was done by the
Romans, that were sent out of Rome into Iudaea. For if any one stand stiffly
to maintain that this city where Jesus Christ was crucified is Jerusalem, I
doubt how he ca^ make it good, since that Christ was not crucified in
Ier^^salem, but out of the city on mount Calvarie.

In this great city therefore, which is the false church, God says by S.
John, that the faithful witnesses shall be slain, and their bodies cast out
into the streets without burial; which was done unto us in their last
massacres, and persecutions, after which the tyrants did rejoice, as who had
got the victory, and eased themselves of a great burden. There were Bonfires
made at Rome, in token of joy for the death of Lewis of Burbon prince of Conde.
In the Popes chamber of presence there is the massacre of Paris to be seen
painted, as a victory of the church, that the prophecy of Jesus Christ might
be fulfilled; Verily, verily, I say unto you that ye shall weep and lament,
Ioh. 26. v. 20
but the world shall rejoice.

This being so, it appears by this prophecy that the church of God must be
oppressed, and stifled as it were for a time, and that her enemies shall rejoice
hereat, as if it were their doing. And this Ecclypse of ^he sun of the Gospel
must last for three days, and a half, which once expired, God shall raise up
other witnesses of his truth, so like those that went before in power and
zeal, that one may say they are the same, according to the style of holy
Scripture, which calls S. John Baptist Elias, because that he was clothed with
the virtue and spirit of Elias. Matt. 11. v. 14. And Jesus Christ himself was
called John Baptist, and Elias, of those which did take him to be nothing but
a Prophet. After this manner of speech, Ezechiel calls Jesus Christ David.
chap, 34. v. 23.

As for the time of three days and a half, during which, the bodies of the
faithful witnesses shall be cast out through all the quarters of the Romish
Church, it is manifest that S. Ioh. does hereby show us how long the
persecution of the Church under the Roman Hierarchy must continue. For to know
how long this time shall endure, and to how much the three days and an half
come, we are to note that 3 days and an half make half a week, which gives
us to understand that the holy Ghost here under the name of a week does
comprehend the whole time of the beasts reign, and that he does advertise us
that the persecution shall last half the time of this reign. Since therefore
he shall reign 1260 years, as we have showed in the exposition of the 5. verse
of the 13 Chapter, and this 11 chap. does confirm it, it follows that the
Roman Hierarchy shall persecute the faithful 630 years. Now I do not find
that the Church of Rome did begin to persecute, and to use cruelty in general
against all that did withstand her doctrine, till Berengers time, whom Pope
Nicolas the 2. compelled to recant by force, in the year 1059. And ever since
the Popes have persecuted such as have maintained the same doctrine. If then
you add the 630 years to 1059 years, you shall find that the persecution of
the Church under the Pope, shall have an end in the year 1689. This term
once expired, the truth that was oppressed shall lift up her head afresh, and the
faithful witnesses shall be seen to stand up again, who shall astonish the
Church of Rome for a short time. For the holy Ghost tells us verse. 12. that
God shall take them up into heaven with evident signs that he has gathered
them unto himself, and these^ signs shall be made manifest even to their very
enemies.

At this time the people shall be much moved, for this is signified by the
earthquake. In this commotion, affrightment, and dissension of the people, the
tenth part of the men of the Church of Rome shall be slain, which number is
expressed by the number of 7000, according to a fashion of speech usual in
Scripture, which by 7000 men understands a greater number then can be
conceived, as when Elias thought that he had been the only faithful man that
was left in Israel, God told him that he had 7000 left yet, which never bowed
the knee to Baal, that is to say, a greater number then he could imagine. At the
sight of which plagues many being stricken with amazement, shall turn unto God
and give him the glory.

By all that which has been formerly said, it appears that we at this time
live in the last half day of these three last days and a half of persecution,
which is the time also that goes next to the sound of the last trumpet, that is
spoken of in the 15 verse, that is to say, the seventh and last execution of
Gods judgments, which shall go before the day of judgment. Note that the 33
years in which Christ was in the world are to be taken away, and do not fall
upon the trumpets.
But if you divide the time from the death of Christ until the year 1689, into
six equal parts (for every trumpet has a certain space of time) you shall
know how many years the seventh trumpet must take up. And if you compare the
whole sum with that which we have said in the exposition of the 13 Chapt.
upon the 5 verse, you shall find great agreement between them, and in
probability gather the time well* near of the coming of our Savior, the
son of God, blessed for ever.

There remains one difficulty to clear concerning these two witnesses, which
our adversaries say are Enoch and Elias, whom they would have to return into
the world again to withstand Antichrist, and to preach, one to the Gentiles,
the other to the Jews, for this is the task that they have laid upon them by
their magistral authority without the word of God, and would pull them from the
place of rest where they abide in happiness, to thrust them into frayes, and
of glorious and immortal persons, make them weak and mortal. It would have
been hard for me to have added any thing to that which his Majesty of England
has learnedly and diligently noted upon this question, were it not that
Bellarmine and Coeffeteau go to snap at his discourse, and being not able to
say any thing of themselves, take delight only in contradicting. This therefore
deserves to be examined.

Of the Translation of Enoch and Elias. Of the place where they are. Who these
two witnesses be. The book of the King defended against false calumnies.
Moses in the 5. chapt. of Genesis says, that Enoch having lived 365 years
(which is a year of years) was seen no more, for God took him away. This
translation of Enoch being done in the body, did exempt him from death, as the
Apostle says in the epistle to the Hebrews, chap. 11. v. 5. Enoch was
translated that he should not see death, neither was he found, for God had
translated him.

The like befell Elias in the 2. chapt. of the 2. book of Kings, where he is
rapt up to heaven in a whirlewinde.

This seems to me to have fallen out, by the secret counsel of the wisdom of
God. For as the world is divided into 3. ages, to wit, into the time before the
law, into the time under the law, and into the time under the gospel, so it
pleased God that in every one of these ages there should one man be taken up to
heaven in his body, Enoch before the law, Elias under the law, Jesus Christ
under the Gospel; to the end that the souls of the Saints that lived either
before the law, or under the law, or under the gospel, and are now in heaven,
should have a man in that age of theirs that should be an image of the future
estate after the day of judgment, and a pledge of the resurrection of the
body. For even as Moses and Elias did appear unto Jesus Christ on the
mountain, for to signify that the law and the gospel gave testimony unto him
(as the King has excellent well noted in his book) so I am persuaded that
these 3 were as so many witnesses of the resurrection unto the Saints that
lived before the law, under the law, and under the gospel.

To these two servants of God, Enoch and Elias, the curious spirits of men have
assigned diverse habitations. There be some that lodge them in the air, which
is a place that the holy Scripture has appointed for the devils, Ephesians. 2. v. 2.
Others think to pleasure them more by making them to be in an earthly
paradise, which (as they say) is sixteen cubits higher the^ the highest hills,
that so it may be one cubit Gen 7.20. Fifteen cubits upward did the waters
prevail when the mountains were covered.
higher then the flowd. And it is credible that Enoch (which as then was there
all alone) seeing the waters to come with in a cubit of his feet, thought
himself not sufficiently secured. All these are fables that smell of the
Jewish Cabalisticall traditions, which it has pleased our adversaries to
follow in this point, and which Moses has clearly confuted. For he describes
the garden of Eden to be in Mesopotamia, and makes the river Euphrates to pass
thorough it, painting out the course that it runs, and naming the countries
that it scoures, and the nature of the land is set down by him, in that he
says that it yields Gold and Bdeliu^, and Onyx stone: which are most certain
proofs that he speaks not of any fantastical regio^. Now there are none but
know that Mesopotamia is a plain even country and that the rivers do always
overflow the valleys and lowest places. Whence it follows that if the deluge
did cover the highest hills, by a far greater reason must it cover, and wast
the champion of Mesopotamia.

All this overbusie curiosity of this people, proceeds from their neglecting to
read the word of God, which decides this question saying in express terms,
that, Elias went up by a whirlewind into heaven. He was therefore taken up*
into heaven, and there is no reason to place Enoch any where else, since that
he was equally translated in body. But if the faithful that are in heaven be
with Jesus Christ, John 17. v. 24. Philip. 1. v. 23. Why should these so
excellent servants of God, have an inferior blessedness allotted unto them?
this translation had been no favor done unto them, but a punnishment. But if
the thief crucified with Jesus Christ entered into Paradise 40 days before the
ascension of our Lord, what should hinder but that Enoch and Elias might have
free access into the same place before his ascension? Jesus Christ I confess
says in the 3 of S. John, v. 13. No man ascends up to heaven, but he that
has descended from heaven, the son of man that is in heaven. But he speaks
according to the Hebrew fashion, which by going up into heaven, and descending
down thence, understand, the bringing of the knowledge of heavenly things to
men from on high: and so does the Apostle take it in the 10 to the Romans. ver.
6. as it appears by the drift of the discourse. Jesus Christ therefore in this
place means to tell Nicodemus only thus much, that none can bring us the
knowledge of heavenly things, but only the son of man that came down from
heaven. Nor may we think it strange that God gave them a special privilege
to be exempted from death, since that the scripture pronounces as much not
only of Enoch, but also of all those that shall live upon the earth at the
coming of our Lord. For seeing that all the Saints do already stand possessed
of heavenly glory, what have these two committed, that they only should be shut
out thence, and kept in a place of expectation apart, to be subject to death
still? And besides I would know of M. Co^ffetau* if he would make a conscienee
to invoke Enoch and Elias; if he do invoke the^, he presupposes that they do
already enjoy the presence of God, if he do not, he sins against the
Church of Rome, which in their Letanies call upon all the Prophets and
Patriarchs in general.

Since then that their abode is in heaven with Jesus Christ, let us see what
reason these men have to pull them out thence, for to make them come down upon
the earth again, and condemn them to die.

As concerning Enoch our adversaries produce no place out of the Canonical
Scriptures, only they allege Ecclesiasticus in the 44 chapt. v. 16. a passage
that runs thus according to the Greek which is the Original. (...).
Enoch pleased the Lord God, therefore was he translated for an example of
repentance to the generations. Is there ever a word in all this either of the
translation of Enoch into an earthly paradise, or of his returning hither to
fight with Antichrist? Therefore Bellarmine thought it better to allege the
common translation clean contrary to the Text, which has translated it
falsely, after this manner. Enoch placuit deo and translatus est in paradisum vt
det gentibus poetitentiam.
Enoch pleased God, and was translated into Paradise to give repentance to the
Gentiles. The word Paradise, and the word Gentiles are falsely thrust in; and yet
when all is done we must be feign to suppose that this Paradise is earthly.
Let the reader judge whether this opinion be not built upon good grounds, which
has nothing brought to maintain it, but only a false passage, and that out of
an Apocryphal book too. These people therefore do much wrong to Enoch in
keeping him 5000 years from the presence of God, and stripping him of his
immortality, to send him down hither for to be slain by Antichrist, as if
God had not other men enough in that age to employ. Nor may we omit, that the
men which lived before the flood, were giants, and that our stature is dwarfish
in respect of theirs: if Enoch therefore should come into the world in his old
stature, he would be thought a kind of monster, and men would be frighted with
the bigness of his personage.

The fable of Enoch being once confuted, that of Elias vanishes with the same
breath; for these squires must of necessity seek elsewhere for their two
witnesses if one of them fail: nevertheless let us see that which they
produce for Elias.

They find these words at the end of Malach. 4. v. 5.6.
Malachie. Behold I go hence to send Eliah the prophet before the coming of
the great and fearful day of the Lord. And he shall turn the hearts of the
fathers to the children, and the hearts of the children to their fathers, least
I come and smite the earth with cursing. To this the King answers that there
is no better interpreter of Malachies words then Jesus Christ himself, who
does assure us that this Elias promised by Malachie is John Baptist. If (says
he) ye will receive my saying, this is that Elias which was to come, Mat.
11.14. And yet more plainly in the 17. chapt. he having said that Elias was
already come, and that they did not know him; S. Matthew adds that his
disciples understood him to speak of John Baptist. Jesus Christ indeed had
said before that Elias must come, speaking in this (as the King has well
noted) according to the common opinion, but to the end that this might not be
understood of any other but John Baptist, he annexeth immediately, But I say
unto you that Elias is already come, and they have not known him. Good cause
therefore had his Majesty to accuse Bellarmine of falsehood, for alleging
these words of Christ, Elias shall come without alleging the words that follow,
But I say unto you that Elias is already come.

Now here the point of the question is, whether Malachie and the Apostles
obiecting to Christ that Elias must come, do speak of an Elias that must go
before the first, or second coming of our Savior. As for Malachie he begins
this discourse from the beginning of the 3 chapt. in these words. Behold I go
hence to send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me, and the
Lord whom ye seek shall speedily come to his Temple. Words that cannot agree
to the second coming of Christ, when he shall need no preparing of his way,
and the earth shall the^ be his temple no more. This appears also out of the
7. chapt. where Malachie says that this Elias shall turn the hearts of the
fathers unto the children, which are the very words of the Luke 1.17.
Angel unto Zachary declaring the office of his son. To the same purpose
also serve these words, For fear least I come and smite the earth. For how can
it be said that these two witnesses shall come for to hinder the coming of
Christ to judgment, and to keep him from smiting the earth? Seeing that his
coming is inevitable, and that the faithful shall long for it? and pray that
the kingdom of God may come, saying with S. John Apoc. 22.20. Even so, come
Lord Jesus.

As for the 17. chapt. of S. Matthew, it is manifest that the second coming of
Christ is not meant in that place, but only the first. For the Apostles either
ravished with the glory of his transfiguration, or rather persuaded by the many
powerful miracles of Jesus Christ, to believe that he was the Messiah,
nevertheless found themselves unable to solue the objection of the Scribes,
which did prove that Christ was not the Messiah by this argument, because that
Elias was not yet come. Doubtless these Scribes did not contest about the day
of judgment, but about the manifestation of the promised Messiah, which (as
they thought) was not yet come.

To this they oppose the words of Malachie, which calls this day a great and
fearful day* which seems ill befitting the gentleness, and humility of
Christ's first coming. His Majesty's answer is that the day of the Lords
passion was full of horror and astonishment. The sun was darkened, the veil of
the Temple was rent, the earth trembled, the stones were cloven, the monuments
were opened, the dead were raised. Or we may say that the first coming of the
Messiah although it were in humility, was yet for all that very fearful. For
he was sent to be a stumbling block unto many, and drew a total destruction
upon the Jews. God a little after (according to the prediction of Malachie)
having smitten their land as accursed. Besides we find that (...). iom hunnora
in Hebrew may signify an wonderful and honorable day as well as a terrible
day. Aretas in the 30. chap. of his co^mentarie upon the Apocalypse, turns it,
dies Domini magnus and manifestus, and the translation of the Septuagint
renders it, (...), diem Domini magnam and illustrem.

The passage that is alleged out of the 48 of Ecclesiasticus. verse. 10. is of
no force, for the book is Apocryphal, and the translator thereof craves
pardon in the Prologue if he has chanced in some places not to express his
Authors meaning so significantly. And yet the place is falsely alleged too.
Behold the true here; Elias was appointed to reprove in due season, (...).
and to pacify the wrath of the Lords judgment before it kindled, and to
turn the hearts of the fathers unto the children, and to set up the tribes of
Jacob. Where is there in all this the least word of coming back into the
world, of being slain, or of fighting with Antichrist? To be short, although
all that they feign of the returning of Elias were true, yet this makes nothing
for the two witnesses, till they have proved as much of Enoch, of whom they
have nothing at all to say.

In one thing they cannot choose but be much cumbred, to wit, in this, when
they say that these two witnesses shall be sent to fight with Antichrist for
the space of three years and an half, at the end of which, Antichrist shall
slay them. By this reckoning Antichrist must be in the world before them, and
stay in the world after them, yea and be in the height of his strength after he
has slain them, seeing that there by he shall become victorious. And by a
consequent he must be in the world above three years and a half; what becomes
then of their assertion, wherein they affirm that Antichrist shall continue
but 3 years and a half? Surely it must needs be that these two witnesses and
Antichrist must come into the world in the same day and die in the same day.

The fathers are of diverse opinions concerning this, and resolve upon nothing
certainly. Tom. 9. Dabo duobus testibus meis, 1. testamentis. Duo candelabra
ecclesia est, sed pro numero testamentorum.
S. Austin in his 8. homily upon the Apocalypse, I will give unto my two
witnesses, that is, unto the two Testaments: and a little after. The two
Candlesticks are the Church, but according to the number of the testaments.
Primasius says the same in his 3. book, and Beda upon the Apocalypse.
Lactantius in the 17. chap. of his 7. book (after many fancies with which that
book is stuffed) says, that toward the last times there shall come a great
Prophet, which must be slain by a king that came out of Syria, and was begotten
by the Devil. For Bellarmine in the third book of his Apology against the
King chap. 1. where he names many fathers without alleging their words.
Bellarmine belyes Lactantius when he makes him to say that Elias shall come
again. Hilarie in the 20 Canon of his co^mentarie upon S. Matthew, recites
diverse opinions of his time, in these words. Apparui^ cum gloriae suae habitu,
Moyse and Elia in mont^ comitantibus and h^s quid^ eosdem prophetas duos
praevenientes adventum eius intelligimus, quos Apocal. Iohannis ab Antichristo
perimend^s esse dicit, licet variae vel de Enoch vel d^ Elia plurimorum
extiterint opiniones.
Jesus appeared in the form of his glory upon the mount, Moses and Elias
accompanying him. And these are the two prophets (as we conceive) which must
come before his coming, and which the Apocalypse of S. John tells us, must be
slain by Antichrist, albeit there have been diverse opinions of many, touching
Enoch, or Jeremy, one of which must die as Elias. Irenie in his 5 book says
that Elias and Enoch were translated into Paradise, and ibi manner vsque ad
consummationem conspicantes incorruptionem: and that they remain there till
the end of the world, beholding incorruption. If they remain in Paradise
still until the end or consummation of the world, Enoch iustiss^mum, non
circumcisum (...) sabbatizantem de hoc mund^ transtulit, qui nedum mortem (...)
vt aeternitatis ca^didatus iam (...) ostenderes nos quoque sine legis onere
Moys^s, Deo placereposse.
they shall not come down hither upon earth to fight with Antichrist before the
consummation thereof. This is his Majesty's observation of England, and is most
fit to the purpose. Tertullian in the 1. Chap. of his book against the Jews,
says that, Enoch an upright man, was translated by God, although he were not
circumcised, neither yet did observe the sabbath, who has not to this day
tasted of death, to the end that he which did aspire to eternity, might show
unto us that we might please God without the burden of Moses law. A passage
which Bellarmine clips in the 6. chap. of his 3 book de Pontifice, where he
seems not to understand the place well: for Tertullian calls Enoch
aeternitatis candidatum, that is to say, one that did aspire to eternity, not
because he aspires unto it now, but because he aspired unto it, whilst he
lived here upon the earth. For the intent of Tertullian is to make it appear
unto the Jews, that a man may attain unto eternal life without the
Ceremonies of the law, by the example of Enoch which without ever keeping of
these, did not desist to aspire to immortality; And whereas he says that he is
not as yet dead, this does not enforce that he must die, no more then if I
should say that the devil has not as yet destroyed the church or that there
could no lie as yet be found in the Gospel, does infer that either of these
two things must come to pass. Enoch (...). status est in car^^ Et Elias
Carneus raptus est in coelu^, necdu^ mortui, and Paradistiam coloni, habe^t
membracum quibus rapti sunt atque tra^slati Quod nos imitamur i^iuni^, illi
posside^^ consortio.
S. Hierome to Pammachius against the errors of John of Jerusalem, Enoch was
translated in the flesh, Elias was rapt up to heaven in the flesh: being not as
yet dead, they are already made inhabitants of Paradise. They have the same
members with which they were taken up and translated. That which we imitate by
fasting, they enjoy by their conjunction with God. Note that they are in
heaven, and joined with God, contrary to our adversaries tenent. As also that
they are already in Paradise, that is to say, that the condition of others is
such that they cannot be there in body till after the day of judgment, to the
end that none might imagine that he speaks of an earthly Paradise. Aretas in
the 29. chapt. of his commentary upon the Apocalypse, upon these words of the
Angel to S. John, Apoc. 10. v. 11.
Thou must prophecy again, Opinantur multi beatu^ hunc. virum vsque ad seculi
consummatione^ vivere, ae venturu^ esse circa te^p^ra Antichristi, cum Enoch
and Elia.
says, that many were of opinion that S. John lives until the end of the
world, and that he shall come in the time of Antichrist with Enoch and Elias.
Hippolytus Martyr says the same in his book de consummatione seculi; To be
brief, there is nothing more diverse, then they are in their opinions.

Our adversaries themselves disagree about this. Arias Montanus speaks after
this manner upon the 4 of Malachie: Ac diem hunc magnu^ and terribile^ non
iudicii extre^i sed Messiae advenientis te^pusantiqui Scribae sopie^ ter
interpretabantur, idque a Christ^ probatum and confirmatum est. Mat. 17*
The ancient Scribes by this great and fearful day did wisely understand, not
the day of the last judgment, but the time of the coming of the Messiah:
which interpretation of theirs was approved off, and confirmed by Christ in the
17. of Matthew. Bellarmin in the 6. chapt. of his 3. book de Pontifice, wonders
what Iansenius bishop of Gaunt dreamt off, when he said that the coming of
Elias again into the world could not be gathered out of the 48. chapt. and
10. ver. of Ecclesiasticus. The Jesuit Tam apertam rem esse Moysen and Eliam
veturos esse, vt nemo id non solum sine temeritate, sed nec sine impudentia
negare possit.
Maldonate in his commentary upon the 17. of Saint Matthew says, that it is
so clear a case that Moses and Elias must come, that no man can deny it not
only without being rash, but also without being impudent. In the judgment of
this Jesuit, Bellarmin is impudent, seeing that he denies that Moses shall
come, and would have it to be Enoch. The Jesuit Pererius in the 7. book of his
commentary upon Genesis, in the disputation Qu. 1. number 137.
touching Enoch does refute their proof of this taken out of the 16 verse of
the 44 of Ecclesiasticus, and expounds the place as we do.

The cause of this error (which the King with good reason calls an idle
dream, and an old wives tale) came from the corrupt Greek translation of the
Septuagint, which puts a word into that place of Malachie, which is not in the
Hebrew, for whereas in the Hebrew it is only, Behold I go hence to send you
Elias, the Greek translation turns it, (...). A translation which Chrysostom
followed in his 58 Homily upon S. Matthew, and which made him to be of the
opinion that Elias should come back again into the world.

This matter might have been ended, were it not that hereby his Majesty takes
an occasion to complain of the wrongs that the Church of Rome has done unto
the old and new Testament, which may probably be thought to be meant by these
two witnesses, seeing that these are they which bear witness of Jesus Christ.
The Kings complaints are. 1. That the Church of Rome does revile the holy
Scripture. 2. That she does prefer her corrupted translation before the
Originals of the Greek, and Hebrew. 3. That she does make Apocryphal books to
be of equal authority with the Cononical. 4. That she does apply the psalter
of David to the virgin Mary, by putting out Gods name, and placing hers instead
thereof. 5. That she does deny the people to read the Bible, and will not
suffer it to be translated into their vulgar tongue, and yet for all that, will
suffer them to have fabulous, and ridiculous legends. 1 Point, that the church
does revile the scripture


1 In the first place the King does challenge them for calling the Scripture a
nose of wax, a dead letter, a leaden, or Lesbian rule. Coeffeteau aunsweres,
that such blasphemies are not found in the writings of the Doctors that they
approve off; Bellarmine on the contrary does confess it, but says that
nothing else is meant by this, but only that Heretics do make the scripture a
nose of wax, a Lesbian rule, etc which is refuted by the learned Bishop of
Elie, in his answer to the Cardinals Apology, where he cites Eckius, Luthers
Antagonist, in his book de fide and iustificatione, cap. 73. Eckius,
efficacior qua^ scriptura est traditio.
Tradition is more powerful the^ the Scripture, and in the same book. Traditio
certissima est veritatis regula ad qua^ Scripturam expendere oporteat,
Evangelistaru^ non f uit hoc in scribendo consitium, vt sua illa scripta
praeessent nost^ae religioni and fidei sed subssent potius
Tradition is a most certain rule of the truth, by which we ought to examine
the Scriptures. The end that moved the Evangelists to write, was not because
they would have their writings to rule over religion and faith, but rather that
they should be subject unto it. Coster says the same in his Enchiridion of
Controversies. And in the 71. chap. Sunt enim scripturae velut cereus quida^
nosus qui sicut horsum illorsu^que trahise permittit etc.
The Scriptures are as a nose of wax, that suffers it self to be turned this
way, and that way, he says that they are; and not that they are made to be. He
alleges Hosius also, which maintains against Brentius, that his words which
said that the Scriptures without the authority of the Church are no more to be
esteemed then Esops Fables (p^tuisse pio sensu^ici) might be spoken in a godly
sense. And Turrianus Si Scriptura^ s^lam fidei regula^ Christus reliquisset in
Eccles^a quid aliud quam gladium Delphi cum haberemus?
Turrianus who in the p. 250. says, that if Christ had left no other rule of
our faith then the Scripture, we should have had nothing else but a Delphian
sword, that is to say, a two edged sword that cuts upon both sides. And behold
here some of Bellarmines own words (which are little better) in his 4. chap.
and Quarto ^ecesse. Etsi Scriptura di cat libros Prophetaru^ and Apostolorum
esse divinos, tamen non ce^to id ^redam, nisi prius credider^ Scripturam quae
hoc dicit esse diuinam. Na^ in Alcorano Mahumetis passim legim ipsum Alcoranum
de coelo a Deo dimissum.
4. book, Of the word not written; Although the Scripture say that the books
of the Apostles, and Prophets are divine, yet I shall never believe it
assuredly, if I do not first believe that the Scripture which says this, is
divine. For we read as well in the Alcoran that the Alcora^ was sent from
heaven. This Cardinal would have the testimony that the Scripture gives of it
self to be no more credited then that which the Alcoran gives of it self,
and in the 10. chap. he says Ad^lla. Supra diximus Scripturas non fuisse
absolute necessarias.
that the Scriptures are not absolutely necessary, and in the seventh chapt. he
is bold to affirm, Sed omissi^ Quaeda^ sunt traditiones maiores quoad
obligationem quam quaeda^ Scripturae.
that there be some trad^tions which are greater then some of the Scriptures,
as concerning the obligation, that is to say, that a man is bound more to
believe them then the Scripture. In the 12. Chapt. Respondeo Scripturae finem
propriu^ and praecipuu^ non fuisse vt esset regula fidei, sed vt esset
commonitorium quoddam vtile.
The proper and principal end of the Scripture, was not that it should be a
rule of faith, but that it should be a profitable admonition to make men
entertain the doctrine of preaching, And a little after. Dico secundo
Scriptura^ etsi non est sact^ praecipue vt sit regula fidei* esse tamen regulam
fidei non totalem sed partialem
I say that although the scripture were not made properly to be a rule of
faith, yet it is a rule of faith, though not a total rule, but a partial.

The famous Doctor Charron surpasses them all. Behold how he does extol the
Scripture in his 3 Truth, a book which France has received with wonderful
applause. In the second chapter, having said that the Church and the Scripture
are judges together, he adds, But the church is primarily and principally,
and with great pre-eminence. And a little after, The Scripture is not, nor
cannot be the last rule, and sovereign judge of doctrine. In the 2. page of
the 3. chap. Faith that is necessary to salvation comes from the Church
speaking, and not from the reading of the Scripture, without knowing of which
after a sort, yea and without believing or obaying it expressly, a thousand
millions are saved -- To be short, a man may be a Christian, and a good
Christian, and be saved, without the Scripture, but not without the Church.
And a little after, How can one get out of contention by the scripture seeing
that we come into it by the Scripture? This is an open field for all quarrels;
and as we use to say, a sword for all hands; yea by this many come to be
Atheists -- it is like a forest where all claim right to graze, yea even
Atheists themselves. And in the same chapter, The scripture has no authority,
weight, power over us, but only as much as the church does appoint, and assign
unto it. Now every one knows that by the scripture we do not understand the
paper or ink, but the word of God contained therein, and none can deny but
that the church is subject to the word of God. But by these Doctors reckoning
the word of God should be subject to the church, and men should give weight and
authority to the word of God. In the 4. chapt. he says unto such as exact
proofs out of Scripture for every point of faith, that this is a wrongful and
unjust demand: for it is to require an impossible thing; because the Scripture
does not speak of all things: and in the same place, It is most false that
Gods intent was to inform the world of his will, to plant the faith, and make
Christians by the Scripture. What was therefore the end of those holy Scribes?
It was (says he in the same place) to write certain particulars according as
they saw occasion (de re nata) A little after he says, that to ask for
scripture is to play the ill debtor, and the part of an dishonest man, which
will not pay his money except he may first see his bond. Thou do believe
because thou do read, thou art therefore no Christian, for a Christian
believes before he read, and without reading. -- A Christian believes at first
without expecting a reason, with his eyes close shut, and afterward he sees
reason. -- He that believes because he has read the bible* ^his faith and
belief is in a manner not Christian like: we must call it by some other name,
a humane, purchased, studied faith, but not a Christian faith, neither is he
that shall profess it a Christian. In brief, under the show of a respect
toward the church (by which we must always understand the Roman church)
these people do persecute these two faithful witnesses, and do plant
Atheism under hand, whereof this Doctor Charron in particular is not a little
conscious: as it appears by many places in his book of Wisdom. The Kings
complaint therefore is just, and had he but held his peace, the matter would
have proclaimed it self.

But above all the Cardinal of Perons book seems intolerable to his Majesty,
concerning the Insufficiency of the Scripture; Coeffeteau answers that this
is an Imposture of the Minister Tilenus, which caused it to be printed at
Rochel with this title. In all this Coeffeteau is ill informed. For Monsieur
Titenus is not Minister to this day. Secondly although he did put this title
before the book, yet can he not in this respect be accused of imposture,
because the book being without a title, and being that there must one of
necessity be put before it, he could not have chosen any more fit to the
purpose then out of the first line of the book, which is this, The scripture
is not sufficient without traditions. And that his Majesty might know in what
this insufficiency consists, the first point is that there is no mention made
of the immortality of the soul in the books of Moses. Which yet is mentioned
there very Genesis 5.2^ Genesis 49.18. Exodus 3.15 Number. 23.10
often. And although there were nothing said of it, yet these holy books being
the religion of Gods people, they do necessarily carry the immortality of the
soul imprinted on their foreheads, and presuppose it by the title, because
that without this, religion is nothing but folly, and an unwieldy yoke.

The second thing that his Majesty finds fault with, II. Point. Of their
preferring the corrupt translation before the original.
is that the Church of Rome does prefer the vulgar Latin translation (which
is corrupted in a thousand and a thousand places) before the Original text of
the Greek and Hebrew. And he says this because the Counsel of Trent in the 4
Session has decreed Vt vetus and vulgata editio pr^ authentica habeatur, and
quod ^am ne m^ reiicere quovis pr^textu audeat vel presumat
that the old and vulgar edition be held for authentical, and that none
presume to reject it under what pretext soever. Whence it follows that in all
places where it is contrary to the Original Greek and Hebrew, a man must
beware how he reject it, and that he must rather think that the Original is
false then the Copy. And indeed Bellarmin in the 7. chapt. of his 2. book de
verbo Dei speaks thus of the Hebrew Bible, and of the New Testament in Greek,
In this, my opinion is that we are to hold that of the Greek which I have said
already of the Hebrew bibles, to wit, that the Greek Copies are not generally
corrupted, and yet that their fountains are not altogether pure. But if the
Originals of the word of God be marred, what surety then is there in religion?
and if the springs be troubled how can the streams run clear? Now amongst
other corruptions of the Romish translation his Majesty does produce two. The
first is in the 15 of S. Luke verse 8. where in steed of to sweep the house,
the vulgar translation has turned it, to overturn the house. The other is in
the 21. chapt. of S. John, ver. 22.23. where in steed of, If I will that he
stay, the vulgar translation turns it, I will that he stay so, upon which
corruption some have grounded that idle conceit of theirs, that Saint John is
not dead to this day. Coeffeteau says these places have been corrected in the
last bibles, meaning the Bibles newly printed by the authority of Clement the
8. But Bellarmin Locus posterior non est mutatu^, quo^i^m hab^tur in omnibus
Latinis codici^us.
contradicts him, and says that the first place only is corrected and not the
second. But the Bibles of Sixtus V. printed but a little before have nothing
corrected in them: and before Sixtus, the Council of Trent did approve of the
vulgar translation in all things; seeing that it has pronounced it to be
authentical clean through out, and has forbidden any part thereof to be
refused: But the Pope does correct the Councels, and the Popes his
predecessors, and after this Pope Clement, there will some Boniface come,
which shall undo that which Clement did.

As for the impurity of the vulgar translation, it would be easier for a man to
alter it clean, and make a new one of it, the^ to purge it. In the greatest
part of the Psalms and of the prophets, there is no more reason then there is
rhyme: To be short, it is clean a diverse thing from the Original. The 13.
Psalm which is the 14. in the Hebrew, at the 9. verse, where there are 10.
lines added, which are not in the Hebrew. In the second psalm instead of kiss
the son, the Latin translation has it, Apprehend discipline. In the 132.
psalm. v. 5. in steed of I will bless her vitailes, this translation renders
it, I will bless her widows. In the 9. chap. of Esdras, v. 8. instead of
paxillus, this translation has pax illius, that is to say, his peace, for a
nail. And in the verse following, where it is in the Hebrew for to give us a
hedge in Judah, this tra^slatio^ has it, Spe^ for sepem, cecinit ^udus for
cecidit, lapides saeculi, for sacculi, ipsa mulier, for ipsum semen
to give us hope in Judah. In the 19. chapt. of the 1. of Samuel, verse 24.
instead of He fell down naked, this translation turns it, He sung all naked;
In the 16. of the Prove. ver. 11. the Hebrew says, the waights of the bag,
the translation, the waights of the time. These are ridiculous faults, but
they which follow are malicious. As the translating it in the 3. of Genesis,
and 15. verse, she (to wit the woman) shall bruise the serpents head; whereas
it is, The seed of the woman shall bruise the head of the serpent. Whence in
the Virgins psalter this commendation, of having bruised the head of the
Serpent is attributed unto her. As also the translating it in the 99. psalm.
Fall down to his footstool, whereas it is in the Hebrew, Fall down toward,
or before his footstool. A corruption that was in the time of S. Augustine,
who did not know that they would in ages following ground the worship of
creatures upon this place. As also for omitting these words in the 11. chapt.
and 6. verse of the Epistle to the Romans, If it be of works it is no more
grace, or else were work no work. I wonder much also how it comes to pass
that in the 11 of S. Luke the vulgar translation cuts off the fourth part of
the Lords prayer, omitting these words, which art in heaven, as also, Thy will
be done in earth as it is in heaven, as also these words, But deliver us from
evil. The vulgar translation (that it might bring in a diffidence and
uncertainty of salvation) renders the first verse of the 9. of Ecclesiasticus
after this manner. A man knows not whether he have deserved love or hatred, but
all things are kept in uncertainty, for the time to come. Whereas the Hebrew
has only, No man knows either love or hatred of all that is before them. We
might note many more such like places, whence it appears that his Majesty's
complaint is most just.

The King complains also that these two witnesses are wronged in this, III.
Point. Of their equalling the Apocryphal books with the Canonical.
that men's writings called Apocryphal, are made of equal worth with the^.
Which we have proved to be against the authority of Jesus Christ, and the
Apostles, and all the ancient church, and have showed that Coeffeteau does
allege a falsified Council of Nice, and abuse a place of S. Austin. See the
5. Article of my 2. book upon this. And note besides that not only the
Apocryphal books are set in the same rank with the Canonical, but also that
the Roman Decree in the 19. Distinction in the Canon In Canonicis, says that
the Popes Decretal Epistles are to be reckoned amongst the Canonical
Scriptures. So behold with what good companio^s these two witnesses are matched.

The fourth Complaint that his Majesty makes, IV Point, David's Psalter
corrupted.
is of the horrible corruption, allowed off, and published in the church of
Rome, in that they suffer a psalter, commonly called the psalter of S.
Bonave^ture made in honor of the Virgin Mary, where the psalms of David are
applied to the Virgin, and her name put in the place of Gods name. And this
worthy psalter has been translated into French, and printed at Paris in the
year 1601. with the approbation of the faculty of the Divines of Paris. In
reading thereof you would say, See here the Psalms of David, but only that the
name of God is not called upon in them. And it seems that David does invoke
the Virgin Marie. The 131. psalm begins thus. Memento Domina David, and omnium
invocantium nomen tuum. Remember David, o Lady, and all those which call upon
thy name. With the like grace, the Reverend father Solier a Jesuit of
Saints, has lately set forth 3. sermons in praise of the Beatified Ignatius,
in the first of which, page 33. he says that Ada^ sung these psalms to
comfort himself in his banishment. It may be also that Elias did read them at
the Canonical hours of our Lady. Bellarmine in his Apology against the King
excuses the matter, saying that Bonaventure did not change David's Psalter, but
only made another of it in imitation of David's Psalms, being moved thereunto
by a goldly affection that he bore to the holy Virgin. But that which is an
impiety against God, can be no piety toward the Holy Virgin. She does not
think her self honored by the dishonor of God. For this profane psalter is
made as if one should apply the Lords prayer to the Virgin Mary, in saying, Our
mother which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, etc. He that should speak
after this manner to the Virgin Mary, might he excuse himself in saying that
he did not corrupt the Lords prayer, but made another in imitation thereof,
being moved thereunto by a godly affection that he bore to the holy Virgin?
This Psalter is little better. The 109. Psalm begins thus. Dixit Dominus
Dominae nostrae, sede matter mea a dextris meis. The Lord said unto our Lady,
sit down mother at my right hand. The Psalm Which is the 110. in the Hebrew.
129 De profundis clamavi ad te Domina: Domina exaudi vocemmeam. Out of the
deep places have I called unto thee o Lady, o Lady hear my voice. The The 91.
in the Hebrew.
90 Psalm, which in our Psalters begins with, who so dwells in etc. is thus
applied to the Virgin Mary. He that commits himself to the protection of
the mother of God, shall rest secure under her shadow, and safeguard. His
enemies though they come against him shall not hurt him, and the arrow that
flies through the air shall not strike him. and in the The 94. in the Hebrew.
93 Psalm, he makes as though he durst not presume to speak to God, but it
is to wrong him. The Lord is a God of vengeance, but thou o merciful mother
art inclined to pity and compassion; you would say that she were set to
pacify Gods anger, and to make him change his will. It was a hard matter
therefore to get access to God, before the birth of the Virgin, or before she
was crowned queen of heaven; To conclude, all this whole Psalter is such and
yet Bellarmine dares say that it was made with a holy and godly affection, and
the faculty of the Divines of Paris, did not stick to approve of it. And yet
afterward they are bold to say that the worship of Latria appertains to God
only, as if the Psalms of David were no divine service.

V. Point. the suppressing of the holy scripture.
On the complaint which his Majesty makes in the 5 place of the suppressing of
the Scripture, for fear least the people should come to see it, these Doctors
say, that the reading of the Scripture is not absolutely denied unto lay men,
but that they are forbid to read it without having a special permission; (that
is to say) that the Pope by a special privilege will give a man leave to obey
God, for God would have the people to read the Scripture. Kings are Laymen, and
yet for all that in the 17. of Deuter. they are commanded to read in the book
of the law all the days of their life. And when the Apostle wrote to the
people of the church of Corinth, of Rome, of Ephesus, did he not mean, that
they to whom he wrote should read his Epistles? And when in the beginning of
the Apocalypse it is said, Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the
words of this Prophecy, why should we not, following the counsel of S. John,
apply our selves to the reading hereof, seeing that it is the next way to make
us happy? And yet this is one of the obscurest books in all the Scripture: how
much more then are we exhorted by this to read the books of the Gospel, so
full of perspicuity and instruction? In the 17 of the Acts. ver. 11. they of
Beroe are commended because that after they had heard S. Paul preach, they did
daily use to examine his doctrine by the Scripture, to know whether it were so
or no, and yet it is probable that the Apostle S. Paul did, at the least
speak with as much certainety, as Curates and Bishops do now adays. Why then
may not they which hear them (after their sermons ended) compare that which
they heard with the Scripture* to see whether it be truly alleged or no? A
strange case! These Doctors both in their sermons, and in their writings
pretend Scripture commonly, but will not have the people to see whether they
deal truly or no. As if they should say, S. Paul, or S. John says so, but
do not go thither to see it. They send you to the holy Scripture, but stop
you in the way; yea and in their full sermons they allege the Scripture in
barbarous Latin, and interpret it according to such allegations, as if French
were worth nothing except it were set in the tail of Latin. Jesus Christ many
a time in the Scripture asks of those that stand about him. Matt. 19.4. Luke
10.26.
have ye not read, and, How read thou? should Jesus Christ now adays speak
in the same manner to the people of the Church of Rome, they would answer him,
we have not read, for the Popes Holiness will not permit it, except it be
unto some few which understand Latin, and which have special leave from their
Ordinary. Certainly I dare maintain that for a man to take upon him to
permit any one by his special favor and privilege, to obey God or to be
instructed in his word, is far worse the^ if he should forbid him to serve God.
For he which does forbid a man to serve God, does only oppose himself
against God: but he which gives any one a privilege to serve God, makes God to
be his inferior, and his subject, seeing that he cannot be served but by the
permission of the Pope, and it will come to this pass at last, that God must
do him reverence, if he himself look to be served. Hereunto add that women,
and the common sort of people which do not understand Latin care not to sue for
a permission to read it in Latin, which yet is the only tongue that is allowed
of in the Church of Rome. But if you turn over all the histories of the
Church, you shall never find that any went about to hinder the reading of the
Scripture, but certain monsters and tyrants, as Antiochus Epiphanes, and such
like persecutours of the Church, whose example the Pope has followed. For that
there are some vulgar translations seen now adays in France and Italy, this
has been but of late, and without approbation: and our adversaries are
beholding to us for it. For it is not yet a hundredth years since that you
should as soon have found an Alcoran, as a French or Italian Bible, amongst the
people of the Romish church. And yet to this day at Rome, or in Spain, to
find a Spanish, or Italian Bible with one of the people, is a burning matter,
and a case of the Inquisition.

Yet judge what tyranny this is. For the books of the old and new Testament,
are our contract of marriage with our bridegroom Jesus Christ, and the
testament of our heavenly father. The clauses of the Legacies and donations
contained therein, do appertain to the people as well as to the Priests: why
then should any one keep their fathers testament from the people? Why may not
the Spowse be suffered to see her contract of marriage? Must I in this
business rely upon the trust of men that live by my ignorance, and make their
gain by concealing the truth from me? Why do they suffer me to read fables
and profane histories, and will not suffer me to read the will, and the
ordinances of my father? Why do they make me to suspect the Holy scriptures as
if they were dangerous books, and a knife to cut my throat with? Suffer us at
least to have a good opinion of God, and she shall be bound unto you for it. If
you say, But many abuse the^; I answer that preaching is abused too, and so is
the goodness of God, and yet for all this we are not to abstain from them, or
suspect them the more: And besides that there is more danger in a voluntary
ignorance, then in a desire to profit. And it shall never be found that the
people did hatch heresies by the reading of the holy Scripture, but all the
Arch Heretics have bin men that have had the charge of teaching which should
therefore rather of the two be barred the holy Scripture. They say that it is
for none but men of knowledge to read them; whereas I ever thought that a man
did read them to get knowledge; but these men will have knowledge to be gotten
before the reading of them: which is a most wicked assertion, to make a
knoweledge in religion that may be without the scripture, and before the
scripture. And yet if it were so, what should become of a great company of the
Priests, which are more ignorant then the most part of the people, to who^
notwithstanding the reading of the Scripture is permitted?

But if any be desirous to know the belief of the Ancient Church concerning
this, and whether the people did read the holy scripture then or no, behold
here some of their testimonies. Chrysostom in his 3. Homily of Lazarus
speaks thus to his auditors, I do exhort you always, and will never cease to
exhort you that you be not only attentive here to that which is spoken, but
when you be at home also, that you would set your selus carefully to the
reading of the holy Scripture. A thing which I have not forborne to inculcat
unto the^, that have spoken with me, in particular. For it is not fit that any
should say unto me, these words are but little gracious, and there be many
other things to busy a man, I am tied to attend at the Court, I ma^nage
public affairs, I have my occupation, I have a wife, I see to the bringing up
of my children, I look to my family, I am mingled with the world, and
therefore it is not for me to read the Scriptures, but for those which have
bid Adieu to the world, whose dwelling place is upon the tops of hills, there
leading a more strict kind of life. What say thou o Man? must thou not turn
over the scriptures because thou art distracted with many businesses? But it
lies thee upon rather to read them then they which are more free: For they
have not so much need of the assistance of the scripture as thou which art
tossed amidst the waves of businesses, etc. Till at last he says, that it is
impossible, yea I say impossible that any should attain to salvation, if he
employ not himself daily in this spiritual reading. And a little after. The
graces of the spirit has so ordered and fitted the scriptures, that publicans,
fisher men, makers of tents, the Pastors and Apostles, the simple and ignorant
sort of people may be saved by these books, that none of them hereafter may
have any cause to complain of the difficulty. To the end that the things
which are said there might be easy to understand, and that the Artizan, the
groom, and the widow woman, and he that is most unlearned of all me^, may
carry away some profit by the hearing of this read. To be brief the whole
homily is spent about nothing else. Hierome in an Epistle to Laeta concerning
the instruction of her daughter Paula. Pro ge^^is and serico divin^s codices
(...), in quibus non auri and pellis Babylonicae vermiculata pictura, sed ad
fidem place^t emendata and erudita distinctio. Di scat primo psalterium, bis se
ca^ticis ^v^cet -- Ad Evangelia transeat, nu^quam ea positura de manibus,
mandet memoriae Prophetas, caveat omnia Apocrypha.
In steed of precious stones and silk, let her love the books of God, in
which let her not love the gold, nor the painting upon the covers, but the
scripture learnedly corrected, and distinguished. Let her first learn the
psalms, let her solace her self with these songs. Let her learn how to live
well in the Proverbs of Solomon. Let her learn how to despise worldly things
by Ecclesiastes. Let her follow the examples of virtue and patience in Job.
From hence let her pass over to the Eva^gelists, and never lay them out of her
hands. Let her learn the Prophets by heart. Let her beware of al Apocryphal
books. Then therefore the reading of the scripture was permitted, yea and
commanded, even to young maids.

S. Austin in the 9. chapt. of his book de Doctrina Christiana, speaking of
the Canonical books, In his omnibus libri^ timentes Deum, and pietate man's
eti qu^runt voluntate^ Dei. Cuius operi^ and laboris prima observatio est (vt
diximus) n^s se ist^s libros etsi nondum intellectum, adlegendo tame^ m^ vel
mandare memoriae vel omnino incognitos non habere.
In all these books, they which fear God, and are of a zealous disposition,
do seek after the will of God. In which work and travel, the first task that
they have to do, is to know these books: and although they cannot understand
them presently, yet in reading them over, either to learn them by heart, or at
the least not to have the^ altogether unknown unto the^. The third book begins
with this. Homo time^s deum voluntatem eius in sanctis scripturis inquirit. A
man fearing God seeks diligently for his will in the holy Scriptures.

In a word, all this forbidding of the scripture to be read without a special
permission, and the denying it to be translated into any vulgar tongue, for
fear least the people should put their noses into it, is a thing never heard
off in all ages, a new kind of tyranny, and a manifest betraying of a bad
cause. He that is loath to have the law seen, acknowledges that it does not
favor him in his suite.

The other complaints of the King, as of the abuse of fabulous legends, of the
traffic, which has changed the spiritual keys into keys of gold, and the
fishermans boat into a merchants ship, these have been proved in the 6.
Article of my second book, and in the exposition of the 18. chapter of the
Apocalypse.

PROPHECIES SCATTEred throughout the Apocalypse, speaking of the Pope and his
seat, noted by the King of Great Britain. CHAP. 10.
BEsides these prophecies formerly expounded, which describe the Popes seat,
and his person, by a continued discourse of whole chapters; His Majesty has
noted other places also to this purpose scattered here and there in diverse
places of the Apocalypse, which may not be omitted. The first is in the 6.
chapt. and 8. verse, Where the Popes seat is represented by a pale horse, and
his name that sa^e on him was death, and Hell followed after him, and power was
give^ unto him over the fourth part of the earth, to wit over Europe. Hell
follows him, because it is the reward for those which serve this seat.

His Majesty notes also that the Pope is the king called Abaddon, or Apollyon,
that is to say, one that destroies, and wastes souls, who is spoken off in
the 9. chapt. v. 11. and is king over the Locusts which came out of the thick
smoke of the bottomless pit, v. 2.3. that is to say, which arose out of
gross ignorance that proceeded from hell and the devil, and that, after that
a star fell from heaven, that is to say, by the means of one which having
been a light unto the church for a time, tumbled down, and fell away from
heavenly things to earthly, of a spiritual Pastor beco^ming a Temporal Prince:
which is altogether suitable to the Pope. This is confirmed by this, that the
men which serve him are punished in the 20. verse for serving Idols of Gold,
of silver, of brass and of stone, to the end that no man should apply this
prophecy to the Turcks. For the Turcks have all sorts of Images in
detestation. And the vices reckoned up in the 21. verse do all agree to the
Roman Hierarchy, as the King has showed most exactly and truly.

He does likewise apply the 16. chap. of the Apocalypse to the Sea of Rome,
where God does power out 7 vials of his wrath, that is to say, 7 sorts of
punishments upon those which bear the mark of the beast in their foreheads,
ver. 1. and 2. The three last are the worst. For in the fifth, which is spoken
off in the 10. verse, God powers out darkness upon the throne of the beast, and
God smiting them from above, they blasphemed against him. But at the pouring
out of the sixth vial, verse 13. There came 3 unclean spirits like frogs out
of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the
mouth of the false Prophet, by which Frogs his Majesty understands, the
Emissaries, and new religious orders, which the Pope sends out to seduce the
people, and especially the Jesuits compared (as the King has most wittily
observed) to Frogs, because as these live by land and water, and are of a mixed
nature, so the Jesuits are half Ecclesiastical, half lay creatures; men of
the church, and yet such as will thrust themselves into worldly affairs. And
they are said to be 2, because (says the King) of their threefold direction,
being sent from those 3. mentioned v. 13. Which seems to be confirmed by that
which is annexed in the 14. verse. These are the spirits that work miracles,
which go unto the kings of the earth, and of the whole world to gather them to
the battle of that great day of God Almighty. For these men speak of
miracles, and incite kings and people on to persecute the faithful, but at the
encounter God shall overthrow them in the day which he has appointed, and
does (as it were) expect them in battle.

The place where the Adversaries shall be discomfited, is called Harmageddon in
the 16. verse, which is an Hebrew word, and signifies the mounetaine of
Mageddo, near to which, that is to say, in the neighboring vallie, the good
Chron. 35. v. 22. Herodotus in his 2 book called Euterpe speaking of this
battle of Neco against Josias. s^ith (...) for Meguido (...).
King Josias was slain by Neco king of Egypt. In the same place was Si^era,
captain of Iabins army king of Canaan, discomfited by Debora the Prophetess;
as it is to be seen in the 15. of Judges, ver. 19. whence it appears that
the holy Holy Ghost does here allude that discomfiture which was effected by
contemptible means, to wit, by a woman attended but by a small company; to
signify, that the Popes throne, and they which follow him, shall be vanquished
by the Church compared to a woman, and by contemptible means. Notwithstanding
we are to note that this word Harmagaddon does also signify the overthrow of
the proud or haughty: yea and that in Hebrew it signifies (...). Roma
subversio, the subversion of Rome, which falls out by an admirable occurrence.

The 7 vial powered out in the 17 verse. Even to the end of the Chapter does
represent the plagues which must befall the City of Rome, and the Romish
Church, before her destruction. The great Earthquake, and the division of the
great City into 3. parts. v. 19. do foretell us of the divisions and
dissentions which shall trouble her a little before her final overthrow: which
is touched by the way in these words. And that great Babylon came in remembrance
before God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his
wrath. This destruction of hers is described more at large in the 18. chap.
which we have expounded.

He that would be more fully informed in these things, let him read the Kings
kooke; For all that we can do herein, is nothing else but to follow his steps.
Because the holy Ghost is more concealed in these last observations, then in
the other Chapters which I have expounded all along; Experience will make it
more manifest, and posterity shall hereafter reckon this amongst one of Gods
wonderful works, that he did set such a great King upon the Throne, to
publish his secrets from an high place, and to expose the truth to the sight of
al me^. But especially the Kings and Princes of these and succeeding ages, will
be admonisht hereby, and perceiving that it is more then 1500 years since that
God did speak of them, and that they do make a part of S. John's Revelation,
will apply themselves readily to execute his ordinance. To who^ his Majesty of
England (toward the end of his preface) makes an exhortation, which deserves
to be written in letters of Gold, and which I have put here for the conclusion
of my book, as a more delicate dish at the end of a feast.

THE CONCLUSION OF THE King of Great Britains Preface, containing an
exhortation to all Christian Kings and Princes.
My hearty desire is that you would deeply consider, and weigh your common
interest in this Cause. For neither in all my Apology, nor in the pretended
Refutatio^ thereof, is there any question made anent the Popes power over me in
particular, for the excommunicating or deposing of me. For in my particular;
the Cardinal does me that grace, that he says, The Pope thought it not
expedient at this time to excommunicate me by name; our question being only
general, Whether the Pope may lawfully pretend any temporal power over Kings,
or no?

That no Church men can by his rule be subject to any temporal Prince, I have
already showed you; And what Obedience any of you may look for of any of them
de facto, he plainly forewarneth you of, by the example of Gregory the Great
his obedience to the Emperor Mauritius: not being ashamed to slander that
great Personages Christian humility and obedience to the Emperor, with the
title of a constrained and forced obedience, because he might, or durst do no
otherwise. Whereby he not only wrongs the said Gregory in particular, but
even does by that means lay on an heavy slander and reproach upon the
Christian humility and patience of the whole Primitive Church, especially in
the time of Persecution: if the whole glory of their Martyrdom and Christian
patience shall be thus blotted with that vile gloss of their coacted and
constrained suffering, because they could or durst do no otherwise; like the
patience and obedience of the Jews or Turkish slaves in our time, clean
contrary to S. Paul and S. Peter's doctrine of obedience for conscience sake;
Romans 13.6. 1. Pet. 2, 13.
and as contrary to Tertullians Apology for Christians, and all the
protestations of the ancient Fathers in that case. But it was good luck for
the ancient Christians in the days of Ethnicke Emperors, that this profane and
new conceit was then unknown among them: otherwise they would have been
utterly destroyed and rooted out in that time, and no man to have pitied them,
as most dangerous members in a Commonwealth; who would no longer be obedient,
then till they were furnished with sufficient ability and power to resist and
rebel.

Thus may ye see, how upon the one part our Cardinal will have all Kings and
Monarchs to be the Popes Vassals; and yet will not on the other side, allow the
meanest of the Pope his vassals, to be subject to any Christian Prince. But he
no^ thinking it enough to make the Pope our Superior, has in a late Treatise
of his (called the Recognition of his books of Controversies) made the people
and Subjects of every one of us, our Superiors. For having taken occasion to
revisite again his books of Controversies and to correct or explain what he
finds amiss or mistaketh in them; in imitation of S. Augustine his
retractions (for so he says in his Preface) he does in place of retracting any
of his former errors, or any matter of substance; not retract, but recant
indeed, I mean sing over again, and obstinatly confirm a number of the
grossest of them. Among the which, the exempting of all Churchmen from
subjection to any Temporal Prince, and the setting up not only of the Pope,
but even of the People above their natural King; are two of his maine points.

As for the exemption of the Clerickes; he is so greedy there to prove that
point, as he denies Caesar to have been Paul's lawful Judge: Act. 25.10.
contrary to the express Text, and Paul's plain Appellation, and acknowledging
him his Judge; besides his many times claiming to the Roman privileges, Act.
22.2^*
and avowing himself a Roman by freedom; and therefore of necessity a
Subject to the Roman Emperour^. But it is a wonder that these Roman
Catholics, who vaunt themselves of the ancienty both of their doctrine and
Church, and reproach us so bitterly of our Novelties, should not be ashamed to
make such a new inept gloss as this upon S. Paul's Text; which as it is
directly contrary to the Apostles words, so is it without any warrant, either
of any ancient Council, or of so much as any one particular Father that ever
interprets that place in this sort: Neither was it ever doubted by any
Christian in the Primitive Church, that the Apostles, or any other degree of
Christians, were subject to the Emperor.

And as for the setting up of the People above their own natural King, he
brings in that principle of Sedition, that he may thereby prove, that Kings
have not their power and authority immediately from God, as the Pope has his:
For every King (says he) is made and chosen by his people; nay, they do but so
tra^sferre their power in the Kings person, as they do not withstanding retain
their habitual power in their own hands, which upon certain occasions they
may actually take to themselves again. This, I am sure, is an excellent ground
in Divinity for all Rebels and rebellious people, who are hereby allowed to
rebel against their Princes; and assume liberty unto themselves, when in their
discretions they shall think it co^venient.

And amongst his other Testimonies for probation, that all Kings are made and
created by the People; he alleges the Creation of three Kings in Scripture,
Saul David and Jeroboam; and though he be compelled by the express words of
the Text, to confess, that God by his Prophet Samuel anointed both 1. Sam. 10
1.
Saul and 1. Sam 16.12, 13.
David; yet will he, by the post-consent of the people, prove that those Kings
were not immediately made by God, but mediatlie by the people; though he repeat
thrice that word of Lot, by the casting whereof he confesses that Saul was
chosen. And if the Election by Lot be not an immediate Election from God;
Acts 1.
the^ was not Matthias, who was so chosen and made an Apostle, immediately
chosen by God: and consequently, he that sits in the Apostolic Sea cannot
for shame claim to be immediately chosen by God, if Matthias (that was one of
the twelve Apostles, supplying Judas his place) was not so chosen. But as it
were a blasphemous impiety, to doubt that Matthias was immediately chosen by
God, and yet was he chosen by the casting of Lots, as Saul was: so is it well
enough known to some of you (my loving Brethren) by what holy Spirit or
casting of Lots the Popes use to be elected; the College of Cardinals, his
Electors, having been divided into two mighty factions ever since long before
my time; and in place of casting of Lotts, great fat pensions being cast into
some of their greedy mouths for the Election of the Pope, according to the
partial homours of Princes. But I do most of all wonder at the weakness of
his memory: for in this place he makes the post-consent of the people to be
the thing that made both these Kings, notwithstanding of their preceding
inauguration and anointment by the Prophet at Gods commandment; forgetting
that in the beginning of this same little book of his, answering one that
alleges a sentence of S. Cyprian, to prove that the Bishops were judged by
the people in Cyprians time, he there confesses, that by these words, the
consent of the people to the Bishops Election must be only understood. Nor
will he there any ways be moved to grant, that the peoples power, in
consenting to or refusing the Election of a Bishop, should be so understood, as
that thereby they have power to elect Bishops: And yet do these words of Cyprian
seem to be far stronger, for granting the peoples power to elect
Churchmen, then any words that he alleges out of Scripture are for the
peoples power in electing a King. For the very words of Cyprian by himself
there cited are, Cyp. lib. 1. Epist. 4.
That the very people have principally the power, either to choose such Priests
as are worthy, or to refuse such as are unworthy: And, I hope, he can never
prove by the Scripture, that it had been lawful to the people of Israel, or
that it was left in their choice, to have admitted or refused Saul or David at
their pleasure, after that the Prophet had anointed them, and presented them
unto them.

Thus ye see how little he cares (even in so little a volume) to contradict
himself, so it may make for his purpose; making the consent of the people to
signify their power of Election in the making of Kings: though in the making
of Bishops, by the peoples consent, their approbation of a deed done by others
must only be understood. And as for his example of Ieroboams election to be
King; he knows well enough* 1. King. 12.20.
that Jeroboam was made King in a popular mutinous tumult and rebellion* only
permitted by God, and that in his wrath, both against these two Kings and their
people. But if he will needs help himself, against al rules of Divinity, with
such an extraordinary example for proof of a general Rule; why is it not as
lawful for us Kings to oppose hereunto the example of Iehu his Inauguratio^ to
the kingdom; 2 King. 9* 2, 3.
who upon the Prophets private anointment of him, and that in most secret
manner, took presently the Kings office upon him, without ever craving any
sort of approbation from the people?

And thus may ye now clearly see, how deep the claim of the Babylonian
Monarch touches us in all our common interest: for (as I have already told)
the Pope, nor any of his Vassals, I mean Churchmen, must be subject to no
Kings nor Princes: and yet all Kings and their Vassals must not only be
subject to the Pope, but even to their own people. And now, what a large
liberty is by this doctrine left to Churchmen, to hatch or foster any
treasonable attempts against Princes; I leave it to your considerations, since
do what they will, they are accountable to none of us: nay, all their
treasonable practices must be accounted works of piety, and they (being justly
punished for the same) must be presently enrolled in the list of Martyrs and
Saints; like as our new printed Martyrologie has put Garnet and Ouldcorne in
the Register of English Martyrs abroad, that were hanged at home for Treason
against the Crown and whole State of England: so as I may justly with Isaiah,
pronounce a Woe to the^ that speak good of evil, and evil of good; Isai 5.20.
which put light for darkness, and darkness for light; Verse. 23.
which justify the wicked for a reward, and take away the righteousness of the
righteous from him. For eve^ as in the time of the greatest blindness in
Popery, though a man should find his wife or his daughter lying a bed in her
Confessors arms; yet was it not lawful for him so much as to suspect that the
Friar had any errande there, but to Confess and instruct her: Even so, though
Jesuits practicing in Treason be sufficiently verified, and that themselves
cannot but confess it; yet must they be accounted to suffer Martyrdom for the
Faith, and their blood work miracles, and frame a stramineum argumentum upon
strawes* when their heads are standing aloft, withered by the Sun and the
wind, a public spectacle for the eternal commemoration of their treachery.
Yea, one of the reasons, that is give in the Printers Epistle of the Colonian
edition of the Cardinal or his Chaplains pamphlet, why he does the more
willingly print it, is; because that the innocence of that most holy and
constant man Henry Garnet, is declared and set forth in that book; against
whom, some (he knew not who) had scattered a false rumor of his guiltiness of
the English treason.

But, Lord, what an impudency or wilful ignorance is this, that he, who was
so publicly and solemnly convicted and executed, upon his own so clear,
unforced and often repeated confession, of his knowledge and co^cealing of that
horrible Treason; should now be said to have a certain rumor spread upon him
of his guiltiness, by I know not who? with so many attributes of godliness,
constancy and innocence bestowed upon him, as if public Sentences and
Executions of Justice, were rumors of I know not who. Indeed, I must confess,
the book it self shows a great affection to perform, what is thus promised
in the Preface thereof: for in two or three places therein, is there most
honorable lying mention made of that strawe-Saint; wherein, though he confess
that Garnet was upon the foreknowledge of the Powder Treason, yet in regard it
was (as he says) only under the Seal of Confession, he sticks not to
praise him for his concealing thereof, and would gladly give him the crown of
glory for the same: not being ashamed to proclaim it as a principal head of
Catholic doctrine* That the secret of Sacramental confession ought not to be
revealed, not for the eschewing of whatsoever evil. But how damnable this
doctrine is, and how dangerously prejudicial to all Princes and States; I
leave it to you to judge, whom all it most highly concerns. For although it
be true, that when the Schoolmen came to be Doctors in the Church, and to
mar the old grounds in Divinity by sowing in amongst them their
Philosophical distinctions; though they (I say) do mainetaine, That whatsoever
thing it told a Co^fessor under the veil of confession, how dangerous soever
the matter be, yet he is bound to conceal the parties name: yet do none of
them, I mean of the old Schoolmen, deny that if a matter be revealed unto
the^, the concealing whereof may breed a great or public danger; but that in
that case the Confessor may disclose the matter, though not the person, and by
some indirect means make it come to light* that the danger thereof may be
prevented. But that no treason nor devilish plot, though it should tend to the
rvi^e or exterminion of a whole Kingdom, must be revealed, if it be told
under Confession, no not the matter so far indirectly, disclosed, as may give
occasion for preventing the danger thereof: though it agree with the conceit of
some three or four new Iesuited Doctors, it is such a new and dangerous head
of doctrine, as no King nor State can live in security where that Position is
maintained.

And now, that I may as well prove him a liar in facto, in his narration of
this particular History; as I have showed him to be in iure, by this his
damnable and false ground in Divinity: I will truly inform you of Garnets
case, which is far otherwise then this Answerer alleges. For first, it can
never be accounted a thing under Confession, which he that reveals it does
not discover with a remorse, accounting it a sin whereof he repents him;
but by the contrary, discouer^ it as a good motion, and is therein not
dissuaded by hi^ Confessor, nor any penance enjoined him for the same: and in
this form was this Treason revealed to Garnet, as himself confessed. And
next, though he stood long upon it, that it was revealed unto him under the
veil of Confession, in respect it was done in that time, while as the party
was making his Confession unto him; Yet at the last he did freely confess*
that the party revealed it unto him as they were walking, and not in the time
of Confession* But (he said) he delivered i^ unto him under the greatest S^ale
that might be, and so he took that he mean^ by the Seal of Confession; And
it had (as he thought) a relation to Confession; in regard that he was that
party* Confessor^ and had taken his Confession sometimes before, and was to
take it again within few days thereafter. He also said that he pretended to
the party, that he would not conceal it from his Superior. And further it is
to be noted, that he confessed, that two diverse persons conferred with him
anent this Treason; and that when the one of them, which was Catesby* conferred
with him thereupon, it was in the other parties presence and hearing and what a
Confession can this be in the hearing of a third person? And how far his last
words (whereof our Answerer so much vaunts him) did disprove it to have been
under Confession, the Earl of Northhamptons book does bear witness.

Now as to the other parties name, that revealed the Powder Treason unto him,
it was Greenwell the Jesuit; and so a Jesuit revealed to a Jesuit this
treasonable Plot, the Jesuit reuealer not showing any remorse, and the Jesuit
whom to it was revealed not so much as inioyning him any penance for the same.
And that ye may know that more Jesuits were also upon the party, Owldcorne
the other Powder-Martyr, after the misgiving and discovery of that Treason,
preached consolatory doctrine to his Catholic auditory; exhorting them not to
faint for the misgiuing of this enterprise, nor to think the worse thereof
that it succeeded not; alleging diverse Presidents of such godly enterprises
that misgaue in like manner: especially, one of S. Lewis King of France, who in
his second journey to the Holy Land died by the way, the greatest part of his
army being destroyed by the plague; his first journey having likewise misgiuen
him by the Soldans taking of him: exhorting them thereupon not to give over,
but still to hope that God would bless their enterprise at some other time,
though this did fail.

Thus see ye now, with what boldness and impudency he has belied the
publicly known verity in this errand; both in auowing generally that no
Jesuit was any ways guilty of that Treason, for so he affirms in his
book; and also that Garnet knew nothing thereof, but under the Seal of
Confession. But if this were the first lie of the affairs of this State, which
my fugitive Priests and Jesuits have coined and spread abroad; I could charm
them of it, as the proverb is. But as well the walls of diverse Monasteries
and Jesuits Colleges abroad, are filled with the painting of such lying
histories, as also the books of our said Fugitives are farced with such sort
of shameless stuff; such are the innumerable sorts of torments and cruel
deaths, that they record their Martyrs to have suffered here; some torn at
four Horses; some sowed in Bears skins and then killed with Dogs; nay,
women have not been spared (they say) and a thousand other strange fictions;
the vanities of all which I will in two words discover unto you.

First, as for the cause of their punishment, I do constantly maintain that
which I have said in my Apology: That no man, either in my time or in the late
Queens, ever died here for his conscience. For let him be never so devout a
Papist, nay, though he profess the same never so constantly, his life is in no
danger by the Law, if he break not out into some outward act expressly
against the words of the Law; or plot not some unlawful or dangerous practice
or attempt; Priests and Popish Churchmen only excepted, that receive Orders
beyond the seas; who for the manifold treasonable practices that they have
kindled and plotted in this country are discharged to come home again under
pain of Treason, after their receiving of the said Orders abroad, and yet,
without some other guilt in them then their bare home-comming, have none of
them bin ever put to death. And next, for the cruel torments and strange sorts
of death that they say so many of them have bin put unto; if there were no more
but the Law and continually observed custom of England, these many hundredth
years, in all criminal matters, it will sufficiently serve to refute all
these monstrous lies: for no tortures are ever used here, but the Manicles or
the Rack, and these never but in cases of high Treason; and all sorts of
Traitors die but one manner of death here, whether they be Papist or
Protestant Traitors; Queen Mary's time only excepted. For then indeed no sorts
of cruel deaths were spared unexecuted upon men women and children professing
our Religion: yea, even against the Laws of God and Nature, women with child
were put to cruel death for their profession; and a living child falling out
of the mothers belly, was thrown in the same fire again that consumed the
mother. But these tyrannous persecutions were done by the Bishops of that time,
under the warrant of the Popes authority; and therefore were not subject to
that constant order and forms of execution, which as they are here established
by our Laws and customs, so are they accordingly observed in the punishment of
all criminals. For all Priests and Popish Traitors here receive their
Judgments in the temporal Courts, and so do never exceed those forms of
execution which are prescribed by the Law, or approved by continual custom.
One thing is also to be marked in this case; that strangers are never called in
question here for their religion, which is far otherwise (I hope) in any
place where the Inquisition domines.

But having now too much wearied you with this long discourse, whereby I have
made you plainly see, that the wrong done unto me in particular, first by the
Popes Breues, and then by these Libellers, does as deeply interest you all in
general, that are Kings, free Princes, or States, as it does me in particular:
I will now conclude, with my humble prayers to God, that he will waken us up
all out of that Lethargike slumber of Security, wherein our Predecessors and
we have lien so long; and that we may first gravely consider, what we are
bound in conscience to do for the planting and spreading of the true worship
of God, according to his revealed will, in all our Dominions; therein hearing
the voice of our only Pastor (for his sheep will know his voice, as himself
says) and not following the vain, Ioh. 10.27.
corrupt and changeable traditions of men. And next, that we may providently
look to the security of our own States, and not suffer this encroching
Babylonian Monarch to win still ground upon us. And if GOD has so mercifully
dealt with us, that are his Lieutenants upon earth, as that he has joined his
cause with our interest, the spiritual liberty of the Gospel with our
temporal freedom: with what zeal and courage may we then embrace this work:
for our labors herein being assured, to receive at the last the eternal and
inestimable reward of felicity in the kingdom of Heaven; and in the mean
time to procure unto our selves a temporal security, in our temporal
Kingdoms in this world.

As for so many of you as are already persuaded of that Truth which I profess,
though differing among your selves in some particular points; I think little
persuasion should move you to this holy and wise Resolution: Our Greatness, nor
our number, praised be GOD, being not so co^temptible, but that we may show
good example to our neighbors; since almost the half of all Christian people
and of all sorts and degrees, are of our profession; I mean, all gone out of
Babylon, even from Kings and free Princes, to the meanest sort of people. But
above all (my loving Brethren and Cosins) keep fast the unity of Faith amongst
your selves; Reject 1. Tim. 1.4
questions of Genealogies and Ibid c. 4.7
Aniles fabulas, as Paul says; Let not the foolish heat of your Preachers for
idle Controversies or indifferent things, tear asunder that Mystical Body,
whereof ye are a part, since the very coat of him whose members we are was
without a seam^; and let not our division breed a slander of our faith, and be
a word of reproach in the mouths of our adversaries, who make Unity to be one
of the special notes of the true Church.

And as for you (my loving Brethren and Cosins) whom it has not yet pleased
GOD to illuminate with the light of his Truth; I can but humbly pray with
Elizeus, that it would please GOD to open your eyes, that ye might see what
innumerable and invincible armies of Angels are ever prepared and ready to
defend the truth of GOD; and with S. Paul I wish, that ye were as I am in this
case; especially that ye would search the Scriptures, Act. 26.29.
and ground your Faith upon your own certain knowledge, and not upon the
report of others; since every Man must be safe by his (...) faith. But, leaving
this to GOD his merciful providence in his due time, Abac. 2.4.
I have good reason to remember you, to maintain the ancient liberties of your
Crowns and Commonwealths, not suffering any under GOD to set himself up above
you; and therein to imitate your own noble Preaecessors, who (even in the
days of greatest blindness) did diverse times courageously oppose themselves
to the incroaching ambition of Popes. Yea, some of your Kingdoms have in all
ages maintained, and without any interruption enjoyed your liberty, against the
most ambitious Popes. And some have of very late had an evident proof of the
Popes ambitious aspiring over your temporal power; wherein ye have constantly
maintained and defended your lawful freedom, to your immortal honor. And
therefore I heartily wish you all, to do in this case the office of godly and
just Kings and earthly Judges: which consists not only in not wronging or
invading the liberties of any other person (for to that will I never press to
persuade you) but also in defending and mantaining these lawful liberties
where with GOD has endued you. For ye, whom GOD has ordained to protect your
people from injuries, should be ashamed to suffer your selves to be wronged by
any. And thus, assuring myself, that ye will with a settled judgment free of
prejudice, weigh the reasons of this my Discourse, and accept my plainness in
good part, gracing this my Apology with your favors, and yet no longer then
till it shall be justly and worthily refuted* I end, with my earnest prayers
to the Almighty for your prosperities, and that after your happy temporal
Reigns in earth, ye may live and reign in Heaven with him for ever.


