A BRIEF AVNSWERE OF JOSEPHUS QVERCETANVS ARMENIAcus, Doctor of Physic, to
the exposition of Iacobus Aubertus Vindonis, concerning the original, and
causes of Mettalles. Set forth against Chimists.

Another exquisite and plain Treatise of the same Josephus, concerning the
Spagericall preparations, and use of mineral, animal, and vegitable Medicines.

Whereunto is added diverse rare secrets, not heretofore known of many. By
John Hester, practicioner in the Spagericall Art.



At London, Printed Anno. Dom. 1591.

conceal or fraudulently obscure, and with many fallacies and subtilties
shadow and cover those things, which being plainly set down, might redounde
to a more general good then easily may be expressed. And howsoever this
malicious suppressing, or sophisticate publishing of diverse secrets, be
general in many*Artes and knowledges, yet I think it is in no one thing more
common then in the Spagericall Art. In the which Art, after I had bestowed
many years study and travail, J freely imparted to my Countrime^ at diverse
times heertofore, such secrets as by often reading in the best Authors of the
same Art, or by many experiments of my great labor and charge, I have found
out most certain and without deceit. And now under your worships favorable
protection, J offer to my Countrimens freendly acceptance the Spagericall
practices of Josephus Quercetanus, augmented with diverse rare secrets not
commonly known, all which J doubt not, will with more favor be received in
general, if they may be graciously shadowed and defended under your
worshipful name, whose prosperous success in all your honorable and virtuous
attempts and actions, with a most deuote affection, J do most earnestly wish.

Your dutiful Servant, John Hester.

To the gentle Reader.
EXperientia stultorum gubernatrix, is with some held as a Proverb autenticke:
but in mine opinion, (friendly Reader) they are most fools that want it. For
without it howsoever otherwise well read, a man can say no more in Arts then
the great Trauailer, (who in some few days, having coasted the world in a
Card-makers shop) can discourse directly either of this or that, but must be
feign if fault be found, to confess his own ignorance, and blame the Maps
falsenes; yet as we have with us a custom, when we hear things incredible
spoken from a far, to say, it is better believing it, then going thither to
disprove it: so are there many, yea the most, which will not stick to talk
most, that least of all adventure in this perrilous passage to Science, and yet
the only directed path called experience: for besides the daily cares, nightly
watchings, external wounds, internal woes, deforming of members, disquieting
of mind, debilitie of senses, and loss of sight, with infinite other
incombrances, which lie as Adders in his way that treads this walk, he shall
on each hand be terrified with Legions of lying Spirits, deluding flatterers,
of tame beasts by the Philosopher held the most devouring, and injurious
slanders of wild beasts, the most implacable, self trial has taught me
this since I first undertook to search the secrets of Earthes flowing bounty,
and her Mineral veins, I have suffered all the unpleasant sharpnes that
experiences paths yeeldes, and endured every envy that malice could devise:
yet the end I hope for, being the benefit of this Weal public, in which I
live, a willing, (though unworthy member) animates me in despite of envy, to
profess the never dying labors of my ouer-wearied powers, to those that are
willing to buy, (for nothing in a manner) what I have obtained with my precious
life. O the God that rewards all things, and will in my Redeemer, accept (I
doubt not) of my intent, has secretly summoned my soul to discharge the
fruits of her experience.

I have translated this ensuing work, and written these present lines for thy
good (gentle Reader.) On these flowers let no Spyder presume, for they are full
of virtue, that makes envy mute. They are free gifts, and should be
gratefully accepted, the best intend the best, the worst I write not for.

Such faults gentle Reader, as by unskillfulness of the Printer in this
argument, and want of my continual presence in the printing, which are in any
place to be found, J pray thee courteously to pardon, and freendly to correct.

A BRIEF ANSWER OF Josephus Quercitanus Armeniacus, Doctor of Physic, to
the exposition of Iacobus Aubertus Vindonis: Concerning the original and
causes of Mettalles.
ANOTHER EXQVISITE AND plain treatise of the same Josephus, concerning the
Spagericall preparation, and use of Mineral, Animal, and Vegetable medicines.
AND FIRST AN ANSWER TO his slanderous Epistle, wherein he goes about to
overthrow certain medicines of those whom he calls Paracelsians.
MInding to answer the little book of Aubertus, concerning the original of
metals, and their causes, although it be not greatly worthy of answer, yet I
neither can, or may pass over this: greatly maruelling at the rashness of
those me^ which dare curse and condemn this art, approved by the authority
of so many ancient and great men, especially Hermes*Trismegistus, Geber,
Lullus, Arnoldus, Villanouanus, and our Auicen himself, Whose testimonies,
confirmed with authority and arguments, yea and with practice it self, are of
more weight, then that they should so easily be shaken of, with the slender
reasons, and t^unts of such me^. But this truly I grant, that through the
fault and deceits of some ignorant and wicked men, that the Chymistes are evil
spoken of: but to condemn things for their abuse, specially of so great
weight (as I know and defend this to be) truly it neither can, or ought to be
so. For it opens unto us so many works of the almighty God, it laie^h open
so many secrets of nature, and preparations of herbs, beasts, and mineralies
hitherto unknown, and shows the uses almost of all things, which were hidden
and laid up in the bosom^ of Nature, that they show themselves unkind toward
man that would have this art buried.

As touching Paracelsus, I have not taken upon me the defense of his
divinity, neither did I ever think to agree with him in all points, as though
I were sworn to his doctrine: but besides the testimony wherewith Erasmus
adorneth him in certain Epistles, I dare be bold to say and defend, that he
teaches many things almost divinely, in Physic, which the thankful
posterity can never commend and praise sufficientle: whereof I trust occasion
shall be given to speak in another place. But that all men may know with what
discretion (thou Aubertus) have taken in hand to oppugn these things: go to,
we will reason of those two points, which in the Preface of thy little book
thou have taken upon thee to handle. But thou art a man truly (as I perceuie)
of a very sharp wit. The one of thy points which thou handlest, is
concerning Laudanum, accounted very perilous: the other of the burnt eyes of a
crabbe, which you also think to be ridiculous.

And first, because you think it not to be the Laudanum of Dioscorides, you
demand what it should be. Learn then this of ine, that this laudable medicine
is so called of the Chemical Physicians, and that it does plainly answer
unto his name, if you call it Lawdanum. But you say it is made of Opium, Is
that it that brings such a maze into your mind? Indeed Opium is put into
it, but of a far better preparation then is commonly in use: not without the
spirit of wine, or the infusion of Diambrae, by certain months, not without
the essence of Safferon, Castoreum, Coralles, Perles, Mumia, and the oiles of
C^namon, Cloves, Mace, and Anniseedes: of all which, being rightly mingled (as
it is the manner of art) is made that most excellent medicine, to put away all
unkind heates, to stay all fluxes, and to assuage in marvelous sort all
manner of greefes: yet so, that it does not extinguish the natural heat, but
rather preserve and defend it by strenthening the spirits, much less that it
does benumme them, or take away the motions from the parts (which is ridicular
to be spoken) but with a certain marvelous quality wherewith it excels,
it helps the powers, as by the description of the foresaid things, and their
due and not common preparation and mixture may easily be gathered.

What will you say if I add more, that there is put into it the true essence
of gold, which is so commended in old time, by the writings of learned
Philosophers and Physicians? I believe you would laugh at this essence, which
is unknown unto you, yet familiar unto many philosophers. But I affirm that
gold to be a most temperate and effectual remedy to help the strength of
nature, against melancholic affections, weak stomachs, passions of the
heart, and such as be extremely sad.

Truly you may worth lie believe, that there is much more force in his
essence, then in your leaf gold. And this you will grant (my friend
Aubertus) that there is greater force of secret qualities in that most fine
gold, then in your brothes sodden with gold. Neither yet do I think you do
believe (for that were too absurd) that gold which cannot be wasted or burned
with the heat of the fire, can be so digested or overcome by natural hear,
but that it may by some mean streng hen the heart the substance remaining
whole, when as the opinion of the Philosophers is this, that all earth is dead,
and that it is only the spirits of things that can work in bodies. But
Laudanum it self, although it be opiat, yet is it not so to be reprehended.
For if it were not so corrected before, it were very dangerous, and for his
extreme coldness deadly, as the Paracelsians which are the folowers of the
true and ancient physic, do well understand. For neither does any of them
doubt, but that Opinm, to take away his venomous force, is corrected of many,
only with safferon, castoreum and mirre, which correction does nothing hinder,
but that it may be done with a better preparation: for Aloes also is washed,
that it frette not the veins with his sharpnes: and black Elebore is made so
commodious for use, with the spirit of wine, and oil of Anieseedes, (that you
may learn also of the Chymicke Phisicians) that it may be safely given to
children against the dropsey, and all melancholy affections. Therefore opiat
medicines are not so rashly and unadvisedly to be condemned, of which are
made sundry medicines to assuage the vehement pains of the collicke, reins,
plurisies, and goutes: to provoke sleep, to ease the cough, to stop spitting
of blood, and to stay all reumes, such as is that Philonium which is allowed of
all ancient Physicions.

Also opiat things are necessary in medicines that expel poison, Antidotes*
to strengthen the principal parts, to withstand the malignitie of any
poison, and infinite other affects, as may be seen in that excellent triacle,
described by Andromachus the elder, into which 3. ounces of Opium is put*
Likewise in the fourth and last preparation of Mitridate, which Galen, Aetius,
and other Greeks, have drawn from the ancient Phisicians, Antipater and
Cleophantus, whose qualities they have described to be most like unto the
triacle. Peradventure you will except, that the composition of this our
Laudanum, is not so temperate, as this composition of triacle. Therefore you
should know it first before you reprehende it, which notwithstanding, both
reason does commend, and experience shewe^h to be very profitable. Which only
medicine it were much better for you and such like to have, for the curing of
many diseases, then those sundry decoctions of herbs, wherewith many are most
miserably tormented. Plin. lib. 20 not hist. cap. 18.
Plinius writes, that Licinius the father of Cecinna, killed himself with
Opium, being weary of his life. But I am assured, that there can none be found
that has been hurt by the use of our Laudanum, which you notwithstanding
falsely and shamelessly do write: yea many learned and godly men will avouch,
that it is not without reason given, but with most happy success, and profit
to the sick, in all manner of rewmes, and to swage inflammations, and all
other griefs aforesaid. The composition of which most excellent medicine, and
the preparation described, which is unknown to you, and such as you are: I had
put in print if your writings had not forced me to consider, whether it were
expedient to cast pearls before every one to tread upon.

Now I come to the other medicine, which you call a jest, and laugh because we
minister the eyes of Crabs calcined, to those that are sick of a quartane: and
specially because we prescribe for one dose.. i. ss. of this powder, and his
mixture, for the cure of the quartane: and you conclude, that the whole Lacus
Lemanus will scarce yield so many eyes of Crabbes, which certainly is most true:
for there be no crabbes in that lake, but many Creuises, which you (my Aubert)
have not well noted. For there be four kinds of those shell fishes, which the
Greeks call (...). The one is called (...), that is, a Locust. Another they
call Gamarum, which Galen calls (...). The third (...), which they call
Squilla. The fourth is the Crabbe, which the Greeks call (...)* All these the
learned know to be sundry kinds.

The Astachi which you supposed to be Crabbes, and of the Frenchmen are called
Escreuises, are like unto Locustes, and do little or nothing differ, but only
by a variety of certain forepartes and arms: for they have a long body, and
a long tail, whereupon there are found five sins. Only the Crabbes have a
round body, and no tail, for they have little use of it, because they live
near the earth, and creep into hollow places, and swim not much. But for
your better understanding, you may consult with Aristotle, Pl^nie, and
specially with Edward Plin. lib. na^ hist. 6. cap. 71.
Wottonne in his tenth book of the difference of beasts, also the
Commentaries of Matheolus upon Dioscorides, which altogether will teach you,
that there is very great difference between the Astachum, whereof you
vndiscreetlie speak, and the river or sea crabbe. But you will say, there is
no great regard to be given unto words, and that these kinds of shell fish,
for the most part, are confounded among them selves. Let it be so, this I
would also speak by the way, because I see you do lack them, and that our
disputation might be both more evident, you think it two ways absurd, that
the eyes of crabbes calcined, should be prescribed in a quartane, because that
by their drith and sharpenes they increase the discase. O subtle argument, and
worthy of such a Physician. We are not ignorant (my Aubertus) that the
continent cause or matter of the quartane ague, is the very juice of
melancholy, which by his proper causes being gathered much together, that it
cannot be ruled by the natural heat, at length putrifieng, it inflameth this
fever. This melancholy humor the Phisicians make double: the one natural,
which is as the fex and slime of blood: the other adust, which is as it were,
the congeled tartar or ashes of certain burnt h^mors: and that comes
specially of yellowe collar, and melancholy adust, although sometime it come
of burnt phlegm, if we credit the Arabians. Therefore seeing that the
melancholicke humor which is cold and dry, is the matter of these fevers, we
will confess with you, the couse of them to be partly cold and dry: but that
it is increase^ by the use of all dry and sharp things, we deny as false. For
whereas this humor by nature is gro^se, sh^^e and tough and that abounding
specially in the spleen Mesenterium, and uses to be gathered about the
Hipochondria or sides, and by success of time to be indurate: truel^e there is
no learned Physician that doubts, but that it is to be mollified, digested,
rarefied, made thin, and cut: but those things which for this purpose are
of least force, are mollifying, which the Greeks call (...), and those which
are o^ a greater force, whotte and thin, to the second o^ third degree, are
called of the Greeks (...) of the Latinists, rarifying, which with their heat
and mean drith, do dissolve and disperse, mollify and digest all the hardness
of the spleen, and grieved bowels. The timely use of which medicines,
chiefly is both requisite and greatly commended in quartanes. So the bark of
the Ash, and of Cappars* the root of Brionia, the wild Cowcumber* Walwort,
and Ireos, all whotte and dry some even in the third degree, being taken, they
mollify and drive away all hardness, or being applied outward, do dissolve
and consume the hard spleen: So may I fay of Amoniacum, bdellium, opoponax,
galbanum, which although they be all whotte and dry, even Barbers know that
they have a great force to mollify and digest. Seeing then mollifying and
rarefying things are convenient to cure the quartane, as all men confess being
taken in season, think it not so absurd or ridiculous (my Iacobus) if ani^
do also use the ashes of the eyes, or sometimes of the heads of Crabbes, or
for lack of them, Creuisses. For the ashes of those shell fishes, specially
of the eyes, have great force to extenuate and dissolve that fex of the
melancholy humor, which those (whom you call Paracelsians) do name tartar
congealed. But if you do so much abhor these calcinations, which we often
use, and do ask why we do it, learn this Auberius, out of Galen, in the
eleventh book de simpl. medic. faculs. whereas speaking of salt, he uses
these words: Salt burned, digesteth Cap. 11.
more strongly then unburned, by how much the body is made more subtle,
rcceiuing his qualities of the fire. Also he writes in the same book those
medicines which consist of thin parts, have more force then they of gross
parts, although they had like quality, because they pearce better: for which
cause only we use calcined Crabbes, to loose those feces, and tartarous
humors. For by calcination, the salt of things is drawn out, and salt must be
dissolved with salt only, if you do well understand it, and so you shall
learn that diseases are not to be cured with co^traries, but like with like,
although as yet you perceive not the reason. Otherwise, how could you say that
the stones of spunges, burnt glass, Goats blood dried, the ashes of Cocles,
Lapis Iudaicus calcined, or the bone of a cuttle, with so great force could
help the stone, or gravel of the reins. I know you will fly to the Asses
sacred anchore, namely, of secret qualities, which notwithstanding, reason it
self teaches to be done with the salt which does dissolve them, and expel
them by urine, what will you then say of the hedge sparrow, that laudable
medicine of ancient Physicians, for the same disease, whereof Paul Aeginet.
lib. 3. cap. 45. where he leaves it thus written: This (says he) pouthered
whole with salt, and often eaten raw, drives out the stones that are already
grown by urine, and lets the^ not to grow again afterward: but if it be
burned whole with his feathers, and all his ashes, by it self, or with a
little pepper dronk with old wine and honey, it works the same effect. Thus
you see how the ancient Physicia^s did use the ashes, which you call absurd,
and in what diseases: even in curing the stone of the reins, whose matter is
also such a gross humor, that with heat it grows to a stone. How much more
Crabbes calcined prevail against that disease, is noted of Hollerius and
Mathiolus, and a thousand times has been proved by certain experience.
Neither will I pass over (among other medicines which are used for this
disease) Crystal, which is the chief: Crystal (I say) calcined, in a
reuerberatorie, out of which after is drawn his salt, of whose dissolution, in
a moist place, is made a most excellent oil, very profitable to put away all
obstructions of the bowels. Wherefore you may not think it so ridiculous, that
a medicine should be taken out of the calcined eyes of Crabbes, neither so to
spue out your bitter poison against it. This will I also add out of Galene,
and the opinion of all the auncientest, that the Crabs them selves calcined,
even by the property of their whole substance, are marvelous effectual
against the biting of mad De simpl. med facult. cap. 30. lib. 7.
dogs. And Galens words which he reports of his master Pelope, do show
that madness to be a most dry infection* It is not without cause (says he)
that the Crabbe (being a waterie creature) should help them that are bitten of
a mad dog, in whom it is to be feared, least they should fall into a most dry
disease, that is, madness. Now there remains that I should speak of the
sharpnes which you find in the calcination of Crabbes: which (as you say)
does increase the quartane. But I fear least by those words the learned may
think you utterly ignorant what a sharp taste is. For it is easy for us to
show, that the ashes of Crabs are not sharp: for all sharp things (as it is
known to Physicians) are very hot, of which Phisicians make two sorts. The
one sort may be eaten, the other unapt to be eaten. These have a certain
sweet, although obscure quality De simpl. med. facul. lib. 2. cap. 17.
mixed. The other are deadly (if we believe Galen) or at the least being laid
upon the skin, do quickle raise a blister. And those truly are to be called
sharp when they are not mingled with strange qualities, whose proper term and
end is to burn, as it is the quality of sower things to cleanse, of sweet,
to nourish. And that the ashes of Crabbes work not that effect, Galens words
do show, where he disputes of De simpl. med. facul. cap. 18.
the differences of bitter and sharp taste: for the sharp (says he) has
certain moisture mingled with it, but the bitter he confesses to have a hot
and dry quality, and says they are like (as a man may well compare them)
unto ashes. By which reason you should better have said, that the ashes of the
eyes of crabbes are rather bitter then sharp, whose moisture being consumed and
vapored away by hear, they are made drith and ashes: whereby they get not ^
sharp, but a bitter quality: and although an earthly substance, yet thin,
by how much the body is made more subtle, taking his quality of the fire, as
before we showed Simpl. 11. cap. 51
out of Galen, and of necessity is made hot and dry, and therefore bitter, to
cleanse, break asunder, and cut gross and viscose humors, as no doubt ashes
and nitre does (as Simpl. 4. cap. 18.
Galen teaches) whom at an other time you may better co^sult withal, least
you appear plainly ignorant of your first principles. But because I see some
things must be pardoned you, go to, I willingly grant you that the calce of
crabbes is sharp: but that with his sharpnes, it does increase the quartane, I
utterly deny. For I pray you (good Sir) is not Mustard, Peper, and Garlike, so
far forth granted unto him that is sick of the quartane, by all the learned
Greeks, Arabians and of Paul Aegineta himself, that they are also prescribed
them for a diet. And the Diatrion Pipereon, or that they call Diospoliticon,
are they not reckoned amongst the remedies for the quartane? neither is it
besides the purpose Lib. de febribus.
to show the words of the famous Physician Hollerius upon this point, where he
writes of the diet of the sick of the quartane. As touching the diet (says
he) at the beginning of a mean matter, and by spaces from the beginning to the
force of the disease, you may use sharp things as mustard, and salt meats,
and after the force of the fit the use of them is necessary, toward the end
he adds. Therefore are salt meats commended, because salt does extenuat and
drive away the excrementes, dries them up, gathers strength and comfort.

By this I think you and all other do sufficiently perceive how greatly you
are deceived in contemning our remedy taken out of the true doctrine of the
learned. But because you know not the other simples which are put into this
medecin, or at the least pass them over with silence, behold I will gratify
you and show you the composition. It takes the root of Aron, or
Cockow-pintell prepared, also the roots of common Acorus, and Pimpinella,
prepared and dried, the eyes of the Crabbe calcyned (of which for one dose,
there is used not half a scruple) with seme^ nastortij and sugar a mixture is
made of all. The dose is one spoonful in the morning for to comfort the weak
stomach, to put away all obstructions of the bowels, and hardness of the
spleen, an excellent medicine often proved, and at this day in use, with most
learned Physicians. I think there is no Doctor will say this to be so absurd
and hurtful for the quartane. You should therefore if you reprove Paracelsus
medicines, have chosen some other more special things, wherein you might have
exercised the greatness of your wit and proved your cunning. For these things
(although you enuiously call them Theophrasticall) are both agreeable to
reason, and to be allowed of every learned Physician. But peradventure you
will say these things have not been known to the divine Hippocrates, nor
unto Galen, and therefore you will conclude that they are to be rejected: but
that is only by your own judgment, and not by any reason, we do not despise
their excellent knowledge and divine learning, neither violate their lawdable
memory, when as we say they were the first that flourished in Physic: yet
therewithal we affirm that they had not tried all kind of medecines, or knew
the properties of them all. Life is short says Hippocrates, and this Aphor. 1.
art which is occupied about this perilous practice is over long: Neither was
Galen ashamed to confess where he writes of Hydrargyru^, or quickesiluer 9.
of simp. cap. 19. that he had never made any trial, neither that it would kill
if it were eaten, neither if it were applied outwardly: nor is it to be
thought that Theophrastus was the first and only inuenter of so many remedies,
the knowledge whereof (he himself confesses in his books) he attained by the
conference of diverse learned Philosophers and Physicians, both Egyptians and
Arabians, amongst whom for learning sake, he remained certain years captive,
from whom at the length he brought away so many fair prises of remedies, all
which are taken partly out of the true oiles drawn of spices, herbs, fruits,
flowers, and seeds, and thessence of all laxatiues, whereof one drop will
profit more, then so many drammes and ounces: which also (that they may work
by their whole substance) may be sowed and cast upon their proper salt, which
in many may be done, as in other the earth is to be cast away as utterly dead
and contrary to purgation. Also of diverse rosins, gummes, and other kinds of
vegetables are drawn many fair and very profitable preparations: as also of
diverse parts of sundry beasts, of which rightly prepared are made many very
wholesome medicines, as by the true preparations of Mumia only known unto the
Paracelsians is made a most laudable medecin in all pestilent infections. Of
the oil and salt of a man's scull not buried for the epilepsye: of the oil of
honey and wax for the tophy: of greases and other preparations the better to
mollify and dissolve. So also of Musk, Ciuet, Castoreum, the Unicorns horn,
Iuorie, the horn and bone of the Heart, of a Stagge, and infinite other things
are made many extractions for the pains of the heart and such like. Of all
which the Chimicall art has taught the true preparations which you do
condemn. For the Paracelsian remedies are not only taken out of the
metalliyne bodies, perles, and precious stones, as many foolishly think and
persuade the whole world: neither are they sharp and violent (as the ignorant
and unskillful prattle) but most sweet and familier to our nature, which
through the excellency of the spirits they often preserve, quicken and cleanse
from all impurities only by sweates: and finally are not a little profitable
by their whole substance, as many learned men daily (with great success) do
practice: but of these things more then enough. Therefore now we will go
forward to those things which you write touching mettalles.

A brief answer of Josephus Quercitanus Armeniacus doctor of Physic, to
the exposition of Iacobus Aubertus Vyndon. concerning the original and causes
of mettalles against the Chimistes.
MANY write that mettell is a body to be dug up by nature, either liquid,
Agric. lib. 8. de natura fossil.
as quicksilver, or hard, which may be molte with the heat of the fire, as
gold, silver copper, lead and tin, or softened as Iron. Other call all
things that are dug out of the bowels of the earth by the proper name of
mettalles. So Onesicritus writes that in Carmania there is a metal of a red
chalk. Herodotus affirms* that in Lybia about Atlantus, is a metal of
salt, and this does Pliny testify in his 33. book of his natural history.
Others say that is proper metal, which being molten is brought again to his
former form, and that may be beaten out with hammer, is hard and apt to take
impression and for that cause they divide it into six, that is, gold, silver,
copper tin, lead, and Iron: whereunto some have added mercury, not that it
is a metal indeed, but it may be. The Chimistes use to call them by the
names of the planets, not to refer their substance to the planets, as
Aubertus foolishly thinks: but partly moved with a certain likeness of the
greatest and principal stars (for which cause they named the two most
perfect mettalles, the Sun and Moon) and Iron for his hardness, Mars, whom
the Poets feign to be the God of arms and battle, and quicksiluer for the
great and uncertain motion they called Mercury, and partly after the
Pythagoreans, that they might hide their secrets under dark speeches. But I
see no reason why Antimony should be properly received among mettalles
(wherefore by Agricola his leave, whose authority Aubertus leans unto) it
is to be excepted out of their kind, for that it is altogether repugnant to
their definition: for all mettalles molten do return to their, proper form,
and such as are easy to be driven, be hard, and apt to receive impression: by
which reason they differ from many liquable stones, in which the humiditie is
not strongly mixed with the dry earthines, as also from infinite kinds of
marcasites and half metalles. But Antymony molten does utterly loose his first
form, as practisioners do daily try, neither is it easy to be driven, and
practice shows it will take no print, and therefore properly it cannot be
called metal. But it pleased Aubertus which is so learned in mettalles to
affirm this, that yet he dreameth that tynne glass (which is that Bisemutum,
and that sinder or ashie kind of lead whereof Agricola speaks much in the
8. book de natura fossil.) to be Stibium molten, and the Chimists, basiliske,
which is most absurd. For that tinne-glasse which is commonly called bisemutum,
is not stibium any way prepared, neither the Chimistes basiliske, extract with
tartar and niter, may be called bisemutum, which I leave to the judgment of all that be of upright minds: but this is small to the purpose, when many things
are called by the name of metal, and yet not properly. But let us pardon
Aubertus in this which never saw any mines that he might judge rightly of the^,
neither understands the mind of Agricola. In the mean time he complains
that Chimistes divide the metalles into perfect and imperfect, and that he
thinks ridiculous for many causes. First because of a certain diffinition
given by Geber, which agrees no less to one metal then an other: whereas
the perfect might be discried from the imperfect, one diffinition were to be
given to the one an other to the other. As though the diffinition of a man were
not agreeable to a child, although he be not yet come to a man's age: or in
other accidents seem to differ from him, as metals do differ among
themselves. So the diffinitions of white and red coralles should be sundry and
diverse, that by reason of absolute and perfect concoctio^ the white have not
attained the uttermost degree, whose definition notwithstanding is all one. But
Aubertus to prove his opinion the better, writes that all things, which have
essential form (as it is certain mettalles have) must of necessity be
perfect. And that nature the godly parent of all things in doing of her office
does not cease or rest (except it be let) until she has attained her
purposed end and scope. He adds that the matter whereof any natural thing is
made, and whereabout nature is occupied, does move so long until it has
attained the essential form. He concludes that metal cannot rightly be
divided into perfect and imperfect, neither that gold ought by any means to be
called more excellent and perfect, although it be more bewtifull and temperat
then other mettalles, all which we must confute, as sriuolous and vain. And
to prosecute all things in due order, we must show that gold it self of the
true Philosophers is worthily called more perfect, excellent, and pure then
other metals: that hereuppon we may conclude, mettalles not without reason to
be divided of the Chimistes into perfect and imperfect. Therefore that I may
also stay upon the authority of Agricola (out of whom Aubertus has specially
taken those his words) he writes in lib. 5. de ortu and causis
subterraneorum, that mettalles do differ among themselves, not only in
shining, but also in color, savor, sent, weight and power. And specially
speaking of shining (which you Aubertus confess to be in gold and silver) he
says. But by how much the humor is more subtle, thick and pure, by so much
the metal is more clear and shining: for which cause in this behalf gold
excels the other. The excellency of which gold Agricola himself seeks in
the difference of sent, savor, and weight. For the imperfect mettalles, when
they come in any liquor are perceived to be sower of taste, as copper and Iron:
for the adust earth is cause of their sowernes, whereof those mettalles do
participat, as Agricola himself witnesses. But the other because of their
pure earth, and more abundant water do not give the liquors so sensible a
savor, bur rather a sweetish taste, as gold and silver. Also for as much as in
gold the earth is most pure and very well tempered with his water, it gives
very little or scarce sensible smoke when it is burned, and rather sweet then
stinking. And Agricola adds more that gold when it is purged in the fire has
in a manner no excremente* because of his purity, in others there is more, but
so much more in one, then an other, as it is more vnpure. Also the excellency
of gold is to be sought for in his force and strength, because that besides
it and silver all other mettalles do vanish away in smoke, and perish with the
violence of fire upon the test or cople: which happens unto them, as the
earth in them is found to be less pure and their temperature not so good. As
it happens unto Iron through the impure earth, whereof there is great store in
it. But when as gold alone cannot be consumed 3. Meteor. cap. 6.
with any fiery heat, as Aristotle says, and loses nothing of his weight
though it be burned or tried, of necessity it must have a most pure earth, and
well compact with his water, whereby it comes to pass, that his earth does
hold and let his humor, that it vapor not away, and contrariwise the humor
defends the earth, that it butne not (as says Agricola) which comes to
pass, as others do affirm, because of a most subtle, moist, and dry, that
has not any impuritie mixed. By this reason gold according to the nature of
thing* is purer then other mettalles, and surmounteth them in price, because
it is the most simple and purest metal, and furthest from imperfection of
elements by reason of his form. So Pliny says, unto one thing, which Lib.
natu. hist. 33. cap. 3.
is gold, nothing decays by fire (as the Poet also says) and as appears by
that aforesaid. By this we may gather, that amongst all mettalles, gold is not
only the brightest, but most temperat and perfect, in respect of which all
other mettalles may worthily be called imperfect. For nature always tends to
perfection, that is, to the making of gold, which alone amongst metals is
called perfect: for no agent natural (as the Philosophers say) cease from
work in his own matter, neither is seperat, but with putting on some form in
that matter. Therefore so long as the agent is joined to the matter, or works
upon the matter, that is said to be imperfect: for the perfection of any thing
is not but by putting on of form. For so much then as in all mettalles there
is a certain viscous water, which the Chimistes Philosophers call
quickesiluer, because of the likeness which is put in place of the matter, and
that which they call sulphur by like similitude of the agent or inducer of form
in that matter: no metal can be called perfect, but that from which the
sulphur is separated, But because other mettalles have their sulphur mixed in
the matter, whereby they are killed, made black, calcined and burned (which
happens unto them only by that dry exhalation, that is, the sulphur because
it is a matter apt to be set on fire) for that cause they be altogether called
imperfect. But on the contrary part because only gold is altogether without
this sulphur, which the affinity of gold and quicksiluer by it self does
sufficiently declare. (For as Pliny writes, all things swim upon it but
gold, which alone it draws unto it) Lib not. hist. 33. cap. 6.
By this means it is free from corruption both in the fire and out of the fire,
Of right therefore, it alone is called perfect, and formed according to the
first and true intention of nature, and complete, because it is come to the
uttermost end wherein it is complete, and pure because the agent is not mingled
with the matter, but is seperat from it. To this purpose writes Aristotle Met.
3. cap. vltimo speaking of mettalles: wherefore says he they contain earth in
them, and are all burned because they have a dry exhalation, But gold alone of
all the rest uses not to be burned. But Aubertus not content with these
reasons will answer: what so ever has attained an essential form, of
necessity must be perfect. But all mettalles have their substantial form. No
man will deny (says he) except it be some blockhead ashes blower: and by that
means hereupon concludes, that all are perfect. But it is easy enough for us
to answer this objection. For those things which persevere in their nature are
called perfect in their kind through their substantial form: but some
continue by nature in their kind, which notwithstanding are made perfect by
some means through their substantial form, to the which their is a certain
motion and end: but because they are carried to another later essential form,
which altogether finisheth the matter it self, and makes it complet: therefore
they are called imperfect* so long as they remain under that first form, in
respect of the later, to the attaining whereof they do endeavor themselves. But
if no account be made of that later form, but they be considered only in
themselves: they are truly perfect in that their kind (through their
essential form) as that kind does require. This all men see in the
generation of eggs, in which there is a certain determined motion in the
getting of his substantial form, which does so remain. But because those
eggs are by nature ordained to this end, not to remain under that form, but
to bring forth a bird, and so is made the begetting of the latter substantial
form: Therefore eggs are called imperfect under the form of an egg: but it
is a perfect thing after the bringing forth of a bird, for that is the last
end of eggs. This is likewise to be judged of mettalles, which albeit they
have in their kind gotten an essential form, yet can they not be called
perfect, in respect of gold, which alone is said to be perfect, until they
come to that last and perfect end, that is, to the perfection of gold, and
become gold. And like as in the generation of the Embrio, there is comparison
of the vegetable soul to the sensible and of the sensible to the rational,
and not as forms so other imperfect mettalles are in respect of gold.
Therefore the Chimisticall Philosophers have worthily divided the mettalles
into perfect and imperfect. For although the difference of mettalles be in the
form it self, yet shall it not be properly the difference of the kinds, as
the difference of man and horse, but shall be taken more properly of the
matter, and his parts that is according as it is digested or undigested,
complete or incomplete, seeing those are altogether of one proper matter. But
indigest and incomplete is spoken in respect of gold. But whereas Aubertus
judges Iron more noble then gold, because it serves more to the use man, I
think he shall never persuade any Physicians (be they never so unlearned)
which rather desire to catch gold then Iton. But I suppose there is
suff^ciently spoken touching the excellency and perfection of gold: and
because we said that mettalles are of one proper matter, although not in all
alike digested, herein consists the point of the question, therefore we must
now come to seek out that matter of mettalles. The Philosophers make two
causes of metals, as also of all other mixed bodies. The one general and far
of, which is taken of the elements, as of the first causes of all things, of
which they consist, as of most simple, and are resolved again as into most
simple. The Peripatecians contend against the Stoickes, that only the
qualities and virtues of the elements do pass one into another, and
altogether mingled. The Stoickes contrarily do affirm that whole substances
are mingled with the whole: but leaving these waves of slipperie opinions we
will go to the safe and quiet port. And in this point we do allow the opinion
of Aubertus, who thinks the elements not to be mixed bodies essentially, or
in deed, but in power, which Galen witnesses in the first book, de methodo
medendi, where he writes that the elements are to be mingled wholly with the
whole, only by their qualities. Of the second or proper matter of mettalles,
the opinion of many Philosophers is not agreeable, but very diverse. For some
said the nearest matter of metals is a moist breath, as Aristotle: and some
hold it to be a water drawn from other elements, which Agricola allows,
whose opinion our Aubertus agrees unto. Other deem it ashes moistened with
water. But the Chimist whose opinion Aubertus goes about to overthrow, says
quicksiluer is the matter of them: some have joined sulphur: all which opinions
are breefly and diligently to be examined by us, that the matter may be more
evident, and that all men may understand how unworthily Aubertus and others
have inue^ghed against so many famous Chimist philosophers. Aristotle the
prince of 3 met. cap. vltimo.
philosophers assineth a double matter of those things which are made within and
upon the earth, by the supernatural power and force, that is a breath and a
vapor, by the mixture whereof, in the bowelles of the earth h^ethinketh all
are made and have their original* and those he d^uideth according to the
diuer^e nature of the matter into two sorts, that is, into things to be
dug, and ^e^^allyne. They are called fossilia, because they are dug out
of the earth, and like unto the earth that is dug, neither are they
liquable, as all kind of stones which are made of a dry exhalation set on fire,
and with the heat consuming the moisture, and in a manner burning it. The
other sort are metallyne, whereof some are fusible and liquable, because they
draw nearer to the nature of moisture, then of drith, as lead and tin, and
are so called because they are easelier molten then beaten. On the contrary,
those that are to be beaten, which are molten with greater difficulty, as Iron,
whose next matter is a vaperous breath congealed by cold, and grows into
metal according to the opinion of Aristotle, whom our Aubertus thinks
worthy to be reproved: For says he, it cannot come to pass in the nature of
things that there may be a passage from one extreme or contrary into an other
without any mean: for it is evident that mettalles and breathes are of
contrary qualities, for these are very subtle, and the other very gross.
Hereupon he concludes in the original of mettalles, breathes and vapoures
Lib* 5. de ortu and causis sub^er.
do of necessity first congeale into humors before they harden into mettalls.
This did he take out of Agricola: but that excellent learned man, Iacobus
Scheggius in his commentaries upon Arist. Meteors, does sufficiently defend
Aristotle, being unworthily reproved, where he teaches, that the breath or
vapor whereof water comes is one. and that whereof mettalles concreteth is an
other, as also that whereof a storm grows another: for it is sometime more
ponderouse and gross then that whereof water grows. By which reason they
propose a further distant matter of mettalles which say it is water, the^ they
which say it is a breath, when as the greatest part of meteors do grow upon
these breathes and vaperous matters raised up out of the water and earth by the
force of heat: for so much as there is no fertility of the water or earth
without heat: for heat does procre at these two as a first child in whose
nature the force of the parents (that is of the four elements) is
represented, and as it were an ingendring power of them does consent together,
two qualities working by a masculine force, the other two suffering as
feminine. But either of them obaying the celestial temperature as their
father, whereby these things without life are accustomed to be procreat, by
the instrument of the first qualities. And this may be perceived by the very
sense, that so gross vapors do often break out in places under the ground
that the diggers can not take breath, and sometimes through the grosenes thereof
as Galen witnesses, are choked. If they be so gross, who will judge that
mettalles and breathes, are of contrary qualities, but that they may grow into
a sound matter of mettalles, without any other mean, as the ponderous vapor
does into a storm? Furthermore (as multitudes of people can testify) if it
has rained copper and Iron, and that stones and such other bodies do grow and
are made in the uppermost air, how should these be engendered of water, and
earth, for whom there is no place to tarry in the air, rather then of vapor
and breath, which both can pearce and stay there for their thinnes and heat.
Wherefore it is certain that mettalles rather have their original of breath
then of water: which breath because it is gross, does also easily congeale.
But what needs more of this, when it is manifest to all Philosophers that all
thing have their original of that whereunto they may at last be reduced, For
all mettalles (except the two perfect) which by greater decoction have their
matter more compact and fixed, are they not reduced into a breath of vapor? and
in the examination of the test or cople do they not vanish away into smoke? Yes
truly into smoke, which is not turned into water, or moisteneth, but gross
because of the earthines mixed with it, being co^geled and thickened with cold,
which by certain experience may daily be seen and perceived of those which
work in fire and more easily also of the Philosophers in their sublimations.
The same does Tutia, Cadmia and Pompholix with other such like prove, which
coming of the vapoures of mettalles stick to the walls of the furnaces, and
show them to be gross in the mines, neither do represent water by any means.
Let Aubertus therefore with his leaden argument hold his tongue which goes
about to overthrow Aristotle's opinion, neither let him judge rashly of things
which he knows not, but credit those which have experience, and know those
vapors to be most thick, whereof metals are first congealed, and without any
other mean hardened. But having overthrown Aristotle, let us see what
judgment he will give of other lerrned men and Philosophers, as of Albertus
magnus, Geber, and other Collars (for by that name this our noble censor
adorneth those excellent men) whose opinions Aubertus refelleth in this point,
because they say, that quicksiluer and sulphur is the next matter of mettalles,
and goes about with certain arguments to show, how they are out of the way.
First touching quicksiluer, he says, it is not likely to be the propper matter
of mettalles, because it can not congeale into hardness: surely an excellent
argument and worthy to be often repeated of the author, whereunto
notwithstanding he is answered by us before the says it can not congeale*
because it is of an airy substance. But the vapor which we concluded out of
Aristotle, to be the next matter of mettalles, who will not confess to be airy
in respect of water, and notwithstanding who will deny but it may co^geale?
then I confess that quicksiluer is airy: and therefore many Philosophers judge
it not to be a metal but only in Power: but I do call it so to be airy,
that it sends forth a most gross vapor, which by cold congealeth, as may
be seen in Mercury ^u^limat, and many other his preparations, wherein he
sends forth his smokes and vapors, but not so a^rye, but they will grow
thick. But what will you say to those vnp^rfect mettalles, which as we before
said in examination do fl^e away into smokes and vapors: what finally shall we
think of their matter and form brought to nothing, will you not confess the
gross vapor which we call quicksiluer to be the matter of them, when at the
last mettalles are reduced again into it. But Aubertus alleges this out of
Aristotle: those thing* which perteine unto water* if they conte^ne ^n them ^
o ^ a^re then water, they can not congeale as o^le and quicksiluer. But the
matter of (...) is (...) to be ^ rought to a hardness, otherwise they cou^^^ not
put on the form of mettalles: there fore their matter can not be quicksiluer,
for so much as it can not congeale to hardness. But this argument is no more
effectual then the former: For he sets down as granted that which he has
not by any means prou^d, and which we have already denied: for we granted
unto him that quicksiluer was of an a^rie substance, but that it cannot
therefore congeale, we deny, when contrary to his mind we have showed his
vapors do congeale. And truly Aubertus does not deny but by art it does harden,
but he thinks that neither by art or nature it may congeale into mettalle in
hardness or form, as though to think, were to demonstrate a thing. Therefore
he denies quicksiluer to be the matter of mettalles: the cause which he
alleges, that it is of an airy substance, is of no force. For we have showed
out of Aristotle, that it is a vapor of an airy substance in respect of water,
and nevertheless the next matter of metals. Therefore airy things are to be
distinguished: for such as are altogether and simply airy because of the
predominant matter cannot be coagulated neither by heat or by cold, because
their airie moisture cannot be dried up, the earth w^nting, by which reason
also they swim upon the water, witness Aristotle as oil, and are easily set
on fire, because it is matter of fire, as oil it self and wooddes which
swim upon the water, except ebenum which is more earthly, as by his weight
may be judged: but quicksiluer is neither set on fire, neither matter of fire,
but most contrary unto it like water, neither is it light but ponderous, that
in it the sou^dest boddies of all mettalles will swim upon gold only except
for the great affinity of them both, whereby it appears, that it is of an
other substance, then simply air like oil. Therefore to the similitude of
this quicksiluer, the next matter of mettalles: the Chimicall Philosophers have
said, that this quicksiluer is engendered of a strong commixtion of the first
matter of all metals, that is of a moist viscous incombustible humor,
incorporat with a subtle earth, equally and strongly mixed by small parts in
the mineral caves of the earth. Unto this wise nature (because the matter
brings not it self to effect) joins his proper agent, that is sulphur,
which is nothing else then a certain fatness of the earth engendered in the
proper mines, and by temperat decoction thickened, that it may turn the
quicksiluer by digestion, and concoction into form of metal. Therefore this
sulphur is to the quicksiluer as the man to the woman, and as the proper agent
to the proper matter. Not that this quicksiluer and sulpur (as some foolishly
think) are found by themselves in their nature in the mines, but that these
are already mingled by nature, and by long concoction brought into the nature
of earth. And this truly is the ne^rest matter of mettalles, as in the
generation of man meat is nearer matter then the elements, the blood nearer
then meat, and the sperme nearer then blood it self: and at last by apt
digestion the matter receives the shape of a man. So when as it is said, that
metals are first made of the four elements, as of their general and first
matter: the same order kept, it is necessary that of those elements come
vapors, of vapors a slimie water (which is yet a nearer matter the^ the
vapors, lest by defending Aristotle, Aubertus may think me to gainsay my
self) and heavy, mingled with a subtle sulphurous earth which is called
quicksiluer: of which as of a nearer matter by mean of the mixture and working
of the outward sulphur is made gold or other metal according to the great or
lesser digestion of nature. For as the Philosopher writes Metaph. 6. when any
thing is said to be made of another, either an extreme and perfect, is made of
a mean and imperfect, as of a child, a man, or else an extreme* of extreme,
as air of water: but let us return to our Aubertus. He writes that sulphur
also can not be the matter of mettalles. But let us hear by what reasons he
does prove it. Sulphur, says he, according to Aristotle, is engendered of a
hot, dry, and unctuous breath, but metals are engendered of an other breath
hot and moist, and a little unctuous. Truly a goodly, but sophistical argument,
by which he goes about to prove his purpose, by the opinions which he has
already impugned, Let him therefore remember that he before has affirmed
against Aristotle, that breath was not the matter of mettalles: and now he does
confess that mettalles are engendered of breaths. Therefore he speaks against
himself, that he shall not need my refutation: he adds to prove his
opinion, that sulphur waxes soft with moisture like salt, and that mettalles
are molten only with strong fire: but of a false antecedent can not follow a
good consequent. For by no means is sulphur dissolved into water, but by heat
is molten like lead: and this should our searcher of things under ground
first have tried, then to affirm so boldl^e that which is false. Therefore
that dart may be bent against him wherewith he supposed to have wounded ^he
Chimistes. Also he says, that sulphur is of an airy and fi^ie substance, and
therefore can not be increased or congealed. But I have before showed the
contrary, wherefore he is not to look for any other answer of me, because he
has neither reproved my argument, neither made any demonstration of his
opinion by firm reasons. But this one thing suffices, that all wise Chimistes
do affirm, that this which they call sulphur, is not the common sulphur which
burns with combustion of blacknes and adustio^ and is burned: whereas their
proper sulphur does whiten, rubify, coagulat, and finally make perfect that
Chimicall quickesiluer which is commonly unknown into the substance of gold,
according to nature, or of the philosophers stone, and gold according to art.
And this is the true secret sulphur, and the only tincture and shadow of the
son and the proper congeler of his quicksiluer which the Philosophers have
shadowed with diverse names their dark speeches and enigmaes* whereby it
appears Aubertus to have far erred, and by all means to be refused,
because he speaks of a sulphur which he knows not: and that the Chimick
Philosophers are not to be blamed because they say quicksiluer and sulphur to
be the matter of mettalls, which do not understand it of the common quicksiluer
and sulphur. For they know that these things whereof they speak are not found
in the metal mines in their very nature: but o^ those two they say, there is
made a third mixture, having the natures, properties and virtues of them, that
of it may be engendered, any metal according to the diversity of the
composition, digestion and place. These shall suffice touching the next matter
of mettalles which Aubertus would have to be water wrought upon by the other
elements, but he has kept sile^t the cause why he thinks so being contented
to say that it is set forth by others, or that he has found it in other men's
writings, which is the saying of a man that will prove his opinion by an other
man's credit, and not by reason, as the true Philosophers do. But now the
efficient causes call us which the Philosophers make double and so many
passions. for heat and cold are called (...), because they have power to move:
moist and dry (...), for because they rather suffer any thing then work, and
are said to be wrought upon of the first qualities, as of the most noble and
higher in nature, by whose work form is engendered in things: for the matter
is not known by it self, but by the change which cannot be without
suffering, as neither that without touching, the which by conjunction, and
cogelation, and by introduction of act and form is abolished. But it is to be
observed that by the mixture of dry and moist the bodies are first called
congealed, then hard or soft: of which congealed bodies there is a triple
difference? for it is either a watrie humor that is congealed, or some dry
earthly thing, or a mixture of them both. Also these, some of them are molten,
some dried, some moistened, and some made soft. But those things which are
dry and fiery, as honey and must, will never be congealed, and they which are
moist and airie predominant as all oily things. Wherefore these also are not
elements, neither the matter of these sufferinges. But of bodies which do
congeale and are hardened according to Aristotle, some are affected by heat
and some by cold: by heat drying up the humor, by cold driving out the heat*
Therefore those things that are congealed by heat by want of moisture are
dissolved of cold, which makes the moisture to enter in again as salt. And
those things which for lack of heat are congealed, are dissolved again by
heat, entering in again as metals: for whatsoever is dissolved melting, is
molten either by fire or water. Whatsoever melts by water must needs be
congealed by hot and dry, that is, fiery heat: and those which fire melts,
or whose congelacion in any part it does dissolve (as horn) are congealed by
cold, for of contrary effects the causes be contrary: and because that
mettalles do melt by heat, it is of necessity that first they were congealed
by cold, as the efficient cause, whereof none of the Chimist philosophers does
doubt, although, as Aristotle some time says, experience shows us the
contrary: for salt is congealed by heat, and may be dissolved and molten by
fire as I have often tried, and it is called fusible salt. Neither Albertus
Magnus that great Philosopher ought to be reprehended of our Aubertus because
he refers the power of making mettalles unto heat, when as Albertus does
not mean it of only heat, as he thinks. Therefore it is to be known, as
Aristotle witnesses things by means of cold to suffer rather then to work,
because that cold is proper to the patient elements, that is water and earth,
which both by nature are cold. For they do not receive cold from any other
thing as they do heat, but by taking away the heat they cool of their own
nature, neither are they cooled by any external cause, as the aier and fire.
Wherefore albeit cold in mixed things has an efficient force, yet it
prevails rather to corruption then to generation, Therefore the Chimists are
not to be reproved, although they say that nature needs a heat under the
earth for the procreatio^ of metals, as a more effectual efficient cause
which may mingle, alter, dispose, digest, and concoct their matter, and at last
with long tract of time frame it into gold as into his last end. Neither are
they to be reproved in this that they refer some force to the influe^ce of the
heavenly bodies: for Aristotle ^onfirmeth their opinion in his book de coelo
and mundo and his book of the causes of the properties of elements in these
words. For says he the first beginnings moving to generation, and inducing
form in every thing are the starrie and heavenly bodies, by their moving and
light. For they are the first that move, moved of the intelligences to perform
the nature of generation or corruption for the preservation of kinds, and of
them is given form and perfection, and as he said in an other place: the
son and man engenders man* nether does Aubertus rightly conclude upon this
reason, the art of Alchemy to be vain, if mettalles be engendered by force of
the stars, when as the Chimiste s can not have the fruition of this heavenly
power: for they believe with the Philosopher, that if forms be put on upon
inferior things by the motion and light of the heavenly bodies, and by their
site and aspect, the same by consequent to come to pass in mettalles, but that
is done as it were by a general cause and far off: but they have a nearer
efficient cause, as we said that is heat, by force whereof mettalles congealed
in the bowels of the earth are disposed, digested and made perfect. These
things thus declared, we must see to what end Aubertus tends and what is his
uttermost scope, he would have the labor of the Chimistes, which they take
upon them in making perfect of mettalles to be utterly vain and lost, and he
denies that copper, tin, Iron or lead, (which of them are called imperfect
mettalles) can by any art be made perfect, and be turned into gold and silver.
And first says he, it is evident those four mettalles to be perfect: but we
have before showed they are altogether imperfect for many causes, neither can
it be denied but that by art and right preparation they are made much more
perfect and excellent in their kind. Therefore Aristotle 4. met. cap. 6. Iron
says he, wrought is molten that it becomes moist and congealeth again: and
no otherwise are they accustomed to make steel, for the fex of the Iron
setleth and is seperat into the bottom: and when it is after made pure and
clean from his forces it becomes steel: but Iron is so much the better as
it has least excrements. But let us pass over authorities, when we have
sufficiently approved this by philosophical reasons, by which we have more
then sufficiently showed only gold to be perfect, all other mettalles to be
imperfect. Moreover Aubertus adds, that he might make the art of
transmutatio^ impossible. Those things which are ma^e perfect and formed by art
are artificial, but mettalles both by knowledge of the name and diffinition of
the essence are natural, for they are mineralles says he and have their
original only from a natural beginning, therefore they are natural, and
that according to Aristotle. For natural things have the beginning of their
making in themselves. but those which are made by art, not: but have it
outwardly from some other* and briefly to end, he adds that no natural
form can be put on by art, whereby he concludes that there can be no
artificial mettalles. Now therefore go too, it is our part to overthrow these
arguments, and finally to prove the Chimick art to be true, which imitating
nature it self does transmute mettalles, we said before they were called
imperfect, which were in motion to that form whereunto they were last decreed,
and those perfect, which have attained the end of their motion. And because
gold is come to the uttermost term of his motion, and is formed according to
the true intent of nature as we have already showed: therefore we hane
concluded that alone to be perfect, and all other that be in their motion to
the form of gold to be imperfect, whose perfection notwithstanding nature does
still prosecute in her bosom that she might convert them, although in long
time into gold. This can the diggers of mettalles testify which in one hundred
weight of lead find certain ounces of fine silver, which is their great
gain. So also in many copper mines there is found gold: and likewise in silver
mines, which when as such as are skillful of these things perceived, or as
often as they found any imperfect silver through indigestio^, they use to shut
up their mines, and provide that they be so let alone for 30. years or more
until there be made a perfect concoction by the heat under the earth. So
also writes Plinius, that there Hist. lib. 33 cap. 4.
is silver in gold by diverse weight, in some the tenth part, some nine, and
some eight. In one only metal says Galen, which they call Albi^rarense, the
26, part is found, and therefore it is more excellent then other, because it is
according to the greater or less digestion of nature, as may be judged* For
when as digestion is complete, then is found most pure and perfect gold.
Whereby it appears that albeit metals be in a certain term of motion, yet
not to be in the last, and that they are in the way and passage to gold, as to
that Hist. lib. 33. cap. 6.
which is only perfect. For where any vain of metal is found near thereto is
also found another: whereupon after Pliny they are called metals of the Greeks
(...) that one is sound after another. But Aubertus will say to this. If
imperfect metals by longer decoction may be reduced into gold by nature, why
do not the diggers expect that time, specially seeing, if that should come to
pass, they should have much greater gain by the thing: we answer there are
certain things which make the generation of mettalles diverse not only in
kind but in properties and accidents, according to the regions and places
where they grow, as also beasts are made diverse, as writes Aristotle 6. de
animalibus. For in Egypt Scorpions are not venemouse, in other places contrary:
and wheat in time and in some places does degenerate into rye, and rye into
wheat: So is to be said of mettalles which although they be appointed of nature
unto their end, that is that they should be gold, notwithstanding by the
diversity of Regions and mines and their corruption some are brought to their
degree of perfection that they become gold, and some remain in the path of
imperfection according to the diversity of digestion or purifying: For by
weaker heat nature does congeale some undigested things as lead and tin,
and some with a superfluous and burning heat, as copper and Iron, and some
contrariwise for want of heat and lack of an agent does not congeale as
quicksiluer. But nature it self brings forth silver with a reasonable
temporat heat, but gold with a most temperate which needs no workmanship to
be made perfect, as that has attained the uttermost end and accomplishment.
For as Aristotle says in his 2. book de Coelo and mundo: that only is good
accomplishment that needs no labor to make it good, and all perfection of
things consists in this point, that they receive their last accomplishment,
For so much then as the imperfect metals have not attained to that last end
of perfection for the causes aforesaid: therefore they lack the work of art,
by whose help following nature it self, they are at length made perfect, and
attain that last end whereunto they were ordained of nature, that is they
become gold. For as the Philosopher writes 2. Ethicor. truly sometime art
makes perfect some things which nature cannot work, other some it does
follow. So nature being helped by art, trees bring forth their flowers and
fruits even in the winter season, and in cold countries, which nature of it
self could not do, as is to be seen in the county palatines orchard at
Hedelberge, and in many other places: but that which Aubertus says, that in
the whole work of Alchemy nature does utterly rest, and only art does move the
subject, it is most falsely spoken: for by reason of nature being agent Chymia
is a natural work, for the matter in the self same stone which by decoction
it desires, retains, digesteth, expels, corrupts, engenders, and
forms in his time by the commandment of almighty God, wherewith nature does
form mettalles by the mixture of it: but by reason of the ministry I
confess Chimia to be an artificial work, not that art does corrupt engender
and form, but thus far only that it ministers all this unto natures
working, which otherwise of it self it could not alone perform: for nature
works two manner of ways to engender gold: one by it self: and first of
all when it does engender gold in his proper mines, and of his proper
beginninges, in which it is impossible for art to imitate nature. Secondly it
works by it self but not first, because first it engenders some imperfect
metal of the same beginninges in his mine: and lastly conuerteth it into
gold, in which point art follows nature it self, in that of imperfect
mettalles it makes gold as nature it self does. Hereby it is evident
something to be made of something: two manner of ways mediatly and immediately.
For according to Arist. lib 9. Meta. There may be many matters of one thing, as
mediat and immediate: albeit at the last the mediat matter must be reduced into
the immediate, for otherwise of diverse matters diverse things would rise.
Therefore because art takes both the mediat and immediate matter which nature
does, and reduces the mediat at the last to the immediate as nature also does,
and has one and the self same agent which shall spoil the quicksiluer, and
at last transform it, and the end of art and nature is all one, that is by the
uniting of this form with his matter, at last to engender gold: there is no
doubt, but that art imitating nature it self in all points can make an
imperfect metal a perfect, as nature it self does make, as we have
aforesaid. Wherefore the causes being all one, of necessity they also must be
one, and bring forth the like effects. Neither do I think them to be excused
which seek the subject of the Chymick Philosophers in the vegitalles. Their
lahour is in vain, for there can be no generation but by the nearest,
convenient and immediates, Others have bestowed their labors upon animal
things, specially in an egg, because the Chimick Philosophers moved with a
certain similitude of eggs called their work the egg, and said that the
egg even as the Elixir does contain 4 elements, whose shell they called the
earth, the thin skin the air, the white water, and the yelke fire. So also
the same Philosophers by a dark speech said, their stone was one in three, and
three in one, because it contains in it a body that stands, a soul that
g^ueth life, and a spirit that staineth. They which understand not these dark
speeches, persuaded themselves that an egg was the Philosophers stone, because
it contained three in one, the shell, the yelke, and the water: and therefore
at last concluded the egg to be the only matter sought for by the Chim^stes,
being no less deceived then other, not considering this matter not to be fit
to draw out metal out of. For a man begets a man and a beast a beast. But
because good Au^ertus has tried this with his loss (as I hard) which
decocting eggs philosophically consumed some hundred of crowns: therefore he
quarrelleth with the art, as though it had deceived him, but undeserved, when
he himself rather erred: for art is not bound to maintain his fault. For
kind ought to be joined with kind, and like with like, and every blossom to
answer to his seed, as we said before. And there be some which seek the matter
of their Elixir not in vegitals or animalls, but in things under the earth and
nearer. For they say that art does immitate nature, and therefore think to
labor upon those first matters whereupon nature, wrought and decoct quicksiluer
and sulphur, which they hear to be* the next matter of mettalles. But silly
men they loose both their cost and labor: For the Philosophers quicksiluer is
not that common, neither also the common sulphur as I said. For is there any
man which can attain the intent of nature in due proportion and measure? no
man truly. Moreover quicksiluer if you set it but to a very little ^ier, it
vaporeth away, and being mixed is separated, and sulphur also not hardly, when
notwithstanding the conjunction of both these is necessary even to the end of
digestion in the generation of mettalles: so are they deceived as many as seek
the stone in marchasites, tuty, antimony, ar^^ick, and orpment, when as it is
either altogether an inseparable sulphur, and yet ought to be seperat at lest,
as we have said: or because it is seperat with a small fire, all the
Philosophers writings sufficiently declare that it can not be the Philosophers
subject. They also err which think to take gold for the man and silver for the
woman: which two they amalgame (for we may use the words of the art) with
common mercury, and of three make one, which they decoct chyminically,
sublyme: and out of it at last draw the spirit, which afterward they go about
to fix. For they depart from the philosophers writings which confess all with
one mouth, that the agent is joined and proportionat by nature in the mines
with his own matter, and they say, that it is but one thing wherein are the
four elements well proportioned, that there is the ^ixer and the ^ixed, the
stayner and the stained, white and red, male and female compound together. It
is therefore as we said before a certain third nature, common and altered of
diverse mixture and digestion of sulphur and quicksiluer, in which is a mineral
power to engender a mixed thing, which to do so, perpetually work and suffer
between themselves until they be translaved from the form of imperfect
bodies, first begotten (the agent not being yet seperat from his matter) into
an other form, and at last come by continual digostion and purifications to
the last and true perfect form which is the form of gold, in which is the
last term of motion where also the agent is v^terly separate from his matter.
Many see^e what this is, few find it, or if they do find it, they know not
the preparations and intentions of the philosophers, whose medecin is also
drawn out of those things by art, in which it dwells potentially by nature,
and in Philosophici lapidis operationes. Calcinatio. 1
which the perfection of the first matter, and all mettalles are found. This
matter after they have found it, first they think meet to be calcined, and
purged from all his filths restoring his h^a^e and preserving his natural
moisture: for in the Chimicke calcination there ought to be no diminution
Solutio. 2
of* the body, but rather multiplication. Then they reduce the calcined matter
by making thin his groines into a certain liquid substance, as into his first
matter, which they call mineral water, which does not wet the hands. then is
it made one in kind, but not so in number: whose father they call the sun,
the moon the mother, and mercury the mediator, and the body is altered from
his proper form, but a new is induced immediately: for there is nothing
Element. separatio. 3
found in the nature of things spoiled of all form. That done, out of that so
dissolved they seperat the four elements and divide them into two parts into
the ascendenter spiritual, and into the inferior or earthly, which two
parts yet are of one nature, for the inferior is the leaue^ fixing it, and
the superior part is the soul quickening the whole matter. Notwithstanding
their division is necessary, that they all might be the easilier changd
amongst themselves, and therewith part by passing into water wax black, and
the water by passing into airie wax white, and the air be^ turned into fire.

Coniunctio 4
The separation of elements made, they make a conjunction of water and earth
with air and fire keeping a proportion that every element may be dispersed
with other, and give unto the male 3. parts of his water, and unto the women
ix. parts then every like rejoices with his like, for the desire of the
joining specially of the material and sulphureouse form. These thus joined,
they putrify it in a moist heat Putrefactio: 5
(lest by hot fire the mercury should be seperat or carried up on high through
his spiritual nature) that by this corruption the matter might be changed, and
the elements naturally divided, that regeneration may follow: for there is
nothing borne or grows, nor without life, but first things putrefaction is
made.

Coagulatio 6
After putrefaction they come to coagulation, and with the same most temperat
heat continually altering the matter, as well inwardly as outwardly, they do
work until all the matter be white like unto pearls, then is there a true
fixing and congealing of the shining spirits with the bodies The Chimick
philosophers call this the white thorn, and white sulphur incombustible, which
never departs from the fire.

Cibatio. 7
Finally they proceed unto Cibation, that is, to the making thick of the
thin, and making subtle the gross mingling his water with the ashes, and
his milk with the foliat earth: but moderatly that so the whitenes and rednes,
goodness, quantity and virtue of it may increase and grow, and by decocting and
decocting again, the matter might be nourished.

Sublimatio 8
Then they sublyme the matter, but not with common sublimation, and so purge it
from all uncleanness lifting up the body, and making it spiritual, and the
spirit corporal, and fixed by taking away the sulphurous saltnes that it may
all be white and easily be molten,

Formeutatio. 9
Having finished the sublimation, they leven the water by joining the spirit
with his whitened earth or calce, as with his ferment, or incorporating the
soul with the body. For the spiritual accidents cannot show their permanent
qualities, except they be joined with fixed bodies, as with his leven, which
brings vnro him his aptnes to his nature, color and savor by the mutual
and common impression of the body, and spirit, without the which the work can
not be finished, as paste cannot be leuened without leven.

Exaltatio. 10
But for the greater nobility of the matter, they think it must be exalted by
increasing the spirit, and sublyming and making subtle the earth by natural,
rectifying of all the elements, and the true circulation and graduation of them
until they be brought to a perfect ^mbrasing.

Augmentatio. 11
Then they increase the force of their Salamander by reiterating their
solutions and coagulations, and with new leven in force and quantity, and that
into infinite.

Proiectio. 12.
Last they make proiection of one weight upon many, upon the imperfect
according to the perfection of the medecin: for by how much the more it is
made subtle and stained, so much the more abundantly it works: and so
following nature they make perfect imperfect mettalles, and turn them into the
sun and moon: and of their proper matter purified and made subtle by art,
and then fixed by decoction, and digested until it come to a white, and after
into a red color, and is made again flying, and again fixed until it have
his entrance and sta^ne perfectly, they ma e their medecin and their powder,
which they call the philosoph rs stone. And that by sundry works, ^iuers
things, many vessels, and many furnaces, as by that is aforesaid, the
unskillful of art peradventure will judge, when as unto the true Philosopher in
all this great work, there is but one work, one way, one thing, one vessel,
one only fire and furnace, as all do confess. All these things would I note
by the way, whereby I might overthrow master Aubertus opinion touching the
philosophers stone (for it is lawful for any m^n by i^sting to utter his
folly in things unknown and that I might demonstrat, that not the bare form
of gold or silver drawn from his substance (as he thinks) is not the matter
of the philosophers medecin, But says he, I care not of what matter the stone
be compounded. Notwithstanding because it is not a natural substance it
cannot put on a natural^ form, but only artificial and deceitful. I could
here appeal to the witness of many notable men, but I think it better to
deal by reason. Therefore I say that mettalles truly altered are known to be
perfect, not by the form the^ had before, or that is put in (for that were
impossible) but by the accidents, properties, and passions which follow the
forms, Therefore if in metal altered all those things are found, in every
examination that are in the true metal: truly it is to be judged they have
not a counterfect form, but the true form of mineral gold and silver. For that
which works the work of the ^i^ is the ^i^, as the philosopher writes 4.
Meteor. and so contrary. Further more we have showed the Philosophers stone to
be natural, by reason of his making, and that by means of the natural agent,
that is fire, with his natural color sent, and form, which are accidental
forms, following his determinat substantial form, art ministering matter unto
it. For art is joined with nature, for the beginning of art is nature it self,
as the philosopher writes 2. phisic. ^y which reason art may be called
natural, his works natural, and his forms are called natural in two sorts,
that is when nature prepares matter for it self, and afterward induces
form, as in man and stone: or when art does minister and prepare matter for it
self (yet not with the last prepation) with nature notwithstanding does
dispose and prepare even to the end, and does induce a form upon it, as is to
be seen in the making of ceruse and red lead. Neither is it any new thing,
that art in many points follows nature, and that many natural things are
made by art, which Arist. affirms 4* Metaph. spheaking of colchota and
calchant. For nature, says he) in the mines of Atraments engenders
Atraments, and he shows the manner of the making. And a little after he
says, the two atraments may be made and compounded by art: for art being the
follower of nature, as he writes 2. Metaph. by taking the substance of Iron or
copper (whereof naturally they are made) ministering it unto nature, with often
dissolutions, distillations and coagulations does so perfectly and ingeniously
make them, that they have the same properties and operations active and passive
that the two mineral attraments have. The like is seen in making of salt.
There is some mineral salt found, as in Polonia, other some is made, as in
France, yet having the same properties and passions as the mineral, by which
reason it may be called very natural, and his form also natural and very
perfect. The like is to be thought of metals, for as the want of proper matter
is the cause chiefly, why that of every thing an other the like is not
engendered: so if fit matter be found out, it is the chief cause why that of
one another the like is engendered. Therefore for so much as it is possible for
the art of transmutation to find out the same matter of gold and silver which
is altogether natural, that is that third nature, the quicksiluer coagulat and
mixed with his sulphur, and that it is easy to follow and imi^at nature it
self in his working, because it does decoct and digest that matter with most
pleasant heat, until in the last term of his motion his agent be seperat
from it, that is his strange sulphur. It follows both on the behalf of the
agent, and of the proper and natural matter, the art may be called possible
and truly natural: but at the length Aubertus will fly to this argument. If
this Philosophers stone could iuduce the shape of silver and gold, it would
make it like unto it self, and by that means frame another Philosophers
stone. I answer, this conversion of mettalles is the reducing of them unto a
certain mean, that is, to a temperature, and that excellent equallitie (which
is only found in gold) in substance color digestion, fusion, sound and other
properties. These hitherto disputed shall suffice, not that I would take away
any thing from Aubertus estimation in other points, but to show him and such
as think his little book to be adorned with tauntes, that they have used
their sharp tauntes against such as have not deserved. And finally that I
might defend the truth, whereof it were meet that he also were studious, if he
be a good man such as I think him to be: neither are these things devised by
me, but set vide plin. lib. natural. histor. 33. cap. 4. qui ex auri pigmento
aurum perfectioni factu^ fuisse scribit.
forth by most learned men, and confirmed with most certain arguments:
notwithstanding least any man may think one to use only their authority, which
Aubertus ought not utterly to contemn, for who will think that they have left
unto us rashly or without credit those se^retes even under a holy oath.
Therefore this same part of philosophy which he so sharply does taunt improve
and cauell: I on the contrary dare boldly affirm, that it can never be
sufficiently commended and praised according to desert. If we do behold only
the miracles of nature which it brings out of his secret bosom, or the
commodi^ities thereof, which are almost innumerable, besides the infinite
things wherewith it does open many arts. For to pass over al other, the
virtue of the Philosophers stone is such, and his excellency snch, that it is
sufficient for the healing of most diseases and it shows the true and
exquisite preparations of medecines: but it is no marvel if the thing sti^ke to
them that are accustomed with most unclean things or with whom only custom
makes a law. But I do counsel such men either to learn better things, or
not to envy those that are better taught, or at least that ^hey will not
reprove things they know not. If not, yet we will not care for their
enterprises, because we know that at the last truth shall have the victory,
and with his brightness will drive away those darkness, and make all things
manifest, as it is indeed.

THE TRVE AND PERFECT SPAGERIKE PREPARATION OF MINERALS, animalles, and
vegitables with their use.

Set forth by Josephus Quercetanus of Armenia Doctor. Whereunto are added,
diverse rare secrets, not heretofore known of many. By I. H. practisioner in
the Spagericall Art.



AT LONDON, Printed, Anno. Dom. 1591.

The spagyricall Preparation of Mineralles and precious stones.
And first of Gold, Chap. 1.
De au^^
ALL medicines are taken out of things, mineral, animal, or vegetable, by
preparation. Amongst the mineralls gold only is most temperate and perfect,
the which being brought in to thin leaves, is ministered by all the Greek and
Arabian physicians, to strengthen nature against the passions of the heart, unto
such as are much addited to sadness, and against all melancholy diseases, as we
have showed in another place. Wherefore they prescribe it in their electuaries
of pearls, and in laeticia Galeni (although some think it falsely ascribed
unto Galen) in their Antidote of Coccus baphicus, otherwise called alkermes, in
Aurea Alexandrina of Nicolas Mirepsi, and in his Analeptike electuarie: In
their diamargariton of Auicen his description and many other medicines, All
which according to their nature and quality do exhilerate the heart, subdue
melancholy and frensies, restore the spirits, and strength decayed: and this
they use to give without any other preparation. But the Chimicall physicians do
draw out of gold a true tyncture to cure the same diseases: and many other
incurable greefes, specially the leprosy, canker, and other corrosiue ulcers:
and so make thereof a perfect wholesome medicine which may easily be carried by
the meseraicall veins unto the liver, and so unto the heart, and through the
wholl body: where as being otherwise used, it helps little or nothing, but
rather hu^teth much, because it cannot be overcome by natural heat: for as the
fire with any heat cannot burn or consume the same, much less the strongest
stomach, heart, or liver of any man what^oeuer: wherefore after this manner
following you shall draw forth his tyncture.

Of the tincture of Gold.
tinctura auri.
THe tincture of gold is his color, so separated from the body, that it
remains altogether white, and is prepared thus. First ye must purge your gold
by Antimony according to art, than Amallgame it with mercury, and set it in a
furnes of reuerberation until it become spongious and light, and of a purple
color, and so that it cannot be brought to gold again, out of the which ye
shall draw his tyncture with Acetum alcalisatum, by digesting it in Balneo 40.
days, being close luted with hermes seal: The which ye shall afterward
vapor away, and circulat it with Alcoholl vini, alcalisated, whereby his force
shall be meruailously increased, for the curing of diverse and sundry diseases,
of the which tincture i. being mixed with i. of Aqua theriacalis, is taken
every morning i. fasting for the space 10. days. This medicine is
diaphoreticall purging the superfluous and noisome humors of the whole body,
by sweat, the white body of gold, which is true lune fixed, the tincture being
drawn away (as before) is by an expert practisioner in few days brought into
Mercury: which being precipitated by himself into a red powder 8 grames
thereof is given in wine or Aqua theriacalis to cure the dropsy and the pox,
and that only by sweat. If thou cast this Mercury of gold upon a due
proportion of his proper sulphur, low it and digest it philophically, then
shall ^hou make a most excellent medicine of all other to cure the leprosy,
for it does purify the blood that is corrupted, and cleanses the whole body
from all excrements, only by sweates, and makes a man as it were young again.
There are diverse and sundry preparations made thereof, which here I do omit
for breuity sake.

Of Silver Cap. 2.
De argento.
Silver which amongst all other metalles obtains the second degree of
perfection is also temperat, and does some way emoulate the qualities of gold,
which Physicians do minister against the same diseases especially against
frensies and all melancholy greefes, and to comfort the brain: It is put into
the Electuary of peatles, laeticia Galeni, aurea alexandrina, and almost in all
Antidotes wherein gold is used. Neither is it otherwise prepared then after the
manner of gold only that it is brought into thin leaves and filinges. But the
spagerickes out of silver itself draw an oil, whereof 2 or 3, drops are given
with water of Betony flowers, sage, or balm, against the falling sickness, and
all diseases of the brain (as we have showed) and it is thus prepared: Then
Calcine fine coppell silver with the oil of salt, so often that it can not be
brought into his body again: and thenwash the calx or powder until it be
sweet, and reuerberate it: out of the which thou shall draw forth his proper
salt in balneo, then circulate it with the spirit of wine 15. days in a
pellicane to his perfect graduation: the menstrue being separated in balneo,
there remains in the bottom, the oil of Lune fixed, which is the best
medecin for the aforesaid purposes.

Of Jron. Cap. 3.
Do ferro.
THe ancient physicians used Iron especially the scalles of steel to dry, and
a stringe: and for that cause they quenched steel oftentimes in water, whereby
the water did gather a vehement force of drying, which being drunk did cure
the spleen: and the wine also wherein it is quenched does help the chollike
and disenterie, and is good for those that are troubled with choler, and to
strengthen weak Aeginet. lib. 7. Act. li. 10.
stomachs (as Aegneta and Actius have learnedly written) cap. 11. and lib. 14.
cap. 24.
for A^tius in his 14. book reports that the scalles of steel brought into
powder is given by it self unto those that have the spleen especially to
countriemen and such as are strong, which kind of remedy is much used now a
days amongst Phisicions for the curing of the same diseases: yet many of them
condemn our mettalline remedies, and conclude that they are to be rejected as
most venomous: notwithstanding the ancient Physicians have drawn many inward
medicines out of mettalles, wherewith they helped many diseases, as it may be
seen. Who then will disalow their due preparations, and extractions of their
quintessences. Concerning Iron as it is not without biting, so by spagyricall
preparation it loses his corrosiue qualities, because there is a certain sub
till substance drawn out of it, or else it is brought into oil which may be
ministered inwardly with more safetee and with great profit against the same
diseases because it may be suffered of the natural heat, and it will also
work kindly upon the body. This Galen also does testify in his 9. book of the
properties of simple medicines 42. chap. where he speaks of the scalles of
brass, all scalles says he do dry very sore, but they differ among
themselves, for some dry more, some less, because some are of a more gross,
and some of a more thin essence, afterward he adds: but all flakes or
scalles are strongly biting, whereby it is evident that the matter of their
substance is not thin but rather gross, for amongst those things which have
that quallitye, that which is the thinnest is least biting. The Spagyrikes
therefore do draw out of Iron, but especially of steel a most subtle
substance, which also with the fire of reuerberation they make thinner, and
thereof prepare crocus martis: out of the which afterward they draw their oil
which is a most excellent and no biting medicine against the Diarrheam,
lienteria, Disenteria, and flux of the liver, a notable medicine for the
stomach, and against all issues of blood as well inward as outward, if it be
mixed with conserve of Roses or Comferie, being prepared and confected after
this manner.

Rec. the filinges of steel, wash it often with salt water, and then
afterward with fresh water, then put thereon sharp vinegar that it may be
covered four fingers high, let it stand certain days in the sun, pouring
on fresh viniger oftentimes that the filings may be made subtle. This ye shall
reuerberate a whole day in an open vessall until it be brought into a fine
light red powder by the force of fire, the which you may use: Then with his
sharp menstrue or the spirit of wine well prepared, you may draw easily forth
his spirit, whereof ye may make his oil, whereof one drop is given in a
convenient decoction, or mingled with some astringe^t conserve, to the uses
before said: In this manner also is a lawdable medecin made out of Iron:
Calcine the filinges of Iron in a violent fire with the flower of sulphur
until all the filings be come red, and till the stinking earth be vanished
away: reuerberat this the space of a whole day, and it will come, to a very
fine purple powder, the which as I say before may be kept for your use.

Balsamum martis. Balsamum martis.

Upon the filinges of Iron often washed with salt water, power sharp vinegar,
that it may be covered four fingers above your filinges, set it upon warm
ashes eight days every day stirring the matter: and seperat the vinegar which
will be colored red, and pouring on new vinegar again. And that so long till
the vinegar be no more colored red: which being taken away take the powder
that remained in the bottom, and sub lime it with a like portion of sal
armoniake: the same sublimate ye shall return again so often upon his
feeces, and sublime again until they appear of the color of a Rubie, then
cast all into scalding water that the salt may dissolve, which done by and by
put on cold water, and the feeces of Mars will remain in the botom, like the
calxe of gold, power away the water, and power on fresh that the balm may be
made sweat. In the aforesaid order you may make crocus veneris and balsamum
veneris.

Of Coper. Cap. 4.
De Aere
THe Physicians do use copper diversely prepared in their plasters and
vnguentes for chi urgerie, viz. For Emplastrum Apostolicum Nicolai Alexandrim,
and Viride aeris, Emplastrum diuinum Nicolai Praepositi, unguenium Apostolorum
Auicenae and Egyptiacum Mesue. All which do cleanse vehemently, but not without
some biting, for they are sharp: out of the which notwithstanding by often
washinges before they be mingled the sharpenes is taken away, and they be made
in manner of Epulotica, medicines most apt to cleanse ro^ten: and hollow ulcers.
The Ch^micall physicians prepare out of the said coper other medicines against
the same diseases, and to cure all eating hollow and rotten ulcers, much more
excellent, which will work without any biting or pain: Calcine therefore your
copper after the common manerthen out of that cum acida muria, being prepared
and Alcolisated, you shall according to art draw forth his green spirit in
Balneo, until the menstrua be no more green, seperat it in Balneo, and that
which remains dissolve in a moist place, and it will come to a clear oil,
which must be circulated with, vini dulcedine, that it may take away all the
sharpnes of the menstrua, and then you shall have a most excellent medicine to
heal all the aforesaid ulcers if it be mingled with butter.

Out of coper also calcined and reuerberated with the proper menstrua of
vitrioll, that it may be covered 10. fingers there is drawn a clear blue
vitrioll: they being circulated together in Balneo 15. days. And then the
menstrua being separated by distillation in ashes: This vitryoll of coper being
made sweet with convenient washings, and rubisied by calcination is good to
cure all maling ulcers, and to take a way the hardness, if it be put into a
fistula that is hardened with a tough skin, and to take away all proud flesh
without pain: it helps the flesh that grows in the neck of the blather if
it be mingled with any convenient plaster: and put in as it ought to be with a
wax candell. Misi, chalcitis Calcanthum vulgar. Sorry, and the rest of that
sort may in like manner be prepared to cure all malign ulcers, and very
effectually to cleanse all fistulaes without biting or pain, for by these
means they shall loose their corrosiue quallitie, and burning nature or
strength.

Of Lead. Chap. 5.
De Plumbo
Lead is of a cooling quality (as Galen says in his 9. book of simples,) and
therefore it is good for hollow, cancred, and rotten ulcers either by it self,
or mixed with certain other things, whereof Ceruse and red lead are made by
art, which the physicians use against the infla^mation of the eyes when they
would refrigerate, dry, repel or bind: and thereof they make their vnguentes
with cold waters. They are also put into vnguentum album rasis, citrinum, and
diapompholygos, it is put also into plasters called by their names, as of
ceruse and red lead.

These are destitute of all manner of biting, and the physicians use them to
close up ulcers withal. Many do use only Gal. 9. simp.
a plate of lead to dry up ulcers, other some use burnt lead, which does more
effectually dry up ulcers, and is more commodious for those that are
rebellious, according to Galen his judgment. But by this praeperation
following, which is better, it is made more excellent to dry and heal all
manner of malign wounds and inueterat ulcers, which preparation is made after
this manner following.

Take lead well calcined, out of the which with distilled vinegar Alcalisated
and prepared as it ought to be, y^e shall draw out the essence in Balneo, and
this ye shall do so often times until all the lead be dissolved: and by these
means let it be purged from his leprosy and all impurities: Then separate the
menstrue in Balneo, and that which remains in the bottom of the vessal
dissolve again in Alcoole vini tartarisato, and circulate all together
certain days to take away the sharpnes of the menstrue: and by these means
you shall make of lead a most sweet sugar and temperat, most friendly to our
nature, serving for many infirmities. This in a moist place is dissolved into
oil a most excellent medicine to heal all manner of malign vlc^rs in short
space: Of the same is made a most precious balm against the pains and
inflammations of the eyes, so that it be first well dulcifyed and prepared. The
like ye may make of tin, whereof among the old phisicions there was no use
that I know of. Moreover you may so deal with tucia, litarge, the true
cadmia, spodium, and pompholix: all which may be well prepared and made so
gentle that without any biting they will take away the spots and
ouergrowinges of the eyes, asswaging the inflamacions and great pains of the
same, curing all ulcers without pain and close them up.

Balsamum saturni.
Balsamum saturni.
TAke the aforesaid salt of lead being dulcerated with the spirit of wine, and
circulat it 15. da^es, then seperat the menstrue by distillation, and put on
fresh and circulate it again putting thereto a fittewaight or quantity of the
salt of tartar cristalline, and you shall have a balm sweeter then sugar,
which will meruellously prevail against all malign ulcers, and diseases of
the eyes.

The making oil of lead, told me of a learned D. of Germany.
TAke lead calcined, and set it in a strong fire to vitrifie, then beat it to
powder, and draw away his essence with distilled vinegar, as is showed before,
then vapor away that viniger until it come to the thicknes of honey, then while
it is hot put it into a retort of glass, and distill it with a gentle fire,
until there appear certain white fumes, then change the receauer and augment
the fire according to art, until all the fumes be come forth, the which is the
oil of satu^ne. This ye shall rectify many times, the which is thus to be
understood. Calcine, dissolve, vapor, and distill as ye did before: but if it
happen that all the matter be not dissolved ye shall take that powder that
remained in the bottom of your matters and dry it in a crusible, then grind
it on a stone and dissolve it in fresh vinegar, and distill and vapor as before
is said: then if thou will make another oil thereof to beautify the face, and
to dry up old ulcers, and to distroy fistulaes. Take the said powder after
the oil is distilled from it, calcine it, and dissolve it with fresh vinegar,
and vapor it away to the thicknes of honye, then let it cool and one part
will turn to salt being very white in the bottom, and the oil will be yellow
and swim on the top the which ye shall power of into another glass, for it is
the sweet oil of saturn, the which if one drop be put into fair water it
will be turned like milk, the which is used to beautify the face, and is called
lac virginis. Then if ye will use the salt that remained in the bottom to
beautify: take the quantity of a small nut, and dissolve it with the juice of
lemondes and there with anoint the face slightly. Also if ye rectify the said
oil in Balneo, there will come forth an aqua vite more stronger then of wine,
the which serves to dissolve gold after it is thoroughly calcined: that being
done there will remain in the bottom of the glass a white matter: having an
oil swimming thereon of a yellowish color, the which being drunk is
singular good against spasmus, and sincope: The first oil not being rectifyed
is good to whiten scares, and cicatrises, against burnings and noli me tangere,
and herpes: The rectifyed oil is good against cancres, and such like sores.
This salt is by nature cold and dry, and is used with good success in hot and
moist bodies, where the liver sends forth certain vapors like fat scabbes,
and viscous phlegm, and such like: it helps all weeping wounds and ulcers in
few days. Being mixed with oil of turpentine and anointed, it cures
conuulciones and resolutions, being mixed with oil of camomill, it dissolueth
tumors, and suppresseth burnings and scaldings 3. or 4. grains being drunk
helps the chollicke, being mixed with oil of roses, it cools and dries
meruellously all heates, scabbes, and itch. etc.

Of Quickesiluer. Chap. 6.
Lib. 9. simp. cap. 59.
THe Physicians in times past have made sundry experimentes of quicksiluer:
but Galen does plainly confess, that he never made any trial of it, either
by ministering it inwardly or outwardly. Paulus Aegineta writes this of Mercury
in his 7 book: Many have given to drink Mercury burned to ashes, mingled with
other spices to those that have had the chollike and pain in the bowels:
latter Physicians do use crude Mercury to kill the worms in children as
Mathiolus reports in the 5. of his commentaries upon Dios^crides out of
brassauola. Many use crude Mercury to cure the pox and make thereof pills
which they call De barberossa: the description whereof Rondelecius a learned
man (my master) has showed in his book de morbo gallico. In outward diseases
many do only use precipitate prepared with Aqua fortis which is good to heal
al malign ulcers, especially of the pox, and that without pain if it be well
prepared. With this remedy my father (A man of godly memory, and one that
deserved well of all men for his physic) did use to take away the flesh of
the neck of the blather, whereof when he had showed me the true preparation,
I used it often with most happy success both to cure that disease, as also
the ulcer of the blather: whereof Steph. caretonus, an Appoticary famous both
for learning and experience was an eye witness. For a certain noble man friend
to us both, which had bin sick three years of a perilous ulcer in the neck
of his bladder, by means of a foul Gonorrhoea imperfectly cured. At the last
after long use of Guaicum (whereof they say diet is made) and many remedies so
often reiterated taken, and cast in, and all those by the counsel of the
learned Physician Doctor. Isandon, this only remedy put in by a wax candell,
or small ^ent, within fifteen days he was fully cured. Thus much by the way of
digressio^: but to return to Mercury, these before named are almost all the
remedies which are made thereof, saving that it is also put in ointments. And
many diseases otherwise incurable have enforced Physicians (even without the
counsel of Galen) to search out these properties, whereof at the length
experience (the mistress of all things) has made them certain. For the truth
which consists in reason ought to be manifested unto the sense, and
experience is not perceived but by the sense, as Galen testifyeth in his 6.
book De sanitate tuenda. It is necessary (says he) that those things which
are to be thought upon be considered by reason, and afterward certifyed by
experience to the intent that reason by experience may be confirmed. And in the
second of the same book he writes thus: the force of reason shows the
strength of the experiment. Who could otherwise prove that the Cyaneum and
Armenie stones do help melancholy affections? Persely to hurt women with
child, and to do no good against the falling sickness? That Harmodactiles
could purge phlegm out of the joints? that Lapis Iudaicus and Lyncis should
break the stone? that pearls should strengthen the heart, or that Napellus is
so deadly a poison, save only that by the practice and working of the foresaid
things it had bin proved by diverse experiences* In like manner by experience it
is found out that Mercury is a fit remedy to cure many infirmities. As for
example Doctor Ioubertus a learned man, lately tried it to be a most excellent
remedy to cure the wounds made with shot, who thereof co^poseth his
Triapharmacum. Neither is it to be marvelled, when as with slender
preparations it becomes so forcible, if with far better it attaineth the
highest degree of perfection amongst medicines to cure many, and those
otherwise incurable diseases, as well inward as outward. This excellent
preparation of Mercury is hard and difficult and not only unknown unto many
Physicians and Poticarieso^f one sort, but very few of the spagerikes have
truly attained thereunto. For Mercury is a flying spirit having a certain
arsenicall air very hurtful to the body: whereof at length being cleansed
and fixed, are made so excellent medicines* and those so wholesome: (for it is
the property of every perfect spirit to quicken the body) that it seems not
credible except unto such as are cunning and experienced, I wish heartily and
desire earnestlye (least my judgment may seem different from reason) that the
learned would consider the nature of these three Mercuries, the common
Mercurye, the Mercury sublimate, and Mercury precipitate: I know that there is
not any man except he be altogether ignorant, but he will affirm that the
sublimate Mercury is more venomous, then either the crude which some do
minister in pills inwardly to kill worms (as is aforesaid) or the
precipitate: whereof Paulus Aegineta, seems to speak where he intrcateth of
Mercury brought into ashes, which in time past was given for the collike,
which is made thus, or at least with sulphur. And many men at this day without
any other preparation than with bare and simple washinges do give Mercury
precipitate to cure the pox. (as Matheolus witnesses) neither do we perceive
although it purge upward and downward, that it does hurt like unto the
sublimat, whereof half a scruple will kill a man. If this which is true be
granted, that mercury sublimat is stronger poison the^ the crude, or
pr^ecipate, how comes it to pass (I pray you) that sublimation (the only
purifying which al philosophers do use) I mean this spirit exalted should get
such malignitie and venomous force. Some will answer peradventure our
Auberius, that this does not come by sublimation (by which it is certain all
things are purifyed) but by carrying with it a certain subtle sharpnes from
the things that are mingled with it. Let us then examine this, of one pound of
crude mercury, another pound of crude vitrioll, and as much common salt, not
armonicke (as Matheolus thinks) mingled altogether, at a soft fire, and
ground on a stone, or mortar, that it might be well incorporated, and brought
into a powder, and put in to a subliming glass, giving fire thereto by degrees
for the space of 40. hours, is made your mercury by sublimate. If then he
draw venomous quallity from the things it is mingled withal, of necessity it
must be from salt and vitrioll. But that common salt and vitrioll do not hurt
as poison. Infinite numbers do daily prove the same which eat salt in their
meats, and drink vitrioll water in their baths: And many other throughout
Germany and Italy do use the spirit and oil of vitrioll for the curing of the
falling sickness, the stone and asthma, with great ease and meruellous profit.
simp. ca. 60. lib. 5.
And Dioscorides speaking of vitrioll says thus: it kills the broad worms in
the belly i. of it being taken inward. Being drunk with water, it helps
against the poison of toadstooles: and dissolved in water, dropped into the
nose purges the head. By this it does sufficiently appear that so great a
venomous quallitie is not in Mercury sublimat by means of vitrioll: much less
it is to be thought of common salt. Finally if so great malignitie were in it
by means of the salt or vitrioll, because it carries up the spirits with
him this malignitie also would be in Mercury precipitat, for the strong water
wherewith it is made is compounded of the spirits of vitrioll and salt: with
the which also the physicians make their precipitate, which many of them do
minister without further preparation: which albeit through his great sharpnes
by means of the spirits enclosed in the strong water it purges the body
violently, yet it is well known unto many learned men at this day, that it
does not hurt as the sublimat does. This malignity therefore in the sublimat
comes by how much the more it is made subtle and stronger by exaltation and
flies with a small heat: but in the precipitate it is not so, for it is
mortifyed and so fixed with that philosophilall fire the strong water, that it
will suffer great heat, neither can that malign air be sent unto the heart (if
it contain any) which by nature is easily assaulted with all poisons, because
that the natural heat cannot cause the precipitate to fume, which no violence
of fire can cause to vanish away, as by certain experiences is approved: the
fixing therefore of his spirit is the true preparation that either taken inward
or applied outward cannot hurt: the which many go about to do sundry ways (I
speak of them which seek his preparation only for physic) which think by
pouring on the water twice or thrice upon the feces (which they call caput
mortuum) and so distill it again that the true preparation of so great a
medecin may be attained, but they are not a little deceived, specially because
they are not careful to take away his corrosiue, or else know not how to do
it: for truly Mercury precipitat can never be a sufficient profitable medicine
so long as the corrosiue quality taken of the strong water is joined with it,
which is not taken away as many suppose with common washings, but with far
other preparations and dulcifyinges, which being unknown no perfect thing can
be wrought, therefore ye mustworke after this order following, specially for
the making of turpetum that wonderful medicine.

Rec. Calcis terrae pellucidae and fixae, Talcum well calcined, the ^urpeti
mineralis descriptio.
which calcination shall be showed in another place, of each one pound, make of
them a strong capital lie, in the which ye shall boil one pound of Mercury,
first five times sublimed and every time quickened according to art, the space
of 7. hours, and so shall ye attain unto the perfect purging of Mercury, and
the beginning of true fixing to all works: for these calces are so fixing,
that with sublimations reiterated upon them at the length, the mercury shall
be fixed. This mercury so prepared, dissolve with regali foetido, and proper
menstrua: dissolve also by it self iij, of the mercury of Antimony well
prepared, and i. of gold purged by antimony according to art. All these
dissolutions put into a body of glass, and the vessel will be darkened or
clowdy, set that glass in an Athenor giving the^ soft fire until they wax
clear, then increase the fire, and distill away the water by alimbecke from
the feces till they be dry, pouring on the water again upon the dead head
four times: then put on new fixing water that the matter may be covered 4
fingers, set that to digest 2. or 3. days, then distill it twice or thrice
upon the feces, and toward the end give it fire of sublimation that those
things which are not truly mortifyed, may rise and be exalted, which must be
kept a part, for they serve not for our purpose: then take the dead mass, and
bring it to powder, and put it in a scaruell stirring it the space of 12.
hours in the second degree of the fire in a fornes of reuerberation until it
come to the redness of a Salamander, out of the which ye shall draw all the
sharpnes and venom on this manner.

Rec. Of the sleume of vitrioll and allome ana. lb. ij. fs. distilled vinegar.
lb. ij. calcis terrae nostrae pellucidae ae fixae 4. sulis corneoli cristallint
i. whites of eggs 20. distill all these by alimbeke twice upon the feces: put
three pound of this water to one pound of the powder of Mercury prepared as
before, and distiil it away from the feces in alimbeke 4. times: and the last
time distill it until the feces be dry. This done grind your powder upon a
stone, pouring to it again new fixing water, distill it again four times as
before. Then you shall fix and make sweat thy mercury, by distilling from it
the Alchooli vini five times, putting on fresh every time. This the chyminicall
physicians call precipitate or turbith mineral, by cause it purges gross and
slymie humors, eight grains of this is given with conserve of Betony, and
aqua theriacalis, to cure the pox, due purgations being used before.

With two drammes of the extract of wild cucu^bers one dram of the extract of
Hermodactiles and ss. of this precipitat is made a mixture, whereof half a
scruple is mingled with two drammes of aquae theriacalis, and is given for the
gout 4. or 5. times according to the age and hardness of the disease, and the
strength of the sick body in the spring and Autumn. For without any grief
it does meruellously purge the sharp excrements, and draws them out of the
joints. For to cure the dropsy there is made this composition which does
purge the sharp excrementes and strengthen the nutritue parts.

Rec. Of this precipitat aforesaid i. the extract of alhandall and Elaterium
ana. one scruple and a half, of the extraction of Elebori nigri, well prepered
and Rhuberbe, ana one scruple the essence of red coral and yellow sanders ana.
2. scruples spiritus vitrioli i. scruple olei mafliichini and cinamomi ana.
half a scruple mingle the^ with the powder of cubebes, and the muslage of
gum tragagant and make it into pills. The dose is from half a scruple to
one scruple: it must be given twice in a week, if their strength will bear it.

If it be mingled with Diaphoreticall things it only provoke sweates, and
by that means helps also many diseases: mingled alone with butter it cures
cankered and eating ulcers specially that come of the pox. Likewise the fistula
and all callowes matters.

Ex triapharmaco, and the aforesaid precipitate is made a plaster, which being
put into the neck of the bladder with a wax candle or small tent as it ought,
cures the ulcers of it, and takes away the flesh without pain or danger. The
fixing water for the said turpetum is made, ex Climia, lapide Sedenegi, lapide
perlato, marchasitarum sulphur rubicundo, lacerta Aqua fixatoria pro ^urpeto.
viridi and rubra, halinitro, and sale aluminoso, this made after the manner of
Aqua fortis: among all waters of graduation, this is the chiefest and very
fixing, if any attain unto it truly.

Of mercury also are made other medicines: for there is made of it being first
prepared as it ought Amalgamy, with gold which is put into a bolts head, and
closed with Hermes seall, and so being kept in a temperate fire 20. days is
brought to a yellowish fixed powder, the sign of perfection is when it will
not vapor away by force of fire, neither be quickened again in water. This
medicine is Diaphoretical, and is ministered for the forenamed diseases,
specially to cure the pox only by sweates. There is also made of Mercury a
balm with the water of the calex of egge-shelles and tartar, also a most
excellent oil for fistulaes, all ulcers, and callosites, this shall suffice to
be spoken of Mercury, so that this one thing being noted, that the whole
perfection of this medicine consists in the fixing and dulcifying of it.

Of Arsenicke Chap. 7.
De arsenico.
Amongst the corrosiue medicines which by the extreme sharpnes of heat do
distroy our natural heat, or convert it into fiery quallity, and by their
malignant nature dissolve the natural moisture, consume all the substance of
the body, and cause putrefaction with stinche: the Physicians do account
Arsenicke, sandrake, and orpiment: and therefore do judge the use of those
medicines very perilous in surgery nether by any means necessary because
they are so venomous and contrary to our nature. This they may very well say
if they knew not their true preparatio^s, whereby they are made apt to cure many
outward infirmities. These medecines are said to be venomous, for their malign
quallitie and sharpnes. But that evil quallity consists in the spirit,
stinking air, or black smoke which it sends out with a small heat, but
the sharpnes is only in the salt: This venomous and black smoke when it is
raised by natural heat does weak the matter of the part, corrupts it, and
oftentimes kills, as if one had drunk poison, if it be not laid too far
from the principal parts, specially the skin being wounded, which happened to
a certain woman: and Fernelius the chief of physicians of our time
witnesses, that he saw it: seeing that malign quality is in the black smoke,
it must be altogether fixed: for by fixing as we said before in the chapter of
mercury all the venom is taken away from the spirits, as from arsenicke,
mercury, orpiment, and others: The sharpnes is taken away by extracting the
salt, which may be done by their proper washinges, as we have before showed,
by which reason arsenike shall not hurt, but profit much in local medicines
for poisoned wounds, the wolf, fistula, canker and gangrena, if it be duly
prepared, fixed, and sweetened. Of which true preparation Dioscorides seems
secretly to entreat of, when as he speaks of that simpl. 5. cap. 71.
metalline sandaraca, which in the beginning of the chapter he writes to smell
of sulfur. It is given with mulsum to those that coughe out rotten matter, and
to those that are short winded, it is very well given in drink with rosen. It
is very hurtful to give sandrake unprepared: when as Galen does witness, it is
of a burning quallitie, unto whose opinion Dioscorides also agrees in the sixth
book 29. chapter of simples. Lib. 9. simp. cap. 53.
Therefore it will not be amiss or hurtful to use arsenicke, or any other
corosiue medicine being prepared in chirurgerie specially, the preparation
thereof is thus: sublime arsenicke 3. times with salt prepared and rubifyed
vitrioll and the scalles of Iron that ye may purge it, which afterward ye
shall fix with salt peeter, giving fire by degrees the space of 24. hours,
and it will be a mass whiter then snow. Resembling the color of pearls,
which ye shall dissolve in warm water to draw out his salt, and there will
remain in the bottom a very white powder which being dried, ye shall fix with
the like weight of olei inceratiuiex talco confecti, and set it in a fournace
of reuerberation on whole day: then again dissolve it in warm water, that the
powder may remain white fixed and sweet, mhich in a moist place will turn into
a fat thick oil like buter, swaging pains: for like as arsenike not
prepared, brings great pains, and by the malign qualities is poison: so
contrariwise by his fixing he loses that, and works without pain, and is a
profitable medicine for curing of poisoned wounds, if 1. ounce of it be
mingled with 2. ounces of oil of mirrha.

Many also sublime arsenicke 3. times cum calce fixa and colchothare, then
dissolve it in aqua stigia, fixatoria, ac conueniente, for that purpose
distilling the water often from the feces, tha^ reuerberate the caput mortuum,
which will come to a white powder fixed, from which the alkalie is drawn out
with the alchoole of wine, and so is made sweet, the use of this is to cure
fistulaes and cankers.

Of Sulphur chap. 8.
De sulphur.
SVlfur is the balm of the lunges, which the Chimist do 3. or 4. times
sublime with colcothar to purge it from his impurities, and make thereof many
profitable medicines, to cure asthmatis, if sugar be mixed with it: also of the
flowers of sulfur and his proper menstrua Therebinthinat, digested certain
days in a dry heat, there is drawn out a balm like to a rubine, the
menstrua being separated, there remains a very red oil of sulphur, which
must be circulated with vin^ distillato and alcholisato, and be this means is
a balm drawn out of sulfur, whereof 3. or 4 drops is given with water of
Isope to those that are short winded and spitte rotten matter, It heals all
manner of wounds quickly, etc.

Notwithstanding, the ancient Physicians, seem to have thought that sulfure
did only cure outward greefes, that it had a drawing quallitie, and was of a
whot temperature, and thin essence as Galen and Aegineta wrote, and that it was
Galen. 9. Si^pli. cap. 36. Aegin. li. 7.
good against venomous beasts, specially against the Sea Turtle, and Dragon,
either cast on dry or mingled: yet Galen seems to allow the use of sulfurie
waters by these words. The bathes or drinking of sweet waters, is very
hurtful to the sick of the dropsy: But of salt sulpherie and pitchie waters
is very profitable. Dioscorides, writes that sulfur eaten with a rere egg,
helps those that are short winded: But the Spagirickes have attained to many
things unknown to the ancient Physicians. Finally of sulfur is also madeth
sower oil by a bell, which is a very profitable remedy for the teeth, and
cures also cancered ulcers.

Of Vitriolle. Cap. 9.
GAlene and Aegineta, as^irmeth that vitrioll does most De vitriolo. Galen.
9. Simpli. Agineta. (...). 7.
effectually preserve moist flesh, if it be powdered with it: Dioscorides also
writes that the same drunken with water, helps against the poison of Tode
stools, and for outward greefes it is put into Emplastrum Diachalcites, to
cure ulcers: The later Physicians make an oil of vitrioll for the fallinge
sickness, and other diseases* where of Matheolus and many other more make
mentione: But we make many medicines of vitrioll as his spirit, a sweet and
sower oil his Colcothar, Salt, and Oker. The spirit is driven forth by the
ix alimbeke, powringe on again all ways the liquor upon the dead head: and
circulating it in Balneo 8. days, this is profitaable against the falling
sickness, but the fleme being separated from the red Colcothar; by force
of fire there is drawn out a sower oil, which is made sweet by circulating
it with the spirit of wine, and is given with succ^^ie water or with Ptysane
in rotten agues, for with the sowrenes, it drives away rottennes, as the
sirope of the juice of L^mondes does, and puts away obstructiones with the
subtilite of the parts: Wherefore it is very effectual to help the
obstructions of the bowels, liver and spleen, sometime a few dropes of it are
mingled with the conserve of the flowers of Succorie, and is a medicine of a
pleasant taste to quench immoderate thirst, yet the ignorant fay that this
medicine is sharp and therefore to be rejected, but those good men are far
deceived for it being well prepared is sweetish, and the juice of Lemones the
use where of is allowed in Physic; is much sowrer then it: as with the which
Perles are dissolved, and vessels of tin eaten through, and that juice given
alone would hurt the stomach as much as the oil of Vitrioll, but mixed with
sugar it restrains with his sowrenes the rottennes of burning fevers, and the
malignite of Pestilent agues, which thing also oil of vitriol does without
hurt of the stomach, not by it self, but mixed with convenient things, as
many Spagiricke Physicians at this day have experimented, who also in outward
causes, use the unsavory and sweetened Colcothar, to dry up ulcers and to stanch
blood.

Of Antimoni. Cap. 10.
De antimonio.
NOt only for outward greefes but also for inward, are medicines made of
Antimoni. The chemical Physicians draw out of it a most excellent medicine,
which they call the tincture of antimoni, for they minding to try the force of
Antimoni in man's body, feared not to seek out the secrets of it, especially
when they perceived it to be the greatest purger of gold, and that it could
drive away all impurities. By which means they labor to seek out the
qualities of Antimoni, that they might prove whether it would work the same
effect in purging of man's body, as it was evident to work in the purging of
gold, at the length they obtained their desired purpose, and found out the
great excellency of this medicine: both to restore and renew the body of man,
specially to cure the Mophew, the Dead evil, the Wolf, and all malign
ulcers, for that tincture purges black blood and all other viscious humors
without any manifest euacuationes, but only by corrections of ill humors. Let
no man think that I speak of Vitrum Antimonij, which many unskillful do use
now a days with great danger, it is a noy-some medicine which by his sharpenes
provoke the expulsive power, and purges both upward and downe-warde with
great vexation, the which I can by no means allow. For all diseases are not
cured with violence, but with fit and convenient purgations, For as
Hipocrates says. 1. Aphori. if such things be purged as ought to be purged it
does help, and they bear it easily: if not contrariwise. But all true
Philosophers therefore avoid these vitrifications, and not seek their
medicines or tinctures in them, use therefore this method following.

Rec. The purest part of Antimoni, that is his Mercury, and subline it 3.
times, that nothing remain in the botome, so shall ye have all his sulfure
with his proportionate mercury, which is called the true Lilly: this digest in
a reuerberatory being closed with hermes seal, in degrees of the fire until
it wax white, and afterward there appear the color of a Rubine. Out of the
which with Alcoole glacia^ Cornioli, that it may be covered 8. fingers* you
shall draw out the precious tincture which ye shall circulate in a Pellicand,
to his perfect graduation and fixing.

It is fixed also Cum terra muria, and with washings the alkaly is drawn
forth, and there remain the white flowers of Antimoni, which do strongly
move sweat if you give 3. ^s. of them with water of Cardus Benedictus, a most
excellent medicine for intermitting fevers.

For outward greefes there is drawn out of Antimoni, a very read sulfure with
tartar and nite^, or only with a lie made of quick lime and ashes, and many
ways an oil is drawn out, all which are profitable to cure festered ulcers,
these shall suffice to be spoken of us for the preparations of metalline
things, of the which God willinge we will entreat shortly in an other book
more plainer.

Of the true preparation of Gemes and precious stones. Cap. 11.
OF sundry stones are made sundry healthful medicines, cheefely out of
precious stones, which of all Phisitiones are though according to the property
of the whole substance, and according to their quality do take away sounding,
do with stand corruption, to strengthen the heart, and defend it from all kind
of poison. By reason where of Electuariae Analepi, Nicolai, Myrep. Diamargarit,
Antidotum^e gemmis, confectio ex Hyacinth and Alkermes, are prescribed unto
sick persons in pestilent diseafes, and continual burning fevers. Into which
are put Perle, Saphires, Smarages, Granates, Iasintes, Sarda that is Corneola,
Jasper and Coral, which kind of stones may be worthily said to excel the
rest, both for their temperance and for their great cleerenesse, which are
neither lost nor spoiled by any heat of fire, for the only fixation of their
spirits, which may be sufficiently perceived in them, for which cause in
many respects they may be compared with gold for the cure of diseases.
Among the rest they be called precious stones, even as gold among all other
metalles is called the most precious. And although the quallitie of these
stones are cordial, yet every one has his proper and peculier virtue to cure
sundry diseases: The Sapphire being drunk does specially help them that be
stunge with a Scorpion. The lacent also does help wounds of venamos beasts,
and causes sleep. The Smarage not only drunk but also hung about the neck,
helps melancholy diseases and strives against the falling sickness, as it
were against an enemy. The Jasper either hung about the neck that it may
touch the mouth of the stomach, or else Galen. 9. Simp. cap. 26. lib. 5. Cap.
107.
borne in a ring comfort the stomach: which Galen writes that he made
proof.

It also helps to hasten the birth as Diosorides, says: Pearls take away
sounding. Coral by his bindinge does strengthen the stomach and stays
spitting of blood. All which precious stones the Physicians use against the
aforesaid diseases, without any other preparation, saving bringing them into
most fine powder as Alcool, the which surely profits very little for
strengthening the heart, if the pure essence be not first taken out of it,
which only the Spagitickes art teaches to do: according to which the
tincture of coral is drawn out as follows, which is said to be given not
only to the aforesaid uses, but to purge the blood, and against the Morphew
and Herpes, and to cure all the discases of the Matrix.

Calcine the best read coral in a furnace of reuerberation in the second
degree of the fire, lest their tincture by Tinctura corallorum.
the violence of the fire consume away, then grind them upon a stone very fine
and put them into a glass, with Menstruum caeleste distillatum, cum proprio
suo saccaro, that it may be covered 7. fingers high, then lent the glass
with Hermes seal, and set it in Balneo. x. days until the menstrua have
taken away all the tincture, then separate the menst^ua in Balneo, and there
will remain a precious tincture in the botome, of which a little drop is
given with water of succorie or fumetorie: That celestial menstrua is the true
menstrua of algemmes, which dissolueth them with true solution, and from thence
is the true essence taken: and this all learned Physicians will judge to be
more profitable for to cure the body, then the only powder of them: that
menstrua does also make soft and dissolve the adamante stone, which contrary
to the opinion of many does take away poison, if upon the^ be cast the salt
drawn out of the blood of a goat, and distilled together, reiterating the
water 3. times upon the deatheade^ let pass the preparations of the Adamant
and also of the rubine, because they be stones of great price and fit only for
Kings.

You shall also rightly dissolve pearls with the aforesaid menstrua, but if
ye want it you shall use Acido menstruum alcolisato* Essentia margaritarum.
with his equal proportion of the spirit of wine also alcolisated, they do the
same also with the juice of Lemondes and Barberes purified and filtred, and
prepared as it ought to be, with ablutiones you shall take away the sharpenes
from the Pearls, if any remain in them by means of the menstrua 2. or 3.
grains of this essence is given with convenient broth to strengthen the heart,
and to refresh the powers, this essence does resist putrification about the
heart, the pestilence and poisons, and is given against resolution of sinews,
conuulcions frenzes, and unto those that are waxen lean through age or
sickness. Arnoldus writes that the dissolution of pearl comfort natural
heat, helps the trembling of the heart, and properly purifieth the blood of
the heart, and many diseases are cured by them. In the same order ye may draw
out of the other aforesaid gemmes their proper essence, and may have their
true preparation to cure many diseases: In this order ye shall prepare the
little stones of spunges. Lapis, Iodaicus, Lincis, and Crystal to break the
stone in the raines.

The quintaessence of bolearmeni and terra lemnij do marvelous much good
against pestilent diseases, and do withstand deadly and venomous poisons that
they cannot hurt. But if ye will use them to suppress blood they need no
other preparation, seeing that it is the yearthes property to thicken and to
bind, as it is of the essence to quicken, so does terra samia, and the stone
called Hematites and Cornalino, which a learned Philosopher shall easily
attain unto.

The Spagiricall preparations of medicines, which are taken out of Animalles.
Cap. 1.
De triplicimumia.
MEdicines which are made out of Animalles, do obtain the second degree of
perfection, for they have more force then they that were wont to be prepared
out of vegitables, which do perish with less heat or cold, and therefore is
easelie destroyed, that they scarcely profit any thing at all for the cure of
diseases, especially when they are commonly prepared, among animalles man by
right obtains the first place, out of whose 3. fold Mu^mia, that is to say:
liquid, fresh and dry, or transmarina, of the which are made sundry most
whole-some medicines to cure infinite sorts of diseases. This last Mummia only
was known to the ancient Physicians, which was nothing else but man's body,
laid in the De his consule. strab. Auicennam and serapio. Cap. 304.
tomb inbalmed with Frankensence, Myrra, and Aloes. By which kind of funeral
the Sirians, Egiptians, Arabians, and Jews, used in old time to keep their
dead bodies from corrupting, which natiuemummia, the Grecia^s called
Pissasphaltus: for they with that kind of pitch did inbalm their dead bodies,
which Mummia they used both inwardly and outwardly to stay blood, wheresoever
it brake out, and to strengthen the stomach and heart and to cure othr infinite
diseases, specially when the fragments of bones being cast away, the earth and
flesh being dry, they took up a liquor concreted and gathered in the hollow
parts of the man's body, but at this day we want that true and native mummia of
the ancients, and the Physicians and Apothicaries in steed of it, use the
dried flesh and that without any preparation, all be it out of it there may be
taken or drawn a certain pure essence, which may after a sort be compared in
virtue and property with the true Mummia, rather then that earthly substance
or only dried flesh, which scarcely avails any thing to cure bodies,
therefore thus thou shall prepare the common Mummia.

Praeparatio mumiae siccae.
Take the best Mummia broken and cut in little pieces 1. pound, put it in a
glass with as much Spiritus vini alcolisati and tere binthinati clari menstrui
ana, that it may be covered 4. fingers: then shut it with hermes seal, and
putrify it in the first degree of the fire. 15. days until the menstrua be
of the colouer of a Rubine, the which ye shall seperat in Balneo for the said
purpose again, and in the botome thou shall find the true tincture of mummia,
the which ye shall circulate with the spirit of wine certain days and so thou
shall have a more pure essence, which is most profitable to the cure of al
poisons, either alone, or if it be mixed with theriakle. Against the plague it
is a most excellent medicine, that it cannot be sufficiently commended: It
defends all bodies from corruption, and is profitablie given to cure Phthisis
and Asthmatis, if it be mingled with the conserve of Enula campane and violets,
it is also profitable against many other diseases, the feces which remained are
put into vnguentes to swage pains and aches. Praep arati mummiae liquidae.


Now remains to speak of the Mummia, that the Chimistes know of which are 2.
sorts, fresh and liquid, which they think best to be thus prepared.

Rec. The pure and best liquid Mummia Alcoolis vini ana 1. pound, mix them
well together in a glass, and digest it in warm horse dunge or Balneo 12.
days, afterward distill it as it ought, reiterating the distillation twice
again, then digest it again 20. days and distill it the third time, then
leave thy glass in the heat of dunge or Balneo, till there be 2. essences
perceived, one of a golden color, and the other white, let these essences be
taken forth and circulated with his like menstrue in a Pelican many days,
always separatinge the feces and the impure from that which is subtle and
pure, and so with reiterating his digestions and rectifications you shall have
a most excellent medicine: of this is given every month in the full moon I.
Scrup* to them that have the falling sickness, it does mittigate that disease
and drives it away, for it is his proper Alexipharmacum, also it purifieth the
bold.

Praeparatio, ^nummie reo^ntis.
Rec. The newest and best Mummia and cut it small, then put it into a glass
with a long neck, pouring thereon the menstrua of Olives, and close it with
Hermes seal, then putrify it a month that there may be a solution, then open
the vessel and put it into a cucurbite of glass and set in Balneo, the vessel
being open that the Mercury may fly away, which it will do with an
incredible stincke, and there let it remain tell there come forth no stincke,
and that all the Mummia be dissolved, that which is dissolved, put into another
vessel and digest it in Balneo again until it come to a thick oil and fatty
like sirope of a duskish color. That being done circulate all with the spirit
of wine in Balneo, 20. days then separate the spirit and in the bottom will
remain a red and sweet oil having the virtue of all natural balmes: which
does greatly help all venomous and pestilent diseases.

Take of the Mummia so prepared 2. ounces of the best Alcoole vini, 2. pound
circulate them a month, then distill Tinctura mummiae.
away the menstrua, per alimbicum, then again let it digest in a vessel
closed with hermes seal, and reiterat it 3. times as is above said, until the
matter abouesaid, do altogether loose the nature of his body, and become a
tincture, which truly does excel with such a quickening power, that there is no
part whereunto it does not pearce. No ulcer or any corruption which it does not
cure, if ye give every day twice for a certain time four or five grains of
it with a convenient decoction.

Of the essence of man's scull. Chap. 2.
De cran^^ humane.
MAny learned men have written that the scull of a man not buried is by a
certain property profitable against the falling sickness: for which cause I
thought it not amiss to set forth the true preparation of it, for I do not
think that there is any of the learned that doubts, but this medecin
rightly prepared, and brought into a thin essence will be a great deal more
effectual and profitable to cure those diseases, chiefly if you do dilligently
consider the essence of the sickness, his causes, and the remedy thereof:
therefore I will entreat of the preparation, of which 1. scruple will profit
more then a whole scull dried and beaten to powder, whose essence is thus
drawn out.

Essentiae cranij humani.
Rec. the scull of a man that has not bin buried, and beat it to powder, and
put it into spiritu vini saluiati, so that it may be covered 6. fingers, and
set it to digest in Balneo 14. days being close stopped, then distill it in a
retort according to the manner of aqua fortis, then power on that liquor upon
the feces or caput mort^^m again, but first grind the feces, then putrify it
8. days, and distill it as at the first, and that do 3 times, than circulat all
together certain days, that being done, then seperat the menstrua, and in the
bottom thou shall find the essence of the scull coagulated, of which ye shall
give half a scruple with the water of the flowers of lintre in the fit and
before the fit. Or prepare it thus: sees the scrapinges of a scull that has
not bin buried with the spirit of Mellissa, or Betony boiled, power that
decoction by it self, and again power on more fresh till there remain no
more force in the scull, then vapor away all that water in Balneo, and it will
remain in the bottom coagulated, the which it shall resolve again, and vapor
and coagulat so long till the matter remaining in the bottom may be sublimed
with a most easy fire. This sublimat does help much them that have the
falling sickness, and loses the belly abundantly without any travel or
molestation.

Of Viperis. Chap. 3.
Galen lib. de theriaca. ad pisonem Aegi. li. 7.
GAlen and other great physicians have taught us many things out of Andromacus
touching the preparation of vipers and their virtue for the cure of the
leprosy which they had proved, chiefly that it purges the whole body by the
skin, out of whose flesh (the head and tail being first cut of, which are
the most venomous parts, and have little flesh in them) being boiled in a pot
with fair water, dill and salt, and putting thereto stale wheaten bread, they
made pastillos, the which is also put into theriakle. Out of vipers also you
shall make a most notable medecin against the leprosy, plague and all
venomous wounds in this manner. In the month of June take 4 or 6. vipers, of
the which ye shall cast away the tail and the head, and pull away the skin
and the intralles, but cut the flesh in small pieces, and put it in acucurbit
of glass 3. or 4. days in the vapor of Balneo or of moist dung to drive forth
the sweat. But take heed ye receive not the air of that fume which is
corrupted and venomous through the vapors of the vipers, which being done power
upon it the spirit of wine Alcolisati and terebinthinati solutiui ana. that it
might be covered 8. fingers high, digest them in a vessel closed with Hermes
seal in Balneo, or moist dung twelve days, until all the flesh of the vipers
be dissolved in the aforesaid menstrua: then power of the said menstrua from
his feeces, and vapor it away in Balneo, and it will be coagulated like a
iellie, upon the which power again spiritum vini cariophillatum and circulat
them in a pellicane 10. days: then seperat the menstrua, and the flesh of the
vipers will remain excellently prepared and essentificated, with the which
mingle upon a gentle fire oleum anethi and cinamomi ana. 1 scrup. and a half,
essentia croci and margaritarum ana. 1. scrup. then with the muslege of gum
tragagant make it in pills, or if ye will make pastillos after the old
manner with dry wheaten bread, 1. scrup. of this medicine is given against the
leprosy, the plague and all other venomous diseases.

Of the skin of vipers, and of other serpents being dried and prepared
according to art is made a powder that helps very much against the wounds
made by beasts or serpents, if it be laid thereon, also to cure all cankers
and malign ulcers.

Of the preparing of horns, and cordial bones musk, ciuet, and castoreum.
Chap. 4.
De cornibus. Moscho zibetta and castoreo.
BOnes are either burnt or sodden with their convenient liquor, that out of
them with the spirit of wine may be gotten the pure essence, the which will
be done in the same order, as we have written of before in the preparing of a
man's scull, therefore thus shall thou draw out the essence of the bone of the
Hearts heart, which by a certain likeliehod of substance does strengthen man's
heart, and is cheiflie profitable against the pains of ma^s heart, and fincope:
his preparation differs from the aforesaid, because it is to be drawn with
the spirit of Celandine alcolisated with his proper menstrua. The hearts horn
is used in stead of that bone for the said diseases, whose essence is drawn
forth with Hipericonis alcoole which is given unto young children that be sick
of the worms.

The horn of the Unicorn (which is the chiefest of al, you shall prepare in
the same order: it defends the heart and drives away all poisons: it is good
against pestilent difeases, his proper menstrua is Alcoole melissae. Ebur or
Iuerie is also thus prepared, whose virtue is to defend the strength of the
heart, and to help conception. Out of Musk is also drawn a certain precious
essence cum vini spiritu terebinthinato, as with his proper dissolution, which
does strengthen and confirm the languishing parts, and helps the weakened
powers: in like sort may you draw forh the essence of zibet.

In the like manner is the essence of Castoreum drawn forth: of the which one
drop is given with great profit in the decoction of the flowers of rosemarie,
sage, and betony against tremblinges, conuulsions, or crampes, and all diseases
of the sinews: it is also applied outwardly in conuulcions, chiefly if it
come of fullness and not of emptines: and then that which is contained in the
sinues contrary to nature must be purged, being drunk with water of
penyryall, it provoke women's terms and casts forth the after burden, and
it does correct opium which is otherwise deadly.

The preparation of oiles out of fattes and greases. Chap. 5.
De pingusnum and exungiarum praeparattonibus ac oleis.
THe Chimistes do draw oil out of the fat of all living things with a most
gentle fire, in the which is found a greater power to extenuate, dissolve and
supple, then in the only fat not prepared, because they be made more thinner
and subtiller: which opinion Galen confirms 11. simpl. where he entreats of
Castoreum, furthermore (says he) because it is of the subtle parts:
therefore it is more available then the other things which do both heat and
dry, as it does, he adds that those m^dicines which consist of more subtle
parts are more forcible then they which be of thinner although they have both
like faculty, because they penetrat and go deeper into the parts to which
they be laid on, chiefly if the parts be thick, as the sinowy parts be. I
think there is no man if he way these words of Galen which will not allow
these extractions both of oiles and essences which we use, and commend the use
of them in physic. In this manner are oiles drawn out of the fat of men, of
the brocke, of bears, of wolves, of hearts, cattes eeles, capons, geese,
duckes, calves, hogs, and of all Marrowes, which do all resolve and supple,
and are good to cure many diseases.

Out of Butter is drawn an oil in the same order, the which is Anodinum, for
the said uses and to cease all pains.

Out of wax is made an oil to resolve, and attenuate, and is profitable
against all cold greefes of the sine was, and is made thus. Take one pound of
yellow wax, and melt it, then power it in sweet wine and wring it out with your
hands, then melt it again, and power it into the same wine, and this do 4. or
five times, then put it into a retort with an half pound of calcined allome,
and a handful of sage, and distill it with a gentel fire, and there will come
forth a gross thick oil and white, the which if it be rectifyed three times,
it will be perfect clear, and will congeale no more.

The virtues of oil of wax experimented by Monsure le count de Shenaus, and
his brother Monsure de Argenteaw in the wars in France. This oil is of a
temperat nature to be used either into the body or outward, and may be used
with out all danger: it takes away the pains of the gout if ye anoint the
parts therewith, it comfort hard sine was, and joint aches, the sciatica,
choppes in the lips, breast, hands or feet, and wounds, burninges either
with fire or water, if ye anoint therewith and lay thereon a plaster of the
same, being put into the ear with black wool, it helps deafnes, it staieth
hair from falling. It is also good against the wind collicke, and provoke
urine, if ye use to drink every morning. 1. with malmesie: it prevails
against the stitch in the side, if ye drink thereof and anoint the parts
therewith. To be short, it helps against all manner of infirmities, as has
bin diverse times proved.

Of sundry parts of living things. Chap. 6.
Sundry profitable remedies are taken out of diverse parts of sundry beasts,
which need very little preparation, notwithstanding are to be reserved in
shoppes for the great virtues they have in healing: for the River Crabbe being
calcined to a white ashes is commended against the biting of a mad dog.

The eyes of Crabbes calcined in a reuerberatorie are given with good success
to them that are troubled with the stone, and expels all obstructions of the
bowelles, of which we have spoken of before against Aubertus.

The water of earth worms distilled is profitable against the dropsy, and to
kill worms in children, and being bound quick upon a panat^tio, they profit
much.

The water of cow dung gathered in May is good against the dropsy, and to
cure all can^erd ulcers.

The powder of the worms called mill pedu^ is good against affectes of the
eyes.

Cattes piss distilled, against deafnes.

The bones cheiflie of a wolf dried and brought to powder, helps the disease
in the ribs, stitches and prickings.

Water of swallows, against the falling sickness.

Water of the spawne of frogs, to repel and stay all fluxes of blood, and
rednes of the face.

Coagulu^ le poris, drunk with Hidromell against the falling sickness.

Cer^aine little bones which are found in the sorefeete of the hare, provoke
urine mightily if the powder be given with white wine.

Orsepiae is with good success given against the said diseases.

The powder of the liver of frogs dried is very well taken against the
coming of the fit of a fever, especially the quartane.

Neither will I let pass amongst others an especial remedy and experiment
often proved against the stone in the raines which is prepared in this order.
In March there are found in the Maw of an ox, certain little stones, which if
they be taken with white wine, dissolueth the stone. Also in the month of May
in the bladder of the gall of a bull is found a certain stone, which if it be
put in white wine, it changes it to a yellow color like safron, changing the
taste but little: if the sick drink every day of this wine, daily pouring on
fresh until the stone be consumed: by these means it is manifest by
experience that the stone is diminished and at length consumed.

Many other medecines are prepared of the parts of animalles, which are not of
themselves to be disallowed of many ignorant, neither their preparations
rejected, because they are unknown unto them all, which they may easily
attain unto in time, if so be they will not condemn at the first sight that
which they know not, and think them so impossible to themselves which are not
able to conceive such great things, which yet by searching and diligent labor
of hand, not without great marvel and profit to the sick, are proved most
true and certain to a true physician.

The Spagyricall preparation of Medicines taken out of Vegitables, and first of
wine.
Chapter 1.
TAke the purest and strongest wine ye can get, and distill it in a gourd of
glass with a narrow mouth, over the which De vina*
ye shall paste a paper, the which being dry anoint it with oil of sweet
almondes, then set on the head and receauer, and distill it in Balneo, and the
spirit will fly through the oily paper, the which ye shall circulat and keep
in a cold place, close stopped, whose virtues are infinite for the health of
man's body, the spirit being taken away, ye shall boil the feces until it
come thick like a sirop, and set it in a moist seller, the which in short time
will congeale into hard stones or salt, which is called of some lapilli vini,
the which ye shall keep in a dry place to your use, that is, to dissolve gold
therewith, the which thou may do in this order. First calcine thy gold into
an impalpable powder, that it cannot be brought to gold again, the^ take
thereof. ss. lapilloru^ vini, prepared as before.. i. fs. Alcooli viniq. s.
digest the^ together 14. days, then distill it, and there will come forth a
water of a golden color, then power on more spirit of wine prepared as before,
and digest it again, and distill it as aforesaid, and this ye shall do until
the spirit of the gold be drawn forth.

Vinum alcalisatum.
Vinum alcalisatum.
TAke those feces that remained after the spirit is taken away, and calcine
them white, then with his proper fleme ye shall draw away his salt, the which
is called sal vini, of the which take si* spiritus vini 2. digest it in Balneo
20. days then distill it until it be dry in the bottom, then put on more
spirit, and digest it as before, and this ye shall do until the salt be
distilled over the helm, and then it is prepared.

The preparation of tartar, and first of spiritus tartari, vel liquor fecularum
vini.
Preparatio tartari.
TAke white tartar lib. 4. and distill it in manner of aquafortis, until all the
spirits become forth, the which ye shall separate in Balneo from the oil, then
take that oil which remained in the bottom, and rectify it in sand, and thou
shall have a most precious oil or balm: thou shall note that the first liquor
separated in Balneo is called liquor fecularu^ vini, or spiritus tartari, which
would be rectified from the colcothar 3. or 4. times to take away his stinking
smell: the oil which ye rectifyed is called oleum fecularum vini, sieve mumia
fecularum vini, the which is most profitable in curing of running and corroding
ulcers, and sores which go creeping upon the flesh, and especially those that
come ex lue venerea, being d^onke in wine, it breaks the gravel in the
raines and bladder and expels it by urine: certain drops being drunk with
the decoction of frogs is convenient for the pthisick: It preuenteth the
infection of the plague if ye anoint the ^ostrelles therewith: It dries and
consumes ficus in ano in short time without any pain. Furthermore. 1. of the
spirit of tartar being drunk with the water of fumetorie, or hirundinaria, or
such like, is convenient for pustulas gallicas, exanthemata, erisipelas, the
dropsy, water between the skin, and the flesh, menstrual flux, and all
obstructions of those parts, as the iaunders. It takes away the leprosy in
the beginning: ye shall note that ye may augment his force meruellously in this
order.

Ye shall mix it with Aqua theriacalis, which is made thus. Take perfect good
theriakle. 5. read mirra. 2. Safrone. ss. the spirit of wine. 10. mix them
in a glass and set it to digest 6* or 7. days, then distill it in Balneo:
Sometimes they put into this water. 2. of Campher, especially when it is used
in whot burning agewes, and inflammations and then it is called Aquae
theriacalis camphorata. As for example: Take Spiritus vitriolli 1. ounce,
Liquoris fecularum vini correcti 3. ounces, Aquae theriacalis 5. ounces: mix
them and digest them in Balneo. 40. days, then give thereof 1. dram with good
strong wine, or other convenient liquor, both for the aforesaid effects, and
also to cure and prevent infinite other diseases, for this composition has a
singular percing quality above many others: ye shall note that the liquor of
Lignum vite may be used in the same order, and so it will work his effect with
more speed.

Sal tartari.
Sal tartari
TAke those feces that remained of the Tartar at the first distillation, and
calcine them until they be white, then dissolve it in fair water distilled
being warm, filter and congeale it and in the bottom ye shall find a white
salt, which laid in a moist place will turn into oil, the which takes away
spots in the face or any other parts: also it cleanses ulcers if ye mix 1.
dram, with 1. ounce of the spirit of wine, this oil makes the hair fair and
yellowe: ye shall note that if this salt be often calcined and congeled, it
will become Christaline, and is of great force against diverse infirmities, as
hereafter God willing shall be taught.

The liquor of Honey. Cap. 2.
Oleum mellu.
THat which diverse men call the oil of H onie, is not a unctuous oil like
unto other oiles, but rather a certain element the which is neither oil nor
water, although it be clear: and this is not much used in chirurgerie by
cause it is not convenient in sores, but rather a thing appertaining to
physic, because it comfort the stomach, strengthens the spirits, and
extinguisheth all fevers, it helps the collicke. It dissolueth the stone in
the raines and provoke urine. The last liquor that is read makes the hear
yellowe as gold, if ye wash it there with diverse times. It takes away spots
in the eyes, and is thus made. Take pure honey 2. pound and distill it in a
glass that contains 2. gallons, with a gentle fire in sand till it changes
color, then change the receiver and increase the fire a little, until all the
fumes be come forth, the which will afterward turn into a red liquor which
some call the oil, ex leonardo Phiorauanti.

There is also a quintaessence or burning spirit made out of honey, the which
has the virtues and quailities that the spirit of wine has in all points
and may be used in steed thereof, some affirm that this quintaessence or
spirit of honey will dissoule gold, being first calcined and circulated
therewith certain days: It dissolueth like wise any kind of jewel that is
put therein. It heals wounds with great speed, if ye wash them therewith:
It helps against the cough, cattar and pains of the milte, it cures spots
in the eyes and preserves the sight. It is affirmed that one vsinge this
essence 40* days, was cured of the Palsy and fallingesicknesse, also this
quintaessence being distilled 20. times with perfect pure silver calcined, it
will restore the sight unto those that are in manner blind.

The extra^ction of liquors out of plants, flowers, seeds and roots. Cap. 3.
PVt Celandine bruised into a glass cucurbit well stopped, Herbarum esseutiae.
set itto digest 15. days in warm dung, then distill it with a gentle fire
until the feces remain dry, the which ye shall stamp, pow^ring there on the
element of water before distilled, that i^t may be covered 4* fingers, the^
stop the glass and putrify it 8. days in Balneo, after distill it again
giving fire by degrees til there come forth no more spirits, and in this 2.
distillation thou shall have the water and air, the fleme if ye will ye may
separate by Balneo which reserve: then calcine the feces that remain, which
imbibe with the fleme reserved, puttifie it in Balneo, and distill it per
alembicum, until the matter appear in white stones, the which by often
solutions and coagulations with his proper water become cristaline, and so the
earth shall remain well purified, which although it be white notwithstanding
contains his fire and inward tincture: upon this put on your 2. first
elements before reserved, and circulate al together in Balneo till the oil
appear and swim upon, which is called the true essence endued with infinite
quallities.

In like manner ye may attain the true preparations of Melissa, sage, and
Valerian and all other herbs.

Olea floril.
In that manner ye may prepare the oils of flowers, but the herbs and flowers
which yield small quantity of oil must be cut, or stamped small, and then put
it into a glass mixing with them if they be dry fair water distilled. But if
they be moist or waterish ye shall put them in a glass, alone close stopped,
and set them in the sun or some warm place to macerate, until ye see the
oil swim upon the top, the which ye shall power forth, and making it
warm ye may separate it by a funnell or convenient instrumente. Some use to
take those herbs and flowers thus, macerated and distill them in a vessel of
copper with a refrigeratory and after separate the oil, ye shall note that
what virtue the herb is of, the oil is of the same, but much more forcible
and subtle.

Oil of Time his virtues. Oleum thymi.

THree or 4. drops being drunk with aqua mulsa, helps the painful cough,
shortness of breath, cleanses the breast and ripeneth the fleme, it provoke
urine, expels the secundine and dead fruit from the ma^rix* in di^^olueth
clotted and co^gealed blood within the body, being used with Oximell and a
little salt, it purges toughe and clammie fleme, and sharp cholerike
humors, and corruption of the blood. It prevails against blastings and wind
in the belly and stones, being often used it prevails against melancholy
diseases, and the gout: the smell of this oil is profitable for those that
are toubled with the falling sickness: Being put in to a hollow tooth it
takes away the pains presently.

Oil of sweet Margerom.
Ol. Ma^oranae.
THis oil being often used with other convenient medicines, is most profitable
for those that are fallen into a dropsy, and cannot make water but with great
difficulty. It prevails against wind and gripings in the belly, and
provoke neesing, it is comfortable against all pains of the head, and
restores smelling being lost if it be put into the ear and nostrels: it is
good against poison and the stinging of Scorpiones.

Oil of Sage.
THis oil dissolueth congeled blood within the body, cures inward wounds and
bruses coming either of a stripe or fall: It provoke urine and expels
gravel, Ole. Saluia.
comfort the heart and head that is grieved with cold humors, it is
profitable for women with child because it closes the matrix, and comfort
the child, it is profitable for those that are troubled with the gout, palsy
or weakness of the sinews, if ye mix it with oil of wax and anoint the
parts therewith, it helps the cough and opens obstructions of the liver
and swageth pains in the side, being drunk with wormwood wine, it is
profitable against the bitings of venomous beasts, for it cleanses the sores
and heals them if it be put into vnguentes fit for that purpose.

Oil of Peniriall.
THis oil being drunk with convenient liquors proueketh Menstrua, and
brings forth the after burden, the dead fruit and unnatural birth: It
provoke urine, and breaks the stone especially in the kidnes, being taken
with convenient siropes it cleanses the lunges and breast from al gross and
thick humors, being taken with aloes and honey it prevails against crampes
and contractions of the sinews, being drunk with water and vinegar it stays
the inordinat desire to vomit and gnawing pains of the stomach, and is
profitable against the biting of venomous beasts: the anointing of the
temples and nostrelles with this oil is profitable against the falling
sickness, and takes away the swimming pains thereof, and is most profitable
for those that have a cold and moist brain, it slaketh the pains of the
gout: the fume of this oil being received at the lower parts with a funnell
is profitable against windines and blastinges, and also against hardness and
stoppings of the matrix.

Oil of Mintes.
Ole. menth^.
THis warmeth and strengthens the stomach, and dries up moist and
superfluous humors gathered in the same, and causes good digestion, it stays
vomitting, being drunk and anointing the stomach therewith, and kills
round worms being often used: it helps the griping pains of the collicke,
and stays the menstruall flux, being either eaten or dronk with some
convenient medicine: it eases women which are much troubled with hard and
perilous travel in child birth: It helps deafnes if it be dropped into the
ears, the only smell of this oil makes the heart merry.

Oil of Hisope.
Ole. Hisopi.
BEing drunk with some convenient liquor it opens all obstructio^s of the
breast, it helps the shortness of breath and cough, being drunk with the
sirope of vinegar it expels tough and clammy fleme, it kills and drives
forth worms, it has the like operation if it be eaten with figs.

Oil of wormwood.
ole. a^sinthi.
THIS oil is a profitable medicine against all pains of the stomach that is
oppressed with hot choleric humors, for it expels them partly by the
stool, and partly by urine, and comfort the stomach: likewise it purges
all choleric humors gathered together in the veins and liver. The use
thereof helps the yellow iaunders, and all obstructions of those parts. It
is profitable against windines and blastinges of the belly, against pains and
appetite to vomit, and the wamblinges of the stomach, if it be mixed with oil
of Aniseede and eaten in losenges or drink, it resists venom, and kills
worms being drunk, and the belly anointed therewith, it helps digestion,
purifyeth the blood, provoke sleep, and preserves them in good temperature
that use it, either with wine or some other convenient thing, it is profitable
against the dropsy, comfort the liver and heart, and resolves the milte, if
ye mix with it 2. or 3. drops of oil of vitrioll, it helps long
sicknesses, being often used in the morning with convenient liquors, it is very
profitable for those that are waxen lean and are evil colored in the face
and body: wormwood wine: is very fit to drink it withal.

Oil of Rosemarie flowers.
Ole. Anthos
THis oil is most commodious against all pains of the head proceeding of
cold, although it have continued along time, it comfort the memory, and
preserves the sight, it helps deafnes if it be dropped into the ears, it
opens all obstructions of the liver and milte, and is profitable against the
dropsy and yellow iaunders, it breaks wind, and is profitable against the
collicke, and rising of the mother, it is also good for those that have drunk
poison, or that are infected with the pestilence if it be drunk with some
convenient liquor and sweat thereon: It comfort the heart and cleanses the
blood and makes a man merie^: to conclude, it comfort against all diseases
of the body coming of cold and moist humors, it helps the canker and
fistula.

Oiles of seeds must thus be prepared.
ole. seminu^
TAke your seeds and beat or bruise them, and lay them to steep 2. or 3.
days in distilled water or wine, then distill them with a refrigeratory, with
a gentle fire until all the oil be come forth, the which ye shall separate by
a funnell.

Oil of Aniscede. oleum Anisi.

BEing dronk or eaten fasting in losenges in the morning, it causes a sweet
breath, and is profitable for those that are short winded and cannot fetch
their breath, but with great pain: it breaks wind in the stomach, belly,
and guts, it breaks fleme, and causes it to be spitte forth, it increases
nature, it drives forth poison by sweat, it comfort the breast and lunges,
it provoke urine, and breaks the stone in the raines and bladder, it is
good against the bloody flixe and piles. The nostrels being anointed therewith
at night when ye go to bed provoke sleep, and wood being anointed
therewith will not suffer mothes to breed there.

Oil of Fenell seed.
ole. feniculi.
IT comfort the affectes of the head. It sharpneth the sight, it helps the
straitnes of the breast, and horsnes of the voice, it helps concoction and
dissolueth wind, It breaks the gravel and provoke urine and the menstruall
flux: it opens the obstructions of the liver and milt, and profits greatly
against the dropsy and yellow ^anders being used with convenient liquors or
medicines.

Oil of commin seed.
oleum cimini.
IT is good against wounds in the spleen, and disperseth wind in the
stomach, belly, bowelles, and matrix: It helps the cough and shortness of
wind, it is good against the fretting of the belly, either taken by potion or
glister. It is profitable for those that have the burning of urine and cannot
hold their water, being drunk with water of fern: it helps digestion of
gross humors in the stomach.

Oil of caraway seed.
oleum Carui.
THe use of this oil is most convenient against windines in the stomach, and
helps digestion, it provoke urine and has in manner all the virtues that
are ascribed unto aniseede.

Oil of Dill seed.
Oleum Aneti.
THe use of this oil drives away ve^tosity or windines, asswageth blastinges
and gripinge torments in the belly: It staieth vomitting and the flux, it
provoke urine, it is available against the suffocation and strangling of the
matrix, if the fume thereof be received with a funnell at the lower parts, it
stays the yex or hicocke, it heals hollow and moist ulcers in the share or
privy parts, it digesteth, resolves and swageth pains, and ripeneth all
raw humors, this oil may not be used too much inwardly, for it diminishes
the sight and seed of generation.

Oil of Percelie seed.
oleum Pe^roselini.
THis oil opens all obstructions of the liver and kidneis, and provoke the
menstruall flux if it be drunk with convenient liquors, it causes appetite,
helps digestion, and comfort the stomach. It expels the stone and
gravel in the mines and provoke urine: it is a good remedy against poisons,
it expels all blastings, and windines, it is good against the cough, being
taken with convenient liquor.

Oil of the seed of Rue or herb grace.
oleum rutae.
CARDANVS writes, that this oil being drunk with wine it is of great virtue
against poison, for it causes the patient to cast it forth by vomit at the
first time that it is taken. And at the second it expels the other evil
humors, that are infected therewith. And at the third time it cures the
patient and makes him whole: It helps all diseases of the eyes so that the
apple of the eye be not perished, if ye wash them with the water and drop one
drop of the oil into the eye: being drunk it suffers no poison to remain
in a man that day, also being drunk it mitigateth the gout and dropsy,
coming of cold humors: It restores all benumbed members taken with the
palsy if ye annointe them therewith: Cardanus also affirms in his second
book De Subtilitate that there are certain poisons the which do slaie only
with their touching, against which poisons (says he) the best remedy is not
to stay in any place, until the hand wax whote, and often bathe the parts
with warm water, and anoint them with oil of Rewe.

ole. fructuu^, and radicu^.
YOur fruits and roots must first be beaten, and put them into a distilling
vessel with as many gallons of distilled water as there are pounds of stuff,
and so let them macerate 3. or 4. days, the^ distill them with a refrigeratory,
as it is said before.

Oil of Juniper beries.
Oleum Iuniperi.
THis oil is profitable against griping pains or wind in the guts, and may
be compared to balm: 4 or 5. drops being drunk preuenteth the resolution of
the Sinews, the falling sickness and other diseases of the brain, it
preserves the body from poison and pestilent aires, it com^orteth a weak and
cold stomach and staieth vomiting, it purges the raines, breaks gravel and
provoke urine, and is profitable against the dropsy, and water between the
skin and the flesh, it kills worms, to conclude it comfort all weak
members by his piercing virtue, it helps conuulsiones and shakings and pains
in the neck coming of a Catar if ye annointe the parts therewith, it eases
the pains of the sciatica in the hippes, the gout and the collicke and all
malign ulcers being anointed therewith.

Oil of Baie berries.
oleu^ e baccis lauri.
OVt of lb. 1. of Baies there is not drawn above. 2. of oil by distillation,
the which is most profitable against Collicum iliacum and sciaticam passionem.

Oil of Iuie berries.
oleum e baccis hederae.
THis oil is distilled as the oil of Juniper berries, but some do take the
berries, wood, gum and all together and distill it by descention, out of the
which there will come forth a thick black oil that is profitable against
cold diseases of the iointes, it provoke the Flux Menstruall, expels the
stone, and purges ulcers.

Oiles of sweet smelling things are thus prepared.
ole. Aromatum.
Beat them grosely, then infuse the^ in fair distilled water as before is
said, and distill them with a refrigeratorie.

Oil of Cinamom.
oleum cinamomi.
THis reuiueth the natural spirits marueilously, it disperseth the evil humors
in the stomach, it opens obstructions and is profitable against all cold
diseases, it preserves from putrefaction, it cures wounds and ulcers as the
natural balm does, it causes fair delivery of child birth, it is a most
precious remedy for those that lie speechless if ye put 3. or 4. drops into
their mouth either by it self or mingled with cinamom water, it helps
concoction, the like virtue the water has but it must be used in greater
quantity. This oil is of such a piercing nature that it pierces thorough the
whole body, and finally it is a present remedy for a woman that sounds in
her travail if she drink 3. or 4. drops.

The Oil or essence of Safrone.
Essentia croci.
TAke dry Safron and draw away his tincture with the spirit of wine, until
the feces remain white, the which ye shall calcine according to art and
circulate them in Balneo with the said me^strua, afterward let it settle and
vapor away the said Menstrua in Balneo, and the essence of Safron will remain
in the bottom, the which is excellent to comfort the spirits, for if ye mix
a drop or two with brothe or some convenient liquor, it restores and
strengthens the weak spirits marueilouslie, but especially the heart with
infinite other virtues which we omit till another time.

Oil of Mace. oleum Macis.

THis oil is of a hot faculty, and therefore it is commodiouslie used in the
Collicke, coming of a cold cause, or of a Catar descending from the head, it
comfort the heart, belly and Matrix: It is also good against trembling of the
heart, the obstructions of the bladder and Matrix, it helps the strangurie and
all diseases having their original of cold. It strengthens the stomach and
womb being used in wine, or broth, or made in losenges.

Oil of Cloves.
oleum cariophilorum.
THis oil is very profitable for the belly, heart and liver, and has all the
qualities of natural balm, it heals all fresh wounds and punctures, it
strengthens the heart and head and helps the megrim, it purges melancholy
blood, it sharpeneth the sight, comfort the stomach, causes digestion, and
makes a sweet breath: it helps the collicke and all the pains in the
belly coming of cold, if ye drink two or three drops in wine or eat
losenges made with the same oil.

Oil of Pepper.
oleum piperis.
THis oil has much more virtue then the Pepper it self in piercing, and
specially in the windy collicke, and other weak parts filled with fleame, it
staieth the shaking of the fever tertain, if ye take three or four drops
with sirope of quinces two hours before the fit, provided that the body be
first well purged and let blood as occasion shall serve, ye shall note this oil
is only the ayrie part separated from the other elements.

Oil of Nutmegges.
THis oil being drunk with convenient liquors brings down the menstruall
flux, and also the quick and oleum nucis muschatae.
dead fruit, and therefore women with child shall not use this oil until
such time as they be in travel, and then it causes fair delivery without
any danger: it is profitable against all pains of the head coming of cold,
it causes a sweet breath and warmeth and strengthens a cold stomach and
consumes superfluous humors of the same, it dispearseth wind and appeaseth
the collicke, and is profitable for the affects of the bladder: it helps
inward wounds being drunk with some convenient wound drink, it helps
cold diseases of the sinews and swellinge of the Spleen two or three drops
being taken in broth.

Oiles of Woods are thus prepared.
TAke Lignum vite rasped in powder, and put it into a glass or stone pot close
stopped, and set it in Balneo or warm dunge certain days to digest: then
distill it with oleum guaics.
a gentle fire Per descensum, and there will come forth a liquor called of the
chimistes, Mercury: then increase the fire and there will come forth an oil
which is called the sulfure, the which must be purged by art from his
stinking smell, then take the ashes of the wood and draw forth his salt with
Fumetorie water, the which ye shall calcine, dissolve and congele diverse times,
until it be as white as snow, the which salt by a workman may be brought
Cristalline: Of the Mercury or first liquor is given one spoonful or more with
2. ounces of Fumetorie water against all vicious humors in the body, and
drives them out by sweat: with the oil or sulfure ye shall cure the ulcers
or other greefes after the body is well purged with the salt, the which is
done in this order. Take of the salt i. good theriakle ss. mix them and give
thereof. ss, more or less according to the discretion of the physician, and
the strength of the party: in this order must thou draw forth the Mercury,
sulfur, and salt, of all manner of woods: there are diverse other orders to give
this Mercury or liquor, whereof some are written in the chapter, where we
entreat of spiritus tartars.

Oil of Juniper wood.
Oleum ex lignis iuniperis.
THis oil is profitable for members that are weakened through cold, it
strengthens the raines and matrix, and helps conception, it cures malign
ulcers and wounds, and swageth pain, it takes away the fit of a quartane
fever, especially being anointed from the navel downward.

Oil of the wood of Ash.
Oleum e lignis fraxini.
THis oil does cure the cold gout, and cicatriceth raw places, it dissolueth
the white morphew, and makes it black, it cures those that have the palsy,
and is profitable for those that are vexed with the spleen, not only drunk,
but also anointed therewith.

The true order to prepare and make oiles out of Rosens concreat liquors and
gummes. Chap. 4.
Oleum terebinthinae.
THis oil is distilled with a gentle fire in Balneo, and is most pure and
clear: some distill it in fand or ashes, putting thereto a ha^dful of salt and a
little aqua vitae: some put to it for every lb. of turpentine iij. of sifted
ashes, to keep the matter from running over. This oil is most profitable
against cold diseases of the sinews, and against asthma, and difficulty of
breathing, if ye drink thereof ij. every morning, it prevails against gross
humors gathered together in the breast, it cease the pains of the collicke,
it helps chappes in wome^s breasts, and wounds, it takes away the crampe,
it helps deafnes and provoke urine.

Oil of Frankensence.
THis oil is distilled as before is said in sand with a gentle Oleum resine
pine.
fire according to art, until all the substance be come forth, the which will
be both oil and water, the which ye must separate by a funnell, the water is
good against wind in the stomach if it be drunk, it helps all chappes and
chilblaines, and such like either in the hands or feet, if ye wash them
therewith and anoint them with the oil against the fire, and straight ways
put on a pair of gloves: it helps the white scall if ye wash it therewith,
and also all manner of scabbes, laying thereon morning and evening a cloth wet
in the same: it dries up ulcers and sores: the oil is most precious against
wounds in all parts of the body, because it preserves from putrefaction and
alteration, and takes away pains, if ye join the wound close together and
lay this oil warm heron. The first oil that comes forth is clear and
preserves the hands and face being anointed therewith: it is also most
profitable against all cold diseases inwardly, if ye give thereof. i. with
convenient liquors, it dissolueth all tumors and aches coming of cold, it
takes away the blacknes of any bruise being new done in two or three hours by
continual anointing the place so fast as it dries in.

Oil of Succinum or Amber.
Oleum succini.
STamp your amber small and distill it in a retort with the powder of flint
stones, giving it fire according to art until all the substance be come forth,
the which will be both water and oil, and a sal armoniacke, the which will
hang about the Receauer, the which keep as a precious iuell, then seperat one
from another: the oil is good against all affectes of the head, coming of
cold and moist humors, it helps the resolution of the sinews, the
Apoplexia, the falling sickness, and being put into the nostrelles when they
fall, it will recover them presently, it preserves a man from poison, and
pestilent aires if ye anoint the nostrelles therewith, it is good against
diseases of the raines and bladder, it dryueth forth gravel and provoke
urine if it be drunk with convenient liquors: it helps the collicke and
choking of the matrix being anointed therewith, it brings forth the fruit,
and causes fair deliverance if it be drunk with convenient liquors, it
strengthens and comfort all the powers of the body, it consumes
superfluous humors.

Oil of Masticke.
Oleum ^^sticis.
THe Apothecaries of. 4. of Mastike and lb. i. of the oil of unripe Olives,
with 4. of rosewater do make an oil, which the Phisi ions prescribe to cure
the lienterie, and vomitting, and to strengthen the stomach and liver: which
preparation is accounted ridiculous unto those which out of lb. i. of mastike
by their art draw. 10. of most pure oil, whereof two drops taken either with
wine or broth, or applied to the grieved place, will profit more to cure the
aforesaid diseases, then lb. i. not of mastike, but o^iues rather which our
Physicians (I know not by what reason) do use now adays: wherefore ye shall
prepare your oil in this manner.

Take of pure mastike lb. i. put it in a glass with distilled water, and aqua
vitae of each alike, so that it may be covered 4. fingers high, then lute it
close and set it in warm dung to putrify certain days, afterward distill it
in sand, giving fire by degrees, and first there will come forth with the
menstru^, a yellow oil, the which keep by it self, then augment the fire,
and there will come forth a red oil, then at the last there will come forth
a thick black oil smelling of the fire, the which ye shall circulate with
the spirit of wine separated from the first, and then distill it again, and
thou shall have a perfect oil profitable for outward griefs, especially for
his piercing force, whereby it does refresh all the members, it strengthens
the stomach, it helps concoction and inflations of the bowels, it mollifyeth
and asswageth their sorenes. It comfort and strengthens all the sinews,
also the first yellow oil is given with wine or his proper decoction for the
same diseases, and to stop reumes: if ye fear his fyrie heat after the aqua
vite is separated, ye may wash it with rose water or fair water distilled: and
so ye shall make an excellent medicine against diverse infirmities. Philippus
Hermanus writes, that this oil is of a most subtle nature, and stops the
menstruall flox, and all other flixes being used with convenient medicines,
either inward or outward, it is good against falling down of the fundement, if
ye anoint the parts therewith, and put the^ into their natural place, it is
also profitable against the rupture in young children, it heals wounds, it
fasteneth the teeth if ye anoint the gummes therewith.

Oil of Mirrha.
Oleum ex Mirrha.
TAke pure mirrha vj. and put thereto xij. of the spirit of wine, and set it in
warm dung 6 days, then seperat the menstrua, and the tincture or oil will
remain in the bottom. This oil has the virtues of natural balm, and
preserves all things from putrefaction that is anointed therewith. Also the
face being anointed therewith in a bath or stoue, is preserved in youthful
state a long time, it heals wounds quickly, it helps foul and stinking
ulcers, it helps those that are deaf, it helps the pains of the mother if
it be anointed therewith: This oil dries and consumes all accidents after
child birth, being drunk it makes a sweet breath, and helps the cough and
shortness of wind, it helps the stitch in the side, and all other inward
diseases if ye drink ij. thereof: it stays hair from falling. If any be
troubled with a fever, let them anoint all their body therewith, and lay them
down to sweat, and they shall be cured: it takes away the stinch of the
armepittes if ye anoint the parts therewith in a bath or stoue, being mixed
with wine, and the mouth washed therewith, it fasteneth the teeth and gummes:
when ye will use this oil to preserve any part, ye must first hold it over
the ^ume of nettels boiled in fair water until the pores be open, then dry
it well, and anoint it with this oil, and it will preserve it long time in
youthful state.

Oil of Galbanum.
Oleum ex Galbano.
THis gum must first be dissolved in distilled vinegar, and then distilled in
a retort with a gentle fire: this oil is most profitable against inward
bruses, and crampes, and shtinking of sinews: being drunk with oil of
mirrha, it is good against venom being either drunk or shot into the body
with venomous arrows: also drunk in the same order it provoke women's
terms, and delivers the dead fruit, the fume of this oil being received at
the lower parts, works the same effect. Also the fume of this oil being
taken at the mouth, helps the rising of the mother, being laid to the navel
it causes the matrix to stay in his natural place: the fume of this oil is
profitable against the falling sickness if ye anoint the nostrelles therewith.
In this manner ye may make oil of labdanu^, opoponax, sagapenum, Amoniacum, and
such like, which do soften the knots of the gout, and does mightily dissolve
the hardness of the liver, spleen and other members if they be distilled all
together, or taken every one by himself, according to the method prescribed.

Oil of Eggs.
Oleum ouorum.
SOme make this oil by distillation of the yolks of eggs, and some by
stirring them in a pan over the fire after they be sodden hard. The water of
eggs being distilled takes away scarres and spots in the face or other
places. The oil comfort against all pains, it helps wounds by gunshot,
it prevails much against burninges and scaldings, either with fire, or water,
or powder: it makes hair black, if ye anoint it therewith, it slaketh the
pains of the hemeroides if ye anoint them therewith often times. The yolks
of eggs being distilled with as much white wax, is most precious to heal
wounds and bruses, for it resolves them with great speed, the stomach being
anointed therewith causes good digestion, and comfort it meruellouslie.

The true preparation of certain oiles which are commonly used in
Apothecaries shops, to be applied outwardly.
Oleorum officinariorum vera pr^parandi methodus pro topicis.
FOr outward medicines you shall best draw forth the hole strength of roses,
violets, nymphaea, white popie, henbane and Mandrake with oil olive, which are
commonly used in shoppes, all which do quench inflammations and great heates,
assuage hot swellings, strengthen and thicken the member, stop fluxes, help
madness, and provoke sleep, if you use this method following.

Oil of Roses.
Oleum ros^rum.
TAke oleum omphacinum, and wash it with common water distilled diverse times,
then purify it in Balneo, until it leave no more feces, then take lb. j. of
this oil so prepared, of red roses the whites being cut off and bruised in a
stone mortar lb. j. ss. put them into a glass, and set it to putrify in warm
dung twelve days being close luted, the^ press forth the oil, and put in
fresh leaves, as before is said, and putrify it again: and this ye shall do
three or four times, and so shall ye have a perfect good oil: in like sort
shall you make all other cooling oiles for topicall medecines very well. So is
oil of Quinces, and myrtilles made, which refrigerat and astringe, and are
applied to the stomach, liver, brain and weak bowelles, and also to the
fundement. In like manner are oiles made of Camomill and Lilies which does
strengthen the sinews, moderat, resolve, and swage aches: but these are made
with ripe sweet oil prepared as before.

Of mintes, wormwood, lentiscus, and others after the same order, are oiles
made with oleum omphacinum, which being anointed does moderatly warm the
stomach, and strengthen the other parts, and help concoction, but first they
are prepared with their proper water, and astringent wine, and must be cleansed
from all feces in Balneo certain days as is before said: But if any man will
warm, attenuat, and digest the more strongly by these oiles, let him take like
portions of oil purifyed in Balneo and the spirit of wine.

Out of baies and such like beries ye may make oil, if ye digest them the
space of a month in warm dung, and then press them forth and serua. They are
good for all cold greefes of the brain or sinews, and disperse wind: But
all these oiles of hot quallities will be much better if they be drawn only
with the spirit of wine in Balneo, without any addition of other oil, as Galen
1. simp. cap. 15. Although it does easily inflame, yet it does not so quickly
heat us: for through his gross and slimie substance sticking fast to that it
first touches, and therefore indureth long upon all things wherewith it is
anointed: neither is it extenuated or digested of the air about it, or easily
made to pass into the body.

Of artificial saltes, and their properties. Chap. 1.
Of artificial saltes.
THe use and profit of saltes that are drawn out of simples by calcination are
in manner as great in physic as the rock or common salt is, which daily and
in general serves to man's relief: for when from simples a gross fleme is
taken away, which in troth hinders their operation, how much more would
they perform their operation if they were converted into a spiritual matter,
which by long distillations and filtrings is caused that they may change by a
certain manner into a firye matter: therefore it is not to be doubted that
when the simples be converted into a salt, and the element of fire has in no
such wise dominion in them, but that they pierce sooner, and may perform their
proper action: that such a heap or company of diverse simples, shall not need
besides in the composition of remedies: for such salts have certain properties
the which other purgers being distilled want: for every salt says
Theophrastus Paracelsus purges, but the distilled waters of the purgers lack
or have not the same property, because his salt is not joined in the same, so
that I suppose a great tartnes or sharpnes consifteth in them all.

The manner and fashion to prepare these saltes are diverse according to the
opinion of the Authors. Some will the herbs to be gathered in their due time,
and distill away the water in Balneo, then calcine the feces, and with their
proper water draw forth the salt, the which ye shall calcine in a furnace of
calcination, and dissolve it again and congeale it: and this ye shall do
until it be white as snow: the which afterward by a workman may be brought
christalline. These saltes called alkalye, must be kept in a glass close
stopped, because the air will soon resolve them, which happens (especially
to those that are made of herbs, and those substances) which possess and
have more quantity of eile, and the subtiller.

Observations.
Some calcine them slightly, some more, some less, some make their salt with
their own water distilled from the herbs: some with rain water distilled
from those kind of herbs being dry or green, some put on the water cold,
some hot, and so let it stand certain days stirring it often, the which is
not amiss, then distill it by a filter until it be clear, and vapor it away
in Balneo, until it be dry, then calcine it again, and dissolve it in some
convenient liquor, and then congeale it again, and this ye shall do until
it be white as snow, the which by often calcining and dissoluing may be brought
christalline, whereof one grain is of more force then fix of the first.

De salibus purgantibus per tussim.
Sal Hipericonis.
THe salt of Hipericone or saint John's wort, certain affirm to be highly
commended, and approved in the pluresie, giving the patient in warm wine so
much as will go into half a hasell nutshell. A certain singular physician in
the pluresie gave as much of this salt as he cold hold between the end of his
fingers in malmsie, and God is the witness that the patient was cured by it: the
like virtue has the salt of Polipodij. sal polipodij


De salibus purgantibus per vrinam.
sal chamo^hillae.
AS much as a man may hold between the end of his fingers, of this salt was
given with warm wine unto one that could not make water, and he was presently
delivered, as Leo Suauius writes.

Salt of Woormewood.
sal ab^inihij
THis salt is given in manner in all diseases or sicknesses, with profit: but
especially in the pestilence, it is profitable against all obstructions of the
^iuer and kidneis, it provoke urine, it helps the dropsy and water
between the skin and the flesh proceeding of a salt choleric humor, and is
profitable against the yellow iaundies, it provoke sweat, it helps and
drives forth from the inward parts the pox (Feiguarzen, and such like
diseases.) It comfort the stomach, purges waterish blood gathered together
in the veins and liver, causes good digestion, and slaketh the griping pains
and blastinges in the belly, being used with convenient liquors or medicines,
it mundifieth all foul sores, if it be strowed thereon, or mixed with
convenient liquors or unguents.

Sal Gentiane.
sal ge^tiane.
This salt is profitable against all fevers, it opens and purges all
obstructions of the bowelles, it provoke menstrua and urine being drunk with
convenient liquors.

Sal Gratiolae.
sal gratiolae
This salt is effectual against the dropsy.

Sal Anonidis.
sal anonidi^
This salt diminishes the stone, and provoke urine, and is profitable
against the strangury.

Sal Raphani.
sal raphani
This salt has the aforesaid virtues.

Sal Genistae.
sal geniste.
This salt breaks the stone and provoke urine.

Sal Stipitum Fabarum.
sal stipitum fabarum.
This salt helps the difficulty of urine, and breaks the stone.

Sal Iuniperi.
sal Iuniperi
This salt of Juniper is of a piercing nature and has the aforesaid virtues.

De salibus purgantibus per vterum.
sal arthemisiae. sal melissae.
THis salt does provoke women's terms.

This salt also provoke menstrua, purges the womb and helps the
suffocation of the matrix.

Sal Chelidoniae.
sal chelido^i^.
Take the roots of celandine clean scraped and not washed q. v. stamp them
well in a stone mortar, then digest them 24 hours with the spirit of wine in
Balneo, the^ power it out without pressing, and vapor away the said spirit in
Balneo, and in the bottom will remain a yellow tincture or powder, the which
profits much in provoking of women's terms, the dose is about i. in white
wine or other convenient liquor.

De salibus purgantibus per sudorem.
THis salt is very profitable against the pox or such like sal ligni guaici.
diseases, either to be used inward or outward: it provoke sweat mightily if
it be mixed with diaphoreticall medicines.

sal scabiosae.
The salt of Scabious has the like virtue in provoking sweat.

De salibus dolorem sedantibus.
Olei macrobij, sal eiusdem.
TAke the blood of an old Heart or Stagge being yet warm, and distill it in
Balneo with a gentle fire until all the fleme be come away, then change the
Receauer, and set thy vessel in sand, and augment the fire, and there will
com^ forth both oil and salt, the which will hang round about the glass, the
which must be mixed with the oil. Ye shall note that the stinking smell of
the oilemay be taken away by often washinges in warm water before ye mix it
with his salt. This oil swageth all pains of the gout if ye anoint the
parts therewith.

Sal sanguinis humani.
sal sanguinu humane.
THe salt of the blood of a man and a goat is made in the same order, the
which have great virtue to help the raines, bladder, and all diseases of the
articular parts, as Chiragra, Gonagra, and Podagra.

A composition of saltes that seperateth fleme.
puluis ex s^libus.
TAke hisop, penirial, ana. ss. Origanu^ ij. fenel seed ss. Caraway seed ij.
licorice i. Salis vsti vj. Salis absinthij ij. salis Iumperi totide^, cinamomi.
ou^. i. ss. piperis longi vj. carda momum, granorum paradisi, cariophilorum
ana. ss. Gingiberis. i. misco, fiat puluis.

Sal perigrinorum.
sal peregrinorum.
TAke sails nitri fusi, salis gemmae ana. i. galangae, macis, cubebaru^ ana. i.
fiat puluis. The dose is four or six grains in the morning fasting upon a
piece of bread: this comfort the stomach, makes good digestion, and
preserves the body from putrefaction: the use of this salt being at the sea
will preserve from vomitting.

An addition to that salt to preserve the bodi^ in health.
Additi^*
TAke of the aforesaid salt so prepared iij. Alcoolis vini exiccati lb. ss.
extrahatur alcali, of the which take ij. and put thereunto kissed vnum liquor is
granorum Iuniperi, mix them, (the dose is 1. or 2. gr.) in wine: ye shall not
add any other thing unto this, lest the virtue of the salt be spoiled: this
salt was of great estimation with Hermes trimigistes to preserve the body in
health.

Balsamum vrinae, the which through the great virtues it has, deserves to be
called Catholicum, and is made thus.
TAke the urine of young Children about the age of 12. Balsamum vrinae.
years, that has drunk wine for certain months if it be possible, the same
putrify in Balneo, or dung, a philosophers year, then distill it with a gentle
fire in sand being also luted, the which ye shall note diligently: the fleme ye
shall put upon the feces 4. times, then the last water keep close shut, the
which is white and stinking, and therefore ye may give it both taste and smell
with sinamom and sugar, the feces that remained in the bottom being black ye
shall sublime by degrees of fire, and you shall have a most precious salt, the
which some affirm will dissolve gold, silver and other mettalles: some
philosophers call it their menstrua. The virtues of this Balsamum vrinae are
infinite, and may rightly be called Catholicum remedium, because it has
marvelous virtues in all manner of diseases, and does nourish nature
wonderfully by his similitude and not by contrariety. It cures the dropsy,
provoke urine and menstrua that are suppressed, it resists corruption, it
cures the plague, and sundry fevers, as pestilential, tercians, quartanes,
and quotidianes, it withstandeth vomitting.

There is no doubt but that al these virtues are contained in this blessed
Mumia: for that we see the effect in crude urine, for it moves urine and
menstrua, it cures tumors and the dropsy, it helps the pains and wind in
the gut^es, and collicke, it is profitable against the fever tercian, quartan,
and quotidian, and against the plage and pestilent fever it is a remedy, if it
be drunk 15. days together with safron: or certain grains of this powder
following, whose wonderful virtues daily experience does show as well in
curing as preventing, as has bin proved in the time of the pestilence.

Take Maces laid to steep in vinegar 24* hours ou^. ij. ca^phir ou^. ss.
Manus Christi made with dissolved perle and oil of cinamom ou^. iiij. beat
them in fine powder, and keep it to thy use.

Urine also breaks the stone in the raines and bladder, it dissolueth the
obstructions of the liver, it cures the iandies, it purges the lunges, and
kills worms, with diverse other virtues, which ye shall find written in a
book called Vrinarum probationes, Iodoci Wilichij: the dose of the essence is
from ou^. i. to ou^. ij. with sugar and cinamom: of the crude urine ye may
drink greater quantity.

Rebisola.
Paracelsus writes a great arcau^ of urine, and calls it Rebisola, and sal
cristalline the which cures the iandies: take the urine of a young child as a
fore, and boil it in a glass or stone vessel, and skum it clean, then put
it in a glass, and set it in a moist place certain days, and in the bottom
ye shall find certain stones ^f salt congealed, the which are called
Rebisola, and are of a wonderful virtue against all obstructions of the body.

Puluis conducens opthalmis, suffusionibus alijsqu^ ^gritudinibus oculori^
externis. Aqua ad suffusione^.
The feces remaining in the bottom after the urine is quite boiled away, being
calcined white, and dissolved in a convenient distilled water, and congealed
again into a most white powder, is a most approved experiment against all
outward greefes of the eyes, if it be put therein twice a day*

Rec. Euphrasiae, faeniculi, rutae, chelidoniae, ve^benae, betonicae ana. m. i*
Rosmarini. m. ss. semen feniculi, anisi. carui, sileris montani ana. ou^. ss.
Calami aromatici vi. thurismirrhae, aloes, ana ij. aque rosaru^ lb ij. aque
rutae. vini odorati ana lb i. vrinae pueri lb ss. let them stand together
four days, and then distill them in a glass, and therewith wash your eyes.
Also ye shall hang in this water a fine linen cloth, wherein is the powder
of white amber or succinum, or else put in the powder it self. Also it would
be good to wash their feet in the morning with the decoction of betonye and
sometime to take the fume of Xyloaloes in the eyes, the which is a present
remedy against Opthalmia.

Of common salt.
Common sals.
THere are found three sorts of saltes, the one natural* which is a mean
mineral called sal gemmae, or stone salt, the which is found in mountains in
the province of Calabria, and in Spain in the I Will of Iuiza, whereof there are
diverse medicines prepared, the second is artificial, as is made in Cheshire,
and diverse other places by boiling it. The third kind is made in the sand by
extreme heat of the sun: but the most pleasantest and well relished salt is
that which is boiled on the fire, for it is pure and white, nevertheless the
salt of the mountain is of more virtue in physical causes: for if it be
calcined 40. days and then dissolved in the quintessence of honey, it is of
such virtue that it will in manner revive a man that lies speechless if ye
give him a spoonefull thereof to drink: also this salt being made in a pultus
with branne and oil, and applied warm, helps many griefs. Also a decoction
of sal ge^mae with wine and oil being given in a clister is most profitable
against pains of the head, the sciatica, and pains of the raines, and likewise
is profitable for those that are troubled with a carnositie in the yard: for by
nature it preserves all things from putrefaction: also this salt being often
calcined, dissolved and congealed, may be used in meats in stead of common
salt, for it procures an appetite, causes digestion, kills worms with
diverse other virtues. Also it may be made fusible in this order.

Sal ge^mae.
Rec. lb. i. of sal ge^mae and 2. ounces of tartar calcined, one ounce of sal
nitri, and boil them in distilled vinegar until it be dry, then grind it to
powder, and boil it with as much fair water until it be dry: and this ye
shall do so often until it remain like an oil in the bottom, for as soon
as it feels the air it will turn to water. This oil does retain all
volatill spirits, and is called of the Alchemistes their susible salt. It
helps in manner all kind of ulcers if ye touch them therewith in short time.
L. F.

Oleum salis.
Oleum salis
Rec. common salt lb. 3. terrae luteae lb. 6. salis nitri purgati ou^. i. ss.
mix them well together, and distill the^ in a retort of earth, as ye would do
aqua fortis, until all the spirits be come forth, the which ye shall rectify in
sand until all the fleme be separated from the spirits. This oil being mixed
with oil of verbascum, and anointed takes away the pains of the gout, and
dissolueth hard swellings, It quickneth a man, it consumes water between the
flesh and the skin, it drives away the falling sickness, it profits
against the dropsy and fevers, if three or four drops be drunk with aqua
vitae.

Sal nitri.
THis salt is a kind of salt of urine the which is taken forth of the earth by
art, and is very profitable against many Sal nitri.
infirmities, and works two contrary effects, the first is, that it cools
greatly, as ye may see in summer when the weather is most hot, how that for to
cool their wine presently they take sal nitri, and mix it with water, and
therein shake or move their bottelles of tin or glass being full of wine,
presently it waxes as cold as Ise: also laid upon the tongue, it cools
maruellouslie. To the contrary, if ye drink the weight of i. it will heat the
body maruellouslie. Also a water made of sal nitri and roch allome according
to art is of such an extreme heat that it will dissolve silver, copper, Iron,
steel, and all other sorts of mettalles presently into water. Moreover being
mixed with cole and sulfur, it makes gunpowder. Also sal nitri being calcined
30. days with as much tartar, and circulated with the spirits of wine mixed
with the spirits of cinamom, ginger, and cloves, it will be a most rare
medicine to cure the Etisie, and dropsy, and such like diseases.

Oleum salis nitri.
Oleum sali^ nitri.
There is also an oil made of sal nitri* the which does cui and disperse
humors in the belly, it discharges the bladder of superfluous humors, it
preserves health, linguae nigrae calidaeque medetur, it helps ulcers in the
mouth, vlcer^^ bus canis conuenit, etc.

Sal petrae fusibills.
Sal petre fusibili^*
Salt peter is a certain matter made of stones and is thus prepared.

Rec. Calcis viui q. v. and cover it two fingers high with water; and stir it
well, then let it stand 24. hours, and you shall find upon it a certain
skumme or skin the which is the salt, which gather diligently with a scummer:
take of that salt, and put thereunto a third part of pure oil of tartar, and
it will be fusible, for this is the true salt peter: this serves also to the
making of glass and smaltes, and is apt to cause all mettalles to melt, and
mix with any alchimicall medicine, and is of great virtue.

Colirium contra pustulas, maculas* pannas, cataractas, and similes affectus
oculorum quod visum acuit, and mire conseruat.
Colirium contra maculas.
REcip. Limature auri purissimi ss. Balsami, Croci, ambrae, ana. scru. 2.
Musci, opij anae scru. 1. tutiae extinctae nouies in vrina pueri, 1.
tragaganthi, sagapeni, galbani, stercoris lacertae ana. ss. lapidis
calaminaris, vitrioli albi, saccari candi, aloes hepatica ana. 1. scru Cortic
myrobalan, citrinaru^ and indaru^ ana i. Castorei, Ossis sepiae ana. ss. fellis
vulturis, humani, vrsini, aquilae an^ ij. make of all these a coliri, with
sufficient quantity of the juice of fennel, rue and celandine, of the which
ye shall put two or three drops in the corner of the eye.

In steed of that ye may use many times this medicin, the which has a great
virtue in all living creatures.

Rec. A glass and fill it half full of wine, and set it in an Ant hill, that
they may creep into the wine, then distill them altogether, or else let the
antes stand in putrefaction 5. or 6. days in the wine and strain them forth,
then distill it: of the which essence ye shall put 2. or 3. drops into the
eyes: It is most chiefly against cataractes, read and painful eyes, if the
disease have long continued, and has fattie ^arnositie in the eye, first ye
shall put into the eye a little burnt allome, until the flesh be eaten away,
and then leave,

A most excellent clister dispereing wind, dryuing forth water against Hidropem
asciten, adiuncta timpanit^, ascirrho i^cinor^*
(...) discutiens.
REcip. the urine of a sucking child 10. and boil therein wheat the feed of
fenel, aniseed, dyll ana. i. ss. purifyed honey i. fiat Clister.

Of the causes and reasons of spagiricke preparations of simple purgations.
HYpocrates, in his book de natura humana does write, that purging medicines
do draw unto them the humors which are unnatural in the body, not by a
common mingled quallitie, but by the simillytude or property of the whole
substance, and an ingrafted famillyaritie. Whose sentence Galen confirms
against Asclepiadem and Erassistratum, who thought that purging medicynes,
could not draw any one humor, Lib de purgans med facult,
but whatsoever they touched, they could convert and turn it into their own
nature, and so indifferently like leaches or boxes, to draw the sharp thin
humors as is most apt to purge, rather then gross and thick: But whereas al
alterations are done either by force of heat, or by driving away the empty,
or by a similitude of the whole substance, that only (as Galen writes) is
done with the Sim^athiae of quallities, or else with the likeness of the whole
essence: which things though I have plainly showed them, yet they cannot be
expressed with wotdes, and the Greeks call it (...), that is a property,
which cannot be declared. So the Amber does draw strawes, and the loadstone
Iron: by which reason it is said that Rhabarbe expels collar, Agaricke
fleame, and Senna black choler, although besides this peculier power of
purging, every one of them have a certain general faculty to draw other
humors, which is to be judged by the composition of many medycines, with which
we use to purge diverse humors, which alone would not suffice to purge by
themselves, if those simples did not work together, with natural help to
euacuate, and with a common force did provoke the expulsive power. It is meant
(says Galen) that the simples mingled together do agree and not differ Lib
quos purg conue quibus and quo nodos*
in any thing. Amongst these medicines some be dygestiues of choler which
chiefly euacuate yellow choler* some of fleagme, that euacuat fleame, some of
mellancholly which euacuate black choler, and so forth of the other humors.
Therebe also other medicines which by the veins of the inward parts and belly
do cast out the blood it self, which are called Jmpropriae seeing they be
poisons; neither do they alone purge, but also destroy and kill as Galen
witnesses, who tells a history of a certain man that had found an herb,
which first took Libro de purg medicam fac Chap. 6.
away the blood of them that took it, and then afterward the life also; but
those are to be rejected of al other: for the true and only euacuating of blood
is done by opening of a vain, and not by those medicines which by a certain
malign and sharp quallitie and deadly property, do eat the veins, and by
alteration cast out the blood, the treasure of life not without great violence
of spirits and vexation of nature,

But of these purging medicines there are* 3. orders or sorts. The first
malignaunt, in which is a certain vennamous power and substance, except they
be prepared as they ought, among which are numbered of the roots these, Eleborus
niger, turbith, hermodactilus. Esula, Cucumeris agrestis Asarum, Thymelaea,
Chamaelaea, Among gumes, scamonium, Euforbium, sagapenum. Among fruits and
seeds, Colocynthis Lib. 3. Capit 5. med facult Chap. 24.
Lathyris. Among stones, Armenus, Cyanus.

Which medicines if at any time they do not purge as they should, they do the
body much hurt, as Galen writes.

The second are more milder, or gentle, which are so called because they purge
gently without any grief, and they void the hurtful humors, not of the
whole body, but of certain parts, and soften the belly, and do but little
decline from nourishing of nature, which among herbs are these, Malua,
Mercurialis, Violae, Rosae, Brassica, Beta, serum lactis purnes, manna
theribinthina and cassia medulla, which need no other preparation then the
common, that they may be safly taken.

The third sort are of mean, among the which are, Aloe, Agaricus, Cnicus,
Senna. Amongst roots Rhabarbari, ^oli^odij Jridis, raphani siluestris,
mechoacam and Eupatorij mesuae: Which last simples were lately found out, and
the root of the former is all together like in force unto the vitis ingrae.
All these are called Men because they euacuate only superfluous humors which
are unfit to norrish the body, and that without great labor, and chiefly if
they be well prepared and their due dossis observed. The cause of the purging
quallitie of all these simples is this: that a certain thin portion of it
stirred up by natural heat, creeps in by the open conditts or passages,
into the lesser veins, and from thence flows into the greater, from the
which by the liver it is turned into the intestinalls, and into the reins it
self, and then follows euacuation of humores, by the belly, which sometimes
are discerned by the urine, in which, as well the color as the savor of the
medicine received is manifestly seen, which any man may try in Rhabarbe and
senuae.

Seeing therefore the vapor of these medicines which we call the essence, being
stirred up by natural heat from the earthy parts, does attenuate the resting
humor and moves the nature of the part with a contrary quallitie, and
provoke it to cast out their earthly substance, or feces remaining in the
stomach and the inward parts, who then is so doltish, that will not commend the
spagiricall preparation of these medicines, wherewith we do draw forth the
essence which is the true purger, and take away the malign quallitie: Or at
the least we suppress it with his own menstrua, which agrees with his
properties, and have an unity with them. We separate the feces or earth as
deadly and hurtful, which does much offend for his thicknes, cleaving unto the
tunicle of the stomach which Galen affirms out of Hipocrates in these words:
Lib quos purg conue and er^ Cap. 6.
For says he, the purging medicine how small soever it be, it must needs go to
the bottom of the stomach, and in going do wne the stomach, and what soever is
found about it is infected, not only by the quallitie of the medicine, but
also by the cleaving of the substance: in the swallowing it is greatly hurt,
and again, those that are of more thinner essences, more readily executed
their proper Cap. 11. and lib ^. simp*
accions, then the gross, as Galen witnesses in many places: Also where as he
says in the first book of simples, that those things which have but a small
bodyly substance do work more then they that have great. Our extractions of
esse^ces is to be commended in which al these things are performed the proper
purgative quallitie of the humor notwithstanding reserved in the medicine as
also it is made so much the stronger in that his unprofitable earth and fex is
separated from it, and by his proper menstrua joined unto it all the malign
quallitie is taken away, Lib quos purg, dec and caet cap 8.
which Galen writes is to be done, where he says, those seeds are to be
mingled with medicines, which mittygate their mallignitie and hinder not their
work which have force to extenuate and to cut, that they may cut asunder
gross humors, and open the ways by which they must be avoided. All which
things all learned men may judge to be done in our preparations. But some will
say the extraction of essences is not so necessary, when as Lib. 7.
Actuarius commands (unto whose opynion Paulus agrees) that to such as are
of a weak stomach. 15. or. 20. grains of Lathiris are to be swallowed whole,
and he says, that though they be not bruised minimeque in Corpus permeent, yet
they purge very much: Which place is not against our saying, but does rather
affirm it, because alitle after he wills that those who must be more
effectually purged must eat them; by which it is manifest enough that there is
a greater virtue by bringing the medicine into a fine substance. then in the
whole mase, and in the essence it self a greater force then in the residence
of it: which may be perceived in Rhabarbe it self, the infusion thereof does
purge more mightily then the whole substance does, for* which cause I doubt
not, but that the same grains of Lathyris are prescribed rather whole then
bruised by any means to a weak stomach, because the force and strength of the
Lathiris (as Galen says) is much like in Simp med. 7.
force to Esullae, and these medicines are so sharp and vehement, that they
purge both upward and doneward, with great vexation, and by that means the
more violent they be, the more they hurt the stomak: but the slender body, as
Simp. 1. caq. 12.
Galen writes, is easier altered and changed of that whereunto it is applied:
but that which is grosser is not changed but in a great time, and scarce at
length feels any sensible alteration, for we try by experience that we are
so much the sooner heated with pepper, as by how much the smaller it is beaten,
and even so must we judge of the purging medicines, therefore in stead of
those Infutions and decoctions after the common sort we use their essences,
and that healthfully and without hurting of the stomak, or any of the other
parts. But those vehement medicines otherwise to be feared, have been so
rightly prepared of the true spagiricks, that their malicious quallities and
sharpnes have bin altogether bridled with their proper corrections, and so have
served in stead of gentler medicines for the cure of diverse diseases. So our
Essence of Elcborus Niger being well prepared is ministered at this day in many
places, and is safly given to children to losen the belly without any labor: In
the mean season there be a great number which ignorantly condemn these
essences, and speak against the use of them, and spew out the poison of their
gaul against them, at whose railing I cease to marvel: because the Poet
says, that to those men that think nothing right but what them selves do,
nothing can be found more unjust or wicked then that they do not: But there
be other which being overcome with reason, will at last commend these our
extractions of essences out of all things, but yet they fear this one thing,
that is their fiery nature in them by a certain quallitie received of the
outward fire, and therefore they refuse the use of them, chiefly in agues, and
for curing of hott effects, by which they show themselves to be vnskillful in
the Spagirick Art, and to give rashly judgment of things unknown: For almost
all Essences are drawn forth with the, temperate heat of balneo, or
horsdonge, with proper means belonging thereto, which we call Menstrues,
because the skillfull spagirickes by it, with their art and labor do draw
forth all the strength and virtue of any thing, seperating that which is pure
from the earth and stinking feces, reserving only the quickening escence, whose
power rising up, as it were, breaking his bonds, does draw it self higher
and shows much greater force then it did before, and more effectual for
helping of the body. And if they will say that all the menstrues be hot, they
are very much deceived; for the iuce of Lemonds prepared after our order is
the me^strue for pearls, because it dissolueth them and changes the^ into a
thinner essence, and yet the iuce is not hot, nor the essence of the pearls
hot which remains. When the menstrua is separated away: And as (Galen
writes) we must not call whatsoever is subtle, hot also, for water it self
is of a more subbil essence, which is manifest because it runs spedily
throw hair and garments, and yet being so thin, it never heateth as by his
nature, neither is it the proper norishment of fire, but it is contrary to it.
But they will answer Vini alcool, his essence or spirit (which menstrue we
oftenest use) to draw out the essence of all other things is most hot: let it
be so: shall it therefore be called dangerous by any means: Seeing the
proper menstrua is always separated out of every essence of things and all
his force is taken away, and every medicine remains simple with his proper
quallities, being only increased in virtue. Finally, to return to purgings,
who will deny that they have a hidden power of heat to stir up? with which
notwithstanding, must be mingled such things as must take away their
malignitie and make it more subtle and pearcing, and quicken his slow
operation, and make it effectual according to the opinion Lib quos purg and
caet cap. 8.
of Galen. Therefore Paulus wileth to mingle with Eleborus, Peniroyall and
sauerie, or any of those that soddenly pass through and are not hurtful to the
stomach. Item all physicians do will to mingle with Rhabarbe, Cinamond, and
spikenard with hermodactilis Radish, and Co^min, with Cnicos, Cardamomum, Aloes
with Nutmegges, masticke and cloves. with Agarick* turbith and sennae, ginger:
which although they be hot, yet they are mingled in purgations: which also are
safly given to the sick of the Agew; not that a hot medicine is given for the
Agews sake, but that greater commodity might follow in rooting out the
humors, which cause the feauers: for the commodity is greater, says Galen, in
taking away the molesting humors, then the hurt which necessarily is done to
the body by the purgations; which yet will be more commodiously done, if
whatsoever hurts be taken away without pain by medicines prepared and
corrected, which the common physicians do, although they take not away the heat
of the simple mixed in the corecting of their purgations, and notwithstanding,
they fear not to minnister them to hott diseases. But our Menstrua of Alcoole
Vini although they call it hott, yet is it so spiritual (If we may use words of
art) that with the least, heat it vaporeth away, and is altogether separated
from that which it dissolueth, which is so separated from the feces that his
power and subtle essence only remains, which also more aptly does execute his
proper action, whether it be to cool or heat, or to purge, and that with
less danger for 2 causes. First because the essence of the medicine does more
swiftly pass through the bowels, and thereby the sharp and yearthy parts of
them, cleaving to the inward parts, cannot vlcerate them, according to which
opinion, Paulus speaks thus of Colocinthide, let it, says he, be diligently
corrected, because Lib. 7. cap. 4.
his sharpenes cleaving to the entrails do cause ulcers, and trouble the
sinnowes with like effects. Secondly because all the noisome qualities of those
Essences (if they cannot be wholly taken away in the first preparation may yet
be taken away or easily corrected with mixing of other convenient essence: So
the of Alloes, otherwise is slow in purging, will most swiftly purge, and least
it should open the veins by his to much subtilnes it may eassily be corrected
with our oil of Masticke, and so safly ministered. But let us hear Mesues
Judgment of all these preparations, who agreeing with Paulus and Auicen, that
writes Colocinthides is to be beaten small for our reasons aforesaid in these
words: It does require (says he) long decoction and it is (as it seems to
me) with the son of Serapion, contrary to the mind of the son of Zezaz,
to be beaten to small powder, that his malicious power may be mixed with other
exquisite things to correct him, that it may the sooner pass through the
bowels, and not stay in them for the thicknes of some part not well beaten,
whereby it may peradventure be longer stayed in the bowels, and exulcerate
them, chiefly when by some little parts of it sensibly felt. who cannot
deny, but that al these are done more commodiouslie with our essences, and
with greater profit to the patient then the simple powder. I think none,
except some donghill raker, that is altogether unskillful in physic. It
remains that we set down the extractions of purgers: and their preparations,
and so to prosecute in order.

Of Eleborus.
Extractio sine essentia Eleborie.
TAke the roots of black Eleborus, fresh gathered in Autumn, 1. li. boil
the^ in water of Aniseede and peniroyal, out of which the oil is drawn
Chimicallie, closlie stopped in Balneo, a whole day, then strain it forth
hard, and distill it by a filter, until it be clear: then separate the
menstrua, and in the bottom will remain a slimie substance: unto which pour
the spirit of wine that it may be covered four fingers, and so let it stand
two or three days close stopped, to digest in Balneo, then pour away that
part which is clear, and put on more, doing as ye did before, until you have
drawn out all the essence, with reiterating the digestions, always seperating
the feces, according to art: which done, separate the first menstrua in
Balneo, that being done, circulate it with new spirits of wine of the infusio^
of maces, for certain days, then separate the Menstrue again, and in the
bottom shall remain Essentia Ellebori in form of a sirop, and Duskish of
Coulor, the which thou shall keep to many uses.

j of these essence mixed with certain dropes of oil of And myntes is given
fasting with some convenient decoction or water of worms against the dropsy.
Item with water of Betony it helps against diseases of the brain, as Maniae,
Melancholiae, Vertiginis, Epilepsiae, and Paralysis, it purges choler and
fleame without any pain, and finally the whole body of all
corrupt-excrements, which (as Hipocrates says) makes a man healthful, and as
it were young: it draws not only the hurtful humors and excrements out of
the vessels by purging the blood, but also from the whole body and skin it
self, and therefore it is very healthful against Elephantiasis, the canker,
Erisipelas, malomortuo, all eating Lib. 7. cap. 4.
sores. Paulus did give about i. of the root of Eleborus niger infused in aqua
mulsa fasting against the aforesaid diseases. I know not why in our time we
have left the use of it, and shun it as it were some strong poison: and yet
in the ancient time it was so much commended (except it be through the
unskillfulness of the Physicians) seeing the malice of this medicine, and all
other may easily be taken away with their true preparations, as we have
declared: and that this does good, Hypocrates witnesses, where he makes
mention of white Eleborus, saying thus. To some bodies (says Aph. 16. lib 4.
he) Eleborus is troublesome: as in other places he says, that all biting
medicines are naught for them, but it being corrected by art and industry may
rightly be ministered to whom and when it ought, and works healthfully: but
these men will say, that in the time of Hypocrates their bodies were more
stronger, or else Heleborus in those countries had no malicious qualities (for
simples according to their several regions and places have several qualities)
neither stirs up such fearful passions as in our country: Lib. 2. cap. 20
to which purpose Messue speaks this of Eleborus, the white because it is
troublesome to the bodies of this our time, let it be shunned as it were a
strangling poison: and he adds, but the virtue of the black is tolerable
even unto our time, although also very hardly. I think only by this opinion
many Physicians to be so feared, that being content with the reading of some
writers alone, they condemn things they know not, and whereof they have no
experience, without any reason disalowing medicines, which is altogether an
absurdity, and unfitly for a Physician at the length they will answer, that
both the Greeks and Arabian Physicians did use those violent medicines,
because they wanted the lighter as Rhabarb, Cassia Manna, and such like which
may be safely given and with more profit. But oh what great praise they get by
these medecines in the curing of many diseases. Do not these men know out of
Hypocrates, that to extreme diseases extreme medicines must be applied, and
that some times the excrements mingled with blood in the vains must be drawn
out, not from the only concauitie of the parts, but from the whole body and
from the parts farthest of, yea and the brain it self sometimes, and the
whole head and the instruments of the senses* and the sinews, and the rest of
the intrailes must be purged of many affectes: which when those slight
medicines can not do, we must take the stronger, as Eleborus Niger chiefly.
Although I know that at this day many notable Physicians both in Germany and
Italy do use the white with good success, out of the which if the essence be
taken, as we have taught, it may be given with meruellous profit of the sick
and praise of the Physician to daily diseases, and to such as the superfluities
are broken out in the uttermost parts as the leprosy and Impetigo, for
therein is a great and peculier power of essence, in that to bring forth
whatsoever is mingled with the blood that does corrupt it. It is also given to
such as have the quartaine, dropsy, and are Melancholic, and to many other
diseases, as we have declared, because it does purge gently without any
trouble or vomiting the excreme^t of the whole body.

Of Turpetum, Hermodactilis, Thymelea, Chamelea, Esula, and other milkie
purgations.
Extractum turpeti.
MAke Mesues Turbyth into powder, and choose that which is whitest, and gummy,
and reasonable new, then put it into a glass with a long neck, and put
thereon the spirit of wine that it may be covered four fingers, then lute it
with Hermes seal, and set it in Balneo two or three days that the menstrua
may draw forth all the essence, then power out that menstrua and put on fresh,
and do so still until all the substance or tincture be drawn out: then
circulate all the menstrua together, that it may come to the highest perfection
of degree, then seperat thy menstrua, and in the bottom will remain thy
essence, the which will be more perfecter: if then in the correction of it ye
add for every i. of essence, oil of nutmegges and Ginger ana. scrup. 1. For
with this his operation is so altered, with a certain meruellous property,
that it works without lothsomnes and perturbations, and purges the joints,
and those farthest places from slime and thick fleame whereas else it would
only draw the thin matter, and that very slouthfully. The dose of this
essence is 1 scru. with red wine, or some decoction pectorall. It helps
against the Hed^opes and all phlegmatic diseases.

Extractio Hermodactilorum. Dios^or. 45. cap. 79. Gal. simp. 6. Paul. lib. 7.
THe essence is drawn out of the white and chosen root of Hermodactilis of
Aegineta after the same manner, as out of Eleborus. (Not the root of Cholchicus
ephemeris: of the apothecaries, which Dioscorides, Galen, and Paulus affirm to
be poison.) This draws gross slimie steam especially from the joints, and
therefore it helps much Arthrites: Yet it must be corrected with the oil of
comin and cloves, least with his windy humor it hurt the stomach and provoke
lothsomnes in it: it is given either by it self or with some convenient
decoction. The dose is 1. scru. either more or less according to the strength
of the patient. The roots of Esulae, Thymelee and Chameleae, seu Meserij
serapionis and Thapsi^e succus: which draw forth partly fleame, partly choler,
and Extractio Lactario^u^
yet not without biting because they be all sharp and fiery, and very
dangerous, for they excoriat the bowels, and break the mouths of the veins:
the which are prepared in the same manner that Eleborus is, and their
extraction is given without danger, if it be mixed with the extractio^ of
Myrabolan^ against the Hydropsie, and to purge sharp humors out of the iointes
themselves. The dose is about 1. scrup. with 1. of the oil of sweet almondes.
In the same manner ye may draw the essence out of the grains of Lathiridis
being beaten unto the which to correct it ye shall put oil of Masticke and
oil of Nutmegges.

Of wild Cucumbers, Ebulo, sambuco, and Squilla.
Extractum rad. cucu. agrestis.
THe roots of wild cucumbers must be gathered in May, and then stamped, and
their juice taken forth, the which must be filtred very clear: upon which
power the spirit of wine santalatum and optime praeparatum, then set all in
Balneo 3. or 4. days, and what is pure power of, and put on more spirit of
wine, until their remain no more feces, then circulat all together for
certain days until a higher degree, the which being done, seperat thy
menstrua in Balneo, and congeale thy essence with a soft fire in sand until
it be thick, unto which ad for every i. of essence 1. s^r. of oil of c^namo^
and ss. of the essence of safro^. This medicin does purge sharp humors
mightyly, by which reason it helps the Hidropsie, the iaundies, and all
obstructions of the liver and spleen. If 1. half scru. or more according to
the strength of the patient be given with white wine in the morning fasting.

Out of the juice of wild cucumbers being gathered in Autumn when they are
ripe is made a noble medicine, if it be rightly prepared to purge choleric and
sharp excrements. Elaterium.
This medicine the Greeks call Elaterium, whose preparations Dioscorides
shows in his fourth book of symples. But if it be thus prepared, it is more
effectual, and with less danger or hurt. The juice must be gently pressed
out, and the^ distilled by a filter until it be clear, then put it into a
glass with a long neck, with as much of the spirit of wine, and let them
digest in Balneo certain days until it is separated from his feces* then
seperat the menstrua with a soft fire, and put on new spirits of wine
infusionis diamarg. frigidi, and circulate them altogether 10. days in a
Pelican, that the force of the medicine may be increased, and all malignity
taken from it: at length seperat the last menstrua, and coagulate it with a
most gentle fire, which will be done in a few days, of the which take 1. ou^.
and put thereunto oil of nutmegs and cinamom ana, 1. scru. and mix them
together, and so have ye the Spagiricall preparation of Elaterium, or his
Essence, which does draw meruellouslie all sharp excrementes out of the
joints, and from the brain, and therefore helps much Arthritides, dropsies,
old headache, and the falling sickness, the dose is ss.

Out of the root of Squilla, after the same order you shall draw and prepare
the juice: but to do it better ye shall take Extractum squillae.
sweet malmsie, it does euacuat gross and slimie humors, that stick in the
breast, by cutting, extenuating, clensing, dissoluing, and digesting them, and
takes away the obstructions of the liver and spleen, the dose is 2. with some
pectorall decoction, or cinamome water.

De lachrimis purgantihus and Colocynthide.
Extractum scammoniae.
ALL Physicians do agree that Scammony is a most violent and dangerous
medicine, and that for many causes, for with his biting blastes it hurts the
stomach very much, and ouerturneth it. Further with his immoderate drawing it
does open the veins, and with his sharpnes does excoriat the very intrailes,
and by that means brings great pains: for which cause Galen does mix him
with Quinces, others do boil it with Galingale, Ginger, Aniseed, Lib, 1. a lim.
Daucus, or Smaledge seeds, or with the muscledge of Psyllium, or boil it in a
sower or tart apple to make it more mild: but by the Spagiricall preparation
it may be made so commodious to be used that it may be mixed with any other
medicines without any danger, and safly ministered to purge choler and fleame.

Dissolve Scammonie in oil of Masticke drawn out by the art spagirical with
the spirit of wine, that being done digest it eight days in Balneo close
stopped: that which is clear and shining power of, and power on new menstrua,
until you have drawn out all the essence, notwithstanding put apart all the
feces, then seperat all the menstrua, and put on new spirit of wine
corolisated, that it may be covered, four fingers, circulat them all in Balneo
10. days or more, then draw away the menstrua, and for every ounce of essence
that remains in the bottom, ye shall put thereto the true essence of coral
and pearls, ana 1. scrup. the essence of safron half a scru. oil of
Aniseedes and cinnamon ana 1. scrup. and a half, mix them all together on a
soft fire until a reasonable thicknes. Mingle this essence so prepared with
the essence of aloes and Mirabolanes, and it will be a compounded medicine
very profitable to purge choler, and to draw down sharp excrements from the
head, half a scruple may be given by it self with 2. ou^. of oil of sweet
almondes without any trouble or heat of the heart or stomach, or liver and
brings from those places choler. To prepare Euforbium, Sagapenum, and
Opoponax, you must dissolve them first in white rose vinegar distilled in
Balneo, then strain them through a searce from all their terrestrial matter,
and thus thou shall do 3. times that it may be the purer: then vapor away the
vinegar, that the sharpenes may be taken away with often washing it with rose
water, for these medicines are sharp, and of a thin and fiery substance:
but Euphorbium of all gummes is the hottest, subtillest and swiftest, and
burns most with a fiery force (as Galen witnesses) which it does with such
violence, that Lib. 7. simp.
we must greatly beware of the use of it except it be rightly prepared: Serapio
and Auicen have written that iij. taken of it does kill: and yet Aetius and
Actuarius used it not only to purge fleame, but also mightily to expulse all
sharp excrements. Lib. 3. cap. 80.
And Dioscorides witnesses, that we must give it to the sick of Ischiadis
only mingled with honey. Paulus also says i. of Euforbium being drunk with
honey does rather expel fleame then water. But by this preparation following
all his malign quall^tie may be taken away, so that it will help very much
against the palsy, Arthritide, Crampe, dropsy, and purge fleame without any
trouble whether it be thin or thick or lying among the sinews and Extractum
Euforbij.
joints, and it is prepared in this order.

Take your Euforbium prepared and washed as is aforesaid, and cover it with the
spirit of wine, so that you may draw forth his essence, seperating the feces,
and all the impurity, then circulat al with new Alcoole sacharino 10. days,
then seperat the menstrua and coagulat it with a gentle fire putting thereunto
at the end the oil of masticke 2. scru. olei Anisi 1. scrup. Essentia Corralli
half a scrup. and make thereof a mixture. The is dose 1. scrup. with some
convenient decoction to cure all the aforesaid diseases.

Thus are medicines prepared of Opoponax, Sarcocolla and sagapenum most
profitable against the same diseases, of Extractum opoponax sar. sagap. etc.
whose force purging downward the Grecians have not spoken, but it was found out
by the Arabians: and these purge more gentlier then does Euforbium. of all
these is made a compound medicine, purging thick and slimie fleame even from
the furthest parts of, as the head, the sinews, the joints and the breast. I
will shortly if God give me leave set forth a description of our spagiricall
practice, in which I will more fully and at large declare the compositions and
use of all these medicines.

Extractum colocynthidis.
The force of Colocynthida is so vehement in purging that sometime with his
only touching, and yea, with his only smell he does purge the belly of some.
This medicine though it be otherwise most vehement, yet by the preparation
following it may safely be ministered. Beat Colocynthida in most fine powder,
and put thereon the Alcoole of wine well prepared, that it may be covered six
fingers, then digest it in Balneo 3. weeks being close nipped, and in that
time it will loose all his sharpnes: but if it be digested a longer time, the
extraction will wax sweet, and so it will be made a noble medicine against
fleame and all other gross and clammy humors to draw them from the lower
parts, and that without any harm, as we have declared, and therefore it is
ministered with the Syrop of roses or myrtels, against diseases in the head, and
megrim, and falling sickness, and apoplexia, and is also corrected with oil of
Masticke, Nutmegs, and cynamon.

Of stones that purge.
LApis Armeninus and Cyaneus must be made red hot vj. times and quenched in
aqua ardenti, then beat them to powder very fine, and wash them with fair
water, casting away the earth, and that which will swim upon the water, and do
thus often times: then wash the rest of the powder that is left after it has
been first dried with water of Buglosse or melissa, euaporate away the water
with a gentle fire, which being dry digest with our heavenly menstrua and the
spirit of wine in Balneo, and circulat it 30. days to the highest degree, the^
seperat the menstrua, and congeale it with a gentle fire: and to correct it, ad
the essence of pearls, coral, and saffron, with oil of cinamone and cloves,
it helps against melancolike affects, the frenzy, vertigo, Epilepsia,
Cephalalgia, quartaines, and the canker* His dose is 1. scrup* and half with
water of balm or Buglosse: it purges black choler, and whatsoever gross
slimie thing is mixed with the blood.

The stone Cyaneus thus prepared may more co^modiously be given in the
confection of Alkermes, being commended by all Physicians against the trembling
of the heart, syncope, sadness, and to strengthen all the spirits, and to drive
away all poisons.

Of the preparation of Rhabarb, Aloes, Sennae, Agaricke, Myrabolanes,
Oxiphenicis, and of such like of a meaner sort.
THese medicines are compounded by Actuarius and the rest of the Physicians
among the true purgers, because every of them do draw by his whole substance,
their proper humor: for they purge not the whole body from the root (as I may
say) but not with so great trouble. Physicians use them chiefly to cure almost
all diseases, either because they may be used without any greater preparation
then that which they themselves know, or else because they dare not try any
better, seeing they are ignorant of the preparations of their medecines. In the
mean season the purging power of these mean purgers may be greatly increased
with Spagyricall preparations by taking out of them that which is pure and
seperating the feces which are contrary to the purging of man's body, and
thereby will great profit follow. First, for that the stomach will not be hurt
with the medicine, when nothing shall hinder, but that it may perform his work
and spedily move the body and be likewise moved of it again. And secondly the
sick or diseased person will more easily a great deal take it, for that there
is but a little quantity of the medicine, which are sometimes found to be
hard, that they had rather change life for death, then they would drink up
whole cupfuls of those troubled and thick medicines, which the stomach of
many can not abide before they take them, or else is made so weak that it
loathing them, do cast them up again, and that with great trouble. True
physicians therefore should give diligent heed to seek out these preparations
of medicines, both for their honor of the art of Physic, and for the health
of the diseased. It is manifest that the essence of Rhabarb is of a purging Ex
Rab^
power, because of his sub^ill part, which is left in his decoction* so that
thereby he loses his purging virtue, which by Physicians is taken out, if it
be macerated in some thin liquor by putting too white wine and Cinamom. They
call this the infusion of Rhabarbe, because they do after a sort draw out the
force and essence of the Rhabarbe casting away the seces. But by this method
following, that medicine will be made a great deal better and more profitable.

Beat thy Rhabarb to powder and put thereon the Alcool of wine that it may be
covered four fingers, then close it fast and set it to digest three or four
days in Balneo, until the menstrua be colored, then power it out and put on
fresh, and do so until the menstrua will be no more colored, that the feces
remain white, all being well circulated according to art, seperat the menstrua
by Balneo, and the essence of the Rhabarbe will remain in the bottom: then to
every ounce thereof ad oil of cinnamon 2. scrup. of which if you give 1. scrup.
with a spoonful of white wine, it does purge more mightily then 1. ou^. of the
infusion, and yet with less trouble. This medicine may be ministered unto
children and to women with child and old men, and to those that are weak
through sickness. It purges and brings forth yellow choler. The feces or
earth that does remain is of a binding quality, and therefore it is prescribed
against Lienteria, Dissenteria, and al^^ fluoribus. But if any desire to have
it purge more stronger, let him calcine the feces in a reuerberatorie, and then
with water draw forth his salt, and with reiterating his filteratio^^ it will
be purifyed like crystal: then cast his essence that was drawn out upon his
alkaly, and digest him, and then distill him, for by this means the strength
of all medicines shall be increased.

So shall you prepare the extractio^ of alloes, which does purge ^actum ^es.
choler and thick fleame, but gently chiefly from the stomach and intrailles,
and strengthens those parts as well in clensing as purging them, to this
extraction ad oil of cloves and mace, to resist his force, and the oil of
masticke to take away his sharpnes ^actum ^rici.
and corroding quallity. Agaricke being prepared after the same order does purge
chiefly fleame out of the stomach, mesenterion, liver, spleen, and lungs from
the brain and sinews, not so swiftly because his power is weak. His dose is
2. scrup. as well to the young as to the old, but because it does somewhat offend
the stomach, it is corrected with the oil of ginger and spike. Thus may you
have out the extractio^s or essence of seen, polypody, mechoacam, mirabolanes,
and such like, which you may minister to whom and when they be convenient, by
putting to them their proper corrections according to the quality of the
sickness and the strength of the diseased.

These are they which I purposed to set forth of the Spagiricall preparations,
meaning shortly (God willing) to set forth greater things, that thereby those
that are studious for true physic, may enjoy my labors, watchinges, and
trauelles, and the profit that I have gotten thereby through the talk of
diverse learned men. Of which I thought good to shadow certain things with
certain secret words of art, lest I should seem rashly to cast forth those
precious pearls hear set forth principally for the Spagyricall Physicians to
the Sophisters of all good discipline, and contemners of the secrets of nature,
who when they have gotten any common or never so slight a thing out of the
neast of Cadmi fillius, they contemn things unknown, and are not afraid to
rail at that art, and vnwiselye to taunt with all kind of bitter words, at
that which they never so much once did see.

FINIS.
The virtues of aqua Balsamie.
IT preserves all things from putrefaction that is put therein or anointed
therewith, as the natural balm does in all respects.

If any be touched with the pestilence, so that the heart or brain be not
infected, give them 2. thereof to drink, and anoint his stomach with the
same, and lay him down to sweat, and in once or twice using it, by the grace
of God they shall be help, for it will suffer no venom to remain within the
body. Being taken in the aforesaid order, it helps those that have surfeted
by any means.

Being anointed on the stomach morning and evening, it causes an apetite, and
consumes cold humors: also if you drink thereof every morning i. fasting, it
will purge the head and stomach of all superfluous moisture and sharpeneth the
sight, if ye drop now and then one drop into the eye.

Being drunk as is aforesaid, it helps those that are troubled with the
Rume, Catarre, cough and stitch in the side caused of wind.

Being put into the ear, it comfort the sight and hearing meruellously and
all impediments in the head, and consumes all evil humors by his proper
quality and nature, so that if ye use it, ye shall wonder at the operation. It
helps all manner of wounds, in what place of the body soever they be, if
ye wash them therewith, and lay thereon a cloth wet in the same twice a day.

If ye wash the Sciatica therewith, and lay thereon a cloth wet in the same,
it takes away the pain in very short time.

It provoke urine, and expels gravel in the raines, being drunk with
parslie water, or some convenient licour: it is good against the Fever
Quartane, if ye drink thereof 10 or 12. days together every morning 1. or 2.
after that the stomach has been euacuated. It resolves all aches and
swellings, coming of cold, if ye bathe the place therewith. It helps the
tooth ach, if ye hold it in your mouth so long as ye may suffer it. It helps
those that are troubled with the Cramp, or that have their mouths drawn awrie
by that means* if they drink a small quantity and hold the same in their
mouth, and anoint the parts therewith morning and evening.

Aromatico, L F.
THis Armatico is good against most contagious diseases, as the falling
sickness, Melancholy, the Gout, Elephantiasy, and Resolutions, and such like
kind of diseases, as the quartane, the tertain, and quotidian. It is most
profitable for those that are struck with the pestilence, or that have drunk
poison, and for those that are continually pained in the head, also it is very
profitable against the dropsy, and water between the skin and the flesh,
and those that cannot fetch their breath, and against obstruction of Menstrua,
malign ulcers, the Pox, and such like diseases: it is either to be eaten or
drunk in wine, or a little warm broth: itpurgeth both the stomach and body
of all noisome humors.

Fodicationum Emplastri.
THe virtues of this plaster are innumerable, as well against old ulcers as
new, and also wounds. It dries, mundifyeth and increases good flesh, and
heals more in a week then any other does in a month. It will not suffer the
flesh to corrupt nor putrify, nor evil flesh to grow. Against sinews being
thrust through or bruised it is an excellent remedy. It draws forth Iron,
Lead, Wood, and such like being laid upon the wou^d.

It cures the biting or stinging of venomous beasts. It brings an impostume
to maturation, being only laid thereon. It is excellent against the Canker,
ignem persicum, and to mitigate all pains. And it may be kept 30. years in
force.

These are to be sold by John Hester, dwelling at Pooles wharfe at the sign
of the Stillitorie.

1591.

The Table of the first part of this Book, those marked with R. signifies
remedies.
AIry things that can not be congeled. fol, 12. Alba spina philos. 14, Anima
lapid philosophorum. 13, All metals swim above Quicksiluer, except Gold.
fol, 9 Art imitature of nature. 16, 17, 19. Augmentatione, 14, Ashes of
Cockell shells, fol, 4 Affects of the pestilence, R, 6, 5, Ad tophos. 6, Ashes
of Crabbes, thought rather bitter then to be sharp, 5* Acorus the root, 5,
The natural agent or doer. 8, 18. Agricola and Aubertus did without cause
reprehend Aristotle. 10 Aubertus is contrary to himself. 13 Aubertus perceived
not Agricola his meaning, fol, 8, Aubertus in boiling of eggs, boiled pieces of
gold. 16, A similitude drawn from the increasing or growing of the child
before it has perfect shape. 9, Aloes why it is washed. 2.
B
Bitter things their virtues 5, Briony root. 4, Biting of a mad dog, R, 5,
Bark of Capares, 4, Bark of the Ash, 4, By the motion and operation of the
celestial bodies, forms and essences, are brought upon earthly and inferior
bodies. 14,
C
Commendation of the chimicall Art. 19, Cibacio Coagulacio, fol, 14
Calcinatione, 4. Coniunctione, 13. Collicke. 2, Conulciones, R, 4, Coral, 7,
The Chimist subject is not sought in animal things. 19, Cadmia, 11
Calcinatione was used of the Ancients, 4, Crabs eyes calcined, 5, Cordialles
what they profit, 2, 6, 8, Calchanthi et Colcotharis generatio arteficialis,
19, Common sulphur is not the matter of the Philosophers stone, 16, Cuttell
bone, 4, Chimicall Art may sometime be termed natural, and sometime
arteficiall. 16. Chimicall Art is possible, and may be attained unto, and is
very natural, 19 Chimicall Art teaches the true preparations of medicines.
fol, 6, 19 Chimiste, why they have such evil report spread of them, ^1, Crabs
calex do not increase the quartayne, 5
D
Digesting, I fol, 4
E
Elixer, 17, Expelling of the stone and gravel, fol, 4* 5, Eggs is no matter
requisite among the Chimists. 16 Eggs the chief end whereto they serve 9
F
Fermentatione. fol, 18 Fermentum, fol, 17 Forma essentials, 10, Feminine
qualities. 11
G
Gross vapors under the earth. fol, 11 The great work, 11. Gold, 2, 7, 22,
fire can not consume it. 2. 8. 9 Gold contains Silver, 15. Gold to be in
copper Mines, 15
H
Heat is the next efficient cause of metals, 14 Heat his force and virtue,
10, 13 How many kinds of congeled or co^crete bodies there are, 13 How metals
are made of the elements, 13
I
Iro^ turned to steel. 14 Incoagubilia, 18
L
Lead, 7 Lac philosoph. 18 Laudanu^, a most laudable medicine, and what
simples go to the making thereof, and why his description is here omitted. 23
Lapis philosophic. 16. Like is help with the like, 4.
M
Mean minerals, 7, Markasites idem, Many and those very erroneous opinions,
concerning the matter of the Philosophers stone. 16, 17 Masculine qualities. 11
Molifying the cough, 2,
N
Naturalis formae duplicis. 19 Natural agent or doer. 8, 19,
O
Opium not corrected is very perilous, 2 Opium killed the Father of Licinius,
2, Out of what things the Paraselsians medicines are taken. 6
P
Paraselsus praise worthy. 1, Proiectione, 18, Puluis philosop. 18
Putrefaction. 17 Philosophers stone is not to be sought in vegetals, 16
Perfectio rei, 9, 16 Paraselsians, imitate most ancient physic. 2
Q
Quicksiluer is not unknown to the Chimists, 13, the Common Mercury is not the
matter of the philosophers stone. 16, Quicksiluer is not metal indeed, but
may be brought unto metal, 7, 42, that it may wexe hard and run together, 12,
that it is of an airie nature that it is the next and nerest matter unto
metals, 12, that it may be put in the beginning of the preparation of metals,
in steed of their matter. 13.
R
Regeneration, 18 Rubrica metallum, 7. Refreshing of the spyrits, 2, Rules of
the Chimists. fol, 2,
S
Sharp things what they are, 5 Silver in Lead 13 Spleen, R, 3, 6, Sibium is
not to be numbered among the metals. 7, Sulphur of the Philosophers, is not
the common sulphur. 13, White sulphur inco^bustible, folio, idem, Salt
arteficiall, 19. mineral, 19, fusible, burnt, 14. Salt of metal, fol, 7,
Salt his force 5 Salamandra philos. 18 Sharp things their use is to be granted
in a quartaine Fever, 5, Salt is resolved only with salt 4, Salt which is
congeled by heat, may be resolved by fire, 14, Sulphur is the next matter of
medicines unto quicksiluer, 10, 8, 12 Spirits of things, have only their
actions in bodies, 2,
T
Terra foliata 17 Terra mortua 6, Trogloditys vires, 4, The efficient or
procuring causes, are to be had in greater estimation, then the objects
whereunto they work, 13, That iron contrary to Aubertus opinion, is not more
excellent then gold, 39, That cold is proper to the element suffering 3, 15.
That Trees may bring forth fruits and flowers in winter season. 16 That the
Lake Lemanus has no Crabs in it, contrary to Aubertus opinion, 3. There are
not many things or instruments required necessarily unto the finding out or
making of the Philosophers stone 17, 18 That the Philosophers stone, is a thing
natural, 15, The effects and opeperations of the philosophers stone, 17, the
true subject, the force and virtue 18, 20 That there be many matters of one
and the same thing, 6, 16. That metal is a word signifying many things, 7, 15
The difference of metals among themselves, 9. in the division, 7, 10, the
matter, 10, 14, cause. The difference between metal and stone, that melts
with fire. 7 That in preservatives against poison, such things are necessary,
wherein there is opium, 2, 3, The secret and hidden property of al things, is
a holi-anker of asses, fol, 4, The spirits and metals are not endued with
contrary qualities, 11 The form of Gold or Silver abstracted from his
concreat, is not the matter of the Philosophers stone, 19,
W
Why the Author of this book, took upon him to answer Aubertus. 17
Whereunto a sweet taste tends, 5, Where the elements give no place in mixed
bodies, 10 Whereof procreation or regeneration comes, 16, What is the nearest
and principal matter in the procreation of mankind, fol, 12 What things are
imperfect, 15. Why the Chimists do call the metals by the names of the planets.
fol, 7, Why bodies congeale and grow together. 14
A Table containing those chosen things mentioned in the second part of this
book, whose marks with R. signifies Remedies.
ADamant stone, made soft and dissolved. folio, 33, Adamant the preparation why
it is omitted, idem. Aeris oleum, 24, Aeris vitriolu^, aes vstum. 33 Affects of
the pestilence. R, 33, 34, 35, 36, Against cold affects. 36 Against poysonne of
Musshrompes, 28 A malgamy of Mercury and gold, 29, Antimoni the purger of gold,
his flowers, sulphur, tintur, and glass, fol, 31, Aqua bituminosa, 30
Chalibiata, 23, Fixatorea pro turpeto, 29, Arsenike his oil, preparation, and
sublimation, 29, Asmatiks, R. 28, 30, 31 Auripigmentum, 30, Against all kind
of maling and putrified ulcers, R, 22, 24, 25, Ad tartareos morbos, fo, 38
Affects of the brain, 23, 56, 58, 60, The use of apium very dangerous to women
with child. 27, An excellent glister dispercing wind, 52, Aniseed oil, 42 Aqua
ad sufficione^ oculorum, 50 Agarike his extract, 53 Alloes 53, how it is
corrected, and his force increased, 56, Apoplecticoru^, R, 60, Artritides, R,
58, 60 Ash wood his oil, 45 A composition of saltes, that seperat fleme, 50
Arteficiall saltes, and their properties, 48,
B
Balmes for wounds, 45, 46, 47, Bile^ euacuantia, 57* 58 Blood his true
euacuation, 53, Bayberies his oil, 43 Balsamum vrinae, 50
C
Colocinthis, wherefore it is beaten in powder, 54, 56, his extract, 59,
Colericum, R, 23 Collike, R. 26. 27 Comfortatiues for the heart, 22, 27, 32, 34,
Coral his tinture. 33. Corneola, idem Craniu^ humanij, his salt, oil, essence,
and sublimation 35 Crocus martis 23 Crystal 33 Coper 24 Callos tolentia, 24,
29, Crabs eyes calcined 37 Caput mortuu^, what it is, 28, Cordialles what they
profit. 22 Ceruse or white lead folio, 25 Calcites, 24, Celandine his
essence, folio, 39 Cow dung, the water thereof distilled, 37. Comfortatiues for
the stomach, R. 23. 32. 41 Cuttell bone, 37 Child birth. 36 Chollike cured, 23,
40, Caraway seed, his oil, 42 Cominseed his oil. 42 Cloves his oil, 44,
Cinamo^d his oil, 43. Common salt 51 Colirium contra pustulars, et similibus
affectis oculoru^, 52, Causes and reasons of of the spagerike preparation of
simple purgations. 53.
D
Diaphorelicum medicamentoru^. 22, 29, 32 Dropsy, 22, 27, 56, 58 Defenes, R, 27
Disinteria. R. 23, 60, Diarrheae, R, 23, Dill seed his oil, 42,
E
Eyes, R, 35, 37 Eleborus of both sorts was used of the Ancients. 57, 58,
Elephantiae, R, 56, Erisipelatis, idem, Esula radix, 57 Expelling the stone,
fol. 28, 33, 37, 54 Euphorbiu^ extractum fol, 60 Excoriacione of the
intestinals, 59, Eating medicines, how to take away their malingnite and
sharpness, 30 Eating or coroding medicines, profitable to be prepared in
Surgery. 30, Elephants tooth, or Iuorie, 36, Experience, 27 Eggs his oil, 47
F
Falling sickness, R, 23 28, 31, 33, 34, 35, Phlegm purged from the joints, 27,
58, Phlegm purged, R, 56, 58, 59, 60. Fixationes vires, 29 Fistuloes, R, 24
Febris continua, 32, Febris quartana, R, 37 Febris inter mittentis, R, idem.
Febrium putridiuem cohibentia, 31 Frogs their spawne distilled, 37 From whence
all medicines are taken, 22, For such as coughe forth matter and such like
filthiness, R, 30, Fenell seed oil, 42, Fruits their oils, 43, Frankensence
his oil, folio, 45,
G
Giddines in the head, R, 56 Galbanu^ his oil, 47, Gangrena, 30 Gold, as the
common people do take it, does more harm then good. 22 Gold his tinture,
his white body, essence, and mercury, idem,
H
Hurting the stomach, fol, 59 Himicraniae, R, 60 Hermodactilis his extract, 57
Hisope his oil, 41, Honey his liquor. 3^
I
Impetigo, R, 57, Juniper wood his oil, 45 Juniper berries their oil, 43.
Iuie berries their oil, fol, 43 Iron his oil, 23, Iliacorum, R, 26, Juice of
Lemons is the true menstrua for pearls, 31
L
Liver, R, 46, 23, 31, ^8 Lactariorum extracta, fol, 58, Lapis armenius, 54, 60
Lapis cian^us, ibide^, Latheris granorum essenci. 58 Lodestone, 53, Lunges, R,
31 Liver of a Frog, 37, Lienteria, R, 23, 46. Lilium verum, 32, Lapis
cornalinus, 33, Lapis iudaicus, idem, Lapis lincis, 33 Lapis hematites 33 Lapis
spungiarum, 33 Luna fixa, 22,
M
Mercuri balsamum, oleu^, precipitatus, prepreparatione, et sublimatione. 27,
28, 29 Mysy, 24 Morphe^e, 32 Musk. 36 Mumia of 3, sorts, his essence and
preparation, 34. Mill pedum 37 Mirabolanes 60 Mali mortui, R, 32, 57 Manna,
53, Mechoicam, ibid. Melancholia, R, 22, 23, 27, 32, 56, Menses mouentes, 36,
Menstrum quid, 55 Mellancholy purged, fol, 27, 57. Mynts his oil 41. Mirrhae
his oil, 46 Mastike, idem Mace his oil. 44
N
Napellus, 26, Nutmegs their oil, fol, 44,
O
Obstructions taken away, 31, 37, 38 Opium not corrected, is perrilous, how it
should be amended, fol, 36, Oil of sulphur, his sublimation and balsamum, 30,
31, Oil of silver 23. Oils that swage pains, fol, 37, Oleum inceratium, 30
Oleum macrobi, 49, Sal euisdem ibidem Oil of sweet smelling things, 43 Oils
of seeds, their preparation. 42 Oleum salis nitri. 52, Oleum salis. 51,
P
Panaricio, R, 37, Ptisick, R, 34, Pillule de barberossa, fol, 26 Pissa
spaltus, 34 Plates of lead, their essence, the oil, his Sugar or salt, 25,
Preparations of stones and gems. 32 Precious stones as they are commonly used,
does profit little, 32 The preparations of gums and rosens, 45 Perles their
essence, 33 Punctures, R, 37, The preparation of oils out of woods, folio, 44,
The true preparation of oils, which are commonly used in Apothicaries shops,
to be applied outwardly. 47 Puluis co^duceues opthalmia. 50 Pepper his oil.
44 Percellie seed his oil. 42 Peniryall 40 The Spagericall preparation of
medicens taken out of Vegitables 38 The preparation of Spiritus tartary. 38 The
extraction of lyquors out of plants, flowers, seeds, and roots. 39 Purging
medicines of 3. orders. 54. and their preparations, 55, 60 Poisoned things. R.
30, 31, 34, 35s 53.
Q
Quicksiluer never made trial of by Galen. 27
R.
Rebisola paracelfi. 51 Reviving of the body 22, 32, 56 Read lead, 28 Rednes
in the face. 37 Rhabarb his extraction 60 Refreshing the spyrits. R. 43 Rosmary
flowers his oil 41
S
Saffron his essence 43 Sinews. R. 36 Sagapenum his extract 60 Sarcocolla his
extract Ibidem Scamoniae his extract 59 Silla his extract 58 Seoa his extract
60 Stopping of fluxes. 46 Such are to be put in purging medicynes, which do
either take away their venom or do very much weaken them 55 Sage his oil 40
Sweet Margerum his oil Ibidem Sal Tartary 39 Succiuu^ or Amber. 45 Of Saltes
purging by the cough 48 Salt of Saint John's worte Ibidem Sal polipodi Ibidem Of
saltes purging by urine 49 Salt of wormwood. 49 Salt of gentiane 49 Salt of
gratiola 49 Salt of Anonidis 49 Salt of Radish 49 Salt of broom 46 Salt of
Bean stalks. 49 Salt of Juniper. 49 Of Saltes purging by the womb 49 Salt of
Mugworte. 49 Salt of Balm Ibidem Salt of Celendine. 49 Of Saltes purging by
sweat ibidem Salt of lignum vite. 49 Salt of Scabiowes 49 Of Saltes swaging
pains ibidem Sal Macrobi, oleum eiusdem Ibidem Sal sanguinis humani, 50 Sal
perigrinorum 50 An addition to the same salt to preserve health 50 Salgeme 51
Sal nyter 52 Sal Petrae fusibilis 52 Stone in the gaul of a Bull. 37 Stone in
the mawe of an Ox. Ibidem Swaging pains. 34, 36 Sharpnes how it may be drawn
out of spirits 30 Shaking of the members 36 Salt of goats blood 32 Stinging
of Scorpions Ibidem Sandaraca 30 Sublimation does purify all things 28 Spotes
in the face taken away 38 Sigillum lemni essentia 33 Spleen. R. 23, 31
T
Thyrst slaked 31 Turpeti mineralis discriptio 26 Toothache 31 That the
preparations of Mercury are hard and difficult things to be done 27 The old
Physicians took many inward medicynes out of metals 23 Things strengthening
the stomach, 22, 33, 46 Turpeti extractum. 57 That the extractions of essences
will yield no congeled matter in the Bulk of the body 55 That the graynes of
Spurge though they be whole purge forcible 54, 55 That the medicynes which are
of thyn and subtle parts, are the most excellent 63 That some medecynes are
fitter then other, some for the purging of humors 53 That the venom or
malingnyte of medicynes is taken away by their true perparation 56 That all the
menstures of the Spagerickes are not hot, 55. And although they were hot yet
they hurt no thing in their extractions 56 Turpe^tinehys oil. 45 Time his oil
40
V
Of wine 38 Vinum alcalisatum. 38 Worm wood oil. 41 Viscawes and thycke
humors expelled* 27 Vitriolum, Col^oth^r* (...) Oleum, Sal spiri^^s 31 Vipers
prepared 35 Unicorns horn 36 Water of earth worms 37 The woolfe 30 Wounds,
R, 30, (...) Worms killed 27, 36 Veins opened 60 Coroded 58 Vomyting stayed
46 Venamous medicynes R. 53 Wild Radysh 54
FINIS.

