A TREATISE OF THE COURT or Instructions for Courtiers. Digested into two Books.

Written in French by the Noble, and Learned IurisiConsull Monsr Denis de
Refuges, Councellor of Estate, and many times Ambassador in foraigne Parts for
ye two last French Kings his Masters.

Done into English by JOHN REYNOLDS.

Imprinted by I M: for Will Lee and are to be sold at his shop in Fleets
street, at the siane of the Goulden Bucke near Seriants Inn. 1622

TO THE PRINCE
SIR,
Since Heaven, and Earth, your Blood and your Virtue have made you a most
Illustrious and Exquisite Prince; and since your Highnasse Court is a true and
conspicuous Academie of Generositie and Honor; I therefore conceived, that
this French Courtier was obliged to tender you his homage in English, and to
proffer up his best service to the Dignity of your resplendant and Princely
Virtues. And as Presidents are still the best and powerfulst Precepts, as well
to instruct the accutest wits, as to pollish and refine the finest Natures and
Judgments: so those of my Sacred Sovereign, your living Father, and of that
most excellent Prince, your dead (yet everliving) Brothers have made your
Highness an inimmitable Pattern and Paragon of all Court perfections.

Yet notwithstanding, when your more serious studies and generous exercises
will permit you to descend so low, as to peruse this Courtier (which sailing
from France, is now arrived in England)* J hope he will deserve, and
consequently obtain this testimony from your Highness, that his Ambition
has no other end, nor he any other Ambition then to show what Courtiers are,
what they should be, and not how Great, but how Good they are b^und to make
themselves in their conduction, both to their Prince and Country, to the end
that they may prove as happy, and as Illustrious Ornaments to their
Dignities, as their Dignities are to them. And although I cannot rightly
define, whether Ambition were more predominant, or Zeal preualent with me, in
daring permit this poor and unworthy Translation of mine to soar so high, as
to your Highness protection and Patronage; yet since my Author was both Noble,
Learned and Honest, whose fidelity and fame has crowned both himself and his
Works, I (out of the rich treasure of your Goodness, which sweetly shines to
the world, as well in your looks as actions) flatter my self with this hope,
that your Highness will vouchsafe to shelter him from the scandal of the
Envious, and to protect him from the Envy of the scandalous.

Go on Illustrious and Generous SIR, in your Heroical progression of Virtue
and Honor (wherewith both Arts and Arms ambitiously contend to Embellish and
adorn you) that as we are now truly happy in Royal JAMES your Father; so we
futurely may be as truly blessed in Princely CHARLES his Son, that your
Sword and Lance seconding his Pen, and your Laurels growing up with his Palms
and Olives, may still make the Church and Estate of these famous Kingdoms of
great Britain and Ireland, always Triumphant, always Uictorious, against
the malice of Rome, or the power of Hell, which shall dare seek, either to
eclipse the triumphs of their glory, or to assault (much less remove) the
Trophes of their glorious and flourishing prosperity.

Your Highness in all zeal and humility eternally devoted John Reynolds.

TO THE HONORABLE, IVDITIOVS, AND GENEROUS; Sr. EDWARD SACKVILE, Knight of
the Bath; My Honorable, and singular good MASTER.
Honorable,
IF your curious Judgment had not sought this excellent Treatise of the Court,
my Ignorance had not found him; for I ingeniously confess, that before you
first wrate me for him to Paris, I never heard of him, when led by the
excellency of your choice, and the soliditie of your approbation, upon the
perusal thereof, I was soon induced, both to affect him for his Fidelity,
and to admire him for his Wisdom; when considering (because knowing) that you
(resembling your self) not only cherish Wit, Courtship, Judgment and
Loyalty in your self, but also honor it generally in all men, and
particularly in the Noble and Learned Author hereof, Monsieur de Refuges (so
famous to France for his wholesome council at home, and happy Lega ions
abroad), I upon these foundations eraised the structure of this resolution to
deuest this his Work out of his French habiliments, and to sure him in our in
English atire, that England as well as France might participate in the
acquaintance, and enjoy the company of this his accomplished Courtier, which
having done, although in a phrase and style, altogether unworthy the luster and
sublimaty of his Original (which is still subject to lose a part of her
prestine Grace and Beauty in her Metamorphosis) albeit your Honorable Travels
have shown you so great variety of Courts, that you are far more capable to
teach, then be taught in matters of this nature; yet I had all the reasons of
the World (as well of Equity as Merit) to proffer up the first Book hereof,
to the Honor of your Patronage, and to the protection of your Honor, since it
is not a Donation, but a Retribution in lastly restoring you back that in
English, which (as before) you formerly gave me in French, in the perfection of
which exquisite Tongue (without either flattering you, or infringing the truth)
I may boldly affirm, few English can parallel, none excel you. Again, I did
it in your service, it is therefore yours by propriety, I did it out of mine
own private obligation to your immerited favors, it is therefore yours in the
right of debt and requital: which considered, before I shall be so happy to
deface my arreareges in some more real and serious manner, I hope you will
pardon my Zeal, though condemn my Ambition herein, especially since it is
addressed and devoted you by him, who will eternally remain both zealous and
Ambitious, as well to enjoy the honor to live, as the felicity to dye

Your Honors humblest Servant, JOHN REYNOLDS.

To my Reader.
IT was my desire, and withal my resolution not to have affoorded thee the
bare Complement of an Epistle, although the affectation and iniquity of our
times (in this Wane and Crisis of the world) rather make it Customarie, then
Commendable, if thou will know the reason why my thoughts were thus wedded to
my will. I answer: because I as much disdain to insinuate for the Sugar of
thy applause, as to fear the Gall of thy detraction: for how well or ill thy
curious English Pallat relish this my French Translation, I neither pass to
know, nor care to understand. That I have done it well, I am not so vain to
conceive, much less to arrogate. That I have done it ill, my Ignorance
retains this hope, that albeit I am condemned by my petty censuring Jurors,
yet I shall be at least reprieued by my understanding and competent Judges, to
whom, and to no others I appeal; those for their smattering in the French
Tongue, having only their eyes in their heads to see and censure; these for
their perfection thereof, their heads in their eyes to observe and distinguish,
so, though those report, that I level not at the letter, but at the sense; yet
these will truly find out, that I have chiefly aimde to strike the sense,
without extrauagantly straying or impertinently roauing from the letter.
Neither had I either Defended or Apologisd this my Translation, if the Press
(which runs swifter then our thoughts) had not made me guilty of many faults,
whereof my Pen was innocent, which I hope the Courteous and Iuditious will
winck at, though the Captious and Ignorant carpe at, and those pass it over
with a iuditious modesty, though these perchance) stumble at it with a
malicious dep^auation.

Howsoever, my comfort is, that if I have not righted myself, yet that I have
no way wronged mine Author, the preservation of whose intent, candeur, and
integrity, has been my greatest* Ambition, and not my least care; not that I
delight either to praise him in his Book, or his Book in him, since that were
a take as needles to attempt, as vain to perform, especially since the
greatest Courtiers as well of England as France, know, that as he gave life to
this his Treatise of the Court, so it is so far from Ingratitude, as with a
happy exchange and interest it has returned him Immortality; for such a
weauing and contexture of matter, so great variety of Heads so curiously
anotomisd and so concisely and accutely both commented and cymented, few
Treatises have (and I assure my self) none of this nature can justly Vaunt of.
The Ink wherewith he wrate it, was rather Milk then Vinegar, as teaching
Courtiers how to prevent their fall, in fortifying their subsistence, seeming
equally balanced, as well in commiserating the deaths of misfortunate
Courtiers, as providing for the prosperity of the living.

Grace, Wit, and Fidelity, are the Ornaments wherewith he strives to adorn
his Courtier, reputing nothing so inciuil in him as Ignorance, nor so execrable
as Treason; and then (resembling himself) he with a prayse-worthy Devotion
and Zeal (though not in express terms, yet in a dependant and necessary
consequence) wishes that the Court were (by Antithesis) opposite to the
Athenian Ostracisme, that Virtue might not be robbed of her Deserts and Honor
by Vice, but that Merit and Reward might still march hand in hand as Iumeals,
or else as two destinct Sisters, whereof that the Aisne, and this the Puisne,
which propagates not only the joy, but the glory of a Kingdom. In a word, he
has delineated him in so lively a shape, and depainted him in such rich
Colors, that when we find a Commonwealth so gouernd and reformd, as that of
Plato an Orator; so fluent and capable, as that of Cicero; or a Captain so
Valliant and Ingenious as that of Zenephon; then it is possible for us to meet
with the Courtier of Monsieur de Refuges, difficultly before.

And now (for mine own discharge) I am to advertise thee that in the first
Book, and 31. Chapter, I found the fifth Section wholly left out of the
Original: but whether mine Author did it unwittingly, or the French Printer
ignorantly, since I know not, I will not define; and therefore I have purposely
left a blanke for it, as holding it very unfit for me to fill it up with any
thing of mine own. And here to shake hands at parting, and to part as friendly
Enemies, if not as lou^ng Friends: if thou will not consider this my ensuing
conclusion for my sake, yet (at least) remember it for thine own. Some Readers
are courteous, some ungrateful, others injurious; and as it is in thy choice to
be either, so it is, and shall be likewise in mine either to care, or not to
care which thou be.

John Reynolds.

THE FRENCH STATIONER TO the Reader.
Friendly Reader,
I Hold it a part of my duty to render thee an account of this present Treatise
of the Court augmented as thou see with Summaries, Chapters and Sections, the
better to recreate and fortify thy Memory, and indeed far otherwise, and
withal far richer then it was at the first Printing thereof in Holland, or the
second in this City of Paris; having had it liberally presented and given me
purposely by the Friends and familiar acquaintance of the Author after his
decease, who all, now thought it both expedient and convenient, not to pester
it either with Marginall quotations, or diversities of Authorities and Authors
wherewith it was curiously embelished and adorned more for the sakes of
Sch^llers then Courtiers.

Pulchra satis vell fine vest placent. And now armd with their approbation, it
again assumes the light, enriched and graced by the last hand of his Author,
found with many other like pieces of Estate* in whose Theorie and Practi^e this
brave and Nobl Personage was versed and expert, thereby to serve, as indeed he
did as long as he lived, his King his Friends, and his Country, with wise and
wholesome Politic counsel of Estate, wherein he still most perfectly excelled.

(...). As Well in respect of his deep Learning and Studi^ as through the great
and long experience he had in the Courts and affairs of Kings, Princes,
Free-Estates, and Commonweales, wherein our last Kings very profitably employed
him, who demeand himself so wisely and happily, that they could no way find
any just cause to tax his grave and prudent carriage: and to speak the truth,
his manners were so composde, that he has left to Posterity a perfect Parragon
of his incomparable Uertues; to his Kinsfolks, Friends, and the whole Kingdom
a perpetual sorrow for his Death, and the loss of his sweet and pleasing
conversation. Accept therefore in good part (Frindly Reader this my labor and
care, in making thee see the fruits of so rare and accomplished a Wit, assuring
thee, that the rest of his works will not be detaind thee by his Illustrious
Parents and Kinsfolks, who have the care and keeping thereof, and of whom I
hope to obtain them through the favor and promise of their friends, thereby
futurely to impart them to the Public, when they shall understand, that my
Care and Diligence in this Impression (which indeed is most exact and
exquisite) has proficienc'd and profited our French wits and understandings,
and that thou receive this rich Treatise, according as it deserves with all
entire content and applause.

Farewell.
To my Noble and Learned Author, Monsieur de Refuges, upon my Translation of
his Treatise of the Court.
A Sixain.
ALthough my Care has traced thy curious Style,
In ecchoing forth the Spirit of thy Book;
Yet not my Readers hopes here to begui^e,
When from thy French he on my English ^ooke,
May Judge this comes as short of that, as ^ of thee:
Thus Arts great'st opposite is Ignorance vve^ee.
John Reynolds.

Again to him: An Acrostick Sonnet upon his Name.
Deep Mysteries of ^state and Courtship too,
Enriched and graced with so rich Grace and Art,
No Head nor Hand but only thine could do,
In Modelling, in all and every part,
So svveet and so complete a Courtier (clad so fine)
Depainted in so saire and rare a Frame,
Eternally makes thou in him to shine
Right like thy selse, and him in thy fair Name
E^ch b^^st in other, and both so glorious made
Far, sure beyond the Sphaere of common Praise,
Virtues save Monument which can not dye nor fade,
Grace, Art Wit, Judgment, decking ^^ with Bays,
England as France the^ sing Re^uges Glory,
Svvetly enshrined in this his Court ers story.
John Reynolds.

A TREATISE OF THE COURT: OR Instructions for Courtiers.
The first Book.
Wherein is very amply set forth, the principal parts requisite and necessary
in a Courtier.

CHAP. 1.
1 Of the incertainty, variableness, and alteration of the Court. 2 That in
Court there is more Fortune, then conduction. 3 That in Court Preferments,
Fortune is intermixed with good conduction. 4 The Author his excuse, upon the
method, order, and division of his Treatise.
1 OOf all sorts of conuersations, the most entermixed, dificult and ticklish
is that of the Court* Where (usually) no others betake themselves, but those
who are either driven thereunto by Ambition, or fraughted with a desire to
eraise their own fortunes. Now as these passions are violent, and for the most
part, more abounding in those who resolve to undertake so painful a
profession and faculty: so their motions are likewise violent, their
occurrences harsh and distastefull, and commonly the more usual and frequent,
in that diverse aim at one and the same end: for have Countiers occasion to
conceal any thing, their dissimulation is more apparent and their subtilty
more malicious, as being necessarily constrained to sympathize, and bear up
with the Pride and Vanity of those, who are in favor and credit with the
Prince; and many times being not able to content them in their (seldom
reasonable) desires: they run a hazard, rather to ruin then advance their
own fortunes.

In which Compo^tment, such is the variableness and incertainety, that it is
absolutely impossible to prescribe infallible and certain rules: Wherefore the
best advise and counsel in this cause is, that which we suddenly conceive,
when our vigilance and circumspection (as it were) denounces war to our
eyes: which makes that in this variety and incertainty, many have beleeud that
in Court preferments there is more hazard and fortune, then carriage and
conductio^.

2 And the Emperor Sigismund to teach a Courtier of his (who after many years
service, complained to have received no profit nor preferment of him) that such
faults proceed not from Princes, rather from the ill fortune of Courttiers:
proffered him two close boxes, the one full of gold, the other of lead; giving
him the choice of either of them, for his reward and recompense: who thinking
to take that of gold, took that of lead; whereby perceiving and acknowledging
his own bad Fortune, he condemned himselfo and acquitted the Emperor, in
that he had not formerly tasted the fruits, and enjoyed the effects of his
liberality.

3 Nevertheless we must not believe that Court affairs, are always governed
by Fortune: for it falls out there, as at Primere, or other plays, wherein
Fortune is directed and conducted by Art, and the best and subtilst Gamester
may lose if it cross him; but if it smile on him, and favor him, he then best
knows how to manage and govern it: and we may well say that not only the
Court, but the whole course of our life is the same, and hereunto may be fitly
and pertinently Compared.

Nevertheless, since the Court is an emmi nent and conspicuous Theater, exposd
to the sight and eyes of the world: we may therefore therein the better observe
and remarke the hazard of Fortune, in respect we must not omit the universal
and common rules that may best avail and profit us in this our comportment and
carriage, although they correspond, or concur not always with our desires:
many skillful Pilots have suffered shipwreck, although they have been well
acquainted with the Art and experience of Navigations; and others less seen
therein, without Astrolobe or Card, have happily vanquished and ouer-past many
long and dangerous voyages, and yet we know it folly to infer or conclude,
that therefore without Art, experience, Card, or Astrolobe, we should expose
our selves to the mercy of the winds and seas.

4. But certainly I could desire and wish, ye had chosen a more expert Pilot
then my self, to want ye through the Ocean of these Court affairs, it being
impossible, that (in the solitariness wherein I live) I should present ye any
other then a strange and uncertain map, and so depaint ye the directions and
examples, that fore-past time (the ordinary recreations of my solitariness)
has taught and instructed me: for to produce examples of these modern times,
although it could be performed with more profit: yet since we cannot speak of
the living without envy, I hold it more safe, less dangerous therein to be
silent.

Also, I believe your intent is not that I engage my self in such Treatises of
the truth, wherein ye are more expert then my self; to the end therefore that
I may observe and follow some order, and Decorum in so confused a subject, I
will first speak of the requisites most necessary in a Cour^^er, then of the
practice and use thereof in his behavior and carriage: whither it be to
advance himself into reputation and favor; or to maintain himself therein,
being already advanced; or to prevent his fall and disgrace, to the end he make
himself more pleasing and less rediculous.

CHAP. II.
1 Of the qualities most requisite and necessary in a Courtier, being the first
head and subject of this first Book. 2 Of his Civility. 3 Of his graceful
speech. 4 Of the countenance and gesture. 5 Of his apparel, and the nearing
thereof.
1 THe necessariest qualities requisite in a Courtier for his first entrance,
are civility and readiness to do Good unto all men: for his conduction and
behavior, Gracefulness, and Dexterity, and for his subsistence and
continuance, Patience, Humility, Boldness, and Capacity.

2 Ciu^litie chiefly consists in two points, whereby it makes us complete and
accomplished: the one a decency or gracefulness, whereunto with our best
endeauours we must pertinently strive to conform our selves: The other a
pleasing Affability, which makes us not only have access and welcome to all
those whom we would frequent, but also inwardly incite; and animates them both
to crave our company, and desire our familiarity and conversation.

3 This Dcc^^cy, or gracefulness, looks three ways: to wit, to our Speech,
Countenance and Apparel. In our speech, our voice must be clear, not harsh,
and yet neither too shrill, nor too low; not slammering, but smooth and
distinct; out terms and phrases must be modest, significant, intelligible,
and plain, and yet neither base nor affected: but still pertinent and proper
to the matters we confer of.

4 In our Countenance the air of our Visage must be pleasing, gracious and
modest, not affected, or constrained, but without the least shadow of
ridiculous postures or smiles: the carriage and comportment of our body must
be free from all Mimicke, or peevish gestures, and in all our usual actions,
as in eating, drinking, exercise, pastime, or the like: We must be Modest and
still follow that which is generally applauded of those, with whom we converse.

5 In our Apparel we must be decent, not prodigal or superfluous, and the
fashion thereof must correspond with the time, without too much affecting the
new, or being wedded to the old; but herein to be the better ordered and
instructed, we must consider the apparel and fashion, worn by those who in
Court are reputed both wise and graceful: to the end we may thereby
sympathize with them in the fashion of our Apparel, and so (as near as we
may) both reform and conform our selves to their immitation.

CHAP. III.
1 Of Affability in general, and wherein it consists. 2 Of the allurements
thereof. 3 To hearken and to be attentive. 4 To reprove pleasantly, yet
modestly. 5 What is chiefly necessary in great Personages. 6 Wherewith
Affability must be seconded and attended.
1 AFsabilitie consists of many points, but chiefly in knowing how to salute
and receive men respectively, and to entertain them courteously, how to meet,
honor, and entitle them: in a word, by exterior demonstration of affection,
and by assuring them of our Courtesy and good will, and with many alluring
gestures and compliments, giving them all approbation and considence to speak
freely unto us.

2 Neither is it sufficient to satisfy men's conceits, and only to make them
believe we love them, that we bear them much affection, and eagerly and
earnestly desire to serve and assist them: but we must endeavor with a
pleasing countenance; yea, with an agreeable reception, not only to entice but
to allure them to hant and frequent our company.

3 And having thus prevailed with them, and drawn them to our desires, we must
give ear and hearken to them, with all demonstration both of Content and
Patience; for he that will not be attentive, is never Affable: neither likewise
is he, who interrupts, or contradicts another man in his discourse; or which is
worse, who fore-stals, or foretells that he would say: it falling out often,
that they make themselves both rediculous and confounded, together with their
loss of breath and time, finding themselves many times in their own erroneous
opinions, farthest off from that which another inten^s to say: besides, to
interrupt or distract the conceptions of him that speaks, or not to listen to
him, is both an offense and injury, as also a true testimony of contempt and
disdain.

4 But we shall principally testify our attention, in answering pertinently,
and with judgment, and pleasantness, in avoiding as much as possible we may
all harsh jests and sharp replies, which in those who speak to us, will
speedily engender a hope that they may easily have access to us, and converse
with us as often as they please.

5 Yet although this facility and disposition to understand and answer, be
necessary to all sorts of people, as also to all replies, yet it is more
befitting and beseeming great Personages, who communicate of weighty affairs:
for their inferiors, believing that those who use these pleasing respects and
complements, do as it were make themselves their equals; are thereby induced
and assured, that they need not fear, fully to open and discover them their
thoughts and designs, as if it were to their friends and fellows. Yea we may
well affirm that in a manner, such do hereby as it were keep and retain the
keys of men's hearts.

But as the respect and honor a great man shows us, is not only agreeable
and pleasing to us in respect of his person: but also because his coutenance
and favor purchases us more credit in those who are present: right so his
dis-respect and disdain, does not only anger us because of himself, but it
is insupportable in respect of the base esteem that others make of us, to see
us so slighted and neglected of him.

6 Nevertheless, although this Affability must be accompanied with a pleasing
behavior and carriage: yet it is not therefore to infer, that it must not be
waited and attended on by that Decency and Gravity, which is answerable to our
rank and condition.

But as true harmony is engendered of the sweet and judicious Diapason of these
two discordant ^ones, pleasant, and grave: so affability must be intermixed
with sweetness, and severity, (or statlinesse:) or to say truer, to be a Medium
twixt these two extremes: so as the one affright not those with whom we
converse, nor the other make us seem displeasing, or vicious in their eyes:
but that it be conducted and gouernd with an agreeable sweetness and gravity,
according to the estate and quality, of the affairs, persons, and other
dependant circumstances answerable in all respects to the advice and counsel
that the Emperor Emanuell gave his Son Paliogus.

CHAP. IV.
1 That pleasant Jests and replies bear a part in Affability. 2 How we must
use them. 3 Whereof they must be framd. 4 What Jests and replies we must
eschew and avoid. 5 6 7 8 Of their difference and diversity. 9

1 PLeasant Jests and Replies make also a part of Affability, and serve to
temper our speech: Nature having infusd laughter into man, purposely to case
and recreate his sad and melancholy humors incident and subject to follow his
affairs: nevertheless, herein we must bear a clear judgment and a solid
discretion; for those who upon all occasions, licentiously use the contrary:
in stead of being Affable and Courteous, are commonly held for scoffers and
fools.

2 We must therefore use them soberly and modestly, and intermixe and disperce
them as lightning in the darkness of a Grave discourse: so that they neither
debase the dignity person, or mat ter that is to be treated of.

For as a little water powered on a great sire, the more enlightens and inflames
it, and if we throw too much thereon, does wholly dead and extinguish it: so
the frequency and excess of these Jests, lose their dignity and grace, in him
who makes it a continual profession to use them: whereas, if they be
scattered and disperced iudiciously, they reinflame, and give them the more
luster, vigor, and life; for to say truly, we should use them as sauce or
provocation to appetite, and not as meat, for fear lest in thinking to give
some relish to affairs, and negotiations, they chance procure distaste, if not
a surfeit.

3 But the quantity and quality of these Jests and replies, must be such, as
they comprehend in them, no odious conception or matter: to wit, that they
savor not of scurrilitie, turn not into a scandal or laughter, or into a
reproach of any shameful truth to him with whom we speak or confer: for
such broad taunts, quips, and lests, insted of counselling or reconciling men's
humors, sometimes provoke them to contempt, disdain, or hatred, and
especially great men are subject a long time to remember those of this nature.

And howsoever, although it be lawful to reply when we are touched or
assaulted with the like ^ests: Nevertheless, the most modest and wisest
council we can take herein, is to rebate the edge of such Jests, either with a
grave silence, or with no distasteful smiles, or laughter; rather then through
a bitter Jest or sharp reply to lose our friend.

4 We must also eschew and slye those Jests that are usually frequent in the
mouths of common people, which commonly savor something of baseness and
scurrilitie, as also those that are derived from equivocations, or those that
import a double sense or meaning: because for the most part, they are foolish,
constrained, and subject to be taken in ill part: but above all let us be
careful not to accompany our Jests with wry mouths, deformed gestures, or
unseemly countenances, as Knaves and Fools use to do.

5 Neither must such Jests be affected or premeditated, but conceiud, and
uttered without pondering or ruminating thereon.

6 We must also slye those that are too unkindly fetched, or that favor of
Pride or Presumption: and we must nor bite so sharply, that we engage our
selves, either in other men's malice, or hatred, or in our own shameful
acknowledgement or satisfaction.

7 Neither must we reproach others of that whereof we our selves may be
justly reproached: nor Jest at those who are misfortunate or miserable, since
it is two great a cruelty: nor at the wicked, since they are more worthy of hatred
then of laughter: neither at our friends, or patents, as being a matter full of
envy; and a true sign of a perverse and unnatural Nature. Briefly, whosoever
will delight in Jesting, he must be very considerate and respective of
persons, time, and place; as also of other necessary and dependant
circumstances.

8 As for the diversity of Jests and replies, they are many: some consisting
of a short word; some in the conceit and understanding of him who speaks,
others in the manner thereof: Or that we answer to that they lest expect from
us; or that we answer faintly and coldly, to a question demanded of us with
much vehemence and impatiency.

9 Of which Jests and answers although I could here produce many examples of
the Ancients: nevertheless, since they are sooner and better learnt by practice
and conversation, I will omit them, in respect they for the most part are cold
and impertinent to recite: if the words be not inflamd, and enriched with that
Grace wherewith they were formerly pronounced and uttered.

CHAP. V.
1 That Complements bear a great part in Affability, with their definition. 2
Of their Medium and Extremes. 3 That we should practice them according to
occasions, as also how to practice them. 4 Of the answers we ought return unto
them.
1 COmplements likewise clame a great part and share in Affability; we define
them to be a brief expression of love, a declaration or demonstration of
Honor, and an obligation to those whom we desire should believe they are
exceedingly respected and beloved of us with a reciprocal affection.

2 The manner of this Office and Compliment (as of all other matters) has both
its Medium and Extremes, in so much as to observe the Mediocritie, it is
necessary we enter into the consideration of the circumstances, person, place,
time, matter, and cause: why and wherein this phrase of speech is more sit for
great, small, or equal personages; or when there is no farther need, then to
testify a simple and small good will; or contrariwise when we ought express
and dilate a deeper respect and obligation.

But above all we must be careful, not so much to affect lofty words, as that
we engage our selves in any impertinent or impropper terms, or in any unfit
or far fetched replies, but to our familiars; we must use common phrases, and
not those that are affected or strained: in a word, here our tongue and our
Judgment must march hand in hand, as equals; and we must still accompany our
discourse with gestures, countenances, and other exterior behavior which may
express the like affection and desire; briefly making known the causes and
reasons that induce us to love or honor any one, or that we feel our selves
obliged to the^.

Among which, we must make choice of those Complements, that are more fit and
proper for the purpose, and that are more apparent and known of him to whom we
will perform them.

And if we have formerly received any testimony of his affection: either in
that he has performed us some friendly office, or that he has testified, or
expressed so much in his speeches: we must often remember it to him, and
attribute it to his kind Nature, full of affection and courtesy, the which he
will the sooner believe; because every one being deceived with the love of
himself, very easily persuades himself thereof, and reioiceth that another
believes, he possesses those perfections and qualities, that may make him
pleasing, esteemed, and beloved of all men.

And this means being practiced with Art and Discretion, has a certain
secret, and hidden power, to move and dispose our Understandings to believe
those who make use thereof.

I say discretion, because we meet with some Natures (although they are rare in
Court) who are so far from this common U^^itie, as they only esteem and
repute it, but the trick of a Mount-banke or Iugler; yoa, and for the most
part, they suspect and are jealous of this form of proceeding.

3 Wherefore with these we must avoid all degrees of affectation, and not enter
into such like complements: but in those Jest and replies whose custom makes
them necessary; or when we are enforced thereunto by the consequence or
dependence, of a discourse, or business, that may testify in us, rather a
habit, and firm resolution of our Will, then the impetuositie of any violent
or vehement affection, that may be suspected to be performed, either out of
inconstancy, immitation, or of set purpose and design.

4 In the answers we return to these complements: we must behave our selves
in the same manner and temper; but more particularly to meet and answer the
good offices, reported and acknowledged to be received of us: and albeit we
ought to extenuate them, yet not to diminish them more then is requisite and
fit, as some usually do.

Since in diminishing them too much, or by affirming it a matter we would
perform for any other, we thereby accuse him who receive and applaude those
our good offices done him: and who thinks to enjoy therein an extraordinary
testimony of our affection and good will; the which we our selves deminish in
deminishing it, so as we thereby dis-esteeme and vnderualew his worth, who
thought he had been obliged to us as a friend in comparison of those who are
not.

In which regard although our duty has sometimes led us to perform a good
office; yet we must make show that it is a particular affection that induced us
thereunto; and this nevertheless must be performed without any sign or
demonstration of vanity.

So much in general may be said of these degrees of friendly offices, which
practiced discreetly, may much avail to purchase us reputation and credit;
where contrariwise, if they are not accompanied with Wisdom, they will in the
end prove rediculous, and so it being omitted and neglected, may justly offend
those who expect to receive them from us.

CHAP. VI.
1 Of our readiness to perform a pleasure or good office. 2 Considerations
thereon. 3 4 5 We must do it voluntarily, speedily, liberally. 6 7 8 Having
performed it, we must not instantly expect or ^raxe the like. 9 We must not
displease one to please another. 10 Examples hereon.

1 Readiness to perform a pleasure (or good office) is one of the chiefest
requisites that should be in a Courtier, at least, in him who desires to be
scene, and bid welcome in good Companies, it contains the principal effects
of good will and friendship: that is to say, to pleasure others, and to
acknowledge it, having received the like of others.

Good offices we perform, are the cyment of humane society, and the fetters
and manacles (says an Ancient) wherewith we may inchaine and captiuate others,
especially at Court, where the interest and performance thereof is the twist,
or coard, that conioines and combines so many people one to another: yea,
although for the most part, they are drawn thereunto with different and
contrary affections.

2 But the chiefest consideration we must have and retain in performing a good
office, or pleasure, is to perform it in that manner that it may be agreeable
and pleasing to him that receives it of us: there being many occasions wherein
thinking to please, we displease; and this false out through our own default,
in not knowing the desire and inclination of him to whom we would do good.

3 Another consideration, is the manner how to perform a good office: for
there are diverse sorts and degrees of them; some are Honorable to those who
receive them, and indeed, these should be done, before the public eye of the
world, to the end their honor be the greater and more apparent.

4 Others are profitable; such are those when we assist and relieve the
poverty, weakness, shame, or necessity of him who receives them; and these
indeed must be performed secretly, and apart.

5 But both the one and the other should be done willingly, and cheerfully,
not repiningly, by constraint, or importunat solicitation, or request: for,
that which we depart from, or distribute in this manner, we give not, but
rather sell it at a dear rate; since requests and prayers are always
accompanied with submission and bashfulnesse.

6 They must also be done speedily, and willingly, for the lingering and
delaying hereof, is a sign either of doubt or of no great good will or
affection for soon to refuse, or late to give, is almost one and the same
thing.

7 According to Philosophy, good offices performd, should neither be mercinary,
or performd in hope to receive the like: but in Court there are none performed
or given otherwise; and yet we must do them so, as none may discover this hope
in us: but with all our industry strive to make them believe, that what we do
is freely; otherwise they are no more beholding to us, then to a Usurer, who
lends sorth his money to receive it again with interest.

8 Wherefore he that has performed a good office or pleasure to his friend*
must be aduisd, and take heed that he not suddenly demand him a recompense,
for fear that being discovered, to desire and crave the like, he make it
apparent he did it purposely for the same end.

9 We must also be careful, that in pleasuring one we displease and offend not
another in Court, for fear lest: we lose by the bye, that which we thought to
have gotten by the maine: if a good office that we propose our selves take no
desired effect, it shall be nevertheless wisdom in us to continue our best
endeavors and solicitations therein, there by to enforce the Ungrateful person
to take notice and knowledge thereof; at least if we be any way bound or
obliged to him for so by our new affections and good offices, we still refresh
and confirm our old.

But one thing whereof we must principally take heed, (although it be common in
Court) is, not to trouble or disturb him in enjoying that good he has
received by our means, as do those, who having procured an office for a man,
will make him execute it according to their own fantasy, and pleasure, and
refusing it will convert their affection into hatred, and so seek and plod to
ruin him, whom they have formerly preferred and advanced.

10 Thus did Ruffinus (under the Emperor Arcadius) to Lucian, whom he had
made Earl and Judge of the East; who afterward, not satisfying him in his
iniust request of Eucherius (Uncle unto Arcadius) he caused him miserably to be
slain.

This Example might be accompanied with diverse others of the like nature had I
not (as before) proposed brevity in this my Treatise.

CHAP. VII.
1 Of acknowledging and requitting good offices received, and wherein is
consists. 2 Of the consideration thereof. 3 How they are, to be measured. 4 How
to be considered according to the Persons. 5 The means we must observe in
acknowledging a good office done us. 6 When to acknowledge it.
1 LEt us proceed to the vnderstan^ing of a Courtesy or favor done us, which
consists in the orderly receiving and remembering thereof, as also in knowing
worthily both how, and when to requite it.

This favor, or good office done us, must be graciously received, with amiable
speeches, and a smiling countenance.

As for the remembrance thereof, we must express and testify it, in revealing
the content we have received, not only in praising and cherishing it, but also
in applauding and extolling our benefactor.

And for the regard of the recompense and requital, it must bear proportion,
and relation, to the benefit we have received, and to the persons and means we
have to acknowledge it.

2 A good office or courtesy done us, must be measured and considered in its
true nature, as whether it be great or small, easy or difficult, singular or
common, true or false, by accident or occasion, or whether it were done us in
our great need and necessity: for such favors and gratuities, are of great
force, and make us forget all former injuries and offenses, if there have been
any betwixt us: as contrariwise the refusal thereof in such a time is very
injurious, and makes us forget all former favors.

3 Good offices and Courtesies are likewise to be measured by the intent of him
who has done them: as if he have performed them to pleasure us, or for his own
private benefit, and ends; or through vanity, constraint, necessity or hazard,
either in not thinking thereof, or in imagining to have done the contrary.

4 The consideration of the persons may also more or less oblige us to
acknowledge received favors; for those are always best welcome, that are
imparted us from a friendly hand; and from those who for other respects we are
disposd and addicted to love. Contrariwise, it displeases and distasts us, to
be oblig^d to those who displease us, and to whom we would be no way engaged or
indebted; and that also which proceeds from him, that is in some respect bound
to us: for his courtesy being then justly due to us, we in that regard are the
less obliged to him.

5 As for the means we must use in requiting a received Courtesy, we must if
possible we can exceed, at least equal them, withal demonstration, that we
are bound to more: and that this is not to satisfy the debt, but rather only
to acknowledge the obligation.

Likewise, when we cannot do otherwise, we must at least pay with a pleasing
demonstration of good will, wherein those exceedingly fa^le, who having
received some especial favor, which in effect, they cannot sufficiently
acknowledge, instead of requiting their benefactors with affection and
friendship, they reward them with contempt and hatred, flying and eschewing all
means to meet them: for fear their presence reproach them either with
ingratitude or poverty.

6 Now having obtained the means to requite a former received court^sie, we
must then seek all occasions to come out of their debt, yet with these
precautions, that we do it not either too soon or too curiously; to the end
that we seem not impatient to be obliged to our friend; or that thereby we
imagine, he did us a fouour purposely to receive another from us.

But we must requite a favor or benefit a little after we have received it;
and yet not protract or delay it too long neither: to the end it grow not old,
but we must do it when some fit occasion presents it self to us, or shall
be sought for by us; yet still, with this Prouiso that we do it without
flattery, or ostentation.

CHAP. VIII.
1 Of an active and nimble wit, the second head of this first Book. 2 A
digression upon the difference of the Person^, and wits of men, and of their
natural Capacities. 3 Of natural Capacity. 4 Of men's temper in general. 5
From whence Capacity and Understanding proceed, and of Intellectual wisdom
and her faculues. 6 A rule how to treat and converse with those who are wise
and judicious, and of their behavior. 7 8 Of Wisdom that proceeds from
Imagination, and of the manners of those who are fortunate therein. 9 10 Why
Fortune is most commonly propitions, and favorable to the wicked.

1 A Sharp and sound Judgment, (or an active and nimble Wit) consists in
knowing how to distinguish of Persons, affairs, and other circumstances, and
accordingly how to order the manner of his proceedings, both in his speech and
silence.

2 Now the difference of men's affairs and other circumstances are infinite:
wherefore we will here select and produce no others but those we observe to be
most frequent and common in men's conuersations: and that may awaken and stir up
our wisdom, to the consideration of others, whom we not so usually frequent
and meet.

The difference of persons, is drawn either from their interior faculties,
from whence proceed their actions; or from their exterior conditions, whereby
(as through a cloud) we may discern something of their inclinations.

There are two Interior Influences, and powers in us, which serve to propagate
and produce all our actions: to wit, our Understanding, and our Will. But men's
spirits, or Understandings, are very different, so as we may make as many
degrees of them, as there are of men in the whole world; but for the better
order and method in our Treatise, we will destinguish them by Capacity and
Incapacitie.

Capacity is either natural, or purchased.
3 Natural Capacity proceeds of the perfection of the Organes or instruments
which Nature gives us: for the operation of the functions of Understanding; and
these we may reduce to three heads, Understanding, Immagination, and Memory:
and the Capacity of Wit, is either in one, two, or all three of these: this
diversity, as some report, coming from the temper of the heart; but according
to others (whom indeed I follow) from that of the brain.

4 This temper is nothing else but a commixture of the four first qualities
which not being in one, and the same subject, all in the like quantity,
weight, and measure. We term the temper from the name of that, which in
virtue and strength predominates and o're-swaieth all the others.

Some attribute the Capacity of Understanding to a dry temper that consists
in distinguishing, choosing, and inferring.

Hence it comes to pass, that old men, whose brains are dry, have commonly
most Understanding, and are wiser then young men; and so likewise are poor men,
who because necessity afflicts them, consequently dries up their brain: and
these very often are both fortunate in Wisdom, and rich in Understanding.

5 I say of Wisdom that springs from Understanding, there being another sort
that proceeds from the vigor of Immagination, whereof we will anon speak:
but this whereof we now entreat, is heavy, and slow, because of a long
discourse and ratiocination we must make before, we resolve: yea, to proceed
diliberatly, and upon sound foundations, intermixed with dissidence and
coldness, an excellent temper to negotiat with all sorts of people.

6 For those Wits and Understandings not staying, or stopping, to the
authority of others, in their conceptions and perquisitions: but resolute in
themselves to examine the first and fundamental Maxims by their own
particular discourse and ratiocination; we must content them with reason, and
not neglect or lose time, to persuade them through other men's reputation and
credit.

7 But for the rest of their comportment and proceedings, they must commonly
relish of Simplicity, Innocence, Humility, Mercy, and Affability, and the
greatest part of their actions, are very temperat and moderat.

8 From the hot temper comes Immagination, and as heat is the actiuest quality
of all four; so Immagination is more nimble and active then the other
faculties: but as there are many degrees of heat, so the virtue and efficacy
of Immagination is likewise different.

9 He that is truly Immaginatiue, is generally talkatiue and a great speaker,
as also Incontinent, Arrogant, Presumptuous and Vain: heat representing him
diverse humors in his Immaginations; whereof to content himself, he now
chooses one, and anon another: and this very heat does as it were boil his
moistnes, and thereby stirs up many vapors in his brain, that engender
Presumption and Vanity: which debar and hinder that Understanding can
neither see, nor choose, the truth, which to define rightly is indeed her
chief and princ^pall effect: so that in such Wits we very rarely meet with
that Wisdom we now spa^e off, but only a spark of heat that throws them
into some pretty invention, with a foresight of that which ensues, which only
Imagination presents them, and this Wisdom consists chiefly in ending and
breaking off of matters, which never falls out fortunatly, unless we negotiate
with men of the same humor, except it be in affairs that depend of a speedy
execution: for surely in these, Imagination prevails.

And it many times falls out, that such Wits give themselves sooner to evil
then good: because heat thrusts them on violently to vice, and forgeth them
many subtle inventions to compass their desires and designs.

10 Hence it is that Fortune generally proves propitious to the wicked, since
they be more Imaginatiue then the Veruous: sharper in their inventions, and
more inconsiderate, and less stayed in their executions: althings through the
swiftness and viuacitie of their endeavors: (for the most part) happily
succeed and answer their desires.

Now as we have said, that (commonly) poor men are wiser in the operations of
Understanding then of Imagination: so we may well affirm, that the rich are
more apter and proper in those of Imagination then of Understanding: because
(as Naturalists affirm) these through their dainty fare become Sanguine, and
consequently of a hot, and moist temper, which is opposite to that of a dry.

CHAP. IX.
1 From whence comes the Capacity of Memory, with their conditions who excel
therein. 2 That Imagination and Memory never meet together. 3 The humors of
the Imaginatiue in the first degree. 4 5 In the second degree. 6 In the first
and last degree. 7 The conclusion of the natural Capacity of Understanding.

1 MEmory has for her share and portion, the moisture of the brain; from
whence it comes, that Children and young folks have better and readier memories
then old people: and after their mornings sleep, have it far fresher then at
night, the reason consists in this; sleep moistneth the brain, and watching
dries it up.

Among these sorts of Wits, we shall not find much less Vanity and
Ostentation then in the Imaginatiue: nevertheless, wanting more pondering and
deliberation, they are easier carried away, by authority, reputation, and
president, then the others.

But as temper consists not in one particular quality, but in the combination
and commixture of all four: so although in the operations of Wit, we know one
of the three faculties domineer in some persons; yet to make it capable and
complete, we must have the other two: and if not in the like degree and
measure, yet with some power and sufficiency to direct it.

2 Understanding and Memory, can in no sort conioine and sympathize in the same
degree; because dry and moist can in nothing conceive, or imagine with the like
power and efficacy: from whence we may conclude, that he who has a good
Understanding, has but a bad Memory: and contrariwise, he that has a good
Memory, has but a bad Understanding.

Likewise, where moisture abounds, there can be no great heat; because, in the
end heat consumes moisture: and consequently, they cannot excel in Memory,
who in the third degree have hot brains, as they do that are truly
Imaginatiue.

For if they remember matters well and perfectly, it is not in them as much an
effect of Memory, which is only a passive faculty to receive, and not an
active, as an effect of Imagination that depends, and has a share in
remembrance.

These sort of people likewise, have no great Understanding: for although this
heat produce and engender dryness in the brain; nevertheless, because it is
an enforced and constrained dryness, which dries up the most delicate parts of
the brain, and leaves nothing but the gross and earthly; it cannot produce
the effects of the Understanding, as Natural dryness does.

3 And from th^nc^ it comes that Poets and great bablers, who enjoy this degree
of Imagination (for the most part) are seldom wise.

4 For this promptitude and viuacitie, that heat engenders in these sorts of
Wits, and which for a time makes them admired; is not only contrary to the
operations of Understanding, that requires time and leisure, but also is a
great propension and disposition to folly.

Of whom we may understand that which Aristotle says, that there is no great
Wit without some mixture or spice of folly: and to speak truth it is a miracle
to find one of them wisely moderate, and moderately wise.

We therefore conclude, that Imagination and Understanding in this degree of
heat, cannot meet together in the same subject; from whence it comes, that
those who excel in Understanding, never prove good Poets, or great Orators;
and those of this temper, who are their Art-masters in this profession, have
had need to refresh and warm their Imagination, some by Wine, some by Love,
and others have obtained to be Poets through Choler and Indignation.

5 In other degrees of heat, Imagination may meet with Understanding and
Memory: but those who are in the second degree, shall have less Memory, more
Understanding, and a perfecter Imagination; and shall find out and know that
which is most profitable, as by inuenting of subtilties, wiles, and expedients,
to treat and manage affairs: yea, to foresee and prevent the future, and to
lead, and as it were to counsel and govern others.

Such people are commonly cholerike, and swart, and therefore variable and
inconstant in their humors and resolutions; now heat, then dryth, and anon
cold, working their several effects in them.

6 In the first, and last degree of heat, Imagination concurres and
sympathizeth with Memory, the heat being not so excessiuely fervent to consume
the moistness; and those who easily learn to paint and write well, hold of
this temper: and so likewise do those, who we see are very curious to be
proper, neat, and decent in their apparel, as also in other small curiosities
that recreat and delight the eye.

7 Notwithstanding, although for the most part these sort of men are arrogant,
and proud; nevertheless, being endued with no great Understanding, they
conduct, and bear themselves more by the authority and reputation of others,
then by their own reason or iudgemen^s: Let this suffice to know the Natural
Capacity of the Understanding.

CHAP. X.
1 Of Capacity obtained by Wit. 2 As also by Arts. 3 Which Arts have need of
Understanding. 4 Which of Memory. 5 Which of Imagination. 6 How gotten by
Experience, and wherein experience consists.
1 LEt us come to the purchase: this Capacity is obtained, either by Art, or
by Experience; and that it may be such as may answer our desires, it must of
necessity be conjoined with the natural: (to wit) that the faculty of
Understanding most predominant in us, be proper for the Art, whereunto we will
adresse and betake our selves.

2 Of Arts and Sciences, some have more need of Understanding then others;
some of a nimble Imagination, and others principally want Memory.

3 School Divinity, the Theorie of Physic; Dialect of Natural, and Moral
Philosophy, and the practice of Law, which is to Consuit and Judge, all these
have need of an excellent Understanding.

4 To learn Languages, the Theorie of Law, positive Divinity, Cosmograph^e
and Arithmatique, we must strive to excel in a ripe and happy Memory.

5 As for Imagination, all that consists in form, neatness, propriety,
correspondence proportion, harmony, and order, depend thereon; and
consequently Poesy, Eloquence, Music, the Mathematics, Astrology,
Phisique, Policy, the Art Millitarie, Painting, Meca^^ke Trades, with
Architecture and Commerce: and all these in several manners and degrees, which
are best known, according as every profession has more or less need, either
of Understanding or Memory.

6 Experience chiefly consists in remembering of Examples, or of that which we
have formerly seen, done, or understood: it has need of Imagination, but
chiefly of Memory; Nevertheless, the Examples that we might here present,
agreeing not in all points and circumstances; if we will hence draw any
consequence, and so please our selves with choice, and judgment, we have
always more need of Understanding, then of any other faculty.

CHAP. XI.
1 Of the Incapacitie of Wits, and the causes of this Incapacitie. 2 From
whence proceeds the natural weakness of Wit, and the effects thereof. 3 Of
Inconstancy in opinions. 4 Of Presumption. 5 Of Vanity. 6 Of the manner how
to negotiate with the Vain glorious. 7 That Presumption and Judgment cannot
agree. 8 The properties of those who have moist brains. 9 Of those who have
moist and hot brains. 10 Of those who have moist and cold brains: and of the
Incapacitie of some sorts of Wits. 11 Of the weakness of Wit, which proceeds
from Ignorance: two sorts of Ignorance; The one Presumptuous, and of her
effects. 12 The other simple and Innocent, and of her effects.

1 BY the difference of the Capacity of Wits we may easily know those that
turn into Incapacitie: Nevertheless, because our defects are far more then
our perfections, which we can obtain, either through Nature, or Industry: we
will discourse of them severally, that by the differences of Incapacitie, we
may the better discern and know those of Capacity.

2 The Incapacitie of Wit proceeds of many causes, whereof the chiefest is the
weakness of Wit, and preoccupation The weakness of Wit, proceeds either from
Nature or Ignorance: From Nature, if the temper of the brain be contrary, or
unfit to the operation of the faculties of Wit, or that it engender some
disorder in their functions.

3 The brain that is either too hot or too cold, begets Inconstancy in
opinions: but in the last, the motion thereof is slow, and the Wit dull in her
Understanding, and conceits; and always accompanied by fear, and
Inconstancy, in these sorts of Wits; without execution, very often disolues
into Irresolution, still relishing and finding that council best, when the
time of its execution is past, and consequently too late to be remedied.

Inconstancy that comes from the excess of heat, is occasioned by diverse
expedients that Imagination represents to our Understanding, and through
defect in not being able to choose that which is best, in respect of the
promptitude incident to this active quality.

4 I have heretofore said, that Presumption and Uanitie, usually concur in
those tempers that are fit for Imagination and Memory: but Presumption is more
frequent in that of Imagination; and Vanity in that of Memory; and yet both
are opposite to the opperations of Understanding and Judgment.

5 For the nature of Vanity, is to esteem and value matters, by the show, the
luster, the beauty, and not by the truth thereof; reputing actions, as they
are performed, with much greatness and ostentation: dispraising those that are
done softly, coldly, quietly, and peaceably; as preferring Art before Nature,
an enforced Wit before a natural one, and extraordinary before ordinary.

6 These Wits, are also most commonly paid home with smoke, wind, exterior
decking, and false coin, which they prefer before that which is perfect and
good, prising more the currantnesse, then the interior value thereof:
wherefore, they must be fed according to their palate: and Curiosity being
commonly engendered of Vanity, we must entertain, and feast them with curious
things, although never so unprofitable.

7 As for Presumption, she likewise cannot sympathize with Judgment: for she
makes Understanding prefer her own sufficiency and inventions, before other
men's; believing nothing but that which she understands, and holds that
impossible she understands not; framing all things according to her belief
and opinion, without farther examination thereof: and these are the defects
found in these sorts of Wits.

8 Those whose brains are too excessiuely subject to a waterie and slymie
moistness (there being another sort, that is oily and subtle) do both
quickly learn and forget as having their senses stupefied, and their motions
dull and slow.

9 If the brain be excessibly moist and hot, their conceits are gross and
shallow; if cold and dry in youth, they mount higher then the course or
strength of age permits: but the more we advance and ascend herein, the more
our Understanding becomes old and rustie.

For that which makes our Wits active and sprightfull in our youth, is natural
heat; being then in its prime and force, which as we increase in years by
degrees, waxes old and diminishes.

10 And if the brain be cold and moist, then their Understanding will be dull
and slow.

11 The nature of these Wits, is to examine a matter more by the color then
the cause: whereat their Capacity cannot reach unto, to judge of Counsels by
the event, rather then by reason, and not to lay hold of any part of a
business, but the skin or bark, without examining the depen^ance or
importance thereof, although it be far distant.

The Imbecilitie that Ignorance engenders in our Wits, are of two sorts.

The one is commonly attended on by Presumption which makes us contemn and
disdain all that is prepos d us: and this indeed is true Ignorance, (the
mother of Obstinas^^, Contention, and Contradiction) and incapable to be either
left or changed: Wherefore, by one and the same means, we may revenge our
selves, and be entertained of this sort of people, in still leaving them to
their errors: and commonly such presumptuous persons give fair play, and leave
a breach open to those who will enterprise upon them: whereof Seianus took his
advantage to be freed of Drusus.

12 As for the other sort of Ignorance which is more simple and innocent, it is
still accompanied with astonishment and admiration: yet being flexible and
tractable, it may be instructed and changed, using reason with authority,
which oftentimes is very preualent with such Vnderctandings.

CHAP. XII.
1 Preoccupations, are the cause of Incapacitie in our Understanding: from
whence they proceed. 2 Two sorts of opinions, proceeding from the persuasion
of one particular man. 3 What they occasion, and the remedy thereof. 4 From
whence come those opinions grounded on custom. 5 Every profession have their
particular opinions. 6 Whereof a Courtier must be chiefly informed, and his
precautions. 7 The effects, and considerations of opinions, built upon common
estimation. 8 according to the Raritie. 9 Abundance. 10 Absence, or Presence.
11 Facility, or difficulty. 12 Nouelty, or strangeness. 13 Custom.

1 LEt us proceed to preocupations, that may engender and breed in us some
Incapacitie. False opinions wherewith the Understanding may be preocupated,
come either from some particular man's persuasion, or from custom, or passions
wherewith our Will may be surprisd.

2 A particular man may imprint in us an opinion contrary to truth, either
through the credit, or authority he has over us; or as being the first which
gives us this impression.

3 The first, is a witness of facility, and the second, of too much
promptitude, which being not accompanied with Judgment, for want of Capacity
to judge and distinguish the truth, remains and is linked to the first
impressions: wherefore the safest course and counsel herein, is to prevent
those Wits, and to take order that others prevent not them.

4 The opinions that Custom imprint in us, proceed either of breeding and
particular conversation, or else of a general custom: it is true, that he who
has been bred at home, is of other opinions then those that are professed
Travelers, and for not understanding to make this difference: Musonius the
Philosopher was laughed at, for preaching peace to the Soldiers of Ualens.

5 Every Profession and Vocation have their particular opinions; not only,
because they concern the said Profession, but sometimes for those very things
that are common one to another.

6 Wherefore a Courtier must be informd not only of the Court, but also of
those of particular men, with whom he is to confer, to the end, that
accordingly he govern and conduct himself: the which he shall learn not only
by their actions and discourse, but also by the breeding and conversation
wherein they have been brought up, and live; it being certain, that it
commonly falls out, that we resemble those with whom we have lived and conuers'd.

7 As for those opinions built upon the estimation, which the vulgar sort of
people make of things: they to overthrow the truth, fight with more authority
and power in our Understandings: not only in this universal approbation,
whereunto none dare oppose, but also by the scarcity or aboundacce, absence or
presence, difficulty or facility, novelty or Custom of certain things
whereof the price rises or falls, according as we please to use or esteem them.

8 So through scarcity and raritie, many things not greatly profitable, are
much prisd and esteemed, as Dimonds and Pearls, by reason whereof those who
have in them some rare qualities and perfections, although unprofitable, are
always reputed and esteemed above others.

9 Contrariwise, abundance makes us disesteeme and undervalue our plenty,
although it be not only profitable, but necessary.

10 Likewise, the want and absence of any thing makes us in our Imagination
more esteem it then the enjoying thereof; whether it be before we have it, or
after we have left it, and the retaining thereof makes us dis-esteeme it,
because of the sacietie which the enjoying thereof commonly engendereth in us.

11 The difficulty also in getting it, makes us value things beyond their
worth: provided that the purchasing and obtaining thereof, be not altogether
impossible, and the facility makes us prise them as Common; without respecting
their worth or natural value.

12 Novelty and strangeness make us likewise condemn certain things, as
being unprofitable; and in others (as we have formerly said) the admiration of
the raritie and strangeness thereof, induces us to ouerprise and value them.

13 Contrariwise, Custom^ makes us undervalue some things, as being too common;
and sometimes again, it causes us esteem and prise them far beyond their
value and worth.

CHAP. XIII.
1 Of Preocupation according to our Passions, and his effect according to love
and hatred. 2 Joy. 3 Sorrow. 4 Fear and Choler.

1 AS for the preocupation of Passions, it is but too often that they inueagle,
and sometimes absolutely blind our Understandings; as love that adds beauty
to the object we affect; which is neither seen nor known to those that are
not blinded with this passion; so hatred and Envy suggest deformity, and
extraordinary horror in the object, it hates.

2 Joy so much affects the object of that which inflames it, as she cannot be
silent, and sometimes becomes so vain and talkatiue, that it apparently
discouers our Understanding is out of her proper throne or seat, and so make
it self ridiculous.

3 Contrariwise, sorrow is dumb and silent, and as it were forsaken and
dejected; yea, it so enfeebleth our Wit and Judgment, as from thence comes the
Proverb, That from slaves, and miserable people, God has taken away the one
half of their Understanding.

4 As for the alterations, that Fear, Choler and other passions engender in
our Understanding, every man not only discernes, but feels them in himself.
Whereof purposing hereafter to entreat, I will at present content my self with
that which I have already written to show the obstacles and hindrances they
give to the functions of Understanding, although very capaple in other matters,
as also the differences and alterations they produce not only in our Wills, (as
we will hereafter show) but also in our Wits and Understandings.

CHAP. XIV.
1 Of our Will, being the third head of this first Book. 2 From whence comes
the diversity of Wills. 3 The difference of the Will of our Understanding. 4
Considerations of goodness, and her object. 5 6 7 8 Considerations of the
motions of our Will. 9 Of the diversity of their object, and of that it
produces. 10 Considerations of evil simply: of her objects, and of that it
produces. 11 12 13 14 15

1 COme we now to speak of our Will, which gives an assault to our
Understanding, which of it self is indifferent to all sorts of objects.

2 The differences of our Will proceeds either of the Diversity of objects,
which present themselves to her, or of the Diversity of her own motions.

3 The objects are infinite: but all are conceived and taken by the Will,
either as Good or Evil: as Good, the Will follows them; as Bad, it flies from
them: from whence are derived the two principal motions, the one first, the
other last.

4 Good and Evil, in this cause must not be esteemed according to the opinions
of Philosophers, or common people, but according to the particular opinion of
the person whose Will we would understand and know, to the end, that according
thereunto we may rule and order our selves in that we have to do, it being the
chiefest effect of an active and solid Judgment.

5 For in some men, the consideration of H^nour will effect more then that of
Wealth; and in others the hope of enjoying a pleasure, is more powerful then
either hope, profit, or pleasure.

6 A man's discourse and actions, sufficiently teach us the chief inclinations
that he affects one object more then another: at least, if we will carefully
descerne and epsy it.

7 But if we have to treat of any particular affair: we must especially
observe what the party with whom we treat chiesly desires or fears in that
business, although it may fall out, that according to his desire, there is no
thing to be feared of: For herein we must govern our selves according to
other men's opinions, and not to our own: Let this suffice for the effects.

8 In the motions of our Will, we must consider not only their Diversities and
Differences, but also, the use of this Knowledge; thereby neatly to prevail in
all occasions that befall us.

9 The Diversity of the motions of our Will comes from the diverse forms which
the object conceived of us, represents us: for Good considered of us, simply
as it is, engenders a pleasing affection of the object, which we term Love,
or Friendship: and if it be present, then in obtaining thereof, is borne Joy;
in the use, Rejoicing, Pleasure, and Content; if to come, that motion is called
Desire: and if we seek the means to obtain it; judging it possible, we
thereby enter into Hope: if impossible, into Despair.

10 Evil, considered simply as it is, breeds in us only Hatred, which in
anoiding and flying thereof, is termed Horror; if it proceed from the absence
of any good thing we want, Sorrow takes place in us; if of the presence of any
evil, then grief and anger; if it touch our Honor and Reputation, before the
act, it breeds bashfulnesse, then shame.

11 If the evil be to come, it breeds Timiditie; if it extend to the execution
either of our Nature or being, fear; if for evil past, repentance; or if for
that of others, then pity and compassion.

12 If we think to overcome this evil, as inferior to our strength,
confidence will assure us, and courage and boldness, animate and provoke us on
to undertake it.

13 if the evil we have received, bear in it any contempt or disdain, either
of our selves or our friends, then the feeling and remembrance thereof will
excite us to Choler; which if it last not long, we may term Anger.

14 Sometimes other men's good and prosperity, is an evil to us, and their
evil and misery a good to us, according to the affection or hatred we bear
the party to whom it happens: as that which befalls our Riuals, Competitors, or
Enemies; from whence comes Envy: And the good or prosperity which we desire
only for our selves, without any intent to confer, or impart it to others: if
another participate thereof, we esteem it a wrong, and evil to our selves;
from whence arises Jealousy.

15 If we be angry at the good or prosperity of other men, esteeming them
unworthy thereof; from thence grows Indignation; or if we desire it for our
selves, then Emulation.

CHAP. XV.
1 The use of the knowledge of the motions of our Will. 2 Three things to be
considered therein. 3 The dependancy of these motions in ingendering one the
other. 4 The motions of the Concupiscible part. 5 Of the Cholerique part. 6 The
Order and dependances of the Will, destinguished according to the intention and
execution. 7 8 9 10 The Order of the motions of the Concupiscible part among
themselves. 11 12

THese are the chiefest motions of our Will: from whence we may recollect and
know in how many sorts and degrees, good and evil presents themselves unto us.

1 Nevertheless, for the use, and to draw some profit hence, we must pass on
to the Knowledge of these motions: the use whereof chiefly consists in seeking
out the means, either to incite and stir them up in others, or to moderate
them not only in others, but also in our selves: or else by pleasing and
humouring them, to dispose and accommodate our selves to others, if it be
requisite and necessary to follow them.

2 To stir up these motions in others, the knowledge of three things is very
necessary, to wit, the dependence of these motions in engendring one the other:
of the most universal causes which stirs up every motion, or at least the
chiefest, whereon the rest depend, or men's dispositions in more bending or
enclining to one of these affections, then to the other.

3 To come to the dependence, we must know, that every object is considered,
simply; either as good or evil: or else with an intent and desire to obtain
the one as good, and to secure himself from the other as evil.

4 The motions produced of the first consideration (as Naturalists hold) are
engendered of the Liver (being the seat of the faculty which they term
Concupiscible); and this is occasioned by the spirits that are in our blood:
from whence proceed the motions of all the faculties.

5 And those that are produced by the second consideration, are bo^ne in our
heart, the seat of the faculty, which they term Choleric: and according to
this destinction we separate and divide in two, all the motions of our will.

Those of our Concupiscible Will, spread farther then those of our Choleric:
for those move without any respect or observance to the object: so does desire,
and the other stays thereat; so does Joy, but none of the motions of our
Choleric Will staics at the object.

6 But the stay or rest, being the end of the motion, is the first in
intention, and the last in execution: wherefore if we confer or join our
Cholerike motions, with those of our Concupiscible which stop and stay at good;
it is certain that those of the Choleric in the order of execution will
deuance and take the hand of our Concupiscible motions, which only stop and
stay at good: so hope takes place and is the Herald and Forerunner of Joy.

7 But our Concupiscibile motion which stays at evil, will be in the midst
of our two Choleric motions: so Anger follows Fear; and yet goes before
Choler.

8 As for our Concupiscible motions, which stay not, either at good or evil,
being conioyn'd with those of our choleric: our Choleric adding the
consideration of the difficulty, either in obtaining good, or avoiding evil,
marches first, and goes beyond our Concupiscible: so hope adds some power
beyond desire, and fear ads debilitie or baseness to our courage, in the
apprehension either of horror, or evil.

9 From whence we may conclude, that Cholerike motions are between those of
the Concupiscible, that stop or stay not; to the object, and for those that do
stay, they are deuanc'd by the first, and followed by the last.

10 As for the order of Concupiscible motions among themselves, it must also be
diversely considered, either according to the intent or execution in the object
of good: and that which is first conceived and engendered in us, is a certain
delectation and agreeableness of the object, after our desire is once framed
and formed, which is a motion to Good, and the last point is the purchase and
obtaining thereof, and this ingendereth I^y and Pleasure.

11 According to the intent, Pleasure marches first: for the which we desire
good; and from this desire comes love, then delight.

12 But the appetite and desire of Good, being an occasion that we fly Evil:
the object of Good, in this goes before the object of Evil; and so the motions
and passions which look to the object of Good do in intention take the hand,
and go before those which look to the object of Evil: and this has power
as well in Cholerike as Concupiscible motions.

CHAP. XVI.
1 Of the order of Passions as they engender one another. 2 The causes of
Passions. 3 Of those Passions which have Goodness for their object. 4 Of the
love of conformity, and all that is considerable therein. 5 Of friendship for
our own particular interest. 6 Of the effect of friendship. 7 The causes of
Desire, and from whence it is engendered. 8 The causes of Hope. 9 How Experience
forti^ies Hope. 10 The force and Power of Hope. 11

1 THe order of Passions as they produce, and engender one the other, is thus:
Love, Desire, Hope, Boldness, Joy; and contrariwise, Hatred, flight to
Horror, Fear, Choler, Disp^ire, and Sorrow.

So Joy and Sorrow, are the Passions wherein the others end and terminate.
Hope, Fear, Choler, and Despair, are those wherein reside the most violent
motions of the Will, assaulted and shaken, either by love and desire of Good;
or by hatred and horror of Evil.

I will purposely omit to speak of other Passions, because they observe no
order among themselves; but as the one or other of these entermixe and conioine
among themselves, so accordingly they either march before, or follow after.

2 Let us come to the most usual causes whereby these Passions may be stirred
up, and we will begin with those who have Goodness for their object.

3 Love, Desire, and Joy, have this Good for their common object; but hec that
loves considers it particularly, as an object that may be united to himself.

But a Union being not able to proceed, except in the like things, or though,
not in all points, at least in some one which is very considerable: as, the
similitude or resemblance is of two sorts, so this affection proposes it self
now to the one, anon to the other: according to the accedents and events of
matters.

For that wherein two persons conioyne and meet, is either actually or
effectually in these two persons; as, the like humors and conformity of Wills,
from whence comes true friendship: or else it is in effect, either in the one
or other, through Desire, or Incli^ation; and from thence, likewise is
ingendered Love, or Amity, for our own interest, whose principal foundation,
is the love of himself: whereon almost all the friendships of the World (yea,
those likewise of the Court) are grounded and built.

4 This sort of A^^tie or Friendship has relation to Kinsfolks, Alliances,
Familiarities, Conversation, Conformities of Manners, Wills, and Professions: if
it fall not out that this last be thwarted by Envy, or Emulation, which is
usually found in men of the same profession and faculty. The like we may
allcadge of the Friendship of those to whom both Good and Evil is common; or
of those who are of the same age or Country, to those who are not: (in a word)
of all those who resemble in any considerable point, which seperates and
distinguishes them from many others, by reason of this conformity,
resemblance, agreeableness, obedience, and all that may tend and serve to
erect and build up this frame of friendship.

5 The other sort of Frindship, having for foundation, the love of our selves;
we cannot stir up this Affection in the Understanding of any one, unless it
be in consideration of his own private and particular interest.

6 With this affection the poor man loves the rich, thereby to enrich
himself: and the rich the poor, thereby to draw either service or honor from
him: so in the same sort, we likewise love those, who either have or may do us
a good office: or those also who we cherish or esteem.

Since then our own interest is the chiefest cause of this friendship; we must
seek that which has most power and interest toward the person in whom we
would stir up this affection: as, to a Covetous man, Profit; to one that is
Ambitious, Honor; to a young man, Uoluptuousnesse and Pleasure; every one
measuring his interest according to his necessity, and his necessity according
to his desire.

7 Which being found out, it will be easy for us to stir up Desire and Joy:
for Desire is derived from two principal causes; the first, from the knowledge
of Good, in the object that is proposd us, which (by way of Retribution) Love
gives us according as it has received it: and the other from the absence or
want of this Good.

Nevertheless, this will not suffice to stir up a great motion in some, if
they judge not the obtaining of their desires possible; so that we must anexe
and add the means whereby hope may be enkindled; which means, are of diverse
sorts.

8 For all that can make a man powerful, as Riches Strength, Authority,
Reputation, Friends, Kinsfolks, and the like: or that can steed us in our
designs, may put us in hope to obtain our desire, at least, if we know these
advantages to be in us.

9 Likewise, Experience in that we undertake, may fortify our Hope: first,
because having done, or seen a thing done, we are still more apt and fitter to
do it, then if we had never seen it done: secondly, because it makes us
believe and assure our selves, it is possible to be performed.

From whence it follows, that the Example of the like thing which another has
performed and finished, will serve to revive and encourage our own hope, that
we may obtain what we desire.

10 This Motion is that which helps us in all our affairs; and says Lucian,
Hope and Fear, are the two T^^a^ts, that is to say, the strongest and most
violent motions that rouse and stir us up: for conceiving a matter to be
difficult, stirs up our intention, and the opinion we have, that it is easy;
makes us not greatly care to see an end thereof.

11 Moreover, Hope makes the future time seem as it were present in our
Imagination: it ingendereth Joy in our Understanding, which in this cause is
more free and clcere sighted, to devise and invent many means how to obtain
our desires, then if we were afflicted either with Sorrow or Anger.

For Hope having already judged the means possible for us to obtain our desire;
it breeds in us a confidence to pass on and a resolution to march toward
boldness.

CHAP. XVII.
1 The causes of Considence, and how considered. 2 3 Her Motion. 4 5 From
whence it proceeds. 6 7 The causes of Boldness brought forth by two means. 8
The causes of Joy and how it is conceived and formed in us. 9 10 Of presupposed
enioyance, or imaginary presence. 11 Which is the greatest Joy. 12 How Evil,
is still present with us.

1. 2. FOr if Confidence should stop, and make a stand at the bare terms of
assurance, it were rather rest then motion: but we must consider it as a
passag^ from Hope to Boldness: and this is it that makes us judge the means
easy to surmount all hindrances and oppositions, to the end we may obtain
our desires.

3 This Motion is chiefly engendered in us, when we imagine that those things
that may warrant and secure us, are near, or in our power, and that those
which may endommage or offend us, are far remote from us, either in respect of
place, time, occasion, or will.

4 And according to the nature of the matter: for this last we must ground our
selves on the consideration either of our power, or of the innocence and
equity of our behavior, or of the sufficiency and inclination of those, whose
power we have reason to fear: if they are honest, respectfull, modest, or
friends: if they hope for some benefit from us; or else, if they fear us.

5 Confidence comes also, when those things we would do, are profitable,
either to many, or to personages of greater rank and quality, then are those
whom they may offend.

6 To have no proof of misfortune, and not to know it, may likewise make us
secure and confident. The small repute and esteem that our Inferiors make of
this evil: the hope they have of assistance from Heaven, and other men's
persuasions and requests, may likewise assist and serve to this effect.

7 Confidence being thus formed and fashioned; we must proceed to give the last
shaking and assault to our Will, that is very boldly to attempt and enterprise
what we desire, and this is produced by two means; that is, by those things
which may stir up Hope in us, as our strength, experience, power, assistance of
friends, and other advantages, (whereof we have heretofore spoken) and by those
things which may banish and exclude fear; which consist, either in the
remoteness of that which may offend us, or in the hinderance or remedy that
may be given or applied hereunto.

8 And being by these motions led and conducted to the obtaining of desired
Good: Joy is instantly ingendered in us, which is not so much a motion, as the
end of a motion, having regard to the execution, or beginning of a motion, if
we respect the intention thereof.

9 Which to frame and fashion, two things are necessary; the knowledge how to
obtain and purchase a Good, and the enjoying thereof: the first, because many
possess those things that are good, whereof being ignorant, they rejoice not
in enjoying the same.

10 As for the enjoying thereof, it presupposes either real, or imaginary
presence, such as Desire, Hope and Remembrance, presents unto us: for albeit
Desire, or Hope, have reference to the future, and Memory to the past:
Nevertheless, Imagination makes those things seem present that are absent;
from whence it follows, that Joy, and Sorrow, always accompany Desire, and
Hope.

11 And although of all degrees of Joy, that which a Good really present,
produces in us, seems to be the greatest, as being best grounded;
Nevertheless, through the disesteeme or carelessenesse, which the often taste
of a Good gives us: and contrariwise, representing those things we enjoy not,
greater in Imagination, then in effect: it comes to pass, that that Joy which
produces Desire, and Hope, is always the greatest, especially in Hope, which
not only compriseth and anticipateth a Good* through apprehension, but also
through the possibility to obtain it.

12 As much, we may likewise say of Evil, that is present with us, not only
when it befalls us, but also when we anticipate it through fear, or being past,
that we recall to our remembrance, from whence proceeds Sorrow and Anger.

So then, instead of Good or Evil really present we may stir up and engender
these Passions by their Imaginary presence, not only with as much power, but
sometimes with more effect.

CHAP. XVIII.
1 Of those who are subject to the Passions occasioned through the ob^^ct of
Good. 2 The Motions and Passions of the Will, that have evil for their object.
3 Why we are more sensible of Evil then of Good. 4 5 6 7 8 The causes of
Hatred, and what it engendereth. 9 As Fear. 10 The things that affright and
fear us. 11 Of those we have offended, and which of them we must most fear.
12 Of that which we must most fear.

1 NOw to know those who are most disposed, and aptest to receive these
impressions, although the knowledge of those objects, that are most pleasing
and agreeable to them, may sufficiently teach and inform us: we must
nevertheless know that those Natures who are modest, affable, courteous,
humble, no ill speakers, or quarellers, are most commonly capable of these
Passions; as also, those who love pleasures, plays, or pastimes; or to be
honored, respected, or courteously entreated; those also, who are pitiful,
charitable, or officious; or who love not solitary companies, or that of
headstrong, or perverse people; of desemblers, cousoners, irreconcilable,
vndictiue, or presumptuous persons: and yet those who are vain, in any of
these Natures, so they are not tainted with Presumption, by honoring and
respecting the^, they will be soon drawn to love.

But particularly, for Hope, Confidence, and Boldness, those will be more
easily won, who are most courageous, sierce, and active: as also those who
conceive and flatter themselves with a good opinion of their own sufficiency,
credit, authority, strength, means, and experience; and likewise, who have
been still fortunate in their enterprises, will be easily persuaded to it,
either because of their faculty, or in respect of their ignorance, and want of
experience.

And so likewise will young people, fools, and those who we term
haire-braind, in respect of the inconsideration and precipitation that attend
and accompany these humors; as also, those who ouer-heat themselves with Wine;
the violence of which heat, and the fumes of their spirits and brains, make
them as the rest, inconsiderate, and rash: let this suffice for the passions of
those whose object is Good

2 If by the knowledge of one contrary, it be easy to discry and discern
another: it will then be casie for us, who know the causes of Love, Desire,
Hope, Confidence, Boldness, and Joy, to find out likewise those of Hatred,
Horror, Fear, Distrust, Despair, and Sorrow; it being certain, that as
conformity, and simpathie of humors, or the consideration of profit, combine
and lincke men together in friendship; so contrariety of humors; and the
consideration of damage, breeds likewise hatred and enmity betwixt them.

3 Nevertheless, there is herein this difference, that those passions whose
object is Evil, are more powerful then those whose object is Good, not that
the motion is stronger, but because Evil being contrary to our Nature, it
makes it self to be more sensibly felt then the object of Goodness, which is
near like, and conformable thereunto: the reason of Antip^uhie being desirous
that two contraries strive and contend, whereby they may the more sensibly
feel each others oppositions.

4 That which resembles, is more difficult to discern in our Understanding
then that which is contrary: white upon white is more difficult to discern,
then black upon white; right so, Good is more difficult to distinguish from
Good, then from Evil.

5 In the confusion of many things, those which most resemble, are least known
the one from the other, but in the commixture of diverse things, either contrary
in quality or substance, they are instantly distinguished and found out.

6 Wherefore Goodness uniting it self to our Nature, we esteem not of it,
thinking we have no more then we ought have, but if Evil be fall us, because
our Nature is contrary to it, there remains still a reluctation, and
repining, which is nothing else, then a sensible feeling of Evil.

7 From whence it comes to pass, that we easily forget any good office done
us, but difficultly an ill one.

8 But as from the knowledge of Evil is engendered the hatred we bear it; so
from Hatred comes horror, which cannot be imagined to be without the company
of Fear no more then can Desire without Hope, although they apprehend the
object diversely; wherefore the causes of fear, teaches us the causes of
flight, or horror of evil, whereof these are the most usual and ordinary.

9 All things that can hurt or anoy us, make us fear them; yea, the very
signs and resemblances thereof afflict and distaste us, as that of Death, of a
tempest, and other things likewise affright and terrify us, because the sign
thereof demonstrates that the thing it self is not far from us.

10 But of all things that terrify us, the chiefest and greatest, is the
hatred and malice of those who have any power over us, as those who are
powerful in Ualour, audacitie, wealth, friends, attendants, and to say truth,
in authority, and reputation; because Will joined with Power to do Evil,
makes us believe, the Evil it self is very near us: so Iniuslice seconded
and fortisied by authority is likewise to be feared for the same reason; as
also valor being outraged and offended, conioyn'd with power, makes it
fearful and formidable: for an iniutie received draws on the Will to
revenge, and force and power gives him means to effect it: likewise, the fear
and distruct of great men, is to be redoubted and feared: for they by all
means, and ways, desire to warrant and secure themselves.

11 But of those we have offended, or who distrust us, or are either jealous or
envious of our Good, those are most to be doubted and feared, who spin the web
of their malice secretly and silently; saying nothing, but only desembling
their injuries and designs: because we shall not discover when they are on the
point to revenge or prejudice us.

12 We must also fear, to have our Lives, Goods, Honors, yea, or our Persons
in the power, and discretion of another; from whence it comes, that those who
know any Evil by us, are much to be feared; because of the apprehension we
still must have in being discovered of them, either through Envy, hatred,
^alousie, imbecilitie, future hope, or present profit.

CHAP. XIX.
1 The disposition in the motions and Passions whose object is Evil. 2 What
they are who fear no hurt can befall them. 3 4 A remedy not to fear it. 5 Of
those who are much given to Fear. 6 The use of Fear Considered in two sorts.
7 8 Of Fear accompanied with distrust. 9 Of the Passions of Sorrow, and Anger,
and what other Passions they engender.

1 AS for the disposition requisite to receive those Passions, we may easily
judge those who are disposed and addicted to hatred, because we have already
spoken of those who are dispos^d to love.

2 But in respect of Fear, it is certain that those who believe no hurt or
damage can befall them, are not easily shaken or daunted at this Passion: for
Fear^ cannot be without the Imagination and Expectation of Evil: wherefore,
those who have always been happy in their actions, and who are powerful in
wealth, friends, reputation, strength, and authority; thinking that all should
answer their expectations; yea, and stoop to their greatness, do sildome or
never fear what may befall them.

3 Those likewise who have lost all hope of Good, and who have been still
oppressed with afflictions, and crosses, and as it were inured and accustomed
to Evil, they no longer fear it.

4 Sen^ca says, that Not to hope, is a remedy not to fear: for it must needs
be, that in those who fear, there is still remaining some spark or hope of
Good: for which they suffer this affliction and anxitie.

From whence it comes, that those who fear, are always ready and willing to
hear and receive counsel: but we use not to consult, if we have once lost all
hope of what we desire.

5 Of all which formerly spoken, we may conclude, that those who are subject
to Fear, and think they may receive some Evil; and knowing likewise their
own weakness to resist it: as the greatest part of old men, and the poorer
sort of people, who are destitute of all help, friends, and means; or of
those of inse^iour condition, and of sm^ll reputation, and authority; who are
despis d, hated, enuyed, or suspected, of Uice; or for being heretofore too
valiant, or to have had too much Credit with the vulgar people: and this only
suspicion and distrust ha^h procured the utter ruin and downfall of many
great personages.

6 The use of this motion is frequent and common, and may serve us to draw two
profitable uses thereof: the one to make us lose all Hope of that we desire;
and herein we must aggrauate and augment the Evil, and the hindrances that
may arise in the success of that we desire, without discovering the remedy and
expedients, that may facilitate and make easy the purchase and enjoying
thereof.

7 The other is to incite and stir up our providence and foresight; and herein
it is necessary we observe a Medium in our fear, and that against the
difficulties that may ariue or arise, we come armed with some means and
devices, to surmount and overcome them; wherein Fear in this kind performs
more then Hope: because Hope pre upposeth that this Good may be obtained, and
Fear believes that this Evil will be very hardly avoided: wherefore her in as
regarding that which is most difficult, our Wit and Understanding is more bent
then in the other.

8 Dis^^d^nce follows Fear, and knowing her self Incapable to anoide the
Evil or enjoy the good we desire (the deprivation of Good being taken by our
W^ll for an Evil) it conuerts it self into Despair, and this Despair into
Sorrow, and Anger; which is more or less in us: according to the judgment our
Understanding makes of the importance of the object, and this Passion breeds
diverse effects in us.

9 For sometimes she is the end of motion, staying at the consideration of
Evil, as joy is the rest and repose of Good: and sometimes it reuiues and
stirs up in us many other motions, whereof the chief and most usual, are
Choter, Shame, Compassion. En^^^, ^e^^ousie Indignation, and Emulation, which
are derived, partly from Anger, and partly from the affluence of diverse
considerations that are observed in one and the same object.

CHAP. XX.
1 Of Choler, and the Passions that concur therein. 2 Of contrary objects in
Choler. 3 The causes of Choler. 4 That Disdain and Injury are the chiefest. 5
6 Of those who are soonest subject to Choler. 7 The Passions that dispose us to
Choler. 8 Shame follows Choler, and how it is stirred up in us. 9 The causes
of shame. 10 11 Disposition to Shame.

1 CHoler is framed, and formed, in us by the concurrence and affluence of many
Passions: for beginning with Anger, and Sorrow, of a received injury, it is
accompanied with Hatred, against him that has offended us, as also a desire to
be revenged of him: the which is conioin'd with a certain hope to effect it,
because Desire, and Hope are things possible and feasible, although they bear
in them a show of difficulty: for if we esteem revenge impossible, this
motion would then reside and dwell, in the terms of hatred and sorrow.

But Hope presenting Revenge to our Immagination, we are instantly possessed
with Pleasure, and Content, which Choler finds out to free our selves of
Sorrow, as being the only remedy to make us joyful. Every one still
delighting to think on that he desires.

Or had we perpetrated our Revenge, our pleasure and content were then both
perfected, and accomplished, because it banisheth all Sorrow, and appeaseth the
motion of Choler.

2 So this Passion has two contrary objects (to wit) ^euenge, and him of whom
we would be revenged. Revenge is considered, as being Good and desired, and
held for such: from whence it follows, that it being performed, we rejoice,
and him of whom we would be revenged, is considered as an Evil, very odious
and distasteful to us.

3 As for the causes of Choler, they are usually two: the one, the small
esteem made of us, whether it be through Injury, Disgrace, or any other degree
of Disdain: the other the hindrance and opposition given us, to do or obtain
that which we desire: which others comprehend under the name of Contempt, as
also, to rejoice at our misfortune, to forget us, or the like.

4 In^ury is measured according to the oppinion we conceive and retain of the
Injustice of contempt and disdain, so if we esteem the Injustice great;
Injury then will the more provoke and exasperate us: So Disdain, or damage,
offered a great man, to whom is due more respect; being more iniust the more
stirs him up to Choler, and Indignation; and also to an honest man, the wrong
and Evil that is done him.

5 By this reason we are more chollerike to be disprais'd for that wherein we
think to excel, then in that it excel not, as still esteeming this degree of
disdain more iniust.

6 From whence it comes, that those who are vainglorious, proud, and
presumptuous; and briefly, all those who conceive good opinions of themselves
for any imaginary advantage or perfection in them, do more easily and quickly
grow Choleric; the injury being so much the greater in their Imagination, in
that they conceive and hold a better opinion of themselves then they deserve.

7 True it is, we omit not sometimes to be angry to see our selves dispis'd for
defects in us: but it is because the defects themselves engender in us
weakness of Capacity and So row, whereof the last conducts, and preuokes us
to Choler: from whence it follows, we easily wax choleric, against those who
bring us bad news, and that makes us more apt and vehement to commit injuries;
and hence it comes to pass that a very small matter makes children, women,
old, and sick folks, Choleric, as also those that are possessed with Love,
Suspicion, or Fear, as not having the courage to resist this motion; and this
Passion continues longer in those Understandings, that are rude and barbarous,
then in those that are more polished and ciuilis'd.

8 Shame is a degree of Fear that depends of Honor: but sometimes Anger, and
then Choler steps within it; it has its birth in us by actual presence, or by
supposition of shameful, dishonest, or indecent actions, as well past,
present, as to come, whether they proceed from our selves, or from those who
touch us in affinity, or those that for some other respect and reason we
affect and love.

9 But flattery and praises of us, spoken in our own presence, before whom,
then, and where they ought not have been reported, may also make us blush, and
stir up in us this affection: likewise, the reproach of a good turn, or
office done us: to be reproved of a fault, to confess it and crave pardon, not
to participate of those things that are common to our inferiors and equals: to
serve in any base or servile manner, and to be fallen from a greater fortune,
makes us likewise ashamed in presence of those who have seen us enjoy the
same. Shame for the most proceeding from the presence of those before whom we
present our selves, as also, before those whom we respect and admire, or those
with whom we are conioyn'd in Office, or Dignity; who observe our actions,
and are accustomed to slander, and backbite us: but to those who Cannot
reprove our actions, as children; or toward those who will not as friends, or
dare not, as our Seruan^s, we are not usually moned or stirred up in this
manner.

10. We are also shame faced before those to whom we are obliged and
beholding, without having had the means to requite it: for then their presence
does as it were reprove, and check, our Ingrati^ude.

11 Of all which above spoken: we conclude that those who are jealous of their
Honors, and desire to live in a good reputation, as also those who have
received any injury or disgrace, o^ that are in any contemptible estate, are
very subject to entertain, and incident to retain this motion: the which
nevertheless, as all others changes and assumes other forms, according to
time, place, persons, and other conditions and circumstances, that concuire and
meet in humane actions.

CHAP. XXI.
1. Of Compassion, and from whence it pr^ceeds. 2. Of those who are usually
uncharitable and not compassionate. 3 Disposition to Compassion, and those who
are aptest thereunto. 4 Of that which may engender Compassion in us, and more
stir us up to Pity. 5 6

1 COmpassion arises in us through Displeasure, and Anger, we conceive for
the evil or damage of others, but to stir up this A^ger, it must needs be
that our affection toward him afflicted, or the conceit, that he suffers it
iniustly, does chiefly occasion it: for if we love him not, or if we esteem
his wickedness equal to the Evil he suffers: we would never pity nor
commiserate it.

Nevertheless, there be events wherein the condition of our nature, as also
the power and inconstancy of Fortune, may without any other consideration,
stir up and provoke in us this motion; making us afraid to see in our selves
the miseries and afflictions which we see befalls others.

Which comes to pass when we esteem this Evil not to be far from us,
neither also to be so near as to touch us: for in this last point, instead of
thinking on other men's crosses, we think on our own, and instead of
consideration, Fear surpriseth us: and forms it self in our hearts and
thoughts.

Which is the reason why we will not enter into this motion for unknown
persons; because they are too far distant from our consideration, nor for
persons who are so near as their afflictions and ours seem to sympathise and
make but one, but only for those whom we know to be betwixt these two
extremes and of our ordinary and familiar acquaintance.

2 Of that we have spo^en of the consideration of our Nature and the
inconstancy of Fortune: we may conclude that two sorts of men are very
merciless and uncharitable; those who are driven to so extreme an indigence
and necessity that they are so far from pitying others, as they only
comfort and relieve their own miseries by those of others: it being (as I have
formerly said) the common consolation of poor and miserable people, to have
compartners and fellows in their affictions: and those who believe they are
lifted up so high as they esteem themselves secured against all sorts of
adverse accidents, and who instead of being compassionate to the afflicted,
deride and laugh at them, and many times use them with much pride and insolency.

3 Contrariwise then; those will be soonest disposed and inclined to Mercy,
who fear afflictions and calamities, because they have heretofore felt them,
and who with much difficulty and danger have escaped them; and consequently,
old men who have had more experience of the weakness and mutabilitie of humane
matters, and those who acknowledge themselves weak in strength, wealth,
reputation, friends, and kinsfolks: and in a word, those who have a greater
fear and knowledge of adversity, will the sooner permit themselves to embrace
this motion of P^^^e, and Commiseration.

4 But of miseries and afflictions, those that can soonest move us to
C^mpassion and Pity, are these which either accompany the affliction of the
body, or the distemperature of the mind, and which befall us not through our
own default, but as we believe either through the Malice of Fortune, or of our
enemies.

5 And as these afflictions increase by their circumstances, so does our
Compassion as if in affliction we are forsaken of our own, deprived of our
means and wealth, oppressed without cause, by strong or cruel enemies, or if
we depend of our enemies and other like particularities, which commonly follow
those that are afflicted and unfortunate.

6 But not only present but future Afflictions, if they be any thing near hand
may move us to pity, as also, those that are past: if it be not too far
beyond the present, or that the remembrance thereof be yet recent and fresh in
our memories: from whence it proceeds that the representation of the gesture,
voice, apparel, and countenance of the afflicted, does the more powerfully
move us; because by these exterior signs, the crosses that afflict them, are
as it were present in our own imaginations, and contemplations: In the four
ensuing Passions, Hatred, and Anger, are entermixed, and in some one of these,
as in Jealousy; Love has also her part and share.

CHAP. XXII.
1 Of Envy. 2 From whence it proceeds. 3 4 Of the causes that dispose us to
Envy. 5 6 Of Indignation, and with what it is entermixt. 7 That Wealth breeds
in us this Passion of Envy. 8 From whence arises Indignation. 9 That great
men are more subject to it then others. 10 The causes that provoke us to this
Passion. 11 The nature of Indignation. 12 That Emulation is a degree of Envy,
and the causes thereof. 13 14 Of those who are subject to Emulation. 15 16 How
Emulation is engendered, and of those that are not subject to this motion. 17
18 Of Jealousy, and the causes thereof.

1 ENui^ engendereth when we repine and are angry at another prosperity,
without any other consideration then that we wished he enjoyed not his
prosperity.

2 And although there be no other cause of former variance and distaste:
nevertheless, it cannot be conceived without Hatred, or Ill Will; nay, hardly
without a kind of silent Choler, which not properly extends but to those we
believe are no greater then our selves, or in some respect, if not in all, our
inferiors, or against those we know, and that dwell not far from us.

For we Envy not a man's wealth whom we know not, or who dwells in the Indies;
or if he have not been our equal or inferior, or with whom we have had no
cause of strife and contention.

3 So likewise he that has been still our Superior, can never be enuyed of
us: but contrariwise he that has been formerly our equal, and is of late
become great, he who enioyes that which were fit and propper for us, and on
whom Fortune has conferred it with more ease and less difficulty then to our
selves: him commonly we envy; yea, although he be our Parent and Kinsman.

4 By the same reason, those will be provoked to En^^^, whose equals or
inferiors enter into a riuall-ship to enjoy any thing with them; and it is
usually seen, they are most Envious, who only want some means, and yet are in
some prosperity, thinking because already they enjoy many advantages, they
ought also enjoy this which they want.

5 Those also who desire honor, and reputation, are for the most part more
envious then these who are less Ambitious: esteeming that other men's
reputation and greatness ecclipseth and deminisheth their own: so much for
Envy.

6 In Indignation, we are angry at another man's prosperity, through the
consideration of the person that enjoys it: whom again we deem unworthy
thereof: and this motion is intermixed with Anger, Hatred Envy and Choler.

7 But the prosperities, and advantages, that stir up in us this affection,
are these of ^o^tune. and of Body; as, Wealth, Nobility, Friends, Honor,
Power, Greatness, Health, Strength, Beauty, and the like; and not those of
Judgment, and Understanding: because we cannot say that a man is unworthy to
be Just, Virtuous, or Learned; and the anger which in this respect we receive,
or conc^iue, may properly be termed Envy.

8 Indignation proceeds likewise, when without Industry, or by base and
dishonest means, another obtaines Wealth, or Dignity, from whence it comes to
pass, that the hasty and sudden aduancements of some, make us assume this
motion, as being a thing he has not deserved, either through care or labor:
and generally, all aduancements and preferments from low to higher fortunes,
beget in us these three Passions, Envy, Indignation, and Emulation.

Contrariwise, the frequent seeing a man in the same Estate, makes us judge and
esteem that he deserves it: time making the enjoying of al things lawful, and
as it were by prescription, it seems that those enjoy their own, who have a
long time enjoyed it.

9 Likewise, Great men with whom those of a meaner ran^ke are conioyn'd in any
place or office, are soon moved, and prouok'd to Indignation, esteeming that
their own condition and quality is hereby debased and deminished.

10 Inexperience, in the charge or office wherein some are advanced, likewise
drives us into this Passion; because dignities, and offices bestowen on a man,
should still be preportioned according to his ^^^^ and Condition; all sorts of
pr^ferments being not fit for all sorts of men: as, the conduction and command
of an Army to one of another profession, who is no soldier, though otherways
endued and fraughted with other excellent qualities and deserts.

11 The best, and more virtuous sort of people, are likewise subject to this
passion, because hating iniust things, they cannot endure to see unworthy
persons enjoy places of honor and preferment, and generally those who think
they deserve well, seeing any thing conferd on another, that is inferior to
him, either in birth, sufficiency, or other conditions, and qualities, do
soon murmr and repine thereat: whereas contrariwise, the baser and seruiler
sort of people, as also those of the meanest Cap. cities, and Judgments:
knowing themselves to be such, are not in this manner moved; because they
cannot reproach or tax those faults in others, which they know are in
themselves.

12 Emulation seems to be a degree of Envy; and yet nevertheless they are
far different: for Envy is angry at other men's prosperity, not so much for
the Love of it self, as for some hatred or malice which waits and attends on
this Passion.

13 But Emulation is not so much angry for other men's Prosperities, as it being
possessed of others: but for that she possesses it not her self; which is the
reason and cause that sometimes it stirs up in us, an infinite number of
virtuous operations, to obtain and purchase the like.

14 In respect whereof we many times see those addicted and subject to this
Passion, who are of a hautie courage, and endued with many great and fair
qualities, as with Capacity, Wealth, Credit, Friends, Dignities, or the like
requisites, fit to effect any great matter of moment or i^portance: because
such men think they should enjoy that which is fit and worthy for those of
good parts; in such sort as seeing them in others, they are thereby incited and
st^iue with their best industry and endeavors to procure the same or the like.

15 Young folks are also much subject to this Passion as also those who are
descended of Noble Parentage, and are much reputed and honored, esteeming that
this honor ought be conferd and continued them; and that as it is fit, so it
must not be neglected.

16 But to frame and model this Emulation in our Understandings; besides, the
love of our selves, we must have the knowledge of that Good we desire, which in
this motion chiefly aims at Honor, and Profit.

17 Which to desire we must first want them, and yet in such sort, that we are
still of opinion to obtain them, for those who know not the want thereof but
have them in abundance; or which despair to obtain them, will never
participate of this motion.

18 Jealousy has her chiefest foundation, in the love of our selves; which is
the reason why we so closely affect and embrace the object that we chiefly
love and desire, as we will not impart any part thereof to others; and if any
chance to participate thereof, we not only torment our selves with Envy
against our Coriuall, but also advance so far, as to hate that object which
before we so de^rely and tenderly loved.

But this Passion being always deuanc'd, and anticipated by Suspicion,
Mistrust, and Fear, those who are subject to this motion, will find
themselves fit to enter into lealousie of that Good they enjoy, in remembering
another, where many Riuals and Competitors seek and desire the same Good.

These are the causes and means that are most commonly used to incite and stir
up the motions of the Will, according to the circumstances of place, time,
persons, and affairs.

CHAP. XXIII.
1 The use of the knowledge of Passions, and the means to moderate them both
in our selves and others. 2 The benefit by moderating Passions in our selves,
living in Court. 3 That they are moderated by fair means, and by the power of
Courage. 4 By natural Pleasantness. 5 Or by that which we Procure or
Purchase. 6 By our Breeding. 7 By Experience. 8 By discoursing of Reason, and
how far it extends. 9 Diverse Considerations hereon.
1 COme we to the means to moderate them; wherein I am of opinion, that we
must begin by our selves: for to imagine that we shall have more predominance
over other men's wills then our own, is very unlikely and contrary to sense and
reason.

2 But if we can once command our selves, then there is no doubt, but we are
capable to govern the World, and to become masters of other men's affections,
because this moderation gives us leisure to epsy out the place, time,
occasions, and other necessary advantages, to compass our designs: yea, we
must fawn, bow, and easily defer, according to occasion, always walking as
it were with the bridle in our hand, and if we fail of our purpose, we must
not notwithstanding lose courage, and so despair; but if we find the door
shut one way, we must without torment, or affliction, seek out and open
another passage.

Briefly, we shall secure our selves from those sharp and passionate Motions,
which disturb and hinder the conduction and progression of affairs: yea, that
fetter and stop us, and often times make us lame: and produce in ou^selues
precipitation, obstinacy, indiscretion, bitterness, suspicion, and impatiency.

3 But these motions whether in our selves or others, are moderated, either
through the agreeableness of our conversation and manners, by force of
courage, providence or by dehortation.

The agreeableuesse of our manners, and force of courage, although they are
different in themselves, yet in this respect, they oftentimes produce the same
effects; and both the one, and the other, is either naturally, or artificially
obtained.

4 As for the natural, it is most certain, that we shall sinde some Wills and
Inclinations, that are naturally more stayed and moderate one then another; and
others again more lifted up and elevated above the objects of that may provoke
and stir up those Motions, which is the reason they are not so often removed
and shaken, nor with so much violence or impetuositie.

I mean not here stupiditie, insensiblenesse, or Ignorance, which take from us
the feeling of Good, as they do of Evil: for to be of this humor and
inclination, were to participate more of a Beast then a Man: nevertheless,
because we may prevail according to the occasions of these sorts of Natures,
we must likewise be acquainted with those who are subject to these defects of
Wisdom and Judgment; for, in the Court, as well as in a private Family,
every one is necessary, and has his proper use.

But this agreeableness of manners, and force of Courage, arising from
certain Complexions; and among others, from the Sanguine, which is farthest
distant from excess, as being betwixt the Fleame that engendereth Stupiditie,
and the Gall that produces Choler: to bear our selves upright in this cause,
we must avoid to fall into the two distempratures of the blood; which are the
yellow Gall, and Melancholy: which engender in us many extraordinary motions:
and we must temper Fleame, for fear least through its coldness, it benumme
and stupisie our Understanding.

Nevertheless, I refer it to Physicians to prescribe that rule of Diet, that
may be sit; not only because I will not usurp on their Profession; but
likewise, because of the difficulty that we sinde to practice that which
others have prescribed and written; as also, for the small benefit and good we
can reap, and receive thereby.

5 As for the means to obtain this agreeableness in our manners, and force
of courage there are three chief and principal, Education, Experience, and
Discourse of Reason.

6 To be bred and brought up among those that are either moderate or resolute,
we usually follow their steps, and inherit, and participate of their
inclinations for frequenting them often, their conversation destils in us the
same opinions, and manners.

7 Likewise the experience or knowledge of diverse accidents that have befalne
us, or those of our acquaintance, make us behave and bear our selves, either
moderatly as they have formerly done in the like occurrences.

8 But the discourse of Reason, goes further, and embraces all sorts of
considerations, whereof we will here produce the chiefest that may pertinently
serve for this matter and purpose.

9 The first is that of the true estimation of things; yea, of those things
themselves that may be apprehended of us, either as Good or Evil.

And hereunto all Philosophy aims, and endeavors to fortify us against many
things, that may either dasell our senses, or astonish us: but hitherto it
has prevailed and gained but little among Common people, and less of
Courtiers who spurn at these rules; whereof as I will advise none to make use
thereof against any one whom he knows incapable: for fear least he become
either importunate or rediculous; so I willingly counsel every one in his own
particular, that he seek and procure this moderation (which is the most
requisite perfection in a Courtier) and having found it to make use thereof,
and never to neglect it.

CHAP. XIV.
1 The fourth head of this first Book: three Principal faults we commit in
seeing things Good or Evil. 2 The indifferency thereof being a remedy for the
first fault. 3 What Death is. 4 Time and delay is a remedy for the second
fault. 5 6 Considerations upon these rem^dies. 7 8 9 10 11 Disaduantages, or
Domages, a remedy for the third fault. 12 Examinations of the disaduantages of
an Object, and examples thereon. 13 Weakness, Credulity, and Curiosity,
three d^fects, from whom proceed the ill opinions we conceive either of our
selves or others. 13 Remedies for this Weakness. 14 Credulity. 15 Curiosity.
17 The conclusion of this Chapter.

1 TO say something as we proceed in this Treatise: We must know that we
fail many times in the judgment and true estimation of objects that presents
themselves to our Will.

First, in interpreting and reputing that Good or Evil, which is not, or else
in representing Good or Evil far greater in show, then it is in effect, or
else in tearming that Good which is Evil, and that Evil which is Good.

2 As for the first fault: it is most certain that the greatest part of things
in this world have two handles, o^ holdfasts, whereby we may take them: by the
one they seem to be grievous, and also heavy; by the other easy and light,
and it is in our choice to take them which way we please, there being no reason
whatsoever, but we may find out, and produce its contrary.

3 Death is the distastefullst Accedent we fear: but if we consider the
misery of this world, it is an enfranchising and speedy remedy from and
against all miseries; yea (to use but a word) it is a harbor and shelter
against all the storms and tempests of our life.

It is almost the same in all other objects; for there are not many so
absolutely to be held for afflictions, from whence we may not derive and draw
some profit; nor none so absolutely good, from ^^^^ there may not proceed some
prejudice ^^^^ inconueniencies.

If then those motions that are stirred up by the consideration of Good,
transport us with too much violence, we must enter into consideration of the
losses and profits that may arise, and those which are occasioned by the
consideration of Evil may be moderated, in representing to themselves the
profits they may receive thereby: and so excercising themselves in this
indifferency, we shall find our selves in the terms of this moderation that
is necessary for us, in the managing and conduction of affairs, and we must
not fear that it either cool or weaken our designs: for our Judgment will
always bend more one wa^ then the other; but it must not be with precipitation
and inconsideration.

4 And not to be guilty of the other fault, which is committed in representing
Good or ^uill greater then they are; we must give leisure to our Judgment
maturely to consider it, and so vnst^ip and deuest the object, which may move
and incite us to all those qualities and occurrences, that may make them seem
greater then they are.

5 Time weakeneth the impetuositie of this Motion, and gives place to a more
perfecter knowledge of that, which incites us hereunto; yea, although it be but
in giving our selves so much time, as to repeat the letters of the Alphabet,
as a wise man councelled Augustus to do, when he was choleric.

Every one knows how to condemn Judgments given in Passion and Choler, and
yet notwithstanding all those sentences and judgments we pronounce, are for
the most part of this sort.

6 Let us then permit this motion, to grow and wax old that our Understanding
return to her proper seat, especially since all that is done in passion, ought
to be doubted and suspected of us: and let us consider this object naked and
deuested of all her circumstances, and we shall find it far otherwise then
it seemed to us at the first appearance.

7 As for Example, the presence of Evil at first sight thereof, makes it seem
far greater then it is; from whence proceeds Sorrow, which in the end is
worn away by Time; whereas if Evil were as it seems to be, it will be the
same at twenty years end, as at present. Let us therefore deuest it of this
circumstance of presence, and conform our Imagination to the truth, and we
shall find that we shall not be so vexed and pestered with this motion.

8 But it is not only the circumstance of time present that increases Evil
or Good in our Imagination, for the future performs likewise as much, for she
it is that often deceiues us, both in our fears and hopes: for we miss that
we hope for; that which we fear vanishes, and passes away; and that which
we neither wait nor expect, oftentimes befalls us.

9 Many Accidents likewise befall us, which prevent what we foresee, Thunder
and Lightning is driven away with the wind of a Hat, as also the fortune of
great men in a small moment of time, one turn of a wheel makes that which was
above, beneath; and very often from whence we expect our ruin, proceeds our
security and preservation.

10 And so it is in other circumstances ofsearcitie, abundance, facility,
difficulty, novelty, strangeness, and custom; which as we have formerly
said, hinders the functions of our Judgment, and whereof we must of necessity
deuest the objects, if we will judge according to truth, as also our Judgments
and Understandings from all preocupation of opinions, and popular errors.

11 The third fault is greater then the two former, when we persuade our
selves, that an object is profitable and Good, which is Evil and noisome, and
that evil and pernicious which is not.

This error comes to pass, since all things as we have already said, have two
handels or hold-fasts, and except we be cautious and careful, we only take
hold of the first that comes to our hand.

12 Wherefore before we judge of the quality of an object, we must first know
the profits and preiudices, weigh and consider the consequences of both, and
compare them one with another, and if the profits exceed the preiudices; not
only in number, but in weight, quality, dependence, or importance, we may
then term them Good and profitable; or if the contrary, we must reject them
as Evil.

As for Example: every one holds revenge to be Good, and as a pleasing and
agreeable thing is desired of all men, because of the content it brings with
it, which notwithstanding is far less then distaste, and angers, who torment
and trouble us in seeking the means to accomplish and perpetrate our designs.

This thought of revenge, is a worm that frets and eats out our hearts,
prouokes us by day, torments us by night, and most commonly in vain; and
whilst we thus afflict our selves, our enemy laughes and lives ioccund and
merry: and when we are on the point to execute our revenge, thinking to put
out one of his eyes, we commonly lose both our own; for the fear of Justice
and punishment surpriseth us, and drives us to this extremity, either to hide
our selves, or to fly.

If then we balance all this with a little Content, which for the most part
lasts not long, and sometime is but merely imaginary, we shall then find,
that it does not match or counterpoyse these our angers and afflictions, and so
likewise it is in many other matters.

As for those who imagine they are wronged and injured when they are not, they
again are in a greater error, although they s^^me to be more wise and
judicious, as having an eye to all things, and enquiring after all Matters.

It is to be too ingenious to torment and afflict himself, to seek that he
desires not to find; and it is to have a bad stomach, ill to digest good Viands.

Contrariwise, we must in all things seek the pleasingst interpretation, and
that which contents us best, if we will resolve to taste that which is worst.

Has not one saluted thee as he ought; yet attribute it not to disdain; for
if he be thy friend, it is your great familiarity that is cause thereof, if
he be thine inferior, it is not credible that he thought it so, or neglected
it, either out of folly, or indiscretion, although it be another fault,
whereby he makes himself more worthy of disdain then your self, whose
reputation and honor should not depend on people of that rank and quality.

13 These ill opinions proceed of three defects that are in us, Weakness,
Credulity, and C^^^osi^^e, the weaker we are, the more easier are our to be
shaken, and the more violent we are motions resembling the actions of children
and old people, who run when they think they walk.

14 We must then be courageous and cheerful, and through conference and
discourse stir up in us the knowledge of that which befalls us: yea, we must
avoid and sly the love and delight of these things, which most animate and
provoke us.

15 Also to be credulous and light of belief, and to permit our selves to be
carried away with the first opinion, we conceive either of a man, or a
business, or by the persuasion of another, does in the same manner afflict us.
Wherefore we must shut our ears against the ordinary reports of the Court,
yea we must have recourse unto time, and give our selves leisure not only to
see, but to consider, if the end and dependances of actions answer their
beginning, or correspond with that which has been reported unto us.

16 Likewise, Curiosity in seeking that which may offend and anger us, being
prevented by an ill opinion, and attended on by doubt, makes us interpret other
men's actions in a bad and contrary sense.

We must then sly these two l^tter defects, and fortify our selves against
the former, and also in that which concerns any particular person, we must
represent to our eyes the common and most frequent imperfections of men in
general.

17 Every one halts of one leg, it is much when they do not of both; and if
we will be moderate in censuring other men's faults, let us by little and
little examine our own, and then perhaps we shall find some of them no less
defective, and enormous, and it may be the like, and as bad, if not worse then
theirs: but withal let us lend such excuses to other men's faults, as we give
to our ow^e. Thus have ye the manner how to bear our selves in the estimation
of matters.

CHAP. XXV.
1 Consideration of our power to moderate our Passions. 2 W^^rein this power
consists. 3 Why we throw our selves on the Court. 4 To consider our abilities
by the difficulties we meet withal. 5 6 Foresight is a second means to
moderate our Passions. 7 The first effect of this foresight, is to fly the
causes and occasions, and not to enter into these Motions. 8 9 10 The second
effect of this foresight, is to prepare our selves against that which we
foresee must b^ fall us, and to attend and expect it with a firne and constant
resolution. 11 The third effect of this foresight, is to change and divert
this Evil ^eing befallen us another way, or else to familiarize it to our
self in our Imaginations. 12 Of the diucrsion thereof, the third means to
moderate these Passions. 13 Other meares to divert our Passionat Wit and
Conceits. 14 15 16

1 THe other consideration that may scrue us to moderate our Passions, is the
knowledge of that which we can do, limmitting thereby our hopes and desires
unto things certain, near at hand, and casie, and accustoming our selves to
facility and simplicity (the Mother of peace and tranquillity) we are not
deceived in our desire and hopes, but by a false opinion which we conceive
thereby to accomplish it: for if by little and little we examine our selves
how far our power can extend, we shall not then heap up desire on desire,
nor hope upon hope as we do.

2 But this power not only consists in Authority, Reputation, Friends,
Capacity, or the llike means, whereby we may obtain that which we desire but
also in disposing of our Wills to endure and suffer that, which is commonly
incident in the research of things of this nature.

3 We throw our selves on the Court, to obtain Wealth, Honor, Authorit^ and
Power, we have many fair entrances thereunto, many Friends, many good
Qualities and Perfections which may bring us into reputation and credit. But
these are not enough, we must examine and enquire of our selves, if we are
disposde to flatter great men, and sometimes their Grooms, to wait and attend
a Porter, after he has a long time ma^e us stay to number the Nails of the
Gate or Door; if we will suffer our selves to be scan^alizd, and
calumniated, and can pack up injuries without da^ing to complain thereof, and
if we can accommodate our selves to other men's pleasures or passions: for it is
with this price and coin that this Merchandise of the Court is purchased and
bought.

4 Turn over these circumstances sound the depth of your power, weigh this
money, and consider if these wares be worth this price, and it may be you will
indge, that you must go into this Fair of the Court with more aduisement and
moderation, then others do.

5 It is the like in all other actions; for we must measure and compare our
abilities with the difficulties that do, or may arise, yea, and without the
least flattering of our selves: for it is a common error and ouer-sight that
insensibly destills into us, and that not being able to do what we would, we
must frame our Will to perform that which we can. Let this suffice for the
most general means, that we may extract from discoursing of Reason, thereby
to moderate our Passions.

6 Come we now to the means which the weakest and simplest practice and use,
which are foresight and dehortation.

7 The first effect of foresight, is to free our selves of all canses and
occasions, that may stir^e up in us any irregular motion, and so to cut off all
their approaches, and to stop their entrances.

8 In their birth all things are weak and tender, and it is more easier to
repel and stop the first st^ppe, or asault to this motion, then to delay, or
protract it, either through difficulty, or order.

9 So he who is accustomed to be choleric in his play, let him avoid play;
he that is hasty and angry, let him eschew all causes of debates and
contentions; and he that loves or hates any object, let him not present
himself before it, but rather let him estrange and sequester himself from it.

10 The second effect of this fore sight or providence, is to foresee the Good
or E^^ that may concur, and meet in a business: and not only by little and
little to examine the same according to all the circumstances thereof, but also
to stand upon our guard, and constantly toawayt and expect it in tranquillity
and silence, yea, and without any exterior disturbance, which commonly
redouble, and reinflame the Motions of our Understandings, and makes them more
impetuous and violent.

11 The third effect is, to wheel about, or to divert another way the Evil we
see, ready to befall us: or if we cannot perform it, we must in such sort
represent it often to our Imaginations that when it ariues, we may be armed to
receive it with more patience, and less anger, Since it is certain, that
propensed and premeditated dangers always least prejudice and hurt us.

12 As for the deuerting thereof, it is a means used in all passions: for as
one nail drives out another, so one passion expelles another, and herein we
may bear our selves two manner of ways.

For we divert our Understanding; that is, prouokt or moved, in preposing
another object to the same passion that moves us: so to him that is in love
with a woman, we present him another far more fairer and amiable, or to him
that follows a suit or business by tedious and troublesome means, we propose
him a shorter and far easier course to effect it.

13 Or else we divert the Understanding from one passion to another, as in an
ambitious man, we moderate his hopes from pearching or soaring higher, by
fearing him, lest he fall into his former estate, or peradventure; to a worse;
a subtlety which has been often practiced by many Princes toward their
Favorites.

14 Likewise also, when to a sorrowful man we present. and proffer some thing
that may rejoice him, to a fearful man that may resolve and secure him, and
to one that hates us, some testimony of our affection, thereby to allure and
draw him to love us.

15 But herein we must be cautious and careful, that the object whereunto we
would draw our Understanding, be more powerful in our Imagination, then that
wherewith it was first surprised and possessed.

16 And if one alone object be not sufficient, we must then present many; for
there is nothing that subdues and weakeneth the Understanding so much, as
plurality and diversity of objects: for bending himself against all, his
motions are made less violent toward every one of them severally divided.

CHAP. XXVI.
1 The third use of the knowledge of the motions of our will, and wherein it
consists, as in Affability, or agreeableness; and how to use it in Court,
which is the fifth Head of this first Book. 2 Of the profit and necessities of
this Affability, with Examples thereon to that effect. 3 Of Affability in our
Choler. 5 How to bear our selves in this Passion. 6 7 8 In mildness and
pleasantness, and of their Natures who are mild. 9 10 In fear and of their
natures who are fearful. 11 To accommodate our selves to this Passion. 12 Of
confidence and belief, and how we ought to demean our selves to those, who
are adicted and subject thereunto. 13 Of shame, and of their natures, who are
shame-faced. 14 How to bear our selves toward those, who are subject to this
Motion. 15 16 17 18 Of hatred and malice, with their remedies. 19 Of Courtesy.
20 How to bear our selves to those who are courteous. 21 Of Affability in
ingratitude and how to bear our selves to those who are ungrateful. 22 Of
Compassion and Pity, and of their Natures, as also how to bear our selves
toward those, who are subject to this Passion. 23 Of Indignation, and of their
Nature who are provoked to this Passion. 24 That the malicious, and envious,
resemble those who are passionate. 25 How to bear our selves toward them. 26
Of sorrow, and how to bear our selves toward those who are sorrowful. 27 28
29 30 Of Joy, and how to bear our selves toward those who are joyful. 31
Advice for Courtiers how to behave themselves in their gestures and
Countenances, according to the Examples of the Courtiers of Alexander, and his
Father Phillip. 32 33 If it be lawful for Courtiers to imitate the Vices as
well as the Virtues of those with whom they converse: Examples hereon. 34 That
those who have flexible and changeable Wits, are fit to be Courtiers. 35 The
Conclusion of the difference of persons, proceeding from the difference of
their interior conditions and qualities.

1 THere remains the third use of the knowledge of the Motions of our Will,
which consists in squaring and framing our affections, and actions, to those of
others, which in a word we term Asabilitie, and is most commonly abused in
Court, or many times degenerates into flattery.

2 Notwithstanding it may not only be profitable (as was that of Arcacius.
Patriarch of Constantinople, who thereby mollified and appeased the cruelty of
the Emperor, Leon Macella) but also necessary in many accedents as well
toward our Prince as particular persons: I will hereunto add some thing that
may sort more for example, then to present that which might be alleged upon
this subject, and I will begin with Choler.

3 He that is tormented with this passion of Choler, it may be complains of
injuries received amplifies and augments them, has his Wits bent on revenge,
and applaudes it, is ready to attempt it, not fearing the danger, but rather
seeks the execution, then once to enter into the consideration of that he
does; he approues and follows his headstrong and precipitated resolution,
speaks ill of him, who has offended him, procures him as many enemies as
possible he can, and by his countenance diverse ways, bewraies this his
vindictiue and reuengetull passion, his complexion changes, he speaks with
impetuositie and confusion, looks adverse and ghastly, now here now there.

4 Whosoever therefore will dispose himself to be conformable to his humor,
that is possesst of this passion, he must somewhat immitate his actions, and
ma^e him understand he does it for the same effect and purpose, seeming to be
angry for the injury h^e has received, blaming him that has done it,
praising revenge, and approving his forwardness, boldness, resolution, and
the like to be revenged of his enemy.

5 But because these actions and countenances are not fit for all people, nor
toward all sorts of persons, we must therefore use much discretion, and
propose many degrees of revenge; yea, we must endeavor to choose that, which
requires most time for its execution, as being the surest, to the end that time
may deminish and cool our choler, and so make room for reason.

6 Briefly, in all hasty and rash resolutions, which choler suggesteth unto
us, we must procrastinat and defer the execution thereof by the most
apparent and colorable pretexts we may, grounding this delay (if possible we
can) upon some considerations which we see he embraces or retains, that is
thus passionatly offended.

7 For in this cause, it is Charity to deceive our friend, thereby to divert
him from this Motion of Revenge; yea, it is an excellent wile and viuacitie of
Wit to perform it, so as it appear not that we are opposite or contrary to
him: for fear he be not offended with us.

8 But with those who are mild and opposite to Choler, we must observe and
follow a contrary rule: for these are commonly estranged from revenge: for they
speak courteously of those who have offended them; seeking to deminish and
excuse the injuries they have received, and considering the dangers and
difficulties these are to be revenged, they approve this resolution, not to
permit themselves to be transported and vanquished with this Passion, and so
proceeding with reason and aduisement, they in the and content themselves with
that satisfaction which is offered them.

9 To accommodate and sit our selves then to these sort of men, we must extol
the resistance they oppose, as well to the violence of Choler, as to the
desire of Revenge, it being Wisdom in them, to estimate the injury by the
quality and condition, as well of him that offered it, as of him that has
received it.

10 He that is fearful, esteems and considers all these dangers, although
they are small in appearance; yea, it seems unto him, that the Evil or danger
is nearer unto him then it is; for fearing all things his hope is weak: yea,
he is doubtful of those things that are certain, changes often his purpose
and counsel: he is irresolute, and betakes himself to that party and side
where he thinks there is less danger, although it prove less honorable; he
still augmenteth and aggrauates the danger wherein he is; forgets himself and
those who are nearest and dearest to him; not esteeming them in respect of his
own security, but makes his fear apparent by his gestures and countenance,
now changing complexions; and then again speaking confusedly, inconstantly,
and with much impertinencie, and distraction.

11 To accomodate and fit our selves to this Passion, we must support F^are
with Reason, which we entitle Wisdom and foresight (the mother of security)
and blaming that Leuitie that is built upon vain and infirm hopes, we will
term it timeritie and rashness to perform the contrary, and show our
selves, as if we were possessed with fear; yea, we will excuse that, which
(without shame) we cannot commend.

12 Contrariwise, if we have to do with a man, who is full of resolution, and
confidence, who enters not into the consideration of those things, that may
procure us fear and prejudice, or who deemes himself secure enough from any
Evil that may betide or ariue him, amplifying the conceit thereof, and
deminishing the Evil and Danger, being ready to hazard, and execute his
designs, bearing himself in his gesture, actions, and countenance cheerful
and resolute, and in his speeches constant and secure, we must put such a one
in mind of his condition, quality, power and reputation, which assure us he
will finish and accomplish his desires; deminishing the danger and hazard, and
extolling the care and means he has in his power to effect it; highly
applauding his forwardness to resolve his constancy to follow, and his
audacitie and courage to execute; and if occasion present, we must likewise
inform him, that in matters of the like nature that concerned our selves, we
performed the same, and followed the very same stepps and resolutions.

13 But if we will fit and and accommodate our selves to the humors of those
who are shamefaced, considering that these sort of people are commonly angry,
and complain when there befalles them any thing that makes them ashamed, we
must endeavor and strive to cover and excuse it; and their faults being
revealed and dlsclosde, to acknowledge and confess them, and seeming to be
sorrowful and repentant for their honor and reputation lost, not to take any
delight or pleasure to refresh their remembrance of what has formerly befallen
them.

14 We must seem to grieve for the discontent they suffer, and that we very
unwillingly enter into this discourse; that this shame proceeds not, but from a
praise worthy nature, that is jealous of Honor; and that there are none but
are subject to the like accidents, which in the end either time or some
contrary action will deface, and raze out of men's memories.

15 But if we meet with some impudent or brasen-fac'd fellow, considering that
such fellows conceive neither displeasure, shame or repentance at any thing
they commit, although never so dishonest, but contrariwise applaud and
apologize it, yea, and sometimes take a delight and felicity to report it,
having neither consideratian nor care of the blemish and prejudice which this
may bring to their reputations, but rather hating and disdaining those who are
opposite and contrary to them, or that dislike their actions and behavior.

16 If we cannot untwist and sequester our selves from these sort of people, we
must run with the Hare, and condemn the great respect we must bear some
men, to whom those who serve them are slaves, and deprived of many infinite
pleasures and contents; yea, we must blame those who betake themselves
hereunto, either with too much severity or simplicity.

17 To accomodate our selves to him that is affectionately bent to a man,
knowing that these sort of people, willingly extol, Honor; respect, defend,
and excuse those whom they affect and love: and when occasion presents, do
admonish, and exhort them, we must seem to approve the choice and election he
has made, praising his constancy in his friendship, and his courtesy and
kind offices performed to those he loves.

18 But if he hate a man, and that we see our selves enforced to please him, we
must then blame him who is hated, and aggrauate the wrong he has perpetrated
and committed; yea, seem to rejoice at his error and to be angry at any good
he has performed; and not only blame him, but likewise enerease and augment
the prejudice or wrong he has done others.

19 But because we see that Affection is neither seen nor known but by her
effects, which are comprehended under the name of Courtesy; we must therefore
know that those who are subject to this Motton, are apt and ready to perform a
good Office, rejoicing that they meet with any occasion, and watching and
espying out the time, place, and conditions of those that may persuade and
enuite them to do it, or to give them the means to perform a good Office;
yea, to be well contented and to delight that they are the sirst, in making the
only demonstration of this courtesy, thereby blaming those who do the
contrary: and withal reputing themselves happy, to be found and esteemed such;
thereby to be beloved, cherished, honored, praised, and respected.

20 Wherefore with such people we must approve and commend their forwardness
and promptitude to do a courtesy, either that which they have done, or intend
to do; showing our selves to be much contented, when we meet with any occasion
to perform a good Office to any; still seeming to be respective and careful,
either by acknowledging or in being thankful, or else by requitting, or
performing some good Office, to him who has formerly obliged us.

21 Or if we have to do with Ingratfull persons (whose company I always
counsel ye as much as possible ye may to anoyde) then we must deminish the
good office received, blaming the intention of him that performed it, and
showing, that it is a difficult thing to charge our selves with an obligation
without cause; and that those who are wise, know how to make a difference, and
destinction betwixt real good offices, and those that are counterseit and
dissembled, that as ungrateful men are not to be condemned for their ill
will, no more are those who acknowledge themselves debtors for that thev owe
not.

22 Those whose hu^ors who are free and friendly, are likewise commonly
accompanied with Pitt^e and Compassion toward others, grieuing at their
afflictions, seeming not only to know how undeservedly their misfortune is
befallen them, whom we bewail, but also to take occasion to fear, that the
like befall not themselves, or those whom they love; to commend and applaude
the courage, conditions, and qualities, of those, who are afflicted; cherishing
and comforting them, and proffering them our help and assistance; yea, to
some, giving testimony of our compassion with sighs and tears: and thus we
must likewise bear our selves, yet still according as the quality of the
Affliction or Evil, and also as Discretion and Decency requires.

23 Those who are Angry, at the Good, or prosperity that befalls a man, who
deserves it not, do commonly augment or deminish his conditions and merits,
storming and repining at the conduction and nature of humane affairs, as also
at the partiality and blindness of Fortune.

24 The Envious, and Malicious man bears himself almost in the same manner,
but the better to gratify him, we must enter into the consideration and
comparison of him who bears envy, with him who is envied, still augmenting
the merits of him who is envious, and deminishing those of him that is envied,
always remembering the bad actions which this last has committed, or that are
worthy either of contempt or hatred.

25 But such motions being of the rank and Nature of those, which an honest
man ought to eschew and fly; he must not engage himself to those
obseruances, except he be constraind through some great respect or
consideration; and yet with this Prouiso, and Discretion, that he neither
prejudice, nor wrong his own Capacity and Merits.

26 As for Joy and Sorrow, we must bear our selves therein differentlie: for
Joy neither accepts nor admits willingly of Sorrow into her company.

27 But our Sorrow may be of this Nature, that he that is sorrowful, may
willingly admit a pleasant and merry man into his company, provided always
that he know how to infinuate himself fairly and discreetely: for if in the
midst of sorrow, one come and play the merry fellow, or fool, he then makes
himself not only distastefull, but importunate and rediculous: but having
ouer-past the violence and impetuositie of our sorrows, and accommodating and
disposing of our selves to the time, some one running from matter to matter,
chance to enter into a discourse, which is agreeable and pleasing to him that
is sorrowful, no doubt but he may thereby somewhat mollify and appease it.

28 For man being naturally more inclined and addicted to Pleasure then to
Griese, Pleasure being first duly presented him, he more willingly
embraces it then the other.

29 But this has relation and reference more to displeasing then pleasing,
which in this sorrow will be accompanied and waited on by silence; yea, and
then when with our best endeauours and skill we cannot immitate the gesture and
countenance of him that is afflicted.

30 As for Joy, every man knows how to represent and counterfeit it; and if
we entermixe praises to him, whom we would delight and please, we shall still
be the better welcome. I should be to tedious, if I undertook to represent
the different actions that proceed from our interior motions; yea, and it
would not only be troublesome but unprofitable. That which I have already
written shall suffice, and is sufficient to comprehend how we should bear our
selves in pleasing and observing our friends.

31 Only as it were in passing by, I will cursorily advise ye, not to immitate
those foolish and rediculous Countenances of Alexanders Courtiers, who bore
their heads awrie, and of one side, because. Alexander himself did so; or like
the Courtiers of King Phillip his Father, who seeing this Prince to bind about
his face with a linen cloth by reason of a blow he had received on his eye,
did likewise the same, although they had no hurt whatsoever.

32 This indeed smells too much of the parrasytes of elder times, who
indifferently practiced this observance, or rather of ignoble and base
flattery, which cannot be well received or taken, except among blockheads and
dunces.

33 It Is true, sometimes Courtiers in a manner are constrained to immitate the
Uices and Imperfections as well as the Uertues of those with whom they
converse: For Alcibiades being at Athens, played the Orator and Philosopher,
among the L^c^d^monians, he was austere and severe, with the Thracians he
exercisde not only to ride great Horses, but also to drink and carouse
stiffely; with the Ioniens he was voluptuous, iocund and lasie; and with the
Persians, arrogant, and very sumptuous in his apparel and household stuff.

34 Such spirits are fit for the Court, where we must be conformable and
flexible to all sorts of humors and fashions; yet nevertheless so, as no
constraint thereof be either re marked, or perceived in us.

35 These then shall suffice, and here I will end the discourse of the
difference of men, proceeding from the diversity of their interior
conditions, and so will pass on to the exterior; which being likewise
infinite, we will only produce those that may pertinently serve us there, to
know the interior, or that are most commonly observed and remarked in our
public conversation.

CHAP. XXVII.
1 The difference of men by exterior conditions according to their Age, being
the seventh Head of this first Book, 2 Man's Age divided into many Parts. 3 The
manners and Complexions of young Men. 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 The Manners, Humors and
Complexions of old Men. 12 13 14 15 Of Virility, and of their, Humors who have
obtained this age. 16

1 THe exterior conditions of men which may serve to make us judge of their
interior, proceed either from Age or Fortune.

2 We may divide man's Age into many parts, nevertheless the difference of
manners is chiefly remarked and observed in Youth, old Age, and Ver^litie.

3 In youth we are always full of our delights, and pastimes, hasty and rash
to execute our desires, burning in the incontinency and pleasures of the flesh,
inconstant wavering, and easy to be seduced, any way; yea, willing to surfeit,
and to pester our selves with delights and pleasures, which we more then other
violent things cannot subsist and continue.

4 We are easily prouok'd to Choler and Anger and many times without cause;
yea, we permit our selves to be transported with the impetuositie of choler,
the reason consisting in this, because being in this age more desirous of
Honor, we can less endure to be contemned and despised; but withal we are
less covetous, having not yet made prooffe or trial what it is to want
Wealth, and Means, which is the cause and reason that in this age we so
inconsiderately throw our selves into excessive and superfluous expenses.

5 There is also in youth less Malice, and more Simpli^itie, then in any other
degree of Age, because they consider not, but are ignorant what villainies and
wickedness there is acted and perpetrated in the world.

6 From whence it comes to pass, that not having been often deceined, young
men are credulous and light of belief, in respect whereof they are commonly
so full of hopes, that they think and flatter themselves, they shall obtain
all which they desire: and we likewise affrme, that Hope is always more
predominate in them, then Remembrance: for Hope looks to that to come, which
is far more forcible and preualent in young men then that which is past,
being the proper object of Remembrance.

7 So being Cholerike, and likewise replenished with Hope; Choler, is the
cause that they attempt any thing hastily and rashly, and the hope they
conceive to obtain, their desires, makes that they fear nothing whereby they
become confident in themselves.

8 They are also shamefaced and bashful, as well because they are
unexperienced in matters, as also since they have been still trained up in
Fear: they sooner follow Vanity then Profit; and in this age, friendship is
stronger in them, then in any other, as well for that they are now more desirous
of company, as also in respect the consideration of Profit, which sometimes
dissolues affections is very seldom, or rather never in the memories of young
people.

9 And although in many things they are commonly Ignorant; yet nevertheless
they are not still the less Presumptuous: for presuming to know all, they are
confident of all: from whence it comes to pass, that they often exceed the
limmits of their designs and resolutions bending in all their affections
toward extremities be it either to love or hate a man

10 Nevertheless, they offend rather through Insolenc^, and Choler, then
Malice; they are easy to be drawn to Compassion retaining a good opinion of
all men, as believing them better then they are, because frequency of Vice in
respect of their youth, is unknown to them, which likewise is the reason, that
being innocent themselves, they in their judgments condemn Vice more
severely, and the Sanguine complexion commonly, most predominating in this age
they are seduced and allured to mirth, and to pass their time in sport and
recreation.

11 But old men as they are commonly of a contrary temper, so they differ
likewise from the humors of young men, for having lived long in the world, and
been often deceived, they neither assure others, nor promise themselves any
thing, seeming to suspect and doubt all things, and to know the certainty of
nothing, they are of a poor and weak courage, in having observed and seen in
the course of their lives, many accidents that have hindered them from
attempting any thing, still speaking ambiguouslie and doubtfullie, taking all
things at the worst hand and construing and representing them in the worst
sense, reputing things sometimes for Evil that are Good, yea, and performed
with a good intent: they a^e ^uspitious and doubtful, being the true effects
of fear which freezeth and congealeth their hearts: and of the experience they
have formerly had of men's infidelities: they neither love nor hate excessiuely,
but desire to out live young men; because De^rs is chiefly derived from those
things which are distant from us, and which we want: so as their life absenting
it self daily from them, and a small point of time remaining them to live,
they therefore in this respect desire that which they want, which consideration
partly makes them more covetous, because wealth serves to support and maintain
our life, as also, the remembrance of the care and toil they, have had to
purchase and precure it, together with the small hope they have to retain it,
during the short term of their life, as also their facility to lose it.

12 The remembranee of things past, makes them sometimes be too talkatiue, and
full of kakling, and sometimes in their speeches to be too vain and
importunate; and although they are soon angry and choleric, and very often
with much vehemency and bitterness; yet, nevertheless they commonly perform
it weakly and faintly.

13 The usual and customarie appetites and desires which other men conceive,
have partly abandoned and forsaken them, and those that remain with them are
but of small power and efficacy; from whence it proceeds, that they are often
carried away with their own Wills, which they measure and interpret according to
the profit they receive and reap thereby.

15 From these two extremities, it is easy to point out and imagine the
humors and dispositions of those who are in their Virill age, which will be
still separated and estranged from the Considence and Presumption of young, and
the Fear and Diffidence of old men.

16 So as using Moderation in their manners, and Judgment and Discretion in
their affairs, they will bear themselves circumspectely, joining profit with
honesty, and recollecting and accumy plating what they have wanted as well in
their youth as old age; the excess and defects that are found in both these
ages, will be converted to a mediocritie in this.

CHAP. XXVIII.
1 The difference of men according to the condition of their Fortunes. 2 The
Profits and Preuidices we receive by Fortune. 3 That Nobility is the first
benefit thereof, and of Noble men's conditions. 4 That Wealth is the second
benefit thereof, and of the natures of Rich men. 5 6 The difference 'twixt him
that is of late grown Rich, and he that has been a long time Rich. 7 The
Conditions of Great men and of those that are in authority being the third
benefit of Fortune. 8 9 10 The conditions of him that is fortunate, being the
fourth benefit. 11 Other differences of men besides Age and Fortune, and how to
be considered in our behavior, and conversation with every one in particular.
12 How to behave our selves toward our servants and confidents, and how
toward strangers. 13 How to honest and upright men. 14 How to those of a
pleasant conversation. 15 How to those who are Proud, Ambitious, Modest,
Malicious, or of a Kind Nature. 16 How to the Officious, or Inofficious, or
toward those that are ^ngaged, or not ^ngaged to us.

1 COme we to the difference that proceeds from the diverse conditiof Fortune.

2 The chiefest benefits we receive of Fortune, are these four, Nobilit^e (or
Gentilitie) Wealth, Authority, and Happiness: whereunto are opposed four
disaduantages, that may alter our demeanours, and change our manners and
behavior: because by the knowledge of contraries, the thing it self is best
known, we will therefore here content our self, only to represent the
Inclinations and Manners of those who enjoy these four benefits and advantages.

3 Noblemen, and Gentlemen, are more desirous and ambitious of Honor then
others, it being the common nature of men that are enriched and graced with any
privilege of Fortune, to seek and strive to increase it; and Pride always
accompanying and attending those of this rank and condition, they not only
contemn those of lower and inferior degree: but those likewise who are not so
anciently Noble, or well descended as themselves, and this contempt proceeds,
bebecause those things which resemble, in that they are distant and far from
us, they are by so much the more esteemed and respected of us then these we see
before our eyes.

4 Rich men are Proud and ^nsolent, drawing the conceit thereof from their
wealth, which they prefer and value above all things, and consequently
imagine that all things lie within the lists of their power: In their speech
and actions they are imperious and stately, as well because abundance of wealth
occasioneth it, as also, that they delight to make ostentation of their
greatness.

5 They are Ungrateful, Vinaictiue, Arroga^^, and Vain; because men delight
to think and speak of that which they admire and love: and Rich men admire
and love nothing so much as their wealth, whereof they commonly speak, and
boast, believing that others take as much pleasure therein as themselves: to
conclude they hereby in effect make themselves happy in their folly.

6 But there is a great difference, betwixt those who have been long and those
that are lately become rich, for the last are commonly more Indescreete,
Covetous, and Insolent, then the former.

And for the injuries which Rich men offer and commit, they perform them more
out of Pride, and Bravery, then out of any intent to molest or wrong us.

7 Those who are oppulent, and in any high degree of authority, are almost of
the same humor, but they are more haughty and ambitious of Honor, and not so
vain or retchlesse as rich men.

8 For authority being subject to reprehension, and still in action, it
behoues them to be vigilant and distrustful; Their countenances holds more of
Pride then Anger and are fair more modest then those of rich men, being
always accompanied with a graceful kind of temperate severity.

9 As for their injuries and wrongs they are great according to their power,
they very difficultly reconcile themselves to those whom they mistrust, or to
those who they think are offended with them.

10 Those who have been fortunate in all their enterprises and actions,
sympathize and participate of the humors of the No^le, Sich, and Powerful
men; but they are more arrogant, choleric, inconsiderate and rash, thinking
that all things should answer their desires, and nothing oppose them.

11 Besides the differences that proceed from the differences of Age, or the
variable Condition of Fortune, we must consider it in a man's conversation and
behavior: as if the person with whom we converse be a Domesticke, or a
Stranger, whither he be a confident, or not; equal, or unequal; inferior,
or superior to us; whither of a good, or evil nature; given to speak truth,
or to lie: pleasant, or severe; proud, or modest, ing^ged and beholding to us,
or not: Whereof each particular quality requires a particular form to
converse and treat with them.

12 Because with our Domesticke and Confidents, we must be free; with strangers
distrustful, and more retired and retentiue: yea, we must honor our
superiors, respect our equals, and be pleasant and courteous to our inferiors.

13 We must also proceed with all assurance and con^^dence toward those who
are true and really honest, but we must not believe those who are common liars,
or that have no good reputation, although as we say they have already their
reward in their own hands.

14 To those that are Affable and Pleasant in company, we must be familiar; to
those who are severe or sullen, more retired and cautious, and both receive and
entertain them with few words and much silence.

15 To Ambitious and Great men we must yield all the Honor they can desire of
us; making show as if we much respected and esteemed them, but to those who are
temperate and modest, we must bear our selves without any affectation, we
must not listen to the Enui^u^ or Malicious, and yet we must demean our
selves so, as that we make them confident, we repute them not for such: to
those that bear us much good will and affection, we must he always ready and
willing (to our utmost power) to yield and afford them reciprocal testimonies
of our inviolable friendship.

16 We must seek aad frequent those that are Of^ciou^, if they can steed or
pleasure us, and withal we must avoid the company of the ^^officiou^; to those
that are in^ag'd to us, we^ must bear our selves discr^etly, in that which
concerns their interest, and not rashly or suddenly believe all that proceeds
from them: and contrariwise to those, who are not obliged, or engaged to us,
we must add more credit and belief. Thus have ye the form how we must
demean and bear our selves according to the difference of persons.

CHAP. XXIX.
1 The eighth head of this Book, discoursing of matters, whose subjects are
infinite. 2 Several differences of affairs drawn from causes which examine
and consider them. 3 By means Possible or Impossible; necessary or not; easy
or difficult; Profitable or Prejudicial. 4 The difference of men's actions.
serving to judge of Possibility, or Impossibility. 5 Of Power and Will,
requisite in the Production of Actions. 6 Considerations upon this Power. 7 8
Considerations upon this Will. 9 10 Considerations upon the means and
differences. 11 The Circumstances of Place in things moveable. 12 The
Circumstance of Time. 13 Considerations upon The diversity of hindrances. 14
The fac^ltie of a business. 15 The necessity thereof. 16 Absolute. 17
Conditional.

1 WE E will proceed to the difference of affairs, whereof the subjects being
infinite, and the confluence of particularities which may transform and alter
them numberless; I will content my self thereby to stir up Iu^gement and
Courtship, to prefixe some common an^ ordinary circumstances, whereof we may
draw use and profit in their examination.

2 Affairs are chiefly examined by the causes that gave them their first
^otion and Essence. and which ought conduct them to their end, as by the means
which we may observe and practice to that effect, by the end why and wherefore
we undertook it, and by the effect or issue that may redound to us thereby.

13 The examinaton of the cause and means will inform us; whether it be
possible or impossible, necessary or not; and will show us the facility or
difficulty in the execution thereof. In the end and effect, we must consider
Good or Evil near or far from us; and both in the cause, means, end, and
effect, we must consider the Justice thereof.

4 But of men's Actions, some are produced by one only cause, and others need
meet with many; and this conjunction and commixture is performed either
successively by a dependence, and certain order deuoluing one after another;
or by a concurrence of all together, and at one and the same time: and in this
concurrence of many causes, we must be careful to destinguish those that are
principal from those that are but seconds and assistants: and likewise those
that are absolutely necessary from those that are not, except for greater
facility or pro fit.

5 The chief causes of affairs or actions residing in persons, in whom for
the perfection of an action it is requisite (according to the order of
discourse and reason) that Power and Will meet and con curre together in the
same point and time; and power, having many degrees, and being composde of
many sorts, we must research and seek, if this sort which is requisite and
fit for our business in question, is or may be found in him that must manage
and effect it.

6 For a poo^e fellow, although he be Incapable in other matters, may sometimes
perform more in a business of another nature then those who are more eminent
and rich: they being often times hindered and withheld either through shame,
respect, dissidence, or suspicion, or by some other such like consideration.

7 So our Power must be proportioned according to the quality of the
business, and not measured according to the privileges and advantages of
favor, reputation, or greatness; if they serve not for that business which
is in question.

8 As for our Will, it may be known by the quality of the end, and by the
opinion a man conceiues thereof: for we presume, he desires that which is
profitable either for himself or his, or for that he esteems it just and
reasonable, and his opinion may be known by his words, councels, speeches,
actions, gestures, and ex^e^iour compliments and demonstrations, as well
present as past: I say past, for the execution of the like business, as well
as the experience and example, to have formerly unprofitably attempted and
enterpris'd it, may make us judge not only of the opinion, who can help and
assist us; but also of the possibility or impossibility that is now
proffered: entering into the comparison of the means, time, place, occasion,
and other circumstances, as well of the execution, as hindrance thereof.

9 And these considerations of Power and W^ll, must not only be had or
conceived of him who has the chief managing and conduction of the business,
but of all others that directly or indirectly may prevent or cross it.

10 We must next examine the necessary means and instruments, with their
quantity and quality, proportionable to the action: As that which must go
before, follow after, or accompany it: the beginning, middle, and end thereof,
and in all these we must still have a watchful and yigilant eye to Place and
Time.

11 For considering that in passing from one place to another, we think not
only of the place, where we are, but from whence we came, where we must
travel, whither we would go, and where we must recide and stay: so whether
it be for the managing and conduction of a business, that we our selves
undertake: or for the virtues and perfection of any one that may steed or serve
us herein, still pondering and considering that every particularitie in this
exchanging of place may either bring advantage or disadvantage, to the
business we have in hand.

12 In the Time we must consider when our business may be treated of, or
finished, how long we must employ therein: since when we began it, if it have
been neglected or deferred, if too soon, or too late, or if after, before or
at the instant of some other.

13 Which performd, we must by the same means and ways examine the causes of
the hindrances, that may concur and meet in the execution, whether they
arise from the persons quality, quantity, dependence, or order; or from the
means, or other circumstances: to prevent which hindrances we must seek the
fittest, and most pertinent remedies, to facilitate and finish the action.

14 But a business is held easy, when it may be performed and finished with
small labor, charge and time, and that to bring it to its absolute perfection;
we need not employ many persons or means, which we cannot easily procure, or
who depend not of us.

15 Another consideration which must be had in the cause of actions, is that
of Necessi^ie, whereunto most commonly all others yield, and give way: for of
actions some proceed from our selves, others from others, in those that come
from our selves, and that are in our own power to perform, we must perform
them with as much judgment as possibly we can, thereby to obtain, and arrive
to the end and felicity of our desires, and to storm, and be choleric at
those which proceed not from us; yet with a future reservation and intention,
to direct and shape our course that way again, when the winds of Choler of
either side, shall be ouer-past, and blown away.

16 But if this Choler and Uiolence proceed from Fortune, that is to say, of
a certain affluence, or concurrence of circumstances which we could not
foresee, or from a certain form or necessary dependence of things we cannot
avoid, we must accordingly thereunto order and accommodate our behauiours.

17 But the chiefest discourse and effect of our Judgment depends not so much
on absolute, as on conditional necessity, which tends to the end whereat we
aim, and to the necessary means to obtain it.

CHAP. XXX.
1 The means to purchase a Kings favor. 2 Considerations in procuring it. 3 4
5 The Order and Means we must observe therein. 6 Consideration of the
Benefit, or Damage, that may thereby accrue unto us. 7 Consideration of the
Honor. 8 Profit, and how it is to be considered. 9 Pleasure, and Profits, it
brings with it.

1 WE say then, that to obtain the favor of our Prince: we must make our
selves known to some one near him: and in this sort of conditional
necessity we must consider two things: the one the consequence and importance
of the end why we betake and reduce our selves to this necessity.

2 For if this Necessity whereunto we tie and engage our seluos, bring us
more prejudice and damage, then the end whereunto our desires and hopes aim,
does advantage and profit, it will be, then descreetly done of us, to desist
from our former purpose, and to divert our designs another way.

3 In which respect we must poize and balance (by the comparison of more or
less) the profit of the end, by the disadvantage of the means to obtain it.

4 The other is to consider if there are many means tending to this end, all
which we must likewise weigh and compare one with another, and so choose the
surest and least doubtful, yea the speediest and most honorable.

5 For although in all actions, Honor should march first, and take the
chiefest place, nevertheless in those which are necessary, and when there are
choice of means to obtain it, the first and chiefest consideration, is
Assurance and Security, then Facility, and then Honor: after which we may add
the consideration of Profit, because in such actions we chiefly seek to
withdraw our selves from necessity, which (according to the old proverb has
^o law) and the end of the action being Honorable, the very name thereof
amends and bettereth the form that we have observed in attaining thereunto:
being otherwise of it self excused by necessity.

6 Having made use of these considerations, both upon the Cause and Means, we
must consider in the End and Effect; the Good or Evil that remains therein;
which we must not examine according to the particular opinions of Philosophers;
but according to the vulgar, or according to the opinions of those, who must
either contribute or participate in this action.

All that is Good, aims at Honor, Profit, or Pleasure.

7 Honor consists, either in the opinions we conceive of a man's perfections and
merits, or in the ceremonies of respect and reverence, wherewith we honor him
who is our superior, in power, authority, reputation, wealth, or in some
other remarkable advantage; the which in respect of the Honor that is united
and fixed to it; is desired of all men: by which contrary reason, all things
that have ^^ themselves, or in their dependancy any Dishonor or Infamy, is
justly reputed and held as Evil.

8 P^ofit taken in the l^^gest sense is considered in two things, that is to
say: In the particular or public assurance, or in the gain, which not only
consists in the purchase of wealth which we want: but also in the conservation
of that we have; yea, to sile repel, and diminish the present Evil, and to
divert and put off the future.

9 As for Pleasure: it is (in some sense) found in all sorts of things which
are good; for Honor, and Profit ^ngender Pleasure, nevertheless we chiesly
attribute to Pleasure, those good things that cannot be attributed to Profit
and Ho^our, which are d^lightfull and pleasing unto us: not only for the
feeling we have of their presence, and through a voluntary enjoying thereof*
not constr^ined (for constraint i in all things distasteful) but also by the
remembrance thereof which is past, and by the desire and hope which is yet to
come.

It is in this respect the like in Evil: which is not only such b^ its
presence, as we have formerly mentioned; but also afflicts us through fear
and apprehension, which as futurely to befalls us, as fore past faults do
through repentance.

CHAP. XXXI.
1 Of the Equity and Justice of a matter. 2 Rules of this Justice in two sorts
universal. 3 Truth is a dependant of universal Justice. 4 And also of
Particular. 5 Custom is more received and followed at Court: then particular
or universal Justice. 6 7 Examples hereon. 8 Conclusion of the differences of
Persons, and Affairs. 9

1 GOod or Evil may be in the end or approach of an Action, and it being once
perfectly discerned and known, we must examine it by Justice, there being no
man, how wicked soever, that desires not to give this Iustre to his actions:
yea not only in the End, but also in the Cause and Means thereof.

2 But the rules of Justice are of two sorts, the one universal, received by
most men; yea confessed by those which in other matters are of a contrary
opinion, and held for just almost of all: As to acknowledge a Di^i^itie, to
love and obey our Parents, to train up our children, to receive and
acknowledge a good office done us, and by the same reason to chastise and
revenge an injury offered us.

Nevertheless Policy has found it more expedient to take away the revenge of
greatest injuries from particular persons, for fear they should bear
themselves indiscreetly therein, and has therefore placed and imposed it in
the hands of public authority.

3 Truth (which likewise gives testimony what every thing is, may be termed
dependancies of this Justice; as also Fidelity and Faith (being the cyment and
foundation of all sorts of Treaties, Promises and Conuentions) without which
all things would be in confusion, and the commerce and society of men could
not possibly subsist.

4 The other rules of Justice are particulars proceeding either from the use
that authoriseth them, or from the command of the Magistrate, as Laws and
Ordinances, or the interpretation of these Laws and Ordinances, being in other
matters alike, whereof they have not plainly and expressly disposed.

5

6 If it be not in very serious matters, we seldom inform our selves at Court
of these two later degrees: but contrariwise we there receive and follow
Custom, although it be many times directly opposite to Laws and Ordinances.

7 For Example; he that judges in some Courts upon the point of Honor, or of
the Justice of an Appeal for a Duel, or single combat; according to the
express letter and sense of the Law, or the rule of Conscience, he makes
himself ridiculous in the corruption of these sinful times.

8 This shall suffice to administer to our affairs, the most common and
general considerations; not only thereby to judge what must be done, but
also to conjecture that which is done, in those things that may be prepos'd
unto us.

9 For from men's Power and Will, and from the quality of affairs,
Circumstance, Place and Time, it will be very easy for us to conclude of that
which may be done.

CHAP. XXXII.
1 Of Proceedings. 2 The consideration of Circumstance^. 3 The most frequent
and usual manner to negotiate and manage a business in Court, 4 To divert the
hindrances, and to p^rchase Reputation. 5 What those hindrances are in our
selves. 6 The qualities that may diminish our Reputation. 7 8 The means to
divert and avoid them.

1 LEt us come to the manner of proceeding; wherein the circumstances are of no
less consideration, then the order, which must vary and change as they do,
accommodating and fitting our selves to the Place and Time, and choosing the
most conuenientest answerable to the persons and affairs: husbanding the
occasions without precipitation, and making it known, that we proceed in every
thing according to Nature, still following rather Reason and the advice of the
wise and experienced then Fortune or Passion; doing nothing without mature
deliberation, and being on the very point of its execution, to perform it with
promptitude and celeritie.

2 Sometimes according to need and extremity we must dissemble, defer and
obey necessity, and reduce our selves to do that which we can, being not able
to perform what we would.

3 But the most frequent and general order to treat of an asfayre, and to
insinuate and draw any one to our opinion, is to foresee and prevent the
hindrances that may divert him from that whereunto we would induce him, and
so to work and skrew our selves into his favor and approbation.

4 The hindrances proceed either from our selves, or from hi^ to whom we
address our selves; from those that contradict us, and to whom our advise is
not pleasing, or may offend him, or else from the business it self which we
undertake, or from that whereunto we would persuade others.

5 For our own regard and respect; we must consider why we engage our selves
in this business, either voluntarily of our selves, or as being requested or
commanded by others.

We must know what opinion men generally and particularly conceive of him to
whom we address our selves, which they have of our own Sufficiency, Wisdom
and Friendship: yea and for the regard and reason it self, of that whereunto
we would draw them: and thereunto to add and join the consideration of our
own profession, condition, authority and reputation, which we may have toward
him, in what degree of equality, superiority, or inferioritie we are, and
thereunto dispose and accommodate our discourse: and yet nevertheless
remembering that Modesty does more delight and please, then to bear our selves
imperiously and arrogantly.

But above all we must not demonstrate any show of Malice, Folly, or Ill Will,
as also not report any thing that may contradict our actions and behauiours,
which are publicly exposed to all men's sight; nor either through
forgetfulness, or otherwise to give the Lie to our own Discourse and speeches.

6 But, of the qualities that may disparage or diminish our reputation, some
b^are their disfavor and distaste with them, as weakness throughage, small
experience ignorance, indiscretion, lenity, inconstancy, and presumption.

7 Others make us suspected of those to whom we address our selves; as Power,
Authority, the particular interest which we may have in the business we
treat of, be it through corruption, or otherwise: or through Enute, Fear,
Choler, or the like passions; or else heretofore to have vainly and
unprofitably attempted it, to have often spoken of it, without bringing it to
any perfection, to have been often deceived in our opinions, to have first
motioned it, or either too soon, or too late.

8 These and such like hindrances must be sore-thought, and foreseen of us;
and some of them according to their qualities must be ingeniously confessed
and blamed of us, others we must disauow, showing that they are not so, or
excusing and yielding reason for them, or entermixing that Evil with some
other Good, or diminishing it, as having done it to a good intent, or accusing
Fortune, Hazard, or the nature of things, or else rejecting and retorting the
Evil which may redound hereby upon others.

CHAP. XXXIII.
1 The means to know the hindrances that befall us, of him with whom we are
to treat, or who is opposite to us therein. 2 Knowing them, then of the
Precaution we must observe therein. 3 The means to divert and avoid them. 4 5
Considerations upon those hindrances, and upon the means to avoid them. 6 7 8
How to divert hindrances that proceed from others, and not from those with
whom we are to treat. 9 Hindrances proceeding from the busin^sse it self
whereon to treat. 10 The means to divert and avoid them. 11 12 13 14 15 The
hindrances being removed, the means then to purchase Reputation.

1 IN him who we will persuade or draw to effect our desire. we must consider
his Age, Rank, and Profession, (be it that he has many, few, or only one)
what commonly are his manners, passions, and affections, what his Capacity,
Judgment, Affability, and Wisdom: We must consider his disposition to that
whereunto we would persuade him, as also the respects he may have to diverse
matters or persons; which may occasion his affection to bend and incline more
one way then another: the Ignorant and Common sort of people, being subject to
permit themselves to be carried away with Profit; whereas Gentlemen, and those
of eminent rank, aim only at Honor.

Men are likewise more ready to fly and eschew Evil, then to follow Good;
and the fear of the first mooues them with more power and efficacy then the
hope of the last.

We must also know, that it is far easier to persuade those who are
Fearful, diffident, or Irresolute, not to do, then to do a thing.

2 Having found out the hindrances that may proceed from a man; we must be
careful that there ariue no other from any other way, as if he be persuaded
already to the contrary: if he be weary to speak or to hear spoken
thereof: if he be out of hope, discouraged, or not respective hereof, or not
desirous to perform that which we desire, or if he be possessed by
flatterers, or people who are contrary and opposite to that we would persuade.

3 In all these hindrances we must govern our selves according to the
quality both of the person, and matter, for sometimes we must mildly reprove
and admonish him of his Duty: that he perscuere to follow the advice and
counsel of his friends: sometimes encourage him, acquainting him with the
occasion of a more happy Issue then heretofore, so far forth as he will
follow good counsel, and to make him understand that he neither listen nor
give care to those who would persuade him to the contrary.

4 Sometimes it is fit to excuse him, by throwing the fault on Fortune, or the
like, that he promise and hope for speedy and easy remedies, and that he
fight against passion by these means which we have heretofore alleged, and so
to inkindle and stir up in him those conceits and resolutions which chiefly
make for us.

5 We must also consider the hindrances that may proceed from him who is
opposite and contrary to us herein: and whither his Authority, Favor, Power,
Affability, or any other quality or perfection in him, can offend or wrong
us: and these we must diminish as much as we may, or else augment and extol
them; showing that we fear least they should hereafter offend him whom we
thus counsel; discovering the confidence and assurance which such a one
conceiues of his qualities, and showing how much such confidence has, and may
offend him who enioyes it.

6 And this must be practiced more or less, freely and openly according to
men's conditions, and other circumstances, having always a regardfull and
circumspectious heed, both to fly that which may prejudice, and to follow that
which may advantage and pro fit us.

7 And if he whom we contradict be subject to bad conditions, as if he be
a flatterer, impudent, partial, corrupt, quarrellous, inconstant, malicious,
or passionate, we may perchance prevail, by lessening and diminishing his
reputation; as also if he give any simple or weak reason to support his
contradiction, we may then show him his want of sense and experience in this
matter.

8 Sometimes the hindrances may proceed from other men, as those to whom the
counsel may offend, which we give to another, if he be any way linked by
friendship, consanguinitie, or any other obligation to him with whom we treat;
and then we must diminish the damage, or propose some remedy to the contrary;
or else exagerate above this damage the profit and advantage, which he whom
we counsel may receive; or else to show that that person has changed his
will and affection toward him, whom we endeavor to persuade.

9 The hindrances that may arise from those who enterpose in a business,
being removed and taken away: we must then consider if the business it self
have no defect or distaste in it, that may disfavor or disappoint our
enterprise, as, if it be too difficult, or almost impossible; if it be
incredible or not very likely, if it be hazardous; unjust, unworthy, or of
small moment or consideration; or heretofore counseled or attempted in vain;
with an ill issue contrary to a former conceived resolution.

10 The which we must deny, diminish and repair, and so weigh the
Difficulty, Danger, Dishonor, and other such defects, with the greatness and
importancie of the matter: showing that it has changed condition, and that we
need not thus to ill presage or preiudge it: Examples being not alike nor
concurring in all their circumstances.

11 That if our Misfortune or Necessity enforce us to perswa^e a thing which
in exterior show and appearance is not honest, we must excuse it either as
being necessary, or else as being practiced by others, or as being fit and
properly agreeing with the time, or tending to a good end, and conformable to
the opinion of many others: From whence we may proceed to the Profit and
Utility.

12 But if we have to meet and fight with Necessity, then we must enter into
comparison of the like matters: We must deny this Necessity with as many
reasons as we can: We must suggest and propose new expedients and remedies as
well to anoide the dangers we fear, as to obtain the Good we desire.

13 And because we do not willingly undertake things which we esteem
difficult or impossible: if we will divert any one from attempting a thing, we
must particularly amplisie the difficulties, and if this fail us, we must
esteem the profit, either as little, nothing or uncertain, or else
contrariwise we must consider and weigh the Evil that may proceed from such
an enterprise if it take not effect.

14 And if we cannot daunt it by Profit, we must then fight against it with
Honesty and Justice, showing that the enterprise is full of Injustice and no
way Honorable for him that undertakes it.

15 Those hindrances this removed and taken away: to purchase Glory and
Reputation with him whom we would persuade, we must accomodate and fit our
selves to his inclination, as much as the subject will permit us; yea, we must
use all our reasons, and make our selves agreeable and pleasing to him: and so
stir up in him those Passions that may steed and serve us; yea, we must frame
and engender in his conceit, a certain opinion, that we love, esteem, and
honor him; yea, and with such respect, that he may acknowledge we would not
attempt any thing that might be distasteful or prejudicial to him: and in all
our speeches and actions demonstrating our censeritie, and sufficiency.

CHAP. XXXIV.
1 How to order our speeches, being the ninth head of this first Book: how to
observe Silence with Modesty, Brevity, and Judgment. 2 How to avoid
Importunity. 3 How to avoid Lies, with diverse consideratitions upon lying, and
also upon his reputation that speaks. 4 According to the subject whereof we
speak. 5 How if we speak of our selves or of others. 6 How if he be our
Equal or Inferior. 7 How if he be known to be more Judicious then our
selves. 8 Of some sorts of Flatterers, which are more excusable. 9 Of others
altogether inexcusable, and how. 10 11 Of Lies considered according to the
intent of the Liar. 12 How to avoid the Vanity that is in Boasting and
Ostentation. 13 How far we may vaunt, and the Moderation which we must
observe therein. 14 Of Presumption, Obstinacy, and Contradiction, and how we
must bear our selves in contradicting others. 15 Considerations upon
Contradiction, to the end it be well taken. 16 17 Precautions thereon.

1 THE Order and Decorum to proceed herein being known, it remains that we
modestly govern our speech and silence, and study to be acute and brief
without obscurity, adding thereunto such fair carriage and decency, as is
beseeming and answerable, not only to our own condition, but with those with
whom we converse and negotiate, and in other circumstances that may arise, we
must chiesly slye and eschew Importunity, Lying, and Uanitie.

2 Importunity in speaking nothing Cholerickly, or impertinently, not to
repeat often one and the same thing, and not to speak whiles another is
speaking.

3 As for Lies, they are differently considered, either according to his
reputation that delivers them; and if he believe what he speaks, that he may
not be termed a L^^r Nevertheless he commits a fault, to assure a thing which
he knows not, and the ^ng^nious honest man, although never so well reputed
shall do wisely in this respect to be silent, but if he that speak believe it
to be otherwise then he speaks, he is then a true Liar; and according to his
desert, is commonly little esteemed or regarded: For in effect, it is to ruin
and betray commerce betwixt man and man, which cannot continue or subsist,
except by the belief we should have one of the other: and there is no greater
weakness nor folly then to contradict and belly his own knowledge.

4 Wherein we must consider lying according to the subject of those things
whereof we speak; as if we speak of our selves, or others: to speak of our
selves for our own profit, we shall be held not only Vain, but Liars; and as
Lying makes us odious, so does Vanity, rediculous.

5 Speaking of others we must be careful not to speak to their prejudice or
disadvantage: for if herein truth be odious, Lying must needs be far more,
as being commonly accompanied with Malice: and nevertheless in the Companies
we frecuent, are commonly backbiters and those who to seem wiser then their
fellows, willingly reprove and blame them, where contra^iw^se we should aim
rather to praise then dispraise them.

6 For if he of whom we speak be our ^^f^riour, or Equal, in that whereof we
praise him, we make him not only to be praised and applauded of others, but
also teach them who know us to be their ^^^^, or Equals, likewise to praise and
applande us.

7 Or if he be known to be more capable and sufficient then our selves; in
blaming him, we make our selves simple and rediculous; yea, we thereby
disparage our selves, because being less then those whom we dispraise, we
thereby make our selves the less worthy to be praised.

8 It is then better to speak to the profit then the prejudice of another; for
although it be imputed to flattery, to speak much in commendation of a man;
nevertheless, I hold it is to extend flattery very far, to term those
praises flatteries: for I believe there are some flatteries excusable, and
others inexcuseable.

9 I term those inexcuseable, if we praise a man for any wicked fact he
has done, or if we praise him with an intent to deceive him, or when by our
praises we encourage him to do Evil, or to commend him for that which we know
he has not performed.

10 But when we praise a man, only to sooth and content him without any other
wicked design, or to eschaw any Evil, or for some Good, we may hope for
without preiudicing any man, this flattery is more excusable in men's
conuersations.

11 In which respect we must likewise consider of Lies, according to the intent
of the Liar: for when he lies only for pastime and sport, that is fitter rather
for a Fool then a Gentleman of reputation and honor: or if he lie to Offend a
man, in this cause, we must not consider if he can profit himself in profiting
another; for be it that he reap or reap not benefit thereby; Lying, being
offensive to a man, he must fly and avoid it that intends to frequent good
companies, whereof the chiefest linkes and bonds, are Good not Evil Offices.
But if lying wrong no man, and yet may profit some, we may then dispense
therewith, provided that the cause deserve it.

12 Uanitie is the other Uice that we must avoid and fly in our conversation
and discourse. It has two principal branches; Boasting and Presumption: we
have formerly spoken some thing of boasting, which is rediculous, when we
vaunt of that which we have not performed; he which relates and praises what
he has affected and performed, is a little more excusable, but in that he
shows himself not to be very D^cr^et and Wi^^: for in steed of reaping
praise, he purchases himself dispraise: for those praises that proceed from
our own tongues, can seldom or never be taken in good part.

13 Wherefore if it fall out that we speak of our selves; it must be with much
Retention, and Modesty it being no less fault in a man to boast h^n to blame
himself.

14 As for Presumption, it extends further then Speech: Wherefore setting a
part that which regards Actions. I say it appears and is seen in two sorts,
either not to yield to the advice of any; from whence proceeds o^ ^^^^, o^ that
we will have others to subscribe to ours, from whence arises a very odious
and injurious contradiction, seeming to know and understand more then others,
and every where to have the vpperhand. We must avoid both the one and the other
form of this proceeding; and above all things, if there be cause of
contradiction, we must not then be provoked to be either bold, bitter, or
obstinate, but we must temper our selves with humble terms and speeches;
seeming rather desirous to be taught then to teach; and to propose things by
the way of difficulty and doubt, and not, either by an affirmative or negative
resolution.

15 And to the end it may be well taken, it must be conceived in us at the very
instant of our discourse, and not otherwise, nor from any other former cause,
and that it touch not the person, but only the cause in question. Contrariwise,
we must praise him whom we contradict; yea, and sometimes we must confess our
doubt, to be our own Fault, and Ignorance, and when it is needful and
requisite we must give place and subscribe.

16 But above all things we must be careful not to contradict two sorts of
men, to wit, those to whom we owe respect for fear of offending them, and
those who are our superiors, for fear to disparage them too much in making us
by this contestation their equals, it being still more shameful for us, to be
vanquished by them, then honorable to vanquish them.

17 He that is discreet and wary in his contestations, will not offend or
astonish himself at other men's opinions, although they seem extrauagant, nor
at follies indiscretions, or leuyties, committed in his presence: but will
rather consider wherein they may be profitable to him; be it to entertain our
selves in such men's companies and conuersations, or to take heed of them; or to
advance his own design and purpose, whereby he may draw advantage and profit.

CHAP. XXXV.
1 Of Retention and Reservedness, the last part of an active and ingenious
Wit, which is necessary in affairs, both for our selves and our friends. 2
Toward whom chiefly we should reserve our selves. 3 That Reservedness is
necessary for a Courtier. 4 How we must use it. 5 In how many sorts and degrees
it is practiced and used. 6 By silence. 7 Concurrence of Jests in silence, and
their remedies. 8 To be Reseruedly Cautious in our speech and how it must be
performed 9 Of the Answers and Replies, ^^^^ ^^^^ and observations thereon. 10
To diss^mble by exterior shows, and ^^^^ ^^^^ must perform it. 11 That it is
a point of true Wisdom, when a man desembles a necessary matter in Court; and
of the means to discover the same. 12 13 14 The Conclusion of active and solid
Wisdom, and the means to discover by his countenance whither a man be so, ye
or no.

1 Herein and in many other Jests, and Replies, Reservedness is necessary, it
being the last, but the chiefest part of an active and solid Wit, without
which, it is impossible to conduct our selves securely through men's actions and
malice: for not knowing how to conceal his play, gives a great advantage to
those who would enterprise, not only against those who are careless, but also
against their friends; because their friends affairs are lincked and united to
their own; as Gamesters, who discovering their Cards, not only lose
themselves, but also cause their friends to lose: and right so the friends of
th^s^ participate and bear a share in their friends loss.

Besides we cannot safely trust him, who so easily discouers and bewraies
himself; from whence it proceeds, that those men (most commonly) in the midst
of their affairs, remain without counsel or friends.

2 But these with whom we must chiefly desemble, are those, who to draw some
secret from us, are accustomed to search and esp^e out occasions, whereby they
may o ocure so^^ reputation and belief from ^^* ^ither by communicating us a
business ^^^^ ^^^^ is ^^^^ll importance and co^^^quence, thereby striving to
make us r^p^se confidence in them, purposely to draw from us a matter of
greater weight and worth: Now feigning to hate one, anon to love another,
although their affections in themselves are quite opposite, and otherwise fixed
and disposed.

3 And although Reservedness (in some sort) be necessary in all men; so it is
far more requisite in a Co^rtier, thereby to manage and conduct his Ambition

4 Yet he must be careful how to use ^^sernation: For he must use it as
Apo^^ ^^^^ do their Antidotes in the composition and tempering of their
Ph^sicke: who in ^it time intermixing it with Judgment, do cure; otherwise,
hurt the Patient.

Reservedness (as well as Subtlety) being detected and discovered, not only
serves his Master for nothing, but makes those whom he frequents to suspect and
grow jealous of him.

5 But it is practiced three ways, either by Silence, Speech, or Actions, and
exterior semblances.

6 By Silence, in concealing that which may prejudice either our selves,
friends, designs, or thoughts, or our own or their secrets; but chiefly our
own wrongs received, not only thereby to give us the better means to
revenge them (if they deserve that we wade so far), but also that we do not
occasion and enuite him, who has offended us, speedily to offer us greater
injuries, thereby to prevent our revenge. This Reservedness that is cloaked
and masked in silence, is approved in all occasions; and so the Roman
Senators behau'd themselves toward their Emperor Tiberius, always seeming in
their countenances not to know, or understand his designs.

7 Nevertheless, there are occurrences where silence will be suspected, and
such are fit to be reuealde, as al^o that we make our discontent known; but
yet so, that after a light complaint we make the world believe, we will no
farther remember it, nor be sencible thereof.

Valens not being able to punish his mutinous soldiers, accused only some of
them, for fear lest in dissembling their general delict and fault, they might
conceive he would punish them the more severely.

8 But it falls out often, that it is needful and requisite for us, to be
cautulous in our speeches, which requires more Art and Skill. There are some,
who abruptly break off their talk, and so leap into a new matter, but the
end thereof is never successful.

9 Wherefore our answer in such causes must resemble a retrait, which we
perform without either flying or fighting: for first, we must not enter into
an absolute negation and denial: secondly, we must not speak that which we
should not, or which may offend: thirdly, to him with whom we converse, we
must leave his judgment doubtful, by speaking to him in doubtful and
ambiguous terms, whereby we may be vnderstoad in a double sense, and the
more our answers are retired and reserved, the more commendable and
praise-worthie they are.

10 Again, it is lawful to reserve our selves in exterior Shows and
apparances, by hiding and concealing our Joy, Sorrow, Hope, Desire, Fear,
Choler, or the like passions, seeming neither to see, hear, do, or speak, if
we reap not some profit and advantage thereby.

11 But as Reseruednes is part of an active and powerful wit, so to know how to
discover it in others, and from thence to find out the depth of their thoughts,
with whom we have to converse and treat, is a most necessary point in a
Courtier; the means also that serve to maintain friendship, serve likewise to
make him lie open, and disclose himself, who relyes and trust in us. Some
Nations given much to Drink, have to this effect imployde and made use of Wine,
which commonly discouers his masters secrets, and sometimes without Wine* the
heat of discourse makes us vent and utter some things, whereof we after repent.

12 The manner how we bear our selves in our Choler, Prosperity, and
Adversity, makes men also judge of the rest of our humors and inclinations.

13 There are those who have vsd play and gaming hereunto, wherein occasion
sometimes happens, that we employ and exercise all the motions of our Will; and
we discover it more freely in secrecy and familiarity, vsd and practisde among
Gamsters: but this will crave time to effect it.

14 Briefly, to recolect the carriage and countenance of a discreet and wise
Courtier, his wits must be bent by little and little to examine, as well his own
as other men's actions; he must still be vigilant, and stand upon his guard,
that he see, understand, and judge all things, but speak but little:
nevertheless, covering and oueruailing his thoughts, desires and designs, with
an affable and pleasing countenance.

CHAP. XXXVI.
1 Of Dexterity, bring a part of an ingenious and active Wit. 2 The definition
of Dexterity. 3 Some are unapt for this Dexterity. 4 The ready proceedings of
those, who are skillful and iuditious herein. 5 6 Some precepts for this
Dexterity. 7 8 9 10 Other precepts and points for the same Dexterity. 11 12
13 14 15 16

1 Dexterity is so united and conjoined to a nimble and ingenious Wit, that
the one cannot be without ^^^^ ^^her; we commonly term those dexterious, who
are of a sharp and nimble Apprehension and Understanding, who are quick,
proper, and graceful in all sorts of Motions and Actions, and who with a ready
and brave disposition, know how to meet and surmount all oppositions and
difficulties

2 And it is according to this similitude, that we term this power and virtue
Dexterity, to perform a business; by means whereof we converse and treat
fortunately, making that which is difficult, easy and pleasant, and
representing and receiving it without gall or bitterness.

3 Contrariwise, there are some so unfit and unapt for this purpose, that they
make small things great and those which are easy, difficult; yea, they make
that sower, that was scarce sharp, being not capable to manage a business;
but in an indecent and disgraceful manner, making it to be defective and
imperfect yea, and sometimes impossible: like unskillful Chirurgeous, who in
lieu of healing a wound, make it incurable; and in stead of sowing it up, do
rend and tear it.

4 Opposite to whom are those who are wise and Iuditious, who sweeten the wound
with lenitiue and cool ointments; so as if they must cut off any thing from
him, they first so allure and provoke the Patient to sleep, as he feels no
pain; in whose immitation and example those who are Wise and Iuditious,
represent angry and distastefull matters, by softly insinuating into the
conceits and judgments of those to whom they speak, without violence or
trouble; and so by little and little dispose them to enter into the
consideration of their reasons, whereby chiefly serving themselves toward
them, who being of a sharp and harsh nature, or for some passion or interest,
show them to be insupportable, speaking arrogantly and proudly; yea, in such
sort, as they seem rather to challenge us to a combat, then in amiable and
amicable manner to treat with us; because from this their violent and
impetious assault, they almost like enraged Bulls, without Wit or Fear, not
only rush, but run furiously to overthrow us.

5 And it is not as some esteem, a servile or base act for a Wise man to
answer thus pleasantly, or not to be choleric with those, who are either in
choler, or speak with passion; but it is a point worthy of a temperate spirit
and full of Wisdom and Discretion; and again far fitter for greater men,
then for those of any other condition, who must not the less enforce
themselves, to become masters of their own proper affections.

6 In this Dexterity then, we must resemble Tennis Players, who to commit no
fault in their play, not only look to take the Ball fully, but also with
their best endeavor and skill, watch to be sure to receive him handsomely, and
to return him to that place, that shall make most for their advantage.

7 Also in conuersing or treating, we must observe the same consideration,
being very careful and circumspect, that we commit no fault in the matter
whereof we treat, bringing those words with us, which are pertinent and proper,
and receiving those from him that speaks to us in the best manner the sense
thereof will safely permit.

8 With this skill we may sometimes dissemble, or conseale some truth very
honestly; yea, and make show not to know or understand some thing that is of
consequence and importance in the business we have in hand, to the end that
we may gain time to answer, and not be surprised, or taken unprovided.

9 And the resolutions from whose conclusions, we may take assurance and
security must be so conceiude, that which way soever they turn, we may
still subsist and stand, and find (as the saying is) a Posterne door open to
save our selves; according to the example of Mucianus, his answer to Antoniuns
Prumus, who asked him his advice, if whilst he staid for Vespasian, he should
assault Rome.

10 It will be also a point of Dexterity to yield in those things, wherein we
have the upper hand so far forth, that another way we be sure to obtain a
greater advantage.

11 It is likewise Wisdom to be flexible and tractable in a business, and a
Vice to be too partial and jealous of his own opinions; we must sometimes
be lofty and fast girt, and then again we must abate our pride, and unloose
that which we have so straightly bound.

12 But above all, we must avoid the occasion to break friendship with any
man, and rather excuse and shift our selves from those, who are tedious and
importunate upon the haste and necessity of their business, referring them to
another time, or showing them the quality of other business, is not fit to be
treated of in this time or place; or if this will not suffice, then to show
them the impossibility thereof.

For it is one of the most difficult and ticklish points in our conversation,
absolutely to refuse a man; the reason thereof is, because every one flatters
and persuades himself, that his demand is just.

13 In which respect some do consent and promise all; yea, they cannot, and
which is worse, they will not any longer stand off, hoping that before the time
of the execution, many accidents will fall out, which may hinder and frustrate
the effect of their promise, and so free them from that whereunto they are
obligd and tied, or else that they will find out some excuses and euasions,
having in the Interim, nevertheless, given content to the demander; and as said
Aulus Sempremu^, Many hold themselves better satisfied with this Coin, then
with bare and simple hopes.

14 But these manner of proceedings are good to be practisud but once, because
being found out and known, they soon discover and deserie him that uses them
often; as also they descrie themselves, which to content their vanity, and to
be courted and followed, make use of these hopes.

But the best and surest way, is neither to yield nor promise any thing but
that which we can, we ought, and we will perform.

15 And if that which is demanded of us, participate of neither of these three,
we must then under color of diverse other pretexts, defer the answer thereof
as long as we can; or else make those who press us thereunto, alter their
designs and purposes; in preposing them in stead of their demands, some o there
thing, wherein we may aid and assist the^ or to make them know, and be sensible
of our good will and affection toward them, although the issue thereof answer
not their desires, or else to contriue our promise in such general terms,
that it do not precisely bind and oblige us.

16 This last form of proceeding, is somewhat remoted far off from freeness,
but the injustice of the demands makes it excusable, es^ecially if our
refusal proceed rather from our insufficiency, then from any defect or fault
of our good will the effects whereof we will assuredly demonstrate, and
testify in any other subject and occasion, that may depend of us toward those
we refuse; and in this sort reviving their courage and affection by the hope
they receive, that the door of our affection is not altogether shut, for them
to obtain some other request and favor, we not only sweeten the bitterness
of this refusal, but also by the most moderate and temperate sort of people,
this refusal will be interpreted and taken for Grace and Favor.

CHAP. XXXVII.
1 Of other requisites necessary in a Courtier, as Patience to support
injuries. 2 Wherein Court Patience consistes. 3 A Courtier must not speak ill
of any man. 4 Another Court Patience, is for him to be^ still assiduall and
resident at Court. 5 6 7 It is one thing to be obstinate in a reasonable
business. 8 And another not to precipitate or run headlong in any thing.

1 IT remains to speak of four other points, that are requisite and
necessary in a Courtier, which are Patience, Humility, Boldness and
Capacity: as for the regard of the first, an old Courtier be ing demanded, how
he was grown so old, and had remained so long at Court, answered, that it was
in supporting injuries patiently, and in giving of thanks: and Augustus, as it
is written and reported of him, loved Agrippa for her patiency, and Mecaenas
for his secrefie.

2 But Court-Patience not only consists in supporting and desembling other
men's injuries, but also as we have formerly said, their errors and
imperfections, there being nothing so odious as to reprove and censure,
although many men's vanity may deserve it, or to think themselves not reputed
or esteemd, if they control not other men's actions.

Nevertheless, such are commonly admired of none, but of the vulgar, and
ignorant sort, and their conversation and carriage can neither be suffered nor
^upported, except by those who are far their inferiors; and if they are not
the more capable and sufficient, they make themselves rediculous, and a common
may game to those, who seem to admire them.

3 A Courtier therefore must take heed, not to speak Il^, or mock at those
things that are true, which commonly off^nd us most, and whereof Great M^n do
longest and chiefly remember.

4 Another sort of Court-Pati^nc^ is ^o subject our selves constantly to
continue and remain there, and not sl^igh^ly to abandon and forsake it,
although some disgrace ariue and befall us, but still to have one foot firm
there, since there is nothing so subject to revolution and c^ange, as the
affections of Princes, which are as it were continually ebbing and flowing.

5 But above all things we must keep our selves still in sight, and as near
our Prince as we may, not only to avoid the aspersions and calumnies, which
are usually cast upon those that are absent, but also because it may so happen,
that upon some occasion (although but small) you may be the man among all the
rest, which he may obserne to continue in Court, and so by your assiduall
residence and attendance, knowing hereby your zeal and affection to his
service, he may believe, that he may entrust you with any of his commands;
whereof if you worthily acquit your self, the Prince may take you into his
Grace and Favor, and so continue to confer and heap others on you, and in
the end admit you into his service.

6 There is in the Court (as well as we say, there is in love) the happiness
and felicity of a Carre-man: for a Prince has need of so many diversity of
Servants and Attendants, that he which is sometimes esteemed the most unfit
and unprofitable, the Dice may so run, and alter, as Fortune may make him not
only profitable, but pleasing to his Prince.

7 Another effect of necessary patience in court is, that if we undertake a
business with likelihood and reason, we must be constant and obstinate to
finish it, and not to forsake it; but withal, we must not precipitate our
selves, or run headlong therein, but with a Wise Patience we must awai^e and
attend the occasion.

8 There are many, who with the help and assistance of time, might have hoped
to have risen their Fortunes at Court; but cutting off, and preventing their
hopes, they not only retire and forsake it, but also through their headlong
impatiency, have shipwrackt and ruined their Fortunes.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
1 Humility is a second perfection, necessary and requisite in a Courtier. 2
Wherein it consists. 3 4 5 6 Uoluntarie Humility consists in two parts. 7 The
Sxteriour is remarked. 8 in our Countenance. 9 Speeches. 10 Actions, wherein
there are three degrees of Humility. 11 Which of the three suffi^eth for a
Courtier. 12 The unseemly and unproper behavior of Courtiers risen from a low
Fortune. 13

1 HVmilitie is no less necessary in Cour^ which (for the most part) is
^omposed of vain and Ambitious persons, who commonly having nothing
commendable in themselves, seek those outward c^ouches, and exterior
submissions given them by others, thereby to make themselves esteemed and
honored; and so much the more are they careful and Ambitious hereof in that
they know, they themselves are of far less sufficiency and merit.

2 Nevertheless, Humility consists not only in this point; for it is seen and
remarkd in us, either by the opinion which we seem to make others know, we
conceive and esteem well of our selves, or through the Desire and Will we have
to attempt any thing, either according to our quality and condition, or above
it, or else by our exterior behavior and carriage.

3 The opinion which an humble Wit holds of himself, consists in esteeming
little of himself to believe himself unprofitable, to acknowledge his
imbecilitie and weakness, to the end he attempt nothing above the reach of
his Capacity.

4 But although we must inwardly conceive this opinion of our self,
nevertheless let it suffice, that a Courtier must not vaunt of himself, or of
any thing he cannot perform, and not knowing how far his Capaci^i^ can
extend it is more safe and commendable for him to perform a thing, without
speaking or vaunting thereof.

5 For he shall then bear himself, without prom sing or praising too much of
himself, and al^o without disparaging or making himself base or vn^rofitable,
whereby others be not induced so to repute and esteem him

6 Humility which consists in our Will, has two branches Obe^ience to their
commands on whom we depend, and the Moderating of our desires (whereof we have
formerlie spoken.)

7 As for Humility which appears in exterior show, it is observed in our
Countenance Gesture, Words and Actions.

8 In our Countenance by a modest regard, neither too lofty, nor too bold; by
a grave, yet pleasing smile, and not by a laughter or mockery, and by
respective complements, as salutations, reuerences, and the like ceremonies.

9 In words, by proffering our service, and the like co^p^ements, as also by
speaking soberly, pertinently, and respectfully, being silent till we are
questioned or demanded, and attentive to that which is spoken unto us.

10 In Actions there are: degrees of Humility, First, to submit our selves to
Great men, and not to esteem our selves above our Equals: Secondly, to submit
our selves to our Equals, and not to esteem us more then the least: and
thirdly, and lastly, to submit our selves to the least.

11 Many are of opinion, that it is fit for a Courtier to hold and bear
himself in this first degree: to the end that too much familiarity and
humility procure him not contempt; but the Court being so composed, that very
often great men have need to use those of lower rank: and there being therein
Offices, which none but they can perform: we are also sometimes constrained,
with humble countenances, and fair speeches to seek and re-search them:
Caesar (as reports Dion) living in a Commonwealth, wherein this Hu^ility was
no less necessary to an Ambitious man, then in a Prince his Court: was
enforced to flatter and make fair weather, not only with the greatest, but
with the meanest thereof.

But herein notwithstanding we must use a Medio^ritie, and bearing our selves
according to the quality of the person and occasion: we must not permit our
selves to be too much depressed and disparaged, but still hold and detain our
Humility within the lists and bounds of Courtesi^.

12 So^e men issuing from a base descent, and seeing themselves in a short time
advanced and preferred: imagine they cannot surmount the contempt of their first
condition; and quality; if they bear not themselves high: and make themselves
to be feared; deferring by courteous and fair means to moderate and reprove,
when through the continuance of their good Fortune and happiness: this
contempt with the remembrance of their first condition, will be rased out and
defaced.

13 But it is to be feared that this Exchange befalls us not, but with much
difficulty or too late; because a man which is inured and accustomed to Pride,
cannot easily forsake it.

CHAP. XXXIX.
1 Of boldness, a necessary Point in a Courier, he must be bold to advance
himself, and not step back for any refusal. 2 How it must be tempered. 3 Of
the Judgment and Sufficiency of a Courtier. 4 Whereof a Courtier must be
chiefly capable, and of the dusersitie and differences of Courts. 5 The
affairs of Estate, are more frequent in Court then any other. 6 The Court is
subject to alterations. 7 The Conclusion of the first Book of this Treatise.
1 Boldness is a necessary requisite in a Courtier (whereas those who are
bashful lose it) be it to give us entrance and admittance in many places, the
which he himself must procure: or be it, not to retire or step back for one
or two refusals, but to remain and present himself always there with one and
the same constant resolution.

For although Importunity be distasteful to many; yet we must consider there
are many Natures who delight to be pressed and importuned.

2 Notwithstanding, this boldness must be accompanied and conducted with much
discretion and modesty, for fear it be not imputed to impudency and deceit,
which is subject to many unfortunate accidents and disgraces.

3 As for the regard of a Courtiers Sufficiency, or Capacity; as the Court is
composed of all sorts of men, and that all sorts of affairs are there treated
of, so he which frequents it, must be versed and seen in all things as well to
the end he may be imploved in all sort^ of occasions, as also, to make
himself necessary to many, and thereby to purchase himself more friends and
reputation.

4 Which nevertheless, if he cannot perform, he must chiefly make himself
capable of that which is most esteemed and prisd in Court, wherein he intends
to remain: for we see some of one profession have more au thoritie then
others, as Martial^ts and oulaiours in the Court of a Warlike Prince;
Ecclesiasti^kes or Churchmen, in that of a Religious Prince; Physicians, in
that of an old and ^ickly Prince; Lawyers, in that of a Peaceable and Just
Prince; Excheckerers, who know how to manage and invent new means to find
money in that of a covetous, prodigal, or poor Prince; and Scholars, in that
of a Learned Prince: for in all these Courts, these sorts of men, are for the
most part still welcome.

From whence, by the Prince his inclination, and by the Nature of the affairs
which are treated of, we may conceive and judge what sort of sufficiency is
most requisite and necessary for a Courtier.

5 But as the affairs of the Estate are the most frequent and common, so we
must diligently inform our selves of the particular humors, interests, and
dependancies of those who manage them, or who must suruay or control them,
with their Issues, which the greatest part of Courtiers, either ignore or
forget.

6 And because the Court is subject to alteration and change, and that those
who are there this day are not to remain long in authority, be it that they
are drawn away for other occasions, or for want of favor: those who enter
into their places, are subject to commit great faults, in being ignorant how
affairs have formerly past, or in not knowing the motives and reasons of those
who managed them before them: from whence it follows, that by changing of
form, their end^nours are disliked and disauowed of their Prince, and so the
Sun shine of his favor and their prosperity lasts not long.

7 Let this suffice concerning the parts and perfections, necessary in a
Courtier, and let us now see how he must use and employ them in his Carriage
and Conduction, expressed in the second Book.

The end of the first Book.
A Table of the Contents of the Chapters of the first Book.
CHAP. I. 1 OF the Incertaintie, Variableness, and Altera^ion of the Court. 2.
That in Court there is more Fortune then conduction. 3. That in Court
preserments. Fortune is entermix'd with ^^^^ conduction. 4. The Author, his
excute upon the method, order, and division of this Book. Fol^o. 1

CHAP. II. 1 Of the qualities most requisite and necessary in a Courtier, being
the first head and subject of this first Book. 2. Of his civility. 3. Of his
graceful speech. 4. Of his countenance and gesture. 5. O^ his Apparel, and
the wearing thereof. ^ol. 5

CHAP. III. 1 Of Affability ingenerall, and wherein it consists. 2. Of the
Allurements thereof. 3. To hearken, and to be attentive. 4. To reprove
plea^antly, yet modestly. 5. What is chi^sly necessary in great Personages. 6.
Wherewith Affabilit^e must be seconded and attended. Fol. 8

CHAP. IV. 1. That Pleasant Jests and replies bear a part in Affability 2.
How we must use them 3. Whereof they must be framed. 4, ^* 6, ^. What l^sts
and replyas we must eschew and avoid. 8, 9. Of then diffe ence, and diuersiue.
Fol 11

CHAP. V. 1. That Complements hear a great part in Affability, with their
defin^tion. 2. Of then Medium and Extremes. 3. That we should practice them
according to occ^si^ns; as also, how to practice them. 4. Of the answers we
ought return to them. Fol. 15

CHAP. VI. 1. Of our readi^esse to perform a Pleasure or good Office. 2, 3, 4.
Considerations thereon. 5, 6, 7. We must do it voluntarily, speedily,
liberally. 8. Having performed it, we must not instantly expect ^r crave the
like. 9. We must not please one to please another. 10. Examples hereon. Fol. 19

CHAP VII. 1. Of acknow^d^^ng and requiting good Offices received, and wherein
it consists. 2. Of the consideration thereof 3. How they are to be measured. 4.
How to be considered according to the persons. 5. The means we must obletue in
acknowle^g^ a good Office done us. 6. When to acknowledge it. Fol 23

CHAP. VIII. 1. Of ^n act^ue and ^^mb^e Wit. The second head of this first
Book. 2. A org^^sti^n upon the difference of the Persons and Wits of men, and
of their natural Capacity. 3. Of natural Capacity. 4. Of men's temper in
general. 5. From whence Capacity and Understanding proceed, and of
^ntelectuall Wisdom, and her faculties. 6, 7. A rule how to treat and
^onuerse with those who are wise and i^d^cious, and of their behavior. 8, 9.
Of Wisdom that proceeds from Imagination, and of their manners who are
fortunate therein. Fol. 27

CHAP. IX. 1. From whence comes the Capacity of the Memory, with their
conditions who excel therein. 2. That Imagination and Memory never meet
to^ether. 3, 4. The humors of the Imaginatiue in the first degree. 6 In the
first and last degree. 7. The Conclusion of the natural Capacity, of the
Understanding. Fol. 32

CHAP. X. 1. Of Capacity obtained by Wit. 2. As also by Arts. 3. Which Arts
have need of Understanding. 4. Which of Memory. 5 Which of Imagination. 6. How
gotten by Experience, and wherein Experience consists. Fol. 36

CHAP. XI. 1. Of the Incapacitie of Wits, and the Causes of this Incapacitie.
2. From whence proceeds the natural weakness of Wit, and the effects
thereof. 3. Of Inconstancy in opinions. 4. Of Presumption. 5. Of Vanity 6. Of
the manner how to negotiate with the Vaineglorious. 7. That Presumption and
Judgment cannot agree. 8. Their Properties who have moist brains. 9. Of those
who have moist and hot brains, 10. Of those who have moist and cold brains,
and of the Incapacitie of some sorts of Wits. 11. Of the weakness of Wit,
which proceeds from Ignorance; two sorts of Ignorance, the one Presumptuous,
and of her effects. 12. The other Simple and Innocent, and of her effects. Fol.
38

CHAP. XII. 1. Preocupations are the cause of Incapacitie in our Understanding,
from whence they proceed. 2. Two sorts of Opinions proceeding from the
persuasion of one particular man. 3. What they occasion, and the remedy
thereof. 4. From whenc^ come th^s^ opinions grounded on Custom. 5. Every
Pr^fession have their particular opinions. 6. Whereof a Cou^tier m^st be
chiefly informed, and his Precautions. 7. The eff^cts and considerations of
opinions built upon common e^^imation. 8. According to the ra^i^ie. 9.
Abundance 10. Absence or Presence. 11. Facility or difficulty. 12. Noueltic
or strangeness. 13. Custom. Fol. 43

CHAP. XIII. 1. Of Preoccupation according to our Passions, and his effect
according to love and ha^r^d. 2. According to Joy. 3. Sorrow. 4. Fear and
Choler. Fol. 47

CHAP. XIV. 1. Of our Will, being the third head of this first Book. 2. From
whence comes the diversity of Wills. 3. The difference of the Will of our
Understanding. 4, 5, 6, 7. Considerations of goodness, and her object. 8.
Considerations of the motions of our Will. 9. Of the diversity of their
object, and of that it produces 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Considerations of
cuill simply and of her objects, and that it produces. Fol. 49

CHAP. XV. 1. The use of the knowledge of the motions of our Will. 2. Three
things to be considered therein. 3. The dependancy of these motions in
ingendering one the other. 4. The motions of the concupiscible part. 5 Of the
Cho^lericke part. 6, 7, 8, 9. The order and dependence, of the Will,
destinguished according to the i^tention and execution 10, 11, 12. The order of
the motions of the concupiscible part among themselves. Fol. 53

CHAP. XVI. 1. Of the order of Passions, as they engender one another 2. The
causes of Passions. 3. Of those Passions which have goodness for their object.
4. Of the love of conformity, and all that is considerable therein 5* Of
friendship for our own parti^ular interest. 6. ^^^^ the effect of friendship.
7. The ca^ses of desire, and from whence it is engendered. 8. The causes of
Hope. 9. How Experience ^ortifie^ Hope. 10, 11. The force and power of Hope Fol
57

CHAP. XVII. 1, 2. The causes of confid^nce and h^w c^nsidered. 3, 4. Her
motion. 5, 6. From when e^^t proce^^es. 7. The causes of boldness prod^ced by
two means. 8, 9. The causes of Joy, and how it is co^c^iued, and formed in us.
10. Of presupposed ^nioyance* or imaginary presence. 11 Which is the greatest
Joy. 12. How evil is still present with us. Fol. 62

CHAP. XVIII. 1. Of those who are subject to the Passions, occasioned through
the object of good. 2. The motions and Passions of the Will that have e^il^ for
their object. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Why we are more sensible of evil then of good.
8. The causes of hatted, and what it e^g^^acreth 9. As Fear. 10. The things
that aff^^ght and ^^a^e us. 11. Of those we have offended and which of them we
ought ^eare most. 12. Of that which we ought ^eare most. Fol. 6^

CHAP. XIX 1. The dispositions in the motions and Passion: whose object is
evil. 2, 3. What they are who fear no hurt can befall them 4. A remedy not to
fear it. 5. Of those who are much gi^^n to fear 6, 7. The use of fear
considered in two sorts. 8. Of fear accompanied with distrust. 9. Of the
Passion of sorrow and anger, and what other Passions they engender. Fol. 71

CHAP. XX. 1. Of Choler and the Passions that concur therein 2. Of contrary
Objects in Choler. 3 Causes of Choler. 4, 5. That disdain and injury are the
chiefest. 6. Of those who are soonest subject to Choler. 7. The Passions that
dispose us to Choler. 8. Shame follows Choler, and how it is stirred up in
us. 9, 10. The causes of shame. 11. Disposition to shame. Fol. 57

CHAP. XXI. 1. Of Compassion, and from whence it proceeds. 2. Of those who are
usually Uncharitable, and not compassionate. 3. Disposition to Compassion, and
those who are aptest thereunto. 4, 5, 6. Of that which may increase Compassion
in us, and more stir us up to Pity. Fol. 80

CHAP. XXII. 1. Of Envy. 2, 3 From whence it proceeds. 4, 5. Of the causes
that dispose us to Envy. 6. Of Indignation, and with what it is entermix'd. 7.
That wealth breeds in us this Passion of E^uy. 8. From whence arises
Indignation. 9. That great men are more subject to it, then others. 10. The
causes that provoke us to this Passion. 11. The nature of Indignation. 12, 13.
That Emulation is a degree of Envy, and the causes thereof. 14, 15. Of those
who are subject to Emulation. 16, 17. How Emulation is ingendered, and of those
that are not subject to this motion. 18. Of Jealousy, and the causes thereof.
Fol. 84

CHAP. XXIII. 1. The use of the knowledge of Passions, and the means to
moderate them both in our selves, and others. 2. The benefit of moderating
Passions in our selves living in Court. 3. That they are moderated by fair
means, and by the power of Courage. 4. By natural Pleasantness 5. Or by that
which we procure or purchase. 6. By our breeding. 7. By experience. 8. By
discoursing of reason, and how far it extends. 9. Di^e^^ considerations
herein. Fol. 91

CHAP. XXIV. 1. The fourth head of the first Book, three principal faults we
commit, in seeing good or evil. 2. Their differency thereof being a remedy
for the first fault. 3. What Death i^. 4, 5. Time and delay, is a remedy for
the second fault. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Considerations upon these remedies. 11.
Disaduantages or Domages, a remedy for the third fault. 12. Examinations of
the disaduantages of an object, and examples thereon. 13. Weakness,
Credulity, and Curiosity three defects, from whom proceed the ill opinions
we conceive, either of our selves, or of others. 14. Remedies for this
weakness. 15. For this Credulity. 16. For this Curiositio. 17. The conclusion
of this Chapter. Fol. 95

CHAP. XXV. 1 Consideration of our power to moderate our Passions. 2. Wherein
it consists. 3. Why we throw our selves on the Court. 4, 5. To consider our
abilities, by the difficulties we meet withal. 6. Foresight is a second
means to moderate our Passions. 7, 8 9. The first effect of this Foresight,
is to prepare our selves, against that woe foresee must befall us, and to
attend and expect it with a firm and constant resolution. 11. The third effect
of this Foresight, is to change and divert this evil being fallen us, another
way, or else to familiarize it to our selves, in our Imaginations. 12. Of the
deuersion thereof, the third means to moderate these Passions 13, 14, 15, 16.
Other means to divert our Passionate Wit and conceits. Fol. 104

CHAP. XXVI. 1. The third use of the knowledge of the motions of our Will, and
wherein it consists, as in Affability or agreeableness, and how to use it in
Court, which is the ^ist head of this first Book. 2. Of the ^^^^ and
necessity of this affabiliti^, with examples thereon to that effect. 2. Of
affabilit^e in cur Choler. 5, 6, 7. How to bear our selves in this Passion.
8, 9. In mildness and pleasan^n^sse, and of their natures who are mild. 10.
In fear, and of their natures who are fearful. 11. To accomodate our selves
to this Passion. 12. Of confidence and belief, and how we ought de^eane our
selves to those who are adicted and subject thereunto. 13. Or shame, and of
their natures wh^ ^^^^ sh^m^f^ced. 14, 15, 16, 17. How to bear our selves
toward those who are subject to this motion. 18. Of hatred and malice, with
their remedies. 19. Of Courtes^e. 20. How to bear our selves to th^se who are
Courteous. 21. Of Affability in Ingratitude, and how to bear our selves to
those who are ungrateful. ^2. O Compassion and Pity, and of their natures, as
also how to bear our selves toward those who are subject to this Passion. 23.
Of Indigration, and of their nature who are provoked to this Passion. 24. That
the malicious and envious resemble those who are Passionate. 25. How to bear
our selue toward them. 26, 27, 28, 29. Of Sorrow, and how to bear our selves
toward those who are sorrowful. 30. Of Joy, and how to bear our selves
toward those who are joyful. 31, 32. Advise for Cou^tiers how to bear
themselves in their gestures, and countenances, according to the Examples of
the Countries of Alexander, and his Father Phillip. 33. If it be lawful for
Courtiers to imitate the Vices as well as the Virtues, of those with whom they
conu^rse, Examples hereon. 34 That those who have flexible and changeab^e Wits,
are fit to be Courtiers. 35. The Conclusion of the difference of persons,
proceeding from the difference of their interior conditions and qualities.
Fol. 110

CHAP. XXVII. 1. The difference of men by exterior conditions, according to
their a^e, being the ^euenth head of this first Book^. 2. Man's age divided into
many parts. 3, 4 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. The manners and complexions of y^u^g man.
11, 12, 13* 14. The manners, humors, and complexions of old men. 15, 16. Of
Virilit^e, and of their humors who have obtained this ^g^. Fol. 124

CHAP. XXVIII. 1. The difference of men according to the condi^^o^ of their
Fortunes. 2. The Profits and preiudices we ^ec^iue by fortune 3. That Nibilitie
is the ^^ist benefit thereon, and of the conditi^ns of Noble men. ^^^^ ^h^t
wealth i^ the second benefit thereof, and of ^^e ^^^^ of Rich men 6 The
difference 'twixt him that is of late grown rich, and he that has been a
long time rich, 7, 8, 9. The Conditions of Great men, and of those that are in
authority, being the third benefit of For^une 10. The conditions of him that
that is fortunate, being the fourth benefit. 11. Other differences of men
besides age and fortune, and how to be considered in our behavior and
^onuersation, with every one in particular. 12. How to behave our selves
toward our Seruan^s, and Confidents, and how toward Str^ngers. 13. How
toward Honest and Upright men* 14. How to those of a pleasant conversation 15
How to those who are Pr^ud, Ambitious, Modest. Malicious, or of a Kind nature.
16. How to the O^sie^^^s, or Inofficious, or toward those that are engaged, or
not engaged to us. Fol. 131

CHAP XXIX. 1. The eighth head of the first Book, discoursing of m^tters whose
subjects are infinite. 2. General differences of affairs drawn from causes
which examine and consider them. 3. By means possible or impossible, necessary
or not, easy or difficult, profitable or prejudicial, just or unjust. 4. The
difference of men's actions, serving to judge of possibility or impossibility.
5. Or Power and Will requisite in the production of actions. 6, 7.
Considerations upon this Power. 8, 9. Considerations upon this Will. 10.
Considerations upon the means and their differences. 11. The circumstance of
Place in things moveable. 12. The circumstance of Time. 13. Considerations upon
the diuers^tie of hindrances. 14. Considerations upon the fac^li^ie or
difficulty of a business. 15. Considerations upon the necessity thereof. 16.
Absolute. 17. Conditional. Fol. 137

CHAP. XXX. 1. The mean^te purcha^e a Kings favor 2, 3, 4. Considerations in
Procuting it. 5. The order and means we must observe therein. 6. Consideration
of benefit or damage that may thereby accrue unto us. 7. Consideration of the
honor. 8. Consideration of the Profit, and how it is to be considered. 9.
Considerations of the Pleasure and Profit it brings with it. Fol. 143

CHAP XXXI. 1. Of the equity and Justice of a matter. 2. Rules of this Justice
in two scrts Vniue^sall. 3. Truth is a dependant of Vniue^sall Justice. 4. And
also of Particular. 5, 6. Custom is more received and followed at Court, then
either particular or vniucrsall Justice. 7. Examples hereon, 8, 9. Conclusion
of the differences of Persons and affairs. Fol. 147

CHAP. XXXII. 1. Of proceedings. 2. The Consideration of sircumstance^ 3. The
most frequent and vsualll manner to negotiat and manage a business in Court. 4.
To divert the hindrances and to purchase reputation. 5. What those ^inderances
are in our selves. 6, 7. The qualities that may deminish our reputation. 8. The
means to divert and avoid them. Fol. 149

CHAP. XXXIII. 1. The means to know the hindrances that befall us, and of him
with whom we are to treat, or w^o is opposite to us therein. 2. Knowing them,
then of the Precaution, we must observe therein. 3, 4. The means to divert and
avoid them. 5, 6, 7. Considerations upon those hindrances and upon the means
to avoid them. 8. How to divert hindrances that proceed from others, and not
from those, with whom we are to treat. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. The means to divert
and avoid them. 15. The hindrances being removed, the means then to purchase
Reputation. Fol. 153

CHAP. XXXIV. 1. How to order our spe^ches, being the ninth head of this first
Book; how to observe silence with modesty, brevity, and judgment. 2. How to
avoid importunity. 3. How to auoidlyes, with diverse considerations upon lying,
and also upon his Reputation that speaks. 4. According to the subject whereof
we speak. 5. How it we speak of our selves, or of others. 6. How if he be our
equal, or inferior. 7. How if he be known to be more judicious then our
selue^. 8. Of some sort of flatteries which are excuseable. 9, 10. Of others
which are inexcusable, and low. 11. Of lies considered according to the intent
of the liar. 12 How to avoid the vanitic that is in boasting and ostentation.
13. How far we may vaunt, and the moderation we must observe therein. 14.
Of Presumption, obstinacic, and contradiction, and how we must bear our
selves in contradicting others. 15, 16. Considerations upon contradiction, to
the end it be well taken. 17. Precautions thereon. Fol. 159

CHAP. XXXV. 1. Of retention, and reservedness, the last part of an active and
ingenious Wit, which is necessary in affair^s, both for our selves and our
friends. 2. With whom chiefly we may d^ssemble. 3. That di^^^^ulati^n ^^
n^cesary for a Courtier. 4. How we must use it. 5. ^ how many sorts and degrees
it is practiced and used. 6. By silence. 7. Concurrence of le^^s in silence,
and their remedies. 8. To dissemble in our speech, and how it must be
performed, 9 Of the answers and re^lies fit for Jests, and observations
thereon. 10. ^o disse^^ble by exterior shows, and how we ^ust perform it
11, 12, 13. That it is a point of true wisdom. when a man dissembles a
necessary matter in Court, and of the meane^ to discover the same. 14. The
conc^^sion of act^ue and solid wisdom, and the m^anes to discover by his
countenance, whether a man be so; ye^, or no. ^o^. 166

CHAP. XXXVI. 1. Of dexterity being a part of an ingenious and active Wit. 2.
The definition of dexterity 3. Some are unapt for this dexterity. 4, 5. The
ready proce^dings of those who are skillful and i^dici^^^ ^eetci^ 6, 7. 8, 9.
Some precepts for this dexterity. 10, 11, 12, 13. 14, 15, 16 Other precepts
and points for the sar^e d^x teritie. Fol. 17^

CHAP. XXXVII. 1. Of other requisites necessary in a ^ourti^r, as Pa tience to
support injuries. 2. Wherein Court patience consists. 3. A Courtier must not
speak ill of any man 4, 5, 6. Another Court patience is* for him to be still
assiduall and resident at Court. 7. It is one thing to be obstinate in a
reasonable business. 8. And another not to precipate or run headlong in any
thing. Fol. 17^

CHAP. XXXVIII. 1. Humility is a second perfection requisite in a Courtier. 2,
3, 4, 5. Wherein it consists. 6. Voluntary humility consists in two parts. 7.
The exterior is remarked. 8. In our countenance. 9. In our speeches. 10. In
our action^, wherein there are three degrees of humility. 11. Which of the
three suffices for a Courtier. 12, 13. The unseemly and improper behavior of
Courtiers, r^^^n from a low fortune. Fol. 182

CHAP. XXXIX. 1. Of boldness, a necessary point in a Courtier, he must be bold
to advance himself, and not step back for any refusal. 2. How it must be
tempered. 3. Of the judgment and sufficiency of a Courtier. 4. Whereof a
Courtier must be chi^fly capable, and of the diuers^tie and differences of
Courts. 5. The affairs of Estate, are more frequent in Court then any other.
6. The Court is still subject to alterations. 7. The Conclusion of the first
Book of this Treatise. Fol. 186

The end of the Table of the first Book.
A TREATISE OF THE COURT.

Digested into two Books.

WRITTEN IN FRENCH BY THE NOBLE AND Learned Iurisconsull, and Councellor of
Estate, Monsieur DENIS DE REFVGES.

Done into English by JOHN REYNOLDS.

II. Book.

LONDON, Printed by Aug. Matthewes for William Lee, and are to be sold at his
shop near Sericants Inn in Fleetstreet, at the Sign of the Golden Buck. 1622.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL AND MY VERY HONORABLE FRIEND, Sr. ROBERT OXENBREGGE
(Of Husburne in Hampshire) Knight.
Right Worshipful,
YOur Virtues and my Promise are the two wings wherewith this my Translation of
the second Book of the Noble and Learned, Monsieur de Refuges) Treatise of the
Court flies to your Protection and Patronage. You saw when I did most part
thereof in loose sheets, both in Paris and London, as also in your Husburne,
and in seeing it, likewise desired it might be seen of the World, and
consequently taught as well to speak English, as French. I cannot flatter, I
disdain to desemble, for looking from you to my self, I find many reasons that
your requests should still be to me commands. In which respect I have done it,
and despoylde and Metamorphosed it from its French Garb into our English
attire; but how well or ill, whilst the World censureth, I leave to your
knowledge and curiosity to judge, since you like a wise and iuditious Traveler
have profitably traueld as well through the bowels of the Language, as the
Country of France.

It Is true, the Camp, not the Court, is your more proper Element, as rather
desirous (if the ^eruice of your Prince and Country required) to dye a
Soldier, then to live a Courtier, not that you are ignorant in the profession
of the first, because expert in that of the second, or any way hate that
faculty, because you better love and affect this; and therefore since this
French* Courtier is Noble, and withal honest, I hope you will entertain him,
although he come to salute you, clad in homely and plain English: I could wish
my self more happy in meeting with some weightier and greater occasion wherein
I might testify you, how much I am yours. Till when (Right Worshipful) my best
wishes shall ever zealouslie wish you the best prosperities, and for mine own
part I shall never repute my self truly fortunate, till my future service make
satisfaction and requital for your former favors.

Your Worships at all Commands, JOHN REYNOLDS.

A TREATISE OF THE COURT OR, Instructions for Courtiers.
The second Book.
Wherein is demonstrated, how a Courtier must employ all the Requisites and
Parts mentioned in the first Book: thereby to know the better how to conduct
and bear himself in Court.

CHAP. I.
1 In all our actions, we must chiefly consider where as they aim. 2 The
end, and intents, are very differens, of those who throw themselves on the
Court. 3 4 The favor of the Prince, is the general aim of Courtiers, and the
first head of this second Book. 5 Favor anticipates, and presupposes the
knowledge of him that is favored, and the approbation of his actions. 6 How to
make himself know^^. 7 The continuance hereof. 8 Great men are not commonly so
strictly linck'd to their Prince, as those of inferior nancke and condition. 9
To what Princes, those things above proposed and mentioned, properly concern.

1 IN the conduction of all our Actions, we must consider what the principal
and chiefest end is, whereunto they should aim.

2 The ends and intents of those who throw themselves on the Court, are very
different; for some are drawn by P^o^it others through Ambition, and the
vanity of greatness,

3 Others are induced hereunto, through a desire to command, and others (as
says Veneca) to dom^neer, tyrannize, and oppress the people; whereas there
are but few, that undertake the profession and faculty of a Courtier, only for
the service and advancement of the ^rince his masters affairs.

4 But to speak to the purpose: the common end and mark whereunto Courtiers
aim, is to purchase the favor of their Prince; for herein consists all their
skill and in this very point they must employ all their industry and labor.

5 But the favor of a Prince respects two things; first, the knowledge of him
who seeks to be a Favorite, then the pleasingnesse and agreeableness of his
behavior, actions, and carriage, as also of other recommendable parts and
qualities in him.

6 Those who through the greatness of their blood, or through their
authority, and necessary duty, of some hereditarie or purchased dignity, or
office, (whether great or small) that have access to their Prince, are exempt
and freed of the first point, and are already arrived half way.

7 Whereas others who are deprived of those privileges and aduancements, meet
at first with more difficulties and labor: but being come to be known of
their Prince, who esteems and judges them fit for his service, they often
raise their fortunes higher: because being elevated from a low, or poor
condition (though otherwise peradventure well desc^nded) they are commonly more
subject, obayed, and tied to the will and pleasure of their Prince, whom they
acknowledge for the father of their good Fortune, and if it be lawful to use a
Court phrase, for their Creator.

8 Which Great men do not, who being borne such, are either through the
greatness of their blood, or Office, bound to certain respects, that regard
their own particular honor, preferring many times: their own interest and
ends before that of their Prince, the which otherwise is more subject to hinder
their advancement, sometimes because of the jealousy, or fear he may conceive
or take, that giving them to great author^tie, they do not either despise or
ouer-master it in such sort, as it is not then in his power to dispose or take
it from them, without either hazarding his Person, or his Estate, the which he
may easily do, to one of a lower condition, who in this respect must turn his
back, and not only take leave of his former authority and greatness, but
also forsake and abandon it to greater men then himself.

9 I here understand to speak of discreet and wise Princes, who for a
certain time know how to advance those whom they desire to favor, both in
wealth, honors, and authority, without conferring or committing the whole
strength of their Estate unto one, or to make the greatest of the Kingdom
stoop to him, as some have done, whose misfortunate ends have not proved
answerable to their ambitious desires.

CHAP. II.
1 Two ways to advance a Courtier. 2 The seeking of Offices and Dignities. 3
The following of the Court. 3 The last is the shortest way. 5 Examples and
Considerations heereon.
1 OF all the different ways held by those who have sought to advance
themselves into credit and authority, there are specially two, which have
been more practiced and frequented then others.

2 The one is vigilantly to seek Offices, Places, Preferments, and dignities,
and so to proceed from step to step till we come near those who approach
nearest to the Prince.

3 The other is, continually to follow the Court, and to seek to be employed
in extraordinary Commissions, and in the particular affairs of our Prince.

4 Whereof the last, without doubt, is the shortest, and has been most
practiced and followed, by those who are arrived to the highest point of their
Prince his favor: as Moecenas near Augustus; Cr^fipus Salustus near the same
Emperor, and for a time likewise with Tiberius his successor.

5 Tacitus reports, that Mella, (Seneca's brother) to equalize himself to
the Consuls, and more speedily and readily to purchase power and riches,
disdaind the research of offices and dignities, purposely to employ himself in
Commissions, and the particular affairs of the Emperor.

CHAP. III.
1 Diverse means how to make our selves known of our Prince, as by especial
action or service, or by the assistance of friends. 2 What the Prince is above,
as well the great, as common people. 3 The Example of one who would make
himself known to Alexander. 4 A consideration upon this example.
1 AS for the means how to make our selves both known and pleasing to our
Prince, they are of diverse sorts, according to the ^iuersitie of subjects and
occasions that present themselves to us: be it that we make our selves known
by some singular action or service, or by some extraordinary virtue and
sufficiency that is in us; or that we be brought to be known of our Prince
by others, which indeed is the most common and ordinary step to advancement.

2 The Prince is so elevated above the Commons, and environed with such a
crowde and multitude of Nobles and old Courtiers, that it is very difficult
for a newcome, or ^p-start Courtier, to make himself seen amongst this
multitude, unless some of the greatest of them take him by the hand, and make
way for him to approach the Prince, or that (as before) he himself make not
himself seen, by some extraordinary action or invention.

3 It is reported of an Architector named Dinocrates (termed by others
Stasicrates) who desirous to make himself known to Alexander the Great, and
not being able to approach him, although he had thereunto solicited many of
his Nobles: he at last resolved to present himself to him naked; having
anointed his body with oil, with a hat or Crown of Poplar branches on his
head, his left shoulder covered with a Lions skin, and in his right hand a
great clubbe, and in this manner he went and found Alexander, sitting in his
throne of Justice: The rareness of which spectacle, causing all the company to
look on him, made Alexander command, to have him brought before him, who
hearing him, although he neither liked nor approved his proportion; yet, he
nevertheless retained him for his follower.

4 I here produce not this Example to incite any to the like folly, that
purposes to make himself known in Court: but to make ye consider and see,
that those who are put back, if they are not seconded and assisted by some
great man of authority and reputation, they can hardly break through this
Crowde and Thronge of Courtiers who enuiron the Prince, except (as I have
formerly said) by some extraordinary action, or Jest, we make both them and our
Prince behold us.

CHAP. IV.
1 The second head of this Book, the Courtier must consider the inclination of
his Domesticke Officers and Servants, as also other Courtiers. 2 What the
Inclinations of a Prince are, and the reducing thereof, either to that which
concerns his greatness or his pleasures. 3 Wherein the greatness of a Prince
consists. 4 Of the vitions Pleasures and inclinations of a Prince. 5 Princes
willingly love those who serve them in their Pleasures. 6 Examples hereon. 7 8
9 10

1 ACourtier therefore as well to make himself known as to become agreeable
and pleasing, has need to consider not only the conditions and qualities of
the Prince, but also those of his most confident Domestickes and Servants, as
also of the great Noble men, and chief Officers, and of those who may assist
him, or which through jealousy, fear, envy, hatred, or their own, or their
friends, Interest may distaste and cross them.

In the Prince, a Courtier must consider his Inclination, and the manner of his
carriage and behavior, which is commonly most conformable to his humor, the
which although the greatest part of wise and discreet Princes endeavor to hide
and disguise: nevertheless, it is difficult to perform it so cunningly, that
at sometimes they be not espied; because their actions are so obuious and
apparent to the World, that by the issue and consequence thereof, it is easy
to judge whereat they aim, and the weight and importance of affairs does
sometimes so press and cross them, that by the motions of their spirits, they
must of necessity discover their Natures and inclinations: and Tiberius the
most subtle and close of all the Emperors, could never play his part so well
in concealing and obscuring his intents, but that during his reign, almost
every one bewrayed and discovered them.

2 The Inclinations of Princes are diverse, and almost infinite in this
diversity, as are those of other men, but they may be briefly reduced either
to their greatness, or their pleasures.

3 Greatness consists either in their reputation, riches, or obedience of
their Subjects, or in the valor or sidelitie of his warriors, according as
the Prince bends and enclines more to one side then the other; answerable
whereunto, those who are most fittest to serve him (having no other parts in
them that are supitious or distasteful) are always best welcome to him.

4 The like it is in his pleasures and vicious inclinations: for a Prince that
is fearful and suspicious as was Tiberius, will love a bold Calumniator, who
fears not the envy of great men, and who is ready to execute his commands,
and such a one Tacitus depaints Seianus to be.

5 In his vices: if he be subject to drunkenness, he will draw near him men
of the like humors and qualities, as the same Tiberius did Pomponius Flaccus,
and L^^cius Piso, with whom sometimes he remaind drinking two days and a night
together without starting, terming them his friends, to perform all, and at
all times and hours, and in consideration and recompense whereof, he gave one
of them the Government of Syria; and the other the Praefect-ship of Rome.

6 The same Emperor likewise preferred a man of a base descent (and scarce
known to many honorable Personages) to the Questership; because (as it is
reported) he had done him reason (to use the term of this fair art of
Drunkenness) of a certain measure of Wine, which held nintie six glasses.

7 Nero's Impudicitie (among others, who served his beastly pleasures) made
him choose Tigilinus; he likewise drew near him C. Petronius to be Arbitrato
of the bravery of his luxury and lust: and the Emperors Commodus and
Heliogabalus filled all the offices and dignities of the Empire, with those who
were as vicious and deboshd as themselves.

8 Mucianus was not so much esteemed and beloved for his fidelity and carriage,
as because he was fit to content the covetousness of Uespasian his master.

9 The covetousness of Isaacius Angelus, Emperor of Constantinople (after the
death of Theodora Castamonita his Uncle) made him take into his favor, a young
Clarke of his Exchequer, who could scarce write, because he proferd him part of
those bribes and gifts which he drew from those that employed him.

10 The Emperor Comnenus, likewise to satisfy his prodigalitic, wanting a
severe exactor, and subtle inuentor of Taxes and Monopolies made choice (as
reports Nicetas) of one John de Putze, a rude and choleric man, of a
difficult access, and insupportable in his Actions; and such a one as is
usually put in the execution of the like charge and office, unto whom he gave
so great authority, and conferred so much power, as he enterpris'd and
usurped on the functions of all other Officers: yea, he was so impudently
bold, sins to break, and reuoake the Statutes and Laws of his Prince and
Council under the color of parsimony and frugalitie, cutting off the most
necessary charges and expenses, as the arming and entertaining of the Galleys,
being indeed the chiefest strength and force of the Empire.

CHAP. V.
1 He that will be welcome to a Prince, must second and follow his
inclinations. 2 How to banish an honest mrn from the Court. 3 The proper
definition of the Court. 4 Examples on the corruption of the Court. 5 6 7 A
Courtier must some times wink, to see tie wicked do what they please. 8 It is
very difficult for an honest man to live and maintain himself in Court. 9 An
honest man may live and be patient in Court for a time. 10 How we must
understand this. 11 How to divert the Princes evil inclinatons, Examples of
Seneca, and others lereon. 12 13

1 But we need no more Ex^mples to establish this Maxim^, which is not only
known, but too much practiced by th^se, who frequent the Courts of Princes,
insomuch that whosoever will be welcome to them, must conform himself to
second their inclinations and passions.

2 Here an honest man may believe, that to tie himself to follow all the
inclinations of Princes, is to banish himself from the Court, since most
commonly they at their pleasure exceed the terms of reason, and of a well
grounded Judgment.

3 He indeed who will live an innocent l^fe, and altogether estrange himself
from the common garb and custom of those, who a^e faulty and subject to
their own passions, he shall do far better not to throw h^mselfe on the
Court, which sometime or other co^^upts the most chaste and virtuous.

4 Let us only consider one or two examples of the Corruptions of the Court:
Festi^^s (the Fellow of Maximin) under the Emperor Valentinian, governed Asia
with much repitation and happiness, blaming and conde^ming the cruelties which
Maximin used tow^rds the people, thereby to advance himself

5 But when he saw, that by this means his fellow was made General of the
Pretorian Bards, being the highest dignity next to that of the Emperor, he
resolude to change his actions and life, and so from thenceforth committed many
cruelties and iniustices.

6 To which Example we may add that of John De Pntze (of whom we have
formerly spoken) who sometime with much candeur and integrity managde the
affairs, and treasure under the Emperor Emanuel, the performance whereof was
the cause, that his pride and insolent proceedings were more silently and
peacefully tolerated and supported: but in the end, as Nicet as affirms, he
resolved to enrich himself, and to do as others had done before him, enuiting
his friends to do the like; and that which these did by corruption, others
more honest have been constrained to give way to do the like, for fear of
ruining themselves, in striving to prevent and hinder them.

7 Aristides (just both in effect and surname) being appointed to be
superintendant of the Exchequer of Athens, did at first bear himself
honestly, and prevented and hindered those from stealing, who were under him:
but by his enemies he was shortly accused to be the greatest Extortioner and
Thief that had ever executed that charge, and with much difficulty could he
free himself from being condemned of this accusation and crime: but in the end
being aquited and discharged thereof, he resolved to bear himself as others
had formerly done before him, permitting those to steal, who were accustomed
so to do, and then by all men's reports, he was again held and reputed an
honest and just dealing man.

8 The like it is in most Princes Courts, where through their malice, who
govern them, not able to endure, to see honester men then them themselves; or
else through the carelessness and stupiditie of the Prince himself, it is
difficult for an honest man long to remain so.

9 Nevertheless, he who is driven to this profession of a Courtier, either
through the necessity of his quality, through the greatness of his blood, or
by the dignity of his office, or called thereunto by his Prince, or through a
desire he has to serve his Country, or his Friends; although he be a true
honest man, he (in my judgment) may patiently live and remain there for a
time, and according to occasions and accidents, not only benefit himself but
pleasure others.

10 I say, in the Courts of those Princes, who are choleric and humorous, it
being far easier to live in the Court of a wise Prince, who makes great
estimation of judgment, sufficiency and capacity.

11 And as many have heretofore councelled honest men, to follow the managing
of public Offices and dignities; not only to procure the good of the
Country, but to prevent, that the wicked enjoy them not; so I believe, that
for the same considerations, they should desire to be near, either a Tyrant,
or a voluptuous Prince, and as much as in them lies, to depresse and beat
down his wicked and pernicious designs; if not directly and publicly, at
least indirectly and underhand, whether it be in deferring or opposing
difficulties thereunto, or in inuenting some other sweeter and more plausible
expediments and remedies.

12 Burrus and Soneca, two wise Courtiers, who (according to that time were
reputed and held for very honest men) being ordained to train up Nero in his
youth, and knowing that his perverse nature could not be brought to
perfection, but was wholly inclined to lust and lasciviousness, and in danger
to occasion in the Noblest Families of Rome many scandals and adulteries, they
resolved to quench this his intemperate lust and desire, by giving him a free
Woman, who indeed for a time appeasde his youthful fury, covering these his
affections under the culler, of making a Friend of Seneca's, named Annaus
Serenus, to research and seek her; under the veil and pretext of whose name,
Nero gave many presents and familiarisd with this Woman.

13 So an honest Servant and Courtier, being not able to hinder the vices,
disorders, and wicked designs of the Prince his Master, he must neately and
pleasingly divert them another way, where they may commit less danger and
prejudice, as well to others, as to his reputation.

CHAP. VI.
1 Not to oppose our selves vnprositably against tho will and pl^as^ye of our
Prince, and not to subject our selves to any base se^^^^de. 2 Examples on the
^^^^ ^ere^f. 3 That an honest man is sitter to serve a Prince, then any other.
4 Advice for Princes rather to take honest, then wicked servants, and that the
Court participateth more of evil, then of good. 5 Why vicious mea are favored
of some Princes. 6 Examples hercon. 7 That we seem honester, in being compared
with a wicked man: the example of Augustus and Tiberius. 8 Advice that we
speak not too freely and liberally of Princes. 9 Examples hercon.
1 But some will say, it very seldom falls out, that a vicious Prince or
Tyrant draws near him an honest man, it is indeed rare if he make this choice;
yet there are few Princes Courts so abandoned and forsaken, but we meet with
some honest men: for if he be not called by the Prince, he may be provoked and
enuited through a desire to serve, or steed honest men, and to counterpoyse and
weigh down the power of the wicked, assisting himself by those, who are least
wicked; or else being united and linckt in affection, familiarity, or
conversation with some great man, he may be entertaind, in not opposing against
the violent inclination of the Prince, and yet not so stopping or subiecting
himself to any base slavery, or servitude, that he either adhere or
participate of his wickedness or tyrannies; imitating herein Lepidus under
Tiborius, whom ^acitus represents both for an honest Man, and a wise Courtier.

2 The same Tacitus likewise makes great osteeme and account of two others,
Labeo and Capito; of whom the first discreetely maintainde his liberty in
Court, and was commended and applauded of all men; and the last made himself
agreeable and pleasing to his Prince by his obedience and humility.

3 I affirm, that an honest man shall have more labor and trouble herein,
then a wicked man; but he shall likewise reap far more honor and content:
and if he govern himself discreetlie, in not opposing his Prince in that,
from whence he sees he cannot remove him, I may say, that in the end, how
wicked soever the Prince be, he will more affect and favor him, then wicked
men, among whom there is rarely found as much fidelity as there should be to
serve a Master, and that may be expected and hoped for, from an honest man.

4 It was likewise the advice of Salust to Julius Caesar, and of Mecaenas to
Augnstus, to serve themselves chiefly of honest men, who are more retaind by
honor and conscience, not to undertake any thing against their duties, then
the wicked who have no other cut be or reine, then the fear of punishment, or
their own debilitie.

5 The Court nevertheless being mixed and participating more of evil then
good, the number of the last is greater, then that of the first, and serve
vicious Princes in two ways and respects, the one to flatter them, and to
execute their vices, wherein they make themselves more obedient, because
thereby they purchase approbation and applause; the other to make them seem
honester among those, who are more dishonest then themselves; and there are
other Princes, who for their conformity of Manners, believe they are more
secure and assured among these sort of people.

6 Denis (the Tyrant of Syracusa, being requested to abandon and banish a
wicked man who was near him, and hated and envied of all men, replied, that
he would still retain him, that he himself might not be most hated of all
his Court.

7 It is the use and custom of those, who know defects and faults in
themselves, to make themselves more prizd and esteemd, y comparing themselves
with those, who are more vicious then they: from whence proceeds this other
Court-policie, to substitute in his place a meaner then himself, thereby to
advance and prefer his own actions, by the immitation of his successor: and
we affirm Augustus had this design, in choosing Tiberius for his successor,
and likewise Tiberius in leaving the Empire to Callgula.

8 But above all, an honest man must bear himself discreetly: for wicked
Princes are seldom pleasdo, that one of this quality should speak freely to
them; and Plato found himself deceived, in using it to the same Denis, Prince
of Syracusa, who being committed by him to the custody of a Ship master to sell
him into Candy, because he gave the reins to freely and licentiously to his
tongue: from whence being redeemde and ransomed by some Philosophers, they gave
him this adui^e and lesson, to serve him another time, eith^r that he should
not frequent P^in^^s o^ ^lse that he should be more pleasing and agreeable to
them in his speeches.

9 And the like advice and Counsel Aristotl^ gave his Kinsman Callisthenes,
who followed the Court of Alexander that he should speak seldom, and when he
spoke, it should be to please and content him, who had power and authority
over his life.

CHAP. VII.
1 Of that sort of Flattery which is most pleasing to Princes, and chiesly of
that which sauoreth of freeness. 2 Of too much flattery, and the advice of
Plutark and Eschynes thereon. 3 Examples on the same subject. 4 Who first used
free flatteri^. 5 Another Example on the same Flattery. 6 Advice thereon, and
wherein and how we must use it.
1 THere is no remedy, for we must sometimes permit our selves to flatter,
thereby to work and skrew our selves into our Princ^s favor, but we must not
inure and accustom our selves to all sorts of flatteries: for that of base and
humble flattery was displeasing to Tiberius, who departing from the Senate,
often complained to see the Senators so simple, and so disposde to servitude.

2 And sometimes too much flattery more wrongs us, then if we had used none at
all: for he whom we so flatter, commonly belieues we will deceive him. There
must be (says Eschynes and Plutarke) in outward appearance some point of
freeness mixed with flattery: not only to persuade our Prince, that we
believe as we speak, but also to make others believe it, thereby the sirmer
to support and maintain our reputation.

3 Cr^ssus having been a King, showed, that he herein knew the delights and
appetites of Kings: for Cam^y^es King of P^rsia, demanding of those, near
him, what they esteemde of him in comparison of his Father Cyrus, they
answered, that he was a far greater King, having ioynde Egypt, and the
command of the Sea, to that which his Father had l^ft him: but when it came to
Cress^s to dedeliuer his opinion, he s^ake freely that he held him far
inferior to his Father, because he had not as yet made a Son, who resembled
him. Which answer says Herodotus) more satisfied and pleased the vanity of
this Prince, then the former, because it seemed to him to be far more freer.

4 Valerius Messala began first to practice this form of flattery toward
Tiberius, when he was of opinion every year to renew the oath of fidelity;
and Tiberius suddenly asking him, if it were by his command he proposde it,
he very boldly answered him, no, alleging, that, in matters which concerned
the Estate he used not any man's advice, but would always freely speak that,
which he himself thought good; yea, although he offended any one therein; and
(says Iacitus of all flatteries) there rested no more but this to practice.

5 Since when, Aetius Capito used a flattery near of the like nature, when
Tiberius prohibited to proceed in the Process against Annius a Roman Knight
accused for using indifferently the Image of the Prince in his silver dishes,
for then Aetius violently opposde himself against this defense and
prohibition, as being repugnant to the liberty and authority of the S^nate,
where of he said, Tiberius ought not deminish, nor cut off the power, or
vigor; but to leave him to deliberate herein, for the punishing of such a
crime, adding withal, that it was lawful for him to pardon the offenses and
injuries done to his person, but not those that were committed and perpetrated
against the Estate.

6 We might here produce other Examples, but hese shall suffice to advertise
those, who shall be constrained to practice these sorts of flatteries, not to
employ them to the damage or prejudice, either of the Commonweal, or of any
particular person, but to practice them only to satisfy and content their
Prince.

CHAP. VIII.
1 The third Head of this second Book, we must not attempt to advise a proud
Prince, how Princes demand council to have their own opinions approved, and
sometimes to sound the affections of their Counselors: Examples hereon. 2
Princes make many propositions, rather to have them approved, then consulted;
together, with Examples tending to that effect. 3 4 Before we advise a Prince,
to must endeavor to know his intent. 5 How to bear our selves to a choleric
Prince that de^a^nds our aduic^. 6 Advantages for a Councellor, whereof he
must make use, when his advice given to his Prince, proves contrary to his
expectation. 7 8 In unlawful matters, the b^st way is to defer, and to take
time to give Council. 9 An Example hereon. 10 How we must practice the said
Example.

1 NEither must we entermeddle to council a proud Prince, although he demand
us, if we can any way well excuse or shift our selves thereof: for such Princes
commonly ask council in the same manner, as did X^xes, who resolving to pass
into Greece, to make war, assembled the Princes of Asia, under color to
deliberate and consult thereof; and because (quoth he) I will not be seen to
undertake this enterprise of mine own head, I have here conuoked ye: yet
remember notwithstanding, that ye ought rather obey then consult

Canbyses, who raignd before him over the Persians, being resolved to marry his
own Sister, demanded of his Privy Counselors, if there were any Law in
Persia, that defended a King to marry his own Sister: the Council knowing
that this Pr^nce demanded not this question, to be resolved what he should
do, but to sound and discover, if they would approve this his marriage, made
answer, that there was no Law which permitted it, but that they had another
Law, which tolerated their King to do what he pleased.

So we must judge of the Princes humor and inclination, and of the nature of
the cause, and whether we ought consult and deliberate on that, whereof he but
in show, or fo fashion sake demands our advice.

2 In our Fathers time, a man far inferior to the quality and dignity of a
King, and yet Viceroy in Spain, made the Grandos of that Country know, that
all which was preposde in Council must not be executed. The History is thus:
After the Death of King Ferdinand, Charles of Austria being in Flanders, was
councelled by the Pope and the Emperor Maxim^lsa^, to take upon him the Title
of King of Spain, although that lane his Mother, Daughter of F^rdinand, were
living, because by reason of her indisposition, she was not capable to
command and govern: to approve which proposition, the Grandos of the Kingdom
assembled, to whom the Cardinal Xi^enes (being Uice-roy) opened and dilated
his Reasons, whereby this new proposition might be approved and maintained:
but the Nobles more icalous of the preservation of their fundamental Laws,
and of her Honor, who was their lawful Queen, as true and faithful
Counselors to him, to whom aft^r their Qu^enes decease, the Kingdom
rightfully and properly appertained, openly contradicted and opposde it; which
made the Cardinal Ximenes arise from his ^eate, and tell them in choler, that
the matter in hand consisted of a business, which must not be made
questionable or doubtful, and which needed not their advice; the consent of
subjects being not necessary to authorize, or seat a King in his Estate but
that he had only conuoked them for their ewne profits and good, where of he
was still careful, to the end, that by approving this election, they might
thereby gain their Prince his favor; but since they attributed that to
privilege and right, which was courteously both expected, and requested of
them, he was speedily resolved to cause him to be proclaimed King in Mad^id, to
the end that other Cities might follow her Example.

3 And it is not only in the like occasions, that Princes practice and use the
same, but almost in all others; for they very seldom ask advice, except it be
to have their own desires and resolutions approved, or to sound their
affections and wills, of whom they make show to be advised and councelled, and
this Tiberius commonly practiced in the Senate of Rome.

4 A Courtier must therefore strive to know the intent and meaning of his
Prince, and avoid as much as in him lies to engage himself in any advise and
council which may be ill construed and mistaken.

5 Wherefore doubting of the intent and desire of the Prince his master, he
must make show to examine the business that is prepos'd him and must present
him reasons Pro and Con. whereof if possible he can, he must leave him the
choice, without concluding any thing: for if the Prince be not as yet fully
resolved: seeing these reasons contrary to his designs to be most probable and
powerful, it may so chance that he will easily be induced to change his opinion
and resolution.

6 And this Evil (that we term Shame, which often retains Great men from
changing their resolutions; fearing thereby to show themselves Inferiors to
those who counsel them) will not withhold them, because therein there was
nothing fully concluded and resolved on, and whereby a Courtier may warrant and
secure himself from a check that may be given him, if his advise having been
followed, there had befallen any thing contrary to the will and pleasure of the
Prince his Master.

7 But if the Prince following his own first resolution, meet not with the
fruition of his desires, the Courtier has then this advantage to have
foreseen and shown his Prince, the Evil that he might have avoided, by
weighing remembering and considering the reasons he formerly gave him.

8 But where we are importuned by our Prince to give him our advise in
unlawful matters, there we must find means to defer it; or else humbly
request him to call a third man on the place to consult and deliberate thereon;
to the end that it being maturely considered and debated, he may take that
resolution which shall be most answerable to his dignity and security.

9 Of which, first Bur^hus made use the first time when Nero resolved to
murder his mother: Offering himself to be executed for this Paracyde, if it
were found she had at tempted that whereof she was accused; showing him that
before it were proved and made apparent, he ought not condemn his mother, nor
to be readyer to punish her then any other particular person, to whom he still
permitted and allowed they should have time, and leave, both to defend and
answer their accusations; whereby, it fell out, that the time employed to
discover and find out this fact: not only cooled and appeased Nero's choler,
but likewise cleared his distrusts and jealousy; and so by this delay, Burrhus
for this first time, diuerted the effecting of this his Masters bloody and
impious resolution.

10 But we must not use and practice this in all sorts of affairs, but rather
seldom and sparingly, and in these only which are most ambiguous and
doubtful, and withal we must consider to what Princes we make these delays.

For some are quick, and ready, and so great enemies to delays, protractions,
and difficulties, that those who frequently use these delays are commonly cast
out of favor, and disgraced.

CHAP. IX.
1 Remedies against the rashness and forwardnes of a Prince, upon deferring to
counsel him, to know how to abound in expedie^ts. 2 Princes do usually
rather ask Council to bring their Purposes to pass, then to know wbat is
necessary and expedient to do. 3 Consideration upon the means taken from the
Pr^tracting of Time. 4 Upon the breuity of Time. 5 What expedients the Prince
most commonly chooses: Consideration upon the tediousness, breuity, and
difficulty of a business, together with the Authors advise, upon those that
are most whole some and necessary for a Prince. 6 We must rather impose and
retort the exe^ution of a wicked fact vp^n a wicked and vicious Person, then
engage our selves therein. 7 Examples of Burrhus and Ancetus to that effect. 8
The Authors opinion on his Examples. 9 Advise how to divert the Prince his
vicious resolutions. 10 To use the pleasant and most respectfull demonstrations
and considerations hereon. 11 As, to break a Jest herei^ that may steed us. 12
Considerations upon this advise, with the Examples of Tiberius, and Domitian in
the like cause. 13 Other means and advise, not to rush and oppose our selves
against our Prince, in his evil inclinations, and from whence they are
derived. 14 Aremedy to assault and fight against his wicked inclinations, and
what we must oppose against them.
1 IN respect whereof, with such Princes we must abound and not be barren or
sterrill in expedients yea, and if possible we can, our invention must be
still in action; and not at a stand herein.

2 But as for the most part, they crave not advise, what is to be done, but how
to obtain their desires; therefore in things which we judge contrary to reason
and duty, we must propose and seek out the longest means, either as most
easy, just, or secure, the shortest being commonly accompanied with many
difficulties, and inconveniences, wherewith we may contest and fight against
them.

3 True it is, that a Prince who has no other end but to obtain his desire
and design, will always seek out the easiest, cleerest, and securest remedy,
although it be the longest: if he of himself be not violently transported with
too much impatiency, and although he be; yet, he can have no just cause to
blame him who proposes the longest way to obtain his desire: since it is
excuseable, either upon his circumspection, who proposes it, or upon the
desire he has, to satisfy his masters will with more fecility and safety.

4 But if he chance meet with more difficulty in the shorter means, which
the Prince himself has chosen; his wisdom then that has proposed others
will seem the greater, and if he choose the longest way to compass his
designs, many things may fall out, that may either cool the Prince from not
following his resolution, or which may make him judge of the impossibility or
inconueniency thereof.

5 Nevertheless, where (in this cause) we see the Prince resolved to follow
those means, which in the beginning bear their difficulty, or
impossibility, as we must not council him thereunto: so with a silence fu^l
of respect we must let him alone to do what he pleases, for fear least
aduenturing to dissuade him, he seek out other means, more easy to effect
his wicked inclinations, the which he may lose, in knowing and foreseeing the
hindrances thereof at the beginning.

6 But it sometimes falls out, that impatiencie in a Prince, ma^es him
command an honest man to execute his wicked designs, wherein there is no man
how wise soever, but will find himself much grauelled an^ perplexed;
especially, if by the estate and condition of the matter, we can find no
means to excuse, or shift our self; or to reject this charge, thereby to
gratify another; as Burrhus did, when Nero first consulted of the manner how
to put his Mother to death: after he understood she had es^aped her
counterfeit shipwreck, under which pretext and color he thought to make her
away, knowing well that this reuengefull and cruel Woman would never forget or
pardon this his first attempt.

7 Burrhus and Seneca (says Tacitus) were a long time beholding each other,
and at last Seneca seeing the impatient vexation of this Prince, demanded of
Burrhus with a loud voice, if he thought the Soldiers of the Guard would not
perform this Office, when Burrhus resolving neither to imbrue his own hands,
nor those of his soldiers in this murder, answered, that he thought they
would not do it, as too well loving the House and Blood of the Caesar's, from
whence Ag^ipuia was descended, and that he thought that Anicetus having
undertaken it, was bound to perform and finish this execution, and so excused
himself from committing this Parracide.

8 I confess it is not a work of Charity, to confer such Commissions on
others, but in such occasions it were better for an honest man to leave them to
those of Anicetus his quality and condition, then to imbrue, or defile his
own hand therewith.

9 But the surest way, if possible we can, is to foresee and prevent those
evil inclinations in our Prince, before they are conceived, or at least before
they have taken root in his conceits and imagination.

10 Hereunto many have administered pleasing discourses and speeches, and (as
^arysatis said) silken words, but those who use them, must be in great
reputation and esteem, and that they find a Prince more capable of reason,
then to follow his own proper inclinations, which indeed is a very rare thing:
and if some have been found of this humor, it has only been in one or two
actions, but not always.

11 I much both like and approve a means which some have held and practiced,
who being of a nimble and sharp Wit, with a pleasing grace to deliver a tale
or jest: and having this aceesse and familiarity with their Prince, without
deminishing in any one point the respect they owe him, have known so
pertinently to deliver and unfold a tale, approaching near the humor or
matter that possesses the Prince; that under other specious pretexts and
counterfeit names, they have made him know the danger, evil, and consequence
thereof.

12 But herein, besides the viuacitie of Wit, and necessary Grace of him that
uses it, he must be very wary and cautions, that the Prince, conceive not this
his Jest or tale, to be purposely contrived or directed him: As Tiberius, who
imagined that Scaurus Tragedy, (entitled A^raeus) was purposely composed to
reproach his fratrycides. And Domi^i^n, that of Paris and Oeno^e, composed by
Heluidius to blame his divorce. But we must slide and intermix our jests among
many other things; far from the Prince his inclination, yea and administer
them pertinently, and to the purpose; using them not seriously, but rather in a
form of careless repetition: for besides, that the Grace hereof may stir up
the Prince, to enter into consideration of what is spoken: yet being exteriorly
delivered, without any interior design; he will then take it more graciously,
and will then draw more profit from thence.

13 We may think, and advise our selves of other means; thereby not
unprofitably, to aboard the Prince his evil inclinations, and not maliciously
to cherish or second them. And these may be drawn from the affairs
themselves, or from the occasions of other matters, or from the time, or
persons who are near the Prince.

14 But if we are constrained to fight against some of these passions; we must
as much oppose that whereunto he is subject and addicted, as that which we
intend to assail and fight against; ther^by to make it appear, that all which
we say, proceeds, and is a part of the respect and obeydience we owe him, as
did Mucianus toward Domitian, to contain him in his duty, and to prevent
that he joined not with C^rialis.

CHAP. X.
1 Consideration upon the Prince his humor; which has reference to. 2 The
manners and conditions of a choleric Prince. 3 How to behave and govern our
selves with this humor, and that Princes are tame Lions. 4 The manners and
condition of a Prince of a Sanguine complexie^. 5 How to bear our selves
toward one of this humor. 6 Of those who properly please Princes of this
complexion. 7 The m^nners and condition of a Melancholy Prince. 8 How to bear
our selves with this humor. 9 Of an angry and froward humor, and of his
other imperfections. 10 The manners and conditions of a Flegmaticke Prince. 11
How to behave our selves toward this humor.
1 TO which purpose it greatly behooues us to consider the Prince his humor,
differing not much from other men's; if not that, as Princes are more powerful
in all other things: so they are more weak to moderate their own passions and
humors, as being for the most part more violent, and less restrained by reason.

2 So then he will quickly enter into choler, and in all his actions be proud
and haughty: desiring that all things may stoop to his commands: an enemy of
the least disobedience, impatient in the execution of his enterprises,
headstrong in his counsels, and little regarding to be counseled of others,
if it be not, to find out one that will conioyne with his; and so undertake the
execution of his will and desire. Injurious, quick to offend, but ready to
return to himself: provided, that we make no semblance of remembering the
offense he has done us; otherwise he will then become inexorable and
irreconcilable, and so from thence perpetually hate him whom he has offended.

3 Near such a humor, a Courtier must always have his eye and ear open; and
(as we say) one of his feet above ground, to see, understand, speak, and do
all which his Prince desires; without reply, delay, or difficulty, for fear
least we make our Master believe we are wiser then himself; yea we must be
humble and obedient to all degrees of his commands, although they be inferior
to our quality and dignity: we must be patient to digest all injuries, ready
to forget them, still redoubling his service and our obedience after he has
been displeased or offended, never remembering our services for fear of being
seen to vaunt and insult thereof, but rather to continue them: thereby to
incite and stir up gratefulness and acknowledgement in our Prince his
remembrance; he must fly all extreamitie and excess of choler, for then all
things displease, and then those who are most beloved, can neither speak nor
do any thing, agreeable to him that is in choler: The Princes of this humor
repute and attribute all familiarity to disdain, in such sort that although
they tempt and allure us to be familiar with them: we notwithstanding must not
engage our selves therein; but still bear our selves toward them with much
respect and humility. For though first they seem to be tame Lions, yet in
the end they devour those, who vainly and ambitiously presumed, they had the
Art to know how to govern them.

4 The Prince of a sanguine complexion, is still of a joyful nature and
disposition, loving mirth, pleasure, and pastimes, an enemy to sorrow and
melancholinesse; hating all matters that are intricate or ambiguous, and all
quarrels, debates, and contentions; much desirous of ease and peace, remitting
willingly the disposing of his affairs to those who are under him, and wholly
relying on their care, loving those who ease him of that burden, without
giving him any cause of complaints; the which he understands with much
unwillingness: he is courteous, gracious, and very difficultly drawn to
offend any; or if he do it is rather in words then otherwise; and does as
willingly forget those offered him, as those he commits himself, he delights
to pleasure any man, and is generally very liberal.

5 With those sorts of Princes, we must be as seldom grave as we may,
observing nevertheless the respect and duty we owe them; and as for those,
who manage his greatest and most important affairs, they must not come into
his presence, except they are called, or if they be not assured that they find
them not playing, or recreating themselves: for besides that, he interrupts
the Prince in the pastime he affects; the Prince is also ashamed, that such
as they are should surprise him in his pleasures, knowing that in their hearts
they approve them not.

Philip, King of Macedon, on a time playing at Dice, word was brought him that
Antipater was at his chamber door to speak with him; whereat being instantly
angry and displeased, he threw the Tables and Dice on the bed, as ashamed that
Antipater should find him playing.

As those then have a great advantage in the managing and conduction of his
affairs, their Prince wholly relying on them; so they have also a great
disadvantage and hinderanc^ to approach and familiarize with him, who hates
those serious and grave humors, as altogether contrary to his Nature.

6 But those who are of a Ioueall humor, and withal capable to manage and
dispatch business, oftentimes attain to preferment and advancement near
these Princes: Provided, that being out of their sight, they retain that
gravity which is beseeming and answerable to their place and dignity; whereas
failing thereof, they make themselves despised and contemned; and from this
contempt is engendered and produced the boldness (under borrowed and feigned
pretexts) to complain; and those complaints being heard and known of the
Prince, are of such power and efficacy, that many times to appease them, he
resolves to discard and put away the author thereof.

7 A melancholy Prince is heavy and slow in his resolutions, still pensive,
mistrustfull, suspicious, ingenious, and most commonly malicious, but of few
words, the which for the most part he casts forth, to sound those who approach
him, framing his speeches doubtful and of a double sense; yea, in more grave
and dangerous affairs (as we have said Tiberius did); he is both secret, and a
dissembler, an enemy of mirth and familiarity, always retired and loving
solitarines, not desiring to be frequented or conuersed with, affecting very
few, and those coldly* subject to hate for a small, or no cause, in respect of
the diffidence and suspicion which still follows him; he is extremely
covetous, and fears the whole Earth cannot suffice him; as great an enemy to
those he has offended, as to these who have offended him; he is reuengefull
and irreconciliable, and we must not repose much confidence in his favor and
reconciliation.

8 With Princes of this humor, we must bear our selves carefully and softly,
walking as it were with the bridle in our hand; we must retire our thoughts,
poyse all that we speak, speak nothing but that which may serve, and which
we judge fittest to be received, and the surest way is not to vaunt or boast
too much, nor to speak except we are demanded: in all our behauior and
speeches, we must be very circumspect and careful to eschew contradictions,
and not press this humor too much in our Prince his resolutions; for fear
least malancholinesse being inflamed, it turn into choler, and choler into
hatred; we must be careful and tautious how we importune him in our requests
especially in those wherein we doubt we shall be refused. For besides that, it
is dangerous to accustom a Prince to refuse us; he that is Melancholy being
speculatiue, holds his refuse for an offense offered you and conceiues that
you hold your self justly offended, and are therefore become his enemv: so we
must afterward perform Miracles to deface and withdraw him from this opinion:
for as lie forgets not injuries, so he also believes that you have nor
forgotten the refusal he gave you.

9 Briefly, this humor is the dullest and heauiest of all others, for the
variety and strangenes of the objects it ingendreth, and produces in us; and
also because it is the more difficult for us to conduct and bear our selves
with Princes subject hereunto.

10 He that is Flegmaticke, participates of the heaviness and slownesse of the
Melancholy: but he has neither the opinion, malice, or distlust of evil, for
the coldness that freezeth his heart, rather makes him distrustful of himself,
then of others; if he undertake any thing, he is fearful that he shall not
accomplish it; which commonly proceeds from being ignorant of the means to
work the same; he has irresolution in his counsels, timiditie and fear in
their execution and stupiditie, or dullness in his conceits; still
hatingwithout much bitterness and violence, and loving without much zeal and
feruency.

11 Near such Princes, those of active, courageous, and inuentiue wits, are
sit to heat this cold humor of theirs. For a Prince knowing his own defect
by the difficulties and crosses that arise in his understanding; the which he
himself may resolve and clear: if he find any who will give him the means to
accomplish and effect that, which he thought impossible, and such a one he
loves, admires, and believes he is necessary for his service; so is this his
favor grounded on necessity, is more perdurable and permanent then any other;
the which a Courtier well knowing, he must with his best endeanours strive to
accomplish those things the Prince his master judges most possible, and
prevent if he can, that one more ingenious and subtle then himself be not
admitted to undertake it; in which respect he must not be far from Court; for
when another is known to be more capable in the discharge of a Charge, then
our selves; we are then reputed less necessary; and when they are for a time
inured and accustomed to pass without us, it often falls out, that they will
then wholly abandon and forsake us.

This needs no great inducement and persuasion, for it is one of the most
common and frequent subtilties of the Court, practiced by those who are
employed in Estate affairs, to call and select none but those who as well in
rank as Capacity, are by far their inferiors, to the end thereby to give
themselves the more lustte, and to avoid the danger of being casheeid, if the
Prince find another more pleasing and agreeable to his fancy. Add withal,
that these men are more capable to perform a bad office, or to cover some
corruption, according to the intent and desire of those who advance them; which
one of a more Noble and Eminent condition would not do.

Of these four humors (as we have formerly said), as well Princes as other
men are composde, and some way or other are addicted and inclined to one, or
more of those humors, according to the degree of the humor it self, that
most predominats in them.

CHAP. XI.
1 We must never tie our selves to the humors of that Prince, who changes
according to his age, conversation, and other incidents. 2 A Prince is of one
nature in War, and of an other in Peace. 3 He is subject to change his
inclination, and to settle his affection on others. 4 Examples hereon. 5 The
cause of these alterations. 6 Tryphons humor alleged hereon. 7 Another
Example of Agamemnon in Euripides. 8 From whence proceeds the ordinary faults
of Princes. 9 Greatness and Power often be witcheth our Understandings. 10
Examples of the wise Men of Greece hereon. 11 Notable Examples of the
Pythagoriciens to the same effect. 12

1 Nevertheless, we must not still make a perpetual conclusion herein; for
as our humors change according to our age, affairs, and conversation; so our
gesture and carriage changes* and so likewise do the inclinations of Princes.

2 In time of War, a Prince both affects and honors Captains and Souldier^,
whom in time of Peace (his need being past) he makes little or no esteem of
them, and changing his inclinations to delights and pleasures, or the like
passions; he will affect and favor those Agents, who serve and second him in
his affections.

3 Tiberius was of one inclination under Augustus of another during the life of
Germanicus and Drusus, of another during the life of his Mother Liuia, of
another when he loved and feared Seianus, and of another when he had made him
away; and as Passienus reports, there was never a better servant scene then
Caligula in the time of Tiberius, nor a worse Master then himself, when he
came to govern the Empire.

4 Plutarke speaking of alterations in the Manners of M^rrius and Cylla, makes
a doubt if it were Fortune that changed their Natures, or that now discovered
that which was formerly concealed and hidden in them.

5 To speak truth in the most part of such people, it is not that their
Natures and inclinations change, but he which was with held by fear, discouers
himself such, as he was when he feared not ^, as Le^^^ins said of Zeno, he is
the Paysan Serpent, who shaking with cold, cannot offend, but being warm and
hot, begins to vomit forth his poison.

6 Josephus says, that Tryphon a long time bore the mask of an honest man,
whilst he lived a private man, to the end to draw the wills and affections of
the people; but being made King, he entirely took off the mask of his deceit
and hypocrisic, and then openly showed to his subjects what before he eue^ had
been.

7 Euripides gives Agamemnor a reproach not much unlike this, for being of an
humble and lowly mind, before he was chosen chief General of the Grecians he
became afterward enemies to his friends, and of very difficult access, and so
at last shut himself up in his house; which this Poet alleges, that an
honest man managing a great Office or dignity, must not alter his fashions and
manners; a lesson very seldom, or to say truer) never practiced, if it were
not by Pollion, as Seneca writes.

8 But the most frequent and common defects of Princes, proceed from
presumption, which commonly follows, and is incident to power, which makes them
more difficult to receive council and advice; flattring themselves with this
belief, that as they are superiors in power to their subjects; so they are
also in Capacity and Sufficiency, and some believe, that in this respect they
cannot fashion, or subi^ct themselves to laws and and reasons, without
disparaging or deminishing their authority; and that if they cannot do all
that they please, they are no longer Sovereigns: is to abate their greatness,
and to be no more then common people, to rule and suffer themselves to do
only that, which is permitted to the Commons, for whom they only think, that
the rule of Pi^tie, Honor and Justice have been instituted and ordained, and
not for themselves.

9 If these tyrannical opinions entered not but into common wits, it would not
prove so great a wonder; but it seems that power sometimes inchanteth the best
Spirits and Judgments.

10 In all precedent Ages, none left better rules of Moderation, then those we
term the seven Wise Men of Greece, and whilst they lived, there were no
greater nor seuerer Tyrants, then those who reigned over them.

11 Appian speaking of the Philosopher Aristion and of other Philosophers, who
had tyrannized in Athens, joined with them the Pythagoriciens, who had
commanded in Italy, whom he with the rest said, had been the greatest and
seuerest Tyrants of their age: which indeed makes us doubt, if the
Philosophers, who disdained the honors and managing of affairs did it in
earnest, or if thereby they only sought some shelter, to cover their poverty
and idleness.

12 And if we will believe Aristophanes, the Pythagoriciens used this
frugalitie and parsimony, rather to make their poverty and necessity
believed, then for any desire or affectation of Virtue; rejoicing (as he
reports) to make good cheer upon other men's purses.

CHAP. XII.
1 That the suggestions and applause of vicious persons near Princes, serve
greatly to change their humors, and consequently to debosbe them. 2 Examples
of Princes who have permitted themselves to be led by these sorts of men;
together with the blindness and stupiditie of some Princes upon the ends and
intents of those vicious fellows. 3 4 How the Prince is betrayed by these
sorts of flatterers. 5 Examples to this effect of Old Clodion. 6 Seianus. 7
Perrinis. 8 Bardas. 9 Advice for Princes not to hear or regard these
flatterers.

1 THe suggestions, flatteries and applause of vicious fellows, who approach
near Princes, do much serve to change and alter their natures.

2 The pride and cruelty of Uitellius, is by Tacitus imputed to these sorts of
men.

3 And Vesp^sian held to be of a good nature, learned to invent and impose new
subsidies, and to oppress his subjects in the Schools of the like Masters;
yea (to use but a word) the greatest number of Princes are commonly changde in
their natures, by the conversation of such vicious servants and ministers, who
to gain favor and credit with them, still lull them asleep with their
greatness, power and riches, the which they the more willingly digest and
embrace, in being sometimes ignorant of the duty of their charge and dignity;
but blinded as they are, they neither see nor consider, that those who flatter
and applaude them, and who make show to approve all their actions and gestures,
do it commonly of purpose to betray them, and to make them hated of their
subjects.

4 The surest way and course to betray his Master, is to second his
covetousness, cruelty or lust and this attempt is free from all danger or
hazard, because the Prince cannot justly condemn his servant, without he
likewise first accuse and condemn himself.

5 He who would restore Clodius (tearmod the Hayr^e) to his Estate, being
banished by the French, assisted by Aegidius, who then commanded Gaul for the
Romans, insinuated himself in the favor of Aegidius, a cruel and covetous
man, and (says the History) he so inflamed and imprinted covetousness and
cruelty in this Roman, whereunto he was excessiuely disposed and adicted,
that the French having sencibly felt it, instantly resolved to call home their
King; this Frenchman his faithful subject finding no surer way to betray the
enemy of his Prince, then to observe and second him in his passions.

6 Seianus to chalk himself out the way to the Empire, after he had caused
Aggripina and her children to be imprisoned, knowing that his Master Tiberius
being weary of the City of Rome, was desirous to retire himself to Caprea;
he persuaded and fortified him to undertake this resolution, to the end, that
whilst his Master soiourned there, he might take authority on him to command
and govern all, as if all depended of him* Tiberius this Interim (as one
writes) being Prince of a little Island, whilst Seianus dominered and playde
the Emperor at Rome.

7 Perrinis having freed himself of those, who might oppose his designs,
under color to find out them which were accessory to Lucilla, who had
conspired against the Emperor Commodus, plunged this Emperor as deep as he
might in delights and pleasures, thereby to intrude upon the government of
affairs, and after to usurp the Estate.

8 Bardas, the Uncle of Mi^hael, Emperor of Constantinople, performed no
less, after he had caused Theo^ostus his fellow Tutor to be slain, and
banished Theodora, the Emperors Mother, persuading this young Prince, that he
himself should govern and rule all; whereunto being very incapable and
improper, Bardas plunged him in vain delights and pleasures, making him
believe, there was no exercise more honorable, then to conduct a Coach; nor no
virtue greater, then to be a skillful Coach man. In which mean time, Bardas
courted, and the peoples affections; and calling near him the learned
Philosophers, and erecting and building Schools for all sorts of Sciences in
Constantinople, he thereby squared himself out the way to have made himself
Sovereign of that Estate, if he had not been prevented by another.

9 I understand not here, to give any man precepts to betray his Prince, but
rather I desire to give this advice and council to Princes, that they take
heed, and look to themselves, and not to believe those, who flatter and
soothe them up in their vices and irrigular actions, affect them better, then
those, who freely contradict and reprove them.

CHAP. XIII.
1 Considerations upon a Prince his domestic Servants, and how we may reap
profit by them: Princes bear themselves differentlie in Private or Public,
and they more willingly discover themselves to their servants, then others. 2
Examples hereon. 3 4 5 In this point its very difficult for a Prince so to
hide and conceal his intentes and motions, that his Servants discover them
not. 6 In Court we seek all sorts of men to effect our affairs. 7 In Court
there are no great friends, nor small enemies. 8 In Court we must seek to
make the Prince his Servants our friends.

1 AS for the Prince his domestic servants, who (when he with-drawes himself
in private) are still near his person, they may do us much good in employing
them, be it to have access to the Prince at some extraordinary hour; be it to
afford their word of favor when the Prince speaks of us, or be it to be
advertised of the ill offices which are intended us: for most Princes are of
one humor and countenance in public, and of another in private, and when they
once repose confidence in these their servants, they then the more willingly
discover themselves to them; being assured, that for the baseness of their
quality, and the obligation whereunto they are bound to them, they dare not
reap profit hereby.

2 Every one knows the power which Claudius his free women had over him, of
which number he so enriched one of them, by name Pallas, as upon complaint the
Emperor made of the necessity of his affairs, he was councelled, that to
enrich himself, he should adopt himself the heir of Pallas: also it was to
her, whom Agrippina adressed her self to have the Emperor marry her: and a
little before, Narcissus being another of this Prince his free women, persuaded
and induced him to put Messalina to death.

3 We also know the power the Eun^ches have had over the Grecian Emperors,
under whom for a time they as it were, governed the Emperor. and without the
aid and assistance of those of the same condition, as also of Constantius his
Grooms of his Chamber: Arbetio, tho ouer-seer of the affairs of the Empire,
being accused by the Earl Verissimus, was in danger to lose his life.

4 Under Batoniates, Emperor of Constantinople, two poor Grooms of his
Chamber, the one termed Borilus, the other Germanus, who wholly governed him,
disgraced Isaac and Alexius Comnenus.

5 But when the Prince discouers and consults his affairs to men of this
rank, it is very difficult for him to keep his mask on his face, and that in
his private motions (the which because they then escape more violently, then in
the public view of the world, they are the more difficultly retaind) we
discover not something of his intents and desires.

6 It is a humor and compliment of the Court, not only to seek all sorts of
men, thereby to advance our affairs, but also to persuade our selves, that as
a man grows in reputation and greatness, so he grows in Wisdom and
Understanding.

The which Arian represents in his Epictetus, by the Example of one
Epaphroditus, and of his two slaves who were advanced, the one to be Groonor of
the Vrinall and Close-stoole to the Emperor; and the other his Shoemaker; both
whom Epaphroditus favored, esteemde, and praised their council and wisdom,
although a little before he had sold them as slaves, as not knowing what to
do with them.

7 Howsoever, we must persuade our selves, that although we find no great
friends in Court, yet that there are there no small enemies, and that every one
may prejudice or profit us, according to his quality and condition.

It was reputed a favor in the Court of Tiberius, to be known of those, who
were doore-keepers to Seianus, whilst he was in credit and authority.

8 It is therefore wisdom to make the Prince his domestic Servants and
Officers our friends, and to yield them all respect and observance, as much as
discretion and judgment permits.

CHAP. XIV.
1 Of the great ones in Court, the sixth Head of this second Book, and that
they are of diverse sorts and degrees. 2 Of those who are of a Noble Blood and
House, and yet not in credit and reputation at Court, and how we^ must bear
our selves toward them. 3 Considerations of them, and what their Power is. 4
The Examples of Archelaus upon these considerations. 5 Other considerations
upon the same. 6 How the Prince his Favorite must bear himself in opposing
great men. 7 The profit which redounds to him thereby. 8 9 Wholesome Advice and
Council for a Favorite. 10 How it must be understood when we say, we contest
and contend with a great man. 11 What it is for a Favorite to oppose the
enterprises of great men. 12 The Example of Cardinal Ximenes, Favorite to
Isabell, Queen of Spain upon this subject, with a brief abridgement of his
life. 13 14 Another Example upon the lamentable end of Simonera, Favorite to
Francis Sforza, Duke of Millan. 15

1 AS for the Nobles and Great Ones of the Court, they are differently to be
considered; for some have nothing else to maintain them but their house, and a
certain hereditarie mark of Greatness and Nobility, without any reputation,
familiarity or acquaintance with the Prince but exempt of authority and
managing of any affairs of the Estate; others have less reputation, but more
authority and employment, and others again have more authority in the
managing of affairs, and more access and familiarity with the Prince.

2 The first are of small consideration for our advancement, nevertheless, we
must bear ourselves toward them very respectively, as well for the discharge
of our own duty, as for fear they molest or offend us, especially since there
may fall out a business, wherein although they cannot assist us themselves, yet
they may pleasure us herein, either by their servants or friends.

3 For those great personages are never without many dependants, who are glad
to please and pleasure them, either for some former courtesy or obligation
which they have received; or for fear of their greatness, or the eminency of
their favors, as well from their Prince as their Fortunes.

4 Archelaus, King of Capadocia, not respecting Tiberius when he retired
himself to Rhodes, afterward repented it: for Tiberius coming to the
Sovereign dignity, reproched and reproved him for this his disrespect and
contempt, and so to revenge himself, caused him underhand to be accused of
another matter, whereof this old man for mere grief died, having not omitted
this respect or duty through disdain, but only purposely to avoid the
jealousy that Augustus might have conceived, because he was not resolved to
show himself a friend to Tiberius, whilst Caius Caesar lived.

5 We must also consider, that these great men are never so de^ected, but they
may commit some evil, if the means for them to do good, be taken from them;
nevertheless if they be any way suspected of the Prince, we must seek out
some pretext to approach them, that may serve to excuse us; if not, let us yet
endeavor, that we make them not our enemies.

6 But where we know, that the Prince his intent in advancing our fortunes, is
to have us assault and confront these sort of Nobles (as it has often fallen
out, that Princes have done the like) then we must do it so circumspectly and
wisely; yea, and with such choice of occasions, that the Commons may judge we
have performed it with reason, and that our Prince may therein likewise receive
satisfaction and content.

And although this profession be dangerous; Neue^thelesse, he who is advanced
by his Prince, purposely for this effect and end, may reap profit and benefit
hereby.

7 The one is, that hereby he authoriseth himself, and that those who are
inferior to these great Nobles, whom he is to assault, will resolve ^o stoop,
and be drawn to strike sail and bow, as fearing to offend the Prince if they
should do the contrary.

8 The other is, that thereby he linckes and ties himself more closer to the
Prince, and if he know how to select important and serious occasions, that tend
to his masters service, the protection of the poor, or the good of the
Commonwealth: he will thereby purchase himself fa^e and praise; and so,
exceedingly increase and augment his reputation.

9 But he must be careful to attempt nothing, except he accomplish it; for
besides that, the Commons judge of most things by the issue thereof, as blaming
him who has lost his suit in law, although it were neuerso just or right: yet
he will thereby greatly hazard his reputation with his Prince; and consequently
the favor he has borne him: who then will be constrained to disa^uow him, to
the end he participate not of the shame, in that this enterprise undertaken
has not succeeded; or if he do aduow him, yet without doubt he will fall into
the hatred and contempt of his subjects; which will then infuse courage into
the hearts, and hopes, of those against whom he derected and bent his malice.

10 When I speak of assaulting and falling foul upon these Great men; I
understand not, that we must challenge or fight with them at single combat:
because, that cannot be performed without troubling the Estate, much less to
proffer them any disgraces or cuill speeches: since that savors of a man of
small, or rather, of no capacity, or judgment; and who does, as it were
surfeit, or is drunk of his good fortune, which has wholly deprived him of his
sense and understanding, which sort of men commonly make no good or fortunate
ends.

11 But, I understand to oppose and assail the designs of Great men, who may
be justly suspected and reputed to have badde and pernicious intents, either
against the Estate, or the Government, or against the order that concerns
either Religion, Justice, Arms, or the Exchequer; and yet so to assail and
oppose them, that there be not descried, or seen in us, any particular
violence or passion, but only a good and zealous desire (as much as may be) to
justify our actions to the most virtuous sort of people, and toward all those
who have any interest to enquire or understand thereof.

12 If I would prepose any one to be immited in this exployt and charge, of all
our Modernes it should be the Cardinal Ximenes, who (as I have formerly said)
was taken into favor and reputation by Isabella, Queen of Spain, to give the
check or mate to the Grandos of that Kingdom, who then were not so obedient as
they now are, having of a Franciscan Friar, made him her Confessor, and since
by the advice and council of the Cardinal of Mendoza, Archbishop of Toledo
after him, wherein he so well demeaned and bore himself, that not only under
Isabella, but since under Ferdinand of Arragon, and since his death, until the
coming of Charles, who was since Emperor, he has been the only Arbitrator
and Moderator of all the business and affairs of Spain, being still so
subtle and wise, as to oppose the Commons, in contentions and quarrels against
the Nobles and Grandos of the Kingdom.

13 And although it has been reported that he was poisoned, and that he
himself believed it; yet this was not true, nor could ever since be found out,
or verified; he himself being exceeding old when he dyed.

14 But the end is more deplorable and lamentable of Cicho Simonera, who had
managed the affairs of the Estate, under Francis Sforza, Duk^ of Millan; and
since, under Galeas his son: and because of his fidelity, was chosen to
oppose against the brothers of Galeas, and so to govern the Estate under the
Widow during her sons minority.

15 Who being constrained to banish from Millan the brothers of Galeas, and of
Robert de Saint Seuerine, to the end to conserve the Estate to his pupil: the
Mother a little after, agreed with them, to the utter overthrow of this poor
honest man, whom most ingratefully she gave and delivered into his enemies
hands.

Who after some time of imprisonment, caused him cruelly to be murdered in the
Castle of Pauia; wherein we may consider, and know, how dangerous it is to
employ our selves for such Princes as are wavering and inconstant: and who for
very small matters disauow, and abandon their Servants and Ministers, to the
merciless mercy of their enemies.

CHAP. XV.
1 Of Great men who are familiar with the Prince, without having any authority
or command in the affairs of Estate. 2 Of their power, and how we must seek
them, and reap profit by them. 3 Of Great men who have authority in affairs,
and yet small access near the Prince: of the inclinations of Princes, under
whom these Great men are. 4 5 Of Princes who give all the Command of their off
^ires to one or two, and of the curb or reine wherewith they commonly
restrain them, thereby to fashion them wholly to his w^ll and pleasure,
without leaving them power to do otherwise, and to dispossess them of his
favor and their greatness when he pleases. 6 How to bear our selves toward
these Great men. 7 8 Of Great men who are in favor with the Prince, and have
authority in the affairs of the Estate, and how we must seek and observe
them. 9 10 We must examine the degreees of Great men's favors, from whom we
may expect assistance. 11 12 And when we cannot make our selves known of Great
men, we must seek those who have some interest or power in them, or are
familiar with them, and so make our selves known to them.

1 THose Great men who are in reputation and favor with the Prince, without
having any authority in the affairs of the Estate, may steed us, if not for
our advancement to the Prince, at least to make us have access to him.

2 They may also cause us to be well reputed and esteemed of him, in commending
and remembering the services we have done, as also to excuse our faults
whereinto we have ignorantly fallen, and to defend us against the calumnies of
the Court: and as in having them to our friends, we may receive many profitable
offices, and pleasures of them, in preparing the way to our advancement,
although it depend not immediately of themselves: yet if they are against us,
they may much hinder and prejudice us, and peradventure retire or estrange us
from the favor of our Prince; wherefore we must respect and observe them, and
by all pleasing means answerable to our rank and degree, endeavor to gain
their favors and affections, and withal to consider, that it is very
difficult for such men's favors and affections to remain long either familiar
or constant: for although the Prince be resolved not to confer the managing
of his affairs to these Great men; nevertheless, upon their recommendation,
he will seldom refuse to advance a man, whom he likewise sees agreeable and
pleasing to him; and whom he knows deserves it: and albeit they cannot
(peradventure) absolutely and wholly perform us this good Office; yet they
make us to be esteemed and preferred before others of the same desert and merit.

3 As for those who have the chief authority and command of affairs, and yet
but small access to the Prince; they are still near Princes, who live in
peace and tranquillity, or who are wholly addicted to their pleasures, being in
that respect unapt, or incapable to govern his affairs, or who neglects to
understand them, relying wholly on one or two Considents, whose company he
commonly auoides, for fear of being importuned with the discourse and relation
of his affairs, which he esteems a kind of subjection only to think of.

4 Under such Princes, it were better seek and court the Servants then the
Master; for as they relate and report the nature and disposition of a
business: so for the most part it depends in them to make choice of those who
must be employed therein, because the Prince not understanding or knowing it,
they know not what Sufficiency or Capaciti^ is requisite to undertake and
perform it.

5 There are other Princes who more vmbragious and jealous of their Estate, and
Greatness, confer the whole authority of their affairs to one or two,
authorizing them in all the functions of their Offices, and yet without giving
them any great access or familiarity; yea, for the most part, they will
neither see nor hear them, except it be to discover or resolve the matters of
their charge and Office, not permitting them to employ others, for fear that
the subordinate power and authority which they give them, take foot, and make
so many servants under them; that if it chance they commit any fault, having
such support, they cannot easily chastise and be rid of them, it being one of
the chiefest points and reasons, that such Princes desire to detain those in
fear who serve them, thereby to make them believe, that with a wincke, and in
a moment, they can ruin those whom they have been many years advancing.

6 Toward these Nobles and Great men, there is much care and difficulty how
to bear and behave our selves; for seeking their good will, it cannot much
steed or serve us: Contrariwise, the Prince most commonly refuses us, if he
know we seek them: and again, not seeking them, it is very hard and
difficult for us to be inducted or admitted to any employments, whereby we are
exposed, and subject to many crosses and accidents which they may occasion and
procure us.

7 Wherefore we must herein bear our selves very discreetly, using much
respect toward them, and if occasion present to signify and testific them our
affection by services and secret offices, unknown to the world, and not
withstanding seek favor and assistance other where, that may be more pleasing
and agreeable to the Prince, thereby to procure our entrance and admittance
near him.

8 As for those who are in great Reput^tion and Credit with their Prince, and
have all the command and managing of his affairs, it is as good for us to
observe, and court them, as the Prince himself.

9 Wherefore we must strive to know their humors and inclinations* and
accordingly conform our selves to them; yea, and in that respect, as much as
to the Prince himself.

10 So then as near as it is possible, we must examine the degrees of favor,
wherein those Great men are with the Prince, who may assist us, and howsoever
they stand well affected to us, yet we must demand or request them nothing,
which we think is not in their power to perform for us: for there is nothing
which so much angers a man, as to be solicited and requested by one whom he
loves, in that which he is constrained to refuse us.

11 For it is a wrong, and offense to the good will which is borne us, to make
it meet and fight either with the inciuilitie, or impossibility of a request:
and as once, a Great man was importuned in a matter, which he either could
not, or ought not do, he afterward hated and feared his presence, who had
formerly importuned him, either for fear of the like request, or for shame,
that he should thereby remarke or know the weakness of his power and
reputation.

12 But he who has not the means to make himself known to Great men, he
must then proceed by steps and degrees, and so endeavor to make himself
known of those who are great and familiar with them, whither they be strangers
or of his own family: yea, we must seek those who depend of them, and
according to this degree of dependancie, obligation, and affection, which they
bear them, we must judge of the power they have to assist and pleasure us.

CHAP. XVI.
1 The seventh head of this Book, of those who are under Great men; of whom,
there are two sorts, one which may assist us, and how. 2 Considerations upon
both, and how to purchase friends in Court. 3 Of th^se who may cross and
oppose us, who are of three sorts. 4 Of those who hate us, and are our enemies.
5 It is a difficult thing to be a neu^er in Court, and of great factions, and
Partialities in the Courts of Princes. 6 How some have withstood and prevented
such partialities, and how they very profitably made use of Neutralitie. 7
Examples upon the wisdom of this Neutra^itie. 8 9 Solon his Law against
Neutralitie. 10 How and wherefore friendships must be conserved among different
parties.

1 AS for others who retain to Nobles and Great men, be they our superiors,
eq^als, or inferiors, we must doubly consider them; for some of them may
assist us, others molest and cross us, and both the one and the other, as well
as Great men, we must weigh and consider, not only the power and reputation
which they have of themselves in that we seek; but also, that of those, who
depend of them, either by consanguinitie, a^liance, affection, or obligation,
there being many things which it were fitter to propose to our friends by
others, who depend of them, rather then by our selves, whither it be to have
our request well esteemed, or else to divert the designs and endeavors of
others, who would prevent or hinder them.

2 But above all we must not stay, or defer to purchase friends till the very
time and point we have occasion to use them, but we must procure and make
them before, and by diverse good and friendly Offices, have lincked and obliged
them to us, as also by many other demonstrations of our affection and good will
toward them.

3 Those who may cross or thwart us, are commonly of three sorts: to wit, ou^
Enemies; our Enuy^rs, or our Competitors who provoked by Emulation, pretend and
aim at the same we do.

4 Those who malign and hate us, because of our selves, or friends, to whom
they are enemies, this last hatred is commonly the least, and may be appeased
and practiced in yielding and gining these Enemies some friendly Office, or
good turn, to testify that we are not so much bound to their Enemies, but
that there is in us some affection denoted to their service.

5 Nevertheless, Partialiti^s and Factions are so common and frequent in
Princes Courts, and the humors and friendships of Great men so inconstant and
tyrrannicall, that it is very difficult for us to live long in this
Neutralitie, at least to perform it openly.

6 For we know, that some have secretly conserved the friendships of the chief
heads of a contrary faction, not to betray him whom they openly follow and
adhere to, but still to subsist, if they should chance fall, esteeming that as
the first is unworthy of a Gentleman, so the last, which has no other end and
intent but his own proper conservation, should not be rejected.

7 It is a point of wisdom which has been practiced not only in
Court-quarrels, but also in those of the Estate: Sye^neses, Co^er^our of
T^rsi^s for the King of Persia, seeming that Cyrus took arms against his
brother Art^xerxes, and not being of power, (without his palpable ruin) to
declare himself against Cyrus, resolved to ^ollow his party, and yet sent his
son to serve Artaxerxes, to the end, by this means to assure himself of
him, if in cause that Cyrus should be vanquished.

8 ^ardas Durus escaping from the hands of the Saracyns, and understanding that
his Enemy Bardas Pbo^u was named Emperor against Besilius, thereby to assure
himself of both Parties, he sought the friendship of Phocas, and yet sent his
son to Basilius; feigning, that he was stolen away, without his consent or
knowledge, to the end, that if Pnocas were vanquished, he might reconcile him
to the Emperor, as indeed it after fell out.

9 Solon, in the division and combustion of the Estate, made a Law, whereby he
forbade Neutralitie; but nevertheless, he understood not thereby, that those
friends who take diverse parties, should renounce their particular friendships
and affections: Contrariwise, the chief aim and foundation of this his Law
was, that those who were friends, and yet of a contrary faction, should seek
by fair and mild means to extirpe, and take away these differences among
them.

10 In the same manner, we may allege, we should conserve the love of his
friends who are of diverse factions, not only in respect of the hope of aid,
and assistance, which we may draw and receive from them in time of our
necessity, and disgrace, but also for their help; in serving toward the
reconciling of the parties, when their humors and affections shall be well
disposed and made capable of atonement, and when a fit occasion presents: it
being the surest and most honorablest way in living among the quarrels and
contentions of Great men* to Court and gain their affections, and as near as
we may to conserve the favor and friendship as well of the one as the other.

CHAP. XVII.
1 Of Enemies who hate us, because they have formerly offended us. 2 A Remedy
against such Enemies, and how to beware of them. 3 That threatenings do more
offend, then profit those who practice them; and that they procure us shame and
weakness, if they take not effect. 4 5 A Discourse against Revenge. 6 How to
bear our selves when we receive injuries, and how to seake the means of
reconciliation and friendship, whether the injuries be fierce and outrageous,
or no. 7 8 9 Of injury done us in an out-brauing and daring manner, and of the
revenge thereof.

1 THose who hate us for our own regard, it is either that they have formerly
offended us, which is a common hatred of Great Men, toward their inferiors,
(whereunto the Italian Proverb has relation that Whosoever offends, never
pardons) or else it is because we have formerly offended the^.

2 To the first sort we must make no show that we are offended; or if the
offense be so great, as it cannot be dissembled and concealed, we must yet
make it appear, that time has swectned and appeased it, yea and made us
forget it: for contrariwise seeming to bear and brook it impatiently, will
occasion him to believe we still retain a desire of revenge; which perceived
and known of him, who has offended us; will again cause him upon all new
occasions, to molest and indomage us as much as possible he can.

3 But we must especially beware not to menace or threaten, if it be not at the
ve^ie inst^^t that we are resolved to revenge our seluos*

4 For besides that by our threatenings, our Enemy is advertised to stand upon
his guard, we do thereby as it were inuit him (as I have formerly said) to
seek and embrace all occasions to do worse, yea we are ashamed there of,
which discouers our weakness and imbecillitie if we cannot make good, or bring
our threatenings to pass.

5 I know that this mildness is not pleasing nor liked of, of all men, and
far less of those who are vindictlue and reuengefull, and who hold that we
must never pack up a wrong or injury, without being sensible thereof: not only
for the content there is in Re^^nge; but also that an injury silently digested
and past away draws on another, and therefore conoludes, that we must be
irreconcilable toward those who offend us. But otherwise, they who are so
irreconcilable endeavoring to make others fear them, do commonly remain
alone without friends, and none will come near or approach them: for every one
being subject to stumble and fail, through passion or want of heed, we fear
to f^equent their companies, least if we should fail or trip in any point or
respect, they will be angry with us; and those who haunt and frequent their
company, perceiving that they have done some thing that is i^ taken of them,
will for ever withdraw themselves from them, and leave those irreconcilable
fellows, as vntained beasts in their solitarines, and well knowing that these,
if they meet any occasion will not fail to molest us, they will thereby
endeavor to prevent it. Wherefore that we may not engage our selves in so many
enmities, I hold it fit to take a contrary course, and so to show that we are
tractable and reconcilable; yea in the greatest inluries and offenses, the
which we must distinguish according to the Motive of those who commit them and
sometimes according to their own rank and quality.

6 For if transported rather with some sudden passion then with malice, they
offer us any wrong which they should not offer us, the injury being not too
impetuous or outrageous, we must make show that we are so far from being
sencible thereof, as we think not thereof; and if it be too too violent and
outrageous, as we must not seem altogether insencible to that which touches
and concerns us, or our honor, so likewise we must not seem to be
irreconciliable, but amidst the discontent which we discover to have received,
we must always give some apparition and testimony of reconciliation, still
leaving a door open to entertain a pleasing and mild satisfaction,
complaining to their friends who have offended us, yea, making them Judges of
the wrongs we have received.

7 But if it be done in an out-brauing or contemptuous manner, then this
domineering impetuosity (if may be) must be suddenly revenged not so much for
the consideration of revenge as to chastise and correct him who has proffered
us the injury, that thereby he may hereafter become more wise and respective as
well toward us, as toward others, to whom he may address himself.

8 Notwithstanding, we must not show our selves irreconcilable, but
contrariwise we must testify, that it is with much grief, that in the
misfortune of this received injury we have gone so far, or that we are
constraind to complain, and to seek and follow satisfaction, which being
given us according to the quality and nature of the wrong we have received,
we make it apparent, that we are again ready to enter into friendship, and so
to become new friends.

9 But if we cannot have this satisfaction in some convenient time, or that he
who has offended us, do repent himself of it, or through submission do
request our favor, we must then again forget our choler, and be newly
familiar with him, taking his seeking of us for satisfaction, and thereby
manifesting the need and necessity he has of us who has formerly so
disdained and offended us.

CHAP. XVIII.
1 Our first remedy against injuries offered us by Great men is to confer
very respectively with them. 2 The second to dissemble patiently. 3
Considerations hereon. 4 5 Of those who are our Enemies, because we have
formerlie offended them. 6 Advice her^n, with consideration and means how to
bear our selves herein. 7 8 That commonly Fear, rather then Revenge more
violently exasperates our enemy against us. 9 How to appease and prevent his
Passion and Violence. 10 Another way is to assist our Enemies in their
affairs* that thereby they may become our friends Example of Agesilaus herein.
11 A common subtlety of Courtiers in this cause. 12 Another fetch and
subtlety of Eutrapellus and what it was. 13 Another fetch against our Enemy
is, to second him in his evil intents, thereby to ruin him. 14 That we must
assist our Enemy if we cannot hinder or anoy him. 15 An excell^nt Example
hereon. 16 An other Example and expedient, to prevent that he wrong us not. 17
Another means for us in pl^guing our Enenemie is, to oppose one that is a
greater Enemy to him then our self; with a very p^r^inent ex^^^ote hereon to
the same effect of Gerlac, Archbishop and Elector of Mentz, upon the election
of Adolphus, Earl of Nassaw to the Empire.

1 ANd because injuries are commonly offered us by greater men then our selves,
the first remedy that we may not enter into those enmities, is to confer and
converse with them, with all manner of respect, without being too familiar or
troublesome, through our importunity to them, and if we find they be too
au^rse and chollericke, then not to frequent them at all, if conveniently we
may avoid it.

2 The second, is patiently to dissemble the remembrance of the offense we have
received, neither is it security or wisdom to present our selves with
defiance or threatenings, in any dispreportioned or preposterous quarrels: for
the power of those whom we have iniustly offended, may therein excuse our
dissimulation.

3 I know that the threats and fears, which we give those that have wronged
and offended us, may occasion them to resolve to seek to be reconciled to us,
which indeed may move some base spirits to a feigned not a firm
reconciliation, and yet if they can, will not under hand omit to wrong us, so
as it being more difficult to secure our selves from a secret then a known
Enemy, it seems more for our advantage and profit that he reconcile not
himself to us, but rather that he be induced thereunto through fear, I
mean those who are not our Superiors, and whose companies we may well avoid.

4 For where the conceit of hatred, that some great one bears us, may much
prejudice our affairs, and diminish our reputation, there a feigned
reconciliation is far better then a public enmity.

5 If we are hated for wrongs we have done, if the wrong proceed from us, it
is then fit for us to seek the means to repair it, either by our selves, or
by the mediation of our friends.

6 But to judge and destinguish which of our enemies may most annoy and
endomage us, after we have considered their power, we must also be very
careful, with what vehemence and passion, besides their hatred, they are
provoked and incited to prevent us.

7 For some in regard of the hatred they bear us, are provoked through desire
of Revenge, others through Fear, that if we once obtain what we seek, we
will annoy and endomage them.

8 And although the desire of Revenge be very violent, nevertheless, Fear
more passionately prouokes our enemy to cross us, and it is far more
difficult to divert him which is provoked with this last motion, then it is he
which is stirred up with the first.

9 For the one by good offices, services, and satisfaction, we may persuade and
compass; but of him who is fearful and doubtful, we can very difficultly be
assured; therefore the best, nay the only way, is to reconcile our selves; and
so through frequenting him, and by friendship, to cause such spirits to
engender and conceive a confident and good opinion of us, wherein we must
discreetly husband and manage all occasions, since we can prescribe our selves
no certain rules.

10 Ageselaus, desirous to be a friend to those who were his enemies, sought
and research'd the means, to advance them to some honorable Offices and great
Commands. wherein in outward appearance, he oblieg'd them to him; but because
it is difficult for them in the execution of these great offices and dignities;
so to content all the world, that they gave none occasion to complain of them:
they were very shortly accused and constrained to have recourse to his favor,
to secure them as well from danger, as disgrace: from which Ageselaus by his
assistance and authority, acquitting and freeing them, he thereby linck'd
them unto him, and so made them become his good friends.

11 And indeed it is a fetch and subtlety, but too frequent and common in
Court, to put out our leg to make a man*fall, thereby to bind and obliege
him to us, in succouring and lifting him up.

12 But there is another final subtlety and wyle, whereof we must be
careful to take heed; and that is that of Horace his Eutrap^ll, who would lend
money to use, give trust and credit for brave apparel, and infuse Vanity and
Courage to those whom he purposed to ruin.

13 Those that applaud and second our appetites, pleasures, choler, and
expenses; who prize and repute us more then we are, making us (beyond all sense
and reason) to undertake things above our strength and power; they for the most
part do it rather purposely to overthrow us, then to delight and please us.

14 But to come to the means which we should observe, to reconcile our selves
to our enemy, if we see we cannot prevent him, from obtaining that which he
intends and pursues: we must then make show to aid and assist him therein,
thereby to bind and obliege him to us.

15 Which subtlety, was indeed practiced by Cardin^ll Ascanio Sforza, who
foreseeing he could not prevent the secret designs and purposes of Cardinal
Julian, who desired to make John P^^it (Son to Pope Alexander VI.) a
Cardinal, did then withal his power employ himself in favor of the said
John, as he held himself more obliged to him for his Hatt, then to Julian,
and so became his friend; and to say truth, it is wisdom to desire that which
we see we cannot prevent, always prescribing and prefixing bounds to our
will, according to our power.

16 And if we cannot by any means gain our enemies, or assure our selves of
them, by making them more flexible toward us: let us then consider in what
degree of enmity we are with them, and if we know any one whom they more
hate or fear then our selves, we will propound it them, or cause some other
to propose it in those things, where there is found a concurrence to make him
go on with the same suit and business, to the end that in comparison and
hatred of that other, either he will favor us, or not so much distaste, and
envy us.

17 And very little different to this, was the manner of Gerlac Archbishop and
El^ctor of Mentz, his proceeding to cause his Cousen Adolphus Earl of Nassaw
to be elected Emperor, whereof the Electors themselves never dreamt; for
understanding and seeing the discord that was among the Princes, who aspired to
the Imperial Diadem and dignity, he broke with many of the Electors
severally; giving Wenceslaus then King of Bohemia to understand that the Mayor
voice of the Electors, tended to make his enemy Albertus, Duke of Austria
Emperor: but if he would give his consent and letter of Attorney to nominate
some other, he would do his b^st to exclude and prevent him; which W^nceslaus
did, naming the Duke of Saxony; to whom he bore in hand that they would elect
the Duke of Brunswicke his Enemy: and to the Count Palatine, that they would
likewise elect his Enemy Wenceslaus King of Bohemia: and so having extorted
their suffrages, commission, and power: from all these Electors, by general
promising them to oppose the election of their Enemies; he, as before,
nominated his own Cousen Adolphus, who in the beginning had been absolutely
excluded, if he had not been nominated.

CHAP. XIX.
1 Of Envious people, the eight part of this Book, and how to bear our selves
toward them. 1 Rem^dies against Envy, to make common that which is envied or
desired. 3 4 Another remedy to avoid Vanity and Superstition, and that which
accompanies it. 5 Considerations thereon. 6 To make our selves entreated to
receive that we wish and desire. 7 Example hereof in Cardinal Ximenes. 8
Considerations upon this Example, by another of Constantine the Mesopolitane.

1 COme we now to see how we must bear our selves toward the Envious; for we
must have much fortunacy and courage to surmount and vanquish Enute, which (as
I have formerly said) is appeased in applying and enjoying that which we
desire, but for as much as we would have that peculiarly for our selves which
we desire, it seems that that may be practiced.

2 Which nevertheless I conceive may be effected, not only in making that
common which we pursue; but in making them know, who desire and covet this good
with us, that it being in our custody and possession, they may receive
advantage, profit, assistance, and the increase of their hopes.

3 Now the means to effect and compass this, is to seek their friendship and
familiarity, and what Envy or Malice we perceive or know they bear us; to
show our selves much affected to them in the place, rank, and quality we
are, to the end they be induced to believe that our Fortunes increasing, it
will be an increasing of means to serve and assist them; wishing them still
that which we desire, if it be a thing pleasing and agreeable to them, and
showing that woe desire it not, but to gratify and pleasure our friends,
especially themselves.

4 It is also a remedy against Envy, to sly and avoid vain supersluitie, as
excessive expenses, Uanitie in apparel, extraordinary and unseasonable mirth,
and not to brave and flaunt it out too prodigally.

5 But these should chiefly take exact and careful heed to all those things
who are descended of a low and mean extraction, and that if either the
pleasure of their Prince, or the dignity of their own office, occasion them
to do otherwise; it shall be then wisdom in them that they are not
voluntarily addicted: but as it were enforced thereunto by their Masters
authority.

6 Wherein the Cardinal Ximenes at the first rising of his Fortunes, bore
himself very discreetly, who being of a base decent, although since many have
reported and written, he was a Gentleman; howsoever being poor, he made
himself a Fransiscan Friar and being observed by the Cardinal Mendoza,
Archbishop of Iol^do that he was learned, and of a sharp and sound Wit; he
upon his recommendation was made Confessor to Queen Isabell of Castile; and
since (by the Council of the said Mendoza) Cardinal; to oppose him against
the Grandos of the Kingdom: and after the death of Mendoza, the said Queen
sued and procured a Bull from Rom^, to make him Archbishop of Taledo; and being
willing to confer it on Ximenes, he purposely re^used it, foreseeing and
judging, that if he accepted this dignity, it would incur and draw on him
the envy of all the Grandos of the Kingdom, and consequently he must needs
faint under the burden thereof.

7 So as in that regard to secure himself, the Queen was constrained to cause
him by many Great personages to be requested to accept thereof, which in the
end after many refusals he did; but yet he deferred along time to augment
either his train or expenses, notwithstanding that many instances were made
him, that this Dignity required an alteration and addition of his pomp, so as
it was requisite the Popes authority and express command should interpose,
whereunto in the end he obayed, and so avoided the envy of a Great and
Illustrious dignity, desired of all the Grandos of Spain and the vanity of
superfluous expenses, which not only equalled but exceeded that of many
Princes.

8 But if this form of Hippocriticall proceeding may serve at the first rising
of a man's fortune, yet it cannot always shelter him from envy, who has
formerly discovered in his inclination and behavior, more Ambition then
Simplicity, no more then it did in one Constantine a Mesopolitane, who being
first expelled the Court of Isaacius A^gelus, and since that of Alexius,
Emperors of Constantinople; and returning with the Empress Euphrosina, made
show that he would no more entermeddle with matters of the Estate; and to the
end to insinuate and persuade it more easily and smoothly, he made himself a
Deacon, thereby to have some pretext and color to excuse himself, and to make
himself to be importuned and prayed; yea, he so ^unningly acted his part, that
the Emperor himself sought a Dispensation for him from Xiphlin, Patriarch of
Co^stantinopl^ whereby he was again permitted and authorized to remain at
Court and to manage the affairs of the Estate as before, notwithstanding the
Decrees and Canons which forbad him, and then he introduced two of his
brothers, who were always nailed to the Emperors ears, whilst he was
dispatching of affairs; but having heretofore discovered and bewrayed his
Ambitious Nature, this his hypocrisy served him not long, for he was again
banished, and after dyed far from Court.

CHAP. XX.
1 Of Competitors or Emulators, who are less malitions then the envious. 2
That they are won and purchased, either through Honor or Vanity. 3 How to
bear our selves with them. 4 5 Public suits are odious. 6 Sure council and
meane^ one these suits. 7 8 We must not be an Emulator or Contendant with one
more fauour^d then our selves: Example of Lepidus and Seianus hereon. 9 That
Justice usually is oflesse power in Court, then favor.

1 THe same course which we observe to secure our selves against the effects of
En^y, we may likewise keep to defend us against Emulation, which has less
then En^y, but more sharpnes of Ambition, which produces no less crosses and
oppositions.

2 Nevertheless, those who are possessed hereof, are sometimes gaind by vain
respect and honor which we yield them, and to deuert them from running the
same race that we do, it will not be amiss or impertinent to give wings to
their hopes, to observe and serve them, and to employ our selves with our best
skill, to imprint in their thoughts, that that which we pursue, is a thing
unworthy of their deserts; and yet such, whereby we are constraind to begin,
since the wealnes of our power can attain and reach no higher; and withal
contrariwise to eleuate and extol their power, sufficiency and merits, as those
who may both hope and deserve a far higher forture.

3 But if we fear they will ourstrip and get the wind of us in any thing we
seek, we must then entertain them with doubts and distrusts of that they
enterprise, alleging reasons Pro and Con, so as nevertheless, that those
things which are opposite to their designs, may still be most preualent, and
bear the greatest sway.

4 But if we can conceal, or desemble out suit, and so make it sure, before
our competitors know thereof, and thereby seek to cross and prevent us, it
will be the very best and shortest way.

5 Those ambitious suits that are publicly followed, do sometimes offend us,
who would aid and assist us, if we proceeded otherwise, who thereby prove more
strange, and the issue thereof, being more incertaine, and attended and waited
on by En^ie, if it fall out according to our desires; or if the contrary, the
refusal is more shameful.

6 It is therefore the surest way to immitate Rowers (or Whirry-men) who turn
their backs to the place where they desire to ariue, as feigning quite contrary
thoughts.

7 I hose likewise who have ambitiously pursued places of Command, have steered
the same course, as seeming to be more desirous of rest, then Honor; (as
Euripides his Agamemnon), and hereby have secured themselves against the
crosses and oppositions which might have befallen the^ in their suits, if they
had been discovered; yea, they thereby have warranted themselves from shame,
which is often incident to those who are deceived, and come short of their
hopes, and the issue coresponding their desires and wishes, has been rather
attributed to their merrits, then their industry.

8 But of one thing we must be very careful, not to concur and meet in one
and the same suit, with a greater and more eminent man, then our selves, under
color of hoping to bear it before him, but rather herein to immitate M.
Lapidus (who^ as I have said, was held by Tacitus for a most iuditious and
discreet Courtier, who being nominated by Tib^rius, with Iunius Blessus Uncle
to Seianus) that one of them should by the Senate be elected Proconsull of
Africa excused himself, by reason of his age, indisposition and children, and
especially by reason that one of his daughters was shortly to be espoused,
refusing herein to contend and wrestle with the power and greatness of
Seianus, who undoubtedly would have proved his enemy, if he had borne this
dignity from his Uncle Blessus, as he might have done, had he not wisely
excused himself.

9 And we should be far less importunate and obstinate in a suit against
one, who is backed by a Prince, or Great Man, that is in favor and credit, and
therefore of great power and reputation, although we have Law and Right of our
side, because in the solicitation of this suit, Law commonly proves the
weaker, as it fell out in the like, which Germanicus and Drusus made to have
Platerius Aggrippa, Prator, who prevailed and bore it in Senate against the Law.

CHAP. XXI.
1 The deuison of this second Book, containing considerations upon the
examples of those who have been disgraced at Court. 2 The c^^^se^ of our
fair^^r, and of the deminishing of our reputation in Court. 3 Off^^^r
proceeding from a Courtiers own default. 4 Enterprises attempted by Fauorits
against their Prince, being the true and first cause of their ruin. 5 Advice
and precaution for a Favorite to support himself. 6 The description of
Courtier in the Example of Seianus. 7 8 The issue of Seianush Ambition. 9
Considerations of his Ambition, and of Tiberius his proceedings, being ^ore
subtle them himself. 10 11 Ambition is commonly rash and impudent. 12
Tiberius sounded the affections of his great ones, before he e^terprised any
thing against Seianus. 13 The subtlety of Tiberius to intrappe Seianus. 14 15
Those who stand betwixt Hope and Fear, are more irresolute, and easy to be
surprisde. 16 The policy of Tiberius to ruin Seianus. 17 18 19 The downfall
and ruin of Seianus. 20 21 Another Example of the downfall and ruin of
Perrinis, being fauorits to the Emperor Commodus. 22 The designs and
machinations of a Subject against his Prince, very seldom take effect, how
cu^ningly soever compacted. 23 The example of Boylas, being fauorito to the
Emperors of Constantinople, and his designs, etc. 24 25 26 27 A Subjects
Pride is always odious to his Prince.

1 THese are the chiefest consider^tions which he must observe, who desires to
advance himself in Court, and the remainder should proceed from himself, I
mean, from his own Judgment, Carriage, and D^xterity: and although these
considerations may steed and serve him; nevertheless he may draw some fruit
and profit from the Examples of those Courtiers; who are formerly fallen into
disgrace, and in knowing that which has crossed and afflicted others, thereby to
make himself the more disposed, capable and ready, to avoid and prevent his
own, or at least to be the better prepared and armed to encounter it, the
last being no less necessary then the first; because the first commonly tends
to an unprofitable effect, and the last to sweeten and diminish a fall, which
many times is (almost) infallibly subject to those whom Fortune has advanced
and pearcht aloft in Court.

2 Disgrace, or the diminishing of our Reputation toward our Prince, proceeds
either from our own default, the malice of our Enemies, or Emulators, the
malicious or inconstant Nature of our Prince, or from his death.

3 The behavior and actions of Courtier^, are full of defects and
imperfections; but those are more subject to them, who esteem themselves far
advanced and elevated above others, and who have purchased and obtained not
only this point, that none dare oppose or contradict them: but also through
their Greatness and Author^ties, to enforce those who frequent them, to
approve the faults and errors they commit.

4 All Enterprises against the Estate, or Prince, are Just causes of his
Indignation, against him whom he has admitted and advanced into his favor:
because it proceeds of Iusidelitie and Ingratitude, and consequently is the
truest motive which he can have to ruin him.

5 Wherefore he whom Fortune has advanced, must take great care and heed, that
he bring not his Prince into this conceit and belief of him, and to this
effect to avoid the research and seeking of plurality of Offices and Honors,
which may give him some shadow, jealousy, and suspicion hereof.

6 Seianus is (by Ualeius Paterculus) represented and reported to be one of the
wisest, and most judicious Courtiers of Tiberius his Court, and indeed it was
requisite for him to be so, thereby to mainetaine himself and bear up his
greatness and fortunes, near a Prince so subtle, and withal so vmbragious
as was Tiberius.

7 He was (faith he) always in action, but so as it seemed he was still in
tranquillity and repose, doing all things without pain or constraint, glorying
in nothing, but effecting and compassing all matters, esteeming himself
little, and far inferior to the opinion conceived of him, seeming could, and
stayed in his visage and countenance, but of a vigilant and watchful spirit,
not given to sleep, but in the end his Ambition bore him to seek Liuia (the
widow of Drusus) in marriage, to the end that hereby entering into the line of
the Cas^rs, this marriage might s^rue him as a ladder to mount to the designs
he had against the Estate; and although he endeavored to make the Emperor his
Master consent thereunto, yet he might apparently perceive, that this his suit
was suspected of him, as well by the delay he demanded to advise and consult
thereof, as by the speeches he gave him to dissuade him from it: But all this
notwi^hstanding he los'd not his ambition and envy to authorize himself by
other means to effect and compass it.

8 For seeing that Tiberius disliked his residence in the City, he endeavored
and resolved to make him withdraw himself to the Island of Caprea; hoping by
this means to diminish the Jealousy, which his Master might conceive of the
flocking and resort of the Great ones to him in Rome, as also of the E^u^e
borne him, and thereby to increase his reputation and power; since all affairs
were to pass through his hands; and all Letters through those of the Guard,
over whom he commanded, it being in his power to give or deny entrance to whom
he pleased; whereby in short time, under pretext to ease and comfort the
Empero^rs age and weakness; he usurping and taking the charge and
superintendance of all the affairs of the Estate, purchased as it seemed a
firm and powerful authority.

9 But having to deal with a wise and prudent Prince the event showed, that
his designs were more dangerous then profitable for him, the circumstances
whereof I hope will not be impertinent here to insert, to the end that our
Courtiers may be better advised, and experienced in the conduction of their
Fortunes, and Princes more discerning and discreet in the dispensation and
destribution of their favors.

10 Tib^rius supported the Actions of Seianus, until by his art and policy,
he was assured of Agrippina, Nero, and Drusus, wherein he employed himself
more earnestly and willingly, because thereby he assured Tiberius against the
suspicions he conceived, and by the service which he performed him herein,
thought he had engaged himself deeper in his favor; and contrariwise, that
thereby his power was, and would become more formidable, and his hopes to
attain the Empire more certain, there remaining none of the Blood of the
Caesar's, but young children, who were so far from hindering his ambitious
designs, as they rather served for bridges and plancks to pass on to the
Soueratgntie, and so to establish himself by seazing of their persons, and
under the veil and cloak of their names, to continue the managing of all
public affairs, until he had provided and settled his own private.

11 But as most commonly Ambition is indescreet, inconsiderate, and rash; so he
considered not, that the nearer he was his mark, he thereby gave and
administered the more cause of suspicion to an vmbragious and diffident Prince,
and that to maintain himself in his favor, he ought rather seek to deminish
then increase his power, which he omitted: for wanting nothing but the Title of
Emperor, which some of his adherents and Partisans already gave him, and the
power and authority of Tribune. which the Emperors had united to themselves
(to the end under the Title of this dignity to make themselves Sovereigns) he
more and more of all sides and hands sought to augment and increase his power,
the which in the end made him seared of all men and apparently and vehemently
suspected of his Master.

12 Tiberius seeing that Seianus had not onelic gained his Guards, but also his
Pretorian Regiments and Cohorts, and a great number of the Senators and
chiefest Families of Rome, some by gifts, others by hopes, and others through
fear, and that his own Followers and domestic Servants reported to S^ian^s
all that he either spoke, or did, and none dared return or relate him what
Seianus did or spoke: he resolved before he undertook any thing, severally to
sound the affections of his Nobles and Courtiers, to the end he might thereby
know both whom, and whom not to trust, in that he was speedily resolved to
perform and execute.

13 And the better to finish his plot, fearing lest Seianus should suspect it,
he made him Consul, stiling and tearming him his Companion and Friend, in all
his Letters which he wrote either to the people or Senate; which continuing a
while, he feigned himself dangerously sick, to the end he might thereby
know who rejoiced or sorrowed thereat, but chiefly to observe the countenance
and hopes of Seianus and his confederates.

14 So, sometimes he wrote from Caprea, that he was reasonable well recovered,
and that shortly he would be at Rome; in some of his letters praising, and in
others dispraysing him; in others preferring and advancing some of his servants
upon his letters of recommendation, and then disgracing and sleighting others,
that he might hold him betwixt Fear and Hope.

15 Thus the honor and favor wherein S^ianus saw himself, restraining him to
atempt any thing, which with one blow might solely ruin and overthrow his
affairs, hoping that in a very short time he should be able to dissipate and
deface these triuial discontents, and yet notwithstanding those who more
narrowly considered T^b^rius his diversity and inconstancy in his opinions,
and who were not so fast linck'd to ^^a^us as to his Fortune, began by little
and little to withdraw themselves from him, and some to make less esteem of
him then before.

16 But Tiberius fearing that this contempt would make this ambitious spirit,
resolve to set on foot, and give fire to his pernicious designs and
enterprises, gave out in all places, that he would give Seianus the authority
of Tribune, to the end he might surprise him with more case and facility; and
a little after writes to the Senat^ to constitute him prisoner; the bearer of
which letters was Macro, Captain of his Guard, who as soon as he came to
Rom^, before day imparted this business of the Emperors command to M^mius
Regulu^, then Consul (the other Consul being a Partisan of S^ianus) and to
Gr^cinus Laco Captain of the Watch, who coming in the morning to the Palace,
to present Tiberius his letters, he met with Sei^nus, who greatly troubled,
demanded him, if he had any letters for him from the Emperor, who the better
to assure himself of him, very secretly whispers him in the ear, that he had
brought him the power of ^^^^; whereat Seianus rejoicing very chearefully
enters the Senate, and Macro gave the Praetorian soldiers (who had followed
Seianu^) to understand the command which he had from Tiberius, to cause them
to retire to their Camp, showing them the letters, wherein there was some
sums of money promised them; and so in their steads placed the Companies of
the Watch: which done, he enters the Senate, presents his Letters, and then
instantly again withdrew himself before they were opened, when having
commanded Laco to keep a strong and vigilant Watch, to prevent that S^ianus
should not escape, or stir up sedition, he tripps away to the Pretorian Camp,
to make good, and contain them in their duties.

17 The Letters which Tiberius wrote to the Senate were very long, thereby to
give leisure to Macro, to take order for the execution of all that was
ordained; yea, they were artificially pend and composde; the beginning spoke
not of Seianus, but of many other affairs; then followed a light and brief
complaint against him; then they went on to other business, and again
followed another complaint against Seianus; nevertheless (as the former) very
short and brief, then among other matters Tiberi^s commanded them to punish
two Senators, who were Seianus his friends; and lastly, that they should seize
his person, without speaking or mentioning his death, to the end to give him
hope to acquit and purge himself of those complaints and accusations framde
against him, which notwithstanding in outward appearance were triuiall, and
seemde to be of small consequence and importance.

18 The letters being read, many of those present, and who had accompanied
Seianus to the Senate, seeing no mention therein made of the Off^ce of Tribune,
began to rise, and to inuiron him of all sides, that he might not escape, the
which it is credible he would without doubt have done, if the letters had
spoken more severely, but observing nothing th^rin, which might give him cause
of fear, he remained firm in his seat, from whence Memi^s Regulus having
twice or thrice assomoned and called him, he rose up, not (as Dion writes) that
through pride he refused to do it at the first, but because till now he was
not used and accustomed to obey, and so was followed by Laco, Captain of the
Watch.

19 When Regulus likewise rising, being accompanied with the other S^nators and
Magistrates led him forth the Court, and so conducted him to prison, where he
was condemned by the Sena^e to be thrown down a high Rock, or Precipice,
commonly called the Gemonien Ladders.

20 Here ye see the fall of one of the expertest and powerfullest Courtiers of
elder times, wherein we must not attribute or impute so much wisdom and
conduction to the Emperor Tiberius, (who nevertheless showed herein much
circumspection) as to his power, who alone without all or any of these forms
and fashions might easily have ruind him.

21 Which the Emperor Commodus (by far less cunning then Tiberius) showed in
the person of Perrennis, who took the same course that Seianus did, and who
having to deal with an idle Prince, might have promisd himself a better issue
of his treachery and conspiracy.

22 I know that in such attempts and enterprises, every one thinks himself
more subtle then his companion, and that he has a particular art to
accomplish his designs; yea, many have conducted it to the very last point of
execution, as did Boylas under Constantine Monomaque, Emperor of
Constantinople, who had very fortunately managed and conducted his enterprise;
yet he had not escapt the punishment, which the like undertakers had
vnder-gone, had he not met with a more gracious and mild Prince, who easily
remitted and pardoned his offenses.

23 This Example shall suffice to inform us, that in such persidious actions,
that which is hid from men, God reueales, by means whereof we neither think
nor doubt; and what cunning soever a subject seems to have against his
Sovereign in the like designs or enterprises, he nevertheless runs a
sharp and dangerous hazard, not only to ruin his Fortune* but many times
himself.

24 This Boylas was a man whom truly this Prince could not suspect, not only
because he had obliged him to him, in res^ect of the former friendship he bore
him, but also because he had many defects in him, which made him incapable of
Ambitious attempts and enterprises; for besides that he was of a base descent,
he could not speak without stammering; yea, and so grossly, that he could
very difficultly be understood; and because he saw, that the Prince his
Master delighted to hear him speak so, he aided this his imperfection, and so
from thence very foolishly affected and practiced it.

25 Through which folly of his, he became so familiar with the Emperor, that
neither the place where his Concubines were pent up, nor his own Closet were
shut to him: But in fine, being enriched and made Senator by the Prince his
Master* he aduanc^d and lifted up his hopes higher, and so most ungratefully
and treacherously undertook to murder him, and to seat himself in his
throne: the which he first discovered to those whom he knew hated the
Emperor, giving them great rewards and promises who approved and adhaered to
his designs, and who engaged themselves to assist and aid him: and to those
who disliked his project, he highly praised them; showing them that what he
had proposed them, was but to try and sound their sidelities toward the
Emperor, whom he would not fail to acquaint therewith, and likewise exhorted
them to persevere in this their loyalty and duty.

26 So managing his business in this manner, he was along time undiscovered of
either parties, and those of his faction assured themselves that his plot would
take effect, which if one of his confederates had not revealed it and caused
him to be watched and taken with the manner, having his sword ready in his
hand to strike his Prince, he had indeed perpetrated and finished his treason,
when being surprisde and taken, the Emperor caused some of his adherents to be
punished, and contented himself only to banish Boylas.

I should be very prolixious, here to relate all the Examples of Great men who
have suffered shipwreck at Court, not only for the like enterprises, but for
jealousy and suspicion of conceiving the like: I will therefore at present
content my self with those few I have already alleag'd.

27 And will conclude this point, that in what sort soever, a Courtier shows
his Pride against his Prince, either in Ambition, Presumption, Reproaches,
Ill-speeches, Superfluious pomp, or Extraordinary train; he assuredly runs
an immenent danger and hazard, to ruin and overthrow, both his fortunes and
himself.

CHAP. XVI.
1 The tenth division of this Book, containing the causes of disgrace, near
the Prince. 2 The first cause is of boasting, and reproaching, our services
done; with Examples hereon. 3 4 The second cause is, to reprou^ or complain of
the Prince his actions. 5 The third cause is, to reveal and abuse s^cresie,
and to desire to make known we govern the Prince; Example of Thurinus, a
seller of smoke, under the Emperor Heliogabalus. 6 The fourth cause is, not
to contend with Nobles, or Great men, either through Pride, or Vanity; example
hereon of Plantianus 7 Example of Enguerrand of Marigny. 8 The fifth cause is
to be an Instrument of Division among the Nobles, with an Example thereon.

1 PHilotas and Clytus overthrew themselves under Alexander, for boasting and
reproching their services; And Craterns was not so welcome, nor beheld with so
gracious an eye, as formerly he had been, for not containing himself within
the terms and bounds of a Generous Modesty.

2 It is recorded, that Sylius tuined himself in this manner under Tiborius,
and that syllas, General of King Aggrippas troops (as reports Josephus) for
reproaching his Master, lost the fruit of all his former services. Antonius
Primus likewise overthrew his Fortune and Reputation through the same Uanitie.

3 For Princes believe that thereby we deminish some part of their happiness,
which they hold is united to their persons, and not to the valor, sufficiency,
or merit, of their subjects.

4 It is Indiscretion proceeding from Arrogance, either to reprove the actions
of our Prince, or to complain too boldly to him. Eumenes complaining to
Alexander, that Heph^stion with his rabble of Fools and Iesters, took up the
houses that should be given to Soldiers, and speaking too freely herein,
went near to have been disgraced and discarded.

5 Likewise to abuse the private will and inclination of a Prince, and to
delight to show that we wholly order and dispose his affairs, still sauoureth
of Pride, although some do it through Vanity, and others through
Covetousness: as Zoticus under that monster Heliogabalus; who yet had better
fortune then Thurinus under Alexander (the son of Mammea) as a Sergeant
reported who was present and assisted at his execution; His History is thus:
He made all the Court believe that he governed his Master, vainly attributing
all affairs which the Emperor undertook or enterprised to his own advise
and counsel: and selling liberalities; yea, those in the pursuit and purchase
whereof he had neither share nor interest.

6 But to come to that sort of Pride, which is aimed and leuelled to Princes
and great Nobles, who are subjects to Sovereigns, one of the most remarkable
examples for Audacitie, Vanity, and Insidelitie, is that of Plantianus, whose
impudent boldness was so great, and with all so sottish, as he slighted and
maligned Bassianus the Emp^rour his Masters son, who had raised him to that
greatness wherein he lived; yea, such was his Vanity, that passing the City,
not only none dared come near him; but also he sent some of his people before,
to make those retire from the places and streets where he should pass, and
withal defending, that none should be so bold to look him in the face.

But in the end, this vainc blindness brought him to Infidelity, which made
him conspire against the Emperor his Master; for which treason, he lost his
life.

7 We likewise know what danger and disgrace Enguer^and of Marigny fell into,
during his Greatness under his Master King Philip the fair, for contending
and opposing himself against Charles of Uallois.

8 Neither must we make our selves Instruments and Incendiaries to sow
sedition, or set fire, betwixt Princes, who always agree at the proper cost
and charge of those who made them Enemies; and among other examples, we read
one in the History of Bauaria, of Otho Crondofer, the Favorite of Raoul, Count
Palatine of Rhyne, who having stirred up contention betwix^ his Master and the
Lady his Mother; they afterward agreeing, in recompense of his Villainy, caused
his tongue to be torn off, and his eyes to be put out.

CHAP. XXIII.
1 That we must not contend with those who are more favored in Court then our
selves. 2 The Council of Germanicus to Aggripina hereon. 3 A Courtier must
know in what degree of favor be is with his Prince. 4 The Courtier who is
lincked to the will of his Prince, is better beloved then he who is wedded to
his Interest, Dignity, or Reputation, Example hereof in the quarrel of
Craterus, and Hephestion, and the wisdom of Alexander i^ reconciling them. 5
Considerations upon the degrees of favor, which the Courtier has in his
Prince. 6 Our contempt of Favorites is more revenged them toward the Prince. 7
The Reason of this consideration yielded by Dion the Historiographer.
1 But it is not enough for us not to contend or contest with Great Noble men,
but we must also take heed, not to offer it to those who are more in Favor at
Court then our selves, neither to tax nor repine at their advancement.

2 It was the advice and Council which Germanicus (on his deathbed) gave
Aggripina not to provoke those Great men who are in Credit and favor, the
which she not following, occasioned the ruin of her self and children.

3 Wherefore it is most necessary for a Courtier to know in what degree of
favor he is with his Prince in comparison of others, and not to judge so much
of exterior shows as by the causes of their favor.

4 Craterus and Hephestion for a time seemed to be equally in Credit with
Alexander, who termed Craterus the Kings friend, and Hephestion, Alexanders:
wherein notwithstanding Craterus might well observe, that Princes most commonly
are more subject to their wills and inclinations, then they are for that which
is requisite for the Dignity of their Office and Greatness, that he likewise
who affects his Dignity, if he be beloved of the Prince, is yet less beloved
of him then he who does affect, and wholly tie himself to his Person which
more nearly concerns the Prince then his Dignity, and if in the quarrel of
Craterus and Hephestion, which divided all the Court; Alexander bare himself as
a Neutre, reproving sharply both the one and the other, and equally threatening
to punish them, if hereafter they continued their contentions: it was rather a
point of his Wisdom and Judgment to quench this quarrel, and the slames
which this division would have enkindled if it had continued then any way a
witness of his equal affection toward them: publicly reproving Hephestion
to diminish the Enuse was conceived against him; and Craterus privately, to
avoid that the greatest part of the Macydonians who were for him, might not be
incensed and offended, which indeed is the true rule and order that Princes
should observe in the like accidents.

5 But to come to the consideration of the degree of favor which we are in
under our Prince in comparison of others: it is observed, it was one of the
first saults which Anto^^ius Primus committed (whereof we have formerly
spoken) to emulate and contest against Mucianus, without considering and
observing that he was more in favor and reputation with Uespasian, and whom
Tacitus reports, it was more dangerous to disdain and discontent, then
V^spasian himself.

6 And it is a matter apparently known in all Courts: that contempt conceived
against the Favorites of Princes, are commonly more revenged then those we
offer the Prince himself: whereof Dion gives reason and instance speaking of
Se^anu^.

7 For as those, says he, who enjoy some Dignity through their ow^e virtues
and merits, they do not curiously affect and hunt after those vain respects
and ceremonies, which are commonly used and yielded in Court toward Great
Personages: so those who hunt after honors to ouer*vaile their low descent and
condition, do very impatiently bear, and esteem it an in^urie offered them,
when that respect is not given them, which the rank of the Prin^es favor
toward them deserves: From whence it follows that it is more difficult to
entertain and maintain friendship with these, then with the Prince himself;
who in pardoning injuries, may increase and augment his reputation; whereas
these believe, that in doing the like, it will be reputed and attributed to
be fear and weakness in them, and that there is no better means to
demonstrate and settle their power, then to pursue and chastise those who
forget themselves and their duties.

CHAP. XXIV.
1 Pride in the execution of an Office is odious to a Prince, who often
punishes it; the Example of Aluaro de Luna bereon. 2 The sixth cause of a
Courtiers disgrace, is the hatred of the Commons, and the envy of Great men
against him. 3 The examples of unfortunate Favorites who have been put to
death. 4 5 6 Insidelitie is the seventh cause of a Courtiers disgrace. 7 It is
very difficult to know the secrets of a Prince. 8 The censure of Phillipides,
on those who reveal their Princes secrets. 9 The opinion of Hieron, Prince of
Syracush hereon.

1 PRide is not only insupportable toward Great men: but also, it very often
overthrows these who practice it toward those of a meaner rank and
condition: Aluaro de Luna, bastard of Arragon was so highly beloved and
favored of John King of Arragon, that this King, out of his own free will and
pleasure, stole out of the hands of his Grandos, purposely to commit his Person
and Affairs soly to him, in the managing and conduction whereof, he bore
himself so imperiously and insolently, that he caused a Gentleman to be
thrown out at window, who from the King spoke some thing to him which he
distasted; in recompense whereof, the King afterward caused him to be
beheaded, and so chastised the pride of this Ambitious Prince.

2 Another cause of a Courtiers disgrace, is when through his lofty carriage,
he incurres the hatred of the Commons, or of the Nobles, either against
himself, or the Prince his M^ster; for then either his Master is resolved to
be rid of him, or other Courtiers to ruin and overthrow him.

3 Commodus was constrained to put Cleander to death, who governed all his
affairs under him, to appease the fury of the Citizens of Name, against whom
Cleander had armed the Emperors guard.

4 Eutropius the Favorite of Arcadius, being the cause of the revolt of
Tribigildus, was by his Master abandoned to his en^mies, thereby to pacifice
them.

5 Commodus being hated for excessiuely loving and a^fecting Aternus; the
Emperors chiesest servants resolved one night, when this young man was
retourning to his lodging to surprise and kill him, as they did.

6 Infidelity in bewraying the secrets of our Prince, and to be of
intelligence with his enemies, is also one of the most just and infalliable
causes of a Courtiers ruin: and yet o^e of the most common delicts and faults,
that is committed as well through Leuitie, Indiscretion, and Vanity, as through
Treachery.

7 For the first, I say, that the greatest point of Wisdom in a Courtier, is
not to insorme himself of his Princes secrets, and not to intru^e himself, or
to be too busy to understand them, except in presence of others; because if it
happen we are alone when the Prince acquainteth us therewith, and that through
discourse drawn from the Condition or Estate of affairs, there run a report
which in many points come near it, presently the ^^^^ will suspect ye to have
revealed it, and to be the Author thereof; or it may also happen, that the
Prince having disclosed the same matter to another; either, whether he remember
it, or whether he esteem the other to be more secret then your self, although
he, I say, do reveal it, yet the Prince may suspect you to be guilty thereof
rather then the other.

8 Phillipides (the Comicke Poet) being more favored and beloved of King
Lyssimachu^ then any of his Courtiers, being on a time demanded by the said
King, whereof he was desirous to have any part, made this answer: Of any thing
you please, so it be not of your secrets * showing thereby that he who may
avoid it, should not entrust and charge himself with those things that are so
difficult and dangerous to retain: neither to be no more curious to know and
understand them from those to whom the Prince imparts them, then from the
Prince himself.

9 Hieron, Prince of Syracusa, said; that those who revealed the secrets of
Princes, did not only wrong the Prince, but all others to whom they revealed
them: for the knowledge of their secrets, offending them, as much for the
regard of the one, as the other: Princes most commonly hate them both alike.

CHAP. XXV.
1 Intelligence with his Masters Enemies, is the eigth cause os a Courtiers
di^grace. 2 Example of Cardinal Balue hereon, his descent and advancement. 3
Example of Cardinal du Prat, and his subtiliy. 4 Example of a Cardinal of the
Emperor Fredericks 5 Another example of Stilico.
1 THe fortunes have been no more firm and secure of those who either through
Cou^tousnesse, or Ambition (or to make friends of all sides) have had
intelligence with their Masters Enemies, whether Domestickes or Strangers.

2 The Cardinal Balue (who of a Tailors son, was by Jews XI. of France made
Thr^sorer; of ^ ^res^rer, Bishop, and since obtained a Cardinals Hat of Paul
II, which was granted him partly at the Kings request, and partly to gain and
prevent him that he should perform no bad Offices to his Master as formerly
he had done) was discovered to have intelligence with the Kings enemies: for
which delict and crime of his, the King caused him to be imprisoned in the
Tower of Loches, where he remained twelve years, and had not been freed from
thence, but at the instant request and mediation of Pope Sixtus IV.

3 Cardinal du Pra^st, for the like enterprises and conspiracies in the time
of Francis the first of France, falling into disgrace, ran the same fortune,
and had not been released, but that the King feared the Pope would be offended
if he had dyed of a retention of Vryne; whereof he made all his Physicians
believe he was dangerously sick, and yet only occasioned by drinking of his
own Urine, which he performed so closely, that none could perceive it.

4 Peeter De Uignes, chief Councellor to the Emp. Frederick II. escaped not
so cheap: for being suspected to have Intelligence with Pope Alexander III,
his masters enemy: his eyes were pulled out.

5 The death of Stilico is atributed to be not only for the design he had to
seize the Empire of the East for himself, the execution whereof was yet far
distant; but also for the strict Intelligence, he had with Alaric King of the
Goths, with whom he had made a shameful peace for the Emperor, contrary to
the advice of all his Council, especially of Lampidius, who then told him,
that this Treaty was not a Peace, but an Indenture of slavery and servitude,
since the Emperor was bound to pay Tribute to the Goths under the title of a
Pension.

CHAP. XXVI.
1 The ninth cause of a Courtiers d^sgrace is, when he is the Author of
pernicious Counsel. 2 The Examples of Stilico, and Olympius. 3 The
Court-Fauorite should rather council Peace th^n Wait. 4 Exampl^s hereon, and
the subtlety of Iouius to engage his M^st^r ^^ War, and yet ^o free himself
from Envy.
1 A Courtier must likewise be very cautious and circumspect in being the
Author of a Council, the issue whereof is doubtful and dangerous: for
although it succeed according to his expectation, yet it shall be then
attributed to the Prince; or if the contrary, then he that gave the counsel
shall be taxed and condemned, and not only by the Commons, who judge of all
matters according to their Events; but also, by the Prince, who will be very
glad to cast and retort the the aspersion and Envy of evil counsel which he
has followed, on him who gave it him.

2 Before and after the death of Stilico, the Peace he by his own advice) made
with Alaric was taxed and blamed, which gave occasion to Olympius (who was the
Instrument employed by Honorius to make away Stilico) to resolve to oppose it;
and having then all authority in affairs, he caused the Peace to be disolued
and broken, notwithstanding many reasonable conditions proposed and proffered by
Alaric, engaging by this means his Master in a wa^re, whose issue not
answering his expectation, it was a matter both easy and pleasing to the
Eunuchs near the Emperor to accuse him, as being the Author of all the
miseries where with the Estate was afflicted, in such sort as he was enforced
and constraind to abandon the Court, and to fly into Dalmatia.

3 It is a Masters, yea, a Prince his Prize, either to resolve on War. or to
break a Peace, and that which his subordinate Minister should perform, is to
dilate and propose him reasons Pro and Con, without making choice, or
preferring either, and if he be constrained thereunto, without great
necessity, or an evident pro^it to the contrary, that of Peace will be
always the more sure, since their dangers and inconveniences are still smaller,
and of less number.

4 In which consideration Iouius succeeding in power and favor to Olympius
under the Emperor Honorius, although he desired the continuation of the war
against Alaric, thereby to make himself necessary to his Master (the frequent
subtilty of the greatest part which profess this Art) made show to desire
peace; and so speaking face to face with Alaric at Rimini he sent Honorius the
Articles proposed of either side, and by a private Letter advised him to declare
Alaric General of his Armies, to the end that being flattered and deluded by
this offer, he might cut off a great part of his other demands.

Whereunto the Emperor answering, that he held it not fit to give this command
either to Alaric or any of his; he only authorized Iouius to grant him his
demand of victuals and pensions for the Goths, as he should conceive and
think fittest.

Iouius read this letter to Alaric, who grew so choleric to see the small
esteem the Emperor made of him, and his Nation, that he absolutely brake the
Peace; and Io^ius likewise seeming to be incensed hereat, returned toward the
Emperor his Master, swearing that he would neither make contract nor any thing
with Alaric, and caused al his followers to take the same oath, among who^ he
was the foremost; and so by this manner of proceeding, dischargd himself of the
taxation and and aspersion of this breach, both on his Master and on Alaric,
oblieging Aleric by the demand he made to have him General of the Emperors
forces, and by the same subtlety and invention, engaged his Master to continue
the wars, which made him more necessary, and thereby exceedingly settled and
confirmed him in his authority and favor.

I should make this discourse swell far greater, if I would here undertake to
produce all those, who by their own particular faults and errors, have been
dejected and put off their Princes favor, and when I should here produce them,
yet we may find out many other faults that may occasion the same effects, which
because they are infinite, we must leave to the judgment and discretion of
Courtiers to beware thereof, and how they should wisely bear, and carefully
conduct themselves herein to prevent and anoyde it.

CHAP. XXVII.
1 The eighth division of this Book, containing a Courtiers disgrace, procured
and occasioned three manner of ways, by our Enemies, Enuyers, or Emulators. 2
First, by absenting him whom we would disgrace, which is effected many waie^. 3
To avoid quarrels without pretext of an honorable Commission: Example on this
Pretext. 4 To avoid Envy and Jealousy; Example of Tiberius, who withdrew
himself ^^ Rhodes. 5 Or of our selves by the command of ex Prince. 6 Or when
we will withdraw one from an Office who is far off. 7 Examples hereon. 8 9
To cause him to be sent far off. thereby more easily to calumniate him in his
absence. 10 Or to cause him to be made away in some enterprise: Example hereon.
11 Another Example hereon.

1 LEt us speak of a disgrace, or of the deminishing and eclipsing of our
reputation procured us by our Enemies, Enu^ers or Emulators, who commonly
practice one of these three means, either to cause us from Court, under color
to employ us other where, to make us suspected and odious to our Prince, or
else to solicit and persuade our Prince to enforce us from Court, and so to
discharge us of our attendance.

2 We may be absented the Court, either by diverse means, or to different ends:
for some have caused this absence to be approved, and liked of, by proffering
us an honoura^le Office far off, or by some occasion, wherein we desire to
be employed, thereby to assist and serve our friends, as that which was managed
by Styppiota under the Emperor Emanuel Comnenus, to put off and expel John
Hagiotheodorita his Companion and Colleague, from the managing of affairs, who
had therein more reputation and authority the^ himself: for there arising a
difference between Michael P^lcologus and Joseph Balsamon, Styppiota, advised
and persuaded the Emperor to send Hagiotheodorita (Balsamons Brother in Law)
with a power to govern Peloponessus, and by this means to appease their
differences: whereunto Hagiotheodorita willingly condescended, and the sooner,
because he desired to ay do and assist his Brother Balsamon, without
considering, that in his absence Styppiota would usurp all the authority of
affairs, and that hereafter he would accustom and inure the Emperor to
pass without Hagiotheodorita.

3 There are others, who because of great quarrels and contentions which has
been risen against them in Court, have under pretext of some Commission, taken
occasion to absent themselves, as did Agrippa, Son in Law to Agustus, who
withdrew himself into Asia, under color to give order to the Emperors
affairs, but purposely to desemble and conceal the quarrel he had with
Marcellus.

4 Tiberius during the reign of Caius C^sar, who hated him, retired to Rhodes,
making show that he took delight and pleasure in studying; and the better to
cover his voluntary exile, at the instant suit of his Mother he was thereof
made the Emperors L^eui^na^t.

5 But when those pretexts fail, then to induce him whom we would absent, to
pursue and seeko some occasions of his own absence, we cause him to be
commanded in the Princes name, to employ himself in some place or of^i^^,
wherein we have already informed the Pri^^e, that none can more worthily serve
him then himself.

6 In the same manner we may fetch away one from any good place, or O^fice,
wherein he is in author it i^ a far off, by drawing him to Court, in
p^^rswading and insinuating him, he will be ^^ry necessary and useful near
the Prince.

7 And this subtlety was used and practiced by one ^earmed ^^dpeli^s to take
away the Go^ernm^nt of Pel^^on^ss^^ from Ta^rion, by assuring and persuading
him, he was very necessary to assist and be present with the King in his
wars.

8 Dariu^ under pretext, and by the advice of Megabyzus, commanded Histe^^s
near him* yet not there to make use of him, but rather to place and settle him
among the Ionians, with whom he was in great esteem and reputation.

9 Arbetio under the Emperor Constantius, to the end he might with the more
facility callumniate Sylanus (General of the Infanterie) who was in great
favor and reputation near the Emperor; prevailed so far, that he procured
him the dignity and Office to command the Gauls, thereby to oppose the
Barbarians, who pillaged and ransacked these Provinces; where remaining,
Arbetio very cunningly found the means to make the Emperor jealous and
suspicious of the greatness and authority which Sylanus had purchased in those
parts; yea, and so greatly he caused him to be incensed and exasperated
against him, that at last he resolved to ruin and overthrow him.

10 ^rsicinus, General of the Ca^alry under the same Emperor, purposely to
be kept far from the Court, was sent unto the frontiers of Persia, where
being detained for the space of ten years, Sabinianus (a man of small
valor, and less experience) was sent to succeed him in his place, and upon
the news which came to Constantinople, that the Persians were preparing for
Wars, Eusebius the Eunuch, and Chamberlayne to Constantius, nevertheless
commanded Ursicinus to stay there, although he had neither authority nor
power given him: but the designs of Eusebius and other Courtiers, who had
conspired his ruin, was, that if the Persians by reason of his stay, desisted
and retired, then to attribute the honor to Sabinianus; and contrariwise, if
they continued their march and progress, to impute the fault which might
happen to Vrsicinus, as in the end it fell out, who at the Eunuchs
solicitation was degraded of al Martial Dignity, and so called home, and
consined to his house.

11 Before which time under the same Constantius, Ruffinus (Uncle to Gallus)
and General of the Praetorian Cahorts, was sent to appease the tumult and
mutiny of the Soldiers, in hope that he should never return, but there be
slain; and Clyitus being after sent into the Pronince of Sogdeane, complained,
that Alexander sent him thither to the same end and purpose.

CHAP. XXVIII.
1 The second means which our Enemies practice to disgrace and make us odions
and vmbragious to our Prince, consisting of two ways. 2 To collumniate us, and
considerations on Callumnie. 3 That Callumnies are very powerful in Princes
conceits. 4 How Callumnies are made resemble on the other. 5 The effects of
Callumnie. 6 Why Callumniators take occasion to Callumniate. 7 Example on this
occasion. 8 Subtilties to throw one into Despair that is Callumniated, and an
Example thereof. 9 Another Example thereon. 10 Other subtilties to that effect,
and Examples thereon. 11 12 Another Example of the subtlety of Callumnie
practiced by Seianus to ruin Aggripina. 13 The subtlety of Callumniators, by
persuading friends to callumniate their Masters. 14 Examples hereon. 15

THe second means which our Enemies practice to disgrace us, is to make us
suspected and odlous to our Prince; and to this effect they use two ways,
which in exterior appearance seem opposites, and yet produce one and the same
effect, and these are Calumnies and Praises.

2 In Calumnies, there are two considerable points; the first is, if the
matters be powerful enough to cause our Prince to change his affection
toward us, and the second if they likewise are true.

That which may either move, or change the affections of our Prince to us, must
be in^ged and considered by his inclination and Humor, and also by the
Condition and Estate of his affairs.

3 But the Calumnies which have formerly ruind great Courtiers or Nobles, are
those which have thrown the Prince into dissidence or suspicion of some
enterprise either upon his Person or Estate, or being informed and made believe
of the small esteem, or rather contempt, which he whom he has advanced into
favor makes of him, or through his disbedience, or small regard to his
commands, or insolent, or indiscreet speeches, orderiding and mocking his words
and behavior.

4 ^^d these Calumnies may seem true, either by the indiscreet words and
actions, as well of those who are calumniated as of those who depend of them, as
Servants, Friends or Kinstolkes: either by supposition of false letters, by
their reputation who report it, or by the distrust and iealosie the Prince has
already conceived of those who are calumniated.

5 The behavior and speeches which are interpreted against those who are
calumniated, proceed from themselves, either voluntarily without enforcement,
constraint or persuasion of others (of whom we have formerly spoken) or else
Calumniated are provoked thereunto by the subtilty of their enemies, enuiers
and copettitors, who herein use as much art and subtilty, as their malice and
the occasions ca^inuent*

6 Some have councelled; or caused him who^ they would calumniate, to be
councelled a thing, which under pretense that it might be beneficial and
profitable for him, has proved his ruin, by figuring and enterpreting it to
his Prince, for a pernicious and dangerous design.

7 Bafilius, Emperor of Constantinople) loved a certain Friar, being a
Magitian, named Santabarinus, whom Leon his Son hated; the which the Friar
perceiving, endeavored to insinuate himself into the Prince his favor,
thereby to make him believe, that he honored and affected him, and prevailed
with him so far, that at last he persuaded him to wear a Poniard when he
rid on hunting with the Emperor his Father, thereby to defend himself if any
one should assault him; whereunto this innocent and inconsiderate Prince
consenting, the Friar failed not to callumniate him to his Father, aduertising
him, that his Son had a design to murder him, and that to this effect he
secretly wore a Poniard whereof the Prince being found seizd, he was committed
close Prisoner, and had not the greatest Nobles and Courtters solicited and
mediated for him, his Father had put him to death.

8 Aetius under Valentinian III. desirous to ruin Boniface, Earl (or
Governor) of Africa, who was in great favor and reputation with the Emperor,
accused him to Placidia (Valentinians Mother) that he had a design to become
Sovereign and sole Lord of Africa, and therefore counseled her to call him
home to Court, and at the same time gave advice and intelligence to Boniface
(as if he had been his intimate friend) that he was accused to the Emperor,
and that he should be very speedily sent for to Court, and that he should stand
upon his guard, and refuse to come, except he meant to lose his head; which
Ca^eat made him resolve not only to disobey the Empress her command, but also
to withstand and oppose those who were sent against him, and likewise to call
to his assistance Gontarius and Genserick the Son of Gondarick, King of the
Uandales, being in spain, who by this means surprisde Mau^it^nta; since when
this treacherous plot being discovered, and for the greater trial and clearing
thereof, the Combat being by Placidia granted betwixt Aetius and Boniface,
Aetius being vanquished, was in recompense of his treachery for ever after
banished the Court.

9 Samonas being in some credit and favor with Leon, the Son of Basilius
(because he had discovered the conspiracy of another Basilius, being kinsman
of the Empress Zo) resolude to disgrace and ruin Andronicus Ducas, who (with
Himerius Logothete, went against the Agareens, or Sarrasins) conspired, that a
friend of Andronicus should advertise him, that Himerius had commission from
the Emperor to pull out his eyes (a punishment much practiced in those times,
to make great Noble men and Commanders both vnprositable and unserviceable) and
therefore that he should look to himself: which Anaronicus believing to be
true, (although it were a mere imposture and feigned invention of Samonas to
ruin him) fled from Himerius, and surprisde a Castle, whereon ^amonas took
occasion to accuse and callumniate him to the Emperor, and prevailed so far
with him, that there was an Army sent against him, which for his safety
constrained him to fly to the Saracins, the Emperors enemies.

10 Arbetio having made Constantius suspect Sylanus, and fearing that if he
came to Rome upon the Emperors command, he would sufficiently justify
himself, made the letters to be given to one Apodemius, who being in Gaul, in
stead of presenting them to Sylanus began to publish and brute his Estate and
affairs to be desperate, and out of all hope; thereby purposely to make him
revolt, as indeed he did: whereby he verified and confirmed Arbetios
callumnie, which could never have been done by those letters that were
falsified by Dynamius, and others, whom Marcel^s nominateth.

11 S^ianus to ruin Agrippina, plotted, that underhand her friends should
eleuate and enlarge her Hopes that thereby she might be the more suspected of
Tiberius; and to make her soar the higher in the air of her ambition, he
caused Domitius Afer to accuse Claudia Pulchra her Cousin, to the end to
provoke Agrippina to complain to Tiberius in her behalf; which she did, but
in words so conformable to her lofty and arrogant humor, that they incensed
and offended the Emperor.

12 Another time he advised this Lady not to eat any thing that her Father in
Law sent her, because he meant to poison her; which she soon believing,
refused to eat that which the Emperor proffered her, and thereby more
extremely incensed and exasperated him.

13 Since when, the Emperor appoin ing guards over her and her children, the
same Seianus procured some to persuade her to escape and to fly into the
German Armies over whom her husband Germani^us commanded, or else to have
recourse, and recover the Statue of Augustus, and then to call the Sen^te and
people to her assistance, and all this purposely to procure and hasten the
ruin of this Princess.

16 And before this time to make Tiberius mistrust and suspect, that she had a
design against his person and Estate, he resolved to make Titius Sabinus (a
Roman Knight) enter into some such, or the like discourse: now four Romans*
who had already been Pr^tors, and who by the favor of Seianus hoped shortly to
be made Consul^ (whose affection could not be purchased but by some wicked and
vicious Art) undertook this business, and it was concluded among the that
La^aris, who was most familiar with S^binus should be the chief instrument and
conducter hereof, and the other three should serve for witnesses: La^aris
meeting Sabinus, began to utter and let fly some speeches tending that way,
then he praised her constancy, in that contrary to others, she had not
forsaken Germanicus his house in his affliction, seeming to take great
compassion of Agrippina, whereat after that Sabinus had shed many tears,
Latiaris joining his complaints, accused the cruelty, ^ride and designs of
Seian^s yea, and not excusing or aquiting ^^eri^s himself in such sort, that
their discourse and conference c^posed of matters prohibited to be related,
began to make these four more familiar one with another, and so Sabinus
sometimes meeting with La^iaris, went with him to his house, and there very
freely vented such secrets, as he had in his heart.

15 ^he foundation of this treacherous project so laid, these four consult in
what manner this discourse may be by them understood, thereby to fra^e an
accusation: to hide themselves behind a door or hangings, it was to be feared
they either might be se^ne, or at unawares hea^d ma^e some noise, whereby they
might be disclosed, or else that Sabinus might mistrust something, if they
approached near a do^e, which made them resolve to place themselves in an upper
planked room, and there to listen through the chinks and holes, to understand
what they said, which concluded Lati^ris meeting ^abinus, and making show to
tell him something he had of late discovered, led him to his house, and into the
very appointed chamber, where making him repeat all that had past between them,
which was ouerheard by the witnesses who lay harkening above, Latiaris being
the Accuser, so Sab^^^s was condemnd, and Agrippina and her children committed
to the Emperors Guards.

CHAP. XXIX.
1 To induce others to do evil, thereby to have cause to calumniat him,
Example herein of Firmius Catus against Lybo, allied to the house of the
Caesar's. 2 To induce others to speak evil of our Prince, purposely to accuse
him, example on this Induction. 3 A means to make accusations and calumnies
seem true, by falsifying and counterf^tting of Letters, and the Remedy of
th^s Calumny. 4 Domesticke Servants gained ^o be false witnesses, to make a
Calumny seem true. 5 Examples hereon. 6 7

1 FIrmius Catus (a Senator) desirous by the ruin of Lybo (allied to the house
of the Caesar's) to insinuate and advance himself into Tiberius his favor;
persuaded this young man (who was more vain then wise) to enquire after
Soothsaiers and Magicians, if he might not one day attain to the Empire; and
upon these hopes he councelled him to be free and bountiful in his expenses,
and to borrow great sums of money: making himself his companion in all his
delights and pleasures, and causing him to perform boldly and publicly, all
which might serve or tend to the accusation which he purposed to frame and
contriue against him, and when he had gotten witnesses enough of his actions,
behavior, and speeches, then by means of Flaccus a Roman knight, he accused
him to Tiberius.

2 Stippiota, who (as you have heard) knew very subtly how to estrange John
Hagiotheodorita his companion, thereby solely to manage all affairs under
Emanuel Comnenus, had not yet wit enough, to beware and prevent a surprise
(like unto that which ruined Seianus) whereof Cameterus Logothera disgraced
him, accusing him to the Emperor as a disloyal fellow, and an Impostor, in
betraying the affairs of Cieslye; and to make his Calumnies bear the greater
appearance of truth, he caused the Emperor to hide himself in a certain
place of his house, where he might understand all that was spoken in another
Chamber, wherein Camaterus lead Styppiota; who speaking of the Cicillian
affairs very licentiously and freely, gave the reins to his tongue in the
relation of many discourses, the hearing whereof, made the Emperor enter into
distrust and suspicion of him, and Cameterus not content herewith, adding
subtlety to subtlety, caused some false letters to be scattered among
Stypp^ota his writings and papers, which being found and read in pr^sence of
the Emperor, served to convict him, and so he was condemned to lose both his
eics.

3 This Example will enuite and occasion us to pass on to a second means,
which many have used to make scandals and calumnies seem true, by falsifying
and counterseiting letters: which although it may in the end be discovered,
notwithstanding, it has had that force and belief, that the very suspicion
thereof has altered and alienated the good affection of our Prince, and
constrained the party suspected, being advertised of this change, softly to
retire himself from affairs, and as either fearing worse, or else thinking to
retire himself from Danger. has at last resolved on some irrigular and
extraordinary course, which has not only given and administered new matter for
his Calumniator to work on; but also, has confirmed his old accusation, and
so occasioned his disgrace, and consequently hastened his overthrow, as it
happened to Syluanus, whereof we have made former mention.

4 False witnesses may likewise make an accusation seem true; especially, if
it be a matter of crime, in the vindication and sifting, whereof it is the
custom to fortify and assist it with I^se Masestatis, or Treason; but more
ospecially we add belief to this accusation, when the witnesses be either our
Retainers, or Domesticke servants.

5 Eutropius resolving to ruin Timasius (an old Captain belongi^g to the
Emperor Arcadius) who had purchased much credit and reputation, used means to
gain one Barous who was a retainer and intimate familiar of Timasius, and by
him caused him to be accused, to have a treacherous design and enterprise upon
the Estate which was the sooner believed; because it could hardly be persuaded,
that a man whom Timasius loved so intimatly, and withal had so obliged him,
would have accused him if it had not been true.

6 Whereunto having joined some counterfeit Notes and remembrances; this honest
man, and also his son, were consined and banished to the Island of Oasis, from
whence neither of them ever returned.

7 Tigillinus desirous to disgrace and overthrow C. Petronius, who was esteemed
fitter then himself to serve Nero in his delights and pleasures, corrupted and
seduced one of Petronius his servants, to accuse his Master, for being of
intelligence with Sceuin who had conspired against the Emperor, and thereby
disgraced and ruined him.

CHAP. XXX.
1 The confidence a Prince reposeth in a Courtier, makes his Calumny seem
true, Example upon this trust and confidence. 2 The bad opinion a Prince
conceiues of the accused, makes the Calumny seem true, and is the sooner
believed. 3 Examples hereof. 4 5 The subtlety of the Arbetio, herein to
withdraw Vrsicinus from Court, and then to oblige him.

1 LIkewise, the Trust and Confidence a Prince reposeth in him who is the
Author of an accusation; makes that he the sooner beleenes it, which Seianus
well knew, when endeavoring to possess Iabia, (the Mother of Tiberius) of the
bad affection, which Aggripina (the widow of Germanicus) bore her, he gained
Julius Posth^mius the Confident of Liuia, and the Favorite of Mutilia Prisca,
(a Powerful and wise woman) to manage the affections and judgment of this
Pri^cesse.

2 But accusations and Calumnies are far easier believed, when they are
directed against those of whom the Prince is already suspicious, whereof some
have made use, not only to disgrace those whom they Calumniate, but also to
insinuate and work themselves into the favor of their Prince.

3 Uitellius his Courtie^s, calumniated not Blasus, till at the declining of
his fortune, and when the Prince began to enter into suspicion of him, which
again seemed to bear more probability of Truth, because they had engaged and
employed Uitelius his brother to be his accuser.

4 Grapius (Caesar's Freeman) held and reputed by Tacitus to be an old and
subtle Cour^^e) accused and Calumniated Cornelius Scylla, whom Nero suspected
and mistrusted, thereby to conserve himself in the Emperors favor, and the
like did Tigillinus against Plautus and Scylla.

5 Arbetio did the like in accusing Ursicinus (General of the Caual^ye) whom
the Emperor Constantius suspected, because he was allied to Gallus;
nevertheless, his accusation being not proved, Arbetius made show that he
desired to save him, deferring the judgment to another deliberation, and so
leaving it undecided, he with one stone gave three blows to his own
advantage; for thereby he seemed to oblige Vrsicinus who might fear the
incertaintie and iniquity of a sentence (such as were many given in those
days) then he drew away from the Court and the affairs thereof, a more
capable and honester man then himself, whereat he chiefly aimed; and lastly in
participating and seconding the Emperors jealousy and suspicion conceived
against Vrsicinus, he thereby made him believe that he very carefully watched
for his conservation.

CHAP. XXXI.
1 The Reports of matters pretended to be true, seem true. 2 Example of
Tiberius upon his reports. 3 4 5 The means how to reproxe a Tirant for his
wickedness. 6 The Conclusion on Calumnies.

1 THe reports of pretended scandals or calumnies spoken by some one, seem to
be as true, as when we tax a man for speaking ill of the Prince, in a
matter, which is after found and proved to be true.

2. C^pio Crispinus resolving to accuse and calumniate Granius Marcellus, for
speaking ill of Tiberius, made choice of the greatest and worst vices which
were reprouable in the life of this Prince, and accused Granius to be the
author and reporter thereof, which was so much the sooner believed, because
every one knew the Emperor was subject to all these vices.

3 Which fashion was followed by the most part of other C^lumniators, who
(without punishment) under color to calumniate others, reproved this Emperor
for his imperfections and vices, who otherwise would have refused to have given
ear to them.

4 Nevertheless hating reproaches, and loving Calumny, not to hear the first
in Senate, and yet to content his cruelty by the last, he in the end resolved
to retire from Rome, and to reside in the Island of Caprea.

5 The only way safely to reprove a Tyrant for his wickedness is to tax and
accuse another for reporting it, as did they who would reprove Nero for
murdering his mother, by accusing some other to be the author and perpetrater
thereof; not so much to punish him whom they accused, as to terri^ie and defame
the Tyrant himself.

6 These are the frequent and ordinary ways to practice Calumnies, besides
which we must have a careful and vigilant eye, to other falla^ies and
subtilties, which the malice of our enemies may invent, according to the
disposition of affairs, and the inclination of our Prince; and now pass we
on, and proceed we to praises, wherewith commonly our enemies no less disgrace
and endomage us.

CHAP. XXXII.
1 The second subtlety which our enemies practice to make us odious to our
Prince, is their praising of us, whereby they dissemble their hatred. 2 How
some have used Praises, Examples hereon. 3 4 Advise for Courtiers, that Princes
use to Praise and flatter him whom they will ruin. 5 Examples hereon. 6 That
there are some who praise others, to the end the Prince may be jealous and
suspicious of them. 7 A notable speech of Julian upon this Hypocrisy. 8
Another Hypocrisy to praise one, thereby to dispraise another. 9 Another to
praise the dead, thereby to s^ame the living, as did Augustus. 10 Another
subtlety to reprove, and excuses practiced likewise by Augustus. 11 ^^^^ and
pr^m^n^tions against these subtlety and Hipocrisies. 12 The ^hird means which
our Enemies and Competit^^s, use to disgrace and banish us from Court, and
consequently to ruin us, is through Power, and Force, and how it is practiced.
13 Examples of this third means. 14

1 SOme have (to this end) used and practiced Praises, thereby to cloak and
desemble their Hatred, Envy, on ^^^^ from him whom they desi^^^^ to deceive
with more facility and ^^^e.

2 F^bi^s (publicly before all the world) praised M^nlius Ual^ns, thereby the
better to cover the ill Offices which he secretly did him toward ^^^^ Arhe^^o
(says Marcellin) termed ^^^^ to be dourng^ous and valiant, at the very same
time when he taxed and ^c^used him to the Emperor.

3 Alp^^^^s King of Arago^ h^aring a follower of his commend and extol his
Companion more then accustome^, told one of his Courtiers neer^ him, that all
those praises tended to disgrace and ruin him whom he so praised: as
afterward it had fallen out, if this king had not diuerted and rejected the
accusation, which at the end of six months was exhibited him, by him who ^
before had praised him: and Mucianus resolving to ruin A^tonius Primus
performed the like, praising and applauding him in open Senate, a little before
he disgraced and disarmed him.

4 Likewise our Courtier must be advertised, that not only those of his rank
and condition, but also Princes them selves do sometimes praise him whom they
purpose and resolve to ruin.

5 When Tiberius would put Libo to death, he made him Praetor, and graced him
extraordinarily, and many times had him to his own table, without either in
word or countenance showing him to be any way discontented with him; and the
like he did toward Setanus: Dominan was never so much to be feared, as when in
exterior show he seemed to be pleasant: and Nice^^s reported, that the
praises of Anaronicus were the beginning of his injuries; his liberality a
sign of consiscation, and attaindor; and his mirth the Herald and forerunner
of death.

6 There are some who have used flatteries and praises to make the Prince
suspect those so praised, as those who applauded and praised Julius Agricola,
before Domitian; whereunto Tacitus attributed a great part of his father in
Laws disgrace.

7 The Emperor Julian writing to Basilius, sai^, he had no greater nor more
dangerous enemies then his Court-flatterers; and indeed, he (as says Mam^rti^
in his Panegeg^rick) had sencible experience thereof: and Polibius termed it a
new fashion and degree of Calumne used in his time, only in Princes Courts,
where Envy plays with her eyes vayled, and Flattery with hers open.

8 There is another degree of Praises, whereof we may serve our selves to
disgrace a man, as, when we praise one thereby to dispraise another: Plutarke
accused Herodotas of this malice, who in praising the Athenians in that they
opposed the Persians, intended thereby rather to blame the Grecians, then to
honor the Athenians.

9 And Seneca says, that this wile and practice is common to Kings and
Princes, who use to pra^se the actions of the dead, thereby to shame the
living* as Augustus did the fidelitic of Mecaenas and Agrippa, whereat he
grieved, when the vices of his own Daughters where discovered him, thereby to
reproach those near him, of the small care they had of his affairs, and
reputation.

10 The same Augustus as well practiced excuses, as praises, to reproach and
accuse that which he found amiss, as he did toward Tiberius. when he caused
him to give him the authority of Tribune, for writing of him to the Senate in
terms enough Honorable, he added many things which were to be accepted
against, the which excusing, he thereby secretly seem d to reproach him.

11 Whereby we may learn how to endeavor to know, as well the interior of those
who praise us, or make show to excuse us, as of those who scandalize and
calumniate us.

12 The last means which our Enemies employ to disgrace us, is Power and
Force. which is chiefly practiced, when matters are disposd either to a popular
revolt, or to a seditious mutiny of soldiers, for the discontent they may
receive, either of our advancement, or behavior.

13 The Eruptions and Emotions are well known, and notorious, which happened in
Paris in the Reign of King John. during his imprisonment in England, and the
Regency of his son, wherein many of the chiefest who managed the Estate, ran
many eminent dangers to be ruined and overthrown.

14 And not many years since, the seditions of the ^anisaries, have with
violence drawn out of the Turkish Emperors hands, their greatest Favorites
and Courtiers: Stilico desirous to be rid of Ruffinus, who governed all matters
under Arcadius, under pretext and color to reinforce the Army, sent Gains
with some troops to it, with a secret command, that when R^ffinus
accompanying. Arcadius should present himself before his troops, that then
the soldiers at a certain signal, should surprise him and cut him in p^eces,
which they did; Now a little whiles after, ^^^^ being possessed of Ruf^inus
place, and discontenting many of Arcadius Noble. and chiefest Courtiers: Gai^es
then caused Tri^igildus to revolt, who with his troops pill^d and sackd Asia,
until at the price and ransom of Eutropius head, the agreement by the
mediation of Gains was made with the Emperor, who purposely stayed at Court
the better to act this Tragedy; and since that time the same Gains openly
reuolting, and joining with Tribigildu to make his capitulation and agreement
with A^cadius, demanded that Aurelian S^t^^ni^, and Io^n, who then chiefly
managed and governed his affairs, should be delivered into his hands to use
the^ at his discretion, which was performed, and so contented himself to have
them banished after he had made them feel the point of his sword.

CHAP. XXXIII.
1 Of the disgrace of Courtiers, which proceeds from the evil inclination of
the Prince, the ninth division of the second Book: Seneca a judicious
Courtier. 2 An envious and suspicious Prince, is cause that oftentimes he is
ill served, and how it comes to pass. 3 Examples of some Courtiers hereon. 4 5
The Authors judgment on this proceeding. 6 The means how to free our selves
from the Jealousy of our Prince. 7 Examples hereon. 8 Envy and Jealousy, is a
sickness common to most Princes: but for less cause to one then to another. 9
Examples of such Jealousy. 10 How Courtiers should bear themselves toward
Princes of this Nature and Condition.

1 SOmetimes the evil inclinations of a Prince make the fortunes and
prosperity of his Servants the shorter and less permenant: especially is he
be Light; Inconstant, Vain, Suspicious, Envious, Covetous, Cruel, or
Fearful; which imperfections most commonly surpasle the Art and Wisdom,
that a man can invent to support and maintain himself in favor: seneca, who
although in some matters free enough of his speeches toward his Master, was
nevertheless reputed and held, a wise Courtier, and a iuditious Counselor:
but the perverse and vicious nature of his Pupil Nero. exceeded, and surpassed
the viuacitie of his Art and Judgment, and who could not prevent, but that his
Eloquence and W^al^^, were maligned and envied at, and whereby through the
pernicious speeches of his Enemies, he was constrained to lose first his
authority and reputation, and then his life.

2 Many Courtiers have so much apprehended and feared the distrust and Envy of
their Prince against them, that they have sought rather to deminish their own
reputation, to the prejudice of their Masters service, then to increase it by
doing well, for fear of ruining their fortunes, and hazarding their lives.

3 Ventid us fearing the ^nuie of Antonius, under whose authority he waged
war, contented himself to have enforced the Parthtans in three batailes he
gave them, to retire as far as Media and Mesopotamia, without chasing them
farther, although it was in his power and pleasure to do it.

4 Ag^thias said that B-lisarius under ^ustin, performed the like, contenting
himself to chase his enemies, without pursuing them far, for fear that
increasing the reputation of his exployts, the malice of the chiefest Courtiers
would stir up and incite that of the Prince, which might have increased, and
grown the more dangerous, through the public applause and reioycings of the
Commons.

5 Which indeed is to betray both his own Honor, and his Master: but this
fault ought rather be imputed to the Master, then the Servant: for which
respect Mecanas councelled Augustus not to impute the ill success of his
affairs to his public Ministers, nor yet to envy in them the good, to the end
that without fear they might chearefully employ themselves in his service:
for many of those (quoth he) who have the managing of affairs, fearing to
throw the Prince their Master into jealousy or suspicion of them, have
oftentimes rather chosen to do ill, then good service; thereby preferring the
security they find in the first, before the reputation which they might have
purchased by the last.

6 Nevertheless, I more approve their proceeding, who to free themselves from
the ialousie of a great, or famous exployt, have left and conferred all the
honor to their Prince, whether present or absent.

7 Agrippa (Nephew to Augustus) caused and councelled others to undertake
dangerous exployts and enterprises, but to leave the happy issue thereof to the
Prince: so did Ioa^ (as Iosep^^^^ reports) at the siege of Ra^a^lia who
deferred the taking thereof til the Kings arrival to the Army: so did Crat^rus
in the behalf of his Master Alexander, who attended and waited his coming to
receive Arte^^nas capitulation; and Agricola attributed to his Captains all
the good fortune of his ^xployt^s.

8 This Envy or Jealousy (for in this respect both the one and the other
produce one and the same effect) is a sickness subject and incident to all
Princes; yea, and the most generous and valerous (as Phillip and his son
Alexander) have bin pestered and afflicted therewith ^ut there are some who rush
and run hereunto upon less and smaller occasion the^ others.

9 The Emperor Theodosius II. having given to one Cyru^ the conduction and
superintendancy in the building of a Wall of the City of Constantinople, from
one Sea to the other the ended it in threescore days; which brevity and
beauty performed in this work ^^^^ ^^^^ the people, that he passing the
Streets, they cried with many loud acclamations, Constatine built this City,
and C^rus has renewed him: which the Emperor understanding, he presently
disgraced him, and forced him to turn Friar; and this was the recompense he
had for so speedily executing that which was commanded him.

10 With Princes of this nature there is more difficulty how to behave o^r
selves, then if they were more considerate, firm and constant in their
judgments, and permit themselves to be less carried away with their fears
and imaginations. Wherefore our Courtier must strive with his best Art and
Ingenuity, to know and penetrate into his Princes motions and passions, thereby
if possible he can) toward and defend himself against them, or if he cannot,
he shall at least have this comfort and consolation to have forgotten nothing
which Courtship could afford, or Dexterity invent.

CHAP. XXXIV.
1 The last cause of a Courtiers dis-fauor or fall who was great in Court, is
the death of his Prince. 2 The Prince who succeeds to the Estate many times
sooner aduanceth his own servants, then those of his Predecessor. 3 A Courtier
is continued in favor after his Prince his death, either by making himself
fit for affairs, or in oblieging his successor by some especial action, or
agreeable service: Example hereon. 5 Good advice and council upon these
considerations, thereby to auoids the Prince his ill will: That Humility is
necessary to maintain great men in their greatness. 6 We must with a vigilant
eye observe the praises given us. 7 The common foundations of Calumnies, and
how to remedy them. 8 How to reform those defects whereof we are taxed and
accused, whether it be in discreet speeches, or by clearing and interpreting
that which may be ill taken. 9 Not to absent our selves from him, who we fear
will scandalize us. 10 To make friends in Court, to defend us against all
Calumnies and false reports, that in Court every one seeks to depresse or duck
his fellow.
1 WE repute him happy in Courtfauor whose authoririe and reputation suruines
the Prince who advanced him, and is continued him by his Successor, a thing
indeed very rare, it often falling out, that those who are advanced to this
degree, may, whilst they enjoy the same, in some occurrences contest or oppose
the presumptiue heir of the Prince, who is sometimes suspected of him that
reigns so as instead of being beloved, he is often hated of him.

2 And if this happen not he who succeeds to the Estate having many servants,
whose capacity and affection are known to him: either he resolves rather to
advance them, then those whom his Predecessor has favored, or else his own
servants study how to disgrace them, that thereby they may enjoy their places
and Offices.

3 And yet there are some who have subsisted and maintained themselves in their
places and favors, being aided and friended herein, either by the event and
disposition of affairs, wherein their service is held profitable; or in
gaining the Successors favor by some agreeable service, in adoring (as we
say) the Sunne-rising.

4 Macro neither respected, nor spared his own wife, thereby to gain
Caligula^ favor, to whom as it is said, he performed this acceptable service,
purposely to hasten the death of Tiberius: and Arbetio became so officious and
necessary, that the Emperor Julian knowing him to be a factious and turbulent
fellow, and who indeed loved him not, continued him in reputation and
authority, and since was again called by Valentinian to oppose Procopius.

5 By the consideration of all those examples, it will be easy for us to
recollect a part of that which we should avoid, to the end we all not into
disgrace with our Prince: but the wholsomest council which I can give to a
Courtier that is in reputation and authority, is, that he stoop as low as he
can to his Master, measuring that which he ought do, more by the condition of
his Prince whom he serves, then of his own fortune that he perform nothing
through ostentation, but through obedience, and as accustomed, and still
delighting to eschew ^nuie. There being many great men, who for this
consideration have made show to addict themselves to mirth and good felloshi^,
and others at studying thereby to make it appear, that they were far from
thinking of any matter of Estate; and so did Domitian and Galb^ for a time, to
idleness in the Reign of Nero: likewise if they perform any action of
remarke or fame, they should still give the honor thereof to the Prince their
Master.

6 But above all (without being lulld a sleep with praises and exterior
shows) we must still have our eyes fixed upon our Enemies, Enuiers and
Competitors, thereby to divert their callumnies and subtilties, whether toward
the Prince, or others, who may offend or disgrace us.

7 Callumnies are commonly grounded either upon some defect pretended to be in
us, upon some word ill placed and spoken, OF purposely to offend, or for some
error and fault, we have committed against another.

8 The defect presupposde in us, must be either repaired, or excused by us, or
supplied by some other benefit and remedy; and as well in our words, actions
and behavior, we must be so cautious and circumspect, that we neither do, nor
speak, any thing that may be differently enterpreted by the hearers, whose
intents we should first sift and sound, before we disclose either our secrets,
or selves to them; and whereas some words for want of heed has escaped us, we
must endeavor by some office or discourse pertinently framed to the contrary,
that our intent was good toward him, who could be offended thereat.

9 We must also not absent or estrange us (but the least we can or may) from
him by whom we fear to be taxed and calumniated: for besides that, Absence
and Time deminisheth the heat of affection which a man may bear us, we
thereby likewise give him time to frame and imprint a Callumny, the truth
whereof we cannot so soon find out, vindicate, and clear; and finding
nothing to the contrary, men are as it were, enforced to believe it; or if they
believe it not, their opinions and conceits will be equally affected and
divided, and yet both will agree to rest doubtful, especially when the
Calumniator vehemently affirms and assures it, what disposition soever he
have to the contrary; and if it ariue to the understanding of the Prince, to
whom by flatterers, reports are secretly and insensibly carried, then is
suspicion and distrust engendered, which hinders him any farther to enquire out
the truth thereof from whence it comes, that it degenerates into strangeness,
and after into enmity and hatred.

10 He then who is absent, must chiefly and necessarily be provided of one (or
rather of more who may perform him the office of a true friend, to defend him
against all falls and scandalous reports, and to make choice of such as are of
reputation, and may have admittance into those places, where they may assist
their friend in this degree of charity. A thing I confess very difficult and
rare to be found in Court where every one rejoices (as we have said) to
depresse or ducke his Companion, or to see or hear him to be ducked or
depressed. Nevertheless, sometimes we may meet some Courtier, who either out
of the obligation he owes us, or out of the desire he has to oblige us, or
through Envy or Malice that he bears our Calumniator, may perform us this
duty.

CHAP. XXXV.
1 To fly Pride and Ostentation, for fear least our Prince grow ie^lo^s of
us. 2 Example of Cardinal Spinosa for his Osten tation. 3 The Courtier must not
defer to rule and moderate himself upon the declining of his Greatness, but
contrariwise to begin in time to conform himself to modesty Examples of those
who have done the contrary. 4 5 A Courtier must make as many friends as he can,
and why. 6 Consideration on this point.

1 I Have formerly said, that a Courtier must do nothing through ostentation
the which I again repeat; not only to avoid the Envy of our fellows, but
also that our Prince grow not jealous of us.

2 It is recorded in Spain, that one of the means whereby the Courtiers of
King Phillip II. made use to disgrace the Cardinal Spinosa, was in generally
following, observing, and attending him; showing thereby, that they depended of
him: yea, they were so officious and obsequious herein, that the Kings own
domestic servants did nothing but that which he commanded; which the King
perceiving and understanding, he commanded and estrangd him from Court, and by
this subtilty within the space of two years his favor and fortunes were
ruined.

3 From whence a Courtier may learn how to have his train composde of few,
and according to the quality wherein the Prince is pleased he shall continue,
and bear himself; yea, or rather below it, for he must not at the ebb of his
fortunes attempt to deminish his train. It auailed not Senoca after he had
lost Neros favor, to retire himself to his house, under color to follow his
studies, or to feign himself sickly, and to cause his doors to be shut up
against those, who were wont to flock thither, as to the Court; neither did it
steed Agricola under Domitian, not to go abroad but at night, and then to be
followed bu by few.

4 Wherefore our Courtier must in time compose and fashion himself to modesty.

5 Nevertheless, he who is in reputation and credit at Court, must not omit to
purchase many friends, and to obliege and bind as many as he can to him; not
through vanity to be well followed, but to the end that his fall be the less
and more silent, and that he may find those who will receive and entertain
him.

6 For although it be very difficult to make friends at Court, who will assist
you in your disgrace; nevertheless, in so great a number we may chance find
out some one, who, if it be not for the consideration of Friendship, at least
for his own proper interest, in requital of the access he has had to you,
and the hope which he might have had, to have reaped some benefit and profit
by you, who will lament and pity your misfortune, and so both endeavor and
enforce himself to assist you.

CHAP. XXXVI.
1 The Courtier who is beloved and favored of the Prince, must be discreet in
the demands and requests he makes him for others, and the reason thereof. 2
The quality and nature of his demands and requests he makes to the Prince. 3
Not to boast, or vaunt of his Reputation. 4 How to bear himself in the
execution of his Princes commands. 5 A Courtier must refuse no Command or
Commission from the Prince: how Princes measure and esteem the Greatness of
their commands. 6 A Courtier must still be near his Prince, for fear to be
surprised. 7 How he must bear himself toward those who are discontented. 8
To speak soberly and modestly of the Prince and his Servants. 9 Advice not to
break, or contest with the Prince.
1 But as it is most profitable for the deminishing and sweetning of our
disgrace, in having obliged many, whilst the Sun shine of our Prince his
favor lasted, by mediating and soliciting for them: so I will advise our
Courtier to bear himself discreetly herein: for the greatest part of that
which our Prince graunts us for others, he puts it to our own account,
wherefore let us reserve those favors for our s^lues, and not interceede and
solicit for others, but very rarely, and upon good ground; yea, and in those
suits and matters which the Prince already understands, to the end we be not
answerable for other men's faults.

2 We must also be careful, that the requests we make to our Prince be just,
fitting to the ^ime, and commonly granted, and if it may be correspondent to
his Honor, Profit, or Pleasure, so if he grant our requests, we must make
great esteem thereof; and if he refuse us, we must yet endeavor by all sorts
of demonstrations to make him believe we are not displeased or discontented
thereat.

3 Notwithstanding, we must not boast or make show to others, in what
reputation and favor we are with the Prince, much less vaunt as some have
done, that we rule and govern him; ^ith Princes still desire to make it
appear to the world, that what they do, is of themselves, without the aid or
a sistance of others, much less of any of their subjects, and commonly such
boasters fell wind and smoke at a cheap rate.

4 If our Prince command us any thing, or give us any Commission, if possible
we can, we must cause it to be put in writing with all its circumstances;
yea, we must remove all the difficulties which we foresee may fa^l out in
the execution thereof; and if it be a matter not subject to the pen, or a
thing secretly commanded us, let us then relate and repeat it often to the
Prince, thereby the better to conceive his intents, that by this repetition he
may hereafter more perfectly remember what he has commanded us

5 We must not refuse any Commission or Command from our Prince, though never
so small; for sometime a small beginning to a great and eminent fortune; and
Princes judge the greatness of their Commands, not by the importancy thereof,
but by their own proper greatness; and hold themselves as much wronged in the
denial of their small commands, as in the refusal of those of greater weight
and consequence, and which nearer concern them.

6 Being near and resident with our Prince, we must be still wa^chfull, and
in guard, that none surprise us: we must narrowly foresee such affairs as we
may be employed in, and prep^re our selves for those which are already a foot
and in question: we must speak little and only of that which we well know, we
must be attentive when the Prince speaks, and make it appear to him that we
think on nothing else; and we must not show our selves either sad, sorrowful,
or pensive, lest he interpret it to contempt and discontent in us.

7 If any Mal-content come to us to bewray us his secrets, and to reveal us
his heart, we may for once hear him, and seem to have a feeling of his
disgrace, and so encourage him to hope for better; yea, we must deminish and
extenuate the wrong which he pretends is offered him, and so excuse our
Prince, exhorting him to be silent herein, and to brook it patiently: but
especially and above all, let us take heed what offers we make these sort of
people: for many purposely feign to be malcontent, as desirous to draw from
us some speech or demonstration of our bad inclination and affection to our
Prince, thereby to ruin us; or if they are malcontent, commonly passion so
transsports them, as they cannot conceal that which is delivered and told them.

8 Great men and Courtiers must also command their servants and retainers to
speak modestly and soberly, both of our Prince, and of those who are near
him: for it many times falls out, that the Master is accused for the servants
speeches.

9 But the chiefest point of wisdom in a Courtier, is by degrees to foresee
the disrespect and coldness of the Princes affection toward him, and so very
softly to unrip but not to rend our Fortune, to the end that our Prince
reconsidering her^of, we may always have a gappe and back door open to
reenter into his fauo^, and yet without any way making the least shadow or
show, either to be discontented or offended with him, or that we have once
conceived or suspected the declination of his grace and favor from us.

CHAP. XXXVII.
1 Advice upon the continuance of a Courtiers advancement and reputation being
the thirteenth division of this second book. 2 From whence proceeds the favor
of our Prince toward us, and of the causes that induce a Prince to love a
Courtier. 3 That favor l^st^th not long which only proceeds from the Grace
and comeliness of our Person. 4 Of the conformity of Humors in the Prince and
his Favorites, that the privileges and advantages which a Favorite enioyes
hereby, should cause him to make good use of his time, and so to settle his
fortune thereby.
1 But, to the end that a Courtier may judge of the continuance and
subsistence of his prosp^ritie, besides that which he may conjecture by the
inclination of his Prince, and by the favor which his friends or enemies may
have near him, he must also consider the cause why his Prince affects him,
for that once failing, or finding the like or a more powerful in another,
without doubt his affection and favor will then diminish toward us if not
absolutely desolue.

2 There are many favors, whose causes are difficultly found out and known,
and many will be much perplexed and graueled to know the reason of their own
happiness and good Fortune: notwithstanding, to speak as it commonly falls out,
the favor and affection of Princes proceeds either of a conformity of
humors, grace, or comeliness, which delight and please them, from the
obligations of their Fau^rites services; or because they know those whom they
will favor, to be fit Instruments to second their wills and commands; or else
that they are endued with some rare Capacity or perfections beyond the vulgar.

3 The favor which proceeds from personal grace and comeliness, although it
seem to be doubly united; yet, it is that which is soonest dissolved and
dissipated there being nothing so inconstant as men's humors, which not only
change (as we have formerly said) through age, but also by some small occasion
or accedent which may arise, whereunto we may add that it is impossible for
two so to correspond or be conformable in humors, that either of the one or
other, there be not some particularitie which makes them different, and which
being provoked or contested, does futurely more estrange and separate them then
they were formerly strictly united.

4 Notwithstanding, I affirm that where this conformity is most found, that
there, in the Prince it produces more effects of his favor then any other
cause; but he who is advanced in the favor of his Prince, must prouidently
manage and husband his time, thereby to make the best use thereof that he can;
and as if he already foresaw the approaching tempest, he must hasten his pace
to recover a place of safety and shelter.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
1 Of the favor of Princes toward Women. 2 How they bear themselves to
subsist in reputation near the Prince. 3 Example of Poppaea toward Nero. 4
The affection of some Princes has been retained, more through subtilties for
fear of being wronged and defamed by women, then by enjoying them. 5 The
favor which proceeds of Pleasures and services done us, is not of long
continuance and why. 6 7 A Prince is angry if we believe he is indebted to a
subject for any great or singular service, and therefore refuses to see him;
considerations hereon; and that Princes are many times forgetful in rewarding
their servants. 8 Considerations hereon, it is better for us to be obliged to
our Prince then ^e to us. 9 Of the favor of those who second the inclinations
of the Prince; and considerations on his inclinations.

1 SVch favors toward women, are by so much the more violent, in that the
pleasure of a Prince, and the fury of his desires do inwardly entermixe and
combine.

2 But if the ill behavior and conduction, that is commonly in such women, do
not disgrace them; satietie, or a more pleasing beauty then themselves will
assuredly perform it: wherefore those women who are Ambitious, to maintain
themselves in the favor of a Prince do still endeavor to withdraw themselves
from all other companies, and to divert them from the sight of purer beauties,
which may make them change their affection, others have used dissembling, and
practiced feigned refusals, and some more bold and impudent, knowing that they
are as it were lincked and tied to them, have rebuked and checked them.

3 It was an artificial trick which Poppaea used toward Nero, after she had
allured him to love her, when she feigned to retire and live with her husband
Otho; to whom she said, she was engaged and bound, as well for marriage, as
merit, and preferred him before N^ro; who (quoth she) forgot and debased
himself so much as to use and entertain poor Chamber-Maides. And again,
after thus, N^ro deferred to put away Octauia, for fear least Agrippina should
distaste it, and in mocking him, should call him Pupil, which was, not only,
not to be Emperor, but also, not to be a freeman.

4 Of this humor there are many Princes, who by such like subtilties and
fetches, are rather won and retained, then by daliance and facility in
enjoying that which they desire and seek; all which, notwithstanding their
vain conceit of pleasure, and chiefly their inconstancy and leuitie, many
times carries them away to others.

5 The favor which proceeds from good Offices and services already performed
to our Prince, should seem to be more lasting and durable then any other, as
being purchased by the best title: and again, which may stir up many others
to be zealous in his service.

6 But contrariwise, we see none of less continuance, and it falls out very
often, that great services which cannot be rewarded, or recompensed, do rather
purchase us contempt then fauou^ from our Prince.

7 It is the custom of Princes to desire to be discharged of all debts: for
this burden is still ircksome and troublesome to them: but it more sencibly
angers them, when they believe they are indebted to one of their subjects, for
some special or singular service done them; yea, they then apprehend to see
them, thinking that their meeting will reproach them of shame and ingratitude;
and commonly there are none so hindered, (and I speak with grief) so
unfortunate, as these sort of servants: for respecting their honor, they will
not as soon as they have done the Prince service, expect to be rewarded, for
fear they should be held, rather to sell their service, then to perform it
liberally and freely: whereas contrariwise, the most part of Princes are
forgetful and careless to recompense these their Servants, and although some
acknowledge they ought to do it, yet they defer it to other times and
occasions, that thereby these services may wax old in the memories of those
who are witnesses thereof, and so by little and little, at last absolutely
forget them.

8 Which occasioneth some to strike whiles the Iron is hot, and foreseeing that
they must be necessarily employed in a business, willing to take advantage,
and to husband this occasion, they before they were sought unto, have received
and drawn some profit and benefit from the Prince. The Hope of a Servant being
more powerful in Princes then the fruit of a service received; and many are of
opinion (as I lately noted) that it were better for us to be bound to our
Prince, then our Prince to us: the Prince always regarding those with a more
gracious eye whom he has obliged as believing they have more cause to affect
him then those to whom he has done small or no good, and that they having
deserved a reward and not received it: he knows they have small cause to
affect him, and this indeed, says Philip De Commines* was the opinion of
Jews XI.

9 The favor of those likewise who second the Prince in his inclinations and
passions, should seem to last and continue long, as commonly it does; at
least, as long as the Prince possesses and retains the same passions; but as
he falls from one Passion to another, so he changes his Instruments and
Favorites: and sometimes turning himself toward the duty of his charge, he
begins to distaste the passions which oppose it, and so hates and malignes those
who have served him.

10 Nevertheless, as Passions are more durable one then another, so those who
serve him, continue longer in favor one then another, according to the Passion
which they observe and subject themselves to.

CHAP. XXXIX.
1 Of the exorbitant pleasures of Princes, and of three sorts of excess
whereinto they run. 2 The first is Love, and of those who serve them in their
loves. 3 The second is cruelty. The Envy of Cruelties returned and thrown on
his head who caused them to be executed, Example of Caesar Borgia. 4
Considerations on this Example, and that those who make themselves the
instruments and actors of Princes cruelties, do it not long, because they are
quickly ruined. 5 Example of Nero. 6 Of the Covetousness of a Prince, and the
effects thereof, the favor of those who serve and second Princes in this
excess, is durable, provided that they moderate their carriage and actions,
and not excessibly enrich themselves. 7 Consideration upon the carriage and
demeanor of such servants. 8 Examples drawn from our France, as of Peter de
la Berche, in the ^i^^ of Philippe the fair, of Enguerrand de Marigny, Mons.
de Gyac, and others. 9 10 The Author his advise upon such Servants and
Courtiers, and how our Courtier must bear hi^se^fe, that he serve not
unprofitably in his charge and place, but rather in great honor and
reputation.

1 I Will not here speak of many pleasures, whereunto Princes are often
subject and addicted, because they very seldom serve for a firm foundation,
whereon to erect and build a great Fortune; only I will mention those three
excesses, whereunto they often permit themselves to be transported and carried
away; as, Love, Cruelty, Covetousness.

2 As for Love, the more violent, the less permanent it is, and although this
passion may surprise a Prince, yet it continues not long in one and the same
object: Nevertheless, many Courtiers have built the foundation of their favor
with their Prince hereon; yea, so far as to prostitute their own wives: So
did Otho, and yet he fedg'd not well with Nero; for that was the proper and
efficient cause, that he was estraung^d by him thereby to free himself from
his Jealousy.

3 Others have believed that they may obliege their Prince, to maintain them
in his Grace and Favor, in making themselves companions, witnesses and Actors
of a thousand vices and impudicities, as did Tig^l^nus without considering that
the Prince is always enough powerful to defend himself from the Hatred and
Envy which such actions may stir up and procure him in abandoning and
sacrificing them to the Commonweal, which in this cause may be practiced, as
well as Caesar Borgia made use thereof to free himself from the Cruelty which
he had caused Remiro de Orco to commit, whom he put to death, and so relected
all those faults and crimes on him.

4 But what is one Example to teach us that the favors of those who make them
selves the Instruments and Executioners of Princes cruelties, are not only of
short continuance; but also shortly cause the ruin of those who practice and
profess it: For not only those cruelties represent themselves to the eyes and
remembrance of the Prince, but he also e^tereth into Jealousy and distrust of
him who so voluntarily became the executioner thereof.

5 N^r although confirmed and obdurated in cruelty, made good and approved the
same; for when Anicetus by his command had ^ill'd his mother, he very shortly
after would no more see him, because his presence still reproached him of the
Parra^yd he had caused him commit.

6 Cou^tousness lasts longer, for neither Age, nor diversity of Objects can
change it, as it does love: Contrariwise, it grows with the Age of our Prince,
and although it be as odious to the people as Cruelty; nevertheless they
longer support it, because of the pretext of the Public good and necessity,
which is accustomed to be borrowed, for the procuring and gathering of moneys
into the Exchequer: so as it seems that those who herein assist the Prince,
for the most part continue longer in their reputation, and greatness: provided
that they bear themselves temperatly and modestly, and not be too lofty and
imperious in their proceedings (a virtue rarely found in these sorts of people,
who commonly, to their answers and refusals, add injuries and reproaches) and
withal not to become too excessiuely rich.

7 The first, usually incurres and draws hatred against themselves, which in
the end, the Prince fearing he shall feel, is constrain^d to give him his
Cenge, and Far w^ll, if not worse measure; and the other does not only p^rchase
the envy of the Commons, but also sometimes that of the Prince himself, who
being truly covetous, it is to be feared, he will not content himself as
Uespasi^n did, to wring and depresse the sponge; but that herein he will use
them as Country people do their Hogs, who after they have made them fat,
eat them.

8 Our France has seen many of this Condition, as some for their insolent
carriage, and others for the Envy of their exces sieve wealth too speedily
gotten, have at one blow been disgraced and precipitated from a great fortune
to a miserable Estate.

9 In the reign of King Philip the fair, Peter de la Berche his High
Chamberlain and super-intendant of his Exchequer was strangled and hanged at
Paris under Jews son of the said Philip Enguerrand of Marigny, met with no
better fortune under Charles VII: Monsieur de Gyac being likewise High
Chamberlain, for the same crime was clapped into a sack and drowned, after whom
Camus de Beulieu, entering into his place was killed at Po^cters; and under
Philip I: Peter de Essarts was in danger of the same fortune, but in the end
he was freed for one hundred thousand Florins.

10 I will silence and pardon the memory and names of some others which I
might hereunto adioyne, and will now content my self to say, that as we must
avoid too much facility in executing Offices and Commissions for the good of
our Princes affairs; so we must also detest and eschew Presumption and
Insolence, if we will defend and free our selves, from the Envy and Malice
which follows and attends it: and as it is not prohibited us to reap some
profit of our seru^ces: so we must carefully avoid excess herein, at least if
we mean to secure and shelter our selves from Envy and Danger, and
consequently to continue our Authority and Greatness in Court.

CHAP. XL.
1 Of favor, proceeding from some Capacity and Sufficiency beyond the vulgar:
and what we must consider therein. 2 Our Courtier must not make himself a
Competior, nor contest with his Prince for suf^^ciency, in that wherein he
desires and pretends to excel. 3 Examples hereon. 4 5 Not to show himself too
wise before the Prince; The advice of a wise Ancient, to show our selves in all
things inferior to our Prince. 6 Conclusion upon the inconstancy of Court
-favor. 7 Whereunto our Courtier must address and prepare himself. The
Author his advise hereon. 8 The Author his advise to our Courtier, to retire
and withdraw himself from Court, before the declining of his Fortune. 9
Considerations on the fortunes of Courtiers. 10 The conclusion, and the Author
his Excuse, taking his instruction, and wishes from some Latin verses out of
Seneca, which he alleges to pass the remainder of his days, in
Tranquillity, Peace, and liberty.

1 IN the favor which proceeds from a more then vulgar sufficiency or
Capacity; we must consider if it be pleasing to our Prince either because it is
necessary for him: or because he himself delights and takes pleasure in the
same subject: for first we need not doubt but that as long as this necessity
lasts, his favor will continue though peradventure more by constraint (that
is to say for need) then for friendship.

2 And if the Prince give and addict him self to the same subject: wherein our
Capacity and sufficiency is admired, we must believe that as soon as he
knows, that we surpass and excel him therein, he will begin to look on us
with a frowning eye: for it is both natural and common as well to Princes as to
all other men, not to be seen inferior to any in that which they profess:
much less will not a master, and which is more, a Prince, have any one know
that his servant is more skillful then himself.

3 Some one encouraging Asintus Polio, to answer certain verses which Augustus
had made of him: replied, that he would take good heed, and not out of F^^u^e
or Emulation turn Scribe against him, who had all authority to prescribe.

4 And the Philosopher Fauorinus being fallen into dispute and contention with
the Emperor Adrian, about a certain word, yielding it lost, made answer to
some of the Auditors his friends, who reproved and blamed him thereof, that
he was not ashamed to be found less learned then one who commanded Thirty
Legions.

5 In which respect a wise man admonishes us not to seem too learned before
our Prince: for there is no remedy, but in this we must betray our own
sufficiency and honor to hand^ell and gratify our master, especially if we
think and resolve to be welcome to him: and it suffices not to stoop and
yield to him in words: but we must likewise in effects and deeds make it
appear, that in all things we are inferior to him: yea, and in plain
earnest, do something grossly and slightly, so it may please him: provided
always, that it be not either to the blemish or prejudice of our Honor and
Reputation.

6 By which we may imagine the mutabilitie and inconstancy of all sorts of
Court aduancements: and since the favor and preferments of the Court are so
variable and incertaine: The chiefest consideration which a Courtier must have,
who sees himself so highly favored and graced of his Prince, is to dispose
and prepare himself to descend and strike sail, It is indeed valor and
courage to fight as long as we can, but if in fighting there is more to be
lost then gained: it will be wisdom to provide for our retr^it: or to follow
and imitate the P^rthi^ns who retire in fighting.

7 It is far more honorable to descend silently and peacefully by the
stairs and door, then to stay till we are enforced out of window: and fair
more shameful to be banished, then orderly of our selves to take our leave of
the Court, under some honest pretext and color.

8 Those are esteemed, and reputed happy, who die in the midst of their
felicities; and I hold that Co^rtier happy and fortunate, who knows how to
retire in the midst of his prosperities: those who are ignorant hereof will
affirm, that these are unworthy and incapable of their Fortunes, who abandon
and forsake the Court in the midst of their c^urse: but we must give them
leave to speak, and withal we our selves must remember, that in all games or
Lotteries, it is far better to return a gainer then a loser, and not to
hazard the certain for the incertaine.

9 We ascend to those Great and Eminent fortunes of the Court by degrees and
steps; but when we are mounted, and have attained the top, then we find
neither stepps nor degrees whereby to descend; and the least dasling of our
eyes (which commonly befalles those who are elevated so high) makes us loose
our footing, and in one moment and blow precipitates, and throws us down
headlong.

10 Lo, this is it which is fallen within the power and reach of my pen, and
which I have here collected and gathered more to satisfy your desire, then for
mine own particular use, as being contented to take for my instruction and
wishes these Verses of Seneca.

Stet quicunque volet Potens
Aule Culmine lubric^
Me dulcis saturet quies
Obscuro positus loco
Leni parfruar otio
Nullis nota Quiritibus
Aetas per tacitum sluat
Sic cum transierint mei
Null^ cum strepitudies
Plebeius moriar senex
Illi mors grauis incubat
Qui notus nimis omnibus
Ignotus moritur sibi.
Denis, de Refuges.

FINIS.
A Table of the Contents of the Chapters of the second Book.
CHAP. I. IN all our actions we must chiefly consider where^t they aim. 2, 3.
The ends and intents are very different of those who t^row themselves on the
Court 4. The favor of the Prince is the General aim of Courtiers, and the
first Head of this second Book. 5. Favor anticipates and presupposes the
knowledge of him that is favored and the app^obation of his Actions. 6. How to
make himself known 7. The Continuance hereof. 8. Great men are not commonly
so strictly linked to their Prince, as those of inferior rank and condition.
9. To what Princes these things a boue proposed and mentioned, properly
concern. Fol. 1.

CHAP. II. 1. Two ways to advance a Courtier. 2. The seeking of Offices and
dignities. 3. The following of the Court. 4. The last is the shortest way. 5.
Examples and conside rations hereon. Fol 5

CHAP. III. 1. Diverse means how to make our selves known of our Princ^, as by
especial action or se^uice, or by the assistance of Friend^. 2. What the
Prince is above all, as w^ll the great as common people. 3. The example of one,
who would make himself known to Alexander. 4. A consideration upon this
Example. Fol. ^

CHAP. IV. 1. The second Head of this Book, the Courtier must consider the
inclination of the Prince, his domestic servants and Officers, as also other
Courtiers. 2. What the inclinations of a Prince are, and the reducing thereof,
either to that which concerns his greatness, or his pleasures. 3. Wherein the
greatness of a Prince consists. 4. Of the vicious pleasures and inclinations
of a Prince. 5. Princes willingly love those, who serve them in their
pleasures. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Examples hereon. Fol. ^.

CHAP. V. 1. He that will be welcome to a Prince, must second and follow his
inclinations. 2. How to ba^ish an honest man from the Court. 3. The proper
definition of the Court. 4 5, 6. Examples on the corruption of the Court. 7. A
Courtier must sometimes wink to see the wicked do what they please. 8. It is
very difficult for an honest man to live and maintain himself in Court. 9. An
honest man may live, and be patient in Court for a time. 10. How we must
understand this. 11, 12, 13. How to divert the Princes evil inclinations:
Examples of Seneca and others hereon. Fol. 13

CHAP. VI. 1. Not to oppose our selves unprofitably against the will and
pleasure of our Prince, and not to subject our selves to any base servitude. 2.
Examples on the confideration hereof. 3. That an honest man is ^itter to serve
a Prince then any other. 4. Advice for Princes rather to take an honest then
wicked servants, and that the Court participates more of evil, then good. 5.
Why vicious men are favored of some Princes. 6. Examples hereon. 7. That we
seem honester in being compared with a wicked man: The Example of Augustus and
Tiberius. 8. Advice that we speak not too freely and liberally of Princes. 9.
Examples hereon. Fol. 1^

CHAP. VII. 1. Of that sort of flattery which is most pleasing to Princes, and
chiefly of that which favors of sreenes. 2. Of too much flattery, and the
advice of Plutarck and Eschynes thereon. 3. Examples on the same subject. 4.
Who first used free flattery. 5. Another example on the same flattery. 6.
Advice thereon, and wherein, and how, we must use it. Fol. 22

CHAP. VIII. 1. The third Head of this second Book, we must not attempt to
advise a proud Prince: how Princes demand council to have their own opinions
approved, and sometimes to sound the affections of their Councillors: Examples
hereon. 2. 3. Princes make many propositions, rather to have them approved,
then consulted; together with Examples tending to that effect. 4. Before we
advise a Prince, we must endeu^r to know his intent. 5. How to bear our
selves selves to a choleric Prince, that demands our advice. 6. 7. Advantages
for a Councellor, whereof he must make use, when his advice given to his
Prince proves contrary to his expectation. 8. In unlawful matters the best way
is to de^erre, and to take time to give Council. 9. An example hereon. 10. How
we must practice the said example. Fol. 5.

CHAP. IX. 1. Remedies against the rashness and forwardness of a Prince, upon
deferring to council him, and to know how to abound in expedients. 2. Princes
do usually rather ask council to bring their purpo^es to pass then to know
what is necessary and expedient to do. 3. Consideration upon the means, taken
from the protracting of time 4. Upon the brevity of time. 5. What expedi ents
the Prince most commonly chooses: Consideration upon the tediousness;
brevity, and difficulty of a business; together with the Author his advice
upon those that are most wholesome and necessary for a Prince. 6. We must
rather impose and retort the execution of a wicked fact upon a wicked and
vicious person, then engage our selves therein. 7. Examples of Burrhus and
Anicetus to that effect. 8. The Authors opinion on his examples. 9. Advice how
to divert the Prince his vicious resolutions. 10. To use the pleasant and most
respect ^ullst demonstrations and considerations hereon. 11. As to break a
Jest herein that may steed us. 12. Considerations Upon this advice, with the
Examples of Tiberius and Domitian in the like cause. 13. Other means and
advice not to rush and oppose our selves against our Prince in his evil
inclinations, and from whence they are derived. 14. A remedi^ to assault and
fight against his wicked inclinations, and what we oppose against them. Fol. 31

CHAP. X. 1. Consideration upon the Prince his humor, which has reference to.
2. The Manners and Conditions of a chollerick Prince. 3. How to behave and
govern our selves with this humor, and that Princes are ^ame Lions. 4. The
manners and condition of a Prince of a sanguine complexion. 5. How to bear our
selves toward one of this humor. 6. Of those who properly please Princes of
this complexion. 7. The manners and conditions of a melancholy Prince. 8. How
to bear our selves with this humor. 9. Of an angry and froward humor, and of
his other imperfections. 10. The manners and conditions of a phlegmatic Prince.
11. How to behave our selves toward th^s humor. Fol. 38

CHAP. XI. 1. We must never tie our selves to the humors of that Prince, who
changes according to his age, conversation, and other incidents. 2. A Prince
is of one nature in war, and of another in peace. 3. He is subject to change
his inclination, and to settle his affection on others. 4. Examples hereon. 5.
The cause of these alterations. 6. T^ypl^ns humou^ alleged hereon. 7. Another
Example of Agamemnon in Euripides. 8. From whence proceeds the ordinary faults
of Princes. 9. Greatness and power often bewitcheth our understandings. 10
Examples of the wise men of Greece hereon. 11, 12. Notable examples of the
Pythagoriciens to the same effect. Fol 47

CHAP. XII. 1 That the suggestions and applause of vicious Persons near
Princes, serve greatly to change their humors, and consequently to debosh them.
2, 3. Examples of Princes who have permitted themselves to be led by these
sorts of men; together with the blindness and stupiditie of some Princes, upon
the ends and intents of those vitiou^ fellows. 4. Wow the Prince is betrayed
by these sorts of flatterers. 5. Examples to this effect of old Clodion. 6. Of
Seianus. 7. Of Perrini^. 8. Of Bardas. 9. Advice for Princes not to hear, or
regard these flatterers. Fol. 51

CHAP. XIII. 1. Considerations upon a Prince his domestic seruant^; and how
we may reap profit by them. Princes bear themselves differently in private
or public, and they more willingly discover themselves to their servants then
others. 2. 3. 4. Examples hereon. 5. In this point it is very difficult for a
Prince so to hide and conceal his intents and motions that his servants
d^scouer them not. 6. In Court we seek all sorts of men to effect our
affairs. 7. In Court there are no great friends, nor small enemies. 8. In
Court we must seek to make the Prince his servants our friends. Fol. 55

CHAP. XIV. 1. Of the great ones in Court, the sixth Head of this second Book,
and that they are of diverse parts and degrees. 2. Of those who are of a Noble
blood and house, and yet not in credit and reputation at Court, and how we must
bear our selves toward them. 3. Considerations of them, and what their power
i^. 4. The examples of Arch^laus upon these considerations. 5. Other
considerations upon the same. 6. How the Prince his favorite m^st bear
himself in opposing great men. 7. 8. The profit which redounds to him thereby.
9. Wholesome advice and council for a favorite. 10. How it must be understood
when we say, we contest and contend with a great man. 11. What it is for a
Favorite to oppose the enterprises of great men. 12, 13. The Example of
Cardinal Ximenes, Favorite to Isabel Queen of Spain upon the subject, with a
brief abridgement of his life. 14. 15. Another example upon the lamentable end
of Simon^ra, Favorite to Francis Sforza Duke of Millan. Fol. 59

CHAP. XV. 1. Of Greatmen who are famillar with the Prince, without having any
authori^ie or command in the affairs of Estate. 2. Of their Power, and how we
must seek them, and reap profit by them. 3. 4. Of Great men who have
authority in affairs, and yet small access nea^e the Prince: of the
inclination of Princes under whom these great men are. 5. Of Princes who give
all the command of their affairs to one or two, and of the c^rbe or reyne,
wherewith they commonly restrain them, thereby to fashion them wholly to his
will and pleasure, without leaving them power to do otherwise, and to
dispossess them off his favor and their greatness when he pleases. 6. 7. How
to bear our selves toward these great men. 8. 9. Of great men who are in
favor with the Prince, and have authority in the affairs of the Estate, and
how we must seek and observe them. 10. 11. We must examine the degrees of
greatmens favors, from whom we may expect assistance. 12. And when we cannot
make our selves known of greatmen, we must seek those who have some interrest
or power in them, or are familiar with them, and so make our selves known to
them. Fol. 66

CHAP. XVI. 1. The seventh Head of this Book: of those who are under great men
of whom there are two sorts, one which may assist us and how. 2. Considerations
upon both; and how to purchase friends in Court. 3. Of those who may cross and
oppose us, who are of three sorts. ^. Of those who hate us, and are our
enemies. 5. It is a difficult thing to be a Neuter in Court; and of great
faction and partialities in the Courts of Princes. 6. How some have withstood
and prevented such partialities, and how they very profitably made use of
Neutralitie. 7. 8. Examples upon the wisdom of this Neutralitie. 9. Solon his
law against Neutralitie. 10. How and wherefore Friendships must be conserved
among different parties. Fol. 72

CHAP. XVII. 1. Of enemies who hate us, because they have former ly offended
us. 2. A remedy against such enemies, and how to beware of them. 3, ^. That
threatenings do more offend then profit those who practice them, and that they
procure us shame and weakness if they take not effect; those who practice
them, and that they procure us shame and weakness, if they take not effect. 5. A
discourse against revenge. 6, 7, ^. How to bear our selves when we receive
injuries, and how to seek the means of reconciliation and friendship, whether
the injuries be fierce and outrageous or no. ^. O^ injury done us in an
outbrauing and daring manner, and of the revenge thereof. Fol. 77

CHAP. XVIII. 1. Our first remedy against injuries offered us by great men, is
to confer very respectively with them 2. The second, to desemble patiently.
3, 4. Considerations hereon. 5. Of those who are our enemies, because we have
formerly offended them. 6, 7. Advice hereon, with consideration and means how
to bear our selves herein. 8. That commonly fear rather then revenge more
violently exasperates our enemies against us. 9. How to appease his passion and
violence. 10. Another way is to assist our enemies in their affairs, that
thereby they may become our friends: Example of Agesilaus herein. 11. A common
subtlety of Courtiers in this cause. 12. Another fetch and subtlety of
Eutrapelus, and what it was. 13. Another fetch against our enemy, is to second
him in his evil intents, thereby to ruin him. 14. That we must assist our
enemy, if we cannot hinder or ^nnoy him. 15. An excellent example hereon. 16.
Another example and expedient to prevent that he wrong us not. 17. Another
means for us in plaguing our enemy, is to oppose one that is a greater enemy
to him, then our self, with a very pertinent example hereon to the same effect
of Gerlac, Archbishop and Elector of Mentz upon the election of Adolphus, Earl
of Naslaw to the Empire. Fol. 81

CHAP. XIX. 1. Of envious people, the eighth part of this Book, and how to
bear our selves towa^ds them. 2, 3. Remedies against envy, to make common
that which is desired or envied ^. Another remedy to ^^oyde vanity and
superstition, and that which accompanies it. 5. Considerations thereon. 6, 7.
To make our selves entreated to receive that we wish and desire. Example hereof
in Cardinal X menes. 8. Considerations upon this example by another of
Constantine the Mesopolitan^. Fol. ^^

CHAP. XX. 1 Of Competitors or Emulators, who are less malicious then the
envious. 2. That they are won and purchased, either through honor or
vanity. 3, 4. How to bear ourselves with them. 5. Public suits are odious.
6, 7. Sure Council and means on these suits. 8. We must not be an Emulator
or Contendant with one more favored then ourselves. Example of Lepidus and
Seianus hereon. 9. That Justice usually is of less power in Court then favor.
Fol. 92

CHAP. XXI. 1. The ninth division of this second Book, containing
considerations upon the examples of those who have bin disgraced at Court. 2.
The causes of our favor, and of the deminishing of our repu^ation in Court. 3.
Of favor proceeding from a Courtiers own default. 4. Enterprises attempted by
Favorites against their Prince, being the true and first cause of their ruin.
5. Advice and precaution for a Favorite to support himself. 6. 7. The
description of a Courtier in the Example of Seianus. 8. The issue of Seianus
his ambition. 9, 10. Considerations of hi^ Ambition, and of Tiberius his
proceedings, being more subtle then himself. 11. Ambition is commonly rash
and impudent. 12. Tiberius founded the affections of his great ones, before he
enterprised any thing against Seianus. 13, 14. The subtlety of Tiberius to
intrappe Seianus. 15. Those who stand betwixt hope and fear are more
irresolute and easy to be surprisde, 16, 17, 18. The policy of Tiberius to
ruin Seianus. 19, 20. The downfall and ruin of Seianus. 21, Another example
of the downfall and ruin of Perrinis, being favorites to the Emperor
Commodus. 22. The designs and machynations of a subject against his Prince
very seldom take effect, how cunningly soever compacted. 23, 24, 25, 26. The
example of Boylas, being favorite to the Emperors of Constantinople, and his
designs, etc. 27. A subjects pride is always odious to his Prince. Fol. 96

CHAP. XXII. 1. The tenth division of this Book, containing the causes of
disgrace near the Prince. 2, 3. The first cause is of boasting and reproaching
our services done, with Examples hereon. 4. The second cause is, to reprove or
complain of the Prince his Actions. 5. The third cause is to reveal and abuse
secrefie, and to desire we make known we gouer^e the Prince. Example of
Thurinus, a seller of smoke under the Emperor Heliogabalus. 6 The fourth
cause, is not to contend with Nobles or great men, either through pride or
vanity, Example hereon of Plan tianus. 7. Example of Enguerrand of Marigny. 8.
The fifth cause is, to be an Instrument of division among the Nobles, with an
example thereon. Fol. 110

CHAP. XXIII. 1. That we must not contend with those, who are more favored in
Court then ourselves. 2. The council of Germanicus to Aggrippina hereon. 3. A
Courtier must know in what degree of favor he is with h^ Prince. ^. The
Courtier who is lincked to the will of his Prince is better beloved, then he
who is wedded to his interest, dignity and reputation, Example hereof in the
quarrel of Craterus and Hephestion, and the wisdom of Alexander in
reconciling them. 5. Considerations upon the degrees of favor which the
Courtier has in his Prince. 6. Our contempt of Favorites is more revenged,
then toward the Prince. 7. The reason of this consideration yielded by Dion
the Historiographer. Fol. 114

CHAP. XXIV. 1. Bride in the execution of an Office is odious to a Prince, who
after punish^th it, the Example of Aluaro de Luna hereon* 2. The sixth cause of
a Courtiers disgrace, is the hatred of the Commons, and the envy of great men
against him. 3, 4, 5. The examples of unfortunate Favorites, who have been put
to death. 6. Infidelity is the seventh cause of a Courtiers disgrace. 7. It is
very difficult to know the secrets of a Prince. 8. The censure of Phil lippides
on those, who reveal their Princes secrets. 9 The opinion of Hieron Prince of
Syracusa hereon. Fol 11^

CHAP. XXV. 1. Inteligence with his Masters enemies, is the eighth cause of a
Courtiers disgrace. 2. Example of Cardinal Balue hereon, his descent and
advancement. 3. Example of Cardinal Du Prat, and his subtlety. 4. Example of
a Cardinal of the Emperor Frederick. 5. Another example of Stilica. Fol. 121

CHAP. XXVI. 1. The ninth cause of a Courtiers disgrace is when he is the
Author of pernicious counsel. 2. The examples of Stilica and Olympius. 3. The
Court Favorite should rather council Peace then War. 4. Examples hereon, and
the subtlety of Jouius to engage his Master in War, and yet to free himself
from envy. Fol. 124

CHAP. XXVII. 1. The eighth division of this Book, containing a Courtiers
disgrace, procured and occasioned three manner of ways by our Enemies,
Enuiers, or Emulators 2. By absenting him whom we would disgrace, which is
effected many ways. 3. To avoid quarrels, without pretext of an honorable
Commission, Example on this pretext. 4. To avoid envy and jealousy. Example
of Tiberius, who withdrew himself to Rhodes. 5. Or of our selves by the
command of our Prince. 6. Or when we will withdraw one from an Office, who is
far off. 7, 8. Examples hereon 9. To cause him to be sent far off, thereby
more easily to callumniate him in his absence. 10. Or to cause him to be made
away in some enterprise. Example herein. 11. Another example hereon. Fol. 127

CHAP. XXVIII. 1. The second means which our enemies practice to disgrace us,
and to make us vmbragious and odious to our Prince, consisting in two ways. 2.
To callumniate us, and considerations on Callumny. 3. That Callumnies are very
powerful in Princes conceits. 4. How Callumnies are made resemble on the
other. 5. The effects of Callumnies. 6. Why Callumniators take occasion to
Callumniate. 7. Examples on this occasion. 8. Subtilties to throw one into
despair that is callumniated, and an example hereon. 9. Another example
thereof. 10, 11. Other subtilties to that effect, and examples thereon. 12.
Another example of the subtlety of Callumny practiced by Seianus to ruin
Aggrippina. 13. The subt^ltie of Callumniators, by persuading Servants to
callumniate their Masters. 14, 14. Examples hereon.

CHAP. XXIX. 1. To induce another to do evil, thereby to have cause to
calumniate him. Example herein of Firmius Catus against Lybo, allied to the
house of the Casar^. 2. To induce others to speak evil of our Prince
purpose'y to accuse him* Example on this induction. 3. A means to make
accusations and call^mnies seem true, by falsifying of letters, and the remedy
of this calllumn^. 4. Domestic servants gaind to be false witnesses, to make
a callumny seem true. 5. 6, 7. Examples hereon. Fol 141

CHAP. XXX. 1. The trust a Prince conceiues in an accuser, ma^es his callumny
seem true: example hereon. 2. The badopinion the Prince c^nceiues of the
accused, makes the callumny seem true, and is the sooner believed 3, 4.
Examples hereof. 5. The subtilty of Arbet^o herein to withdraw Vrsicinus from
Court, and then to obliege him. Fol. 145

CHAP. XXXI. 1. The reports of matters pretended to be true, seem to be true.
2, 3, 4. Example of ^iberius upon his reports. 5. How to reprove a Tyrant for
his wickedness. 6 The Conclusion of callumnies. Fol. 147

CHAP. XXXII. 1. The second subtlety which our enemies practice to make us
odious to our Prince, is their praising of us, whereby they desen^ble their
hatred. 2, 3. How some have used Princes: examples hereon. 4. Advice to
Courtiers, that Princes use to pravse and flatter him whom they will ruin. 5.
Examples hereon. 6. That there are some who praise others, to the end the
Prince may be jealous and suspi^ions of them. 7. A notable speech of Julian
upon this Hypocrisy: 8 Another hypocrisy to pray^e one, thereby to disprayse
another. 9. Another to praise the dead, thereby to shame the liui^g, as did
Agustus. 13. Another subtlety to reprove and excuse, practiced like wise by
Agustus. 11. Advice and premonitions against these subtilties and hypocrisies.
12. The third means which our enemies and competitors use to disgrace, and
bani^h us from Court, and consequently to ruin us, which is through power and
force, and how it is practiced. 13, 14. Examples of this third means. Fol. 149

CHAP. XXXIII. 1. Of the disgrace of Courtiers, which proceeds from the evil
inclination of the Prince, being the ninth division of this second Book.
Seneca a iuditious Courtier. 2. The envy and suspicion of the Prince is cause,
that oftentimes he is ill served; and how it comes to pass. 3, 4. Examples of
some Courtiers hereon. 5. The Author his judgment on this proceeding. 6. How
to free our selves from the jealousy of our Prince. 7. Examples hereon. 8.
Envy and jealousy is a sickness common to most Princes, but for less cause
to one the another. 9. Example of such jealousy. 10. How Courtiers should
bear themselves toward Princes of this nature and condition. Fol. 155

CHAP. XXXIIII. 1. The last cause of a Courtiers disfavor or fall is the death
of his Prince, of him who is esteemed happiest in Court. 2. The Prince who
succeeds to the estate, does sooner advance his own servants then those of his
Predecessor. 3* 4. Favor is continued us after our Prince his death, either in
making our selves fit for affairs, or in oblieging his successor by some
special action, or agreeable service. Example hereon. 5. A notable advice and
council upon these confiderations, thereby to avoid the ill will of the
Prince. Humility is necessary to mainetaine great men in their greatness. 6.
We must with a vigilant eye observe the praises and disprayses given us* 7.
The common foundation of Callumnies, and the remedy which we must thereunto
apply. 8. To reform those de^ects whereof we are taxed and accusde, whether it
be in discreet speeches, or by clearing and interpreting that which may be ill
taken. 9. Not to absent our self from him, by whom we fear to be standered.
10. To make Friends in Court, to defend us against all Callumnio^ and false
reports; and that in Court every one seeks to depresse and ducke his fellow.
Fol. 159

CHAP. XXXV. 1. To sly Pride and Ostentation, for fear Jest our Prince enter
into Jealousy of us. 2. Example of Cardinal Spinosa for his Ostentation. 3.
4. The Courtier must not defer to rule and moderate himself upon the
declining of his greatness, but contrariwise to begin by times to conform
himself to modesty. Examples of those who have done otherwise. 5 The Courtier
must make as many friends as he can, and why. 6. Consideration on this point.
Fol. 165

CHAP. XXXVI. 1. The Courtier which is beloved and f^^oured of the Prince, must
be discreet in his demands and requests which he makes for others to his
Master, and the reason thereof. 2. The qualit^e and nature of the demands he
makes to his Prince. 3. Not to boast of his reputation. 4. How to bear
himself in the execution of his commands 5. Our Courtier must refuse no
Command or Commission from the Prince: how Princes measure and esteem the
greatness of their Commands. 6. Our Courtier must always be ready near the
Prince for fear to be surprisde. Precepts hereon. 7. How he must bear
himself to those who are discontented. 8. To speak soberly and modestly of
the Prince and his servants. 9. Advice not to break or contest with our
Prince. Fol. 167.

CHAP. XXXVII. 1. Advice upon the continuance of our Courtiers advancement and
reputation, being the thirteenth division of this Book. 2. From whence
proceed^ the favor of Princes toward us, and of the causes that induce a
Prince to love a Courtier. 3. That favor lasts not long which only proceeds
from the grace and comeliness of his person. 4. Of the conformity of humors
in the Prince and his Favorite, that the privileges and advantages which a
Favorite enjoys, ought cause him make good use of his time, and to settle his
fortune thereby. Fol 172.

CHAP. XXXVIII. 1. Of the favor of Princes toward women. 2. How they bear
themselves to subsist in reputation near the Prince. 3. Example of Popea
toward Nero. 4. The affection of some Princes has been retainde more through
subtilties, for fear of being wronged and defamed by Women, then by enjoying
them. 5, 6. That favors which proceed of pleasures and services done, is not
of long continuance, and why. 7. A Prince is angry if we believe he is
indebted to a subject for any great or singular service, and therefore refuses
to see him. Considerations hereon. Princes are commonly forgetful in rewarding
their servants. 8. Considerations hereon, it is better for us to be bound to
our Prince, then our Prince to us.

CHAP. XXXIX. 1. Of Princes pleasures, and of three sorts of excess, whereunto
they run. 2. The first is Love, and of these who serve them in their loves.
3. The second is cruelty, the envy of cruelties returned on the Masters head,
who caused them to be executed. Example of Caesar Borgia 4. Considerations on
this example, and that those who make themselves the executioners of Princes
cruelties do it not long because they are quickly ruined. 5. Example of Nero.
6. Of the cou^tousnesse of a Prince, and the effects thereof, the favor of
those who serve and second Princes in this excess is durable, provided that
they moderate their carriage and actions, and not excessiuely enrich
themselves. 7. Considerations upon the carriage and demenor of such servants.
8, 9. Examples drawn from our France, as of Peter de la Berche, in the time of
Phillip the Fair; o^ Enguerrand de Marigny, and of Monsieur de Gyac, and
others 10. The Authors advice upon such servants, and how our Courtier must
care himself, that he serve not unprofitably in his charge and place, but
rather in great honor and reputation. Fol. 179

CHAP. XL. 1. Of the favor proceeding from some capacity and sufficiency
beyond the vulgar, and what we must consider therein. 2. Our Courtier must not
be Competitor, nor contend with his Prince for sufficiency in that wherein he
pretends, and desires to excel. 3, 4. Examples hereon. 5. Not to show himself
too wise before the Prince. The council of an Ancient wise man, to show our
selves in all things inferior to our Prince. 6. Conclusion upon the
inconstan^y of Court favor. 7. Whereunto our Courtier must address and
prepare himself. The Authors advice hereon. 8. The Authors advice to our
Courtier, to retire from Court before the declining of his fortune. 9.
Donsiderations on the fortunes of Courtiers. 10. The Conclusion and excuse of
the Author, taking his instructions and wishes from some Latin Verses of
Seneca, which he alleges to pass the remainder of his days in tranquillity,
peace and freedom. Fol. 184

FINIS.
THE FRENCH STATIONER TO the Reader.
FRiendly Reader, here I give thee the third Edition of this excellent Treatise
of the Court, since I have found it very pleasing and agreeable to thee, except
only to some who found fault, that they were frustrated (as they say) of the
Marginall Quotations in the second Edition, which indeed the Author himself
had carefully and diligently inserted, rather by grave Authorities to confirm
his opinion in the matters he alleged and treated of, then that it was
otherwise needful. Wherefore to content both the wise and curious, I have
imprinted and anexed them by themselves at the end of the last book inform of
Annotations; assuring my self, that if thou pry narrowly into them, thou
shall find them more corrected and reformed, and better rangd and rancked in
their proper places, with their true collations of passages, then they were in
the first Original which I recovered, and also in many places augmented and
illustrated far richer, then in any of the precedent Editions, whereof I
thought good to advertise thee, that thereby thou accept and take in good part
the care and diligence which I have had to please thee, and to give, thee full
satisfaction in all points which concern my self.

Farewell.
The Quotations of the First BOOK.
Page 2. l. 30. There is more hazard and fortune then ^ar^age and conduction.
Dubitare cogor, f^to and sort nascen li, vt ^ae e^a, ^ta principi^^ i^cli^atio
in hos, ^ff^nsio i^ illos: an si^ aliq^id in ^ostris consilijs ^iceatque inter
abruptam con^u naci^m, and defor^e obs^quiu^, pergere iter ambitione ac
periculis vacuum. So Ta^^tus lib. 4. de Annal.

Page 3. l. 13. In that he h^^ not formerly ^asted the fruits and enjoyed the
effects of his liberality. Iam reclusa pixide ai^bat Caesar videri palam non
suam voluntare^, sed ipsius fortu^am obstitisse q^o minus hactenus beneficiu^
sit consecutus. So C^rion lib. 3. in Chron.

l. 25. But the whole course of our life is the same: Vitam regit fortuna, non
sapientia. So Cicero.

Page 10. l 25 By that decency and gravity: (...) So the Grecians.

Page 13. l. 5. Or into a reproach of any shameful truth. Quam multam, ex vero
trahunt, acre^ sui memoriam relinquunt.

l. 11. Great men are subject a long time to remember those of this nature. Qui
gratia Augusta sloueras, aptus allicendis feminatum animis, dicax idem, and
Tyberium accerbis facietjs irridere solitus, quarum apu^ praepotentes in longum
memoria est. So Tacitus lib. 5. de Annal. speaking of the Consul. Fusius.

l. 20. Rather then through ab^tteriest or sharp reply: M^lidictum
interpretando facies acrius. So Publianus Mimus counseled.

Page 14. l 3. As ^^aues and fools use to do: Histrionem and Philosophum
nihil amplius quam vrbe, Italiaque summouit, vel contemptu omnis infamiae, vel
ne faciendo dolorem irritaret ingenia. So Suetonius in Vit. Nero.

l. 8. Nor jest at those who are miserable: In calamitoso risus etiam i^iutia
est. So Publianus Mimus.

Page 18. l. 28. So as we thereby disesteeme and undervalue his worth: Licet
it a largiri vt vnusquisque etiam si cum mult^s accepit, in populo se esse non
putet. Nemo non habeat aliquam familiarem notam, per quam speret se promptius
admissum. To this purpose Seneca in lib. 1. De Benefic.

Page 20. l. 26. Is to perform it in that manner* Nullum beneficium esse duco,
id quod quibusfacias non placet; So Plato: and, videamus quod oblatum maxim
voluptati f^turum sit habenti, ne numera superuacua mittamus. So Seneca in his
lib. 1. De Controuers.

Page 21. l. 10. Others are profitable: Quaedam beneficia pulam danda, quaedam
secreto, quae consequi gloriosum est vt militaria dona, and honores, vt
quidquid aliud notitia^ pulchrius fit rursus quae non producunt, nec
honestiorem faciunt, sed succurrunt infirmitati, egestati, ignominae tacit;
danda sunt, vt nota sint solis quibus prosunt. lib. 2. De Benefic.

l. 22. With submission and ba^ofulnesse: Molestum verbum est onerosum, and
demisso vultu est dicendum rog^. So Seneca lib. 2.

Page 22. l. 5. Then to a Usurer who lends forth his money to receive it again
with interest: Turpis foeneratio est beneficium expensum far. So Seneca lib.
2. De Benefic.

l. 13. He did it purposely: Grave est homini pudenti petere aliquid magnum ab
eo de quo se been meritu^ putet, ne it quod petit, exigere magis quam rogare,
and in mercedis potius quam beneficij loco numerare videatur. So Cicero in
Epist. ad Curionem.

Page 25. l. 13. For those are always best welcome:

-- Acceptissima semper. Ovid. Munera sunt author quae pretiosa facit.

lin. 19. And to whom we would be no way engaged: Grave tormentum est d^bere
eui nolis, contra iucundum est ab eo accepisse beneficium quem amare etiam post
iniuriam possis. So Seneca.

Page 26. l. 6. They reward them with contempt: Adeo in contrarium itur, vt
quosdam habeamus infestissimos, non post beneficium tantum, sed propter
beneficia. So Seneca: and beneficia ensque laeta funt que videntur exolui posse
vbin u'tu^n antecedere pro gratia odium redditur. So Ta^itus in Annal. lib. 4.

Page 29. l. And so likewise are pur* men: Grande dolorem ingeni^^m est,
miserisque ^e^tsol^^^ia rebus. And another said, lugeniu^, mala sepe n^ouent,
Et v^xatio dat Int^ll^ctum. So Salo^^op.

Page 31. l. 25. S^^a they be more im^ginatiue: (...). So ^^^^ in Diol. 16.

Page ^6. l 2. It is a miracle: Nullu^ ^^^^ in^er^n side mixtur a demeni^^^, Of
which ^^^^ ion is Seneca.

l. 13 Some by wine: Nunquam nisi potus ad a'ma profili^e di^^n la. So ^^^^.

Page 43. l 10. Whereof Seimus took his advantage. So G^a^u p^as^^orem and
insidijs magis oportun^u^^. Tacitus.

Page 45. l. 10. Mas^^nius the Philosopher was l. ^^^^ al: Miseuaer s^ l^^^^ais
^^^^ ^^^^, Equ^^^sitis oldinis, st^^^m Philosphia ^^. pl^^c^^a St^^^^ ^^^^.
C^ptabatque ^^^^ us mamp^li^, bo^^ p^^is a^ b^lli dis^^i^^na diss^^^ns, ^^^^
^^^^. ^^^^ pl^^risque ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ us ^^^^ n^^^^nt qui pro^^ ^ c^^^^ que and
alijs ^^^^, omisis^ct n^^n ^^^^ ^^tiam, So Tacitus Annol. lib 2.

Page 48 l. 7. So vain and talkatiue: Laetitia I^quax tesest, atque
ostentat^ix sui. So Symaceus.

Page 62. l. ^. Says Lucian: (...).

Page 64. l 18. Which may s^^^e up hop^ in us: (...). In the ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^
^^cuippe lib. 5. Et (...). So Si^^sius.

Page 69. l. 3. But difficulty forgets an ill one: Altius iniuriae qua^ merita
^^^^. So Sen.

Page 71. l. 12. When they are on the point to reu^nge or p^e^udice us: Ira
quae ^egitur nocet, prof^ssa perdunt odia, vindicta locum. Nam ij sunt inumici
pessimi, front, H^^ro, cord tristi, quos neque vt ^^^^, ^eque vt mittas,
sciat. So Cecillus in Aul. Gel.

Page 77. l. 27. The wrong and evil that is done us: Grauissima est
probihominis it a cundia. So Publicanus Mimius.

Page 78 l. 24. And seek folks: Prudentes dicu^t iram nasci ex mollitie mentis
consu^u^ id afferentes argumento probab^l^ quod iracundiores sunt in clunibus
languidi, and foemina, n arbus and inuenibus sen^s, and felicibus aerum^esi. So
Ammian. lib. 17.

l. 30. More polished and civilized: (...) Menand^s in Scol^^s. ^^^^ asperisque
regi^ui^us diutiuae niues haerent, ast vbi ea aratro, domo facta ^chus nitec,
dum loqueris leuis pruina delabitur similiter inspectoribus ira concidit, feras
quidem mentes obsidet, eruditas prelabitur. Petronius.

Page 86. l. 11. Although he be our Parent: (...). So Aristot.

Page 93. l. 15. As they do of evil: Iners malorum remedium ignorantia. So
Seneca in Oedip.

Page 97. l. 12. There being no reason (...). A Greek Proverb.

Page 99. l. 23. For the future performs likewise as much: Non est paruum
tormentum aduersum aliquid formidare venturum: dum semper grauius aestimatur
emergere quod timetur. So Cassiodorus.

Page 105. l. 22. We shall not then heap up. desire upon desire: Ante omnia
necesse est seipsum aestimare quia fere plus nobis videmur posse quam possimus.
Aestimanda sunt deinde ipsa quae agtedimur and vires nostrae cum istis quae
tentaturi sumus comparandae. So Seneca in lib de Tranquilitatis. And

Dulcis in expertis cultura potent is amici
Expertus metuit. So Horace in Sat.
Page 107. l. 4. We must frame our wills to perform that which we can: Quoniam
non potest sieri quod vis, id velis quod possis. So Terence.

Page 108. l. ^. To foresee good or evil: Namque haec audita a docto
meminissem viro; futuras mecum commentabar miserias, aut mortem acerbam, aut
exilij moestam fugam, aut semper aliquam molem meditabar mali: vt si qua
inuecta diritas casu foret; nemo imparatum cura laceraret repens. Cicero in
Tuscul. ex Vrip.

l. 20. Premeditated dangers always least prejudice and hurt us: ^ela praeuisa
minus feriunt. A latin Proverb.

Page 112. l. 11. What in a word we term Affability: (...). Alexius Stobbeus.

l. 13. Degenerates into flattery: (...). So Anaxander in Athene lib. 6.

l. 19. As toward particular Persons: (...). and Theoguis (...). So
Appollodorus in Stobbeus.

Page 122. l. 9. But having ouerpast the violence and impetuositie of our
sorrows:

Quid, quod adulandi gens prudentissima laudat
Sermonem indocti, faciem deformis amici,
Et longum inualidi collum ceruicibus aequst
Hercul^s, Anteum procul a tellure tenentis?
Miratur vocem angustam, qua deterius nec
Ille sonat, quo mordetur gallina marito.
Natio comoeda est, rides? maiore cachinno
Concutitur; flet, si lachrymas conspexit amici
Nec dolet: igniculum brumae si tempore poseas
Accipit Andromedem: si dixeris, astuo, sudat.
So Iuvenall in Satyr. 111.
Page 132. l. 20. Noble men and Gentlemen: Et quanquam virtus gloria, atque
alia. optanda bonis suberabant tamen met at contemptor aui^ us, and sup^rbia
commune nobilitatis malum. ^o Salust. de Metell.

l 27. They not only cont^mne: Verum it a sunt omnes nostri diuites: si quid
beneficias leuior plu^r^a est gratia si quid p^ecatum est plumb as iras gerunt.
So Plato ^^ Pe^ulus.

Page 132. l 15. They are Arrogant: Non est quod putes omnibus diuitias co^
ueni^e. Nihil est irso^entius nonitio diuite. So R^ffinus ad V^b.

Page 134. l 2. Those who are powerful: Non vides vt ma^orem quamque fortunam
major ira co^^itatur? in diuitibus Nobilibusque and Magistratibus precipue
apparet, cum quid leave and mane in animo ^rat, secunda se aura sustulit:
felicitas i^acundiam nut^it, vbi auies superbas assentator and tuiba
circumtent. So Seneca lib 3. In Ira.

Page 162. l. 13. That we should rather praise then d^^praise: Sieve plus, sieve
^inus* sieve idem p^aestas, lauda vel infe^iotem vel superiorem, vel parem,
superiorem quia nisi laudandus ille, non potest ipse lauda^i; inferiorem aut
parem, quia per^inet ad tuam gloriam, quam maximu^ vide^i quem praecedis vel ex
aequas. So Pliny ^^^^ ^^^^^st. 17.

Page 164. l. 23. Then to blame himself: Omnis quippe oftentatio non caret
suspicione m^ndacij. Quia quicquid assumitur proprium non p^tatu^: de hinc
iactantia auara laudis multum de coquit de pudore. So Symmachus.

Page 165. l. 9. Seeming rather desirous: (...). So Elb^nus in Stol b^us ^er.
80.

Page 168. l. 25. To manage and conduct his Ambition: Ambitio mult^s mortales
falsos sie^i sub ^git, aliud clausu^ in p^c^oie, aliud in hugua pion ptum
habere. And ^^^^ where. An icitias in imitiasq^e non ex re sed ^x commodo
estimare, magalque vultum quam ingenium bonum habere. So Salust^. Catalinar.

Page 169. l. 10. Which may pr^^^dice either our selves or friends: (...). So
Euripid. in Trag. Ocdip.

l 23. Seeming in their countenances not to know: Ne dissimulans suspectior
sieret. So Tacitus.

Page 170. l. 1. Val^ns not able to punish his mutinous Soldiers: Quibus vnus
metus si intelligere videre^tur. Solum remedium insidia^um si non
intelligerentur. So Tacit. And likewise, Si intelligere credetetur, vim
metuens. Tacit in A^mall. de Archel.

Page 171. l. 12. Discouers his Masters secrets: Reges dicuntur multis vigere
culullis

Et torquere mero, quem perspexisse laborant.
An sit amicitia dignus. So Horace, in Ar. P^.
l. 14. Whereof we after repent: (...). So Stob.

l. 15. How we bear our selves in our Choler: (...). So Euenus Ap. Stob.

l. Ibid. Prosperity and Adversity:

Ingenium res aducrsae nudare solent,
Caelare secundae. So Horace.
l. 18. Who have used play:

Ludimus incauti, studioque aperimur ab ipso,
N^daque perlusus pectora nostra patent.
So Ovid.
l. 23. But this will crave time: (...). A Greek Proverb.

Page 175. l. 28. The answer of Mucianus: Namque Mucianus tam celeri victoria
anxius, and in praesens vrbe potiretur expertem se belli gloriaeque ratus, ad
Primum and varum media scriptitabat instandum coeptis aut rursus contandi
vtilitates edisserens: atque i^a ita compositus vt ex euentu rerum aduersa
abnuerct, vel prospera agnos^eret. So Tacit. in Anall. li. 3.

Page 176. l 26. Every one persuades himself his demand is just: Pars
beneficij est quod petitur, si been neges: (...). So Halycarn.

Page 177. l. 6. As said Aulus Sempronius: Nihilaeque amarum quam diu pendere,
aequiore quidem animo ferunt praecedi spem suam quam trahi: plerique autem hoc
vitium est ambitione praua differendi promissa, mayor sit rogantium turba,
qualis regiae potentiae ministri sunt, quos delectat superbiae suaelongum
spectaculum, minusque se iudicant posse, nisi diu multumque singulis quid
possi^t ostendant, nihil confestim, semel faciunt, injuriae illorum precipites
lenta beneficia sunt. So Senec.

Page 178. l. 20. This refusal will be taken: Minus decipitur cui negatur
celeriter. So Pub. Mimus.

Page 179. l. 22. In supporting injuries patiently: Notissima vox est eius qui
in cultu regum consenuerat, cum illum quidam interrogaret quomodo rarissimam
rem in Aula consecutus fuisset senectutem; iniurias, inquit, serendo and
gratias agendo, saepe adeo vindecare iniuriam non expedit, vt ne fateri quidam
expediat. So Sen. lib. 2. in Ira. Conformable whereunto is this: pertraxere ad
Domitia^um, qui paratus simulatione in arrogantia^ compositus and audijt preces
excusantis, and cum anui^set, agi sibi gratias passus est: n^c erubuit
beneficij inuidia. So Suet. And si sapiens iniurias fortunae moderate fert
quanto magis hominu^ potentium quosscis fortunae manu^ esse. So Seneca. And
Lysimachus aequo animo Regis veluti parentis contumelia^ tulit. So Justin.

Page 182. l. 12. Through their headlong impatiencie, have ship-wrack'd their
Fortunes: Nonnunqua^ parua res praebuit materia^ adipescendi fauoris. So
Seneca. But the example which he gives to Brutidius to this purpose is
Excellent: Brutidiu^ artibus honestis copiosu^ and sirectuiter pergerer, ad
clarissima quaeque iterum, festinatio extimulabat; dum aequalis, de
insuperiores, postremo suas-met-ipse spes anteire parat, sp^etisque quae tar^a
cum secu^itate, ^rae^ atura vel cum exitio properant. Ibid.

The Quotations of the Second Book.
Page 6. l. I. Salustius near the same Emperor: Salustius quam prompto ad
honores cap^ssendos a ^itu, Moe^ n^tem aemulatus sine dignitate Senat^^ia
^ul^os triu^aphalium, consula^iumque po^^ntia anteijt, diue^s ^s is a v^terum
instituto, per culium and munditias copiaque and affl^entia, luxu propior.
Sube^ar tamen vigor any ^^^^ i^gentibus negotijs par, co acrior quo som^um and
incitiam ^agis ostentabat. So Tacit. in Anal. lib. 3.

l. 4. Tacitus reports that Mella: Mella quibus Gallio and Seneca parentibus
natus, petitione ho^orum abstinue^at, per ambitionem praeposteram, vt l'ques
Romanus consula^ibus potentia aequaretur. simul acquirendae pecuuiae brenius
i^er credebat, per procurationes administrandis Principis negotijs. Ibid.

Page 11. l. 6. Taci^us de^aints Seianus to be: Co^pus illi laborum tolera^s,
animus audax, sui o^tegens in alios criminator iuxta adulatio and superbia,
palam compositus pudot, in^us su^^ia apisceudi libidio, So Tacit, in Anal. lib.
4.

l. 11. As Tiberius did P. Flaccus and L. Piso: Postea Princeps in ipsa
publicorum morum correptione cum Pomp^nio Flacco, andC. pisone ^octem.
continuumque biduum epulando, potandoque consumpsit: quotum alteri praefecturam
vrbis confestim detulit codicillis quoque incundissimos, and omnium honorum
amicos professus. So Suetonius chap. 42.

l. 20. The same Emperor: Ignotissimam quaesturae candidatum nobilissi^is ante
posuit, ob epotam in conuiuio, propinante, vim amphoram. Ibid in Ibid.

l. 29. Made him choose Tigillinus: Ualidior Tigillinus in animo Principis ex
intimis libidinibus assumptus. So Tacitus in Annal. lib. 14.

l. 30. Drew near him C. Petronius: C. Petronius Arbiter elegantiae inter
paucos familiarium Neroni assumptus est, dum nihil amoenum, and molle
affluentia putat, nisi quod ^i Petronius approbauisset. Ibid. in Annal. lib. 16.

Page 12. l. 25. Such a one as is usually put in the execution of the like
charge:

Homo rudis and asper.
Procuratorem vultu qui preferat ipso.
So ^^ Ancient.
l. 31. The Statutes and Laws of his Prince and Council: (...). So Nicetas.

Page 41. l. 3. To second their inclinations:

Nemo suos (haec est Aulae natura potentis)
Sed domini mores habet. Martial.
l. 11. He indeed: Malus est minister regij imperij pudor. Haud est facile
mandatum scelus audere, verum iusta, qui reges timet deponat aut pellat ex
animo decus. So Seneca. And

Aude aliquid breuibus Gyaris and carcere dignu,
Si vis esse aliquid, -- So Iuvenal.
Page 15. l. 1. Committed many cruelties: Sed cum impie peremptus exequijs
suffragantibus ad praefecturam venisse hominem comperisset immeritam, exorsit
ad agenda sperandaque similia, and Histrionis ritu mutata repent persona
studio nocendi concepto incedebat oculis infestis and rigidis praefecturam autu
nans adfore propediem, si ipse quoquese contaminasset insontium poenis. So Amm.
Marcell. lib. 23.

Page 17. l. 11. Burrus and Seneca: Afranius Burrus, and Anneus Senneca
rectores imperatoriae iuu^ntae, iuuantes inu^cem, quo facilius lubricam
principis aetatem, si virtutem aspernaretur, voluptatibus concessis retinerent.
Et delapso Nerone in amorem libertae, metuebatur in stupra feminarum illustri^i
prorumperet illa libidine prohiberetur. Atque ex Sen^c^ familiaribus A^naeus
Serenus simulatione amoris aduersus eandem libe^tam primas adoleratis cupidines
velauerat, praebueratque nomen, vt quam princeps furtim mulierculae tribuebat,
ille palam largiretur. So Tacitus, lib. 13. in Annall.

Page 19. l. 16. Whom Tacitus represents: Hunc ego Lepidum temporibus illis
grauem and sapientem in virum comperio. Nam pleraque ab seuis adulationibus
alio^u^, in melius deflexit: neque tamen temperamenti egebat,
cu^^aequabiliauctoritate and gratia apud Tyberiu^ viguerit. So Tacit. l. 11.
Made himself agreeable and pleasing to his Prince. Namque ill^ aetas duo pacis
decora simul tulit; sed labeo incorrupta libe^tate and ob id fama celebration,
Capitoni oblequium dominantibus magis probabatur, So Ibid. in Anal. lib, 3. And
Pessimus quisque aspe^ri^^e rectorem patitur. So Salust. And ^acile est
impe^ium in bonos. So Dion Cassius.

Page 20. l. 9. It was li^ewise the advice of Salust. So Arist. in Poll. lib.
12.

l. 29. Believe they are more secure: Plerique terum potentes perverse
consulunt, and eo se munitiores putant quo illi quibus imperitant nequiores
fuerint. So Salust.

Page 21. l. 9. By comparing themselves with those who are worse: Habuerunt
nounulli alij principes deuotam and amantem sui cohortem sed alio quodam modo.
Primum quod imperiti ac rudes indoctissimum quemque in consiliu^ deligebant,
seilicet vt ipsius prudenti^ in vulgus aliquatenus emine^et. Ita cu^ vilis^imus
quisque honorum and diuitiarum potius feret sua co^rno^la, and vitia Principum
diligeba^t, Ab his optimus quisque ab^gebatur procul, cu^ suspecta esset
probitas and inuisa, and quento quisque honestior tanto imporru^ior turp^u^
arbiter, vitaretur. So Mamertin in Paneger ad Iul.

l. 15. Augustus ha^ this d^si^ne: Ne Tyberium quidem carirate, aut Reipu^. cu^
a succ^storem acscitum sed quomam arrogantiam saeuitiamque eius intrespexe^it,
comparatione deterrima sibi gloria^ quaesiuisse. So Amm. Marc^l. l. 18.

Page 23. l. 1. That bas^ and humble s^^^^ry was despleasing to Tiberius:
Caet^rum tempora illa adeo infecta and adulatione sordida f^ere, vt non modo
consuleret, magna pais co^um qui p^aetuia a functi, multique e^ia^ pedarij
senatores certatim exurgerent, foedaque and ui^^a censerent. Memory proditur
Tyberium quoties cu^ia egrederetur, G^aecis ve^^is in han^ modum eloqui solitum
O ho^ines ad ser^iturem paratos! seilicet e^iam ill^m, qui libertatem publicam
nolletur tam p^oiectae patientiae sedeba^. So Tacit. in Annal. lib. 3.

l. 7. For he whom we so flatter: Arduus re^um mo^o ne co^umax silentiu^, ne
suspecta libertas, ne diffidere dubijs, pa^ugaudere prosperis videantur.
Adulatio perin^e anceps sinimi^ ac si nulla est. Ibid. And Xiphl n Peaking of
Di^ius Iulia^us says thus: (...). l 14. To maintain our reputation the
firmer: (...) ^o Esch. ^pist. 6.

Page 24. l. 3. Vale^ius M^ssala began first: Addebat Messala Valerius,
iter^nandu n per annos Sacramentum in manus Tyherij, interrogatusque a Tyberto,
an se mand^nte ^am sententiam promisisset, sponte dixisse e^p^ndit; neque in
ij^ que a^ Re ^publicam pe^tinerent, consilio nisi sno vsuru^, vel cum p^riculo
offensionis ca sola species adul^nd^i ^upererat. So Tacit. in Annal. lib. 1.

l. 16 Since when Aetius C^pito: Palam aspernante Aetio C^pitone quasi
li^^rt^tem, non d^bare eripipatribus vini statuendi. Ibid.

Page 28. l. 28. And this Tiberius commonly practiced in the Senate of Rome:
Postea cognitu^nest ad intro piciendads etia^ P^incipu^ volunt^tes, inductam
du^itationem. Ibid. Annal. lib. 1.

Page 29. l. 16. Which retains Great men from changing their resolutions:
(...), etc. So Eurip^^es in And^om.

Page 30. l 15. If it were found she had attempted that whereos she was
accused: Nero Trepidus ^ intersiciendae matris auidus, non prius disse^^i
potuit, qu^m ^arrhus nece^ eius promitt^ret, si facinoris coarguertur. So
Tacitus in Annel. ^^^^. 1. l.

Page 35. l 4. Burrus and Seneca; which cruclise is will recorded in these
words: Igitur B^rrh^ and S^n^ca longum silentium ne ir^iti dissuaderent, etc.
Ibid. in Ibid.

Page 36. l. 31. That the Prince conceive not this rest to be purposely
contrived or directed him: R^p^ries qui ob similitu linem m^^u^ aliena male
facta sibi obi^ct a^rputent. Ibid. in Annal. lib. 4.

Page 37. l. 1. As Tiberius imagined: So Dion. lib. 58.

l. 3. Occidit Helnidin^ quoth quasi scenae exordio sub Paridis, and oenones
diuortium suum eum vxore ^ractasset. So Sueton. chap 10. De Domit.

Page 38. l. 2. And to prevent that he joined not with Cerialis:
Intellig^bantur a^tes Muciani quid noui tentaret Domitianus, sed pars obsequij
n^ in Muciano depr^hend^retur. So Taci^us in Annal. lib. 4.

Page 40. l. 20. Agreea^le to him that is in choler: Ful^en est ^^^^ po^esiate
habitat iracundia. Pub. Mimus. Etgrauis i^a Regum est semp^r. Sense. Trag. in
Medaea.

Page 43. l. 4. Phillippe King of Macedon on a time: (...). So Athene ^^^^. 10.

Page 48. l. 9. Tiberiu^ was of one inclination under Augustus: Mo^^^ qnoqu^
temporailli diue^sa: egregium vita famaq^e qu^ad priuatus, vel in imperijs sub
Augusio fuit, occul u^n ac sub dolu^ fingendis v^^tutibus d^n^e Germa^icus ac
Drusus supeisere idem inter bona malaque mixtus, incolumi matre in tellabilis
saeuitia, sed ob^ectis libidinibus, du^ Sei^num dilexit, timuit me. Postremo i^
sc^lera si^ul ac dedecora prorupsit, postquam remoto pudo^e and metu, suo
tantum ingenio vtebatur. So Tacit. in Annal. lib. 6.

l. 14. And as Passienus reports: Vndemox Passieni dictum perer^bius, neque
meliorem vnquam seruum, neque deteriorem dominum fuisse. So Tacitus in Annal
lib. 6.

l. 19. Of alterations in the manners of Marius and Cylla. So Plutarke in his
lives, lib 22. Sec. 5.

l 28. As Leo^tius said of Zeno: (...). So Suidas.

Page 49 l. 17. Must not alter his fashions and manners: (...). So Eurip.

l. 9. As Seneca writes: Postea promotus amplissimas promosiones nulla
occasion corruptus ab insito abstinentiae amore deslexit, nunquam secondis
rebus intumuit, nunquam officio^um varietate continuam laudem infregit.

l. 24. Which makes them more difficult to receive Council: Nee me fugit quam
du^us ac vere insolens ad r^cta flecti Regius tumor. So Senec. Trag. in Hypol.

l. 31 Without disparaging or diminis^ing their authority: Vbicu^que omnia
honesta dominanti licent, quod non potest, vult posse qui nimirum potest. So
Seneca.

Page 50. l. 6. Which is permitted to the Commons: Ignota tibi sunt iu^a
regno^um haud ^oua, maligni iudices, id ^sse regn^ maximum pignus putant, si
quid quod alijs nonlicet nobis so^is licet. Ibid.

l. 9. And not for themselves: Sanctitas, pietas, fides, priuata bona sunt ad
quae iuuat rege' cant. Ibid.

l. 14. Power sometimes inchanteth the best Wits and Judgments: Erat Dario
mite and tractabile ingenium nisi suam naturan plerum que sortuna co^rumperet.
So Q Cu^t. in Rex Dar.

l. 21. Appian speaxing: (...). So App. in ^ut. Mithr^d.

Page 51. l. 1. And if we will b^le^ue Aristophanes: (...). So Aristoph. Ath.
de Dipnos. lib. 4

Page 52. l. 14. Vespasian learnt it in the Schools of the like Masters:
Tributa grauia atque intoleranda. sed nece^sitate armorum excusata, etiam in
pace mansere. Ipso Vespasiano, inter initia impe^ij, ad obtinendas iniquitates
haud perinde obsti^ato: donee indulgentia fortunae, and prauis magistris,
diduit aususque est, Tacit. in Annal lib 11.

l. 22. Ignorant of the duty of their charge: Et quaeritur quidem quem res
malos principes faciat, iam primum nimia licentia, deinde rerum copia, amici
praeterea improbi, satellites detestandi, Eunuchi auarissimi, Aulici vel
stulti, v^l derestatiles, and (quod negari non potest) rerum publica^um
ignorantia. So Vopis. in vit. Aurel.

Page 56. l. ^2. They dare not reap profit he^reby: Plerique principes cum
essent Ciuium domini libertorum serui e^ant, per hos audiebant per hos
loquebantur, per hos and p^aeturae and sacerdotia, imo consulatus ab his
petebantur. So Pliniae.

Page 56. Sect. Pallas and Narcissus; The freewoman of Claudius: Of whom
speaks Tacitus in Annal. lib 11. 12. 13.

l. 13. Was in danger to lose his life: In comitatu dugusti circumlatrabat
Arbitionem inuidui, velut suaima mox adepturum, decord cultus imperatorij
praestruxisse: in^^abatque ei strepens in manica co ^es ve^issimus nomine, sed
cubicularij^ suffragantibus, vt loqu^batur pertinax tumor, v^nculis sunt exu^ae
personae quae st^ingabautur vt consciae, and Dol^s eu^nuit, and verissi ^us
ilico ^a^uit etc. So Ammian. Marcel. in Hist. lib. 16.

Page 58. l. 20. W^o were doore-keepers to Seianus: Etiam Satrium atque
Po^ponium veneraba^tur: libertis quoque ea ianitoribus eius n^i^scere pro
magnisico accipiebatur. So Tac^tus in Annal. lib 6.

Page 61. l. 5. Archelaus King of Capadocia: Rex Archelaus quinquagesimum annum
Cappa locia potiebatur, inuisus Tyberio, quod cum Rhodi agentem, nullo officio
colu^sset, nec id A^ch^laus per superbiam omiserat, sed ab intimis Augusti
monitus, quia slo^^nte C. Cesare missoque^ad res Otientis intu^a Tyberij
amicitia credebatur. Ibid. lib. 2.

Page 63. l. ^5. Which sort of men commonly make no good e^d: So as Antie^t
^^^^.

Page 77. l. 2. Of enemies who hate us: Odij c^usae acriores quia iniqu^;
proprium humani ing^n jodisse quem laese^it. So Ta^it. And Hoe habent p^^simum
animi magna fortu^a insolentes, quos laeserunt, odeiunt. So Seneca.

l 26. We must make no show to be offended: Optimum remedium instidiarum si non
intelligantur. So Tacit. And Potentiorum iniuriae Hilari vultunon patienter
tantum ferendae: sacient iteru^ iniuriam si se secisse crediderint. So Sense.

Page 78. l. 8. Will cause him upon all new occasions to molest and endomage
us: Here remember that which was sormerly spoken of Arch laus, and heereunto
add: Archelaus ignarus dolived si intelligere crederetur vim metuens, in vrbem
properat: clapsusque in^miti a principe and mox accusatus in senatu, non ob
crimina quae singebantur, sed angore, simul fessus senio and quia regibus aequa
nedum insima insolita sunt, sinem vitae sponte an fato i^pleuit. So Tacitus.

Page 83. l. 2. Without being too familiar or troublesome through our
importunity.

Si vitare velis acerba quaedam,
Et tristes animi cauere morsus,
Nullis te facias nimis sodalem,
Gandebis minus and minus dolebis
So Martial.

Page 86. l. 2. And infuse vanity and courage to those whom he purposed to
ruin.

-- Eutrapelus cuicumque* nocere volebat, Vestimenta dabat praetiosa, beatus
enim iam cu^pulchi is: unicis sumet noua co^silia, and spes: Dormiet in lucem:
scorto post pon^t honestu^ Officium animos alienos poscet: ad imum Thraxerit,
aut olitoris aget mercede Caballo^. S* Horace, ^. 1. Epist. 18.

Page 88. l. 28. We must have much fortunacy and courage to surmount c^use.
Inuidium far aut foelix aut fortis potest. So Pub. Mim. And ^nuidiam qui
habet non solet esse d u. S^ Prope^cius.

Page 94 l. 28. As seeming more desirous of rest then ^^nour Certissima est
regnare cupienti via, laudare modica, and otium ac somnum sequi, ab inquieto
saepe simulatur quies. Sense. in O^dip.

Page 95. l. 13. Herein to imitate Marcas Lepidus, whom as I have said, was
reputed. Tyberius per litteras M. Lepidum and Iunium Bl^sum nominat: ex quibus
proconsul Africae legeretur Tum audita amborum verba, intentius excusant se
Lepido, cum valetudinem corporis, aetatem liberam nubilem filiam obtenderet:
intelligereturque etiam quod solebat Anunculum esse Seians Blasam atque eo
praeualidum. So Tacitus in Anall, lib. 3.

Page 26. l. 6. Who prevailed and bore it in Senate against the Law. De
Praetore in locum Vipsanii Galli, quem mors abstulerat, subrogando, certamen
incessit. Germanicus atque Drusus Haterium Agrippam propinquum Germanics
fouebant: contra plerique nitebantur, vt numerus liberorum incandidatis
praepolleret, quod lex iubebat. Laetabatur Tyberius, cum inter filios eius and
leges senatus disceptaret victa est fine dubio lex, sed neque statim, and
paucis suffragiis: quomodo, etiam cum valerent, leges vincebantur, Ibid.

Page 98. l. 11. To sweeten and deminish a fall in Court. Fortunam citius
reperies quam retineas. So Publianus Minogr. And to this effect. Summum ad
gradum cum claritatis veneris consistes aeque, and potius quam ascendas
decides, cecidi ego, cadet qui sequitur, laus est publica. So Laberius.

Page 99. l. 14. Seianus is represented by Valleius Paterculus. Actu otiosis
simillimum, nihil sibi vindicantem, eoque assequentem omnia, semper infra
aliorum aestimationes se metientem, vultu vitaque tranquillum, animo ex somnem.
Which words are eloquently translated and alleged by our Author, S^ct. 7.

Page 100. l. 11. As by the speeches he gave him to dissuade him from it.
Tyberius laudata pietate ^^^^, suisque in eum bene^icus modice percussis,
tempus tanquam ad integram consultationem petiuit.

And l. 21. And it being in his power to give or deny entrance. Rursum Seianus,
non tam de matimonio Liuiae, sed altius metuens tacita suspicionum: vulgi
rumorem ingruentem inuidiam deprecatur. Ac ne assiduos in domum coetus arcendo,
infringeret potent^am, aut receptando, facultatem c^iminantibus pr^beret, haec
flexit, vt T^b^rium ad vitam procul Roma, amoenis locis degendam impelleret.
Multa quoque prouidebat, sua in manu aditus, litterarumque magna ex part se
arbitrum fore, cum per milites commearent: mox Caesarem vrgente iam Senecta
secretaque loci mollitum, muniae imperii facilius transimislurum, and minui
sibi inuidiam, a dempta salutantum turba, sublatisque inanibus, vera potentia
augere, etc. So Tacitus in Annall. lib. 4.

Page 102 l. 5. But as ambition is indiscreet, inconsiderate and rash. Omnis
ambitio praeceps. S. Seneca.

Page 107. l. 5. Here ye see the fall of one of the expertest and powerfulst
Courtiers. Where our Author has been pleased to particularize the favor of
Seianus, and has briefly and eloquently translated his life, reported by
Tacitus Dion, and Valleius Paterculus. In which Authors the Reader may find
them.

Page 111. l. 23. Antonius Primus ruined his fortune. Inde paulatim leuior
viliorque haberi, manente in speciem amicitia. So Tacitus in Annall, lib. 4.

l. 26. For Princes believe. Destrui Casar per haec fortunam suam, imparemque
tanto merito tebatur. Ibid.

Page 115 l 2. Nor to take, nor repine at their advancement Non est nostrum
aestimare, quem supra caeteros, and quibus de causis extollas Tibi summum rerum
iudicium dii dedere, nobis obsequii gloria relicta est. So Marc. Teren. ^^ Tib
in Tacitus, Annall, lib. 6.

Page 116. l. 15. Whom it was more dangerous to continue and disdain, then
Vespasian himself. Nihil aduentantem Mucianum veritus, quod exitiosius erat
quam Uispusianum spreuisse. Ibid. lib 3.

Page 117 12. Esteeming it an injury offered them.

Asperius nihil est humily tum surgit in altu^ ^u^cta ferit du^ cu^cta timet,
d^saeuit in omnes, Vt se posse putent. -- So Claudian, l^b. 1.

Page 119. l 29. Commodus being hated. Cum praefecti praeterio vidissent
Commodum in tantum odium incidisse obtentur Anteri cuius potentiam praefecti
pretorit far non poterant, v^bano Anteru eductum e palatio sacrorum causa and
redeuntem in hortos suos per frumentarios occiderunt. So Lampridius.

Page 120. l 3. Bewraying the secrets of our Prince, and been of intelligence
with his Enemies. Has conditiones quamquam ipse in secreto volutauerat cum
amicis, vulgo tamen omnes fame ferebant: vanis vt ad caeteram fidem sic ad
secreta tegenda satellitum regiorum ingeniis. So Tit. Liu. in vit Nabd.

Page 130 l. 1. To conceal the quarrel he had with Marcellus Agrippa sub
specie ministeriorum principalium profectus in Asiam vt fama loquitur ob
tacitas cum Marcello offensiones praesenti se subdux erat tempori. So Vall.
Paterc.

l. 3. Tiberius retired to Rhodes. Remansit ergo Rhodi contra voluntatem: vix
per matrem consecutus, vt ad velanda^ ignominiam quasi legatus ab Augusto
abesset. So Sueton. in Vit. Tib. chap. 12.

l. 24. And this subtlety was practiced by Appelles. So Pollyb. lib. 4.

l. 30. Darius by this pretext. So Herodot. lib 5.

Page 131. l. 7. With more facillitie callumniate Syluanus. Syluanus pedestris
militiae rector, Arbetione id procurante in Galliam mittitur, ad corrigenda
mala quas Gallis a Barbaris inferebantur vt absente aemulo, quem quietum esse
ferebatur periculosae molis onus impingeret. So Am. Marcel lib. 15.

Page 132. l. 3. But the designs of Eusebius. Quodideo per molestos formatores
imperii ^truebatur, vt si per se frustra habit^ redissent ad sua, ducis noui
virtuti facinus assignaretur egregium: si fortuna sequior ing^uisset, Vrficinus
reus proditor Reipub. differretur. Ibid. lib. 18.

Page 136. l. 15 Aetius under Valentinian. This Historse is wholly reported by
Theododoret in Vit Paul Deacon.

Page 138 l. 3. Arbetio having made Constantius Iuspect Syluanus. This is fully
expressed by Am. Marcell lib. 15.

l 17. Plotted that under hand her friends. Agrippinae quoque proximi
inficieba^tur prauis sermonibus tumidos spiritus perstimulare. So Tacitus in
Annall, lib. 4.

l. 27. Another time. Seianus maerentem and improuidam altius perculit,
immissum qui per speciem amicitiae monerent, paratum ei venenum, vitandas
soceri epulas. So Ibid. in Ibid.

Page 139. l. 15. Titius Sabinus. Vtque augeatur suspicio insidiae s^mul and
exitium paratur T^tio Sabino equiti summo Germanici amico. Whose falln^ read
in Tacitus, in Ibid.

Page 140. l. 7. Began to make these four more familiar one to the other. In
sermones, tanquam vetita miscuissent, speciem arctae amicitiae facere. Ibid.

Page 142. l. 7. Making himself his Companion in all his pleasures. Quo
pluribus iudiciis in ligaret. All this is drawn from Tacitus in Annall, lib. 2.

Page 145. l. 22. He gained Julius Posthumous: Atque haec callidis
criminationibus inter quos deleger^t Julian Post-humium per adulterium Mutiliae
Priscae inter intimos auiae, and consilijs suis peridoneum, quia Prisca in
animo Augustae valida. Ibid. lib. 4.

Page 147. l. 5. Against those of whom the Prince is already suspicious: Aulici
acriter principum offensa speculantur. Ibid.

l. 17. Grapius Caesar's freeman: Suspectabat maxim Cornelium Syllam, suorum
ingenium eius in contrarium trahens callidum and simulatorem interpretando.
Quem metum Grapius ex libertis vsu and senecta a Tiberio vsque domum Principum
edoctus tali mendacio intendit. Ibid.

l. 22. And the like did Tigill. Ualidior in dies Tigellinus, metus cius
rimatur, compertoque Plautum and Syllam maxim timeri, nuper amatos, etc. Ibid.
in Annal, lib. 14.

l. 23. Arbetio did the like: Arbetio consilio in leni^udinem slexo facinus
impium loesae Maiestatis quo Ursicinius accusabatur ad deliberationem secundam
deferendum persuasit, contentus exturbasse collegam, quam hacratione sibi
deuinxisse existimabat. So Am. Mucel. li 15.

Page 148. l. 9 Which was so much the sooner believed, because every one knew:
Et quia vera erant etiam dicta credebantur. So Tacit.

l. 21. To recide in the Island, of Caprea: Tiberiunperpulit vt vitandos
crederet patrum coetus v^cesque quae plerumque verae and graves coram
ingerebantur. Ibid. in Annal. lib 4*

l. 30. To territie and defame the Tyrant: (...). So Xiphlin.

Page 150. l. 19. Thereby to co^er the ill Offices he did him toward
Vitellius: M^nlius Valens quamquam de p^itibus me^i^us nullo apud Vit^llium
honor fui^, s^cretis cum criminationibus infa^aue^a^ fab^u^ ig^ar^um, and quo
intautior decipetet^ p^^l^^ lauda^u^. ^o Ta^^ius l. 1.

l. 21. Arbetio learni^^ V^sici^us: In pugnaba^ Ursicinum perfectae benig
itatis ill^^ bras Arbetio, and viru^n fortem propalam saepe app^llans, ad
inuectendas letales i^si ^ias vitae si^plici p^r quam callens, and ea
tempestate nimium potens. So Am. M^rcell lib. 15.

Page 151. l. 5. Mucianus to ruin Antonius; P^imus did the like: Igitur
Muctanus. quia propalam opp^imi Antonius n^quibat multis in se^atu laudibus
cu^^ulatum, secret^s promissis onerat, ^iteriorem Hispaniam ostentans, dis^^ssu
sla^ij Rusi vacu^m. So Tacit^^ Annal. lib. 4.

l. 21. And N^c^tas reported: (...).

Page 152. l. 4. The Emperor ^ulian: (...).

l. 7. As says Mamertin in his Panegericke: Callido nocendi artificio
accusatoriam dicacitatem laudem titulis peragebant in omnibus conuenticulis
quasi per beneuolentiam.

l. 9. And Polibius terms it: (...). So. Polib. lib. 4.

l. 12. Flattery with her eyes open: Invidia in occulto, adulatio in aperto
erat. So Taci^us.

l. 16. Thereby to disprasse another: (...) So Chrysoft. Ho^. 11. chap. 1. ad
Corinth. And to this purpose: Regalis ingenij me^ est in presentiam contumeliam
amissa laudare and eis virtutem dare vera dicendi a quibus audiendi periculum
non est. So Seneca.

Page 153. l. 4. For writing of him to the Senate: Quaedam de habitu vultuque
and institutis eius iacuerat, qua velut excusandum exprebaret. So Tacitus.

Page 155. l. 27. If he be light, inconstant, vain: Nullum tam infidum mare,
quam Blanditiae principum illorum quibus tanta laeuiras, tanta fraus, vt satius
esset iratos quam propitios habere. So Pliny.

Page 156. l 28. To have enforced the Rarth^ans. See all this in Appian. in
Parthe^i^.

Page 158. l 2. Have left and conserred all the honor to the Prince: (...). So
Dion lib. 49 Agricola attributed all good fortune to his Captain: Nec vmquam
in su^m ^amam gestis exultault, ad authorem ducem minister fortunam referebat.
So Tacitus.

Page 161. l. 1. Who is sometimes suspected of the Prince: Suspectus
dominantibus quiproximus destinatur. Ibid.

l. 22. Purposely to hasten the death of Tiberius: Macro intrepi his, opprimi
senem iniectu muliae vestis, discedique ad limine. Sic Tiberius siniuit. Ibid.
in Annal. lib. ^.

l. 27. Continued him in repatation and authority: A^betionem semper ambiguum
and prat^^idum, quempiam omnium, salutis suae ^ouerat obiectum praefecit
questionibus. So Am. Marcel.

l. 29. To oppose Procopius: Arbetionem ex consule agertem iamdudum in otio ad
se venire hortatus est; vt Constantini ducis verecundia truces animilenirentur.
Ibid.

Page 162. l. 6. That he stoop as low as he can ^o his Prince: ^rimoribus
clarit^ ^o fua obsequijs prosequenda est, adeoque ijs minus sordida adulatio
videtur quia nec^ssaria est. So Tacitus

l. 18. So did Galba: Pa^lati^ in desidlam, fignitiemque conuersus est, ne
materiae preberet Neroni, and vt dicere sole^^^, quod ^emo rationem otijsui
reddere cogeretur. So Suetonius in Vit. Galb. In which respect Tacitus says
that his indlenesse in those dates, was termed Galbus Wisdom, because Idlers
are least suspected of their Prince: Vt quod illi segnitia erat, sapientia
vocabatur. So Tacitus lib 1 in Anual.

Page 167. l. 1. For although it be difficult to make friends at Court: Nulli
sides vbi iam melior fortuna ruit. So Seneca.

Page 168. l. 24. That we be not answerable for other men's faults:

Quale^ co^mendes, etia^ atque etia^ adspiee ne mox Incutiant aliena ^ibi
peccata pudorem. So Horace lib. Epist. 18.

Page 173. l. 7. Many will be perplexed and grauelled to know the reason of
their own happiness: Subijciet aliquis ista quidem adeptus est, sed effare
quo merito: quid me oneras, sisciter? tationem foelicitatis nemo reddidit, Deus
est qui Deo proximus tacito mun^ra dispergst arbitrio, and beneficiorum suorum
indignatus per homines stare iudicium mauult, de subditis dedisse miraculum. So
Auson in Paneger. de Great.

Page 176. l. 2. Knowing that they are linck'd to them, have rebuck'd and
checked them: Sed accepto aditu, Popea primum per blandimenta and arts
valescere, imparem cupidinise, and forma Nero^ i^ captam simulans: mox acri iam
principi^ amore, ad superbiam vertens, si vltra vna^ alterainque nocte
mattineretur, nuptam esse se dictitans, nec posse matrimonium amittere,
deuinctam Othoni per genus vitae quod nemo adaequarct. Illu^ animo and cultu
magnificum: ibise summa so tuna digna visere. At Nerone^^ pollice ancilla, and
assuetudine Acts deuinctum, ^il e contubernio seruili, nisi abiectum and
sordidum traxisse. So Tacitus in Annal. lib. 13.

l. 15. And in mocking him, should call him Pupil: Nero slagrantior in dies
amore Poppaea quae sibi mat^imonium, and dissidium Octauiae incolu^i agrippina
hanc sperans, crebris criminationibus, aliquando per facetias incusare
princ^pem, and pupillum vocare, qui inssis alienis obnoxious non mo^o in p^rij,
sed libertatis etiam indiger^t. Ibid. lib. 14.

Page 177. l. 6. Do rather purc^ase vt contempt then favor: Argumentum nihil
debentium odio querunt. So Seneca.

l. 30. That these services may wax old in the memories: Haec est consuetudo
vestra, nempe donorum, tandiu vobis cordi sumus quamdiu vsui. So Seneca in
Controuers.

Page 178. l. 14. Then o^^ Prince to us: Sed in principe ratum ac prope
insolitum est, vt se putet obligatum aut si putet, amet. So Pliny ad Traian.

Page 182. l. 8. Because his Presence still reporched him of the Parrasydy:
Anicetus leui post admissum scelus gtatia, dein grauiore odio: quia grauiorum
facinorum ministri quasi exprobrantes aspiciuntur. Tacitus in Annal. lib. 14.

Page 186. l. 6. A wise man admonishes us: Co^am Rege noli videri sapiens.

Page 188 l. 9. Then to stay till we are enferced out of Window. Quid fatigate
foelicitati molestus; ei? quid? expectas donec castris eiiciaris? So said an
old Roman.

l 14 Those are esteemd happy. Felicitas, in ips^ foelicitate mori. So Seneca.

Page 189. l. 11. More to satisfy your desire.

Ego fungar, vice cotis acutum
Reddere quae ferrum valet, ex sorsipsa secandium.
FINIS.
Errata.
In the first Book.

P. 2. l. ^. for distatfull, read dista^lefull. P. 4. l. 23. for strange, r.
straying. P. 30. l. 15. for must, r. most P. 95 sor Chap. 14 r. Chap. 24 P. ^
20. l. 14. for those whose humors, r. those humors P. 137. In the Argument of
Cha. 20. and Head 14. for the sac^^ie of a business, r. the facility or
difficulty of a business. p. 136. for other, r their.

In the second Book.

P. 45. l 21. for so is this, r so as this. p. 64. l. ^. for immited, r.
immitated. p. 131. l 7. 16. for Sylanus, r. Syluanus. p. 110. for Chap. 16. r.
Chap. 22.


