The ballade of ane right noble victorius and mighty lord Barnard Stewart lord
of Ausigny (...) of ^eans (...) king of france knight of hie (...) Capitan^ of
the (...) of his body (...) general of the same Comp^^^ (...) at the said (...)
to Edinburghe in Scotland send in ane tyght exce^^^t (...) fra the said (...)
king to our mai^^ Souuerane l^^d and victorius prince James the ferde king of
Scottis. Walterus chepman


REnownit ryall right reverend and Serene
Lord hie try winphing in wirschip and valor
Fro kyngis down most cristin knight and ^ene
Most wise most valyand most laurent hie wictour
On to the sterns vpbeyt is thine honor
In Scotland welcumbe thine Excellence
To king queyne lord clerk knight and seruatour.
With glory and honor lawde and reverence
Welcum in flour most strong incomparable knight.
The fame of armies and ^oure of vassalage
Welcum in were most worthi wise and wight
Welcum the soun of Mars of most curage
Welcum most lush branche of our linnage
In every realm our scheild and our defense
Welcum our tendir blude of hie parage
With glory and honor lawde and reverence
Welcum in were the secund sulius
The prince of knightheyd and flour of cheualry
Welcum most valycant and victorius.
Welcum invincible victour most wourthy Welcum our Scottis chiftane most dughti
With sown of clarioun organe song and sense
To the atoms lord welcum all we cry
With glory and honor lawde and reucrence
Welcum our indeficient adiutorie
That (...) heipit in their neyd
That never said scot yet indigent nor sorry
(...) thou did him suport with thy good deid
Welcum therefore abute all livand leyd
With us to live and to maik recidence
Quhilk never sall sw^ye for thy s^^k to bleid.
To quham be honor lawde and reverence
Is none of scotland borne fathfull and kind
Bot he of natural inclinacioune
Dois favor the with all his heart and mind
With fervent tendir true intencioun
And wald of inwarthie effectioun.
But dreyd of danger de in thy defense
Or death or schame war done to thy persoun
To quham be honor lawde and reverence
Welcum thou knight most fortunable in field.
Welcum in a^mis most aunterus and able^.
Wndir the soun^ that beris helm or scheild
Welcum ^how campioun in feght wnourcnable^
Welcum most dughti digne and honorable^
And (...) of (...) and hie magnifecence
Nixt wndir kingis to stand incou^pable
To quham be honor lawde and reverence
Throw Scotland ingland france and lumbardy
Fleys on weyng thy fame and thy renoune
And our all cuntreis wndirnethe the sky
And our all strandis (...) the sterris down
In every province land and regioun^
Proclaimt is thy name of excellence.
In every Cete village and in town
With gloire and honor lawd and reverence
O feyrse Achili in furtus hie curage
O strong invincible Hector under scheild
O valyeant arthur in knyghtli vassalage
Agamemnon in gouernace of field
Bold Hennitball in batall to do beild
Julius in ^^pert in wisdom and expense
Most fortunable chiftane both in yhouth and eild
To the behonour lawde and reverence
At parliament thou should be hye renown^^
That did so money victoryle opteyn
Thy cristall helm with lawry (...)wnye
And in the hand a branche of olyve greyn
The lueird of conquis and of knyghteid keyn
Be borne sulo high before the in presence
To represent sicman as thou has beyn
With glory and honor lawde and reverence
Hie furius mars the god Arm(...)
Rong in the (...) at thine natnut^e
Saturnus doeme with fyryeyn did blent
Throw bludy (...) manasing to guard
On the fresche wenus (...) her amor ouse (...)
On the Marcurius furtheyet his eloquence
Fortuna mayor did turn her face on the
With glory and honor lawde and reverence
Prince of fredom And flour of gentilnes
Sweyrd of knightheid and choice of cheualry
This time Ilefe for great p^lixunes
To tell quhat feildis thou wan^u pik^^rdy
In france in bertan in naplis and lumbardy
As I think estir with all my diligence
Or thou depart at lenthe for to d^^cry
With glory and honor lawd and reverence
B in thy name betaknis batalrus
A able^ in field R right renoune most hie
N nobilnes and A for annterus
R ryall blude for dughtines is D
W valycantnes S for strenewite
Quhoise knyghtli name so schynyng in cle^^ence
For wourthines in gold should (...) be
With glory and honor lawd and reverence
printer's device of Andrew Myllar Androv myllar



