A TREATISE OF THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD, As excellently as compendiously handled
by the famous and learned Divine, PETER DV MOVLIN, late Minister of the
Reformed Church in Paris, and Professor of Theology in the University of
Sedan. Faithfully translated out of the Original By ROBERT CODRINGTON, Master
of Arts.

This is life eternal to know thee to be the only very God, and whom thou
have sent Jesus Christ, John, 17. LONDON. Printed by A. M. and are to be sold
by William Sheares, at the sign of the Harrow in Britaines-Bursse, and at his
shop near Yorke-house. 1634.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND virtuous Lady, Alice, Countess of Darby,
Strange, Le Knocking, Vice-Countesse of Kinton, etc.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
THe report and splendor of your Virtues have encouraged me to present these
Papers into your honorable hand, in which, what my presumption has offended,
my duty may excuse; it being Religion to pay most homage unto those shrines
which most Virtues have erected; and Fame so loudly celebrating your praises,
it were some rebellion in me not to attend, or infidelity not to believe her
Story, which pronounces you the Mirror and Blessing of this Age, to be as
great a wonder as an example to Posterity, and eminent in all your actions,
which as they are advanced by your Greatness, so they are crowned by your
Goodness; Goodness it self being so habitual unto you, that it seems she
is become even your nature, and may be called as much your complexion as your
practice.

This is that which has invited me to the Dedication of this Treatise to your
Honor; for to whom more worthily could I present it then to you, whose life is
a commentary on it, making Religion not your affectation, but your most severe
employment, and the excellence of your spirit, although it works you to a
nobler height then our duller faculties can attain unto, yet the height of
your Honor is still the humility of your Virtue, and it is the last of your
praises not to affect them. This I have received from the mouth of Fame, which
I deliver not to your ears, but to the truth of your Story, which parallels
your love to Learning with the nobleness of your other Virtues, and preferres
your love unto Religion above them. Vouchsafe then, Right Honorable, to accept
this Treatise, not unworthy of so Noble a Patronage; and if my devotion to your
Honor can win on your Goodness to pardon my Presumption, the excellence of
the Subject shall win on your Judgment to entertain the Treatise, in which
there is no other error to be found, but that it is presented to the World,
and You, by this rude hand of

Your Honors most humbly devoted R. C.

The Translatour to the Readers.
THis Treatise needs not a Preface to entertain you, or encourage you; the
title it self is eloquent enough, yet Custom expects that something should
be spoken of the subject, and the Author: and it were unmannerly besides, at my
first coming abroad, to press into your acquaintance without saluting you. As
there is nothing then more excellent than this Subject; so there is no man that
could discourse on it more excellently then the Author, the Author abounding
with the Subject, and directing the understanding to that knowledge by which he
wrote it. The Atheist may here learn as well how to worship as to believe a
Deity, and reading the method of his wisdom in the Characters of Nature, may
as well be convinced by Reason as Religion. The Epicure may acknowledge the
loose impiety of his Idol pleasures, and engaged in more holy and high
devotions may perform no more homage to his pursive God. The Recusant may
perceive that Heaven is not to be bribed by his merits or his money, but may
here find his salvation more cheap, and certain. The Treatise is but small,
but what wants in the volume is supplied in the Subject: it was borne in the
English air, though not in the English tongue, this is the Fate of Books to
be eloquent at first, and to speak in variety of tongues, the diversity of
languages being by them promoted into a blessing, and they seem like so many
inspirations, and to be Prophets of that knowledge which our understandings all
shall enjoy hereafter. This then being so expert in other languages, it was
pity me thought it should want his own, and had only the power to persuade me
to this work attended with a desire which I had by the imparting of our Authors
knowledge to improve your own, a desire which (where they are legible in
earnest) can excuse absurdities, and even sanctify the Errors; but I write an
Epistle, not an Apology, and am neither doubtful of mine own integrity, or
indulgent to the faults of others, whom I am so far from flattering, that I
must pronounce to excuse them is a sacrilege, and to conceal them the lowdest
slander, these are they who with impure hands do translate themselves into
their Authors papers, and deprived of their native glories, do present them to
the world in their own deformities; they disguise their beauties in those
accents they would advance them, as if our language was either too dull or too
stubborn to express them, and Eloquence was only confined unto France; nay,
so delicate is their impudence, that it attempteth only the choycest
Excellencies, and the rarest of Authors have the leisure to repent their
miserable Eloquence: but such is the virtue and the happiness of learning,
that from hence she has received encouragements, it being an addition to her
glory to be admired by all; and being praised by Ignorance, from the mouth of
her enemy she becomes more fruitful. The Sun forbeares not to impart his
beams because they draw up clouds, which do as much obscure his beauty, as
express his power, and these lights of Learning continue still their
illuminating influences, though those guilty shadows do invade them, and
conscious of the virtue that did attract them, they do rather forgive then
suppress their splendor. But the works of this our Author being as rich in
substance as in beauty, are able to carry their own strength and light through
all the defects of a rude Interpreter; this piece only of all his Labors lay
almost forgotten, and hid from observation, which being set forth by so divine
a hand, and in such perfect colors, I thought it some religion in me to draw
the curtain, and to present it to the public view, wherein if I have
satisfied you, it shall be new honor unto me, that I have fulfilled with all
the desire of goodness, which is to communicate her self, and obeyed her
inclinations as

Ambitious of your best prosperity. Codrington.

Errors are all but privations: the Translators absence, and the Printers
have, gave these leave to appear, which their review has thus called in:

Page 3, lin. 1. for (...), r. (...). page 5, lin. 12. for incensed, r.
insensed. page 6, lin. 9. for the great, r. the so great. page 8, lin. 2. for
Devil, r. Devils. page 14, lin. 25. r. when addicted. page 15, lin. 25. r.
do differ. page 16, lin. 25. r. and tumults. page 19. lin. 15. for (...) r.
(...). page 32, lin. 2. for another, r. the other. ibid. l. 6. for those, r.
these. page 35, lin. 2. for press, r. knowledge. ibid. lin. 1. for lazy, r.
dusky. page 55, lin. 6. for squares, r. square. page 68, lin 9. for collect, r.
draw. page 71, lin. 18. for le space, r. l'espace. lin. 21, for voire, r. voir.

Lighter faults there are too, which as your eye encounters, are left unto your
goodness, either to correct them, or excuse them.

OF THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD.










great light of rectifyed Reason shines, from hence great knowledge of Divine
wisdom springs forth. Before therefore we enter into the Chancell of this
Temple, it will be profitable awhile to stay in the Courts thereof, where no
little splendour does appear, and where God has left no obscure
representations of his power and his Wisdom: for so will we ascend by method
and degrees to the Doctrine of the Church, that it may appear how much the
Church does differ from the Lycaeum, how much the School of Christ does excel
the Schools of the Philosophers, how much the Revelation of God does overcome
the relation and Capacity of Man.

Suetonius reports of Caligula, that thus he was heard to threaten Jupiter.

(...).


Thee a confined Bondman tie.
He would often also rehearse that in Homer of Menelaus encountering with Paris:
(...).

Thou Father Jove of all the Gods
The most pernicious art by ods.
Yet as often as he heard it thunder, he sought out holes wherein to hide him
from his fears, and wakened from security, startled at the apprehension of the
revenging God: for every one, as he is most abandoned to vice, so at the
shaking of a leaf, or if Virides rubum dimovere Lacertae,
Et cord and genibus tremit.


The Lizards green but move the bramble,
He in his heart and knees does tremble.
Hence it is, that we observe wicked men, who in the course of prosperity had
shaken off all thought that there was a God, in sudden dangers to cry out, O
God, and to fly to his assistance whom profanely they despised, and surely
these words fall from them unpremeditate, it being an acknowledgement that in
sudden apprehension of extremities is forced from them by victorious Nature.

evidently it declares that there is planted in Man by Nature a knowledge of
Divinity, a knowledge that must needs sit deep within him, and thoroughly be
imprinted; when Man a creature of glory, does choose rather to debase himself
beneath the beasts, to worship Stocks and Stones; and from his natural hight
of pride to submit himself to the vilest of things, then to acknowledge at all
no deity; neither could they who invented those monsters of gods, have ever
found men so prone unto obedience, had they not incountred with minds already
incensed with the persuasion of a God, from which persuasion there arises an
inclination to religion.

Defectus Solis varios, Lunaeque labores,
Vnde tremor terris, qua vi maria alta tumescant,
Objicibus ruptis, rursumque in seipsa residant,
Quid tantum Oceano properent se tingere Soles,
Hiberni, vel quae tardis mora noctibus obstet.
The fainting Sun, the Moon in labor often, (aloft, The Earthquakes birth, what
mounts the Deepes

Their bars being broke, calmed by what power they run
Back to themselves; what makes the Winters sun
So soon into the Ocean diue, What stay
In summer keeps the tardy Night away.


World. A man may carry in the skirt of his garment a promiscuous number of
Printers Characters, which his garment being shaken, he may also shake and
scatter on the ground; but will the Characters so aptly fall, or will there be
so fine an industry in the Chance, that some elegant verses or neat Oration
may be read? Surely there is no Oration so polite, no Verse composed with so
much art, that may any ways parallel the Artifice and Beauty of the World.

Psalm. 19. The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows his
handy Works: For the invisible things of him from the creation of the World
are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his
power and divinity.



known by daily experience, how great and hurtful the power of the Devil is,
how they raise up tempests, send forth diseases, tranforme men into Wolves,
transport Groves and Corn (which Pliny reports to have happened in the
PROVINCE of Marrucia;) how they affright men with visions, and with perplexing
Oracles illude those that crave their counsel, and entangle them in errors:
Surely mankind exposed to the injuries of so many invisible enemies, should
have perished; nay and the fabric of the World it self would have dissolved,
did not these Spirits depend on the beck of a supreamer power, who bridles
their rage, and bars them up in the limits of his eternal Providence.



Aristotle wrote eight books of natural Philosophy, the six last whereof
contain no other subject but of Motion only and the affections of it: But the
last does* end in the first Moover, in him who is immovable, for seeing all
things that have motion are moved by some one thing, and that again by
another, and so forward: In this chain of things motionary we cannot proceed
to what is infinite, but we must needs stay at one first Moover, who although
he move all things, is himself immovable. Even so in the body of Man, the
joints are moved by the Arteries, the arteries by the sinnewes, the sinnewes by
the Spirits animal, the Spirits animal by the Spirits vital, the Spirits
vital by the soul, which is not moved but by Accident, or by Another, that
is, by the motion of another; as Wisdom walks in a wise man, or as the
Governor of a ship sitting at the helm does so rest, that notwithstanding by
the motion of the ship he is moved himself. But if there be any thing that
moves it self, it must be compounded of parts, and one part must be moved of
another: But the First Being must needs be most purely simple, and not composed
of parts.



themselves) avail a little to the knowledge of God and of divine perfection:
For this Axiom does stand unshaken, that qualities (suppose Heat or
Whiteness) are more or less imperfect according as they are nearer or farther
off from the Sovereign degree of perfection, or are distant from the chief
degree of Heat or Whiteness: Among creatures therefore that is the better
which comes most near to the chief or primary Goodness; But this
Sovereign Goodness, what is it else but God who is Goodness it self. For as
in the order of efficient causes, so in degrees of Virtue and Perfection, there
can be no procedencie to what is infinite, but it must needs be that there must
be some chief and primary Perfection.

not the aid of any, and from whom all things are, who seeing that of nothing
he has made all things, cannot but be of an Infinite Power, since from
Nothing to Something, there is an infinite disproportion; for sottishly profane
is that ridiculous insolence of the Epicure Velleius, who, in the first Book
of Cicero, Of the Nature of the Gods, deriding the Creation, demands what was
the foundation, what were the tools, what were the Leavers, who were the
Apprentices, in so great a work.



primary perfection, from which by stairs Generations have descended, for the
Diminution of things cannot be infinite: for should we run them over in the
Ages past unto Infinity, we should at length advance Man unto a Stature
higher then heaven it self.



Good; all things are by God, as he is the efficient Cause of all things and
most great: Deservedly therefore do we title God Most Good, Most Great, but
first most Good, before most Great: for he is most Good as he is the End, for
the End is always the foremost in the Intention, and the Efficient Cause is
but moved by it. Seeing therefore there is no Reasonable or Intellectual
Agent which undertakes any thing without proposing to himself the End which
ever appears Good* the most chief and Sovereign AGENT could not work; but
for the last and best End, And seeing there is nothing better then God, nay,
Seeing all things whatsoever are Good come from God, God could not work for
any other End but for himself; And seeing there is nothing that should be
rather pourtrayed or represented in a picture, then what does seem most
beautiful, God who is the first Beauty, and the first Light, was pleased to
draw his own Picture, and as in Phidias his Minerva, the Artist himself has
imprinted in his work, an vndefac'd resemblance of himself.

that not drawn by a pencil as Painters use, expressing only Colors and
proportions, but such an image, as is beheld in a Glass, which represents even
our motions and our Actions; For God has powered into Spirits the Light of
understanding, and knowledge of the Truth, which is as a certain spark of the
Divine Light, he has adorned their Wills (whose faculty it is to move and
produce Actions) with Holiness and Righteousness, he has conferred on them
Immortality and a liberty of choice, which are the Lineaments of the Divine
Image, and Resemblances of God himself.



For God has turned it into a roundnesse, an imitation of his divine
infiniteness, because this figure has neither beginning nor ending, and in
the same first Body he has engraven no obscure resemblances of his immobility
and eternal Rest, a rest which is yet notwithstanding in continual motion;
For although the Heaven is continually moved by Parts, while one Part does
succeed another, so it is, that the whole Body rests, neither is it moved
from its place; He has also placed in the heavens an imitation of his Power,
disposing of his Work in such a method, that the elementary bodies are
governed by the heavenly, and superior bodies work into the inferior their
powerful influences, And indeed most true is that of Aristotle in his second
Book de Genesis Cap. 10. That the perpetual durance and continuance of things
ought to be imputed to the simple and daily motion of the Sun from the East
into the West; But that Generation and corruption does arise from the oblique
Courses of the Sun and Planets through the Zodiac, whiles acording to their
Situation they change their Aspects, and by their access nearer to us, or
recesse farther from us, the affections and Qualities of things differ.

mind, what in him lies, from earthly things, and to advance it unto heaven;
Wherefore we pray unto God with knees humbled to the Earth, but with eyes lift
up to heaven, the one of which expresses our humility, the other testifies
our Hope, the one abates our pride, the other does advance our thoughts.
Neither without good Cause has humane Reason placed the throne of God in
Heaven, For what more convenient habitation can there be for God that mooveth
all things, then that Body, by which he moves all things? What fitter seat
can there be for the Father of Lights, then that Region illustrious of it
self, and always shining with its native splendour? what more agreeable to
the Nature of God, who is the God of Peace, and not subject unto change, then
there to have his throne, where is everlasting Peace, untroubled rest, nor
sign of Change; Hence it is as Justinius observes, in his Exhortation to the
Greeks, that Jupiter in Homer took Ate or Discord by the hairs of the head,
and threw her headlong down from heaven, who fell on this lower Region, which
is shaken with Winds, with tempests, and with Earthquakes, where there reigns
War, Tumult, and Rebellion against God himself.

Exodus 33. to wit, the works of God which are known to us only ex posteriori
by the events and the effects: Or rather by this does not the Scripture give us
to understand, that God coming cannot be perceived, but after that he has
passed by and struck us, then we know him: For we are altogether ignorant
what God will do; but after the execution of the Act, then we acknowledge his
power either by afflicting or delivering us.

Paul says, Act. 14. That God never left himself without witness, which may
be understood not only of outward testimonies such as are rain and fruitful
seasons, but may also be extended as well to the inward testimony of every
Conscience, as the outward testimony of the Creatures.

Aristotle in the second of the Posteriors text 6. says, that those
Enuntiations are known by Nature which are no sooner understood but they are
believed: As who understands what the WHOLE is, and what a PART is, he cannot
but know and believe that the whole is more then the parts thereof: Neither can
a man persuade himself to believe the contrary; but this Assertion that THERE
IS A GOD is not of that Nature; For after the terms are understood there are
found of those that dare deny him.

Diagoras Melius was accused of Atheism, not that he denied that there was a
God, but that he despised the counterfeit Gods of the Athenians, and their
empty superstitions; this is he, that taking the wooden Statue of Hercules by
the leg threw it into the fire, thus upbrayding it: This (says he) shall
be thy thirteenth labor; and Clemens Alexandrinus in his book entitled
Protrepticon does affirm, that the same opinion is to be had of Theodorus the
Syrenian, Evomerus, Hippone, Nicanor, which were all accounted Atheists.

and assistance of Philosophy it has come so far as to affirm that there is
a God.



Plato, Cicero, and Virgil Aen. 6. who have thought that God is the Soul of
the world, who does so moove and guide it, as the soul does the body; Others
have affirmed God to be whatsoever is. That of Euripides is well known.

(...),
(...),
(...).
See thou the Aires uncompast height about,
See thou the greatness of the Earth throughout,
And what she does in watery arms enclose,
Count all that God, and do it Jove suppose.
Simonides deluded the demands of Hiero, who desired to know what God was,
craving at first the liberty of one day to resolve him, then two days,
afterward three, daily augmenting the number, always acknowledging his
inability to answer the request, and that the more he considered what God was,
the more the difficulties did arise and multiply.

Jacob, seems to imply: for Jacob defiring him to declare his Name, he refused
it, saying, Wherefore is it that thou do ask after my name? So the Angel who
is called God also, Iud. 13. checked the curiosity of Manoah, who desired to
know what his name was, in these words, Wherefore ask thou after my name,
seeing it is wonderful? In Hebrew books, even to this day, the name of God is
written Jehovah, which name it seems was wrote on purpose by the Rabbis, that
the name of God which was written on the front of the Miter might be hidden:
For Josephus, who was both a Priest and Pharisee, does testify in the sixth
book of the Jews wars, that the Name praefixed on the Miter of the
Priesthood had four vowels, whereby it does plainly appear that this name
was not Iehova, but IOVA, by pronouncing I and V not like Consonants, but
distinctly by themselves as they are Vowells: which the word Jove among the
Heathens does also intimate: nor much diverse from this is Diodorus the
Sicilian, who in the first Book of his Historical Library does affirm that
the God of Moses was called IAO. But Clemens Alexandrinus in the fifth Book
Stromat. page 240, does say that the foure-lettered name which was writ about
the Sacerdotiall Tyare was IAOT, which word consists of the same vowels, as the
word IOTA, although the letters are otherwise disposed: but howsoever it was,
they are as wide from truth as Heaven, that think by this word, or any other,
the Essence of God can be expressed; for no name can be given which can express
the essence of Man, nay of a stone, seeing there are no names essential, but
names are given unto things by common institution, and as pleased those who
first did practice the diversity of tongues to impose upon them: those names
only express the Essence of the things they signify, which do imitate their
sounds, as the creaking of the Crow, the lowing of the Bullock.

Aristotle confessing in the second of his Metaphysics, that as the eyes of
Owls cannot endure the beams and splendour of the Sun, so the edges of our
Understanding do rebate themselves in the apprehensions of the primary Beings:
The same Philosopher affirms, that there is nothing in the Understanding that
was not first in the sense: but God cannot be presented to the sense. Again,
as long as Understanding is in the body, it comprehends nothing but by the
help of the Fancy, and in the act of Understanding it turns to the Fancy,
a fancy which does as much annoy, as help the Understanding whiles it
represents God clothed in the conditions of Nature, as of quantities, of
extension of parts, and many other accidents. Again, every punie knows that
things are defined by their Genus and their difference, or if that they be not
at hand they are then defined by their proper Accidents: But of God there is no
Genus, no specificall difference, no Accident at all, since God is all
substance.



do stumble on the threshold, or turning aside to vain delights, do wrap
themselves in errors; from hence arise those monsters of the Gods, and illuding
Vizards which were worshipped by the Heathen, who wanting an able Master to
instruct them did follow the custom of their Country, which commanded them to
adore the peculiar Gods of their country or their family, thinking it would
be better with them if every particular man should choose him a private and
particular God: From this sprang up such a multitude of Gods, that in Hesiods
time they amounted to the number of thirty thousand: Again it is planted in
Men, which is their great folly, to measure God by themselves, and to cloth him
not only with man's figure but with his affections also; they do not think
that they serve God aright, unless they make him like a Man or Beast, that
they may have before them some present object, on which they might settle their
eyes and their devotion; This was the language of the Israelites to Aaron, Make
us gods which shall go before us, Exodus 32. And because God had made Man to
the Image of God; Man again to require the courtesy would make God to the
Image of Man: By which God after they had discharged themselves of some
Ceremonies to him, they conceited themselves not only safe against all sins
already committed, but thought for the time to come, they had got a license and
a privilege to sin.

some, who turning desperation into censure, have been of judgment that God
could not be known, and that in vain they travail that bestow their labors
in searching out his Nature, whose modesty indeed deserves to be excused, were
there not too much of sloth in it, and were not the diminution of his knowledge
an occasion of the diminution of his love, and by the same contempt whereby the
knowledge of the Divine Nature is neglected, the knowledge also of the Divine
Will would be despised.

Plato in whose tracks Cicero treads, has been more happy in this inquiry,
for he has delivered to the world many true and excellent things concerning
God; as when he says, That he is the Author and Governor of all things, most
Good, most Great, who sees and sustaineth all things, and that the life of a
wise man is nothing else but a return to God, and that the way to God is by
the study of Piety and Justice: This and much more to this purpose, we may
read in Platoes Politicon, his Philebus, Theatetus, and Timaeus, where we may
find many things taken from the Ancient Divinity which he had learned in Egypt
and in Siria.

Aristotle more sharp in understanding, does add, that God is the first
Moover, the first Being, and moving Power; who notwithstanding is unmoueable,
to whom as to their End the Caelestiall Intelligences perpetually move, and
that he is the cause of the continual Motions of the heavens, which causes
other Motions, and from whom the inferior bodies receive their influences.



Genus of God that is Synonimall, or fully able to define him; and although
there be no specificall difference, yet there is a Genus which is called
Analogicall, and a Difference too; although but by way of Negation; as when we
say that a Beast is a creature that is not reasonable, both which Genus and
which Difference being apprehended by the understanding as proper Qualities do
conduct our minds unto some knowledge of God.

God is the first, the most chief, and most perfect Being, from whom there
flows and depends all Entity and Perfection: For other things which are his
Attributes, as his Eternity, his Simplicity, his Wisdom, and of like Nature
are all contained under this word of chief Perfection.

Psalmist does imply, If thou hidest thy face they are troubled, if thou take
away their breath they dye, and return unto their dust: Psalm. 104.





Momus himself can find nothing in them, that he might tax either for excess
or for default; neither is God said to be perfect after this manner, for he is
not ordained to any particular end, who is himself the chief End of all
things.

in potentia passiua, in a passive power to some Act; but God is a pure Act,
and in him there is no power that is passive.



many places the motionary faculty is given to him, which in some sort does
remedy this imperfection, for by it successively at least, and in diverse
times, the creature may be in diverse places; This perfection must not be
looked for in God, for seeing he is every where, there is no place for him to
move unto.

about the eye of his understanding, or behold things in a succession of order,
or should bring a new intention of the mind to attain new knowledge, for there
is not any thing that is or can be new unto him.

life, but he enjoyes all his life and perfection, together, and in a Moment:
for Aeternity, as Boethius does define it, is the whole, together, and the
perfect possession of a life unlimited. And as to a Man sitting on the bank of
a River, only that Water is present to him which is observed by him in that
instant Moment and point of time, but that part of the River is not presented
to his eyes which is not yet come to them or but now gone from them, yet the
same Man, were he exalted into the upper region of the air, might behold the
whole River, and at one view observe both the fountain and the courses of it;
So by the eye of God who is above time, together, and in a moment, is observed
the whole flux of transitory things, neither in him is there addition or
subtraction, for all things that are, are present to him.





Lupus in Latin, which signifies the creature of prey and Rapine, as also the
bitte or snaffle of a bridle) hold no intelligence together, neither have they
any order in Nature, neither by one do we proceed to the knowledge of another;
but the wisdom and the Righteousness of Angels are resemblances of the
divine Righteousness and sparks shining from it, and the knowledge of one does
advance our spirits to the Contemplation of another; Those things therefore may
be said to have an Analogicall reference which are as Ens, or Being, which is
in Logic called the Genus Analogum of Substances and Accidents, and so a foot
is spoken either by the foot of a living creature or by the tressle of a bed
or table, for in the greatest diversity there is no little Analogy or
Resemblance.

living Being, understanding, incorporeall, without beginning, not depending
on another, infinite, simple, unchangeable, vnmooveable, all-knowing, perfectly
Just, and perfectly Wise.



the Divine Nature, by which preexercitations the Mind being stirred up does
more greedily receive, and more easily digest the Instructions reveiled in the
Word of God, which excellent and sublimed knowledge of the Word of God, shall
be now the Subject of our Discourse.



of him by his works is but a lazy speculation, and the press of him by the
law is terrible, and does press our Consciences with a burden unsupportable.





contemplation of the works of God, did we not distinctly see them by the word
as through spectacles, which of themselves would hardly be discerned; this does
the Apostle teach us in the 11. Heb. Through faith we understand that the
worlds were framed by the word of God, so that things which are seen were not
made of things which do appear; giving us to understand, that they only
believe, as they ought, the creation of the world to be without any
praeexistent matter, which receive the word of God with the obedience of faith;
would you have it made legible by examples? The history of the Creation is well
known as it is related by Moses in the beginning of Genesis: It is there
declared that the Sun was created but in the fourth day; so that three days
and as many nights were past when the Sun was first created; this being to
inform us that God did so use the Sun to illustrate the world, that yet
without it and before it, he shined into the world by his own light, being no
ways obliged to second causes; And when Moses assigns a beginning and ending
to every day, in these words, And the Evening and the Morning were the first
day, and so of the other days, only in the seventh day Moses makes no
mention of the Evening, for the Rest of the seventh day is the shadow and the
figure of the heavenly and eternal Rest of which there is no End; so when the
Naturalists report many things of the Rainebow, the only end and signification
of the Rainebow can be learned out of the word of God* But how many mysteries
and instructions does the Creation of Man and Woman contain? Surely God
forming the body of Man out of clay, did conform his mind also to humility,
and a religious lowliness by remembering him of his descent and ignoble
parentage; also when God created a Wife for the man when he was asleep, it
does instruct us, that a good Wife is not obtained by a man's own industry or
wisdom, but by the Providence of God, which does bring her to him while he
is asleep: Again, the creation of the Woman from the part most near unto the
heart, what does it imply? but faith and love: and that I may not diue into
hidden mysteries, and by what means Adam overcome with a deep sleep, (which
is called by Homer (...), the brother of Death) was a figure of Christ in the
sleep of Death, which sleep God made use of to raise unto him his Spouse
which is the Church.

which he has heard or read in the word of God: If a godly man and one that
knows God by his word, beholds a fountain of running waters, they will
presently prompt his memory to the fountain of life, in John 4. And to the
waters springing up to everlasting life: If he beholds the Sun he
contemplates how greater far is the Light of the Sun of Righteousness: If he
considers the vicissitude of the days and nights he comforts himself in the
remembrance of the assurance of the Covenant of God, God himself so speaking
by the mouth of Jeremy: If you can break my Covenant of the day and my
Covenant of the night, and that there should not be Day and Night in their
season, then shall you also be able to break my Covenant with David: If he
beholds a Shepherd driving of his flock, he remembers presently that in the
Psalm; The Lord is my Shepherd I shall not want: Finally, wheresoever he
turns his eye he will find an ample subject of praise and of thankesgiving,
and a wide field will be opened for holy meditation.



of their deliverance. Most remarkable is that of Sethon King of Egypt, who
holding a Mouse in his hand, stood cut in stone in the Temple of Vulcan, on his
Statue was inscribed.

(...). Whosoever looks on me,
Let him godly learn to be.
Giving thanks to God, who by multitudes of Mice sent in among them had
disbanded the army of Sennacherib the King of the Assyrians. And Phlegas in the
sixth of the Aeneids, among a thousand torments, in hell is personated crying
out:

Discite justitiam moniti and non temnere Divos. By me learn Justice, and be
wise,
Nor do the holy Gods despise.
From hence they feign Nemesis and Rhamnusia hanging over the successes of the
wicked, and stopping the courses of their prosperity; from hence in their
Tragedies if any horrible crime worthy a God to revenge it, was presented, some
God was then produced advancing his head from behind a frame or property: but
these things were rare, and, as it were, forced by necessity, and but light
compared to these which out of the Word of God we learn concerning his
providence, as of the hairs of our head, which are all numbered; of the
Sparrowes, not one of which falls on the ground without the will of God, of the
wicked rejoicing in their follies while the hand of God hollowes their pit
the deeper; of God searching our reins* and seeing the secrets of our hearts;
of giving an account before the Tribunal Seat of God, not only of evil
actions, but of an idle word.

David, Psalm. 73, confesses that at the beginning he envyed the success of
ungodly men, and was not a little afflicted to see them flow with blessings,
not only according to their desires, but also above them, while the righteous
and they who are called the people of God in full boles drink deep of waters
mingled with gall, which affliction of his mind was eased after he was entered
into the Sanctuary of God* from whence, as from a Watchtower, he beheld the
end of the Ungodly, and acknowledged that the happiness of men was not to be
adjudged by the present condition of their state; but by the counsel of God,
and the last event of things: the holy man owed this his rectifyed judgment of
humane affairs to the Word of God, from which in many places he confesses,
that he had derived the wisdom of his knowledge.

Ibis, who with his horned beak did destroy the Snakes, and purged Egypt from
her Serpents; whereupon as every man became more renowned, either by valor, or
by the praise of civil policy, or by the invention and study of the Arts, he
was more easily exalted by posterity into heaven, and numbered in the Catalogue
of the Gods.

of Religion, what vain observations men would fancy, with what painted
fables would they delude themselves and God, attributing those things unto God,
which would misbecome a man but indifferently sober? This was the vanity that
first brought Atheism into the World; for a man civilly wise, that beholds
Cities and Nations to be distracted by contrary opinions, and all things to be
full of fables, suffers himself easily to be traduced to a belief, that
Religion is but a mere invention, to which opinion Plutarch seems to be more
inclined, for in his book expressly written on the same subject he endeavors
to prove, that Atheism is more tolerable then Superstition: and Cicero in his
second Book De Natura Deorum does affirm, that they are called superstitious
who whole days do offer prayers and Sacrifice, that their children may
survive them; and they are said to be religious, who sequester, and with
careful reverence touch those things which appertain to the service of the
Gods; But, good man, he was altogether ignorant that this which he calls
Religion is nothing else but Superstition.

many errourts concerning Religion; for they who worship not God according to
the rule prescribed in his Word, are without God in the world, As the Apostle
has it in the Second of the Ephesians. Although they worship millions of Gods, nay
although the Samaritans came near and next in conformity to the true Religion,
acknowledging that they worshipped one only God, the Creator of the Universe,
the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and were signed with the sign of the
Covenant, and acknowledged Moses too their Lawgiver, yet because they revolted
from the rule of the Word of God, and by a stubborn separation did divide
themselves from the Israelites, our Savior says in the Fourth of John, that
the Samaritans knew not what they worshipped; So necessary it is, in the
business of salvation, to have God to lead us, and to make his Word our Rule.

David, in the 104. Psalm: As soon as darkness is spread over the Earth,
the Beasts of the Forest come out of their Dens, and the young Lions rear
after their prey: but as soon as the Sun arises they hide themselves in
their Dens and dare not come forth, but Man then goes forth unto his work
and to his labor until the Evening: Indeed when the dark mist of Ignorance
overspreads the Earth, Satan and his Ministers triumph securely like unruly
Beasts, but as soon as the Sun of the word of God has begun to shine,
they fly away that hate the truth; then do the godly go forth unto their
labor until the Evening; that is, they labor in the service of God and the
exercise of good works, until by a happy Death they arrive to the evening of
their life.

Psalmist in the 19. Psalm, after he had said, That the Heavens declare the
glory of God, attributing so great an eloquence to the heavenly bodies,
although but speechless, that not a nation under heaven but hears them, he
presently passes to the Law of God, leading us by the hand to a better master,
to more clear and certain instructions; the Law of God (says he) is entire,
converting the soul, the testimony of the Lord is true, giving wisdom to the
Simple.

Paul in the first of the Romans, For suppressing the Truth, and detayning it
in unrighteousness, and because that when they knew God they did not glorify
him as God.

Coloss. who says, That he who falls off from the service of God to the
worshipping of Angels (...), does intrude into those things which he has not
seen, vainly putt up by his fleshly mind; and in the 1. of the Romans he
says, When they professed themselves wise, they became fools, and were
therefore delivered over to vile affections.

God; But wherefore God, who could without the preaching of the Word convert
our hearts, and immediately infuse into them the knowledge of himself, had
rather lead us to the knowledge of himself, and by this knowledge to
Salvation, by his Word, it is not curiously to be sought into: For God who
reserues the reason of his Counsels to himself, and is not subject unto any,
is not to be called to an account, neither is it for man to argue with God;
nevertheless the reason of this divine Counsel is evident, and it is easy
enough to assign the Cause; for be cause Death entered into the World by the
ear, it pleased God that the doctrine of Salvation should enter in by the same
way too; And because that Man fell by believing the words of the Devil, it was
fitting that man should be raised from his fall by believing the Word of God;
for it was requisite that contrary evils should be cured by contrary Remedies;
wherefore God sends us by Esaias the Prophet to the Law and to the Prophets,
pronouncing that it cannot be that without these, the morning Light should
shine on any; and in Luke 16* Abraham teaches us, That it is in vain to have
recourse unto the dead, and to expect Revelations from thence, when we have at
hand the Law and the Prophets. Neither is it to be doubted, but that Christ,
restoring sight unto the blind by annoynting his eyes with spittle, did
secretly thereby intimate, that, only that which proceeds from his mouth
illuminates the understanding, and scatters the darkness of natural
ignorance: Hence it is that in the history of the old and new Testament, there
are found examples of some holy men whom God chastised with blindness, as Ahia
the Prophet, or with dumbnes, as Zachary the father of John Baptist, but of a
religious man whom he struck with deafness, and from whom he took the
sense by which his Word should be conveyed unto him, there is not any Example
in the Scriptures; but the Devil is called the deaf Spirit in the Gospel,
because they who are possessed with him do deaf their ears at the Word of
God.



greatness of the thing. Let Demosthenes be read, or Princeps Romani Tullius
Eloquij,

Tully the reputed Prince
Of the Roman Eloquence.
Only while they are read they do affect, there being a kind of soft harmony
and gentle titillation that strokes the ear, but when the hearer is departed,
the sense of that delight departs also, as the face is seen no more in the
glass when the person is retired from it; But if there be a faithful and
attentive hearer or reader of the Word of God, it will sit deep within him,
and graven in his heart be ever present, breathing forth Diuinities, governing
the affections, cheering the heart, and finally renewing the whole Man.



equal Authority, for men howsoever they be unequal in dignity compared
among themselves, compared to God they be all equal; As the Mountains and
the Valleys make both one plain in the Globe of Earth, when Earth is compared
unto heaven.

Cato was wont to say that he wondered how one Southsayer looking on another
could refrain from laughter, because acknowledging among themselves the
impostures of their profession, by a secret combination they would
nevertheless counterfeit themselves as serious.



Homer and Hesiod the most ancient of the Greek Poets lived at least a hundred
and fifty years after David, yet David's inspired Poems are distant as far from
Homers as heaven from Earth, or the fables of man from the truth of God,
neither does Plato dissemble in the beginning of his Timaeus that the
Aeygptians would say that the Grecians were always boys, who never could be
men of Age as being altogether ignorant of true Antiquity.

Moses in favor of the Israelites, with most terrible threatenings he thunders
against that nation, and every where convinces them of folly and pride, and
Rebellion against God himself.

Moses wrote this, it is apparent, that he conceales not his own offenses,
but rehearses the chastisement wherewith God afflicted him, and that he was
commanded to die on the borders of the promised land because he believed not
the voice of God; And how far he was from Ambition, we may see by this,
that he would not have his sons succeed him in his Government, but elected
Joshua that was of another tribe; And how small the dignity of Moses sons was
among the pirests we may learn out of Josephus, lib. 1. Orig. cap. 11. Who
recites that in the distribution of sacred things which was made by David, the
charge which Moses posterity had, was but the keeping of the treasury, and
the Gifts which were offered in the temple.

Esaias foretell the name of Cyrus and that he should be a deliverer of the
Jews 160 years before Cyrus was borne; Or what other but the Spirit of God
could foretell to Jeroboam that a King should be borne of the Stock of David,
Josias by name, who should overthrow and demolish their profaner Alters, and
that, three hundred fifty and six months before it was done; What shall I
say of Jeremy, who expresselie set down the 70 years of Captivity in
Babylon; What of Daniell, who from the restoration of Jerusalem to the death
of Christ, precisely numbers seventie weeks of years, that is 490 years, the
predictions of the same Daniell of the four Empires, and of the Kings Seluci,
seem rather to be histories then prophecies; Which may be affirmed also of
the prophecies of Esai, of whom Saint Hierom in his Epistle to Paulinus says,
that he seems rather to be an Evangelist then a Prophet; these things
certainly could not be suggested into the Prophets by any other then by him
only, who as he has a foresight of all things so he has an insight also,
and knows them well, because that he will do them.

Platoes or Aristotle's opinion, yet ever ventured to encounter death; Indeed I
could be content to say that Cleombrotus the Ambrocian was Platoes Martyr, who
(as Cicero in his third Tusculan does relate) having read the Book of Plato
entitled Phaedo, where Socrates near unto death disputes of the immortality
of the Soul, did force himself into a headlong death; this man, I say, might
be called the Martyr of Plato, had he done this in any hope of salvation to be
attained by Platoes means, and not through the tediousness of life.

Sybills are abolished, only the holy Writ has remained untouched, as having
God its Author; neither to extinguish it, could prevail the horrible
insolence of Antiochus Epiphanes, or the impious cunning of Julian Caesar, or
the pernicious writings of Lucian and Porphyrius, nay, these execrable persons
were the admirable examples of the Divine Justice. It is known how Antiochus
Epiphanes, constrained to raise his Siege, and abandon Elemais through grief
of mind, in the flower of his age and Kingdom breathed forth his unrighteous
soul: how Julian in his very entrance into the Empire, struck through with an
arrow, gave up his impure spirit: how (if we may believe Suidas) enraged dogs
tore Lucian in pieces.

Josephus writes in the twelfth Book of his Jewish Antiquities, Chap: 2.
where Demetrius Phaleraeus, the Keeper of the Kings Library, speaks thus to
Ptolomaeus Philadelphus out of Hecataeus Abderita, concerning the sacred Books
of the Jews, (...), as being pure and holy, it was unlawful that they should
be expressed by a profane mouth: the same Demetrius Phaleraeus relates out of
Aristaeus that Theopompus having wrought into his story some part taken from
the sacred Word, was for forty days together stricken with an Apoplexy,
until, by some respits of releasement from his sickness, he appeased God by
his prayers, and desisted from his enterprise, being admonished in a dream
that these things happened to him because he intruded into holy things: In the
same manner Theodoctes the Poet, having inserted into a Tragedy of his
something taken from the Word of God, being struck with blindness, was
enforced to abandon the enterprise which so rashly he began.

Clemens speaks in his first Book of Tapist: and Tertullian in his Book of
Women's habites, that Jerusalem being taken and razed by the Babylonians, all
the Books of the Jews were restored again by Esdras; their intention is not,
that the holy Books were utterly extinguished and abollished, and then again
restored by Esdras; for so the holy Books, which at this day we read, should
not be the Books of Moses, of David, or of Esaias, but of Esdras, who by new
inspirations did compile them; the intention of Clement and Tertullian is, that
the Books of the Old Testament, during the Captivity of Babylon, dispersed, or
but rarely and negligently transcribed, were digested by Esdras into order,
more accurately written, and restored to their native beauty.

it with such eyes, as the constant wife does the contract of her marriage, or
the good Son does his fathers Will, who never hears the Scripture mentioned
but his heart does leap, and his filial affections earne, who by this rule
does compose, and squares all his life, his deeds and words, nay, and his
thoughts also: But as young Samuel being awaked from sleep by the voice of
God, lay presently down to sleep again, thinking it to be but the voice of
Man, and not of God; so the greatest part of men, the word of God being heard,
and they awakened by it, in a light fear they begin a little to stir and
stretch themselves, but by and by they fall again into a sleep of vices,
because they heard this word as the word of man, and not as the word of God.



which notions that God might help, and that no man might excuse his sin by
pretending ignorance, God has given his Law written by man, which Law is
reduced to these two heads: To love God with all our heart, and with all our
strength, and to love our neighbor as our selves, which Law with great terror
he pronounced in a voice, whose accents were thunders and shining with flames
of Lightning, that the people might understand that their Lawgiver was armed,
and who so despised his commandments should not escape unpunished; this
dreadful clause adjoined to it, Cursed is he that continues not in all
things, which are contained in the book of the Law to do them.



both extremes by the Communion of Nature.

Adam is imputed to all his posterity, so the Righteousness of Christ is
imputed unto all those who by the Spirit of Adoption and faith in him are made
the Sons of God.



by Generation in Time: Neither was there any thing more agreeable, than that
he who was the Middle in the persons of the Trinity, should also be the Middle
betwixt God and Man, and be the link and tie of all affinity betwixt heaven
and earth; And what could be more apt and suitable to the Wisdom of God, than
that we should be restored into the Right and Degree of sons, by him who is
the only Son of God, and that God should renew Man by the same Word by which
he created him, and that God should speak unto us by him, who is the Eternal
Word of God, and by him should teach us true wisdom who is himself the
wisdom of the Father.

In the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, and that the
people should be instructed in the faith of Christ by the preaching of the
Gospel, by which to the Penitent and Believing, Remission of sins and
everlasting life is promised, and that the faithful should attend the second
coming of Christ, in which he shall raise up the dead, and taking into his
knowledge an Account of all Man's actions, shall render unto every one according
to his works.

Adam, and which shall last unto the End of the World; for the Scripture
testifies, that the Fathers before Christ were saved by faith in Christ;
Abraham rejoiced to see my day and he saw it, John. 8. And Moses preferred the
reproach of Christ to the treasures of Egypt, Heb. 11. And it pleased the
Father to reconcile all things by the blood of the Cross, whether they were
things in Heaven, or things in Earth, Col. 1. And there is no man of sober
understanding, that ever yet made doubt, but that these words of, Things in
heaven, did comprehend the Patriarchs and the Prophets; to which purpose some
of the Ancients have not unaptly applied an Allegory of a Branch laden with
Grapes, which hanging on a staff was carried on two men's shoulders, by him
that went foremost they understood the Church of the old Testament, by him that
came after, the Church of the new Testament, and by the branch of Grapes,
Christ himself; for the old Church saw not the coming of Christ, because it
went before in order of Time, but this latter has Christ ever before her eyes
and beholds him come: Nevertheless the Branch of Grapes is as much the food of
one as of the other, for Christ equally unto both Churches conveigheth life and
food spiritual.





Subjects of Law and Physic there is no comparison, but in certainty it
wonderfully transcends them all: For whatsoever the Philosophers do dispute
concerning the chief or principal good, are so different among themselves, so
contrary one unto another, that their chief good seems rather to be grounded
on opinion then on nature. Augustine in the nineteenth book of the City of
God, reckons up out of Marcus Varro, a hundred and fourscore disagreeing
opinions of Philosophers concerning their Summum Bonum, or Chiefest Good; and
Physicians do rather suspect, then see the inward affections of the bodies,
and the causes of diseases; and hereupon it often comes to pass, that in
pretense of curing the diseased, officiously they kill them: But how great the
uncertainty of humane Law is, the infinite diversity of customs and countries,
the endless discord of municipal Rights, and of the Roman and Barbarian Laws,
does plainly testify: but the foundations of Divinity stand sure and
unshaken, being laid by the hand of God himself, and are more firm then
Heaven or Earth: The Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but my words shall not
pass, says God himself.

abundantly will suffice him both for faith and manners.



viz. eternal blessedness, which consists in an union with God, to which
end it is requisite that other Ends and our whole eourse of Life should be
obedient, unless peradventure we would be careful of our life in some little
portions and pieces of it, but in the whole be unthrifts, and so of many litles
(as we think wisely laid together) one entire folly should be made, and there
would be a good Lawyer, a good Physician, a good Senator, but a bad man.



Jeremy, Let not the Wise man glory in his Wisdom, neither let the mighty man
glory in his might, let not a rich Man glory in his riches, but let him that
glorifieth, glory in this, that he understands and knows me, that I am
the Lord who exercise Judgment and Righteousness on the Earth.

a searcher of the secrets of the heart, whose eyes cannot be curtain'd with
the flattering clouds of lying or hypocrisy, to whom Accounts are to be given
of every idle Word; wherefore the holy Scripture did assign this the Cause, of
the Wickedness of the sons of Heli, they were wicked men, the sons of
Belial not knowing the Lord, and Hosea the 4. Because there is no knowledge of
God in the Land, perjury, and Lying, and Stealing, and committing Adultery
has broken forth, and blood touches blood; On the contrary from the knowledge
of God arise all examples of Virtues; which Esaias witnesses, Chap. 11. They
shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, for the Earth shall be
full of the knowledge of the Lord; And truly a holy Man who considers always,
that God beholds him, will so live in private as in public, so in public as
in the Temple, so in the Temple, as before the eyes of God who is his Judge,
his Master and his father; Neither does Satan open a wider window unto all kind
of vice than by persuading Men that God looks not down on things so low; For
then a deep sleep overwhelmes the Conscience, and the fear of the Judge
being taken off, the bars are broken and Men dare do any thing, running
headlong into all kind of Villainy, although restrained a little by the power
of the law or by the fear of Infamy.

the tongues of Murmurers; For he that knows God, knows all his works to
be as full of Justice as of providence, to complain of whose providence as it
is unrighteous, so to oppose it, is not only unprofitable, but Rash and
Dangerous; And he who is assured that God so works that even evils
themselves do turn to Good to those that fear him, does secure himself in
his care and Love.



seat of God, he is presently touched with an apprehension of his weakness,
and his natural pollutions and deformities present themselves before him, and
is environed with so great a Light, that he is enforced to confess that the
Light of his Understanding is but utter darkness; In the same manner, they
that only behold the things which are before their feet, believe their sight
is good and clear enough, but the same Men when they behold the Sun, have
strait their eyes so blinded that they are compelled to confess, that the
sharpest discretion of their eye is both dark and dull, when it turns it
self unto heavenly things.

whose own lives are Irregular as being altogether without the knowledge of
God? So strange besides is the garb and Condition of humane things, that we
prefer delights even above necessities; So the Confectmaker is valued above
the husband man, and we think the embroiderer to be a more Substantial
fellow then the Tailor; And commonly those studies are more esteemed that make
for gain, then those that instill into our minds the elements of divine
Wisdom; It falls out with these, what Aristotle reports, to have befalne the
suitors of Penelope, who because they could not obtain the Mistress, enjoyed
their desires with her Maids; For the Arts are the handmaids of divine
Wisdom, neither do they deserve a place in the Rank of honest diciplines if
they profess not themselves to be attendants on it, these are those handmaids
which the Divine Wisdom sends forth, as it is recorded in the ninth of the
Proverbs.

that Divinity should be unarmed and unnerved, should it be destitute of the
help of the Arts.

Coryphaei in Divinity, the Prophets and Apostles begged these ornaments;
their Simplicity being more powerful than all Eloquence, and their Majesty of
greater virtue than all acuteness of Logic or Philosophy; As the chaste Matron
is most adorned, that has on no ornaments at all, leaving to the unchaste or
the vnbeautiful, their false and artificial dresses, and borrowed Complexions;
What if the Judge does sell his purple, or the mercenary Lawyer the braver he
is clothed, does esteem his tongue at the deerer rate, must the Tailor
therefore advance his needle above the law? One Science is subordinate unto
another, when it borrows it is principles from it, or, when the Conclusions in
the superior Science, are made the principles of the inferior, so the Optics
are subordinate to Geometry, and Music to Arithmetic; Or when the End of one
Art is subordinate to the End of another, So the Art of making bridles, is
subordin'd to the Art of Horse-manshippe, and that Art is subordinate to
Military Discipline; But no such thing is to be found in Divinity.





covered with dust, or when he expounds supeeannuated Customs about meats
or habits, be heard with great attention and applause, what ears and
Attention should we lend to them, who unfold things more Ancient than heaven
it self, and declare the Wisdom of the Ancient of Days, drawn not from the
defective Cisterne of the Critic, but from the vnfaddom'd deepes of the
Oracles of God? If the Lawyer be heard pleading of eaue-droppings, of
tenements, or of Wills, how, with more purged ears should the Divine, not
discoursing of drops of waters, but of the fountain of Life it self, not of
the tenure of houses, but of the liberty of the Spirit, not of the testament of
dying men, but of the Will of the living God?

Ceres Temple, but after many sighs and tedious preparations by often
purifyings; what manner of man ought he to be, whom God admits into the
Chancell of his most sacred discipline? And if Aristotle in the first of his
Ethics, and the 3. Chap* would have his hearer of civil sciences, to be
neither (...), neither (...), young in age or manners, how much more requisite
is it, that all youthful heates should be cooled in him, who is to address
himself to that Science, to which all other sciences are but servants?

Who seeks after Majesty shall be consumed with the glory of it. This
corruption began in Adam, affecting that knowledge of Good and Evil which
only appertains unto God; wherefore as in the eating of the Paschall Lamb,
the Israelites were to feed only on the flesh and not to meddle with the
bones; so in the doctrine which instructs us in the knowledge of God, we must
labor after those things which serve for the nourishment of our soul, and
abstain from those which by their hardness would break our teeth, and turn
the edge of our understanding: then only in the knowledge of God shall we
observe a mean betwixt an affected negligence and a saucy curiosity, when we
shall refer all our knowledge and meditation to piety and manners, and to the
love of God.

Le Sr de la Primaudaye en ses Quatrains. L'aeuvre excellent des cieux, and
l'entour, and le space,
Rendent leur Architecte admirable a tous yeux:
Mais sa divine loy restaurant l'ame en mieux,
L'esleue sur ce tout pour voire Dieu face a face.
The glorious Vault, and fabric of the skies,
Presents their wondrous Maker to all eyes:
Whose Law divine, restoring souls by grace
Mounts them over all, to see HIM face to face.

FINIS.
THE CHOICEST SENTENCES TAKEN out of this present treatise of the knowledge of
GOD.
In the collection only whereof I have followed the Copy of Mounsieur
Derelincourt Minister of the Hague, which if they be thought either too tedious
or impertinent, it shall be some protection to me, that I had so reverend an
Example.

TRVTH is so affected to the Mind as Light unto the Eye. Sect. 3.

The true knowledge of God is the most absolute perfection of the mind. Sect. 4.

That in all Men is inherent an apprehension of a God, it is manifest by
experience and the testimony of all Ages, amongst whom there is none so wild or
barbarous that has not received some form of Religion, and that established
under most grievous penalties, for this is no written but a native Law, to
which we are not taught, but made, not instructed by precepts but by the
principles of Nature. Sect. 7.

From nothing to something is an infinite disproportion. Sect. 24.

As the beams of Light dispersed over all the World, do flow from one
beginning, namely the Sun, and as numbers proceed all from Unity, and in the
Body of Man, as all the Arteries and Vital Faculties proceed from one heart,
so every Being does depend and is sustained by one chief and Sovereign Being.
Sect. 24. God is not only the efficient Cause of all things but the final
also, as the Apostle witnesses to the Hebrews, saying, That God is for whom
and by whom all things are. Sect. 25.

The End is always the foremost in the Intention, and the Efficient Cause is
moved by it. ibid.

Most true is that of Aristotle in his second book de Genesis cap. 10. that the
perpetual durance and continuance of things ought to be imputed to the Simple
and daily Motion of the Sun from the East into the West; but that Generation
and Corruption does arise from the oblique course of the Sun and planets
through the Zodiac, whiles according to their situation they change their
Aspects, and by their access nearer to us, or recesse farther from us, the
Affections, and the Qualities of the things do differ. Sect. 28

As the Essence of God cannot be expressed by words, so it cannot be conceived by
the Understanding, for a thing infinite cannot be comprehended by a thing
finite, and the inaccessible light of God does dazzle the understanding. Sect.
39.

From the diminution of the knowledge of God would arise a diminution of his
love, and by the same contempt whereby the knowledge of the divine Nature is
neglected, the knowledge also of the divine Will would be despised. Sect. 42.

The life of a Wise man is nothing else but a Return to God, and the way to
God is by the study of Piety and Justice. Sect. 43.

The Maker of time is before time, and above it, neither is his duration
measured by it; for as the infiniteness of God does not only consist in this,
that he is not circumscribed by limits, but most especially in this, that he
is all in every place; so his eternity likewise consists not in this only that
he is without beginning and without end, but rather in this, that his life is
not a motionary course, but a perpetual rest, and in which there is no
succession of parts. Sect. 56.

As to a man sitting on the bank of a River, only that water is present which
is observed by him in that instant moment, and point of time, but that part of
the River is not presented to his eyes which is not yet come to him, or but now
gone from him; yet the same man, were he exalted into the upper region of the
air, might behold the whole River, and at one aspect observe both the
fountain and the coruses of it; so by the eye of God, who is obove time,
together, and in one moment is observed the whole flux of transitory things,
neither in him is there addition or subtraction, because all things are present
with him. Se. 56.

Those perfections which are diverse and scattered in the creatures, in God are
one and the same perfection. Se. 57.

God making the body of man of earth, did conform his mind to humility, and a
religious lowliness, by remembering him of his descent and ignoble parentage.
Se. 67.

The happiness of men is not to be esteemed by the present condition of
things, but by the Counsaeile of God, and last event of all things. Sect. 71.

It is necessary in the business of salvation to have God our leader, and to
make his word our rule. Sect. 74.

Because that man did fall by believing the words of the Devil, it was fitting
that man should be raised from his fall by believing the Words of God: for it
was requisite that contrary Evils should be cured by contrary Remedies. Sect.
79.

The Scripture teaches that Man being first creaeted to the image of God,
endued with holiness and righteousness, revolted from God by his own
consent, and the suggestion of the Devil, whereupon sin came into the world,
and by sin death and malediction, notwithstanding the image of God is not so
deformed in man, that there remains not certain traces of it, to wit, a
certain apprehension of Divinity, and some grains of Honesty and civil
Justice. Sect. 95.

Though God inhabits light which cannot be attained to, yet in some manner he
has made himself visible in his Son, who is the image of the invisible God,
and God with us, whosoever shall endeavor to come to God by any other way, he
shall find him a Judge and not a Father, and the more he hasts, the more he
erres, and headlong falls into a certain ruin. Sect. 99.

Physicians do rather suspect then see the inward affections of the Bodies,
and the causes of Diseases, and hereupon it often comes to pass, that in
pretense of curing the diseased, officiously they kill ihem. Sect. 105.

As there are may be gathered many and excellent fruits from the knowledge of
God; so this is above all the most principal, that we cannot bridle in our
vices, or stop our desires in their careere with a stronger rein, then with the
knowledge of God; for he that knows God, knows him to be a searcher into the
secrets of the heart, whose eyes cannot be curtaind with the flattering clouds
of lying or hypocrisy, to whom accounts are to be given of every idle word.
Sect. 111.

To complain of Gods providence, as it is unrighteous, so to oppose against is
rash and dangerous. Sect. 112.

Without the knowledge of God it is impossible for us to know our selves; for
then the bubbles of our pride sink down, and our plumes do fall when we
look on God. Sect. 114.

Then only in the knowledge of God shall we observe a mean betwixt an affected
negligence and a saucy curiosity, when we shall refer all our knowledge and
meditation to piety, and manners, and to the love of God.

The End.

