A DEFENSE OF THE CATHOLIC FAITH: CONTAINED IN THE BOOK OF THE MOST Mighty,
and most Gracious King JAMES the first, King of Great Britain, France and
Ireland, Defender of the FAITH.

AGAINST THE ANSWER OF N. Coeffeteau, Doctor of Divinity, and Vicar General
of the Dominican Preaching FRIARS.

Written in French, by PIERRE DV MOVLIN, Minister of the word of God in the
Church of PARIS.

Translated into English according to his first Coppie, by himself reuiewed
and corrected.

LONDON Printed by W. Stansby for Nathaniel Butter and Martin Clerk. 1610.

To the KINGS most Excellent MAJESTY.
I Take mine Authors word, and mine own experience, for warrant from beyond
the Seas, (most Dread Sovereign) that your Majesty's excellent knowledge and
learning, have won you admiration among foreign Nations. And for
home-affections it is well known, that your Majesty's sincere love to the
truth of Religion, and constant Confession of the Catholic Faith, whereof
your Majesty is worthily styled The Defender, have knit the hearts of your
people unto you. Who well perceive by your Kingly Apology directed to the
Princes of Christendom, that God has made your Majesty such a one as was
DAVID, The sweet Singer of Israel, even a Prophetical King, 2. ^am. 23.1.
and a Kingly Prophet; whose bold profession it is, Psalm. 119. I will speak of
thy testimonies, Psalm. 119.46.
even before Kings, and will not be ashamed: Such as the Kings also among the
Heathen are said to have been, both Princes and Prophets;

Rex Anius, Virg. Aeneid. 3.
rex idem hominum, Phoebique Sacerdos. Concerning the Author and Penman of
this book I need not say any thing: Authorem commendat opus. Touching my
self, upon whom this task was secundarily imposed, I know the Translation
will blab out mine imperfections. Your Majesty is apt to pardon greater
offenses, and therefore, I hope, these. The ground work is your Majesty's own;
which makes me bold to use that saying toward your Majesty, my Sovereign
Lord, wherewith Paulus Orosius dedicateth his Story to S. Austin, his Master
and Tutor; Totum tuum sit, quod ex te, In initio.
ad te redit: It is all your Majesty's own doing, which coming from you, I
return it back again unto you. And so I dedicate you to your self: In
Apologet. cap. 30.
concluding with that which Tertullian reports to have been the ancient
Christians Prayer, for the safety of their Emperors; and is now in use also in
the Church of Rome, if we may believe Doctor Coeffeteau, but, I fear me, not
with like true affection; Fol. 5.
Vitam Maiestati tuae prolixam, Imperium securum, domum tutam, exercitum
fortem, Senatum fiaelem, populum probum, regnum quietum obnixe precor.

Your Majesty's most humble, and faithful Subject, JOHN SANFORD.

To the most Mighty and Gracious King, JAMES the first, King of great
Britain, and of Ireland.
SIR,
AS your greatness, no way needs our service, so your exquisite learning
wants not any defense. For your greatest enemies, to whom your power is
redoubtable, have your learning in admiration. But were it so that you had use
of any man's pen; yet should you have little cause to seek further then your
own kingdoms, since amongst your subjects there is so great a number of
learned men to whom we are in all regards inferior. Yet notwithstanding, we
have held it necessary to declare unto the world, that that religion which you
defend, is the same which we profess, and that it befits us to make resistance
to such as in your particular person assault the general truth. This
undertaking of mine is great, and my abilities but ordinary; besides, my
vocation very laborious; neither is a tempest a fit time to write in, or a
bank of an unquiet torrent, a fit place for serious meditation. But SIR, the
perfection of your work may supply my defect, for to fight after you cannot be
properly termed fighting, but the pursuit of your victory; for though the
point of truth be ever sharp, yet it enters and pierces more or less,
according to the force, and vigor of the arm. It is not then to be marvelled
if it strike clean through errors, being guided by so strong and powerful a
hand. To you then SIR belongs the glory of this holy work, to us remains the
good, and benefit of following your example: for the easiest way to speak well
for you, is to speak that which we have learned of you: neither is it
possible, that any one should write well in your defense, that writes not in
your imitation. Wherein these my pains, can no way merit to be compared. For
your Majesty pours out largely with a royal hand into the Threasury of the
Sanctuary, whilst I like the poor widow make offer of my mite: the which I do
with the more affection, and boldness, in respect that our Kings participate
with you in the cause, and that we do see our crown already foiled, and our
kings life endangered for want of considering those things which your Majesty
in your book propounds: and God grant that your Majesty's warnings be not
prophesies, and that our good, merciful, and victorious king, who flourishes
equally in peace, as he is feared in war; being endued with an admired vigor
both of body and mind, may be long preserved amongst us; who having had so good
experience, and in so many places of our fidelity, will not we hope be
displeased with this our liberty in defending of our religion, to which we are
not drawn by the hatred of any, but by our zeal to the cause of God, and
through compassion of the poor peopla: who being carried along with the
stream of custom, think they do God good service to hate us, yea so far
are they transported as they are become jealous and suspicious of the holy
Scriptures, fearing lest by the word of God they should be misled and seduced:
for the salvation of whose enthralled souls we would willingly expose our
lives: and will not cease daily to pray to God, to enlighten them in the truth:
whom we likewise pray that he will preserve your Majesty from all evil, and
bless your person, and kingdoms, and the Church that lives under the shade
and quiet of your government: with prayer from my heart I recommend to God,
remaining

From Paris the 20. of January 1610. Your Majesty's most humble and most
obedient servant, P. D. M.

The Translator to the Reader.
Gentle Reader, I here present thee a work very worthy of thy study and
Meditation, if either thou bear a love to Gods truth, or good affection
toward thy Sovereign. Only let me entreat thee, out of a common feeling of
humane frailty, to pardon, and before thou read, to amend the faults that have
herein escaped, through oversight of the Printers; my sickness at that time,
and the distance of place, not giving me leave to be always present, to
prevent the same. In the Translation I have not nicely tied my self to the
words, neither was it requisite: Non verbum verbo curabit reddere fidus --
Interpres: Horat. in Art. poet.
but retayning the strength and sinew of the Sentence, I have rendered it as
best fitted the property of speech in our own language. Where the Kings words
were to be inserted, I have chosen rather to follow his Majesty's own Copy,
then the French Translation, which sometimes varyeth from it: neither have I
therein wronged mine Author. Wherefore omitting those smaller mistakes (which
the discreet will pass over with an easy censure) whether they be words
redundant, as in, or the, twice repeated: Or Syllables disioyned as often, for
often: or letters transposed, as villains for villainies: or words ill
orthographized, as Epostle, and daceiue in one page, for Apostle and deceive:
Likewise Alminacke, Letonies, terent: for Almanacke, Letanies, torrent, etc.
Those other which are represented in the end of the book, I leave to thy
courtesy necessarily to be amended; being such as import the matter, and in
which the Composers omitting, or not well reading the words interlined,
wherein I sometimes corrected my self, have thrust in their own conjectures.

Farewell.
TO THE READER.
MAy it please thee, gentle Reader, to understand, that after we had finished
our work, and that the book was now ready to come forth, there came to my
hands certain corrections and amplifications of some points, from the Author
himself, earnestly entreating to have them inserted: which because they could
not conveniently be brought in in their proper places, the book being already
printed, yet that we might do him right against the malice of his captious
Adversaries, I thought it good, to bestow them in this page; requesting thee of
thy charity, which covers a multitude of sins, at once to pardon both our
faults.

Page 30.14. read the last Canon, 45.25. r. as though he affirmed it without
knowledge, and spoke it only upon trust: 80.23. r. judged to be unjust. 181.7.
r. the earth is almost full of the chips and pieces thereof.

Page 338.16. after the word men leave out the whole sentence, ending with the
word Salvation; then add as follows. Only we must note that this word Dulia
has a double and doubtful signification, and that there be two sorts of
Dulia; The one is a Religious action; the other is only a service, an humane
respect, which is yielded also to the living. As for that kind of Dulia, which
is a Religious worship, the holy scripture forbids it to be given to any
save only to God alone; as 1. Sam. 7.3. (...). Prepare your hearts to the
Lord, and yield Dulia, or Service to him alone. And S. Austin; Quaest. 94. upon
Exodus: (...) debetur Deo tanquam Domino: Doulia is due to GOD as to him who is
MASTER. And de Ciuit. Dei, lib. 10. cap. 1. Religio non est nisi Dei cultus:
Religion is nothing else but the service of God; plainly showing, that the
serving of the Creatures is not an action of Religion. But if we take the word
Dulia for a respect and service done unto men, and not for a religious action:
our adversaries do amiss to say, that they serve the Saints or other Images
with Dulia, seeing they yield them a religious service and a voluntary worship,
tending to the attainment of salvation. Again ibid line 29. read, that then
no miracles were wrought by their Images.

Page 367.13. r. the whole earth is full of the pieces of it. 399.27. Modicum
quodque delictum mora resurrectionis illic luendo.

Page 425.27. r. in the 9. Distinction, and the 9. Canon of the Council of
Antioch, and the 17. Canon of the Council of Chalcedon. These words of the
Canon of Antioch, are for a marginall note: (...).

Page 433. blot out the 8. last lines, and the first line of the next page.

Page 440.21. read, So in the 6. general Council Pope Honorius is condemned
as an Heretic, and cast out of the Catholic Church in the 13. Act: and the
same Council assembled in the palace, in the 13. Act, does by name condemn
the Church of Rome, etc.

Page 441.17. read, the 11. Homily of S. Chrysostom upon Matthew.

Page 454.14. read, that Christ is an head more absolute and greater then the
Pope, and that the Pope is of less virtue then the holy Ghost.

Page 470.12. read, upon the foundation laid by another Apostle. The fame and
good report, and the mutual communication of the strangers that were
Christians with the Romans, had planted the Christian Religion at Rome; but
the Church of Rome required the presence of some Apostle for her full
establishment.

A Table of the principal matters contained in this work.
THE FIRST BOOK. Of the Usurpation of Popes over Kings.
CHAP. 1. The occasion why JAMES the first, King of Great Britain wrote his
Book, together with a judgment upon Doctor Coeffeteaus Book. Page 1. CHAP.
2. Remonstrations of D. Coeffeteau, with his judgment touching the Treasons
and attempts upon the life of the King of England. Page 16. CHAP. 3. Of
Cardinals. Page 23. CHAP. 4. Of Jesuits. Page 39. CHAP. 5. Of the power of the
Pope over the Temporalties of Kings, and that he cannot take from Kings their
Crowns, nor free Subjects from the Oath of fidelity; and thereupon the
reasons of Bellarmine are examined. Page 45. CHAP. 6. Of the Clergy and their
Exemptions. Page 88. CHAP. 7. Of the Authority of Emperors and Kings over the
Bishops of Rome; that they have chosen them, punished them, and degraded them.
That Princes have had power over Bishops and their Temporalties. The first
seed of Popery in England. Page 105. CHAP. 8. That they who have written
against the King of Great Britain his Book, have unjustly called him
Apostata and Heretic. Page 128.
THE SECOND BOOK. A defense of the Confession of JAMES the first, King of
great Britain.
ARTICLE. 1. Of the Creed. Page 133. ART. 2. Of the Fathers in general. Page
134. ART. 3. Of the authority of the Fathers each apart by themselves. Page
135. ART. 4. Of the authority of the holy Scripture. Page 143. ART. 5. Of the
Canonical and Apocrypha books. Page 145 ART. 6. Of the memory of Saints, and of
their Holidays. Page 154. ART. 7. Of the Virgin Mary. Page 164. ART. 8. Of the
suffrages of Saints, and of the service due unto them. Page 173. ART. 9. Of the
Mass without Communicants or Assistants, and of the Sacrifice of the Mass.
Page 202. ART. 10. Of the Communion under one kind. Page 246. ART. 11. Of
Transubstantiation. Page 258. ART. 12. Of the Adoration of the Host. Page 271.
ART. 13. Of the elevation of the Host that it may be adored. Page 274. ART. 14.
Of carrying their God in Procession. Page 275. ART. 15. Of works of
Supererogation, and of super abundant Satisfaction, and of the Treasury of the
Church. Page 276. ART. 16. Of the baptizing of Bells. Page 308. ART. 17. Of the
Relics of Saints. Page 311. ART. 18. Of Images. Page 329. ART. 19. Of the
Image of God. Page 356. ART. 20. Of the Cross. Page 361. ART. 21. Of
Purgatory. Page 375. ART. 22. Of the Anarchy, and degrees of Superiority in the
Church. Page 406. ART. 23. Of the Popes Supremacy. Page 413.
THE THIRD BOOK.
Of the accomplishment of Prophesies.

OF THE VSVRPATION OF POPES Over KINGS.
THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. I. The occasion that moved JAMES the first, King of great Britain to
write his book, with the judgment on COEFFETEAV his book.
IT happens often, that the Lightning falling upon a man without hurting the
flesh, breaks the bones, because they only in the body do make resistance to
it; and herein the lightning, which GOD sends from above imitates the nature of
him that sends it, who bruseth the proud, and such as withstand him; but
takes mercy on the humble, which bow under his judgments, and tremble at his
word. But the fulminations of the Bishop of Rome, are of a contrary nature, for
they hurt none but such as fear them, nor break none but such as bow under
them; but he that sets them light, is neither endamaged by them, nor breaks
his sleep for them, but they fall like the Thunderbolt into the Sea; nay they
rather draw from God a blessing upon the heads of those, that are thus
threatened, according to that of David: Psalm. 109.28.
Though they curse, yet will thou bless.

The happy reign of the late Queen ELIZABETH will furnish us, with a fair
example thereof, who notwithstanding the excommuniations of Pope Pius the fifth,
by whom England was interdicted, she long time enjoyed a Peace without any
disturbance or interruption; and a prosperity almost beyond example. And
finally, when it pleased God to take her to peace, and to gather her to his
rest: many supposed, that the end of her life, would be a beginning of
troubles, and confusions in England; and thereupon the opinions and fears were
diverse, according to the diversity of men's desires. For the English that were
of the Roman Church attentive and heedy to all occasions, had conceived hope
of some great change, whether it were that they were led into their hope upon
false grounds, or that after the death of a sovereign Prince better things are
ever expected from the succeffor; or whether that such as are discontented are
ever desirous of a change; so it was that in this Crisis of humors, the
spirits of the English waued and floated betwixt hope and fear, till by the
happy arrival of JAMES the first, the lawful Successor; all things were
appeased and cleared; even as by the rising of the Sun mists and fogges are
dispersed and scattered.

He in the sweetness and fairness of his own nature, inclined to give
content unto all his subjects with free liberty of conscience: But this his in
clination was ouer-ruled by necessity, when his wisdom entered into
consideration, that the matter now in question was not only Religion, but the
peace of his estate, and the security of his crown, for that it was a thing
dangerous to permit public Assemblies of such persons, as had taken Oath to
others then himself; who hold that the Pope may pull down Kings from their
Thrones, and dispense with subjects for the oath of their alleagea^ce. Moreover
he called to his remembrance the kings his predecessors, whom the Popes had
reduced to extreme servitude, so far as to make England part of the Popes
Demaines; and in Fee to the Church of Rome; and further to make it pay impost,
and to cause the King to go beneath his Legates, and to give up the Crown into
their hands. These are considerations that one cannot square or apply to those
of the Reformed Religion, which live under a Sovereign of a contrary
profession; for they take oath to no other, but to their Sovereign Prince.
They cast their eyes upon no Forrainer, they maintain that it belongs not to
the subject out of the Religion of the Prince, to frame occasions of
disobedience, making piety the match and kindler of rebellion. We are ready to
expose our lives for the defense of our King against whomsoever, though he be
of our own Religion; and whosoever should do otherwise should not defend
Religion, but give way to his own ambitions, and should draw a great scandal
upon the truth of the Gospel.

Notwithstanding his Majesty has used his subjects of the Roman Church in
such sort, that excepting the liberty of public exercise, he desired to have
them in like and equal condition with others, being unwilling to have them
disturbed for matter of conscience, knowing well, that Religion is not by force
but by persuasion to take impression; and that in this case men will rather
follow then be drawn, and that persecutions begin when Arguments are at an end.

Notwithstanding this gentle proceeding, those of the Church of Rome now fallen
from great hopes, which they had imagined, turned their despair into choler
and indignation; and thereupon plotted an enterprise, that should have
enfoulded the King, the Queen, their children, his Majesty's Council and the
Parliament, in one and the same destruction; the plot was to make a Mine under
the house of Parliament, and so to send the King and his royal family, with the
chief of his Country to heaven by a new found way.

Hatred is an ingenious Mistress of invention, for neither ancient nor modern
Histories can parallel this with any example: The Prince of the world reserved
to our times, which are the very sink of former ages, something more
exquisitely cruel and horrible, then ever before has been mentioned. In the
mean time, through all their houses, there was a certain form of prayer
prescribed by the Priests and Jesuits, for the happy success of this
enterprise; to whom the accomplices did mutually bind themselves by oath, sworn
upon the holy Sacrament, both for secrecy and perseverance in the design. The
Mine was already finished, and the Gunpowder laid ready, and nothing wanting
but the execution; when God, who (as he is himself a King) so consequently he
is the protector of Kings, whom he has established; miraculously discovered
this treason; the conspiratours being taken, suffered according unto law, and
amongst others two Jesuits Garnet and Ouldcorne; who are now inserted into a
catalogue of It is a table printed at Rome, Anno 1608. apud Paulum Mauperinum
and Matheum Gruterum, dedicated to R. Farnesius Prince of Parma; in which are
the pictures of such Jesuits as have been killed and executed sinc^ the year
1549.
Martyrs, imprinted at Rome, which is the Springhead and Forge of all such
enterprises.

Less cause would have sufficed an impatient King to have exterminated all
their accomplices, and to have let loose the raines of his just anger, but he
with a rare example of clemency, suffered punishment to pass no further, then
to the principal delinquents, inuenting and framing to himself Causes and
Reasons how he might pardon: he considered that Superstition might alter, and
stir up the mildest spirits, and was desirous by pardoning the wicked, to
make them become good; and though he could not find cause in them why to
pardon, he found it in himself; for though they no way deserved mercy, yet he
showed himself worthy of his greatness, in doing good to those of so evil
demerite.

He considered that God, whom he represents; sends rain upon the Briars and
Thistles, as well as on fruit Trees, and makes the Sun to rise alike to the
good and to the evil; or else it may be that his clemency was accompanied and
assisted with a neglect of his enemies; esteeming many of them not worthy of
his wrath.

But for the better preventing of such conspiracies in future times, the
Parliament, together with the King, framed a form of Oath, to be administered
to all his Majesty's subjects, which is to this effect: That they acknowledge
JAMES the first, King of great Britain for their lawful King, and that the
Pope cannot by any right whatsoever depose him from his Kingdoms, nor
discharge his subjects of their obedience to him, nor give them license to
bear Arms against him: Also that notwithstanding any Declaration or Sentence
of Excommunication made or granted, or to be made or granted against the said
King and his Successors, they will bear faith and true allegiance to him, his
heyrs and Successors, and him and the^ will defend to the uttermost of their
power against all attempts and conspiracies whatsoever: And that they will
reveal al treasons and traiterous Conspiracies, which they shall know or hear
of, against him or any of them. And that they do abhor, detest, and abjure this
damnable position, that Princes which be excommunicated by the Pope, may be
deposed or murdered by their subjects: And that they believe, and in conscience
are resclued, that the Pope has no power to absolve them of this Oath, or any
part thereof. And renounce all pardons and dispensations to the contrary. And
that without any Equivocation, mental Evasion, or secret Reservation
whatsoever, they do sincerely acknowledge and swear all these things, and do
make this acknowledgement heartely, willingly, and truly. So help them God.

This Oath being offered to those of the Romish Church, diverse of them took it
without difficulty; and amongst the rest Blackwell the Archpriest, who then
was, and still remains in England.

These things, being come to the knowledge of the Bishop of Rome, Paul the
fifth, that reigns at this present, he dispatches presently for England, a
breue, or as they term it, letters Apostolic bearing date the two and
twentieth of September 1606. by which he declares. That this Oath cannot be
taken with good conscience, exhorting them rather to undergo all cruel
torments whatsoever, yea Death it self, rather then to offend the Majesty of
God by such an Oath; and to imitate the constancy and fortitude of the other
English Martyrs, willing them to have their loins girt about with verity, and
to have the Breast Plate of righteousness and to take the shield of faith: That
God that has begun this good work, might finish it in them, who will not
leave them Orphants, etc. And finally wills them exactly to put in practice,
that which is commanded in the Letters of Clement the eight his Predecessor,
written to Mr. George Black well the Archpriest of England: by which Letters
all Princes of any Religion contrary to their own, are excluded from the
kingdom of England.

These Letters being come into England, were not received by those of the
Romish Church, with such respect as the Pope expected; for many judged them
ridiculous, as exhorting them to suffer Martyrdom for ill doing, since none
can be a Martyr, but for having done well: As also for that they declare, that
this Oath is contrary to the Catholic faith, without telling why or
wherefore; as likewise for that the exhortations of holy Scripture to shun
vice, and to persevere in the profession of the Gospel, and to resist the
Devil, are in this Papal breue drawn to a contrary sense, to kindle
sedition, and to incite subjects to disobedience. And above all, for that these
Letters, engaging the subjects to revolt, do necessarily pluck upon them
persecution and the just anger of their natural Prince, who being unwilling to
require any caution of them in any thing contrary to their belief, demands
no more of them but fidelity and civil obedience.

For these considerations some part of the Priests and Friars of England said,
that these Letters of the Pope were shufled in by their Adversaries, and forged
by the Heretics (for so they of their goodness are pleased to term us) to
kindle the anger of the King against them, which was already provoked by the
plot of the Powder-mine, which only fell out to ruin the undertakers. By
reason whereof, the same Pope being advertised, that through these doubts,
whether they were true or fained, the Authority of his Letters were infringed;
he writ others more expressly, bearing date the three and twentieth of August,
1607. In which he seems to wonder that they any way suspect the truth of the
Apostolic letters, Non solum motu proprio and exce^^a nostra scientia, verum
etiam post longam and grauem deliberationem.
that under that pretense they might exempt themselves from his commands; and
therefore declares unto them that those letters were written not only upon
his proper motion, and of his certain knowledge, but also after long and
weighty deliberation, and therefore again inioyneth them fully to observe them,
for such is his will and pleasure.

To these letters (giving the Alarums to rebellion) for their greater
confirmation, were added the letters of Cardinal Bellarmine to George
Blackewell the Archpriest. In which after he had put him in mind of their
ancient acquaintance, he greatly blames him for taking the Oath, the which
under color of modifications has no other aim or drift, but to transfer
the authority of the Pope, the head of the Church, to a Successor of HENRY the
eight, and by the examples of his Predecessors he exhorreth him constantly to
defend the primacy of the Pope, whom he calls the head of the faith.

But he shows neither what words or clauses in this Oath are contrary to the
faith of the Romish Church, nor wherefore this Archpriest should rather choose
to die, then to obliege himself by Oath, to be loyal to his King in things
merely civil, and which no way meddle with the Primacy of the Pope: and yet
this is the only thing, whereof question is made, and whereof proose is
expected. These letters, both of the Pope and Cardinal, being fallen into the
hands of his Majesty might well have kindled the anger of a very patient
Prince and have armed and stirred him up against those with whom these Papal
letters were of more power, then either their faith to their King, or their
obedience to God. For what Prince can permit in his Kingdom subjects that
acknowledge him not, or that to retain their fidelity to the Pope, think
themselves bound to disloyalty toward their King.

And yet notwithstanding his Majesty herein contained himself, and would not;
that his mercy should be surpassed, by their wickedness, so far that he has
rather choose to take in hand the pen, then the sword, and has studied to
instruct those, whom he might justly have destroyed, desiring more to convince
them by reason, then to overcome them by force Maluit sanguinem suffundere,
quam effundere.

What would not he do for his faithful subjects, that lets himself down so
low to his enemies? that lays aside the quality of a Judge, to become an
Advocate: but he whom God has lifted up to a Sovereign greatness, never
exalts himself higher then by humility.

This King then to refute these Papal Letters, and to justify what he had
done, made a book, entitled, An Apology for the Oath of Allegiance, but not
setting his name thereunto, for it was nothing to him under what title the
truth appeared; so that his enemies might come to the knowledge of their fault.
This was no combat of the ability of wit, but a mere manifestation of his
innocence: But the style of a King is hardly disguised, for Kings being in more
elevated places, receive nearer at hand the inspirations from heaven. Their
conceptions are as much above the vulgar, as their conditions, this only
thought, that they are GODS Lieutenants, and that they exercise his judgments,
quickens their spirits with an extraordinary life and vigor: besides if it so
happen that their youth has been dressed and ordered by study, and their
judgments polished by experience, as it has happened to the King of great
BRITAIN, why should any body wonder, if their their spirits fly a pitch above
ordinary?

This Royal Apology having then bin known (as a Lion by his claws) stirred
up certain Englishmen, and Italians to write against it, who (as this King
elegantly said) have cast lots upon his book, for that they could not part
it, for the reasons thereof are unseparably weaued together, but they not being
able to bite his work, bark at his person with an incredible impudence, so
far some of them, as to equal themselves with so great a Prince; and to
compare him to Julian the Apostate. Such are the flowers of their devilish
Rhethorique; wherewith their writings are adorned, on whom the Apostle S. Peter
in his second Epistle, Cap. 2.10, 11, 12
gives this judgment, calling them brute beasts, led with sensuality; that
despise government, which are presumptuous, and stand in their own conceit,
and fear not to speak evil of them which are in dignity; whereas the Angels
which are greater both in power and might, gave not railing judgment against
them before the Lord. Then if it be ill done to speak ill of a Pagan Prince,
such as in those times all Monarchs were; how much more of a Christian King;
and if Angels forbore ill speaking of Princes, how much more would it beseem
men, and most of all their own subjects?

But no more then the Moon is turned out of her course by the barking of
Dogs, that look up to her; no more was the tranquillity of his Majesty's
spirit, by these outrageous injuries disturbed, nor his resolution diuerted
from doing good to those which bore him hatred. It is a poor and mean thing
to tread upon worms. There is no glory in ouercomming such people, of whom he
is sufficiently revenged, by the grief, and displeasure which they sustain in
seeing that God has blessed him, and highly exalted him. He would therefore
have contemned their sleighting of him, and would have abstained from refuting
their calumnies by a second writing, had it not been in regard, not of them
but of his people, and of his neighbors, and above all of the glory of God;
for God having honored him with the true knowledge of him, his Majesty would
not permit that the enemies, as well of the Gospel, as of his Crown, should
find in his person any subject or color to defame the true religion: He is
then by an admirable example constituted the advocate of Gods cause, and by a
second book, made in form of a Preface to his former, has fully and
thoroughly justified himself. In which book he discovers the flights and
backeturnings of his enemies, representing the vniustnes of their proceedings.
He likewise makes confession of his Religion conformable to the holy
Scriptures, and with a happy boldness figures, and depaints the Bishop of Rome
and his Sea with lively colors, borrowed from the Apocalips, and the Apostle
S. Paul.

Never was Table drawn with a more exact hand, or in liuelyer colors. Such is
the Torrent of his eloquence, such is the weight of his reasons, such is the
linking together of his discourse, such the variety of his learning, and such
his Majesty in all things, as he may best judge of it, who shall compare them
with that puft-vp weakness of the Popes letters, and with the writing of his
Adversaries. Oh happy eloquence, which being armed with power, is become the
hand-maide of Gods word; the sourse and spring whereof, falling from high, are
like to the waters of Silo, which water the City of our God. He does truly
exalt his Scepter, which lays it down at the foot of the Cross, and that
places his height and greatness beneath the reproach of the Son of God, he
sanctifies his house, making his Cabinet a Temple for Divinity, and a retrayt
for holy Meditations. Then as in ancient times, the earth was more fruitful,
when it was labored by Kings, as though she had taken pride to bear a crowned
Plough, and to be tilled with a Triumphall Coulter. So it is to be hoped that
Religion and Piety will abundantly increase, since Kings are become laborers
in the Harvest.

This latter book then being come to succor and help the first, did diversely
stir men's spirits, some with joy, some with fear, some with hate, but all
generally with admiration. The book being little, it was given out we should
have it answered within three days, and sure their good will was not wanting,
but they found it a harder matter then so, and that they were feign to take
more time. For it was eight months after it was published, before the first
Answers came forth; and what kind of Answers they were, God he knows.

One Coeffeteau was the first that like an Infant perdu of the Romish army,
advanced himself. This Seraphicall Doctor, of the order of the Iacobins, or
preaching Friars, one of the most remarkable amongst the Sorbonists, is of
late through his companions negligence become the defender of the cause. And he
now after eight months being in labor, has brought forth a book, which is
not like to live, because of the untimely birth; and indeed it had been
already extinct and dead, had not the greatness of him against whom he writes
kept it alive; wherein he showed a point of skill to address himself against
a person so illustrious, that he might receive some luster from his reflection.
But those that desire to make themselves known by the greatness of their
Adversaries, are always such as have little in themselves, why the world
should take note of them. This Doctor in his book, handles the King of great
Britain, as a Nurce does her nurce-childe, who after she has dandled it,
beats it, mingling curstness and flattery: For in humble terms he wrongeth
him, and gives him respectfull lies, flatters him with injuries, accuses him
to speak upon trust, and that he busieth himself with quirkes and subtleties,
and says that he makes S. Paul an Interpreter of the Apocalips.

This is the form of his writing: as for the matter and substance of his
book, I find, that he has ill measured his own strength, and that with the
weakness and meandness of his skill, he has made the strength of his
Majesty's reasons more manifest. Giants are not to be ouerthrown with a breath,
neither is a Lion to be fought against with a Festue. Other kind of forces are
necessary to make resistance to so exquisite a doctrine, that is ever
abundantly sustained by the truth. And indeed he clearly confesses his
weakness in this, that he never cyteth the Text of the Kings book, but only
reports the sense thereof disguised and weakened, that he may give himself
greater scope and liberty, forming to himself Chimera's, which he impugneth
with other Chimera's of his own, as will sufficiently appear, by the
examination of his book, to which we now will enter. God herein enlighten us,
since that which we say is for his truth, which is the light of our souls.

CHAP. II. Certain Remonstrances of COEFFETEAV his judgment, touching the
Treasons and attempts upon the life of the King of England.
ARISTOTLE in the second book of his Rhetoriques, Chap. 21. (...).
says, that the Country people use to have their speeches very full of
sentences, but folly is more sufferable then unseasonable wisdom: Coeffeteau
begins his book much after such fashion; making to the King of great
Britain many sententious Remonstrances, interlaced and mingled with threats
and commendations. But whilst he represents to Kings their duties, he goes
beyond his own, for S. Jerome forbids Monks to be teachers, saying in his
book against Vigilantius: Monachus non docentissed plangen it is habet officium,
wishing Monks rather to bewail and be sorrowful for their own faults, then
to reprehend those of other men. But chiefly his Remonstrances are ill employed
to a King, that is better read in the Bible then he is in his Missall; and that
has carefully put in practice the commandment of God in the seventeenth of
Deuteronomy; where he commands Kings to read the book of the law all the
days of their lives. verse 19.
The exhortation that Luther often used by his Letters to Pope Leo the tenth,
to renounce the papacy, and to live of his own, and to come and do as he did,
had more grace with it, then this of Coeffeteau; for it is more probable of the
two, Sleidan. li. 2.
that the Pope was the likelier to have followed Luthers counsel.

This Doctor having thus employed the seven first pages of his book in these
exhortations, which have no other fault, but that they are ill applied, comes
to those motives, which estrange and keep the King of England from the Roman
Religion; supposing the conspiracies that have been against his person, to be
the causes of it, thereupon protests; Fol. 5. page 1.
that the Roman Church no way approves such attempts, but condemns them as
parricides, and wishes to Princes secure government, victorious arms,
obedient people, and faithful Council: And after adds, That for these
considerations the head of the Church (which is the Pope) cannot disaproue the
courses that your Majesty holaeth; to secure your authority and person,
against the miserable enterprises, so that they be not repugnant to that
Religion which he is bound to desend.

To this I say, Coeffeteau has been very ill informed, for the conspiracies
against the King of Englands life, have not withheld or kept him from Popery;
since even from his Infancy he has made open profession of the true Religion,
and before this conspiracy had published the confession of his faith
conformable to that which we profess.

And whereas he condemns such attempts, as are made upon the lives of Kings,
we greatly commend him for it; and thereby suppose that he no way approved the
enterprise of James Clement, who was domesticke with him and his companion:
From thence I likewise gather, that when the Jesuit Mariana in the sixth
Chapter of his book De Regno, prayseth the Act of James Clement, saying that
he was persuaded, and enduced thereunto by Divines, with whom he had
conferred: I gather that Coeffeteau was none of those Divines, and that when
this Parricide Saint, and Coeffeteau went a begging together, he made him not
acquainted with his secret. And further it is no small virtue in this Doctor,
that he fears not in so just a cause to condemn many Jesuits, who were
accomplices or instigators of this last conspiracy, and have been executed for
it. Nay more, it shows a magnanimity in Coeffeteau, that he dares so
courageously oppose himself to the Pope and Bellarmine, who (by their letters
before mentioned) incite the English to rebellion, which could never take
effect so long as the Kings life should be in safety. By the same means he
likewise condemns the Authors of the Legend of S. James Clement, which we
have seen with our eyes, but not without much wonder and admiration. The
success of things have grudged him this honor; and men have been nothing
favorable and propitious to this Saint, otherwise doubtless he had before
this been put into paradise. It is likewise a cause of just joy unto us, to
see that a Doctor of the Sorbons dare approve the sentence of the Court of
Parliament against John Chastell, though the Pope of late has newly censured
it; By which it does also follow that he does not think it well done, that
Garnet and Ouldcorne Jesuits, and parties in the gunpowder treason, are at
Rome inserted in a roll of Martyrs. Whosoever prayseth and approves an act
already done, will questionless counsel and advise the doing of it; for that
which is wicked in the undertaking, cannot be good in the execution: But the
Pope in his breue before mentioned, calls the punishment of Treason and
rebellion by the name of Martyrdom, which is a dangerous speech, and able to
make Kings tremble, when the people shall be taught by Murders and Treasons to
seek the Crown of Martyrdom, An abominable and detestable doctrine: can
there be any so cold and frozen zeal, that will not hereby be warmed, and
moved to a just anger, that this so sacred name of Martyr, so much reverenced
in the Church, should in such sort be prostituted, that whereas the holy
Scripture calls them Martyrs, which suffer for the testimony of the Gospel;
now a days those which have their hands stained and soyled with the blood of
Kings should be honored with that Title? It is not the suffering but the cause
that makes a Martyr; otherwise the devil might likewise have his Martyrs, but
such pains are crimes, and are not only unworthy of praise, but are likewise
unworthy of pardon, and such pains and torments, as are again to be punished
with future torments. Is it then fit that the holy squadron of Martyrs, where
S. Stephen marches first, and S. James near unto him, and after them the rest
of the Apostles; followed by so many of the faithful, who have bin prodigal
of their bloods, but careful and thriftie of the glory of God: Is it fit
amongst them to find Incendiaries and Parricides with fire and sword in hand;
not like unto S. Paul and S. Lawrence, that is to say, not representing their
punishments, but as testimonies of their crimes, not to signify the death by
which they died, but to declare the manner how they murdered? Unhappy age, that
styleth villains with title of virtue: and that by the corrupting of words and
names, depraueth the things themselves, and so by a new kind of Grammar
introducteth a new kind of Divinity. But God be praised, that he has not
permitted the Pope by his skill and art, to plant this persuasion generally in
the hearts of the people, but that even amongst our adversaries themselves,
there are very many that no way approve this seditious and bloody doctrine:
Amongst which number I would willingly place the Doctor Coeffeteau, because of
his protestations, were it not that he allayes them with such modifications and
restrictions, as gives us cause to doubt of them: And which testify that those
Kings, with whose lives and Crowns he would not have meddled, are only such
Kings as are obedient to the Bishop of Rome, for he says, That the Church of
Rome wishes to Princes an assured Empire, victorious Arms, and an obedient
people. Now it is most certain that the Pope desires not, that those Kings
which condemn him should be victorious, or that their people should remain in
their obedience, since he deposes them from their Thrones, and dispenses to
their subjects the Oath of their Allegiance. And a little while after he
says, that he speaks of such estates, wherein the Church (meaning the
Church of Rome) subsisteth, which is as much to say, that where it cannot
subsist, there he approves this rebellion and murder, which he more clearly
shows after Fol. 6. page 1. where after these words: That the Pope cannot
disapproue the courses that you hold to secure your Authority and person: he
adds, So that they be not offensive to that Religion which he is bound to
defend. So that hereof it follows, that if the Roman Religion do receive
any offense in England: Then the Pope does no longer approve the courses, that
the King holds for his conservation. But he gives after more certain
proofs of his intention, the which we will remarke in their due places.
Besides we doubt not, but a prudent person knows how to fashion himself to
the times, and to reserve his bloody propositions for fitter occasions. And
many times enterprises are only blamed because they are not succesfull, and
vices are turned to virtue by happy events. Multa sunt, quae non nisi peracta
Laundantur. And the judgments of those, whose malice is accompanied with doubt
and fear, are framed according to the success. But in respect of our
friendship, I am rather inclined to think well of him, and to free him of this
suspicion.

I will therefore conclude this Chapter with an observation, which I think not
fit to be omitted; and it is, that in the time of S. Paul Nero was then
Emperor, which Monster God either for the scorn of men, or for their
punishment had placed in the Empire; who by his example declared to what
height, absolute and exquisite wickedness, assisted with Sovereign power
could ascend; who likewise was the first that stirred up persecution amongst
the Christians. Had the Christians ever greater cause to rebel? Or served they
ever under a more unworthy Master? Now I would demand of my Masters the
Papists, if S. Paul should have made a Mine under his house, or under color of
salutations should have stricken him to the heart with a Poniard, or had been
taken in any of these enterprises, and so put to death for them; whether had he
been a Martyr, or whether had his death been acceptable, or tended to the
edification of the Church? But because this is a question full of difficulties,
it is fit we should leave it undecided, and that we expect some resolution from
the Doctors, or some decision from his Holiness.

After this Coeffeteau Fol. 6. speaks by the way, of the Popes power over the
temporality of Kings, and promises afterward to speak more at large. We
therefore to avoid the repetition of things twice, will set aside that subject
till he comes to the place where he fully handles it. And now let us hear
what he says of the dignity of Cardinals, Fol. 8.

CHAP. III. Of Cardinals.
FOrasmuch as Bellarmine under the name of Tortus compares the dignity of
Cardinals to the Majesty of Kings, That is to say, the Cardinals Cappe with
the Regal Crown, the charge of a servant of the servant of servants to the
dignity of the ruler of Nations: The King of great Britain speaks thus in
his Apology: I was never the man, I confess, that could think a Cardinal a
meet match for a King, especially having many hundredth thousands of my
subjects of as good birth as he. As for his Church-dignity, his Cardinalship I
mean, I know not how to rank or value it, either by the warrant of God his
word, or by the Ordinance of Emperors or Kings, it being indeed only a new
Papal erection tolerated by the sleeping Conniuence of our predecessors (I
mean still by the plural of Kings.)

To this Coeffeteau makes a mild reply, entreating his Majesty to judge more
favorably of the intentions of so modest and learned a person as Bellarmine
is, Fol. 8.
beseeching him to remember that Calvin acknowledged that the Cardinals
flourished in the time of S. Gregory, which is one thousand years since; and
that even in the Council of Rome, under Siluester the first, there is mention
made of the seven Deacon Cardinals, as of no new Institution then: And adds,
that their charge was to instruct the people, and to minister the Sacraments.
And since, they having gotten unto themselves the election of the Pope; and
being always near about him, their glory is grown and increased, by which
the Church has received much ease and furtherance: the head of the Church
having always about his person, his Council in affairs of greatest
importance. He likewise says, that Kings reverence them; but they are so
far from making themselves equal with Kings, that Princes find none that
bear themselves with more respect toward them, then these great ones do. And
so he ends his amplification with the praise of the Cardinal of Perron.

Now to begin with these which he opposes unto us: The answers.
I do acknowledge, that these two Cardinals, carried along with the current of
the time and course of affairs, have by their wills and abilities much helped
the defense of error, they have employed their vessels of gold and silver,
which they brought out of Egypt, to the making of the golden Calfe: and
Coeffeteau has little in his writings that he has not filtched from them. But
I know that they disagree in many things, and that the Cardinal of Perron
loves his King too well to assent with Bellarmine, that the Pope may either
directly or indirectly deprive him of his Crown, or dispense to Frenchmen the
obedience they owe him.

As for the thing it self, that is, the antiquity, charge and modesty of
Cardinals, it requires a longer discourse. Men dispute of the original of
Cardinals, as they do of the head and sourse of the river Nilus. The greatest
antiquity that Coeffeteau is able to produce, is the testimony of the Roman
Council, held (if we may give credit to the impression) under Siluester the
first since the Counsel of Nice. But it is easy for us to convince this of
falsehood, being forged by some shallow brain that wanted learning to lie with
skill and dexterity. The Cullen Edition. p. 357.
This Counsel is found in the first Tome of the Counsels reduced into twenty
Chapters, whereof the first says, that in this Counsel there were 139.
Bishops, as well of the City of Rome, as of other places near about it, which
is well known to be impossible: In the last Chapter Siluester prohibiteth the
Emperor and Kings to be Judges of the Bishop of Rome. Now it is strange how
this should be, since at that time, there were no Kings in all Christendom;
there he likewise says that Constantine, and his mother Helena, subscribed to
this Counsel, but Constantine was never at Rome under Siluester, since the
Counsel of Nice* and women never subscribed to the Counsels at all. He further
adds, Actum in Traianas thermas, as though this Counsel had been feign to
hide it self in the Stoaues: In the same place Constantine is called Donnus
Constantinus in stead of Dominus; but in those times the Latin tongue was not
become so strangely corrupted, besides, amongst the Romans this very word
Dominus was then odious, as attributed to tyrants. And lastly he says, that
this Counsel was held Constantino Augusto tertio (he meant to have said)
tertium, and Prisco consulibus: which is a most apparent untruth; for we find
in the Chronicles of Cassiodorus, and in the Fasti of Onuphrius and Annian
Marcellinus all the Consulships of Constantine, but it cannot be found that
either Priscus or any of the family of Augustus were companions with
Constantine in Consulshippe; and further, in the page before this Counsel,
Siluester writes to the Counsel of Nice, and deteth his letters from the
seventh time of Constantines being Consul. And yet see this goodly Counsel
which was held since, and yet bears date from his third Consulshippe. It is
likewise to be proved that both Siluester and Helena were long before this
deceased.

These untruths are very easy to be discerned, and any ordinary judgment will
discover them, but to Coeffeteau, who has no great skill in any good learning,
any proofs will serve his turn; It had been very fitting, that so royal a
work might have had a learned adversary, was there not in France some more
able and sufficient man, that might have seduced with a better grace? or could
have found better pretenses and colors to have opposed the truth? Certainly it
is much to the disgrace grace of our nation. But these are briefly his proofs
of the antiquity of Cardinals.

Coeffeteau does further add, that Calvin acknowledges that Cardinals did
flourish in the time of Gregory the first, In the fourth book of his
Institution. Chap. 7.. 30.
which was six hundred years after Christ: and this is likewise another
untruth; Calvin says indeed that there was then the Title and name of
Cardinal, but not the charge, and that in that age this word CARDINAL,
signified nothing less then what it does now a days, and the substance being
changed, the word has still continued; even as we see in the Apothecaries
box, though the ointment be gone the inscripion remains: Also Calvin
speaks not of their flourishing but of their being: Gregory indeed in the
eleauenth Epistle of his fifth book, speaks of a Cardinal Deacon: And
likewise in the four and twentieth Epistle of his eleventh book, he speaks
of a Cardinal Priest, which is as much to say as principal: in the same sense
and nature as we say the Cardinal winds, or Cardinal virtues, which signify
only the chief and principal. But of any Cardinal Bishops, neither he nor
any of his time, nor long after made any kind of mention. A Cardinal Priest
then had no other signification, then the Parson or Vicar of a Parish has now;
neither was this title only used in Rome, There continue still Cardinals at
Compostella.
but in all other great Archiepiscopall Cities, as namely in Millane, where
Sigonius toward the end of his seventh book, says, that there were then two
and twenty Cardinals: but there being then in one Parish diverse Priests, he
that was the first and chief was called principal or Cardinal, for they
signified both one thing; as Pandulphi de vitis Pontificum in Electione
Gelasij. ij.
Pandulphus Pisanus, and after him Lib. de Episco. titulis and Diaconijs
Cardinalium.
Onuphrius teaches us. For Bellarmine in his first book de Clericis Chap. 16
is mistaken, where he says, that in the fourth book of Gregory's Epistles
Chap. 88. there are subscriptions of diverse Cardinal Priests, bearing the same
title, which is altogether untrue; for there is no mention made of Cardinals,
and by Priests of the same title is meant simply in that place, Priests of the
same Church or Parish: He likewise there alleges the Counsel of Rome false
and counterfeited. And he also speaks of Cardinal Bishops, which were
neither in the time of Gregory, nor long after: so that in few lines he
commits three gross errors: This then stands thus; that the Cardinal
Priests were no more but the principal Priests of every Parish: and of this
there remains to this day some shows and traces, for that every Cardinal
Bishop or Priest, bears the title of some Church or Parish of the city of
Rome, which does more plainly appear by the form of the reception of new
Cardinals, as it is set down in the first book of the holy ceremonies. Section
the 8. chap. 12. where the Pope after he has put a ringe on the finger of the
new Cardinal that kneeleth before him, says unto him, To the honor of God,
and of the holy Apostles Peter and Paul, and of such or such a Saint; we
commit unto you the Church of S. Sabina, or of S. Chrisogonus, etc. that is, he
commits to him one of the Parishes of Rome, which is nothing but a bare
formality, and words without substance; for after this ceremony, this new
Cardinal returns home (it may be) into France or Sapine, without ever
setting his foot again into the Church, of which he bears the title: And
from thence it grew, that for a long time, there was in Rome but eight and
twenty Cardinal Priests, according to the number of the ancient Parishes in
Rome, which was seven Churches under every one of the four principal and
Patriarchall Churches of Rome: as for the fifth, that is the Church of Lateran,
where the Pope made his residence, that was above the other four.

This number of eight and twenty Cardinal Parishes (that is to say) Parsons of
Parishes continued in Rome, until the time of Honorius the second, father of
the Cordeliers, in the year 1125. as Onuphrius shows; since which time, the
number has increased or lessened, according to the pleasures of the Popes, who
were at that time in the height of their glory; And the dignity of the
Bishops of Millaine and Rauenna being decayed, (which before were held equal
with the Bishop of Rome:) Since that there has been little speech, but only
of the Cardinals of Rome. As touching Deacons, the custom of the City of Rome
was to have only seven; following the example of the sixth Chapter of the Acts
of the Apostles, whose charge was to keep and distribute the alms, and to
carry the Eucharist in the Church to the faithful, and to remove the holy
table, and to cause those which were not yet fully instructed in the Christian
Religion, Catechumeni.
to go out of the Church before the communion, and to read the Gospel, etc.
S. Laurence that suffered Martyrdom under Decius in the year 252. was one of
those seven Deacons, as Prudentius testifies.

Hic vnus ex septem viris,
Qui stant ad aram proximi,
Leuita sublimis gradu, etc.
Likewise in the time of S. Cyprian there were but seven, as appears by the
Epistle he wrote to Cornelius in the sixth book of Eusebius, chap. 42. which
agrees with the twelfth Canon of the Counsel of Neocaesaria. Now when the
Church was grown to be in peace and quiet, peace bringing plenty, and plenty
pride: these Deacons became proud and insolent; of which S. Augustine
complains, Falcidius duce stultitia and Romanae ciuitatis iactantia, Leuitas
Sacerdotib' equare contendit. Quanquam Romanae Ecclesiae Diaconi modico
inuericundiores videntur.
in his book of questions of the old and new Testament, saying, That one
called Falcidius, lead by folly, and following the arrogance and vaunting of
the City of Rome, would equal the Roman Deacons with other Priests: and a
little after says, that The Deacons of the Church of Rome seem to be a little
too impudent. Pride was then in blooming, but it is now full eared, which
shows that Harvest is at hand.

In the succeeding ages the number of Christians being greatly increased, it is
to be presumed the number of Deacons increased likewise; amongst whom those
which were the cheifest, were called by the name of Cardinal Deacons, which is
as much to say, as principal.

Look Eusebius in the Election of Fabian, Anno 240.
It is not to be omitted, that the election of the Bishops of Rome was long
after this made by the voices of the common people and Clergy: the first
mention of any Pope that was elected by Cardinals, that I can find in Platina,
is in the life of Nicholas the second in the year 1059. And yet a little after
he joins with them, both the layetie and Clergy. Onuphrius says that Gregory
the seventh called Hildebrand, See likewise Sigonius, Ann. 1059. Nos Sanctae
Romanae Ecclesiae Cardinales Clerici acolythi and presentibus Episcopis,
abbatibus, multisque tum Ecclesiastici, tum laici ordinis eligimus, etc.
in the year 1072. and yet Platina affirms that he was elected, not only by
the Cardinals, but also by the whole Clergy in the presence of the people: So
that the custom which reserueth to Cardinals only, the elections of the
Popes, is of a new constitution: as likewise those goodly uses they now have to
shut the Cardinals into the conclaue, to put their meat in at a hole, to serve
their drink in clear bottles, and their bread cut into little morsels, to
make them dyne every one alone by themselves prohibiting them to serve one
another, diminishing every day their allowance: and when the name of a new
elected Cardinal is declared out at the window to the people, to run home to
his house and rob and spoil it; as likewise that custom by which the
elected Pope gives to whom he list his place and Cardinals hatte, as Pope
Julius the third did in the year 1505. who bestowed his place upon a little boy
called Innocentius, who kept him an Ape. Augusti Thrani Histor. lib. 6.
But chiefly that corruption by which every Cardinal sells his suffrage,
receiving from Princes great pensions to give their voices with one of their
faction. Now after this bargain and sale, we must yet believe that such a
purchased Pope cannot err in faith.

By what which is already faid, it appears that the Cardinals now a days
have no more resemblance of those of former times, then the Pope has of S.
Peter, or the Mass of the Lords supper: first, the ancient Cardinals were
Pastors or Deacons of the Parishes of Rome, to teach and to administer the
Sacraments; but the Cardinals now neither teach nor have any cure of souls:
secondly, then the Cardinalship was a function, now it is a dignity: Most
ordinarily the creation of Cardinals is in use one of the ember weeks.
thirdly, then a Cardinal was not made but upon the death of some other,
because that the Parish might not remain without a Pastor. But now the Pope
creates when he pleases, and as many as he pleases; by which it has
happened, that the Pope being careless thereof, the number has been so
strangely diminished, that when Urban the fourth was elected, there were only
two Cardinals; Onuphrius.
so contrary to this, Leo the tenth created eight and thirty in one day:
fourthly, Then the Roman Cardinals were only in the City of Rome, whereas now
they are every where else, and rule the Counsels of diverse Kings. It is
likewise to be presumed, that in ancient time election was made of Cardinal
Priests of the Inhabitants of Rome, and such as were of most sufficiency; but
now the Cardinalshippe is bestowed upon Infants, and Princes children that are
altogether unlearned, as likewise upon others, at the request and entreaty of
Kings, in recompense of their services. Then the title of Cardinal Priests did
not lift him up higher then his fellows, but only in some kind of precedence
in order, as Onuphrius says: Nihil dignitatis aut praeeminentiae illis dabat
antiquitus esse Cardinales. But now the Cardinals look down from a greater
height upon the rest of the Clergy, who are very many degrees beneath their
greatness. There was in those times no speech of Cardinal Bishops; and if any
Cardinal Priest of one of the Parishes of Rome became a Bishop of any City of
Italy, he retained no longer the name of Cardinal, no more then a Parson that
is made Bishop now, reteyneth the name of Parson still; but it were now to go
backewards, and to stoop very low, for a Cardinal to become a Bishop, and
leave his Cardinalship. Then he that was made Cardinal was tied to one
certain Church or Parish, but now it is clean otherwise, for by the contrary
he that is now created Cardinal, is loosed and discharged from the Church that
was his cure, as appears by the form of the nomination of the new Cardinals,
contained in the the first book of the holy Ceremonies; in which the Pope
speaks thus: Sect. 8. cap. 3. Authoritate dei patris omnipotentis, sanctorum
Apostolorum, Petri and Pauli and nostra, N Episcopum Firmanum absoluimus a
vinculo quo tenebatur Ecclesiae suae Firmanae etc.
By the authority of God the Father Almighty, and of the holy Apostle S. Paul
and S. Peter, and likewise by our own, we discharge and free James Bishop of
such a place, of the bond by which he was tied to his Church or cure, and admit
him Carainall Priest: Sect. 9. cap. 14. Cen^ent^r omnia beneficia promo ti
vacantia.
Also by the promotion of a Cardinal, all his Benefices are held void, if he
obtain not a new grant of them from his Holiness. In those days likewise
there was no such thing known, as to receive a ringe, and a red hat at the
Popes hands after they had kissed his feet, nor the new trick of opening and
shutting their mouths, nor of carrying of Sacr. Cerem l. 1 Sect. 3. Quatuor
nohiles pileos quatuor Cardinaliu^ supra baculos deferentes.
four red hats at the end of a staff before the Pope in solemn procession,
as saying like to the Doctor, whereof it is spoken in Saint Luke, Chap. 4. ver.
6. All this power will I give to thee every whit, and the glory of them, for
that is delivered unto me, and to whomsoever I will give it. Aunciently the
duty of the Cardinal Deacons was to carry the Table, on which they celebrated
the Lords Supper: but since their office has been to carry the Pope upon their
shoulders. For which Innocent the third in the first book of the mysteries of
the Mass, gives this reason: says he, It belongs to the Levites to carry
the Arc of the Covenant, which is often in the Scriptures called Everlasting.

All that then which was in the time of Gregory being compared with that which
now is, has no manner of resemblance of it, but even as when wanton verses are
graven in the bark of a young tree, the letters grow together with the tree:

Crescent illae crescetis amores. Even so, that which was amiss in these
Cardinals during the weakness and minority of the Sea of Rome, since they
were glewed and fastened to this Sea, they have grown up together with it: And
as it happens that in a body generally swollen, some part is more troubled
with the swelling then others. So this part of the body of the Roman Church is
swollen more then the rest, and a prodigious deflux is come unto it.

The which will be more apparent, when I shall have examined the truth of that
which Coeffeteau says, affirming that Cardinals are most respectfull to
Princes, and that they desire not to go upon even terms with them: I speak
not to touch any that are living; but as it may well be, that a man may dislike
of his Cloak because it is too gorgeous, so it is likewise possible that many
of those which have been advanced to this degree, do think that there is too
great pomp and glittering in this habit: we will therefore speak only of the
rules and general customs of the Roman Church, which questionless do equal
Cardinals with Kings; for mark the titles which Pope Pius the second gives
them in the sixth Chapter of the eight Section of the first book of the holy
Ceremonies: Ad collegium Apostolicum vocati consiliarij nostri and coniudices
orbis terrarum, Successores Apostlorum circa thronum sedebitis, vos Senatores
vrbis and regum similes, etc.
Being called to the Apostolic College you shall be our Counselors, and
with me shall judge the world; you shall sit about the Throne as the Successors
of the Apostles you shall be Senators of the City like unto Kings, being the
true kings of the world, on which the door of the militant Church must turn.
But it is not much to equal them with Kings; for they are often preferred
before them, they are not tied to hold the bridle or the stirrope of the Pope
when he gets to horseback, neither are they bound when the Pope is carried
by men, to give the assistance of their shoulders as Kings and Emperors are.
In the public actions and solemnities at Rome, Kings are under the Cardinals:
as for example, Prior Episcoporum in capite ad dextram. Et si aderit Rex
aliquis, erit in secundo loco. Si plures Reges mixti erunt cum Card. primis.
^ilij vel fratres regum (si non seruiunt Papae) debent sedere inter Diaconos
Cardinales, vel post eos: Primogenitus autem Regis, quia Rex futurus putatur,
post primum Presbyterum Cardinalem erit.
In that Papal feast which is made after the Coronation of the Pope, described
in the first book of Ceremonies, Section the third, there is set down the
order that is to be held at the table: The first Cardinal Bishop sits
highest on the right hand of the table. If there be any King there, he sits
beneath the Cardinal: And if there be diverse Cardinals and diverse Kings
there, then they intermingle them: placing a Cardinal, then a King, and then
another Cardinal, and so another King; as for the sons and brothers of
Kings, they either serve the Pope at table, or else sit amongst the meaner sort
of Deacon Cardinals; but the eldest son of a King has place next after the
first Cardinal Priest, so that all the Cardinal Bishops and the first
Cardinal Priest, are all before him. Dum Papa lauat manus non Praelati sed
Laici omaes genu flectunt.
And when the Pope washes his hands, all the laietie of what degree soever
kneel down, but all the Prelates stand: and not to seek for examples further
off, it is not unknown to the King of England that Cardinal Wolsey contested
with HENRY the eight. And we shall hereafter hear what authority Pandulphus
and Otho, Cardinals and Legates took to themselves in England, so far as to
take place of the King himself: and if any Cardinal now a days bears
himself with fitting respect unto his King, this is to be attributed to his
particular wisdom and discretion, but not unto the orders and Constitution of
the Church of Rome.

The College of Cardinals succeeded the Senate of Rome, being made in
imitation of it; and we have seen thereupon that the Pope calls them the
Senators of the City. Also they have their right of consecration and
Canonization, as aunciently the Senate of Rome had: the habit indeed is
differing, for the Senators had somewhat a long Mantle, called Latus Clauus,
which was a Mantle bordered with large flowers of purple and scarlet; but the
Cardinals have taken a habit all of scarlet, such as the Roman Pontifices,
and the Priests of Jupiter, Mars, and Quirinus were wont to wear; of whom
Caecilius in the Dialogue of Minutius Foelix speaks, complaining that the
Christians Sacerdotum honor^s and purpuras despiciant ipsi seminudi, do
despise the dignity and purple of Priests, they being themselves half naked,
like to that which Ovid says in his fourth book de Fastis.

Illic purpurea canus cum vest sacerdos. For which cause I cannot but much
wonder, that the Popes, who have so artificially, and with such dexterity
established themselves, have not with the same advise and prudency, taken a
habit of some other color, for fear least it might be thought, that in him
and his Cardinals, the Prophecy of the Apocalips were accomplished, Chap. 17.
ver. 3. So he carried me away in the spirit into the Wilderness, and I saw a
woman sit upon a scarlet colored beast, full of names of blaspemy, having
seven heads and ten horns, and the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet,
and decked with gold, etc. which prophecy had bin the obscurer, were it not
that it is said in the ninth ver. The seven heads are seven Mountains on which
the woman sits: and in the last verse, The woman which thou saw is that
great City, which reigns over the Kings of the earth. The Platina.
Pope Paul the second, was the first that gave scarlet to the Cardinals, as
well for themselves, as for their Mules, to the end that this prophecy which
agreeeth in general with the Sea of Rome, might likewise appertain
particularly to every one of the pillars of the said Sea, which is, to be set
upon a scarlet colored beast.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Jesuits.
THE Jesuits now follow in their rank, who by this their unaccustomed title
have taught us, that Jesus and Christ are two diverse things, since that now a
days it is one thing to be a Jesuit, and another to be a Christian.

The King of great Britain says in his Apology, that the principal of the
Jesuits were dealers in this treason, whereof some fled, others, as Garnet and
Ouldcorne were apprehended and executed.

Hereupon Mr. Coeffeteau with a good grace exhorts the King of great
Britain, to have a good opinion of these fathers, and says, that the Jesuits
would give their lives for his conservation; affirming that they are unjustly
calumniated, and for their full justification, alleges the testimony of the
French King, who since he has come to the true knowledge and understanding of
them, has called and received them about his person. And as for such as have
attempted against his Majesty's life; he says, that if they did amiss (yet
not confessing that they did so) all their society should not be liable to the
reproach of their offense.

The answer.
This Discourse being thus sweetened, doubtless cannot but much please the King of
great Britain; for now he may hereafter sleep in security, since the Jesuits
are become his so sure friends, as to be ready to die for his conservation;
neither is it a small point of charity to hasten a Prince, and send him the
sooner to Paradise. The Patron of their order (which was a Spanish Captain)
gave it them in their Institutions, to be faithful and true hearted toward
France and England: and doubtless the general of their order (which should
always be a Spaniard) nourishes them in that good ^nclination: and men do
them wrong, that say, they enterprise any thing against Kings, that are
excommunicated by the Pope, since it is a Tenent amongst them, that after such
excommunication, they are no longer Kings; as also, they do them wrong, that
say, they incroach upon the temporal, since what they have, by their having of
it becomes spiritual: And by this it is likewise to be presumed, that when
the Court of Parliament by pronounced sentence of all the chambers there
assembled, declared them to be Heretics, perturbers of the Kingdom, and
corrupters of youth: it is to be presumed, that this was done by the advice and
plotte of the Ministers of Geneua, as likewise those Jesuits which have been
executed in England, are not to be blamed, since they were led and carried to
these attempts by a Catholic zeal; and that at Rome, where Saints are made,
they have been matriculated into a roll of Martyrs: And indeed John Castle
in his examination (whereof the original is yet to be seen) confesses, that
he was put into a Chamber of Meditations all full of pictures of Devils, into
which they shut the greatest sinners, there making them to become wild and
fierce with fasting and darkness: And so having cracked and turned their
brains, imprint and fix in them these desperate resolutions. But now we hope
that they being made gentle and mild by peace and prosperity, will employ these
chambers for grammar Meditations: and for this I do not think that the other
Jesuits do approve that which the Jesuit Mariana imprinted at Toledo, apud
Petrum Rodericu^. An. 1599. And since at Mena by Balthazar Lippius. 1605.
Mariana the Spaniard writes in his book, De Rege and institutione Regis, in
the 6. Chap. where he greatly commends the paricide of James Clement, and
says, that he was incyted thereunto by the Cum cognito a Theologis quos erat
sciscitatus, tyrannum iure occidi posse.
Deuines: and the same Jesuit (as it were correcting of himself) Hoc tamen
tem peramento vti in hac disputatione licebit, si non ipse qui perimitur,
venenum haurire cogitur, sed exterius ab alio ad ibeatur, vt sella eo aut vest
delibutauini interficiendi habeat.
says, that he (in his meat or drink) allows not the poisoning of a Tyrant
(for so he styles al Princes that the Pope approues not) but wishes that this
be done by the impoysoning of his garment or chair by some violent poison;
neither is that of the Jesuit Clerici rebellio in regem non est crimen laesae
maiestatis, quia non est subditus regi.
Emanuel Sa in his Aphorisms of Confessions in verbo Clericus, by the advice
of the rest of his fellows, where he says, that the rebellion of a Clergy
man against his King, cannot be treason in that he is not subject to the King,
which agrees with that which is written by the Jesuit Saunders in his second
book of his visible Monarchy, whereof the King of great Britain in his first
book cyteth many passages. Now whereas the Jesuits of France did make a
book, entitled In the page 70. of the Edition of the bigger print, 1595. you
shall find these words. The Pope pretends nothing over Souerainty but to
correct as a father and as a Judge such as are pernicious to the Church. For
then he may not alone, but he is bound to show himself their Superior.
Security would make thee perverse and froward, but thou must be kept down, and
be made to confess, that thou have neither reason nor conscience. For it is fit
that Princes should be often held in and curbed by fear of their temporalities
The defense of the truth against the pleading of Anthony Arnold: In which they
maintain at large, that the Pope may as Judge, deprive Princes of their
temporalties. This is wholly to be imputed to the times; for then it was fit to
speak in that manner; but now they reserve those Maxims for fitter seasons:
Divinity is to be applied as occasions serve; and we are now in an age, that
if we would know how we were to teach and move the people, we must first
look into the A^minake, and accommodate our selves to the affairs of the
Common wealth; and therefore it is to be hoped that such The which are produced
in the Chapter following.
passages of Bellarmine that do make the lives and Crowns of Kings subject to
the Pope, will be mended in the next Edition. And as for the troubles and
seditions which these Fathers have stirred in Polonia, which has cost
Demetrius his life: and as for the causes which have moned the Venetians to
banish them out of their estate: this a thing wholly to be imputed to the
Climate, or to the strange humors of the Country, which is far differing from
France. All this being considered, it is to be hoped that the King of great
Britain following the counsel of Doctor Coeffeteau will take them to be near
about his person.

The other Reasons which are brought to recommend them, seem not to me of any
great weight: It is said that they carefully instruct youth: if it be so, how
comes it to pass, that since they have undertaken to teach, learning is so
much decayed? I would willingly that one could show me in France any of their
Disciples, that were of exact and exquisite learning: or whom have they in
their society that may be compared with those that were the Scholars of
Turnebus or of Cuias? Who are yet (as many of them as are left) the very lights
and ornaments of the Court; where is now the University of Paris, which had
wont to have in it thirty thousand scholars? but has declined toward
barbarism ever since this kind of people have undertaken to teach by their
abridgements and Epitomies; the which have been framed and composed by a rabble
of Pedants that teach all by rote, in stead of drawing their instructions from
the Fountains of the Greek, and in stead of^etling their judgments by the
course of ancient Philosophy. And as for humane learning, Scaliger, Casaubon,
Passerate, Lipsius, and diverse like unto them, were they brought up in their
schools? Or indeed whom have they brought up comparable to them?

But Coeffeteau says, that the most Christian King is served by them, deals
well with them, and takes them near unto his person: our condition is too
low, and our understanding too weak, to search out the Counsels of so great a
King, whom God has endued with an incomparable wisdom: but yet I think that
this serves not to justify them; for who can tell whether his Majesty does
this only to put in practice that rule of the Gospel, which is, To do well
to those that hate us? Or whether he endeavors by his goodness, to master and
overcome their wickedness, and so by that means to bind them to fidelity? Or
who can tell whether his Majesty herein imitateth the example of God, who
imployeth the wicked spirits for such causes, and to such purposes, as are best
known to his divine wisdom? Or who knows whether in this, he does like
Ulysses, who for avoiding of tempests, would keep the winds with him shut up
in a leather bag. This great King whose pains and industry procures our
general repose, whose vigilance makes us to sleep securely, who bereaueth
himself of himself, and bestows himself on the public, and who makes
peace to flourish under the shadow of his victories: Long may he enjoy that
quiet and repose which he has brought, even to those that hate him. Let his
Counsels be ever blessed with happy success, his life with safety, his
subjects with fidelity, his Crown with glory, and his Kingdom with prosperity.

CHAP. V. Of the power of the Pope over the temporalities of Kings; and that he
cannot take from Kings their Crowns, nor free subjects from the Oath of
fidelity. And thereupon the reasons of Bellarmine are examined.
THe King of great Britain in his Apology complayneth of two Breues or letters
Apostolic of Clement the eight, sent into England a little before the death
of the late Queen ELIZABETH, which were produced at the arrainment of Garnet
the Jesuit; by which the said Pope excludes him from the succession of the
Kingdom, by a general debarring of all such as were not of the Roman
Religion. This thing being so notoriously unjust, and so public, yet
notwithstanding Coeffeteau says, that there has been a wrong interpretation
made of this Popes intentions; and that it has been some particular men's
drift, to put it into his Majesty's head, that he went about to hinder his
establishment in the Kingdom. These are insurious speeches, to say that the
King of great Britain has been circumuented, and that men have only made him
believe things; but that he has not seen any such Breues, but speaks this
only upon trust.

There likewise, turning to the side of Kings against the consent of the whole
Romish Church, he speaks thus: It is a thing without doubt, Fol. 6. page 2.
that if the Pope would invade Kingdoms, and give them in prey to whom he
pleases, deuesting the right possessors of them, he well deserves that
Princes should stand stiff against his viosence, and should jointly run upon
him as upon a robber and spoiler of their inheritances. And a little after, The
Popes pretend nothing over the temporalties of Kings, and are contented only to
make their authority appear over the crimes of men, which he binds or loses
without stretching of it, tyranically to dispose of their possessions,
otherwise then such as are fallen unto him: what causes here moved Coeffeteau
thus to favor Kings, and to pare the Popes nails so near, I will not
enquire: But I well know that in other times and in other places, he would for
these words have been sent to the Inquisition. For he opposes himself
against all the actions of Popes, and the judgment of the whole Romish Church.
The examples fallen out in England shall be most pertinent to this purpose, and
such as shall represent unto his Majesty of England how far the Pope had set
footing upon the temporalties of his predecessors, and how much dishonored
their Crown. Page 117: Cum Rex and Archiepiscopus in partem sesessissent
bisque descendissent and his equos ascendissent, his habena^ Archiepiscopi Rex
tenuit cum equum ascenderet.
Matthew Paris a Monk of the order of S. Bennet at S. Albans in England, and a
diligent Historian, witnesses that in the year 1170. HENRY the second being
reconciled to THOMAS BECKET Archbishop of Canterbury, he twice held the bridle
whiles the said Archbishop got to horse; what submission then should he have
yielded to the Pope himself, seeing that one of his Prelates and the King
subjects would mit that his King and Master should make him so servile a
submission? The same Author testifies, Page 125. Carnem suam nudamdisciplinae
virgarum supponens a singules viris religiosis quorum multitudo magna
conuenerat ictus ternos vel quinos accepit.
that the aforesaid HENRY was scourged by way of penance, upon his bare flesh
by a company of Monks, some of which gave him three stripes, others five. The
Pope not content therewith, amerced him to keep two hundred soldiers in pay,
for the wars of Palestina, and to suffer that his subjects, of what quality
or condition soever might thenceforward euoke their suites out of his Courts
and appeal to Rome. Of which punishment Michauel in the first book of his
story of Florence, dedicated to Pope Clement the seventh, speaks in this
manner: Le quali coscfurono da Enrico accettate, and sattomessesi a quel
giudico un tanto Re che hoggi un huomo priuato sivergognarebbe a sottomettersi:
which things Henry yielded unto, and he so great a King submitted himself to
that censure, which a private man now a days would be ashamed to undergo. And
further adds, that the Citizens of Rome scornefully used and curbed that very
Pope, who did thus domineere in England, and would not suffer him to dwell in
their City; and thereupon he takes up this exclamation, tanto le cose che
patono sono piu discoste che d'appresso temute, that things did appear more to
be feared far off then near at hand.

After this HENRY succeeded RICHARD whom the Pope sent into the Leuant; and he
being dead, his brother JOHN came to the Crown. Matt Paris page 215.
This JOHN complained that the Pope drew more money out of England then out of
any Country on this side of the Aples; Page 223. Papa ex consilio Cardinalium.
Episcoporum and aliorum virorum prudentium sente^tialiter definiuit, vt Rex
Anglorum a solio deponeretur. Ad huius quoque sententiae executionem scripsit
Dominus Papa potent^ssimo Regi Francorum Philippo quatenus in remissionem
omnium suorum peccaminum hunc laborem assumeret, etc.
and because he therein withstood Pope Innocent the third (who covered his
tyranny under a title of The liberties of the Church:) he was by the said Pope
in the year 1212 declared to be fallen from the Crown, and his Kingdom given
in perpetual title to Philippus Augustus the French King, and his successors,
with condition that he should conquer him; granting him thereupon remission of
all his sins, and causing the Croisade to be preached against the said King
JOHN of England: by means whereof he was brought into that perplexity, that he
was constrained to undergo all the conditions which Pandulphus the Popes Legate
imposed upon him; as namely, that King JOHN to obtain remission of his sins,
should render up his Crown into the Legates hands, and should give up his
Kingdoms of England and Ireland to the Pope; that he should yield faith and
homage to the Pope, as holding his said Kingdoms in fee from the Church, as
parts of the Popes Demaines, and of the patrimony of S. Peter; Saluis per omnia
denarijs beati Petri Ecclesiae Romanae mill marcas Estrelin gorum percipiat
annuatim. The same Peter's tribute was afterward brought into Poland, as Albert'
Krantz writes, Hist. Vandal. li. 8. c. 2.
and in acknowledgement hereof, he should pay yearly to the Pope a thousand
Marks in money, to be paid at two several times; besides the Peter Pence
which were paid by the pole. All which was executed accordingly, and the
homage solemnly and formally done: the King himself tendered the money in all
submission, which the Legate Pandulphus autem pecuniam quam in arram
subiectionis Rex contulerat sub pede suo conculcauit.
trod under his feet in token to Lordly dominion; following the custom which
the Pope began then to put in practice over the Emperors of Germany, to wit,
Imperator genu flectit, demu^ ad Pontificis pedes peruenit, illos in
reuerentiam Saluatoris deuote osculator -- Iterum genu flectns aurimassam ad
pedes Pontificis offert, etc.
that they should be bound to come and take the Crown at his hands, and after
three lowly courtesies on the knee, and kissing of the Popes feet, the Emperor
was to lay down at the Popes feet sitting in his Throne, a mass of gold,
thanking his Holiness humbly upon his knee, as it is at large set down in
their holy Ceremonies, Lib 1. Sect. 5. cap. 3. The like is reported by Polydore
Virgill in the fifteenth book of his Story, and by Blondus, Decad. 2. lib. 6.

Howbeit the abouesaid King JOHN bare this yoke very impatiently; His Barons
also hated him for having enthralled his Kingdom, and England was so far
exhausted by cruel exactions that the said King JOHN out of extreme despair
resolved to cast himself and his Kingdom into the hands of the Mahumetans:
and to that effect he sent Ambassadors to Morocco in Barbary to Amiral
Murmelin King of Barbary and of Granada, to make him offer of his Kingdom; but
the Barbarian would not accept it. Whereupon the Pope made his yoke more
grievous upon the King and his land, the Oath of subjection was renewed and
engrossed in writing, the instruments, which before were only sealed on wax
were now sealed on gold, and in stead of one thousand Marks, the King was
condemned to pay According to Pope Innocents Letters, reported by Math. Paris,
Ann. 1214 page 239.
twelve thousand Marks. Since that time the Popes have called the Kings of
England their vassals, and England their Demaines. Upon which consideration,
Ann. 1216 the Pope sent letters of inhibition to Philip Augustus and Jews his
son being then at Lions to forbid them to pass over into England: but Philip
answered the Popes Nuncio in these terms: England neither is nor ever shall be
the patrimony of S. Peter. Math. Paris, p. 270. Anno 1216
A King cannot give his Kingdom without the consent of his Barons: And
thereupon all the French Nobility cried out, that they would fight to the death
in that quarrel.

JOHN being dead, Math. Paris page 425. Rex inclinato ad genua eius capite
vsque ad interior a regni deduxit officiose.
his son and successor HENRY the third did homage to the Pope, and paid the
accustomed tribute. Shortly after the Pope sent into England a new Legate, one
Otho a Cardinal; before whom the King bowed himself so^low, as to touch the
Legates knees with his head; which Cardinal behaved himself more like a King
then a Legate. This Cardinal being desirous to have entered into Scotland, the
King would not receive him, Non me memini Legatum in terra mea vidisse nec opus
esse. Page 530. Rex in ampliori regia Westmonasterij pransurus Legatum ^uem
inuitanerat in eminentiori loco mensae, scilicet in Regali sede, quae in Medio
mensae crat, non sine muliorum obliquantibus oculis collocauit.
saying, that he had never seen Legate in his Kingdom, neither had he need
of them. But in England he was his own caruer, cutting and paring away at his
pleasure, even so far as that he presumed to sit at table in the Chair of
State above the king, as he did at a feast which king Henry the third made at
Westminster, as Matthew. Paris witnesses: which Author also, Ann. 1241.
speaking of his Legates return, says, that according to the account then
made, he carried away more money with him, then he left in all the kingdom
besides, having rifled and spoiled it like a Vine, brouzed and trodden down by
wild Boares: yea all the Historians of England do complain of the pillages
and exactions of Rome, which sucked the Englishmen to the very blood. And as I
understand, Cardinal Bellarmine has lately made a book against the king of
England, Bellarm. in his new book. pa. 19. Rex Angloru^ duplici iure subiectus
Papae vno communi omnib' Christianis, ratione Apostolicae potestatis, quae in
omnes extenditur, iuxta illud Psalm. 44. Constitues eos principes super omnem
terram: altero proprio, ratione, recti Dominij, etc.
wherein he maintayneth that the Pope is direct Lord of England and Ireland;
and that these kingdoms are the Churches fee Farms, and the King the Popes
vassal or feudatary: Things which I thought good to represent at large, to the
end that his Majesty of England may know and acknowledge, how much the Crown
which God has given him, is beholding to the purity of the Gospel; the
preaching whereof has broken that yoke, and has made liberty to spring
forth together with the truth, dissipating at once both superstition and
tyranny. Jesus Christ says, Ioh. 8. You shall know the truth, and the truth
shall make you free: which saying may after a sort be applied to this purpose:
for there our Lord speaks of the servitude of sin, and here we speak of
the slavery under the man of sin: there our Lord speaks of the freedom and
deliverance from the bondage of the father of lies, here we speak of being
enfranchized from the thraldom of the son of perdition; and indeed that
temporal servitude of the Crown of England, came from the spiritual bondage
of the conscience. For the Popes laid this subjection upon men, as a means and
condition of obtaining remission of sins. Then England enjoyed the happy
golden age, in which every man for his money might enter into Paradise: but
Jesus Christ overthrew this bancke of money changers set up in the Temple, and
detecting the abuses, sheered asunder those invisible chains of Custom and
Opinion, which held men's souls ensnared in and unjust servitude. Certainly
then the doctrine of the Gospel is the settling and establishment of Thrones,
and that which exalts and raises Kings, seeing that it does: not subject
their Crowns to any man living, and further stops up all ways and access
to rebellion and disloyalty.

Now out of that which above has been said, it is evident that Coeffeteau
(telling the king of great Britain that the Pope does neither expose kingdoms
as a prey, nor pretend any thing upon the temporalties of kings) thought the
king a stranger at his own home, and one that knew not his Genealogy nor the
story of his own house; or else deemed him blind, and bereft of sense, when
he complayneth in his Apology, that Bellarm. writing against him, does
importunately inculcate this position, that the Pope may depose kings, in that
he may excommunicate them. It must needs be then (if we believe Coeffeteau)
that the king of great Britainecy there did not read, or else understood not the
book of his Adversary.

If we would seek out examples of the like cases besides these of England, we
might fill a just volume. How many Germane Emperors have been degraded from
their Empire, by excommunications and Papal fulminations, and their Imperial
Diadem given in prey to him that could catch it? Did not Pope Julius the
second, Anno 1511. take from king John of Navarre his kingdom, and give it to
Ferdinand king of Castile? This Bull of Alexander is found in the beginning of
Francisco Lopez de Gomara his Story of the ^ndies.
Did not Pope Alexander the sixth, Anno 1492. divide the Indies between the
Portugals and the Spaniards, allotting the west Indies to the Spaniards, and
the East to the Portugals: whereat Atabalippa the poor king of Peru asked who
the Pope was, that gave that which did not belong unto him. To omit the
confusions and hurly-burlies of later times, which of fresh memory have blasted
and singed our kings with the lightnings of excommunications, and almost burnt
them to powder, and have made the people to rise in rebellion against their
sovereign Prince, the soars do yet bleed, neither is the wound yet soundly
cured.

Now if experience be not strong enough to enforce the certainty of Papal
usurpations over kings; let us hear the Popes themselves speak; Clementina
Pastoralis de sententia and reiudicata. Nos tam ex superioritate quam ad
imperium non est dubium nos habere quam ex potestate in quam vacant imperio
Imperatori succedimus. In ipsa vrbe vtriusque potestatis Monarchiam Romany
Pontisicibus declararet
and let us learn what their intent is, rather from their own mouths then
from the fearful and doubtful terms of this Iacobin. Clement the fifth being
in the Council of Vienna, speaks thus: We as well by that Superiority which
we have over the Empire, as by the power whereunto we succeed the Empire being
vacant, etc. As it is contained in the Clementine Pastoralis. And in the
Chapter Fundamenta de Electione in 6 Pope Nicholas the third, says that
Constantine has granted to the Bishops of Rome both the one and the other
Monarchy. And in the Chapter Venerabilem de Electione, Innocent the third
maintayneth, that it is in him to advance to the Empire whom he pleases,
Apostolica seeds Romanum Jmperium a Graecis transtulit in Germanos.
and that it was the Apostolic Sea that translated the Empire from the
Greeks to the Germans. And that we may spare to produce the clauses of Sixtus
Quintus his Bull, Anno 1585. (which was the first thunderclap that caused all
the confusions in these later times) and which speak more arrogantly and
insolently then all this that has been said: Let us appeal to Cardinal
Bellarmine for Judge. These are his words: De Romans Pontif. li. 5. c. 6.
Quartum. Papa potest mutare regna and vni auferre, atque alteri confer,
tanqua^ summus princeps spiritualis, si id necessarium sit ad animaru^^ salutem.
The Pope can change Kingdoms; he can take them from one and give them to
another, as a Sovereign spiritual Prince, when it shall be necessary for the
salvation of souls. Of which necessity he will have the Pope also to be Judge.
Consonant whereto one Alexander Pesantius, a Doctor of the City of Rome, has
written a book of the immunities of Ecclesiastical persons, and of the power
of the Pope, dedicated to the now-Pope Paul the fifth, where he says, p. 45.
The Sovereign Bishop has by Divine right a most full power over all the earth,
as well in causes Ecclesiastical as Civil; adding in the margent, Papa iure
diuino est direct Dominus orbis: The Pope by divine right is directly Lord of
the world. Yea within these few days there have been certain Theses printed
and defended at Naples: in which were figured the Turks Turbanes, the
Imperial and Regal Crowns, Le Cornet. Paulo 5. Vice-Deo, Christiani orbis
Monarchae, Pontificiae omnipotentiae assertori, etc.
and the Coronet of the Dukes of Venice to hang in labels from the Popes Miter,
and wherein the Pope is styled Vice-God, Monarch of the Christian world, and
defender of the PAPAL OMNIPOTENCY: where the Pope has accepted the bargain
which our Savior refused at the Devils hands, Mat 4.9. Which was, to become
Monarch over all the Kingdoms of the earth. Thus is the Church become an
Hierarchy, and the spiritual kingdom converted into a temporal Monarchy. In
witness whereof the Popes triple Crown is called by no other name then Il
regno, the Kingdom. And the last Lateran Council calls the Pope in the
first Session, Prince of the whole world; in the third Session, Priest and
King: and in the ninth and tenth Session his charge is called His Holiness
Empire. Who will now make any doubt, but that Coeffeteau pleads the Popes
cause upon good warrant, and approbation? And he goes about to teach them more
modesty in speech, then they are willing to learn, unless that perhaps to
tumble down a Prince from the height of his Empire with flashes of lightning,
or to skimme away the whole wealth of his Country, be not to be termed a
touching of their temporalties: And indeed there is some reason for that, for
temporal goods when they come into his Holiness hands, they become
spiritual, according to the style which this witty age uses, who by a Bishops
spiritualties understands the rents and revenues of his Bishoppricke. The
misery of Princes in this case is, that if the Pope for their sins impose
this penance upon them, to lay down their Crowns, and to give place to
another, yet this Penance once done, is never followed with Absolution: for he
that seizes upon their place by a right of conueniency, Droit de bienseance.
does never quit or forgo it but by force. There be steps and degrees
indeed to clymbe up to a kingdom, but there is no other descent then a
headlong downe-fall. It is a thing seldom seen, that a Prince should survive
his kingdom, or that he should save life or liberty after he is diuested of
Majesty. And that which is more, Coeffeteau having taken from the Pope the
power of disposing of the temporalties of Kings, page 13. Does he not in the
next leaf following restore it to him again, in these words? If Kings depart
from their Duty, and in stead of defending the faith, seek to ruin it, then
it is in the Popes power to reclaim them, being in error, and to bring forth
his just censures, to the end to turn away the mischief which threatens
Religion. Now these censures are, the degrading of the Prince, the absoluing
his subjects from their Oath of Allegiance, and interdicting his Kingdom. And
to show that he ought to proceed forcibly, and by way of fact, Coeffeteau
adds, That the Pope ought to oppose himself herein even to the peril of his
life: And if we will exactly weigh the words of this Doctrine, fol. 7. we
shall easily find, that where he says that the Pope does not pretend any
thing over the temporalties of Princes, he means all the while Romish
Catholic Princes, who obey the Pope, that is to say, that if they be not
such as are now a days called Catholics, the Pope may deprive them of their
Kingdoms.

True it is that he reports upon us by way of recrimination, Page 15.
That those Princes who have shaken off the yoke of the spiritual power of
the Church, (that is of the Pope) see themselves exposed to the rigor of their
Ministers, whom by way of honor he calls Tyrans. I looked all the while when
he would produce examples of Ministers, who had either degraded or murdered
their Kings, or who had been trumpets of rebellion or firebrarnds of sedition,
or who had skummed a Country of their money, or punished sins by the purse:
Or who after the example of Innocent the third, This is found in the Bull of
Innocent 3. at the end of the Lateran Counsel. Salutis aeternae pollicemur
augmentum. Ad Scapulum cap. 2. Nunquam Albiniani, nec Nigriani, nec Cassiani
inueniri potuerunt Christiani sed ijdem ipsi qui per genios Imperatorum
iurauerant.
have given to those who have armed themselves at their commandment, a degree
of honor in Paradise above others, who have nothing for their reward, but bare
life everlasting. But of all this he could allege no one example. For unto us
agrees that commendation which Tertullian gives to the Christians, we never
were, says he, of the league and conspiracy of Albinius, Niger, or Cassius,
but those rather who swear by the life and Genius of the Emperor. The
faithful Pastors having stripped themselves of all this tyrannical pride,
have only reserved to themselves the censuring of men's manners, by public and
private reprehensions, and in case men stand out and rebel against the word of
God, after many rebukes they have reserved only the power of excluding them
out of the Church as Pagans and Publicans, until such time as by true
humiliation they have made their repentance to appear. These sentences of
bindeing and loosing in the mouth of the Pastors are inlocutorie Decrees which
God does ratify in heaven, till that himself in the last day pronounce the
Definitive sentence. They be the keys which depend upon the word of God, and
are annexed to the Gospel. Keys which open the Kingdom of heaven, that is,
open to the penitent sinner, an entrance into the Church, which in an hundred
places in the Gospel is called the Kingdom of heaven. Keys which the Pope
has not at all, seeing he has not that whereupon they depend, to wit, the
true benefits of Jesus Christ, contained in the Gospel: and if he had them,
yet can they not serve his turn, seeing he has changed the locks, and has
made other gates to enter into the kingdom of God.

Being then sufficiently cleared in this point, touching the Popes pretenses,
and Coeffeteaus intention, it were nor amiss, a little to hear their reasons.
Every man knows, that in the year 1301. Nicholas Giles.
Pope Boniface the eight wrote very arrogant letters to Philip the fair,
containing these words: I will that thou know, that thou art subject to me in
temporal things, they that maintain the contrary, we hold them madmen: we
know also how this vigilant and courageous King handled the Pope. This Pope
has made an authenticke Bull, which is amongst the extrauagants, and begins
with V nam Sanctam: wherein he reproves the Popes Souerainty both over the
Spiritualty and Temporalty by certain passages of Scripture, brought in by
such an extrauagant by as, that we should think it ridiculous, were it not the
Pope that speaks it, who has all law in the Chest of his breast, Licet
Romanus Pontifex qui iura omnia in scrinio pectoris sui censetur habere. In hac
(Ecclesia) eiusque potostate duos esse gladios spirituale^ videlicet and
temporale Euangelicis dictis instruimur. Nam dicentibus Apostolis Ecce gladij
duo hic (in Ecclesia scilicet) cum Apostoli loquerentur non respondit Dominus
nimis esse sed satis. Certe qui in potestate Petri temporalem glad^um esse
negat male verbum attendit Domini dicentis Convert gladium tuu^ in vaginam.
Cum dicat Apostolus non est potestas nisi a Deo quae autem sunt a Deo ordinata
sunt, non autem ordinata essent nisi gladius esset subgladio De Ecclesiastica
potestate verificatur vaticiniu^ Ieremiae, Ecce constitui te hodie super gentes
and regna. Si suprema potestas deuiat, a solo Deo non ab homine potest
iudicari, testante Apostolo Spiritalis homo iudicat omnia etc. Nisi duo (sicut
Manichaeus) fin gat esse principia quod falsum and haereticum iudicamus, quia
testante Moyse, non in principijs sed in principio coelum Deus creauit and
terram.
as himself says, cap. Licet. De Constitutionibus in 6.

These then be his Texts and Quotations: I beseech the Reader to lend his
attention.

1. The Apostles said to Jesus Christ, Here are two Swords, and Jesus Christ
did not answer, that is too much; but that is enough: Therefore the Pope has
the Spiritual and the Temporal Sword.

2. Jesus Christ said to S. Peter, Put up thy sword into thy sheath.

3. S. Paul, Romans 13. says, that there is no power but is ordained of God. It
must needs then be that the Temporal sword be subject to the spiritual.

4. God sending the Prophet Jeremy to preach and prophecy to diverse people and
nations, says unto him, cap. 1. I have set thee this day over people and
Nations. This is a prophecy (if we believe this Bontface) which gives to the
Pope power over the Temporalty of Kings.

5 S. Paul, 1 Cor. 2.15. speaking of all the faithful (whom he calls
spiritual, to oppose them to the Carnal man, of whom he speaks in the
former verse) he says, that the spiritual man judges and discerns all
things, and he is not judged of any. This spiritual man is the Pope, the
sovereign Judge, and who cannot be judged.

6. Jesus Christ said to S. Peter, Whatsoever thou shall bind in earth, shall
be bound in heaven. Therefore the Pope is chief over the Temporaltie.

7. He adds, that to acknowledge two Sovereign powers is to be a Manichee.

8. That there can be but one beginning, and one chief Sovereign, because
Moses says in the beginning of Genesis, not, In the beginnings, but in the
Beginning God created the heaven and the earth.

By all these Scientificall Demonstrations, he proves that the Pope is chief
over the Temporaltie as well as over the Spiritualty; and thereuppon admiring
himself in his own plumes, he concludes by a new Article of faith: We
declare, affirm, define and pronounce, that it is altogether necessary to
salvation to be subject to the Bishop of Rome.

I would refute each of these reasons, were it not that I am persuaded, that
the Pope did but mock when he thus spoke, and had no meaning to be believed.
For surely Shamgars goade, or Gedeons bottels may as well prove the Popes
Empire over Kings as any of the former places. And indeed Bellarmine, who
commends this Bull in general as holy and good, has been ashamed to
produce these goodly reasons in special and by retaile, it is confutation
enough for them only to have proposed them. For to dispute by Scripture
against them, were to vnsheath the sword of the Gospel against a filthy
dung-hil. Such reasons be fit to be proposed but with the sword in hand; for
they are not received farther then he that proposes them is feared. And to
very good purpose the King does here apply the Fable, that when the Lion would
have the Asses ears to be horns, the other beasts were bound to believe it.
So these fooleries must pass for verities, because his Holiness will have it
so.

Such a like May Game do we find in Bellarmine, and in all their late Divines,
who willing to cloak this their foul fact, have invented new terms to
express the same thing. They say that the Pope, as Pope, has not this power
over the Temporalty directly but indirectly, and so far forth as it is
available for the spiritual good. But a King dispoyled of his Throne cannot
take a few distinctions for a sufficient payment; for what is it to him whether
he be deposed directly or indirectly, seeing that he loses his Kingdom, be
it in what sort soever: it is as if a man should comfort one upon the scaffold,
going to his execution, telling him, thou shall not be beheaded with a sword,
but with a Fauchin. And indeed who does not see that this distinction is but a
mere contradiction? For that which is in it self evil, being done by a
direct course, cannot be done justly by an indirect course. If a subject be
forbidden to wrong his Prince directly, shall it be lawful for him to hurt him
indirectly? Surely that which I ought not to take away directly, I may not
filtch away indirectly and by wrongful dealing, seeing that the thing can no
ways belong to me in what sort soever. Furthermore Bellarmine by this
distinction has no meaning to contradict the Popes, whom we have produced, who
speak of Kings as of their subjects, and term themselves Sovereigns in
temporal affairs, so that this comes all to one.

It boots not to dispute of the excellency of the spiritual power above the
Civil, by comparing (as did Innocent the third) the Pope to the Sun, and the
Emperor to the Moon; for albeit this were so, yet does not the excellency of
one thing above another necessarily import that one must therefore govern
another: for if I say that the faculty of Divinity is more noble and more
excellent, then the care and custody of the Kings Treasure, must it needs
therefore follow that Divines and Clergy men must sway the Kings Exchequer? And
as little to the purpose is it to allege that the temporal power is subject
to the spiritual; for the question is not whether it be simply subject unto
it, but whether it be subject to it in temporal things, and with what
punishments the Pastor of the Church may punish the Magistrate when he
forgets his duty, Fouiller en sa bourse.
to wit, whether by depriving him of his estates or by fingering his purse;
this is the point of the question which Bellarmine was to prove and not to
suppose. For what authority soever God has given to faithful Pastors over the
Magistrates as they are Christians, yet do they not let for all that to be
subject to the Magistrates as they are Citizens, and make a part of the
Commonwealth. A king that is sick, is for the time subject to the government
of his Physicians, and yet they nevertheless remain his subjects. As then the
Temporal government does not impose spiritual punishments, so the spiritual
government cannot impose temporal punishments, unless it be sometimes by
miracle, as S. Peter did upon Ananias and Sapphira; for ordinary power he has
none to do it, neither does the word of God give him any.

Now if the Pope by virtue of his keys (of which he so much boasts) could
dispossess a King of his Kingdom for any fault, whether it be true or
pretended, it should thence follow, that he has a greater power over Kings
then oner private and particular men, from whom he cannot by way of Penance
pluck away their lands or houses to give them to their neighbors: for if it
were so, the Pope should be the direct Lord of all the lands and possessions of
Christendom. And seeing it is generally confessed, that the Heathen Emperors
were not subject to the Bishops in temporal matters; can it stand with reason
that Princes by being become Christians, should become less Sovereigns then
they were before, and that the faith of Jesus Christ should diminish their
Empire?

I am not ignorant that the Prince ought so to administer temporal things,
that the spiritual administration be not thereby impeached I know also that if
Princes offend God, it belongs to the Pastors not to be silent, but to oppose
themselves against that evil, by all those ways and means which God has
permitted, which are courses full of all respect and far from any rebellion
and sedition. The faithful Pastor that shall least of all flatter the
Magistrate in his vices, is the man that shall carefully retain the people in
their obedience toward the Magistrate, and shall keep that golden mean which
is between flattery and sedition. As he must not be a dumb dog, so must he
not be a furious beast that had need to be tied up.

And to the end that you may know, that these two kinds of subjection do not
iustle or shoulder each other as incompatible; I say that the Princes and the
Pastors in a State, are as the will and understanding in the soul of a man.
The will commands the understanding with an absolute command, which the
Greeks call (...), or Lord-like, inioyning it to study or to learn this or
that thing. But the understanding on the other side leads on the will by
suggestion without command; the one is done by authority the other by
persuasion. So Princes command Pastors, Pastors solicit and entreat Princes:
The respect which Princes owe unto them is not to their persons, but to their
charge and calling, and to the word or message which they bring, for they be
not the candle it self, but only the Candlestick on which it is set, Ioh. 1.
ver. 8.
sent, as our Savior says of S. John, not to be the light, but to bear
witness of the light: Howbeit this comparison taken from the understanding and
the will does halt in more then one point; for the will cannot constrain the
understanding, but Princes may compel Pastors to obey their laws, and to
punish them corporally when they do amiss. Again the understanding is to
guide the will in all things, but the Prince in an infinite of business may do
well enough without the help and counsel of his Clergy, especially in
affairs that are temporal and merely civil. Again the will does never
teach the understanding; for it consists wholly in motion and action; but
many Princes have reformed their Pastors, and brought them back to their
duties; as did Constantine who in the Council of Nice stifeled and smothered
up all quarrels among the Bishops by casting their diffamatorie libels into the
fire: as did David, who erected new orders in the Temple: and as did Solomon
who deposed Abiathar from the Priesthood, being attainted of conspiracy against
him. And likewise Ezechias and Ichosaphat, who cleansed the Temple and set up
the purity of Gods service again. In this sense, a Synodall Epistle written to
Jews the Courteous, calls him Rectorem Ecclesiae, governor of the Church.
And Jews his young son being at Pauia, took an account of the lives of the
Bishops, and of their diligence in their charge, as Sigonius witnesses in the
year 855. The same Author says in his seventh book that Adrian conferred
upon Charlemaigne the honor of gouerneing the Church, and of choosing the
Bishop of Rome; not that he might change the doctrine of the Church at his
pleasure, but only to hold a strait hand for the execution of the things which
were enjoined by the word of God.

But Bellarmine adds for a second reason, That if the Church (that is to say
the Pope) had not the power to dispose of temporal things it could never
attain to perfection, but should want necessary power to arrive at her
intended end: For, says he, wicked Princes might without fear of punishment
intertaine heretics to the overthrow of Religion. This is a reason without
reason, and full of impiety, for it accuses the Church which was in the
Apostles times of imperfection; which then had no power at all over the
Temporalty, all things being then in the hands of Infidels. Add hereunto, that
Kings might use the same reason, and say, that their power could not be perfect
unless they had the means to dispose of spiritual things, for that otherwise
wicked Bishops might without fear of punishment be vicious, mutinous,
Necromancers and firebrands of sedition against Princes: of all which
enormities the Sea of the Bishop of Rome can alone furnish a multitude of
examples; yea, after Baronius, Coeffeteau himself does confess, Coeffeteau in
his book entitled A Refutation of falsehoods. fol. 68. page 1.
that many monsters have sitten upon that seat* The Churches perfection does
not consist in a strength, able by force to defend it self, but in the purity
of prescribing the wholesome means of salvation. No otherwise then the
perfection of Philosophy does not consist in having a strong house, or a good
sword able to repress those that should hinder her from being taught and
professed; but rather in the certainty, perspicuity and sufficiency of her
Demonstrations. God who has never suffered that his Church should be
extinguished by false teachers which infect the souls, will not permit that it
shall be abolished by wicked Princes which offer violence to the bodies; for
whatsoever necessity any man can allege why he should pluck the Crown from
a lawful Princes head, yet can there be no necessity of doing any thing
contrary to the will of God; as there is no necessity that does bind a man to
be disloyal, there can be no dispensing with the law of God. God says by the
mouth of his Apostle, Romans 13.1.
That every person ought to be subject to superior powers for there is no power
but of God: Where it is clear that he speaks of Princes and temporal Lords,
because he adds, that they bear the sword, as being the Ministers of God,
ordained for justice: And a little after he commands to pay them tribute and
customs. Now at the time when the Apostle spoke this, neither the Bishop of
Rome nor any other did either carry the sword or receive any tribute. Who is he
then that can dispense with so precise a commandment? Or what thing can be
more necessary then to obey God? And note moreover, that if the Pope be the
Judge of this case of necessity, for which Princes ought to be dispossessed, it
will be easy for him at any time to say, that it is necessary that this or
that King be degraded, to the end to make himself by that means King of Kings
and disposer of their Crowns.

Howbeit let us a little weigh and consider what this necessity may be, which
carries on the Pope to pluck from a King his Scepter, and to give his Crown
to another. Bellarmine alleges but one, to wit, if it be necessary to
salvation. As in case a King be an Heretic, an Infidel, or a persecutor of
the Church, or a favorer and vpholder of error. But he would feign hide and
conceal from us that the Pope does as well intrude himself to dispossess
Kings that are of his Religion, and no way in fault. So in the Decrees of the
Romish Church in the 15. Cause, Quaest. 6. in the Canon which begins Alius,
Romanus Pontifex Zacharias scil. Regem Fran little non tam pro suis
iniquitatibus quam pro coquod tantae potestati erat inutilis a regno deposuit
etc. And the Canonists who have made the Gloss, dispute upon that place
whether a man ought to pay his debts to one excommunicated. Probabiliter dici
potest quod excommunicato non sit soluendii cum nemo debeat participate cum en.
Lib. 5 cap. 7.. Tertia. Non licet Christianis tolerare Regem infid^le^ aut
hereticum, etc.
the Pope speaks in this manner: Zachary the Bishop of Rome has deposed the
French King, not so much for his iniquities, as for that he is not fit for, nor
capable of so great a power, and has set up Pippin the faher of Charles
Emperor in his place, and has discharged all the Frenchmen from their Oath
of fidelity. (...) Julius the second could not accuse Jews the twelfth, nor
John King of Navarre of heresy: nor yet Sixtus the fifth the late king Henry
the third, who notwithstanding were by the Popes thundering Bulls declared to
have been fallen from their kingdoms.

I freely indeed confess, that in an Elective kingdom, when question is made
of choosing a new king, they to whom that charge belongs, ought in no wise to
choose a king that is an Infidel or an Idolater. But it is one thing to speak
of a king who is chosen by his subjects; and another, of a king who is a
lawful inheritour, and who is beholding to his birth for his Crown, and to
whom, over and above, his subjects have taken the Oath of Allegiance. And
therefore the Argument which Bellarmine draws from the one to the other, to
prove that Subjects are at no hand to endure a king that is an Heretic or an
Infidel, does not follow upon good consequence. It avails not to say that the
danger is like both in the one and the other; for it may so fall out that two
things may be alike dangerous, whereof the one may be bad, and the other not:
as for example, for a man to receive in his body the shot of an harquebuse from
one that did aim to hit him, and from another that did it by chance is alike
dangerous, but not alike wicked. And indeed even in humane policy, and
without any relation to the commandments of God, it is not expedient that
subjects should shake off the yoke of their Prince which is of a different
Religion: for this were the next way to estrange Princes and Monarchs from
Christian Religion, and to make them to have it in detestation, as that which
counsels and persuades to rebellion, and makes piety the cause of mutiny.
Moreover the question here is not of the danger, but of the duty, nor yet what
may arrive, but what ought to be done; we must not do evil that good may come
of it. Many things are lawful which are not expedient, but there is nothing
expedient which is not lawful When we have done what we ought to do, then God
will do what pleases him; and he will do nothing but for the good of his
Church, which he cherishes as the apple of his eye: he has bought it too
dear, that he should be of the mind to destroy it. Now if this rule of the
Cardinal be necessary: that it is not permitted to Christians to suffer a King
that is an Heretic or an Infidel: Saint Paul was very much mistaken in
giving commandment to obey Nero an Infidel and a persecutor, and the
Christians then did not as they ought to have done, in that they did not stabbe
him, or make a mine of powder under his house: Bellarmine answers, that they
might justly have done it, but that they wanted forces, that is to say, Lib. 5.
de Romans Pontif. cap. 7.. Quod si Christiani olim non deposuerunt Neronem etc.
Id fuit quia deera^t vires. etc.
that if they had been able, they would certainly have done it, but that they
feared to provoke this Emperor against them, and to have drawn persecution
against the Christians. O blessed Apostle, how fitly to the purpose do thou
stop this evasion, and furnishest us with an answer that cutteth off all
difficulty? for he says, That we must be subject to Princes not only for
wrath, but even for conscience sake. He will that we obey Princes, not only for
fear of incurring their displeasure, but also to satisfy the conscience and
our duty toward God. And S. Peter in like manner, in his first Epistle and
second Chapter, Submit your selves to all manner ordinance of man for the Lords
sake, whether it be to the King as to the Superior, etc. This then is to be
done, not only to stoop and yield to the present necessity, but also for Gods
sake. And to say truth, could not S. Peter at whose word Ananias and Saphyra
gave up the ghost, and S. Paul, who in reasoning with Elymas the Sorcerer
struck him with blindness; could not they, I say, by the same power have
crushed this monster Nero, or have throne him from the height of the Capitol.

But what will they say if we produce ages, wherein Orthodox Christians were the
stronger party, and yet did they abstain from the life or Crown of the
Emperor. Constantius was an Arrian, against whom Liberius Bishop of Rome did
not cast forth his lightnings, neither did he attempt to dispossess him, but
upon the Emperors command he went into banishment. After his decease Julian
the Apostata mightily labored to restore Paganism, at what time almost the
whole Empire was Christian; and that which is more, his Armies were composed of
Christian soldiers, as Ruffinus witnesses in the first book of his Story,
cap. 1. Theodoret, lib 4. cap. 1. Socrates, lib. 3. cap. 19. And indeed when
the Armies after his death conferred the Empire upon Iouinian a christian
Prince, they cried with one voice, We are Christians. What could there be more
easy then to have thrust this Apostata from the Empire? And if God has given
to the Bishop of Rome this power to degrade Monarchs, why was he then wanting
to this his duty when there was such a pressing necessity, and so great a
facility to have done it? There lived at that time Gregory Nazianzen, the
ornament of his age, who in his first Oration against Julian, says, that the
Christians at that time had no other remedy against the persecutors, save only
their tears. But if our Popes now a days had then lived, This passage is
alleged in the 11. Decree Quaest. 3. c. Iulianus.
and might have been believed, they would easily have furnished other means.
S. Austin upon the 124. Psalm. speaking of the obedience that the Christians
yielded to this Julian, Distinguebant Dominum aeternum a Domino temporali and
tamen subditi era^t propter Dominu^ aeternum etiam Domino temporali.
They made a difference (says he) between the Lord eternal and the Lord
temporal, and yet they were subject to their temporal Lord, because of the
Lord eternal. Such a like example we have in the Emperor Valens an Arrian,
and a persecutor, whose officers and people were for the most part faithful
believers, but their Religion never brake out into rebellion: The Emperor
Valentinian the younger was infected with Arrianisme, as we see by the 33.
Epistle of S. Ambrose, where Valentinian sends his Colonels and Captains to
dispossess the Orthodox Christians of the Temple in the City of Milan, and to
put in the Arrians. Ambrose and the Christian people withstood him, but with
modesty, saying, Rogamus Auguste, non pugnamus. Non timemus, sed rogamus.
Whereat Valentinian was so much offended, that he called S. Ambrose Si Tyrannus
es scrire volo, vt sciam quemadmodum me aduersum te praeparem.
tyrant. At the same time one Sosomen lib. 7. cap. 13.
Maximus a Catholic Prince rebelled against Valentinian, and made him to
forsake Italy, taking in hand the defense of the true faith against an Emperor
that was an Heretic. What did the Christians then? Did S. Ambrose or the
Bishop of Rome command the people to obey Maximus, and to rebel against
Valentinian? Nothing less: nay rather Valentinian by the help of Theodosius
and the Orthodoxes, was re-established in his authority, which greatly served
to set him in the right way. To be short, we find in the ancient Church many
Bishops banished and chastised by Emperors, but never any Emperor
dispossessed of his Empire by the Bishop of Rome. So then Cardinal
Bellarmine does accuse the ancient Bishops of Rome, for that during the
oppression of the Church, they used not those means and remedies which they had
in their hands, in that they drew only the spiritual sword, whereas our new
Popes skirmish with both hands, and flourish both swords, besides all other
dexterities.

Yea futher if the ancient Bishops of Rome were in doubt to provoke the
Emperors, for fear of being cause of much slaughter and confusion; why did not
this fear withold the late Popes from thundering against the Emperors
Frederick Barbarossa and Henry the fourth? Why did they draw on those horrible
confusions which filled the west Empire with blood, sacked many towns, and
caused threescore maine battles to be fought?

It is then a manifest corruption of the Scripture, when in the same place he
produces the Epistle of S. Paul, saying to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 6. that
rather then they should go to law before ungodly men or Infidels, they should
erect those who were of least estimation in the Church, Judges amongst them:
Then he adds, Is it so, that there is not a wise man amongst you, not one
that can judge between his brethren? From this Text Bellarmine makes this
collection, that the Corinthians might establish new Judges. This is to take
the Scriptures clean contrary to the meaning of them. For first S. Paul does
not speak of deposing Magistrates; secondly, he does not speak of erecting
new ordinary Offices in the Commonwealth, but to choose out from among the
faithful some persons, to compose their differences by arbitrament and
peacable means, rather then to draw blame upon the Church by bringing their
suits and quarrels before Infidels. This is the exposition that Theodoret and
Chrysostom give upon this place, and Lyranus and Thomas upon this Epistle. Now
if the Cardinal maintain, that S. Paul does speak of forsaking the ordinary
Judges, to institute new in their places, let him produce some examples hereof;
let him show us the practice of it. There he is silent, and for good cause; for
who makes any doubt but that the Christians, if they should have set up
ordinary Judges in place of Imperial Officers, should have been held culpable
of Leze-maiesty.

The danger which he pretends to be intolerating an heretical King, cannot
bear skale against the commandment of God. Add hereunto, that this reason
is but weak in the mouth of a Jesuit, who holds that a Pope, Bellar. l. 2.
de Romans Pont. c. 29
be he never so wicked and a destroyer of the Church, cannot be deposed no not
by a general Council; and yet there is greater apparent danger in this, then
in the former.

That which Bellarmine adds, seems to have been written by him being
asleep, and is nothing else but a quippe to make men laugh. He proves that a
faithful people may free themselves from the yoke of a Prince that is an
Infidel, that is to say, may rebel against him, and that by the example of
the believing wife, which by the judgment of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 7. is not
bound to abide with an husband that is an Infidel, when he will not dwell
with her. Whereunto I answer, first that Similitudes are no proofs: Secondly,
this Similitude being rightly taken does not hurt us: for as a believing wife
is not bound to follow her husband when he forsakes her, and will no longer
co-habite with her; so I will freely confess, that subjects are not bound to
acknowledge a King, that abandoneth his subjects, and will no longer be King
over them, but renounceth his Realm: and this is all that may be drawn from
this Comparison. Thirdly, this Similitude is aduantageous unto us; for if we
admit the Comparison between the condition of a wife and of subjects, then
will it definitiuely determine our Controversy, and make us gain the cause.
For as while an husband that is an Infidel will abide with his believing wife,
she may not forsake him, nor shake off her yoke: so while a King that is an
Infidel will retain his sovereignty over believing subjects, they may not
abandone him nor rebel against him. The words of the Apostle are directly to
this purpose: If any woman have an unbelieving husband, and he consent to dwell
with her, let her not forsake him.

All that which Bellarmine adds, is nothing else, but as his manner is,
suppositions without proofs. We grant him that Princes who against their
promise, do war against the true faith, deserve to be deprived of their
Kingdom; but we deny that this power of depriving them is in the Pope. We
must reserve that judgment to God, seeing it is he that has established them,
and that (as Tertullian says) they are inferior to GOD alone. Tertul. ad
Scapulam and in Apolog. cap. 30. A quo sunt secundi, post quem primi. Cap. 30.
Cum dixit Petro Amas me, Pasce oues meas, idem dixit and caeteris.


As touching these words spoken to S. PETER; Feed my sheep, to omit for the
present that which S. AUSTIN says in his book of the Christian combat; that
Jesus Christ, saying to S. Peter, Feed my lambs, spoke the same to the rest;
as all the ancients with one accord do say, that the power of binding and
loosing was given to the Apostles, and to the whole Church in the person of S.
Peter, to omit this, because I will treat of it in his proper place: I only
say, that albeit this had been spoken to the Pope, yet might he not for all
that chastise Princes with deprivation of their estates, or by raising a
commotion among his subjects, or by imposing fines and amercements upon his
countries. This is to enterprete the word Feed, too licentiously, we had
need of new Grammar for this new Divinity: for the word Feed, which in times
past signified to teach and to guide, does now a days signify to blast whole
kingdoms with the lightning of excommunications, to overthrow great Monarchs,
and to suck and draw out the very substance of the poor people. Bear with
our simplicity herein; for so great an abuse in words makes us to fear a
greater in the matter it self. To speak barbarously were an evil somewhat
tolerable, were it not that Barbarismes do sometimes pass into Heresies, and
incongruities in words into incongruity in faith. Thus the Bishop of Rome
calls himself the Pylot and Steer-man of S. Peter's Ship, but he imployeth
that bark to traffic his own gain, and S. Peter's nets to fish for Princes
Crowns, and to entramell whole States and Commonweals. His keys now a days
serve only to open Cofers. His power of loosing only to loose the bonds of
fidelity, through a mutinous piety, and a factious Religion, which makes it
self Judge over the consciences of kings, which even hates their Religion
because it hates their rule and government, and makes, that to be a good
subject, and to be a good Christian, are things that cannot subsist together.

Bellarmines reasons having been very feeble, the examples which he produces
in the Chapter following are less current. He says that Osias king of Judah
was driven out of the Temple by the High Priest, and depryued of his kingdom.
The text of Scripture is direct to the contrary. It is said 2. King. 15.2. that
Osias began to reign in the sixteenth year of his age, and he reigned fifty
two yeates: so that he lived threescore and eight years: whence it appears
that he was King even until his death. In the fifth verse Iotham his son during
the time of his fathers separation, because of his leprosy, he is not called
King but governor of his house. And ver. 7. the beginning of the reign of
Iotham is reckoned only from the death of Osias his father.

The example of Athalia driven from the Kingdom by Iehoiada the high Priest is
as little to the 2. King. 11.
purpose. For we speak here of lawful Princes deposed, and he brings us an
example of a woman that usurped another Kingdom by force and tyranny, in
which case every man is allowed to employ himself to expel the usurper, and to
preserve the Kingdom to the lawful King.

The example of S. Ambose Bishop of Millan, who would not receive the
Emperor Theodosius to the communion, by reason of that great slaughter which
his soldiers, at his commandment, committed at Thessalonica, makes expressly
against the Bishop of Rome. For would the Pope now a days endure that a
Bishop of Millan or Colleyne should intrude himself to excommunicate
Emperors, and to declare them to be fallen from their Empire without his
permission? Did Ambrose this by the counsel or commandment of the Bishop of
Rome? And were it so that Ambrose had been, that the Pope now says himself
to be, where will Bellarmine find that Ambrose did degrade the Emperor, or
that he dispensed with his subjects for the Oath of fidelity? Let a man read
his three and thirtieth Epistle, and he shall see with how great humilty he
submits himself to an Arrian Emperor, so far from preaching any revolt
of his subjects from him, that indeed he willingly offered to dye, and to
suffer persecution, if such were the will of the Emperor. As touching the law
which Theodosius imposed upon himself by the Counsel of S. Ambrose, which was
that from thence forward he would stay the execution of any sentence of death
until the thirtieth day. I cannot see how this can serve to give unto the Pope
power of deposing Princes; For if Theodosius would not have followed the
counsel of Ambrose; there had been no harm done. But this good Emperor did
of his own accord yield unto it.

After him follows Gregory the first; at the end of whose Epistles is found a
privilege granted to the Abbey of S. Medard, which has this clause for the
burden of the Song: If any King, Prelate, Judge, or secular person what soever
shall violate the Decrees of this Apostolical authority, and of our
commandment, be he of what dignity or greatness soever he may be, let him be
deprived of his honor. I might say that this is only an imprecation against
Kings, and not a Decree of deposition. But we need not busy our selves about
the sense, seeing that the Epistle is false. It is a privilege indeed unto
which the name of Gregory is put, to win the greater credit and authority.
The falsehood of it appears first in the Barbarism of the style; for men did
never call, neither at Rome nor in Italy, farms or possessions by the name of
Mansos. It is a word which is found in the Chapter of Charles the great, and of
Jews, which shows that this privilege was first composed in France, and not
written at Rome. Which thing also appears in this that he uses these words:
Tusiacum and Mortinetum fiscos regios. To call the lands of the Kings Demaines,
Fiscos regios is a Barbarism that may easily befall some French monk; but at
Rome this would not have been understood: and you espy the French vain in
these words very often repeated, Dominus Medardus, Monsieur S. Medard. Add
hereunto that this privilege is absurd and unjust; for it forbiddes to depose
the Abbot of S. Medard howsoever attainted with crime, unless it be after the
Popes pleasure known, and after a Council assembled, wherein there shall be
found a dousen witnesses, besides the accusers. Now to break this goodly
privilege is thought to be a crime, for which a King ought to loose his
Kingdom. The cheef point is, that the humor of this Gregory the first, who
called himself servant of servants, does very much disagree with these so
arrogant terms; and which cut after the style of an earthly Monarch. For
writing to Mauricius the Emperor in his third book and sixth Epistle: But I the
unworthy servant of your goodness. Ego autem indignus pietatis tuae seruus.
Ego vero haec dominis meis loquens, quid sum nisi puluis and vermis.
And a little after, Now I speaking these things to you my Lords, what am I but
dust and a very worm? And the King of great Britayne has wisely observed in
his first book, that the Emperor Mauricius had commanded this Gregory to
publish a law, which Gregory himself condemned as unjust; and yet to obey his
Master, he published it. I, says he, as one subject to your commandment,
have sent these same laws into diverse Countries; and because they do not agree
with God Almighty, I have by these my letters signified it to my Lords and
Masters. How well this Gregory knew to keep his rank, and could not find
the way to draw this temporal sword, which yet stuck fast in the scabbard. For
an vpshot of falsehoods; so at the end of this goodly privilege the
subscriptions of the Bishops of Alexandria and Carthage, who never knew the
Abbey of S. Medard, especially the Bishop of Alexandria, who never saw Gregory,
and who beside that signeth his name very low among the thronge of ordinary
witnesses, albeit he never thought himself inferior in any thing to the
Bishop of Rome. After all signeth King Theodoret as inferior to all the
Bishops.

After this Gregory, we are brought down to Gregory the second, the great
puller down of Images. If we may believe Cedrenus and Zonaras great adorers of
Images: this Gregory went about to hinder the Italians from paying their
tributes to Leo Isauricus, who had demolished Images. But Platina who has most
carefully searched out the story of Popes, witnesses the contrary, and says
in the life of this Gregory, that upon order given from the Emperor for the
breaking down of Images. The people of Italy were so much moved, Qua
cohortatione adeo animati sunt Italiae populivt Paulum abfuerit quin sibi alium
Imperatore^ deligerent Quo minus a, id fieret authoritate sua obstare Gregorius
amicusest.
that it wanted but little, but that they had chosen themselves another
Emperor: but Gregory employed his authority to hinder that matter. Nay further
he never for all that, declared Leo fallen from the Empire, he did not
translate his Scepter to another, he did not dispense with his subjects for
their Oath of Allegiance: And yet the Emperor at that time did only hold a
third part of Italy, which was a very small portion of the Empire; so that his
tributes of Italy were unto him of very little value.

As for Pope Zachary, when they report in the year 750 to have taken from
Childeriche the Kingdom of France to give unto Pipin; and likewise Pope Leo
the third, whom men say to have translated the Empire of the Greeks to the
French by giving the Empire to Charlemaine. I could convince all this of
falsehood, and show that the practice and custom of Popes is to give unto some
one, that thing which he cannot take from him; Or after having incyted some one
to invade the possessions of his neighbor, to vaunt afterward, and to reproach
him; that what he got by rapine he now holds by his Holiness liberality; or
as if in the Sacring of the Emperor, because he has put the Crown on his
head, he should say that he has given him the Empire; as if in the sacring of
a King he that has inaugurated him by performing the Ceremony should brag
that he has given him the Kingdom. By this reason the Bishop of Ostias, who
has had for a long time the right of consecrating the Pope, should have bin
above the Popes: and the Bishop of Millan should give the Kingdom of Italy to
the Emperor, because from him he is to receive a Crown of Iron: but this
belongs to another discourse, neither is the proof of it necessary to this
purpose. For had these Bishops done much worse then this, yet could not their
example serve for a rule, unless it be showed where and when God gave them
this power. For is it credible that the Bishops of Rome could have had in their
hands this power near eight hundred years together without enploying it? or
that they suffered this temporal sword to hang rusting on a pin, without
ever making use of it, until that after many ages this Zachary bethought
himself of putting it to service in an action which the Church of Rome it
self confesses to bevniust? Seeing that the Canon Alius, before aleadged,
says, that Childericke was not deposed for any crime, but because Pipin was
more capable of government then he. How many Emperors and Kings unfit to
govern were there before this Childericke, whose Crowns the Popes never
touched? But this Pope flattered Pipin to the end to be succored by him
against the Lumbards, who kept him in servitude.

Now to shut up this whole matter, seeing that the Pope does challenge to
himself this power over Kings, who is it that has given it unto him? Is it
from the unwritten word? Is it a custom authorized by the time? or suffered
by Princes? or slid it along by the favor and sleepiness of an age that lived
in darkness? Or if God has given him this power, let him produce his Title,
let him show the clauses of this Donation.

2. Again, If Christ left a Successor or Lieftenant here on earth, it is
certain that he can exercise no other charge then that which Jesus Christ did,
being in the world. Now he did never degrade Kings, nor translate Empyres. Nay
how is it like he would have done that, seeing that he could not be entreated
to become a Judge between private men in a Controversy that was of civil
nature. He that teaches us to yield tribute to Caesar is it likely that he
would have left a Lieftenant that should make Caesar himself tributary.

3. If it be so, that S. Peter or any other Apostle had this power over
Kingdoms: where does it appear that ever he exercised it? And to what end
serves an authority without the execution? Or where did this power of the
Bishops over the temporality of Kings lie couring all this while, that it
should need to be rouzed up some eleven hundred years after Jesus Christ?

4 Moreover, It is God that gives Kings and Princes their power, as Daniel
told Nebuchadnezzar though an Infidel. Dan. 2.37.
Thou O King art a King of Kings, because the God of heaven has given thee a
Kingdom, and power, and strength, and glory. And the Apostle, Romans 13.1. has
told us that all powers are ordained of God. Now that which God gives, man
cannot take away. Let the Pope take away if it please him, that which himself
has given: let him take his Cardinals read hattes, Archbishops pals, if ever
he gave any without money; Let him give out against them that hold Benefices
from him, that their Benefices are deuolted unto him by lapse, but let him
abstain from the Crows of Kings, let him not touch the Lords anointed.

5. Add hereunto those passages which the King of great Britain has
learnedly observed in his Apology, by which he proves, that God wills that
his pleople yield obedience to Kings even to Infidels. So in the 27. of
Jeremy; Submit your necks under the yoke of the King of Babell, and serve
him and his people: and cap. 29. Seek the peace of the City whether I have
carried you, and pray for it; for in her peace you shall have peace This was
far from moving them to revolt. Thus did the Israelites obey Pharaoh: And
even then when the Kings of Judah were Idolaters, as Ahaz and Manasse, yet did
the High Priests never for all that incite the people to Rebellion. The
Emperor Nero was a prodigious monster for all kind of wickedness,
notwithstanding S. Paul would have men to obey him for conscience sake, Romans
13.1. Timoth. 1.
and for fear of offending God. But we now a days stand upon better terms:
for if we ought to obey a Prince that is a Pagan, even for conscience sake in
Civil causes; how much more one that is truly a Christian? And if a Tygre
that has climed to the top of the Empire, how much more a Prince that is wise
and merciful, who preserves the lives of those that desire his death? And if
we may not obey any man that leads and commands a mutiny and treason; how
much less ought we to obey the Pope, whose Empire is founded upon the ruins
of the Gospel, and who being prodigal of the blood of those who are his,
draws persecution upon them, to the end that they for him may loose goods and
life, yea and life eternal?

Now if any man unwilling to enter this list, shall say that this is a matter of
policy, and that we prye into matters of State; such a one by his
tergiuersation will more overthrow the Popes power, then if he had expressly
fought against it. For if this power be a point without the compass of
Religion, it follows thereupon that it is not sounded upon the word of God:
And if God had spoken of it in his word, it were a point of Religion to
believe it. The Pope then is to blame for making such bragges of his keys in
this case, if it be nothing but a matter of policy, and such as has no spark
of Divinity in it: which thing Pope Clement the fifth, does covertly confess in
the extrauagant Meruit: Meruit Charissimi filij nostri Philippi regis Francorum
etc.
where he declares that he does not understand that the extrauagant Vnam
Sanctam of Boniface the eight, which gives to the Pope sovereign power over
the Temporalties of Kingdoms as well as over the Spirituality, could bring any
prejudice to the Kingdom of France, to make it more subject to the Church of
Rome, then before it was, but reintegrateth the said Kingdom into the same
estate that it was before the abouesaid definition of Boniface, and that in
acknowledgement of the merits of King Philip the fair, albeit he had
somewhat rudely accorded matters with Boniface. Let the Reader weigh and
consider this point advisedly. For in this extrauagant (which Bellarmine does
approve and commend) Pope Boniface foundeth his pretensions over the
Temporalties of Princes, upon many passages of the word of God. He means
then that his right is by the law of God: where against King Philip hedoth
maintain, that in temporal things he is subject to no man. Within a while
after Clement the fifth passed it so, in favor of the King, and exempted him
from the rigor of this Bull; the Pope then made bold to dispense with the law
of God: or if on the other side it be nothing else but an humane positive law,
then Boniface dealt very wickedly in seeking to ground it upon the holy
Scripture. But why shall France alone be exempted from this yoke and other
Kingdoms shall be enforced to bear it? Could Philips merits dispense with
him for obeying the word of God produced by Boniface. These Popes make a
Religion of wax, depending upon the conditions of the times, and the train of
their affairs, and make it a prop of their Dominion: they stretch it and
shorten it like a stirrup leather, fitting not their wills to Religion, but
Religion to their will. Now if Philip had bin Master of Rome and
absolutecommander in Italy, the Bishops of Rome would have thrown themselves on
their knees before him, as did Pope Adrian in the second Counsel of Nice, 2.
Act. and would have called themselves worms, dust, and his petty-seruants as
did Gregory the first, writing to Mauricius.

CHAP. VI. Of the Clergy and of their Liberties, and Exemption.
Tertia. Cleri^i non possunt a Iudice politico puniri, vel vllo modo trahi ad
secularis magistratus tribunal.
Cardinal Bellarmine cap. 28. of his book De Clericis, says, That Clergy men
may not at any hand be punished by the politic Judge, or be drawn before the
judgment seat of the Secular Magistrate. He says also that the chief Bishop
having delivered Clerks from the subjection of Princes, Respondeo summus
Pontifex Clericos exemit a subiectione Principum, non sunt amplius Principes
clericorum superiores.
Kings are no longer Superiors over Clerks. In the same place also he
maintayneth that the goods as well of the Clergy as of secular men, are and
ought to be exempted from the tax and tribute of Secular Princes.

Quarta. Bona Clericorum tam Ecclesiastica quam secularia libera sunt ac merito
esse debent a Tributis Principum secularium.
Hereunto the King of great Britain, speaking to the Emperor, to the Kings and
Princes of Christendom, says in this manner: And when the greatest Monarchs
amongst you will remember, that almost the third part of your Subjects and of
your Territories, is Churchmen and Church-liuings; I hope, ye will then
consider and weigh, what a feather he pulls out of your wings, when he denudeth
you of so many Subjects and their possessions, in the Popes favor: nay, what
briars and thorns are left within the heart of your Dominions, when so
populous and potent a party shall have their birth, education and liuelyhood in
your Countries, and yet owe you no Subjection, nor acknowledge you for their
SOVEREIGNS? So as where the Churchmen of old were content with their tithe of
every man's goods; the Pope now will have little less then the third part of
every Kings Subjects and Dominions.

To these words, so full of weight and evidence, Coeffeteau answers very
softly and sillily. He says that Catholic Kings, do not apprehend any such
calamity, seeing that amongst them Ecclesiastical Persons live under their
Laws and acknowledge their authority, even the Pope himself being aware of
it: That in France the Cardinals and Bishops perform unto the King, the Oath
of Fidelity; commends the Kings for having given to Clerks great immunities,
notwithstanding which he says that they do not let to be bound to civil
Laws.

These words are full of timerousnesse and lurking ambiguity. Bellarm.
witnesses and we will show hereafter) that Clerks are no longer subjects to
Kings, and that the King is no longer their Superior. Thus can we learn
nothing of this Doctor.

So that indeed his Majesty's complaint is so just, that if we hold our peace
threin, the cause will proclaim it self: Every man knows what a Diminution
to the Crown and greatness of Kings, these immunities of Clergy men do bring;
all which they cover and rabble up under the Title of the liberty of the
Church, unworthily transporting this sacred name of Christian liberty, which
signifies in the word of God the deliverance from the curse and malediction,
and from the yoke of sin, and from the heavy burden of the ceremonies of
the law; to civil pretenses, and dispensations with that natural duty which
we owe unto our Prince, under whom we had the happiness first to behold the
Sun.

This is a thing that belongs even to the law of Nations: and besides that is
authorized by the word of God, that every person be subject to the Sovereign
Magistrate. But here now see, how in one kingdom, as in France, there will be
found above three hundred thousand persons, who under the title of Clergymen
have shaken off the yoke of the Princes authority; yea even children that are
entered Nouices into that Body, exempted from all obedience toward their
parents:

This body of the Clergy has its Judges and officers and their prisons
likewise apart. Their causes are not called to be answered before Royal
Judges; but receive hearing and determination in the great State chamber at
Rome called La Zuota or in the consistory.

There is a third part of the Lands of this kingdom in the hands of Clergy
men to the great prejudice of our kings. For it often comes to pass, that
the proprietarie owners and possessors of lands do sell their inheritances;
whence accureth profit to the Prince, by the Kings fine which arises of every
first part, or first prime, of such fales and other rights belonging to the
chief Lord; which Rights are lost when once immovable goods, enter into the
possession of the Clergy. The king does also lose his right of Aubaine, which
is an escheate to the king of all such goods, as any stranger dying in France
is possessed of, also the right of confiscation, and in case of desertion when
a man does quit his own estate. The Clergy being a body that never dies, that
never confiscateth, and in which body inheritances dye by Mortmaine: Upon whom
the secular persons confer every day new Donations; but we never see the
sharing of Ecclesiastical goods made to the profit and behoof of any
Layman: for goods find many gates open to enter into the Clergy, but never a
one to get our from thence, like those footings of the wild beasts, which all
turned inward toward the Lions den, but there appeared no trace of any that
ever returned from thence. And hence it comes to pass, that as in man's body,
the thighs and arms grow less and less by how much the bigger the belly
swells through excess: so in the body of a Common wealth. The Nobility and
the Commonalty, who are as the arms and legs of that State, they are brought
low by the increase of the Clergy.

To this end also they have obtained that the Church shall always be held in
nonage and in her minority, that if she shall at any time have made promise or
contract, that may turn to her disadvantage, she may under that pretense be
relieved. And whereas in common course of law, thirty years are sufficient to
keep possession by way of Prescription: De Praescript. Cap. 2. in Serto.
Contra ipsam Romanam Ecclesiam Centenaria. vel contra alias Ecclesias
quadragenaria prescriptro Legitima sit completa.
Against the Church of Rome, and against the Templaries no Prescription can be
of force under one hundred years; which is in effect as much as that against
them there is no Prescription. The other Churches and Orders have forty years
Prescription.

This ought also moreover to be added, which is a thing that does greatly
redound to the weakening of the power of kings. And that is, that al Fee-farms
and lands of the most noble Tenure, as soon as they enter into the Possession
of Ecclesiastical persons, they become exempted from all charges and payments,
as well in regard of their persons as of their goods, being no longer bound to
that personal service, which the possessour formerly owed unto the Prince.
Whence it came to pass that our ancient kings were able within less circuit
of Country, to levy Armies of an hundred thousand men, whereas now a days
within a far larger extent, fewer troops are gathered, because there is a
third part of the lands of France, which contribute nothing to public
necessities. And yet notwithstanding, natural reason requires that they who
enjoy the fruit and benefit of peace, should contribute toward the war;
that those that live at case, should cherish and relieve them that fight for
their conservation. Wherefore then whiles the Nobility and the third State, do
oppose themselves to the invasion of strangers, whiles the King does fortify
his Frontiere Towns; does intertaine Garrisons, does appoint Officers as well
for civil government as for discipline of war; why should not
Ecclesiastical persons, who by these means do quietly enjoy the fat and best
of the Kingdom, why should not they, I say, contribute to the public
necessity: why should their increase be a deminution to their Princes forces,
who watches over them for their quiet?

Furthermore no man can be ignorant but that this is a thing greatly threatening
the damage and impouerishing of the Kingdom, that a third part of France
should be tributary to a stranger, under a title of Annates, Dates,
Dispensations, Absolutions and cases of marriage. Against all which biting
extortion our ancient Kings provided by the Pragmaticke Sanction; being
angryed and agreeued to see the fair pence of the Kingdom to pass over the
Alps under a Religious kind of pillage, and to enter into the purses of those
who made a mock at our simplicity.

But above all, this is that which is most pernicious to Kings and their
estates, that so many persons are exempted from justice, and from the arm of
the secular power. For by this means if a Clerk do himself undertake, or
do abet another to attempt against the life of his Prince, if he coin false
money, set fire on a town, or entertain secret intelligence with strangers;
or if he infect the common people by the example of his lewd manners. The
Prince for all this cannot lay hands on him without leave from his Bishop, and
he shall not dare to touch him, until he be first degraded, in such sort that
the King has in his kingdom an infinite number of persons, who are Lords of
the fairest and best choice of his Country, and who are not his subjects, but
do acknowledge another for their Superior out of the kingdom.

This is verily one of the boldest wiles and the subtilest sleights of the
mystery of iniquity, to have found out a means whereby to make a king by
sufferance to give way to another, to establish an estate within his own
estate, and in the end to thank him for it too: and to think himself
beholding to him for the same. Who will then marvel hereupon, if the king of
great Britain whom God has freed from so heavy a yoke, do look with
compassion upon those other kingdoms, who yet do groan under this burden,
and as standing safe on the shore, gives advise and counsel to his brethren
whom he sees weather-beaten with these surges, and carried away with the
current of an old inueterate custom.

Now here I protest again, as heretofore I have done, that I do not speak of
the persons, but of the rules and orders of the Church of Rome. I know that in
this great body of the Clergy there is a great number that would willingly dye
for the service of their king: in whom their Priestly character of shauing,
has not made them forget that they are borne subjects. In whose spirits nature
has more force then their habites, and the love of their Country more then
the Maxims of Italy: but they are beholden to their own good dispositions for
this, and not to the rules of the Church.

Some to color this abuse, say that Clerks are exempted from the power of
Princes not by Gods law, but only by man's positive law: whereunto I say that
first they contradict not only Bellarmine himself, who in his book of the
exemption of Clerks, Ecclesiae Ecclesiasticaeque personae ac res ipsa^um non
solum iure humano, quinim mo, and diuino a secularium personarum exactionibus
sint immunes.
he does exempt them by Gods divine Law: but also Pope Boniface the eight, who
speaks in this manner in the Title, De Censibus in Sexto: The Churches and
Ecclesiastical persons and their goods, let them be exempt from the exactions
of secular persons not only by man's law but also by Gods Divine law.

Secondly I say that it little imports Princes under what title men take away
their dues, seeing that they are either way alike riffeled and despoyled. And
it goes against the heart of him that has been robbed to pay himself with a
destruction, certain it is that if this be granted, that the exemptions of
Clerks is founded only upon man's laws: yet if a Prince should go about to
clippe the privileges of Churchmen, and should continue on, to draw those
rights and dues upon their lands which he had upon them whiles they were yet
in the hands of secular men; such a Prince I say, shall be never a whit the
more excused: nay, rather he shall be cursed and banned as black as a coal,
and shall be ground to powder with hot excommunications, as a persecutor and
diminisher of the liberty of the Church. And if any Jesuit should come to
suffer death in any such quarrel, he should be put in the Calendar of Saints
and Martirs, as was Thomas of Canterbury, who suffered only for this very
subject.

And indeed it is a thing very easy for us to prove that Clerks have
exempted themselves from Taxes and Subsidies and Contributions, and from
subjection to the secular sword, not only without all law, both of God and
man, but directly contrary to Gods Divine law. For S. Paul, Romans 13. will have
every soul subject to the higher powers. He that will exempt Clerks from this
rule, says by a consequent that they have no soul. Now if they be subject,
then do they owe Tribute: for S. Paul adds, that this subjection consists
in paying of tribute: For this cause (says he) you pay tribute, because they
are the Ministers of God. (...)
Wheruppon Saint Chrysostom in his Commentary on that place speaks roundly
to the purpose; The Apostle (says he) enioyneth this to all, even to Priests
and Solitary Monks, and not to Seculars only. And that which is yet more, he
adds, Be thou an Apostle, be thou an Euangelistor a Prophet, or whosoever.
Whence appears that if the Pope be an Apostle (as indeed he calls his
charge an Apostleship) notwithstanding by S. Paul's rules he should be liable to
taxes and rallages, and subject to the civil Magistrate.

Now because some perhaps may use this exception, This is Bellarmines own
exception, cap. 3. de exemptione Clericorum.
That Christian Clerks were forced of necessity to be subject to Paynim
Princes, to pay them tax and tribute, to appear before their Civil and
Criminal Judges for fear of drawing (by such their refusal) persecution upon
the whole Church: but under a Christian Prince Clerks ought to be exempt from
this subjection. (...).
The same Chrysostom adds in the same Sermon, That if the Epostle
established this law, at what time Princes were Paynims; How much more then
ought this to be under believing Princes? Si omnis, and vestra. Quis vos
excipit ab vniuersitate?
Likewise S. Bernard in his two and fortieth Epistle to the Archbishop of Sens:
Give honor to whom honor belongs: Let every soul be subject to the higher
powers; if every soul, then yours also, for who can except you from that which
is universal? Si quis tentat excipere conatur decipere. He would daceiue you
that would except you. This worthy personage had a sensible feeling of the
excessive abuses which, alleged in his time, were grown up in these
exemptions. S. Ambrose in his Oration of surrendering up Churches, says, De
tradendis Basilicis. Si tributum petit non negatur. Agri Ecclesiae soluu^t
tributum. Very ministri Dei legibus nostris subij ciunt^r.
If the Emperor demand Tribute, we do not refuse it. In the fourth book of
Theodorets Story, cap. 7. Valentinian the elder, writing to the Bishops of
Asia, he says, That the true Ministers of God are subject to the laws of
Emperors. And it is in the very same Emperor, who being joined with Valens,
made that law, of which Pudet dicere, Sacerdotes ido lorum and aurigae mimi and
scorta haereditates capiunt: solis Clericis and monachis hoc lege prohibetur,
and probbetur non a persecutoribus sed a principibus Christianis. Nec de lege
conqueror sed dol^o cur meruimus hanc legem.
S. Jerome speaks in his Epistle to Nepotian, which did forbid
Ecclesiastical persons to receive any heretages, or to take any thing from
women: which law is found in the Code of Theodosius, in the title De Episcopis
and Clericis: Whence appears that the Imperial laws did in those days
subject Clerks to many things; from which the seculars themselves were
exempted. Which was not reckoned any Tyranny, seeing that S. Jerome says in
the same place, that he does not complain of that law, but rather of the
Avarice of the Clergy, who had worthily deserved to be curbed and repressed by
that law made. What shall I say more? Pope Urban and the Roman Decree, in the
Cause 23. Quest 8. in the Canon Tributum, speaks in this manner: De
exterioribus suis quae palam cunctis apparent Ecclesia tributum reddit.
The Church pays her tribute of all her outward goods. Again, P^o pace and
quiet qua nos tueri and defensare principes debent, imperatoribus persoluendum
est
We must pay to Emperors in recognisance of the peace and quiet, in which they
ought to maintain and defend us. Let a man read the Canon Pont^sices procursu
tempor alium rerum imperialib is legib^ vterentur.
Quoniam, and the Canon De Capitulis, in the tenth Distinction: and there a man
shall see how much the Popes do acknowledge themselves subject to the
Emperors, and bound to obey no other laws then the Imperial, in temporal
affairs.

In Sigonius his fifth book, Ansbert Archbishop of Pauia crowned Carolus Caluus
King of the Romans, saying unto him, We have chosen you with joint consent,
Protector, Lord and King, and we yield our selves your subjects with all our
bearts.

As touching the punishment of crimes it is found at large in the De Episcopis
and Cler^cis.
Code of Theodosius, that about the year 315. Constantine discharged certain
Clerks from public functions which they had executed in person, and yet
without discharging their possessions. But as well he, as his successors
retained and reserved to themselves the punishment of crimes: For in the
twentieth chapter of the first book of the Story of Theodoret, he sent
Eustathius Bishop of Antioch into banishment. The Emperor Sulpitius Seuerus
in the second book of his Story.
Maximus put certain Bishops to death; for having been infected with the
Herefie of the Gnostics, contrary to the counsel of S. Martin who did not
approve that cruelty. But S. Martin does not reprehend him for having set in
his foot over the Clergy, or for that he had thrust himself in injuriously
to the judgment of their crimes: yea about the year 1560 the Emperor
Justinian established a law, Iustinianus in Nouellis 79. and 83.123.
by which he permitted Ecclesiastical persons in civil causes to proceed
before their own Bishop: but in criminal matters his pleasure is, that they
should undergo the jurisdiction of secular Magistrates: the indulgence of the
succeeding Emperors has exempted them from al secular jurisdiction, contrary
to the dignity and security of the Empire, yea and contrary to the rules and
examples of the word of God it self.

Under the Law the Levites had no prisons apart, nor Judges apart; they were
subject to the Kings, who sometimes chastised the high Priests themselves, as
Solomon deposed Abiathar from the Priesthood Jesus Christ appeared before the
judgment seat of Pilate, Io. 19.11.
and he gives this testimony that it is given him of God, to be Judge in this
cause. S. Paul did not appeal to S Peter, but to Caesar, Act. 23 11. and he
does it by the counsel of the holy Ghost; to the end that men should not
think, that it was an evasion, which he followed out of necessity, without
approving it as lawful. S. Paul himself does subject every soul to the
powers that bear the sword, and by consequent he does subject them also unto
corporal punishments.

Some perhaps will say; I grant you that the Clergy have now a days many more
exemptions then they have had in former times. But the Emperors and Kings have
given them immunities and freedoms which now are irreuocable. Council. Chalced
can. 9. Si Clerieus aduersus ^^lericum negotium habeat non relinquat Episcopum
suum and ad secularia Iudicia non recurrat.
I answer, that if Kings have given to Clergy men such immunities, they may
take them away from them again, when they shall see it to be necessary for the
preservation of their State. So, all that men are wont to allege out of the
ancient Councels, authorizing these exemptions, may serve indeed to exhort
Clerks to address themselves to their Bishops to compose their differents in
Ecclesiastical matters. But now a days to exempt Churchlands from paying tax
and Subsidy; nor to take from the Magistrate the power of punishing any Clerk
that is a wicked man, and attaynted of some crime which is punishable by the
law.

Secondly, I say that Clerks cannot be judged by the validity of their own
exemptions, seeing they are made altogether in favor of them, and to their
own profit. And being Judges and parties, they will take heed, I trow, of
condemning themselves.

I say further; for I mayntaine this truth, That Princes cannot free Clergy men
from their civil subjection and obedience, seeing that God himself has
subjected them thereunto. So a father cannot free his children from that due
obedience which they owe unto him: Neither can he by any damnable induldence
and facility toward his children, loose those bands of nature which God
moreover allows and authorizeth in his word. That good indeed, or that good
turn is injurious, that byndeth a man to do ill, or that exempteth him from
well doing. And not to speak but of Magistrates only, I say, that God having
commanded the Israelites to subdue the Cananites and Amorrhites, and to make
them their servants: They should have offended God if they had let them go
free and at liberty.

I leave this also to any man's judgment, whether a Prince may take any
Donations, by the which both himself and his Successors may loose the third
part of their Dominion. If any man be an angryed with his money, he may give it
away, and make havoc of it if he please, but he cannot bind his posterity to
the like humor. Neither can his personal liberalities make universal Laws:
Especially when by experien^e it is known to be true, that those persons on
whom the good deeds have been done, do wax the worse by them, and the
benefits extended toward them, corrupt in their own bosoms. For, not to
speak of those manyfold vices which have thronged in at this gate by troops,
Clergymen are become very ill acknowledgers of those good deeds which Princes
have conferred on them: For now they maintain, that these immunities belong
unto them by Gods law, and by Divine right; and that they hold all this from
God and not from man, and that the Pope having exempted Clergymen from the
subjection of Princes, they are no more their subjects, neither are Princes any
longer their superiors. This doctrine is constantly vpheld in Rome, and
mayntayned by all the Doctors that are of any mark in that Church. But about
all, by the lesuites; diverse of whose testimomes, touching this point, we have
heretofore produced.

Out ancient Kings never heard of any such propositions in their days. And
without doubt that which now-a days is called in our law, Le droit de Regale,
and L'appell comme d'abus, and likewise the Inhibition of the Annates, by the
pragmatical Sanction (of which there remains no more now-a-dayes then the
bare name) these are the relics of the ancient power of our Kings, by the
which they did dispose of Ecclesiastical men's goods, as well as of Secular
persons. But now-a-dayes after a lamentable manner of speaking, and iniuri ous
to our Kings, these things are called Privileges of the Gallicane Church. As
if for a man not to be robbed or riffeled, were a privilege unto him. Or as if
it were a special grace granted by the Pope, that a man should have power to
be Master in his own house, Non est Priuilegium sed prauilegium. And yet this
privilege is not observed.

And hereupon I beseech the Reader to consider how handsomely Cardinal
Bellarmine does carry himself in this point, who in the eight and twentieth
chapter of his book of Clerks, Secunda.
to the end to gratify Princes with something, he will, that Clerks should
conform themselves, to civil laws in certain menial small things, as in the
buying of any Merchandise, or not to go abroad in the night without a
Lantern. But within a short space after, he plucketh back, all that which
before he had given, willing them to be subjects indeed, Fol. 128.
Obligatione non coactiua sed solum directiua: by Obligation of direction, not
of coertion. That is to say, that they may be commanded, but not constrained to
yield obedience: they shall obey as far as themselves list: and this is not
to be a subject in any regard. That law is no law that only has reference to
their discretion for whom it is enacted. A law that wants his annexed
punishment, is ridiculous, and should be called an entreatie, or good
counsel rather then a command. And farther observe, that the matters wherein
he makes the clergy subject to the law, are trifles, and things of no moment.
But to be vigilant for the safety of his sovereign; or to mayntaine the peace
of the Country, or to shun private intelligence with forrayners, or to be
punished for robbing, or rauishing, or for treason, are matters wherein he
does not subject them to the power of Kings. So he dazels the eyes of Princes
with Schoole-distinctions, of Directive, and Coactiue, flatly denying the
while, that Princes have superiority over their Clergy. Lib. de. exemp. Cler.
cap. 1.
And he maytaines that Kingdoms are not held by a Divine right, Ad
confirmationem.
that is, are not immediately appointed by God, nor established by Gods
ordinance: directly crossing the Apostle Saint Paul, saying, That there is no
power but of God, Romans 13.
and the powers that be, are ordained of God. By this means taking from
subjects all religious regard due to Princes, whom in a wicked disdain he
calls Profane persons; toward the end of the second Chapter of his book of
the exemption of the Clergy, in these words: Quis dicere audeatius esse
profane homini in ea quae sancta sanctorum id est sanctissima dici meruerunt.
Is there any that dares auerre, that ^^^rophane man has any power over
matters that deser^^ to be styled Sancta sanctorum, that is, most holy? He
gives also this title to Ecclesiastical goods; so that if the money of a
Kingdom be swept away under color of Indulgences: If sins be leuyed upon
the Curtyzans of Rome: If any of the common people do rob their children to
enrich the Friars, this wealth, and these possessions are the holy of holies,
things most holy. O gross abuse, and open mockery! O enmity with God himself!
Thus is our simplicity seduced. These then are the men, that to shake off the
yoke of Kings, call them Profane persons. Kings, who are the anointed of the
Lord, Gods image upon earth, the noursing fathers of the Church, the Princes of
the people of God, of whom the very Angels speak not without reverence. Well
may their glory be advanced, and the kingdom of the son of God established
in their government; but let all those be cast down, that scandalize their
sacred persons, or exempt themselves from their authority.

CHAP. VII. The authority of Emperors and Kings over the Bishop of Rome, that
they have elected, degraded, and censured them, that Princes have had
authority over their Bishops, and their temporalties: The first beginning of
Popery in England.
WHo so desires to see more proofs drawn out of ancient Histories, by which
it is made evident, that the Bishops of Rome acknowledged themselves subjects,
and vassals of the Emperors, let him read the place of the King of great
Britains Apology, Obse crantes interim ex animi feruore vestram
mansuetudinem, obtestando, and veluti presents genibus aduoluti and coram
vestigia pedum volutando.
where he answers the first Breue of Paulus Quintus, whereunto we may adioyne
the words of Pope Adrian writing to the Emperor Constantine son to Irene in
the letters inserted into the second Council of Nice. We in the mean time
with feruencie of spirit beseeching your Grace, and as if we were present fall
before you on our knees, and prostrate our selves at your feet, both my self
and my brethren. In those days Popes kissed the feet of Emperors. Long before
King Platine in vita Agapeti. 1.
Theodorick employed John the first, Bishop of Rome in the nature of an
Ambassador to Justinian the Emperor, and after his return kept him in prison
till he died. Platina in the life of Agapetus the first, says, that King
Theodat sent Agapetus his Ambassador to Constantinople. Soon after Pope
Vigill coming to Constantinople at the Emperors command, he caused him to be
whipped, and drawn with a halter about his neck through the City. Oh that
they had had the grace in those days to have thundered against the Emperor,
and by authority of the Sea Apostolic to have given away the Empire to some
other! as touching the election of Popes, they were commonly chosen by the
suffrages of the people and clergy of the city of Rome: but this election
continued doubtful till the Kings of Italy, or the Emperors had confirmed
them: who did often also establish the Bishops by their own absolute
authority, not regarding the voice of popular assemblies. In the year 535.
Agapet the first was chosen by King Theodate, who elected also Syluerius after
Agapet. Syluerius being deposed by Betisarius a captain, the Emperor
Justinian surrogated Vigill into his place. In the year 581. Gregory the
Archdeacon was sent to the Emperor Tiberius to make an humble excuse, for that
Pelagius was elected without his approbation; the incursions of the Lombards,
and the great inundations of waters having cut off their passages. The same
Gregory being soon after chosen Pope by the common people, wrote humble
Letters to the Emperor Maurice, not to confirm his Election, in the year
679. Pope Agatho besought the Emperor Constantine to forgive him the tribute,
which the Bishop of Rome did usually pay for their consecration; as the King of
England has learnedly observed; Look Sigebert and Luitprand Stella. Platina,
etc.
being far from enforcing the Emperors upon the day of their consecration,
to lay down a sum of money at the Popes feet for tribute in token of their
subjection, as the Almaine Emperors were afterward, constrained to do:
Bellarmine, says, that Constantine the fourth gave over this power of choosing
the Popes to Benedict the second, but he maliciously has omitted, that the
Emperor in stead thereof, sent thither his soldiers, which he ordinarily kept
at Rome: which continualy occasioned Faction and Sedition in their Elections;
witness the election of Canon the first, and of Sergius the first in the
years 686. and 688. by which they were driven to have recourse to the
Exarches, Sigonius lib. 3.
the Emperors Lieutenant in Italy.

The title of the Empire of the West, and the Royalty of Italy being fallen
into the hands of the French, Charlemaine seized both the Sovereignty over the
City of Rome, and the power of electing Popes into his own hands. The form
or nature of this authority is faithfully reported by his Majesty of England,
just as it is inserted into the Romish Decree, in the 69. Distinction, in the
Canon Adrianus: Leo the the third yielding to this authority sought, and
offered him some presents to be confirmed by him: Soon after Paschall the
second send his excuse to Jews le Deuonaire, because his election was
dispatched before his pleasure was known. Some allege hereupon that Jews
did at that time freely disclaim his authority, and to produce a Declaration
to that purpose; but the practice of that time proves the contrary: for a
little after in the year 827. Gregory the fourth would not enter upon his
charge, till his election was confirmed by Jews, as Sigonius and Platina
testify. In whom you shall find a like example in the life of Benedict the
third, which is he, whom Platina and a whole score of other witnesses make to
succeed next after Pope Ioane. In the year 867. the Ambassadors of Jews made
head against Pope Adrian, because they had not been called to his election;
the people having tumultuously forced him to take the Papacy upon him. The
wars of the Normanes came then suddenly upon them, which set the Emperors
about other business: and the Sea of Rome began then to grow to that
ouerflowing and disorder, that for the full space of two hundred years, there
was nothing to be seen but slaughter, theft, adultery, forcery, and one Pope
degrading and thrusting out another: in which time by Coeffeteau's own
confession many Masters sat in the Pontifical chair; and it is pleasant
reading to peruse the Council of Rhemes held under Hugh Capet about that
affair. During which hurly-burlies, the Church of Rome was in the year 898.
constrained to sue unto Berengarius King of Italy, to interpose his authority
in the election of the Popes. And a while after Otho the first, Emperor of
Almaine having subdued Italy, seized upon the same authority, Anno 992.
and chose Pope Leo the eigth, and after him John the fourteenth, and after
that Benedict the fifth, as Sigonius, Platina, and others do affirm. In the
year 995. Otho the third keeping the same custom, chose Gregory the fifth
without any regard to the voices of the common people. Siluester the second,
who (as Platina, Stella, Fasciculus temporum, and sundry others do write)
attained the Popedom by bargayning with the Devil, about the year 997. was
established by the Emperor Otho the second, Sigonius Platina
who had been his Scholar. In the year 1024. the Earls of Tusculum, which
then were grown mighty, advanced John the one and twentieth, who was a
Layman to the Popedom In the year 1047. Henry the second deposed Benedict
the ninth, Seluester the thirteenth, and Gregory the sixth from the Papacy; who
by Platina are called three Monsters; as the King of great Britain does truly
observe. The same Emperor renewed the Oath unto the people, that they should
not offer to choose their Bishop without his commandment. After which Leo the
ninth, Sigonius pa. 372. Platina. In Clemente 11.
Nicholas the second, and Honorius the second were elected according to the
same rule. Sigonius in the year 1064. says that Hanno the Archbishop gave
Pope Alexander a check for entering upon the Papacy, without the penalty of
Henry the Emperor, Quam sedem multos iam per annos nemo nisi a rege probatus
ausus esset attingere; unto which seat none (says he) for these many years
has presumed to approach without the Kings approbation. The same Hildebrand
which was called Gregory the seventh, the scourge of Emperors was confirmed by
Henry the fourth in the year 1075. who having first dared to incite the
Almaines and Italians to revolt from the Emperor, and infinite wars being
kindled thereby under this Henry, and his successors, it would be ouer-long to
reckon up how many Popes have been degraded, and how many Anti-Popes created
by the Emperors. By which confusion and warlike broils, continuing for one
hundred or six score years, the Papacy grew to a far greater greatness then
it maintains at this day: for it is within these two or three hundred years
fallen wel-neare half way from the height and State wherein it stood.

The King of great Britain having alleged some of these testimonies; Mr.
Coeffeteau makes after his fashion a superficial answer, and says, That in
the beginning it was not so. Fol. 16. page 2
And he says well: for in the beginning the Bishop of Rome meddled not with the
election of the Emperors: he did not pull down Kingdoms: he imposed no
Annates, or tyrannous impositions upon the Clergy: he intermedled not with
temporal affairs, neither did his Ecclesiastical authority extend farther
then the Churches and parishes in the Suburbs; that is, no farther then the
Prouost-ship and Jurisdiction of the City of Rome: he was not called the
Monarch of the world, nor the head of the Universal Church, nor God upon the
earth, nor did he wear a triple Crown, nor made the Kings to kiss his feet,
nor did he vaunt that he could not err in matter of faith: but as fast as the
Emperors did fall, so fast did the Popes rise: and I assure my self, that the
Pope would rather renounce his succession of S. Peter, then the Donation of
Charlemaine.

Secondly, Coeffeteau says, That in the first ages the Christian Emperors did
not enterprise such matters, no not the Constantines, or Theodosij. Here then
we must learn him some skill in history. Between Constantine the great and
Theodosius the first. Valentinian was Emperor, whose royal assent concurred
in the election of Ambrose Bishop of Millaine, a Prelate more reverenced at
that time then the Bishop of Rome: Ruffinus speaks plainly in his second
book, the eleventh chapter. The desire of the people being reported to the
Emperor, he gave commandment that their desire should be accomplished.
Socrates has the same, Lib. 4 cap. 25. The Emperor Theodosius chose Nectarius
Bishop of Constantinople: for (as Sozomen. testifies) he commanded the Bishop
to write down in a paper their names, whom they thought worthy, reserving the
choice unto himself: and having cast his eye over the list of such as were
named, among all the rest, he made choice of Nectarius. Now we are to
understand that the Bishop of Constantinople was not then inferior to the
Bishop of Rome in any respect: Of which we could produce 780. witnesses; to
wit, those hundred and fifty Bishops which were in the first Council of
Constantinople under Theodosius; and the six hundred and thirty Bishops in the
Council of Calcedon, in which Councels there are express Canons to that
purpose. The third Canon of the Council of Constantinople speaks in this
tenor, (...).
That the Bishop of Constantines City has prerogatives of honor next after
the Bishop of Rome because it is new Rome. Which Canon attributing to the
Bishop of Rome priority of rank, not in respect of the Sea, but in regard of
the chief City, is expounded at large in the Council of Calcedon in these
words, in the eighteenth Canon: (...).
Our Fathers have very rightly given the pre-eminence to the Sea of ancient
Rome, because the City was the Seat of the Empire. So the hundred and fifty
Bishops of the Council of Calcedon, beloved of God, moved with the same
reasons have transferred the same pre-eminence to the seat of That is to say
Constantinople.
New-Rome, thinking it reason that the City honored with the Empire, and with
the presence of the Senate, and enjoying the same privileges as ancient Rome
being the Seat of the Empire did, and being after it the next should in
matters Ecclesiastical have equal advancement: For then the Sea of Rome had
the precedence without any authority or Jurisdiction above the rest, just as
one Counselor of State goes before another, that is equal in Commission with
him. This excellent Canon has been shamefully falsified in the Roman mane
Decree, in the Canon Renouantes, the two and twentieth Distinction; where in
stead of Etiam in Ecclesiasticis, our Adversaries have thrust in Non ^amen in
Ecclesiasticis. Hereupon I conclude, that if Theodosius being at
Constantinople, had a hand in the election of the Bishop of Constantinople, he
might as well meddle with the election of the Bishop of Rome, in case he
should be present in Rome. And indeed Coeffeteau confesses that the Emperor
Constantius meddled both with the election of Foelix, and with the deposing of
Liberius Bishop of Rome: but he says that he was an Arrian, and that S.
Hilarie called him Antichrist: which notwithstanding disables not the authority
of this example: for if Liberius had been then an Arrian, as he became
afterward, no man could have thought it strange, that Constantius had expelled
him, and advanced another of the Orthodoxe faith into his room. S. Hilary
blamed him, not because he meddled with the deposing, or election of a Bishop,
but because in Liberius he persecuted the truth: which may be as well said of
the Kings of the Goths, favorers of Arrianisme, which made and unmade the
Bishop of Rome at their pleasure: And it is principally to be considered, that
the Emperors took less heed to the choosing of the Roman Bishops as long as
they preached the Gospel themselves, and were contented with the office of
being Pastors of the City of Rome, and did not thrust their Ecclesiastical
sicle into the temporal harvest. But as soon as they began to speak big,
and to meddle with civil affairs, and that when matters were doubtfully
balanced, they were like a great stone in one of the scales, who can wonder if
the Emperors b^gan then to look about, that none of an adverse faction were
brought in to that See against themselves?

That which Coeffeteau subioyneth, makes nothing to the purpose, to wit, That
the Emperors of the East continued the usurpation of the Goths, out of a base
coueteous humor: for it makes not, whether their proceedings were tainted with
avarice, or no: some one in the prosecution of his right, may mingle his
particular vices. Now if this custom be not, then are the Popes, and Councels
worthy of blame that have adjudged them both just, and necessary; as Adrian the
first, Leo the eigth, and others which unrequested did voluntarily refer this
choice to the Kings of Italy, and to the Emperors. And indeed Sigonius Anno
963. says that Leo the eigth was of opinion, Non sine causa Adrianu^ 1. Ca
rolo magno tribuisse vt Ecclesiam ordimaret and Pontisicemlegeret -- Labertate
populo ^eddita Romanos in dies deteriores effectos:
that Adrian the first had cause to refer the honor of governing the Church,
and choosing the Pope unto Charlemaine, and that when liberty was given to the
popular Assembly for the election of the Pope, things greweuery day from bad to
worse. It is here more remarkable that Coeffeteau does a little after
contradict himself; for after having condemned this elective custom, as as an
unjust usurpation of the Emperors, a little after he says, that the Emperor
did not usurp this right, Fol. 18. page 2.
but received it from the Pope. If then the Emperors did not usurp this
power, he does unjustly call it usurpation. And if the Popes gave this
authority, the fault was only in the Popes. And if it be a Right, as
Coeffeteau calls it, it can be neither wrong, nor injustice, not usurpation. The
fear of the Lombards should have been no motive to the Popes to iniure their
own See, to p^ssesse the Emperors of that which appertained not unto them.

Touching that which he adds, Fol. 19. p. ^.
that Jews the son of Charles disclaymed this right; I have already
disproued it, as untrue. The Canon Ego Lodouicus, in the 63. Distinction, is of
the same touch, and as true as the Donation of Constantine.

It is also untrue which he says, that the Popes acknowledged Jews for a
benefactor of this See; and that they should think themselves obliged to him,
and other Princes, which have bestowed on them the temporalities which they
possess. For first the Popes would not acknowledge any such obligation to this
Jews, nor to his predecessors, notwithstanding all their gifts unto them,
having forged the Donation of Constantine to obliterate the memory of this
benefit, and cast an immaginary Conduit-pipe, that might from others of
farther distance derive this bounty unto them. Besides their abusing and
thundering their storms upon our Kings, and robbing their Kingdoms is their
fair acknowledgement of this good turn; like him that having gathered the
fruit, and refreshed himself in the shadow of a tree, does with his bil-booke
lop off the boughs and branches for recompense.

Moreover we deny (notwithstanding any thing Coeffeteau says) that the Popes
held their temporal possessions of Pipin, or Charles, or of Jews, or of any
King or Emperor. I am not ignorant that these Princes have exceeded in their
liberalities to the Bishop of Rome, which they have performed to their
hinderance: but they ever did, as Princes unto subjects, reserve the
Sovereignty over the Donce.

To examine the matter by auncienter proofs and better, Sigonius in the
History of the year 687. says, that the Exarches sent Judges unto Rome, to
administer justice unto the people. Platina has the fame in the life of
Sergius the second, who was the first that changed his name after his
election, because he was formerly called Hogs-snout. In the division between
the children of Jews le Debonaire, Lotharius the eldest son had for his part
the City of Rome, with Italy, etc. Platina in the life of Eugenius the second,
says, that Sigonius p. 116 Lotharius in Italiam veniens Magistratum delegit
qui populo Romano ius diceret.
Lotharius coming into Italy, established Magistrates at Rome to judge the
people of the City. Above all, we have express testimony of Sigonius in the
seventh book of the History of the Kingdom of Italy: Ann. 973. Pontifex
Roman. Rauennamque and ditiones reliquas tenebat authoritate magis quam
imeprio: quod ci uitates Pontificem vt Reip. Principem Regem vero vi summum
Dowinum intue entur atque ei tributa obsequiaque praeberent.
Then (says he) the Bishop of Rome held the City of Rome and Rauenna, rather
by another authority then their own command Because these Cities
acknowledged the Bishop as a Prince in the Common*wealth, but did ever look
toward the King as their sovereign Lord, paid him tribute, and to him yielded
their obedience. And yet it was a long while after, ere the Emperors came to
Rome, to take their Crowns which they held not of the Pope, who had only a
hand in the Ceremony, but of the people of Rome. So that all that which the
Pope does at this day hold in the nature of a sovereign Prince, is a mere
usurpation over the Empire, and he cannot exhibit his titles, nor show us the
beginning of his Princely Sovereignty.

Coeffeteau goes on, and condemns the Emperor Otho for deposing John the
thirteenth for his irregular life; and Henry the third for deposing three Popes
in a short time, and says, that in this proceeding he showed a zeal, but no
knowledge. Whereunto I answerre, that this John being maintained by an Army,
and a very potent faction, he could not be expulsed, but by the power of the
Emperor: nor is it zeal without knowledge to apply unto an extreme malady,
the only and most necessary medicine that can possibly the provided.

Our Doctor does further add that Constantine did show much more Religion,
when in the Council of Nice he acknowledged, that it belonged not to him to
judge of the faults of Bishops. But these were but words of his gracious
respect unto them, such as the same Prince used, when he said, that if he
should find a Clergyman offending with a woman, he would cover him with his
cloak: but before in the sixth Chapter we saw, that the laws of Constantine
did not privilege the offenses of the Clergy from the civil authority; no not
the laws of Justinian which were made more then two hundred years after. And
indeed Theodoret, lib. 1. cap. 19. alleges an Epistle of Constantine to
N^comedians, in which speaking generally of all sorts of men, he says that Si
quis audacter inconsulteque ad memoriam aut landem pestium illarum exarserit,
illias statim audacia ministri Dei h^e. mea executione coercebitur.
If any one will rashly and inconsiderately maintain those pestilent
assertions (speaking of the Arrians) his audatiousnes shall be instantly curbed
by the Emperors execution, who is Gods Minister. I do plainly confess, that
they caused them to be very often deposed by a Synod, but yet they ceased not
to have sovereign authority over the Bishops before their deposition, or to
have power of inflicting corporal punishment upon them: but of this we have
spoken at large before.

Thence does Coeffeteau proceed to the Example of Henry the fourth; which he
says cannot be alleged, because the times were then troublesome: but the
example suits very well to our purpose, for that the Popes were the only
instruments of raising those troubles, to exempt themselves from the Emperors
subjection, and to subject the Emperors to themselves, even in services more
servile then seuuitude it self; stirring up the son to seek the life and
Crown of Henry his father, who died being deprived of his Imperial dignity by
his son, the Popes instrument therein; who vouchsafed not his father so much
favor, See Helmoldus in the Chronicles of Sclauonia. Naucl. 39. genera.
Baronius de vitis Pontificum, and many others.
as to cause his body to be buried. Frederick Barbarossa being come soon
after into Italy to be Crowned Emperor, the Pope enforced him to hold his
stirrope, when he took horse. But this Emperor little-skil'd in these
services, putting himself forward to hold the left in stead of the right
stirrup, was adjudged to practice the same submission the day following: and
howbeit he performed it very mannerly, yet in conclusion the Pope sought to
pull his Crown from him. And in the same degree of pride did Alexander the
third tread upon the said Frederickes neck, upon the stairs of S. Marks
Church in Venice: the History is reported by many writers, and alleged by the
King of great Britain, in his confutation of Bellarmine about the end of the
book: and it is painted at Venice in the hall of del Scrutinio and del grand
Constiglio; the Maps and Tables thereof are reckoned up and expounded by
Girolam Bardi, in a book expressly written of that argument.

In the sequel of his discourse Coeffeteau falls into that wretchlesse
negligence, that he accuses the King of mistaking the History, not alleging
so much as one passage for his confutation. And sure it is not Platina that
does alone record the deposition of these three Popes by Henry the fourth; for
Stella a Venetian Monk, who has written the lives of the Popes, has the same
in these words; Henricus Caesar habita Synodo Benedictum praedictum and
Syluestrum, and hunc Gregorium abdicare se Pontificatu coegit.

His Majesty of England alleges to the same purpose, the example of Philip
le bell K. of France, that wrote with liberty enough unto Boniface the eight,
who first invented the Iubile, Platina Stella.
in these words: Let your great folleship understand, that in in temporal
matters we are not subject to any man, etc. And he it was that surprised the
aforesaid Pope at Anagnia, and committed him to prison at Rome, where for
grief he died, An. 1303. To the example of Jews the ninth, King of France,
that established the law called Pragmatica sanctio, against the pillaging and
merchandising of the Court of Rome; he joins the example of Jews the
eleauenth: who being urged by Pius the second to repeal that Sanction,
remitted his Legates to the faculty of the Divines of Sorbone, Johannes
Maierius libra de schismat Council.
who made it good against the Pope: with whom Johannes Romanus the Kings
Advocate, was joined, that opposed them so far with his conclusions, that the
Court appealed to the next Council; as indeeede they did. The said King says
farther, that the faculty of Sorbone, came to maintain this point, that if
the Pope should offer violence to our King, the French Church had authority to
establish a Patriarch, and sever themselves from the Sea of Rome. And that
Gerson Chaunceller of the University of Paris, was so far from defending
this pretended temporal power of the Popes, that he wrote a book De
auferibilitate Papae ab Ecclesia; that is, Of the possibility of forsaking the
Pope, and remoueing him from the Church. How much more did he believe then
that the temporal power of Kings might be free from the insulting of Papal
authority?

To this does Coeffeteau make no other answer, but that these contentions were
only for temporal matters; and that Philip or Jews, or the faculty of
Sorbonne, or the Kings Advocate, desired not to prejudice the Popes authority
in any regard, as he is head of the Church; so that here, he answers well to
the King of Englands question; whose aim is only unto matters temporal, and
to the usurpation of Popes over Monarchs. Touching the title of Head of the
Church, which is an abuse more intolerable, he reserues that for an
after-discourse. Now if so be, the dissension between Philip and the Sea of
Rome continued not many years, as Coeffeteau observes, Fol. 22 page 2
it was because the Pope gave way unto him: and Benedict the eleventh was very
glad to give Philip absolution, Platina Stella.
which he granted of his own accord, because the other might have been well
without it.

That we may close up this point, the King of great Britain draws many
examples out of Matthew Paris, and out of the Records of his Kingdom to this
purpose; as William Gifford whom King Henry the first invested with his
Bishopric, and Rodulphus whom the same King invested with the Archbishopricke
of Canterbury by his Ring and Crosier-staffe: and Thurstan nominated to the
Archbishopricke of York, deprived by the King of his temporalties, for
corrupting with bribes the Popes agents in the Council of Rhemes. The said
King alleges many examples of Abbots, Bishops and Deanes in England, that
have either against the Popes will, yielded obedience to their Sovereigns, or
have been degraded, censured and imprisoned by their Princes for their
disobedience in adhaering to the Popes And which is more considerable, these
are late examples, such as have happened while the Papacy domineered most: How
stood the case then, when the Bishop of Rome had nothing to do in England,
with matters either temporal or spiritual? The Kingdom of France does
furnish us with examples of more pregnancy. The Synod of France is of
special note to this purpose, which is to be found in the third Tome of the
Councels of the Colleyn Edition, page 39. where Carolomanus qualifying himself
as Duke and Prince of France uses this speech, By the advice of my Clergy,
and others of principal esteem of the Realm, Ordinauimus Episcopos.
We have ordained Bishops in the Cities, and have established Boniface
Archbishop over them. The Council of Maurice holden under Charlemaine, Anno
813. begins thus: Carolo Augusto verae religionis rectori, ac defensori
sanctae Dei Ecclesie: and the first Council of Mayence under Jews le
Debonaire: Ludouico verae relligionis serenissimo rectori. And these, I trow,
should have been accounted irreligious Titles now-a-dayes.

And here let it be principally noted, that Coeffeteau trusts more to his
heels, then to his hands: for he buckles only with the first of these
examples; and all his answer is, that Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury opposed
this course. But to this I reply, that for this opposition he was forged both
to forsake England, and quit his Bishopric. The contradiction of one of the
Popes pensionary Prelates opposing his Sovereign, is of small moment in this
behalf; for Anselme was accounted the Popes, not the Kings subject. Nor is it
any greater wonder if Matthew Paris, who so often magnifies this King Henry, do
now and then cast some imputation upon him: in as much as he was a
superstitious Monk, and lived soon after: who in every passage complaining of
the tyranny and exactions of the Popes, does yet sometimes restrain himself
for some idle respects, in which he oftener gropes for the truth, then he does
see or find it.

We must also observe, that the principal quarrel between the King of
England and the Pope being for inuesting men with spiritual promotions, the
Pope has bestowed very glorious Titles on those persons, that suffered for
this quarrel: as if he should write Rubarbe, upon a pot of Rats-bane. So has
he placed this Anselme in the Calendar of Saints, and Confessors; and Thomas
of Canterbury in the Catalogue of Martyrs, that lost his life, not for the
profession of the Gospel, but for a Controversy of Prebends, and the right of
Inuestiture.

Coeffeteau does here add, That the Kings of England in the matter of
ordination of Priests have never violated the Discipline of the Church: The
King of England alleges these and many other examples of like nature.
And I suppose that he had not vouchsafed the reading of the book, against
which he writes. For the Kings book says that Henry the first, invested an
Archbishop in his Archbishopricke with his Ringe and Crosierstaffe, without the
Popes leave, which is flat repugnant to the discipline of the Church of Rome.
Fol. 15. page 1:
And besides the now Pope Paul the fifth does pretend that the Venetians in
punishing the criminal offenses of their Clergy do derogate from the liberty
of the Church. Edward then the first and second by inflicting corporal
punishment upon the Clergy, that would hold a dependancy from the Pope, have by
this reckoning derogated from the liberty of the Church.

To conclude, our Doctor says, that Henry the first did in other things submit
himself to the laws of the Church; that in the Records of England, most of
the monuments speak of yielding obedience to the Sea Apostolic: that his
Majesty embraces a Religion which his Predecessors never possessed, but have
ever acknowledged the authority of Rome in all matters depending upon matter of
conscience.

First, I answer, that this is to wander from the question, for here is
nothing questioned but the Popes Supremacy over Kings in matters temporal:
Secondly, that barely to affirm, and to confirm nothing, especially writing
against a King, does either discover much weakness, or argue overmuch
neglect: and indeed his whole allegation is untrue. Concerning Henry the
first, I confess, that he ascribed too much honor to the Church of Rome; for
he lived in a dark and ignorant age, and in the height of the Popes tyranny, to
which England of all Countries was most enthralled: which cannot be proved of
the times more ancient. It may well appear, that the City of Rome, being the
seat of the Empire, was by consequent the resort of all nations; by which
means the Church of that city, how poor and miserable soever, might have
aduertisements from all parties, and have intelligence with all the Churches
within the Empire, and consequently which is the Church of great Britain;
which was originally planted by some of S John. Disciples that came thither out
of Asia: whereof we have this proof, that even to the time of August. which was
sent into England by Gregogorie the first about the year 596. the Church of the
Island, did keep the feast of Easter, according to the custom of Asia, upon
the 14. day of the month, which if it had been under the jurisdiction of the
Bishop of Rome, no question but it had abrogated that custom, when Victor, in
the year 200. did excommunicate the Churches which made any precise
observation of the 14. day. Helene mother unto Constantine. was of the Island,
and held no points of Papistrie maintained at this day. Pelagius was also of
this Island, and saving the points of free will, and original sin, dissented
not in any opinions from S. Angustine. Now S. Angustine received no Popish
opinions now defended; as we have proved in the 20. chapter of my book of the
Eucharist in another place, In the twenty Chapter of my book of the Eucharist.
Pontificus Verumnius lib. 4. Jo. Lelandus.
that he died excommunicate from the Church of Rome The first Christian King of
great Britain that can be remembered, was Lucius, that possessed a part of the
Island in the time of Marcus Aurelius: who, questionless had commerce with the
Bishop of Rome, for he had been at Rome, and held correspondence with the
Emperor: but that he should be subject to the Bishop of Rome, or acknowledge
him the head of the Universal Church, admits no manner of proof. In the year
of our Lord 530. that Warlike Prince Arthur reigned in great Britain, of whom
being a Christian it does not appear, that either he depended upon the Bishops
of Rome, or that they intermedled in the election, or inuesting of the Britain
Bishops, during the reign of Arthur, or his Successors. In the year 596.
soon after that the English Saxons (being Almaines, and at that time Infidels)
had invaded Britain, then did Gregory the first send Austen into this Island, a
man full of faction, and arrogance, to plant the Christian faith; although the
Christian Religion had been planted here more then four hundred years
before. But by the Christian faith, these men do now understand the authority
of the Pope. This Austen was strongly and stoutly opposed by the Christians of
that Country, who refused to change their ancient form of Religion, which
they had received from such as were Disciples to the Apostles. They had seven
Bishoprics and one Archbishopricke; the seat whereof being first errected at
Carleon, was afterward translated to S. David's, as it is recorded by Rainulphus
Cestrensis, lib. 1. cap. 52. for the Archbishop of London was of a later
foundation: besides they had a College of 2100. religious persons at Bangor,
who about the year 550. when the Order of S. Benet began to flourish in this
I Will, were called by the new name of Monks: Men that adicting themselves to the
study of Divinity, got their living by the labor of their hands; not being
tied to the rigorous observation of a Vow: whereunto no man by the ancient
Order of S. Benet is obliged. This Austen then found means to insinuate
himself into the familiar acquaintance of one of the petty Kings of the
Country, called Ethelfred King of Northumberland, who was an enemy to the
ancient Christians of that land, and had invaded their Country, and wasted
many Churches: with this Austen then he combined against the Christians, and
both together massacred the poor religious men of Bangor, and flew no less
then 1200. of them: The same Ethelfred assisted by the petty English Kings to
despite the Christians inhabiting the Country, removed the Archiepisopall
seat from London, and translated it to Canterbury, where ordinarily he made
his residence. Now the principal difference between the Christians and the
Romish faction was about the day of Easter, the single life of Priests, and the
Church-musique processions and Letany after the order of Rome: consider further
that some of the people were Pelagians, for there was no speech then of
transubstantiation, nor of the Popes grand Pardons and indulgences, nor of the
Sacrament under one kind, nor of such heresies as were hatched in the after
ages: Whereof we have sundry witnesses, as Amandus Zirixensis in his his
Chronicle. Beda in the second book of his Ecclesiastical History of England:
Mantuan in fastis, and Polydore Virgill: Mantuanus. Add quod and Patres ausi
taxare Latinos. Causabantur eos stulte, imprudentur and aequo Durius ad ritum
Romae voluisse Britannos cogere etc.
but especially observe the words of Geffery of Monmouth in his eight book de
Britannorum gestis. In patria Britonum adhuc vigebat Christianitas quae ab
Apostolorum tempore nunq tam inter eos defece rat. Post quam autem venit
Augustinus, etc.
In the Country of the Brittanes Christian Religion flourished, which never
failed among them from the time of the Apostles. For Austen being arrived
there, found seven Bishoprics and an Archbishopricke in their Province, all
furnished with very religious Prelates, and Abbots, men that lived by the
labor of their hands.

The King of England produces also the Statute of Richard the second King of
England, by which all Englishmen were forbidden to hold, or sue for any
Benefice from the Pope, which was in the height of the Popes usurpation: and
this as the greatest part of the book does Coeffeteau pass by, being content
to scratch where he cannot bite.

CHAP. VIII. That they which have written against the King of great Britains
book, do unjustly call him Apostata and Heretic.
OUR Adversaries are as open-handed in bestowing titles upon us, as they are
niggardly in giving any reason of their doings. Bellarmines book under the
name of Tortus, says, that the King of great Britain is no Catholic; but
shows neither in what sense, nor for what reason: and as unjustly does he call
him an Apostata: for an Apostata is one, that having followed does again does
forsake the true Religion. Now his Majesty of England has not forsaken the
true Religion, inasmuch as he still maintains the same: and should his
Religion be as heretical, as it is sound and holy, yet could he not be called
an Apostata, because he never professed any other Religion. He that has
always done evil, is not a backeslider from virtue: and no man can forsake
that which he never had. Now grant that he had been baptized in the Church
of Rome, yet it follows not, that he therefore received their faith that
baptized him; for the Church of Rome conferring any thing upon him that is
good, binds him not to follow her in that which is evil.

But because it may be presumed, that the Queen his mother being of the Church
of Rome, might have given him some impressions of that Religion, his Majesty
therefore meets therewith, and testifies, that she adhaered not to the
grosser superstitions of Popery; and that in the christening of the King her
son, she charged the Archbishop that baptized him, not to use any spittle in
the Ceremonies, saying, that she would not have a rotten and pocky Priest to
spit in her childs mouth; that at her entreaty the late Queen ELIZABETH, who
was an enemy of Popery, was his God-mother, and christened him by her
Ambassador; that she never urged him by any letters to adhaere to Popery; that
even her last words before her death, were, that howbeit she were of a diverse
Religion, yet she would not press him to change the Religion he professed,
unless he found himself moved thereunto in his conscience: that if he led
an honest, and a holy life, if he did carefully administer justice, and did
wisely and religiously govern the people committed to his care, she made then
no question, but he might, and ought to persevere in his own Religion. By
these Demonstrations does his Majesty of England prove, that this great
Princess had no sinister opinion of our religion.

Hereunto Mr. Coeffeteau says, he will give credit for the respect he
bears unto the King, although it will with great difficulty be generally
persuaded that some Princes allied unto his Majesty, could show some letters
to the contrary. Which is as much to say, that although that which the King
says be false, yet to do him a pleasure, he will believe it, and so gives him
the lie very mannerly; as if he should spit in his face, doing him reverence:
like the Jews that cried all hail to our Savior, when they buffeted him: His
Encounter should have had some coulerable matter at the least: for what can
argue more weakness in him, then to mention letters that no man ever saw? Or
what strength has it to weaken the testimony of a King concerning his own
mother? For to whom should she have opened her mind more familiarly then to
her son? Or what words are more serious, or more vndissemblingly spoken,
then such as are the last that dying persons do utter? For then does the hand
of necessity pull off the mask from the deepest dissemblers: then is it no
time to hide themselves from men, when they must m^ke their appeara^ce before
God. But especially she then speaking to her only son, with whom to have
dissembled, had been a most injurious dissimulation, and an unnatural skill:
which if it be blameable in a mother in any part of her life, how much more at
the time of her death?

His Majesty of England being thus cleared from the crime of Apostasy, he
does likewise acquit himself from the imputation of heresy, which is the
ordinary wrong they do him. The word Heresy signifies a Sect, by which name
the Christian Religion was in ancient time traduced: for so the Jews speak
to the Apostle S. Paul in the last of the Acts, (...); For as concerning this
Sect, or heresy, We know that it is every where spoken against. And his
Majesty of England may very rightly say with the same Apostle, cap. 24. verse.
4. This I confess, that after the way (...), which they call Heresy; I worship
the God of my fathers, believing all things which are written in the law and
the Prophets. After which phrase of speech Tertullian and Cyprian do call the
Christian religion a Sect, Tertul: de Pallio c. 6. Denique etiam diuinae sectae
ac disciplinae commercium pallio conferri Cyprianus, l 4. Epist. 5.
or heresy. In this sense therefore are we heretics and Sectaries; since that
now-a-dayes to acknowledge no other Mediator then Jesus Christ, nor any
expiation but by his blood, or any propitiatory sacrifice, but his death, nor
any satisfaction of Gods justice but by his obedience, nor any rule to guide us
to salvation, but his Word contained in the holy Scriptures, is accounted
heresy.

But more clearly to purge himself of this crime, his Majesty of England,
following the commaundent of the Apostle S. Peter, which is, to be always
ready to yield an account of the hope that is in us, does set down at large a
confession of his faith agreeable to the holy Scripture, and al uncorrupted
antiquity. Who shall henceforward be ashamed to confess the name of God, or
defend the truth of the Gospel, being thus ensampled by a mighty King? but
this confession conceived in choice, and significant words, full of evidence
and of power, does worthily challenge a several Discourse. And besides it is
that against which Coeffeteau does principally discharge his choler.

THE DEFENSE OF THE CONFESSION Of the Faith, of JAMES the first, King of Great
BRITAIN. THE SECOND BOOK.
ARTICLE I. Touching the Creed.
The KINGS Confession.
I Am such a Catholic Christian, as believes the three Creedes, That of the
Apostles, that of the Council of Nice and that of Athanasius, the two latter
being Paraphrases to the former: And I believe them in that sense, as the
Ancient Fathers and Councels that made them did understand them. To which
three Creedes all the Ministers of England do subscribe at their Ordination.
And I also acknowledge for Orthodoxe all those other forms of Creedes, that
either were devised by Councels or particular. Fathers, against such Heresies
as most reigned in their times.

To this Article Coeffeteau finds nothing to reply, and holding his peace
thereupon, he justifies us by his silence.

ARTICLE II. Touching the Fathers in general.
AS for the Fathers, I reverence them as much and more then the Jesuits do,
The KINGS Confession.
and as much as themselves ever craved. For what ever the Fathers for the first
five hundred years did with an vna^ime consent agree upon, to be believed as a
necessary point of salvation, I either will believe it also, or at least will
be humbly silent, not taking upon me to condemn the same.

Here again Coeffeteau is silent, and knows not what to reprehend. The
Reader may please to call to mind that the points in which his Majesty of
England does abstain to condemn the Fathers, albeit his belief is not bound
to follow them, are either points not necessary to salvation, or opinions in
which as well our Church as the Church of Rome does condemn them. The
Ancients for the most part held that the fall of the Devils came to pass by
reason of their cohabitation with women. This is altogether false and a point
little important to our salvation: They held also for the most part, that the
souls shall all be purged by the fire of the last judgment, in the
expectation of which day, the souls as well of the good as of the bad, are
shut up in certain receptacles. And in this point they are neither followed by
us nor by our Adversaries.

ARTICLE III. Touching the Authority of the Fathers in particular.
The KINGS Confession.
But for every private Fathers opinion, it binds not my conscience more then
Bellarmines; every on of the Fathers usually contradicting others, I will
therefore in that case follow S. Lib. 2. cont. Cresconium cap. 32.
Augustines rule in judging of their opinions, as I find them agree with the
Scriptures: what I find agreeable thereunto I will gladly embrace: what is
otherwise I will (with their reverence) reject.

Doctor Coeffeteau does yet approve of all this for good, seeing he says
nothing to the contrary. He acknowledges then that the Fathers often disagree
among themselves, and that they do not always accord with the word of God,
neither must we settle our selves always upon what some one Father has
taught. Causa 12. Quaest. 1. Canon Dilectissimi. Denique quidam Graecorum
sapientissimus, haec ita sciens esse colam, debeatur ait Amicorum comia esse
omnia In omnibus autem sunt sine du bio and Coniuges.
And indeed his Majesty of England says this with just reason: for not we
alone, but also the Church of Rome does not allow the opinion of Pope Clement
the first, who would that men's goods and their wives should be common among
Christians. Neither does the Church of Rome approve the opinion of Ignatius who
in the Epistle to the Philippians, says, that to fast on the Saturday or on
the Sunday, it is to be a murderer of Jesus Christ: nor the doctrine of Justin
Martyr, who says in his Dialogue against Tryphon, That God in the beginning
gave the Sun to be adored. Nor the opinion of Athanagoras in his Apology,
that (...). That second marriage is but a handsome Kind exercise of Adultery.
Also the Church of Rome does not believe with Origin, that the Devils shall be
saved: Nor with Clemens Alexandrinus in the sixth book of his Stromata, that
the Greeks were saved by their Philosophy. Nor with Arnobius in his second
book, that God is not the Creator of souls: And that the souls of the wicked
are reduced to nothing. Nor with Ireneus, Lib. 2. cap. 63.64
that the souls separated from the body have feet and hands. Justin was a
Chiliast; Tertullian a Montanist; S. Cyprian an Anabaptist. Saint Hilary in his
tenth book of the Trinity, mayntaineth in diverse places, Virtus corporis, sine
sensu paenae, vim paenae in se desaeuientis excepit. Christus cum cibu^ and
potum accepit, non necessitati corporis sed consuetudmi tribuet. Secundam
ducere, secundum praeceptumo Apostoli licitum est, ecundum autem veritatis
rationem vere fornicatio est. He says the same about the end of his book, De
fide and Symholo.
that Jesus Christ in his death suffered no pain. And that he did not eat
because his body had need of sustenance, but only by custom. Chrysostom
alleged in the Canon, Hac Ratione, in the Cause 31. Question 1. he says that
S. Paul commanding second marriages, has spoken against truth and reason, and
that is truly fornication. Saint Austin in his fifth book of his
Hypognosticks, and in his Epistles 93. and 106. held that the Eucharist is
necessary for young children newly borne, that they may be saved. And in his
book De Dogmatis. Eccles. cap. 11. He says, that the Angels are Corporeal and
in his book of the Christian combat, cap. 32. he says that our bodies after
the Resurrection shall be no longer flesh nor blood, but an heavenly body.
Gregory of Nyssa, in his first Sermon of the resurrection, teaches a
prodigious error; namely, that the soul of Jesus Christ was already in the
grave, even then whiles he celebrated the Eucharist, and that his body was
already dead. Lactantius in his fourth book and fourteenth Chapter does
formally deny the Divinity of Jesus Christ: and in his seventh book and one
and twenty chapter, he says that the souls of men, as well good as bad, In
vna communique custodia detinentur, are detained in one common prison. Saint
Gregory Nazianzen in his Sermon of Baptism, wills, that unless it be in
case of urgent necessity, the Baptism of young children be deferred until
such time as they may be capable to answer, and to yield account of their
faith. Himself in his Epitaph upon Basil, does prefer him before Enoch,
Contemninus. n. Phegor and omnem ignominiam eius; scientes quod qui in carne
sunt, non possunt placere Deo
and compares him to Abraham. Saint Jerome in his first book against
Iouinian, often calls marriage an unchaste state of life, and an ignominy, and
that the fruit of it is death; and that a woman that does marry the second
time, ought not to participate of the Alms, no nor of the body of the Lord.
The Church of Rome does no longer believe the Purgatory of Gregory the first,
which he places sometimes in Bathes, sometimes in the wind, sometime in the
water. Nor the opinion of Honorius Bishop of Rome, who was a Monothelite: the
Epistles whereof are inserted in the fifth and sixth general Councels. For all
these good servants of God were subject to mistaking, and had their faults and
vices like warts in a fair face; to the end that in reading them a man should
have always in his hand the Compass of the holy Scripture, and the rule of
the word of God. And that a man should believe that which they have well said,
not because they have said it, but because it is found in the word of God: if
they err in any thing, Antiquity cannot authorize an error. There can be no
prescription against the truth. And a time there was when these Fathers were no
Fathers; and before they wrote, the Christians were ruled by the word of God.

As touching that which the King of great Britain says, that they do
contradict one another: the verification of it is easy. For every man knows
the contentions between Chrysostom and Epiphanius; the Disputes between
Cyrill and Theodoret; the sharp Epistles, and full of gall of Saint Jerome to
Saint Austin. And S. Austin speaks far otherwise of Free Will, of
Predestination, and of the gift of Perseverance, then all the Greek Fathers of
his age. He that will have a clear mirror of this their discord, let him
compare the Commentaries of S. Austin upon the Psalms, with those of Saint
Jerome, and he shall scarcely find them to agree in two verses together.

It is then with very just reason that Coeffeteau does grant this to the King
of great Britain, and does acknowledge the faults and contradictions of the
ancients, whom notwithstanding we ought to love and honor as great lights in
their times, and worthy servants of God, who having combatted Heresies in their
life time, do yet beat down Popery after their deaths.

For we maintain, against whosoever he be, that in the four first ages (and
yet we might descend much lower) there shall not be found out any one man who
has had a Religion not so much as approaching to that of the Romish Church
now-a-dayes. And in this challenge I will lay down my Ministers cloak, ready
to be frocked and cladde in a Monks-coule, if I shall find a man that will
satisfy me in this point.

And to the end to express my self more clearly, I say, that between us and
our adversaries, there be two kinds of Controversies: for some there be upon
which they are wont to produce some passages for proofs. But either they be
quotations altogether false, or maimed and curtalled, or of no use to prove the
point in question, or else places taken contrary to the authors meaning. Yet
being a thing ordinary with these Messieus to put the ancient Fathers upon the
rack to make them speak in favor of an untruth. Such is the question of
transubstantiation, of praying for the dead, or Purgatory, and of the Sacrifice
of the Mass. But there are other Controversies no less important, and more in
number: In which they are clean destitute of all authority of the ancient
Church; and upon which being interrogated, they answer besides the matter. For
changing the question, they endeavor to prove that which is not demanded of
them. See here some examples:

1. They cannot show that any ancient Church did celebrate the eucharist
without communicants as it is done ordinarily in the Church of Rome, yea and
sometimes also without any assistants. 2. They cannot show that any ancient
Church has excluded that people from the communion of the cup or chalice. 3.
Or that in any ancient Church, the public service was done in a language not
understood of the people. 4 Or that any ancient Church has hindered the people
from reading the holy Scripture. As it is no way permitted in those Countries
where the Pope is absolutely obeyed, without special privilege. 5. Or that in
any ancient Church they have made Images of God, and representations of the
Trinity in stone or in picture. 6. Also they cannot prove unto us that in any
ancient Church the people has been instructed to pray without understanding
that which they say, speaking in a tongue not understood of himself that
prays. 7. Or that any ancient Church did yield worship or religious service
to the Images of creatures, kissing them, decking them with robes, kneeling
before them, and presenting them gifts and offerings, etc. 8. Or that the
ancient Church has believed, that the Virgin Mary is crowned Queen of the
heavens, and Lady of the world, as this is painted throughout all their
Churches. 9. Or that the ancient Church has given to the Saints diverse
charges, as to one the command ever such a country; to another the cure over
such a malady, to a third to be Patron over such a trade and mystery. 10. Or
that the ancient Church has believed that the Pope can give and take away
Kingdoms. And dispense with subjects for the oath of their allegiance. Can
canonize Saints, and dispense with Vows and promises solemnly made to God,
etc. 11. Or that in the ancient Church the Pope by his pardons did distribute
supererogatory satisfactions of the Saints, for the remission of pain and
punishment of other men's sins. 12. Or that the Pope did then place his
pardons in one Church and not in another; In one Town and not in another, and
that sometimes for an hundred, and two hundred thousand years of pardon. 13.
Or that the ancient Church has believed the Limb of little children. 14. Or
that the ancient Church has adored the host, which the Priest holds up,
with the worship of Latria, which is done to God alone. And to this end the
Priest has caused the Elevation of the Host to be used at the Mass. 15. Or
that the ancient Church has held the books of Machabees for Canonical. 16.
Or that the ancient Church has believed that the Bishop of Rome cannot err
in faith. 17. Or that the ancient Church has believed, that Jesus Christ by
his death and sufferinges did clearly discharge us of the pain and punishment
of the sins that went before baptism. But as touching the pain of the
sins committed after baptism, he has only changed it from eternal to
temporal, and that it lies in us to satisfy the justice of God for the same,
which is indeed the most important point of all Christian religion.
For he that would descend to smaller things and demand of Coeffeteau, if in
any of the ancients there be mention made of Jubilees, of Agnus Dei, or holy
Grains, consecrated Medals, of Cordelier-Friars, or Iacobins, or Jesuits, and
an infinite sort of religions and new devotions I believe he would find
himself terribly puzzled. In all this as in those other seauenteene points
before handled, they receive not the Fathers for Judges. Those ancient Doctors
were not yet arrived to any so high point of learning: But these messieurs our
masters supply and support their ignorance in these matters. In other
controversies they admit and receive the Fathers for Judges, but with this
caution and condition that themselves may be Judges of the Fathers. They allow
the ancients to be interpreters of the Scriptures; But themselves will be the
interpreters of the ancients, to the end to make them speak things contrary
to the Scriptures.

ARTICLE IIII. Touching the authority of the holy Scriptures.
The KINGS Confession.
I Think also that no man doubts but that I settle my faith and belief upon
the holy Scriptures, according to the duty of a Christian.

Hereat Coeffeteau holds his peace, and by his silence approves the
confession of the King of England. For he does not allow of the blasphemies
which his companions disgorge against the sacred books of the word of God. He
has not dared to say with Bellarmine, Bellar. lib. 4. de verbo non scripto
cap. 12.. Respondeo Scripturae finem propriu^ and praecipuum no^ esse vt esset
Regula Fidei. Dico secundo Scripturam esseregulam Fidei no^ totalem sed
partialem.
that the Scripture is but a piece of a Rule, and not the whole entire Rule of
faith. And that it was not properly made to be the Rule of our faith. It may
be also that he does not approve of Bellarmines saying, who in his fourth
Chapter of the fourth Book of the word not written says, Quarto. Necesse
nosse extare aliquos libros vere divines, quod certe ex sacris Scripturis
haheri nullo modo possunt, etc.
that a man cannot know by the testimony of the Scripture, that there be any
books of divine inspiration (albeit the Scripture does say it) and his reason
is, Because we read as well in the Alcoran of Mahomet, that the Alcoran was
sent from heaven. It may be also that Coeffeteau has not dared in this place
to use the terms of Doctor Charron in his book called La troisiesme verite,
where he says that the Scripture is a Forest to forage in, where Atheists
lie in ambushments, and that by reading it a man becomes an Atheist. Thou
beleeuest, says he, because thou read so, thou art not then a Christian.

It is clear then that his Majesty of England does yield a thousand times more
respect to the holy Scriptures then the Church of Rome, or the Council of
Trent, which ordains in the fourth Session, that Traditions be received with
like affection of piety and reverence, with the holy Scripture, equalling men's
Traditions with Gods divine ordinances. For the Pope has letters of credit.
And we must presuppose that besides the New Testament Jesus Christ has made a
Codicill or little book which the Pope has in his private custody, whence he
draws the ordinances that are not contained in the Scripture.

Yet this is but little. For Bellarmine goes farther and says that, Sunt
quaedam Traditiones maiores quod ad obligationem, quam quaedam Scripturae. That
there are some traditions greater in respect of obligation, then some parts of
Scripture. That is to say, to which we are more bound to adhere. Having good
hope that in the end we shall see God to become Disciple to the Bishop of Rome.

ART. V. Touching the Canonical and Apocryphal books of Scripture.
The KINGS Confession. In exposit Symboli.
But even for the Apocrypha; I hold them in the same account that the Ancients
did. They are still printed and bound with our Bibles, and publicly read in
our Churches. I reverence them as the writings of holy and good men: but since
they are not found in the Canon, we account them to be secundae lectionis, or
ordinis ( which is Bellarmines own distinction) and therefore not sufficient
whereupon alone to ground any article of faith, except it be confirmed by some
other place of Canonical Scripture; Concluding this point with Ruffinus (who
is no Nouelist, I hope) that the Apocryphal books were by the Fathers
permitted to be read; not for confirmation of Doctrine, but only for
instruction of the people.

Here Coeffeteau begins to put himself into the field, In exposit. Symb.
we expected him long ago. He brings only two testimonies of the ancients,
and they are both false, howbeit not through his fault, for the falsification
was made by others before him; The first testimony is of S. Austen in his
second book of Christian Doctrine cap. 8. where he makes an enumeration of
the Canonical books almost agreeably to the Council of Trent. To this
testimony he adioyneth the third Council of Carthage, which also puts
Judith, Tobie, the book of Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, and the Machabees, among
the Canonical books. He says that it is not just nor fit to allege the
opinions of particulars, where question is of the public faith testified and
avouched by this Council.

In saying so little as this he spends three leaves, S. Austin who is but one
particular. If he say, that S. Austin does but report that which was the common
belief? I answer that those particular witnesses whom he rejects do report
the same also. Again, Tenebit hunc modum in Scripturis Canonicis, vt eas quae
ab om nibus recipiuntu, Ecclesijs Catholicis, praeponat eis quas quaedam non
accipiunt.
it is false that S. Austen does relate the common belief, for a little before
he had said, that there are some books among the Canonical, which were not
received for such, of all the Churches. Moreover, Coeffeteau hereby
contradicts the Church of Rome, who does not hold the Councels of Carthage
for general Councels, nor their Canons for the public belief of the
universal Church.

1. To clear this matter then, the Reader shall observe first, that these
books, to wit, Tobie, Judith, the book of Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, the
Machabees, they are not found in the Hebrew tongue, and consequently they are
not in the original of the old Testament, wherein there are but two and twenty
books. 2. Secondly, we ought also to know that the Church of the old Testament
never acknowledged these books, nor received into the Church, See Eusebius,
lib. 8. of his Story, cap. 10
as witnesses Josephus in his first book against Appion. 3. Thirdly, it is
also very considerable that Jesus Christ, nor his Apostles, who alleged upon
every purpose Texts and passages out of the old Testament, never named any of
those books, nor never drew quotation out of any of them. 4. Fourthly, the
chief and principal is, that in these books there be many faults, as well in
the Doctrine as in the Story, whereof In my book entitled the waters of
Siloe, cap. 6.
we have elsewhere produced many proofs. But let us hear the testimony of the
ancients.
S. Hierome in his preface upon the books of Solomon, speaks of
Ecclesiasticus and of the wisdom of Solomon; Sicut ergo Judith and Tobie and
Machabaeorum, libros legit quide^ Ecclesia, sed eos inter Canonicas Scripturas
no^ recipit, Sic and haec duo volumina legate ad aedificationem pl^bis, non ad
authoritatem Christianorum dogmatum confirmandam.
As then the Church does read indeed, the books of Judith, of Tobie, and the
Machabees, but does not receive them among the Canonical Scriptures, so let it
also read these two volumes for the edification of the people, but not to
confirm the faith of the Church. He says the same in his Prologus Galcatus,
and mark by the way, that he says that it is the belief of the Church.

Sciendum tamen est quod and alij libri sunt qui non Canonici sed Ecclesiastici
a maioribus appellati sunt. vt est Sapie^tia Solomonis Ecclesiasticus, libellus
Tobiae Judith and macabaeo rum^libri. -- quae omnia legi quidem in Ecclesiis
voluerunt, non tamen proferri ad authoritatem ex his fidei confirmandam.
Praeter istos sunt ad^uc alij eius them veteris instrumenti libri non Cononici,
qui Catechumenis tantum leguntur Sapientia Solomonis etc.
Amongst the works of S. Cyprian, there is a Treatise (which seems rather to
be the work of Ruffinus) touching the exposition of the Creed. There he
reckons up the books of the old and the new Testament. Then he adds: *
These are then the books which the Fathers have included in the Cannon or
Rule, and from which are drawn the proofs of our faith. Notwithstanding we
must know that there are other books which the ancients have not called
Canonical, but Ecclesiastical books, as is the wisdom of Solomon,
Ecclesiasticus, Tobie, Judith, and the books of the Machabees* Then he adds.
All which they would should be read in the Church, but that they should not be
produced to confirm the authority of the faith.

S. Athanasius in his book entitled Synopsis, names all the books of the old
Testament according to the Hebrew Bible. Then he adds: Besides these, there
are yet other books of the old Testament not Canonical, which are not read
but to the Catechumeni or Nouices, newly taught and catechized, such are the
wisdom of Solomon, the wisdom of Jesus, the Son of Syrach, Judith, Tobit,
etc.

Melito Bishop of Sardi, as witnesses Eusebius in his fourth book of his
History and the five and twentieth Chapter; Origin in Eusebius sixth book and
four and twentieth chapter: S. Hilary in his Preface upon the Psalter: S.
Gregory Nazianzen in his verses of the holy Scripture: Eusebius, lib. 3. of his
story, cap. 10. Epiphanius in his book of measures: Damascene himself, though
long after, in his fourth book of the Orthodoxe faith, cap. 18. And diverse
other Fathers make an enumeration of the books of the old Testament: and yet
do they not put in neither Judith nor Tobite, nor Ecclesiasticus, nor the book
of Wisdom* nor the Maccabees; But rather all with one consent and accord
say, that there are but two and twenty books in the old Testament, as many as
there be letters in the Hebrew Alphabet.

And yet further to convince Coeffeteau, let us hear the very judgment of him
whom they most honor of all the Popes: And this is Gregory the first, in his
twenty six book of morals upon Job, cap. 29. where being desirous to allege
the book of Maccabees in the fact of Eleazar, he excuses himself in these
words: Of which thing we speak not out of reason, Qua de re non inordinate
agimus si ex libris and si non Canonicis, sed ad Ecclesiae aedificationem
scriptis testimonia proferimus.
if we produce the testimonies of books not Canonical, but written for the
edification of the Church. This ought to suffice to represent what was the
heleefe of particular men, who being assembled together are equivalent to a
generallity. Howbeit for the more store and the better supply, let us hear the
Councels.

The Council of Laodicea, which was almost about the same time, with the first
Nicene Council, sets over the last Canon, this inscription (...). That is
to say, How many books there be of the old Testament that men ought to read.
Then it reckons up the number of them as far as two and twenty, Genesis,
Exodus, Leuiticus, Numbers, Deuteronomie, Joshua, Judges, Ruth, Hester, the
Kings or Samuel, two books; of Kings two books; Paralipomena or the
Chronicles, Esdras, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles, Job, the twelve
Prophets, Esaias, Jeremy Baruch, or the Lamentations and Epistles, Ezechiel,
Daniel. But of Tobie or Judith, or the Maccabees, etc. there is no news. Above
all it is a thing to be be noted, that this Council of Laodicea is confirmed
by the sixth general Council: (...).
at the end of which Council, the Fathers assembled together in the Palace,
made one hundred and three Canons, in the second of which it is said, We do
confirm and ratify the sacred Canons, made by our holy Fathers at Laodicea of
Phrygia. And this was now in the year of Jesus Christ, 684.

I add the fourth Council of Carthage, which in the Tomes of the Latin
Councels, which are horribly mangled and falsified, has been very ill
handled. For we have not these Councels in Latin, but by the means of the
Church of Rome, who has delivered them unto us, such as she would her self.
But she has not had that power over the Greek Coppies, where there is no
speech at all of the Maccabees. Read the Greek Canons of the Councels,
printed at Paris in the year 1540. with a Praeface of John du Tillet, and the
Canons of Balsamon, and you shall find that which I say to be true But
Coeffeteau being content to write, as Hunters break their Fast, that is,
tumultuarily and in have, has not had this curiosity.

It remains to examine the place of S. Austin, of which every one that has a
quick smell, will acknowledge the corruption and falsification: First of all,
because it is not credible that this holy Personage would oppose himself
single to the whole Church of his time, and to all the Doctors that went before
him, and namely to the Council of Carthage, whereat himself had been a
present assistant. Secondly, because it is not credible that S. Austin would
contradict himself: for in the six and thirty Chapter of the eighteenth book
of the City of God, he speaks thus: The supputation of these times (since
the building up of the Temple) is not found in the holy Scriptures, which are
called Canonical, but in other books, among which are the Maccabees. Is it
possible to say in more plain and express terms, that the Maccabees are not
holy Scriptures nor Canonical books? But here we admire a pretty pleasant
folly and stupidity of a tail handsomely fastened and sowed on by some Monk:
for after all this, they make S. Austin to add, Which books not the Jews,
but the Church boldeth for Canonical O gross Imposture! After that he had
simply set down that the Maccabees are not holy nor Canonical Scriptures,
would he say that the Church receives them for Canonical? By the same
fraud, this other place of S. Austin which Coeffeteau alleges, has been
falsified. Let us add hereunto that S. Austin, cap. 23. of his second book
against Gaudentius, answers thus unto Gaudentius, who served himself with
the example of Razis, who killed himself, whereof mention is made in the
second book of the Maccabees. The Jews do not hold this book in the same
rank with the law, the Prophets, and the Psalms to which Jesus Christ
bears witness, is they that bear record of him. But this book is received
by the Church, not unprofitably, if men read it soberly: principally because of
the sufferings of certain Martyrs. Who feeth not that he does weaken the
authority of these books, in that Jesus Christ does give no testimony unto
them? And if these books have not been reckoned for holy Scripture, amongst
the faithful of the old Testament, I marvel when they became holy Scripture?

It is also a point very considerable, that in this place of S. Austin produced
by Coeffeteau, Ecclesiasticus is put among the Canonical books; in which
book it is said, cap. 46. Samuel prophesied after his death, and declared unto
King Saul his death, lifting up his voice out of earth. An opinion which S.
Austin does condemn in his book of Questions on the old Testament, in the 27
Question, saying, Porro autem hoc esi praestigium Satanae quo vt plurimos
fallat etiam bonos se in potestate habere confingit.
that it is a great indignity to believe it, and maintains that it was an
illusion of Satan, who to deceive many, faineth to have good men in his power.
And in his book of the care that men ought to have of the dead: after having
spoken doubtfully, he says, that men Huic libro ex Hebraeorum Canone, quia ^n
eo non est, contradic^tur.
control the book of Ecclesiasticus, because it is not in the Canon of the
Hebrews. And in his book of the eight Questions to Dulichius, Quaest. 6. he
canuasseth this Question by way of Problem, leaning notwithstanding to the
opinion, that it was a mere fantasme or vain apparition. See hereupon the
Canon Nec mirum in the Cause 26. Quest 6. where also S Austin is alleged;
maintayning that this was done by enchantment: Whence I conclude, Caietan. in
fin-Commenta^oru^ ad Historiam vet. Test. Ne turberis, No uities si alicubi
reperis libros istos inter Canonicos supputari, vel in Sacris Con cilijs vel in
Sacris Doctoribus, Non. n^sunt Canonici, id est, regalares ad probandum ea quae
sunt fidei, possunt tamen Canonici dici ad aedificationem fidelium.
that S. Austin should contradict himself, if after having refuted the opinion
of Ecclesiasticus, he should afterward put him in the role of the Canonical
books.

These falsehoods having not been acknowledged by Cardinal Caietan drove him
to find out another evasion. Be not astonished or troubled, O thou who art but
a Nouice in Divinity, if sometimes thou find either in the Councels or in the
Doctors, these books to be counted among the Canonical. For they are not
Canonical to prove the points of faith; Notwithstanding they may be called
Canonical for the edification of the faithful.

ARTICLE VI. Touching the memory of Saints and of their Feasts and holy days.
AS for the Saints departed; I honor their memory, The KINGS Confession.
and in honor of them do we in our Church observe the days of so many of
them, as the Scripture does Canonize for Saints; but I am loath to believe all
the tales of the Legended Saints.

Here Coeffeteau begins to skirmish without need. Fol 13.
He complayneth for that the King speaks only of solemnizing the memory of
those Saints of whom mention is made in the Scripture. He says that the Church
of Smyrna did celebrate the feast of the Martyrdom of Polycarp. That Basil did
recommend the Feasts of S. Iulitta, and of the forty Martyrs. That Gregory
Nazianzene did solemnize with the other Christians the Feast of S. Cyprian and
S. Gregory of Nissa that of the Martyr Theodore: That Cyprian commanded that
they should mark out the days of the Passion of the Martyrs, to the end that
they mighcelebrate their memories. That S. Austins twentieth book against
Faustus Manicheus, cap. 21. says that the Christian people did celebrate the
memories of the Martyrs: And yet that S. Polycarpe, S. Iulitta, etc. are no
Saints, of whom there is any mention in the Scripture. He adds
notwithstanding that the Church of England is in that, less irreligious then
the Caluinists of France, who have cut off all sorts of holy days of Saints,
as well Apostles as others. As touching the Legends, We are, says he, no more
credulous of them then you. He says he does not receive miracles, unless they
be approved by the public testimony of the Church: and that even in the first
ages they suggested and foysted in, false acts of Martyrs.

These passages which he alleges are in part false, partly they are of no
use to prove the Question. Let us begin with the falsehood.

First in alleging out of Eusebius the example of the Church of Smyrna, who
buried the bones of Polycarpe with honor, and celebrated his memory
Anniuersarily every year, there is no mention made of his Feast or Holy Day,
but only of a day dedicated to the commemoration of his Martyrdom; Ignorantes
nos Christu^nunquam relinquere, qui pro totius seruan dorum mundi salute passus
est, nec alium quenquam colere posse. Nam hunc quidem tanqua^ filium Dei
adoramus, Martyrs vero tanquam discipulos and immitatores Domini diligimus.
which thing was done without any precise necessity of making it holy day.

Secondly, he does maliciously dissemble the excellent words which go before,
where the Church of Smyrnaspeaketh in this manner: They are ignorant that we
never leave Christ, who died for the salvation of them of the world, who are to
be saved, and that we can yield service to none other but to him: For him we
adore as the son of God, but we love the Martyrs as his Disciples and
imitators. Words which show to what end, and in what manner the Smyrnians
honored the memory of Polycarpe.

So is it also falfe that S. Basil recommendeth the Feasts of S. Iulitta and
the forty Martyrs, for in those two Homilies there is no speech at all of
Feasts.

But the falfest piece that he produces is the Oration of Gregory Nyssene in
praise of the Martyr Theodore, which was ridiculously framed by some Greek
Monk, in the time that the Scythians, otherwise called the Huns and Tartars
ouer-ran Galatia, Cappadocia, and Armenia; which In Rhodes began in the year
520 as both Cedrenus and Zonaras teach. Cedrenus in Anastasio, Ann. 23. (...).
For about the end of this Oration the Author entreats this Martyr to
defend his Country against he incursions of the Scythians: of which there was
never word spoken in the time of Gregory Nyssene: for they fell out about one
hundred and twenty years after. The whole story also of this Martyr is
euedently fabulous. The Author says that he was of Jobs Country, and
consequently an Arabian, whereas Theodorus is a Greek name. Within a little
while after, contradicting himself, he says that he suffered at Amasia, a
City of Cappadocia, and that the place of his death was also his Country. He
says that he was a Soldier in the Roman bands: But at that time (to wit,
under Dioclesian and Maximinian) the Romans did not entertain the Arabians in
service. Moreover the Story of his Martyrdom is plainly fabulous. Being
interrogated and examined by his Paynim Judges, with all gentleness and
mildenes, he answered at the first day with injurious speeches, comparing the
Godddesse whom they served to an hare, or to a sow. All this notwithstanding
the Judges sent him away, and gave him time to bethink himself advisedly; he
in stead of retracting any thing, set fire on the great Temple of the mother of
the Gods: and being called for, again by the Judges, confessed the fact:
thereupon the Judges flatter him even so far, as to promise to this simple
soldier (which was a ridiculous thing) to make him Bishop. But this Theodore
burst out a laughing for a long time together, mocking for that the Emperors
took upon them the title and purple of Bishops. The Angels singe melodiously
with him in prison, and lighten all the Town over with Torches. But he that
knows how under Dioclesian they burnt whole Christian Towns without any
form of process; and that this monster made a butchery, a slaughter and
channell-house of the whole Empire, will acknowledge the falsehood of this
Story, which has been forged by some worshipper of Images and Relics about
the time of the second Council of Nice.

I put not in among his falsifications, that Coeffeteau has put in the margent
the eighteenth Oration of Nazianzene for the fifteenth: he that borrows his
Allegations, and writes upon trust, is easily deceived.

Now to his falsehoods let us add the unprofitableness of his impertinent
quotations, which surely do not touch the Question: For if the Church of
Smyrna did celebrate the feast of Polycarpe, or the Church of Caesaria that of
S. Iulitta: what is that to England, who did no more then, then nowadayes it
does celebrate those Feasts, no more then do the Churches of Spain or of
France? And why should England be more bound thereunto now at this day?

Secondly, to what purpose is it, to speak of the Feasts of the ancient
Christians, and of the solemnity of the Martyrs; to establish the Feasts of the
Church of Rome, which are clean different, and have no community with them.
See here the differences.

1 This commemoration of the Martyrs in the ancient Church, was done in the
Churchyards and upon the Tombs: Upon which the Christians did often celebrate
Thence comes the custom of the Church of Rome to have bones hid under the
Altar. Nonne vides ad memorias Martyrum, Cristianu^ a Christiano cogi ad
ebrietatem?
the Eucharist, and then fell to banquet upon the same Tombs, where oftentimes
the Christians committed many abuses and excesses, even so far as to drink
drunk, and to bury their reason upon those Sepulchers, as witnesses the
Author of the book of Double Martyrdom, attributed to S. Cyprian; and S.
Austin in his first book of the manners of the Catholic Church, cap. 34. And
against Qui in memorijs Martyrum inebriantur, etc.
Faustus Manicheus, in his twentieth book, chap. 1. where namely he says,
that he was constrained to tolerate this custom. The Church of Rome has left
this abuse of the ancient Feasts. 2 The commemoration of the Martyrs was done
in times past, in every Church according to the ordinance and appointment of
the Bishops and Pastors of the place, without attending the commandment or
advise of the Bishop of Rome thereupon, In the book of the holy Ceremonies,
lib. 1. Sect. 6.
who at that time did not Canonize Saints. For now-adayes to be held a Saint, a
man must have the Pope to be favorable unto him, and his cause must be
pleaded in the Consistory: If it be judged that he ought to be acknowledged
for a Saint, then his Holiness does ordain a Feast or Holy Day to this new
Saint. 3 Then this solemnity carried with it an Anniuersary commemoration, but
did not bring with it any necessity of keeping Holy Day; whereas now-adayes
there be many Saints Feasts which they keep Holy Day with more scruple, and
are celebrated with more solemnity, then the Sunday it self. 4 Again, then
these days of commemoration of Martyrs were few in number, in stead that now
there is scarcely any day in the Calender which does not carry the name of some
Saint. And there is such a number of Feasts to be kept holy, that many poor
people cry out, they are famished. They make them devout whether they will or not, for they be kept and hindered by this superstition from working to get
bread for their children, having their hands bound with a scrupulous
slothfulness, and a forced idleness. Epist. 174. Nouam inducendo Celebritatem
quam ritus Ecclesiae nescit, non probat rat^o non comme^dat antiqua Traditio,
etc.
5 Then also men were ignorant of so many new-made holy days, as the feast of
the conception of the Virgin Mary, which S. Bernard says to have been
instituted against reason, and the ancient Tradition: the Feast of the
Assumption: the Feast of S Peter's Chair: the Gods feast, otherwise called
Corpus Christi day; to give him contentment. For seeing that every Saint had
his Feast, it was just and reasonable that God should have his also. 6 Then
they sung no Masses in honor of the Saint, whose Feast they celebrated. And
these Masses carry now a days the name of the Saint. There is the Mass of S.
Geneuiefue: the Mass of S. Roth: the Mass of S. Anthony, etc. Amongst which
Masses, we see in the same rank, the Mass of the Holy Ghost, to testify
that the rest are not of that stamp. 7 Then they did not diuersifie the
furniture and preparation for their Masses, in singing great or lesser Masses
according, to the greatness of the Feast. Men were ignorant also of the
distinction of high and low Masses; Dry Masses, and running Masses. Masses in
white or in green. There is nothing so pie-bald and newfangled. The Apostles
understood nothing in a manner in all this. 8 Also in those times, men knew not
what it was to ground Feasts upon an Allusion of Sillables. As now adays the
Feast of the Mat-makers which they call Nattices, is the day of the Nativity of
our Lady: the Feast of Fel-mongers is, Magdalen tide, La Magdalaine, because
they make L'amas de Lain an heap of wool: the Feast of Cooke-rosters is the
Assumption of our Lady, because assum is Latin for roasted: The Feast of the
Tylers or Slatters is Ascension day, because they ascend and climb the tops
of houses. Because Alga alludeth to Algeo, which is to quake with cold.
So in the Physic Alga aduersus querquerum, as Apuleius speaks; You must
give Seaweede or Sea-ore to one that is in a shiuering cold fit of the Ague:
Or to give to a man that is hard bound a bunch of Keys because there is
nothing more opening. Oh what a good time have my Masters the Prelates had, and
how have they dallied with Religion at their idle hours? 9 But I would
willingly know, how it comes to pass, that those ancient Patriarchs; such
excellent personages, Abraham, Moses, David, Daniel; to whom there will not any
be found comparable, of all that have lived within these fifteen hundred
years; how they notwithstanding all this, have no Feasts in the Church of
Rome: that no man prays in particular to Moses, nor Samuel, etc. that no
Temple bears their name: that it would indeed seem a thing ridiculous to
say S. Moses, or S. Daniel, or S. Iosaphat, seeing that for a man but to bear
the name of Isaac, or Daniel, or Abraham, is enough to make a man to be
suspected, as a mark of Heresy.
If a man demand whence comes this great multitude of Feasts? I say that
avarice has hatched them, and that ambition has bred them up: for the more
Festival holy days that there be, the more often men go to the offering, and
the pardons are more frequent: when artisans and tradsemen shut up their
shoppes, then the Priests open theirs. The Prelates also are herein much
honored, for it is a great honor to these great Masters, that at their
commandment the traffic cease, the shops are shut up: the Sessions of the
Justices and of the Privy Council are by them broken up. And therefore when
they are among themselves, they gaude and mock at the simplicity of the
people. For indeed they live upon their blindenes.

Let them then set up the ancient simplicity again; let them restore to the
Churches the liberty of governing themselves herein according to the exigence
of the time and place, and we will not condemn their Feasts. For indeed we
do not condemn this celebration of the memory of Martyrs and of Saints. We
like well the custom of the English Churches, who have certain days affected
and applied to the commemoration of the Apostles: for they are done without
imposing necessity of keeping strict Holy Days, and without opinion of merit,
without commandment of the Pope, and without condemning the French Churches,
who hitherto have feared to assign any Feasts to any man, because that living
in a Country where superstitions do swarm, their people would easily be
drawn into abuse, and attainted with that running and ouer-spreading contagion
which is to attribute that to the creature, which belongs to the Creator:
Mean while we let not to celebrate in our Churches the memory of the Saints
and Martyrs, but without any set day. And we hold this rule for inuariable,
that God having said in his law, in express terms: Six days shall thou
labor, he opposes himself against God, who says, Thou shall not work six
days, but thou shall keep holy those Feasts on the week days which I
command thee. Now if in the old Testament there be found any solemnities or
Feasts, besides the Sabbath day, they are very few in number, and ordained by
God himself, who as he can give the rules, so also can he give the exceptions:
Or if there be any feast found, that was instituted by men: you shall never be
able to prove, that it was held unlawful to travel upon that day.

There should yet remain to speak somewhat of Legends; but I see that
Coeffeteau is ashamed of them, and would cast the blame upon some particulars.
Legends nevertheless, which have been for a long time, and yet are both in
Italy and Spain the subject of Sermons; yea very France is not exempt. And
those very miracles of which Coeffeteau is ashamed, are those which we see
painted on the walls, and in the hangings of the Church: As at Paris in the
Cloister of S. Geruase, an Ass worshippeth and adoreth the Host: near
thereto adjoining, the Bees build a Chapel of wax, for an Host which they
found in the fields. In the Temple of S. Paul, behind the Quire, on the left
hand, after the miracles of S. Roche painted, promise is made unto the people,
that they shall be healed of the swelling of the plague, by adoring his
precious body: at S. Benedict or S. Benets Cloister we see the said Saint
tumbling himself stark naked amongst thorns, and stopping the dogs with
the sign of the Cross. In the forefront of the Church, called Des Billettes,
an Host being pricked and stabbed by a Jew, bleedeth with great drops, and
being cast into a seething Caldron, became a man in his visible greatness,
that is to say, Jesus Christ boiling in a Caldron. An infinite company of such
things are so public, that Coeffeteau cannot condemn them, without opposing
himself to the whole Church of Rome; Fictions that were built up by the favor
of the night, whiles they put the holy Scripture, the only light of our souls
under a bushel. And indeed very lately there have been composed two great
Tomes of the Chronicles of S. Frauncis, which challenge all the Legends, and
give place to none of them for lies. Insomuch that S. Dominicke, Coeffeteaus
Patron, will henceforward be nothing in comparison of S. Frauncis.

ARTICLE VII. Touching the Virgin Mary.
The KINGS Confession.
AND first for the blessed Virgin Mary, I yield her that which the Angel
Gabriel pronounced of her, and that which in her Canticle she prophesied of her
self: that is, That she Luc. 1.28.
is blessed amongst women, and, Ibid. ver. 48.
That all generations shall call her blessed. I reverence her as the Mother of
Christ, whom of our Savior took his flesh, and so the mother of God, since
the Divinity and Humanity of Christ are inseparable. And I freely confess,
that she is in glory, both above Angels and men, her own Son (that is both
God and man) only excepted. But I dare not mock her, and blaspheme against
God, calling her not only Diua but Dea, and praying her to command and
control her Son, who is her God and her Savior. Nor yet can J think, that
she has no other thing to do in heaven, then to hear every idle man's suite,
and bufie her self in their errands; whiles requesting, whiles commanding her
son, whiles coming down to kiss and make love with Priests, and whiles
disputing and brawling with Devils. In heaven she is in eternal glory and joy,
never to be interrupted with any worldly business: and there I leave her with
her blessed Son, our Savior and hers in eternal felicity.

Here Coeffeteau plays the sugitiue, and that little which he murmureth in
flying, are partly falsehoods, partly disguisings of the belief of his
Church. He grants to the King that she ought not to be called Goddess, and
rejects with him, a thousand ridiculous things, and the false honors which
superstition has invented. Now I cannot divine, what Religion it is that
gives to the holy Virgin ridiculous or excessive honors, save only the
Roman Religion. It is only the Roman religion that calls her Queen of
heaven, the gate of Paradise, Regina coeli p^rta paradisi Domina mundi.
having rule and dominion over the world, they are the Titles which are given
to her in the prayer that Sixtus the fourth, has willed to be said before the
Image of our Lady of Loretto, with grant of eleauen thousand years pardon: I
my self have seen in the great Miss^lles of Paris before the late Popes new
plastered them over, these Sapphicke verses barborously elegant.

O fellix puer pera
Nostra pians scelera
Iure matris impera
Redemptori.
It is also in the Church of Rome, that throughout all the Churches, the Virgin
Mary is painted, lifted up and assumed into heaven in body, and solemnly
crowned Queen of heaven, and of all the world, without being able to produce
any witness of worth for the same. Seeing there is none that ever came back
from heaven that had said that he had seen it to be so; And God says nothing
of it in his word, neither does the Ancient Church speak of it.

It is the Church of Rome also which makes the Virgin Mary much more inclined
to procure our good, then Jesus Christ; even so far, as that she must
appease the wrath and indignation of her son against us, as they sing upon
the Feast of Alhallowes, or Al-Saints.

Christ redemptor gentium
Conserua tuos famulos
Beatae semper Virginis
Placatus sanctis precibus.
And so Pope Innocent the third speaks in the Hymn of Christ and the Virgin,
to which he adds great indulgences.

Precor te regina caeli
Me habeto excusatum
Apud Christum tuum gnatum
Cuius iram pertimesco
Et furorem expauesco.
This Church of Rome who in her hours, Rosaries, and Letaines calls the Holy
Virgin, Mother of mercy, Gate of Heaven, our Salvation, She that has bruised
the head of the Serpent, as also Genesis 3.15. this property of bruising the
Serpents head, which is there given to the seed of the Woman, in the vulgar
translation is attributed to the Woman by a wicked falsification.

In a word, for the top of all abuses, there are in the Church of Rome two
Psalters of our Lady, one of which is called Saint Bonauenture Psalter, which
is nothing else but the one hundred and fifty Psalms of David, in which they
have taken away the name of God* and in it is room have put the name of Mary,
which having been printed an infiuite number of times in Latin, has since
been translated into French and printed at Paris, At Paris by Claudius
Chappelet in S. James his street at the sign of the Unicorn. 1601. Printed at
Paris by Nicolas du Fosse in S. James his street at the golden pot 1601.
with priuilede and approbation, of the Sorbonne. The other Psalter is digested
into fifteen Demands, with like approbation of the Doctrines: In which the
Virgin Mary is called, the first cause of our salvation, the finder out of
grace, that turns away the indignation of Jesus Christ by uncovering her paps
unto him, The Rose by whose smell the dead are raised up, who by the fair
Lillies of her face, made the King of Heaven in love with her, who at the last
day shall moderate the sentence of the Judge, even so far have they proceeded,
as to place her before Jesus Christ in these words. Glory be to you, O Virgin,
and to Jesus Christ, etc. It would do well to report the wole book.

Moreover every one knows how in Italy they speak with much more respect of
La madoma, then of God; whom they call by a term full of mis-regard, Messer
Domene Dio, Lect. 80. Confugimus primo ad beatissiman vir ginem coelorum
reginam: cui Rex regum pater celestis dimidium regni sui dedit. Quod
significatum est in Ester regina: Sic pater coelestis cum habeat institiam and
misericordiam, iustitia sibi retenta, misericordiam matri virgini concessit.
Of whom also Gabriel Biel a famous Doctor says in his exposition of the Canon
of the Mass, That God has divided his Kingdom at halfes, with the Virgin
Mary, having reserved Justice to himself, and left mercy unto her.

Now these things are not drawn out of any obscure authors, but out of their
own Missalles Letonies, and public prayers, out of the writings of their
Popes, and Psalters publicly allowed; to the end that Coeffeteau may know,
that in condemning these things, he warreth against the whole Church of Rome,
and comes no longer with a cold dissimulation to disguise his own private
belief.

Which shall serve for an answer to that place of Cyril which he alleges,
where the virgin Mary is called the singular orname^t of the world. A lamp
that never goes out, the Crown of Virginity, etc. For in all this, there is
not any one of these titles wicked (such as are those which we have before
represented) no nor the title which Coeffeteau gives her, calling her the
Spouse of the Father, which is a title, which the Scripture gives to the whole
Church, and not to the Virgin Mary. It is not for us in things of so high
nature out of iollity to forge new terms, which are to the weak occasion of
error or of stumbling.

The passage which he alleges out of Saint Cyprian is altogether disguised
and clipped, and is nothing to the purpose. Saint Cyprian speaks to the
faithful who assailed with contagion, had seen their Fathers, their
brethren, their children, die before them, and enter into Paradise before
them, He says then unto them, our Fathers, Magnus illic nos charorum numerus
expectat, parentum fratrum filiorum freques no^ and copiosa turba desiderat,
iam de sua immortaletate secura and adhuc de nostra sollicita.
Mothers brethren, and Children wait for us in great number, and a great
troop does desire us, being assured of their own, immortality, but in care of
our Father. To what purpose is this to defend the seruiceand titles which they
yield to the Virgin Mary. To what purpose is the general mention of the Saints
deceased, seeing that he speaks only of them who have known us in this life
And though he should speak of all the Saints, what does this make against us,
who have never denied but that the Saints do desire our salvation, and pray
for the Church in General although they do not know the necessities, nor the
prayers of particular persons.

This falsehood of Coeeffeteaus is followed with another of the interpreter of
Ireneus, who speaks thus. Even as Eve was seduced to turn away from God,
Sicut illa seducta est vt effuge ret Deum, sic haec sua sa est obedire Deo, vti
virginis Euae virgo Maria fieret aduocata.
so Mary was counseled to obey God, to the end that the Virgin Mary might
become advocate for the Virgin Eve. The very reading does make the place to be
suspected, so little comeliness has it and less sense. It was in the Greek,
(...) vt fieret consolatrix, that is to say, to the end that Mary might be the
comforter of Eve. For God having condemned Eve, gave her this seed of the
Woman, which is the Virgin Mary for a consolation. The word (...) which in S.
John ca. 14.26 signifies a comforter, is also us ed by Saint John, 1. John.
2.1. to fignifie an advocate. (...) we have an advocate with the Father. The
same Ambiguitie deceived Tertullian Cap. 9. of his Book against Praxeas, where
he thus renders the words of Jesus Christ, Ioh. 14.16. I will pray unto the
Father and he shall give you another advocate. The same fault is found in the
book of Nouation of the Trinity cap. 28.29.

After these, come other two false pieces, namely the Liturgies of S. Basil and
of Chrysostom, which all the learned acknowledge to be forged, yea so
grossly, that even in the Liturgy attributed to S. Chrysostom, there is
mention made of the Emperor Alexius, who was borne some seven hundred years
after Chrysostom. Moreover there is prayer made for Nicholas Pope of Rome,
which was never the custom of the ancient Greek Church.

Nay further, the fashood is double; for not only the parcels alleged are
false in themselves, but also it is falsely said by Coeffeteau, that in the
Li^urgie of Basil, the Virgin is inuocated, It is one thing to pray unto her,
another to make a commemoration of her.

We will close up these false passages with a true one, out of S. Epiphanius,
in his 79. Heresy, which is the Heresy of the Collyridians. Surely the Virgin
was a Virgin worthy to be honored, but yet she was not given us to be adored:
for even she her self adored him who was borne of her according to the flesh,
but came down from heaven out of the bosom of the Father. And therefore the
Gospel does arm us against this abuse, telling us, that the Lord himself
said unto her, What have I to do with thee, woman; mine hour is not yet come:
To the end that no man should presume more, then he ought upon the Virgin Mary,
nor should attribute to her too much excellency, he calls her woman; as it
were prophesying of the things that should come to pass in the world, by
reason of Schisms and Heresies, for fe^re least some out of too much
admiration of her, should fall into the dotages of this Heresy. Now he
speaks of an Herefie which offered a cake to the Virgin Mary, but yet did not
yield her the fourth part of the honor which the Church of Rome does unto
her. Most singular is that above the rest which he adds: Let MARY be had in
honor, but let the Father and the Son be adored: Let no man adore MARY; I
say not a woman, but neither man himself. It is to God that this mystery is
duc. The Angels themselves are not capable of such an honor. And it is worth
the noting, that he girdeth at this Title of the Queen of Heaven; and I
beseech the Reader to observe it: Let Jeremy (says he) repress those odd
house-wiues, that they trouble the world no more, and that they may no longer
have this word in their mouths, We honor the Queen of heaven. And so S.
Ambrose in his third book of the Holy Ghost And for fear (says he) least
some man would derive this same to the Virgin MARY, Lib. 3. cap. 12.
Mary was indeed the Temple of God, but she was not God: And therefore we must
adore him alone, who wrought in this Temple.

Let Coeffeteau then cease to pay us in this false coin, and let him not show
us like a cousening Lapidary his counterfeit Jewels in the dark: was he not
afraid to lay open his false dealing in this Theatour? Or did he think that
he had to do with a King that was blind and without reading?

The best is, that all this service of the Virgin, which they call now adays
Hyperdulia, and which makes up a good part of the Roman Religion, has no
foundation in the word of God. Only our Adversaries bring in men speaking to
this point; but they put their speeches before hand in their mouths, and make
them say that which they never believed. How comes it to pass that Saint
John, who served the Virgin Mary as a son after the death of Jesus Christ,
and the rest of the Apostles, who loved and honored her, had yet never
recourse to her intercession: they might have said in themselves, we have in
heaven a Lady Advocate one that is so near unto us, and, who now is Queen of
heaven: and yet nevertheless if we believe this people, they were so ill
advised as not to make profit thereof; they did not value nor make use unto
themselves of this advantage, neither have they councelled us to address our
selves unto her: but what boldenes is this in worms of the earth, to attribute
unto a creature the Empire of heaven, and of the world, without being
instructed what was the will of God therein? As if the brief flies or Hornets
had taken upon them to establish some man in the Popedom. Let the word of God
then be heard thereupon; which is the thing that we will do in the Article
which follows.

ARTICLE VIII. Touching prayers to Saints, and the service that is due unto
them.
The KINGS Confession.
TS for prayer to Saints; Christ (I am sure) has commanded us to Come all to
him that are laden with sin, and he will relieve us: and S. Paul has
forbidden us to worship Angels, or to use any such voluntary worship, Math.
11 28. Col 28.28.
that has a show of humility in that it spares not the flesh. But what
warrant we have to have recourse unto these D^j Penates or Tutelares, these
Courtiers of God, I know not, I remit that to these philosophical neotericke
Divines. It satisfies me to pray to God through Christ, as I am commanded,
which I am sure must be the safest way, and I am sure the Safest way is the
best way in points of salvation.

Hereupon Coeffeteau confounding the Kings whole discovery, he begins by a
complaint that his Majesty calls Tutelary and familiar Gods those lesser
Saints, to whom many of the people do vow themselves in particular, and of whom
they set the Images upon their Cupboords or over their Chimneyes. But his
Majesty does not intend to call the Saints familiars nor Tutelarie Gods:
neither does he say that in the Church of Rome they call them so, only he
means, that the Church of Rome has substituted them in place of the
Tutelarie and domestical gods, and that he does entertain them after the
same fashion. For the Paynims had their tutelarie gods over every town, and
over every Country. Juno was Lady-gardian of Carthage: Venus of Cyprus and of
Paphos: Palace of the Country of Attica: Mars and Quirinus of Rome, etc. so
the Church of Rome has Saints that are Patrons of Cities and Countries: Saint
Mark of Venice: S. Geneuiefue of Paris: S. James of Spain: S. Dennis of
France, etc. and as the Paynims did distribute charges amongst their gods; so
in the Church of Rome every Saint has his charge apart. The hunters did
invoke Diana, now adays they have recourse to S. Eustace, S. Nicholas, who
now is called upon by the Pilots and Seafaring men, has taken the place of
Castor and Pollux. The good Goddess Lucina who was assisting to women that
traveled in childe-birth, has now given place to S. Margaret: for so her
Legend says that the Dragon having swallowed her down she made the sign of
the Cross in his belly, wherewith he burst asunder, and she came forth through
the breach, which was a kind of lying in. S. Christopher with his huge body,
has succeeded Hercules: for so they make him also to carry a clubbe. There
wanted yet a Queen of heaven in the place of Juno, and this holy and glorious
Virgin has been dishonored with so profane a title: yea the very habites
and furniture of the gods have been transported to the Saints. The Genij or
Penates household gods had a dog by their side, and so has S. Roche: The
Image of James carried a Key, so does that of S. Peter: Jupiter a man had
horns on his head, such do they give to Moses. Isis carried a Timbrell, and
S. Gennasius a Violin. Those circles which you see about the head of the Saints
in picture, are those Arches and shadows wherewith they covered their gods to
fence them from the dust. In like manner are the Officers distributed in
Paradise in a goodly order, and with diversity of furniture and provision. For
his Holiness and the Church of Rome have taken order for it. We are ashamed to
produce these things, whiles they are not ashamed to do them: and we blush at
that of which they have no shame at all. If we would prolong this Discourse, we
would easily show that a good part of these Patrons and Tutelary Saints, are
Saints which never were, they live without having ever been borne, and are
entered into the Church, without ever entering into the world, the painters are
wonted to make characters and pictures in a manner speaking, as when they paint
Justice with a pair of balances: Time like an old man winged: The Friar like
a lame god, because the wood does sustain him: so the ancients did figure the
faith of a believing man by a woman swollowed up of Satan, but who did get
forth again victoriously, and trample the Devil under her feet. And of this
Image they have made their Saint Margaret: so the Christian was painted as
passing over a violent land-flood, but having Jesus Christ with him, Praesertim
cum sit manifestum in omnem Italiam, Galliam, Hispaniam, and Africam nullum
instituisse Ecclesias nisi eos quos Apostolus Petrus aut successores eius
constitueru^t. Legant autem si in his prouincijs alius Apostolus inuenitur aut
legitur docuisse, etc.
who did burden him indeed, but yet did conduct him. This Image has produced
a new Saint, whom they call S. Christopher. Of the lance which pierced the
body of our Lord, they have made S. Longis because that Lonchi in the vulgar
pronunciation of the Greek tongue signifies a Lance. Men run with
incredible zeal to S. James of Compostella in Spain, where they say that he
preached, and that his bones remain there: and yet in the mean time it is
well known that S. James was never in Spain: Pope Innocent in the twelfth
distinction, in the Canon Quis nesciat does stoutly and stiffely maintain,
that there was never any Apostle in Spain; and that neither in France nor in
Africa, nor in Spain any planted Church, save they whom S. Peter and his
successors sent thither. The Story also of his life recyted by John Beleth and
Iacobus de Voragine great personages, says, that he came into Spain before he
was put to death by Herod, Act. 12. It must needs be then that he came into
Spain almost about the time that Jesus Christ suffered: for S. James suruiued
Christ, but a while after his death: His body being put on Ship-boord, went of
it self without Pilot or any guidance into Spain. Queen Lupa reigning then
in Spain: Now it is well known, that at that time there was neither King nor
Queen in Spain; and that it was wholly subject to the Roman Empire. The same
is to be said of S. Denis the Areopagite, whom men say to have planted the
Gospel in France; and having suffered Martyrdom under the Emperor Domitian
as says Methodius, he carried his head between his hands from Mont-Martre, as
far as S. Denis, where he lies interred. The reviving of learning and good
letters has discovered the falsehood of such inventions. For the most ancient
Christian Historian that ever was in France, Sub Aurelio Antonini filio
persecutio quinta agitata, ac tunc primum inter Gallias martyria visa, serius
trans alps religione transgressa.
is Sulpitius Seuerus, who in the second book of his story shows, that there
were no Martyrdomes in France under Domitian nor a long time after; and that
the first Martyrdomes which were seen in France, were under Marcus Aurelius
the son of Anthony, that is to say, in the year of our Lord 162. threescore
and five years after the death of Domitian: whosoever shall calculate the
times, shall find that Denis the Ariopagite was then Judge in Ariopagus, at the
time when S. Paul converted him: whence it is to be presumed, that he was at
least thirty or five and thirty year old: which time if you extend as far
as to the reign of Marcus Aurelius, he should have lived some hundred and
fifty years: and also should die by torment before that he was broken by old
age. We could produce others in this point, but this suffices to justify the
King of great Britain, who though he should have called the Saints that never
were Tutelary gods, yet should there not be just cause to reprehend him.

After this Caeffeteau comes to the authorities of the Fathers: surely this
matter should well deserve some commandment from God: One Ordinance of God
had cut off al difficulty, and had been more of value then a thousand
testimonies of men. But Coeffeteau could find none, for indeed there is none:
Being not able then to draw out of the Divine spring, he seeks here and there
for the Cesternes of men. Our adversaries tell us that they receive the Fathers
for interpreters of the Scripture: but the passages are drawn out of phrases
of the Fathers, in which they do not interpret the scripture: but what will
become of the matter if these quotations be to no purpose, if indeed they be
false? And that is it which we are to show.

Basil in his oration of the 40. Martyrs, says indeed that some in their
necessity had recourse unto them, but he does nor command to do it as
Bellarmine will have it in Where he p^^^teth confugiat for confugit and oret
for orat.
falsifying this place, Aliud est quod docemus aliud quod sustinemus -- donec
emendemus tolarare compellimur.
a man must not marvel if a people newly crept out of Paganism did retain
something of their own Custom and oftentimes, the Bishops, carried away with
the terrent of popular zeal, were constrained to tolerate these abuses. Saint
Austine in his twentieth book against Faustus the Manichee, Chap. 21
confesses that many drank drunk over the Sepulchers of the dead, but withal
he adds it is one thing that we teach, another that we tolerate, it is one
thing that which we are commanded to teach, another thing we are commanded to
correct, and which we are constrained to bear withal, until that it be
amended. And in the first book of the manners of the Catholic Church, Chap.
24. I know many (says he) who do adore the Sepulchers and pictures, I know
many who drink most excessiuely over the dead. The good Bishops saw these
maladies in their flocks, which being desirous to amend, they have been often
hindered by the sedition of the people, as appears by the Counsel of
Carthage, where the Bishops of Africa being desirous to abolish the abuse
which was committed at the sepulchers of the Martyrs, they fear to be hindered
by the tumult of the rude people. (...)
If (say they) men be hindered to do this by the uproar of the people, at least
wise let the multitude be admonished not to assemble in these places.
Coeffeteau then had alleged this to purpose if he had the general custom of
the Church of those times, or some prayer to Saints, made in the public
service instead of producing the misguided devotion of some particular men.

In the second place he aleadgeth the oration of Gregory Nyssen in the praise
of the Martyr Theodore which we have heretofore evicted of falsehood.

After this he produces the oration of Grogory, Nazianzen upon Saint Basil.
And here again his unfaithful dealing appears, for he dessembleth the
words, going before which serve for a solution, where Saint Gregory shows,
that that which he said to Saint Basil being deceased, is only by opinion
and by conjecture. These are his words And now Basil is in the heavens, (...)
offering as I think sacrifices for us, and praying for the people, he
speaks as being assured thereof, we know also, that the custom of Orators,
who speak in praise of any man, is to make Rhetorical appellation to the
dead, and to speak to the absent, as to men present. The Books of the Paynims
are full of these examples. See how Pliny speaks to Ciciro; long before
deceased in his seventh book and thirtyeth Chapter.

Salve primus omnium parens patriae appellate.
To Gregory, Coeffeteau adds the Catechism of Cyrill, which are fal^ely
attributed unto him. Gesner in his Bibliotheca, witnesses that this book is
found in written hand under the name of one John of Jerusalem. Gretzer a
Germiane Jesuit, in his book for Pilgrimages, page. 354. witnesses the same.
Harding in his Treatise of Accidents without subject, Section the 6. says that
in his time this book was not found but manuscript and known to a few. And
the foolery which is found in the 24. Catechize, when he says, that the wood
of the Cross does increase and multiply in such fort that the earth is full
thereof, shows that this book was written many ages since, doubtless by
this John of Jerusalem an advocate for Images who lived in the year 767. See
the Ecclesiastical Stories of Vigner in the year 767.


Afterward comes a place of Saint Austine, It is injury to pray for a
Martyr, by whose prayers we on the other side ought to be recommended. This
place is found indeed in his 17. Sermon De verbis Apostoli; but not in the 80.
Tract upon John, as Coeffeteau alleges it, who spoke by other men's report,
Now this place is not to the purpose, for he says only that the Saints pray
for us, which thing we have never denied: we do out of Godly considerations
presume, that albeit they know not the necessity of particular men, yet they
pray for the Church in general. But that we should for this cause invoke
them, or yield them any religious service, Saint Austine does not avouch,

Lastly Coeffeteau adds Saint Ambrose, who in his book of Widows,
exhorts Widows to pray to the Angels and Martyrs, whom he calls
beholders of our lives and actions. Here a man may see the humor of our
Adversaries, which is to pass by the virtues of the Fathers, and to set forth
nothing but their vices and blemishes, like Flies who cast themselves upon
gauls and botches of bodies, rather then upon the sound parts, The Reader then
shall be advertised that Saint Ambrose was chosen Bishop before he was
baptized. Having thus cast himself, at the first iumpe, into a charge, to the
which he was no way prepared, no man ought to marvel, if in his beginnings
he said somthings, for which he afterward corrected himself. The book of
Widows, is one of his first works, wherein you may see more eloquence then
divinity, and we will no other proof hereof then that place which says, that
the Martyrs if there remained any sins unto them, they purged them by their
blood. what is there less agreeing with the Gospel, then to think that any
Martyrs have been without sin, and that which is worse that a man may wash
away and blot out his sins by his own blood. For the holy scripture does
give us no other labor for our sins then the blood of Jesus Christ. Apoc:
1.5. To Jesus who has loved us, and has wasted away our sins by his blood.
And in the 7. Chapter, The Saints do wash their garments in the blood of the
lamb, and to the end that no man should devise any other clensing. Jdeo ad
Regem per tribunos aut Cometos itur, quia homo vtique est Rex and nescit quibus
debeat Remp. credere. Ad Deum aute^ promerendum saffragatore non opus estsed
mente deuota.
Saint John. 1. Epist. 1. says, that the blood of Jesus Christ does cleanse us
from ALL sin, yea Saint Ambrose himself has not perseuered in this error.
But upon the first Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, he disputes against
those who said, that they did as those who go to the King by his offices and
he calls it, a miserable excuse, and adds, Therefore men go to a King by
his Collonells and Nobles, because the King is a man, and knows not to whom
to commit the Commonweal. But to be received into grace and favor with God,
we need no spokesman, but only a devout Spirit. Himself in the oration upon
the death of Theodosius. Et tamen tu solus Domine inuocandus es, tu rogandus.
Thou ONLY O Lord ought to be inuocated and prayed unto.

Let this be noted in general upon all the passages, that the King of great
Britain, demanded authorities from the first four ages, But all these
allegations are but about the end of the fourth age, we must then help
Coeffeteaus memory, and bring him a little higher,

In the first age we have the Apostles, who did not only not invoke the
Virgin Mary, nor any other of the Saints deceased, But who do expressly forbid
us, to invoke any other then God alone.

1 S. Paul, Romans 10. How shall they call upon him, in whom they have not
believed. He is of opinion then that a man cannot call upon any, but him in
whom he believes. Now we believe in God only. The Creed does teach us to
believe in the Father, and in the son, and in the holy Chost, but not to
believe in any creature. And Jesus Christ, Ioh. 14.1. You believe in God,
believe also in me. If any man will here bring forth unto us two sorts of
Religious worship; he must be pleased to prove them unto us by the word of God.

2 The same Apostle, Romans 14.23. says, that whatsoever is done without faith
is sin. And cap. 10. he says, that faith comes by hearing the word of God.
Prayer therefore to Saints being not founded upon the word of God, it is
without faith, and consequently is sin.

3 S. Peter, Act. 1. calls God searcher of the hearts, agreeable to that
which Solomon says, 2. Chr. 6.30 that God ONLY knows the hearts of men. If
then the Saints know not our hearts, what an abuse is it to call upon them?
Must a man cry high? And how shall they know whether thou be an hypocrite or
no? If it be so that they see all things in the face of God, as some say, then
should they have an infinite knowledge, and by consequent should be infinite,
and should know the day of judgment, marc. 13.
which is unknown to them. And their spirit in one only moment, should
apprehend and behold infinite diversity of things, which is a thing
incompatible with the nature of the creature, whose life and being, and
consequently whose actions are fleeting by acontinuall succession of parts:
That is to say, that as the parts of their duration succeed one another: so
their thoughts and action successively follow one another. They do not then
apprehend infinite things in one moment. Thus is their imaginary looking-glass
broken, wherein nothing does appear but the temerity of these men, who affirm
things that they cannot know; who speak of heaven, and yet have their nose in
the ground, describing what is done there; as if they came but lately from
thence. I further add, that this is greatly to trouble the felicity of the
Saints, to make them spectators of men's affairs. An holy woman that inioyeth
the glory of heaven, would she no feel an extreme grief, if she beheld from
heaven one of her children tormented in Hell, another broken upon the wheel at
the Grieve in Paris, another given to Art-magicke, or bowing his knee before an
Image, or adoring a God made and set up by men?

4 The Apostle S. Paul, 1. Tim 2. There is one God, and one Mediator between
God and men, the man Christ Jesus. In the Greek it is (...): Vnicus Deus,
vnicus mediator, Seeing that these things are thus coupled together, it is
certain that as there is but one God, so is there but one Mediator. It is a coy
niceness to say, that he is the only Mediator of Redemption, but not of
Intercession. But this distinction is not found in the Gospel, and indeed it
does contradict it self, for Jesus Christ is not the mediator of intercession,
but so far forth as he is our Redeemer: whence it follows, that in Jesus
Christ to be mediator of redemption and mediator of intercession, is one and
the same thing. And that which is more, the same Apostle, Romans 8. does teach
us, that even as touching the intercession, he is our only mediator: For he
says, Christ is he who died, nay rather who is risen again, who also is set
at the right hand of God, and who makes request for us. Now he died only for
us, he rose only for our sakes, and only is set down at the right hand of
God: and he alone then also it is, which makes request for us; for the course
of the words and the drift of the place does necessarily so require it. And
that which is more, by this Distinction they condemn the Church of Rome, who
makes Saints also to be mediators of Redemption, as Bellarmine teaches in
the fourth Chapter of his first book of Indulgences: and indeed the Church of
Rome does hold that their sufferings do turn to our advantage: and the
Priest in the Mass, does every day crave salvation of God, not only for their
prayers, but also for their merits, as if by their good works they had
merited salvation, Quorum precibus meritisque rogamus, etc.
and the grace of God for us: Let a man read all the Letanies and public
prayers of the Church of Rome, and he shall find that they say, Petre Ora pro
nobis, S. Nicholae Ora pro nobis. But to Jesus Christ they never say Ora pro
nobis, but Miserere nobis, for they strip him of his office of intercessor,
leaving him only the charge of Judge.

5 Let us add the example of the Angel, Apoc. 22. who would not be adored by
S. John, says unto him, Take heed thou do it not, I am thy fellow servant,
worship God. Now S. John did not think this Angel was God, for chap. 12.9. S.
John says expressly that it was one of the seven Angels, who had the seven
vials. He knew then before hand that it was an Angel: if the Angel had
approved any inferior degree of adoration he would have said to S. John, thou
do adore me with a worship, which is too high for me. But he does not receive
any at all but puts himself in the same rank with S. John, and
acknowledges himself to be his fellow servant.

6 Some man will say, I am unworthy to pray unto God, and it is good to go
unto the King by his officers. I answer, that there is not any greater
unworthiness, then for a man to be the enemy of God: and yet Jesus Christ died
to save his enemies: By this same bounty and goodness then he will yet more
support thine unworthiness, when thou shall pray unto him with an
acknowledgement of thy myserie. And as touching the Interuention of the
officers of the King, I say that he should be foolishly modest, who should
follow that way, when the King himself calls him, and commands him to
come directly unto him. Now God calls us with promise to here us, Psalm. 51.
Call upon me, and I will hear thee. And Jesus Christ his son does inuit us to
come unto him, saying in the eleventh of Matthew, Come unto me all you that are
heavy laden, and I will refresh you. Should we fear then to go directly to
God, and to our father, who calls us with so much sweetness?

7 If we be the children of God and brethren of Jesus Christ, need we any
spokes-men to speak for us to God or to Jesus Christ? This crooked way does
savor of a servile humor, and has nothing of a son like liberty.

8 Moreover, seeing that it is God himself that does put into our hearts to
pray unto him, and who does stir up in us those sighs and groans of which
S. Paul speaks, Romans 8.25. what need we any other intercessors to recommend
that prayer unto God which he himself has inspired into us? Or to make that
the voice of the spirit of GOD speaking in us, should be pleasing and
acceptable to God?

9 It is also very considerable, how and in what sense S. John in his first
Epistle, chap. 2. calls Jesus Christ our advocate: for he is an advocate who
does not only plead for us, but does also pay for us: who not only makes
intercession for sinners, but also of sinners makes them just men: Those for
whom he makes intercession he does sanctify them also. He is an advocate Ioh.
21.41.
whom the Father does always hear: who did already make intercession for the
world, before he came into the world. Does it not suffice us to have such an
advocate? Or do the Saints love us more then Jesus Christ? seeing that the
Saints have neither virtue before God, nor charity toward us, but that which
Jesus Christ has given them?

Above all, the place of the Apostle, Coloss. 2. is very express, which his
Majesty of England does produce, where S. Paul does flatly forbid the service
of Angels: Let no man at his pleasure bear rule over you by humbleness of
mind, and worshipping of Angels. Coeffeteau answers, that to invoke the
Saints, is no more to turn away from Jesus Christ then when a man does employ
the living. I answer, that a man does turn away from Jesus Christ diverse
ways, either in forsaking himself flatly, or in turning from his
commandment. It is in this second kind, that invocation of Saints does
decline from Jesus Christ, as we have showed. As for living men, whom we employ
to pray for us; this is nothing like to the invocation of Saints deceased: God
wills that the living should pray one for an other, but he has not
commanded to invoke the dead: and he who recommendeth himself to the
prayers of the living, he does not for all that acknowledge them to be
searchers of the heart: He does not fall down on his knees before them; he
does not yield them any religious service: he does not bring them offerings,
nor light candles before them: he does not pray unto God for salvation through
their merits. In a word, there is no comparison between them.

Coeffeteau adds, that S. Paul condemns only superstition, which adoreth
Angels in the quality of lesser gods. This is a mere shift and an evident
tergiuersation, and which S. Paul had already prevented in the same place, in
saying that this is done by humbleness of mind, and voluntary devotion. Now
to acknowledge the Angels for Gods, is not for a man to humble himself, but to
exalt the Angels: Humiliation is rather in him, who acknowledging them no other
then servants and messengers of God, does nevertheless humble himself beneath
them by voluntary devotion. And we need here no more upon this matter then
Theodoret, whom Coeffeteau alleges in his margent against himself, whose
words are these in his Commentaries upon Colos. 2. They who defended the law,
induced men also to serve Angels, saying, the law was given by their
interuention. Now this vice continued along time in Phrygia and Pisidia:
Therefore the Synod node assembled at Laodicea the mother City of Phrygia,
forbid them by express ordinance to pray unto Angels, and even at this day we
yet see amongst them and their neighbors, the Oratories of S. Michael. Now
this did they counsel, using humility, and saying, that the God of the whole
world is invisible, inco^prebensible and vnapproachable: and therefore it was
necessary to to make God favorable unto us by the Angels. And that is it which
S. Paul has said in humility, and worshipping of Angels. By these words it
appears that Theodoret judged that the Council of Laodicea did absolutely
forbid prayer to Angels. Moreover that those whom he condemns did not think
the Aneglles to be Gods, but that they served them as ministering spirits, whose
service God had used for the publishing of the law. Now that the church of Rome
has thought that the Canon of the Counsel of Laodicea was against her, (...).
it appears, for that it being in the Greek. (...). The Latin version which
is in the Tomes of the Coun^ell has turned it, abire and ad angulos
idololatriae abominande congregationes facere, having put angulos for angelos.

Saint Jerome in the 10. Question to Algasia thinks that Saint Paul in that
place speaks against the superstition of the Jews, if that be so, he does
not speak against those who did adore the Angels as lesser Gods. For the Jews
since the Captivity of Babylon have not held this opinion; And if it were so,
so is it notwithstanding that Saint Paul condemning in general the worship
given to Angels condemns by a consequent that which the Church of Rome
yields unto them.

All that which before has been alleged, should suffice to overthrow the
invocation of Saints, For after the will of God, Basil in Ethicis regu. 80.
quicquid extra diuinam scriptura^ est cum ex fide non sit peccatu^ est.
in vain do we wait for the testimony of men. The word of God is as strong,
when it is alone, as when it is accompanied, the Law of God is not established
by custom, it is full of strength and force, even from the spring, Haec ab
alio orare non possumus qua^ a que scio me cosecuturum quoniam and ipse est qui
solus praestat, and egosum cui impet rare dehetur famulus eius qui cum solum
obsecro. Jam vero si etiam extra corpus positi sancti qui cum Christo sunt,
agunt aliquid and laborant pro nobis, habeatur hoc quoque inter occulta Dei nec
chartulae commit tenda mysteria.
as tract of time does not bring it any authority, so is there prescription of
time against it. How beit let us grant this to the Malady of time, and to the
depraved taste of our age which brings the Fathers upon the Theator with
pomp, and hides the Lamp of the Gospel under the bushel.

Tertullian in his Apologetico. chap. 30. speaking of the prayer made unto God,
We cannot demand these things of any other then of him of whom I know I shall
obtain it for so it is he alone which grants, and I am he who ought to be
heard, to wit, his servant who do invoke him alone.

Origin in his 2 book and second Chapter, upon the Epistle to the Romans, If
the Saints who being out of their bodies with Christ, do any thing to employ
themselves for us, let that remain among the hidden secrets of God, neither
let it be committed to prayer.

(...).
The same writing against Celsus in his fifth Tome We must address all our
requests, prayers, supplications, and giving of thanks to him who is God above
all, by the living word who is also God, etc. that is to say, by Jesus Christ.
And a little after, we hold that we ought not (...), etc.
to call upon them, who them selves do invoke, for that they had rather that
we should address our prayers to God, whom themselves do call upon.

And in the eight Tome, (...) etc.
We ought to pray to none but God alone, and his only Son.

And in the same place, (...).
we ought to make God alone favorable and merciful toward us, who is Lord of
all things: We must seek his favor by piety, and by the other virtues: but if
any man think, that beside him we ought further to seek the favors of some
others, let him consider, that as the body moving, the shadow does stir with
it, in like manner when any man has God propitious and favorable unto him, he
has by a consequent all the Angels and souls and spirits for his friends.
Which is so much the more to be considered, because in that very place he
says, that the Angels have care of good men, and yet he will not that we
invoke any other but God.

Athanasius and all the Fathers who disputed against the Arrians, prove the
divinity of Jesus Christ by that we ought to invoke him, and accuse the
Arians of Idolatry, for that they adored and prayed unto him, whom they thought
to have been created. Read the Book of the life of Saint Anthony and the
book of the Incarnation of the word, Therefore says he (...).
If thou adore the man Christ, because the divine word dwells in him, Adore
by like reason the Saints, because of God who dwells in them.

The same Athanasius in his fourth Sermon against the Arians, Jacob did not
invoke any other but God, (...).
deliver me O Lord, said he, from the my brother Esau, again, David did not
call upon any other but God to be delivered. And a little after, it is a thing
clear and plain that the Patriarch did not adioyne any other in his prayers
with God, but he which is the word, which he calls Angel, because it is he
alone who does manifest the Father unto us. Which has also been practiced by
the Apostle when he says, Grace be unto you, and peace from God our Father,
and from JESUS CHRIST. And a little before he mocketh at him, who prays thus,
God and his Angel help thee. Now a days we hear no other thing then these
words, to pray unto God and his mother: again, recommend your self to God,
and Monsieur Saint Rock or Saint Fiacre.

Chrysostom in the Homily of the advancement of the Gospel. Tom. 3. col. 1046
Non opus est by patronis apudt Deum neque multo discursu: sed licet solus sis,
patronoque careas, and per te ipsum Deu^ preceris: omnino tamen voti compos
eris Nequeenim tam facile Deus annuit cum alij pro nob is orant, vt cum ipsimet
oramus, etia^si plurimis pleni simus malis.
Thou have no need of advocates toward God, nor of much discourse: for albeit
thou art alone, and have no advocate, and that thou pray unto God by thy self,
thou shall obtain thy desire: for God does not hear so willingly when others
pray for us, as when we pray our selves although we be full of many evils.
And he shows it by the example of the Woman of Canaan, who was not heard when
the Apostles prayed for her, but when she prayed her self.

The same in his 16. Homily upon diverse passages of Saint Matthew. If thou
mean to make supplication to a man, thou ask what he is doing, and he
perhaps falls asleep in hearing thee, or has not the leisure, or else some
servant will not daigne to answer thee, But toward God there is no need of
all this, but in what part soever thou be and thou call upon him, he hears
(...), etc.
thee. There is no need of a Porter, nor of a mediator, nor of a servant, or
Officer, but only say, have pity upon me. Then he adds, this Woman says, I
know no good works in my self, I cannot repose confidence upon my good life:
I have recourse to thy mercy who art the safe harbor for sinners. Tell me
woman, how durst thou being a sinner and wicked, approach unto him? I know
says she, what I will do. See the wisdom of this woman: she prays not
James, She does not beseech Ioh. she goes not to Peter, she does not regard
the whole company of the Apostles: she seeks no Mediator, but instead of all
these, she takes Patience for her companion, which holds the place of her
advocate, and comes directly to the first fountain. For this end came he
down from heaven for this end did he take flesh and was made man, to the end
that I might speak unto him.

There are found in this Father some passages, wherein he recommendeth the
intercession of the Saints, but it is of the living Saints, for the scripture
in a hundred places does so call the faithful. But our adversaries produce
those places for invocation of the dead: being falsaries in this point as in
others Add, that we have never denied, but that the Saints do intercede for
the Church in general, but it does not follow thereupon, that we ought to
invoke them or to serve them, God having not commanded it, yea having
forbidden it, and they not knowing our hearts, and besides Jesus Christ calling
us unto himself.

Saint Jerome in the Epitaph of Nepotian holds for a thing assured, that he
is in the heavenly glory. Scimus N^potian^ nost^um esse cum Chr^sto and
sanctorum mix^^ choris.
We know says he that our friend Nepotian is with Christ and mingled among the
quier of Saints. And nevertheless, he holds that Nepotian neither understood
nor saw the things, which were said or done in the earth. For he says,
Quicquid dixero quia ill^ no audit mutu^ videtur
Whatsoever I shall say unto him, will seem dumb because he hears it not.
Cum quo loqui non possumus de eo loqui nunqua^ desinamus.
Again let us not cease to speak of Nepotian, with whom we can no longer
speak. Again, Felix Nepotianus qui haec non videt, qui haec non audit.
happy Nepotian, who neither hears nor sees these things. Thence it came
that many of the ancients did pray those who were about to die, to have them
inremembrance, when they should be in Paradise: because they thought it would
be to late to pray unto them after their death.

The same Jerome Lib 4 cap. 14. Quod si in aliquo fiducia est, in solo Domino
confidamus. Maledictus enim omnis homo qui spem habet in homine, qua^uis sancti
sint, qua^uis prophetae.
upon Ezechiell, if there be confidence in any, let us put our confidence in
God alone, for cursed is the man who trusts in man, albeit they be Saints,
albeit they be Prophets.

Agreeable to Origin in the 4. Homily upon Ezechiell toward the end. Ad cos
qui in sanctis fiduciam habent, non incongrue profertur exemplum Maledictus
homo qui spem habet in homine.
To those who put their confidence in Saints, this example may fitly be
applied, cursed is the man who puts his hope in the Saints.

There is among the works of Saint Jerome, a commentary upon the Proverbs,
which whether it be of Beda or of Jerome, it contains this sentence Lib. 1.
cap. 2. Nullum inuocare id est in nos orando vocare, nisi Deum debemus.
We ought not to invoke, that is to say, to call toward us by prayers any
other then God.

Saint Austine in his twenty two tract upon Saint John. Hoc tibi dicit Saluator
tuus Non est quo eas nisi ad me. Non est qua eas nisi per me.
This is it which thy Savior says unto thee, thou have not whether to go
save only to me, neither cannest thou go, save only by me.

And upon the Psalm 118. Oration quae non sit per Christum non solum non potest
delere peccatum, sed etiam ipsa sit in peccatum.
the prayer which is not made through Jesus Christ, cannot only not blot out
sin, but it self is turned into sin: and against the Epistle of Parmenian,
Lib, 2. cap 8 Nam si esset mediator Paulus, essent vtique and caeteri Apostoli
ac sic multi mediatores essent. Nec ipsi Pa^lo consta retratio qua dixerat.
Vnus Deus, Vnus mediator etc.
if S. Paul were mediator, so should the rest of the Apostles be, and by that
means there should be many Mediators, and so Saint Paul should have mistaken
himself in saying, there is one only God, and one only Mediator. Now it is
to be noted, that he does not speak in that Chapter, but of Mediator of
intercession; for he disputes against Parmenian who had called the Bishop
Mediator between God and men: howbeit Parmenian did not understand that the
Bishop was the Redeemer of the people. The same Doctor has made a book of the
care to be had of the dead, wherein he disputes at large that the dead know
not that which is done here beneath, neither do they intermeddle with the
affairs of the living: his reasons are, that if that were so, his dear mother
Monica, who had followed him by Sea and by Land, would not have forsaken him;
but would have stood by him every night. That Abraham himself, father of the
Israelites, knew not his posterity, which also complayneth thereof in Esaias:
that God himself promised to Josias for a great blessing, that he should not
see the evils denounced against that people, but that he should die before:
whereupon he concludes; Ibi ergo sunt spiritus desanctorum vbi non vident
quaecunque aguntur, aut eueniunt in ista vita hominibus. Quomodo ergo vident
tumulos suos aut corpora sua, vtrum abiecta iaceant an sepulta?
The spirits then of the deceased are in place, where they see not all the
things which are done, or which happen unto men in this life. How then should
they see their graves or their corpse, whether they lie cast out and abandoned,
or whether they be buried?

And in c. 15. Proinde fatendum est nescire quidem mortuos quid hic ^gitur dum
hic agitur: postea vero audire ab eis qui hinc ad eos moriendo pergunt.
We must confess that the dead know nothing of that which is done here, whilst
it is a doing, but that they understand it aftewards from those, who dying, go
from hence unto them. Yet doubtless not all things, but that which is
permitted them to declare unto those to whom it is granted to have it in
remembrance, and that which is expedient for them to know. They may also learn
something of the Angels, who have intercourse while things are done here below.
I make the Reader Judge, how we can call upon the Saints departed, if we must
stand, till some one of our friends die to report our prayers unto them, or if
it be necessary that an Angel should go from hence below, to advertise them
above. Observe also that this good Doctor never bethought himself of that
looking-glass forged of late: for indeed he never took his degrees in the
faculty of Divinity.

As touching public service, it is certain that at the celebration of the
Eucharist, there was commemoration made of the Saints deceased, but without
inuocating them, as S. Austin witnesses in his two and twentieth book of the
City of God, chap 10. Ad quod sacrificium sicut homines Dei qui mundum eius
confessione vicerunt fuo loco and ordine nominantur. Non tamen a sacerdote qui
sacrificat inuocantur.
At this sacrifice the Martyrs as men of God, who have overcome the world in
confessing him, are named in their place and in their rank, but They are not
Inuocated by the Priest, who sacrifices. And to the same end the third
Council of Carthage in the three and twentieth Canon ordayneth very expressly,
Cum ad altar assistitur, semper ad patrem d rigatur Oration.
that when they stand at the Altar, the prayer be always addressed to God the
Father: not then to the Saints, as they do now adays in many Masses.

In his twentieth book against Faustus the Manichee: Cap. 21: Colimus martyrs
eo cultu dilectionis and societatis quo and in hac vita coluntur sancti homines.
We honor the Martyrs with the same honor of love and society, wherewith men
honor the holy men of God, which are in this life. True it is that he
acknowledges, that it is with more assurance, because they have surpassed all
danger: but he always acknowledges that it is one and the same kind of
honor. It is not then to invoke them or to adore them, and it is that
service which is yielded to living men, which he affirms to be called Dulia,
whence it follows that it is not a religious worship. And therefore also in
his book of the true Religion, c. 55. Tom: 1: Non sit vobis religio cultus
hominum mortuorum quia si pie vixerunt non sic habentur, vt tales quaerant
honores, sed illum a nobis coli volunt, quo illuminante laetantur merito sui
nos esse consortes:
Let not the service, says he, of men departed, be your religion, if they have
lived holily, they are in that state that they crave not these honors. And a
little after, We must honor them for imitation, but we must not adore them by
any Religion.

The same Author in his manual to Laurentius cap. 114. Non nisi a Domino Deo
petere debemus quicquid speramus nos vel boni operaturos vel pro bonis operibus
adepturos.
We ought not to crave from any other, but from God, the good which we hope
either to do, or to procure as a Stipend of our good works.

In his book of Ecclesiastical Determinations, cap. 81. Secreta cogitationis
solus ille nouit ad quem dicitur: Tu solus nosti corda filiorum bominum:
He alone knows the secrets of the hearts, to whom it is said, Thou alone
know the hearts of the sons of men.

These passages, a few amongst many, shall suffice for this time, against which
our adversaries produce some places drawn out of forged books, or out of the
ill governed devotion of some particular men contrary to the public belief.
And if there be any examples found of some few who have prayed Ad memorias
Martyrum, before or near the sepulchers of the Martyrs, our adversaries
persuade the ignorant that these prayers were made unto the Martyrs, in stead
that they were made unto God to praise him for the assistance given unto the
Martyrs, and to crave of God the like grace.

Above all it is considerable, that Coeffeteau does touch but the half of the
question, and wardeth but half the blows: for he endeuoreth to prove that we
must invoke the Saints, which is but a little piece of the abuse. For the
Church of Rome does not stay there, she craves of God salvation, not only
through the intercession of the Saint, but also through their merits: Quorum
precibus meritisque rogamus
Which is not to go to God by the Saints, but contrariwise to lead God to the
Saints, and to represent him their merits. This is also to pray unto God with
an indiscretion; which would be accounted impudent in speaking to a King: If
any man should ask him a favor or benefit for the merits of another. And
this so unworthy a prayer is accompanied with a superstitious iesture, Oramus
te Domine per merita Sanctorum quorum relliquiae hic sunt and omnium sanctorum,
vt indulgere digneris omnia p^ccata mea.
when the Priest bowing himself over the Altar, says, We pray thee, O Lord, by
the merits of the Saints, whose relics are here (for every Altar is a Tomb)
and generally of all the Saints, that thou will vouchsafe to pardon all my
sins. Of such a prayer Coeffeteau has not been able to produce any example.

No more then of this damnable opinion, which holds, that the merits of the
Saints do serve to fill up the measure of the merits of Jesus Christ; Lib. 1:
de Indulg. cap: 4.
in that being adjoined to the merits of Jesus Christ, and put together into
the treasury of the Church, they are employed by the Pope for the redemption
and discharge of the punishment of our sins: whence also it is that Cardinal
Bellarmine says, that in some sort they are our redeemers. How comes it to
pass, that Coeffeteau holds his peace hereat, and alleges not any father?
and has forgotten to excuse the Priest, who in his Confiteor which he says at
the entrance of the Mass, confesses his sins to God, to the Virgin Marie,
to Michael th'arch-Angell, and to the Saints, but not to Jesus Christ.

ARTICLE IX. Touching Masses without Communicants and without Assistants.
But if the Romish Church has coined new Articles of faith, The KINGS
Confession.
never heard of in the first 500. years after Christ, I hope I shall never be
condemned for an Heretic, for not being a Nouelist. Such are the private
Masses, where the Priest plays the part both of the Priest and of the people.

If ever man turned his back and shamefully fled, it is Coeffeteau in this
place: We expected from him the defense of private Masses by the word of God,
or at least that he should have produced unto us the practice of the ancient
Church, or some examples of private masses in the first five hundred years
after Jesus Christ; seeing that the King of great Britain does limit him to
that term, but of all this not a word. But rather he turns aside his
Discourse, and casts himself upon the sacrifice of the mass, Fol. 22. page
1.
heaping up many passages of the Fathers, who call the Eucharist a sacrifice. He
says only that it is not necessary that a sacrifice be offered by many, that
in times past the greatest sacrifice of the Synagogue was done by the high
Priest alone in the holy of holies; that the fathers in many places called the
Eucharist a sacrifice. That the essence of the sacrifice does not depend from
the assistants: That the virtue of this Oblation is always one as well in, as
out of solemnities. Add hereunto that the action cannot be private, albeit the
Priest do it in particular, seeing that he is a public person: That S. Austin
speaking of a place haunted with wicked spirits, says, that one of his Priests
went thither, and offered the Sacrifice of the body of Christ, The Answer. The
Priest in the Mass says that he does offer Sacrificiu^ laudis pro redemptione
animarum.
which could no otherwise be done, but privately and without solemnity.

I answer, that Coeffeteau takes much pains to no purpose; for we agree with
the Fathers, that the holy supper is a Sacrifice; but yet a Sacrifice
Eucharisticall, that is, a giving of thanks, not propitiatory for the
redemption of souls, where Christ is really sacrificed; which we shall see
hereafter. Yea were it such a sacrifice as our adversaries would have it, yet
ought it to be celebrated with the communion of assistants, because God has
so commanded.

1 Christ Jesus saying to the assistants, take, eat, commands them to
participate.

2 Again he adds, Do this, that in the celebration thereof we should follow
his example.

And the Apostle S. Paul, 1. cor. 10.16. defines this Sacrament by the
Communion, saying, That the bread which we break is the communion of the body
of Christ.

4 The Apostle there adds words that strike sure; We are all partakers of
one bread: then all ought to participate.

5 Also the word supper, which he uses in the twentieth verse of the Chapter
following, signifies a common supper, and imports a communion: and we have
elsewhere declared, that all ancient Writers do call this Sacrament a supper.
Now what can be more absurd, then to inuit people to a supper, to look on,
and eat nothing? Who ever heard tell of a feast, where the inuiter does eat
alone? They reply, that at a Feast people cannot be forced to eat: whereunto I
say, that if they should not be compelled, they should at least be entreated to
eat: but in private Masses there are none invited, and the Priest is often
alone: I say farther, that the guests should be constrained to eat; if God
have so expressly commanded: and he has commanded to take, eat, and
communicate in this holy supper. It is no wonder then, if the word Supper, be
grown odious, and out of use seeing it serves to discover the abuse, and that
the Etymology thereof is a kind of commandment.

6 Besides, what resemblance is there between Christ set at the Table with his
Apostles, distributing the bread and the cup to every of them, and the Priest
that not only eats and drinks by himself, but is often alone, and grumbles
some few words unheard upon the Host.

7 More especially it is to be considered, that the Church of Rome teaches,
that the Eucharist is not only a sacrifice, but also a Sacrament: whence it
follows, that although the Eucharist, as it is a sacrifice, may be performed
without Communicants, yet as it is the Sacrament of that Communion which we
have together with Jesus Christ, so is the communion thereof among many
required as necessary: which shows how impertinently Coeffeteau speaks, That
it is not necessary that the Sacrifice be offered by many, and that the essence
of the Sacrifice depends not of the Communicants, and that the virtue of the
Sacrifice is still the same, both with the ceremonies and without them: seeing
we do not here speak of the Eucharist, as it is a sacrifice, but a Sacrament.
If any Sophister make answer, that the essence of the Sacrament consists not
in the Communion, but in the consecration: my replication is, that it
contradicts the Apostle, who defines this sacrament by the Communion, as we
have seen, and definitions are the very essence of things. Again, the
communion of one bread, has an essential reference to our Communion with
Jesus Christ: which two words are relatiues, whereof the former depends upon the
latter. Touching the pretended consecration of the Church of Rome, it cannot be
of the essence of the sacrament, for every sacrament is a holy sign, but this
consecration is not a holy sign, because it does not signify any thing, no
body understands any thing, or sees any thing. In the book of the Apology,
chap. 7.
And we have declared in it place, that the true consecration is done by
prayer, and the ancients so believed.

8 No^withstanding, let us grant that the Communion is not of the essence of
the Sacrament, does it therefore follow that it is not necessary? Is there not
validity in Gods commandment to make it necessary? Is there nothing necessary
besides that which is of the essence of things? then shall not the law or the
Gospel be necessary for men, because they are not of the essence of men: and
so shall it not be necessary for Coeffeteau to draw his breath, because it is no
part of his effence, there can nothing be said more wide from the purpose.

9 Touching that which he adds, that the chief sacrifice of the Synagogue
was performed by the High Priest alone within the Holy of Holies: I do admire
the negligent rashness of this Doctor, that he dares speak of the Scripture,
before he read it; for had he read it, he would have found the contrary; he
should have seen that the blood which the High Priest alone carried into the
Sanctum Sanctoru^, was the blood of a beast already sacrificed in the Court,
upon the altar of burnt offerings, in the presence of the people; and there was
no sacrifice more public, or more solemnly performed. Is there any such a
nouice in the sacred History, that ever thought that Aaron did sacrifice or
offer any beast within the place that was most holy? It was then a sprinkling
of blood which he made upon the Arc, as the conclusion of the public
sacrifice, and was no sacrifice done in private. Read the thirtieth of Exodus
and the sixteenth of Leuiticus.

10 Of like stuff is that which he adds, that Masses without Communicants or
assistants, cannot be said to be private, because the Priest is a public
person: this is a goodly conceit. So then if a Minister do pray alone in the
Church, his prayer shall be a public prayer. And should not this Minister
deserve a green coat, if being alone he should say, Attend my Masters, when
he reprehended the walls? yet this is that which the Massing Priest in private
does; at which private Masses being all alone, he says, Orate pro me fratres,
Brethren pray for me: and which is more, he says, Accipite and man ducate ex
hoc omnes; Take and eat all of this: and yet offers nothing to any body, but
eats alone With like abuse does he say, Vt quot quot ex hac altaris
participatione sumpserimus, etc. That al we which by the participation of the
Altar, have received: the body, etc Whereupon the question is asked, to whom
the Priest speaks, when he says, Brethren pray for me. Pope Innocent the
third does answer finely in the second book of the mysteries of the Mass,
chap. 25. It must (says he) be religiously believed, that the Angels do bear
them company that pray, according to the saying of the Prophet, I will sing
unto thee in the presence of the Angels. Which will also serve to resolve other
doubts, presuming that when the Priest says, Take, eat, he does invite the
Angels to eat, for they come with good stomachs. And so of the rest.

At length the place of Austin is brought, which is the only passage of
antiquity that Coeffeteau can find. This Father, lib. 22. De ciuit. Dei,
speaking of a place haunted with evil spirits, says, that one of his Priests
went, and offered a Sacrifice there: whereupon Coeffeteau says, that this could
not be done but privately and without solemnity: but he dares not to affirm,
that he had no assistants, or communicants; which is that which he should, or
else the place makes not to the purpose. And indeed we may presume the
contrary, forasmuch as S Austin speaks of a great house, and of some great
person of quality, that sent not for a Minister of the Church of Carthage to
celebrate the holy Sacrament, Nusquam express legimus a veter ibus oblatum
sacrificium sine communione al^cuius ve! aliquorum.
to leave him alone without assistants, or communicants: and indeed Bellarmine
confesses the impertinency of this place, lib. 2. de Missa cap. 9. where he
acknowledges, That there is no express place sound, where the auncrents have
offered the Sacrifice, without some Communicants.

The common excuse, and the same which the Council of Trent uses in the
seventh Session, is that it comes to pass through the indeuotion of the
people: which speech does both confess, and yet approve the abuse: for the same
Council adds, The holy Council does not forbid those Masses wherein the
Priest alone does communicate sacramentally, as private and unlawful, but does
approve and commend them: which their practice does prove; for if it be through
the want of devotion in the people, why do they not endeavor the remedy? for
if there be any question of casting into the box, if any business fall out
concerning tithes, and offerings, they easily find the means to hold the
people in the humor of contribution; neither do I find that the Cardinals,
and Bishops do communicate of^ener then the people.

For the Priests hinder the people from assisting them, because they say an
infinite number of Masses in private, and upon the sudden; of which they give
no warning. For three sundry persons will one Priest dispatch three Masses, to
every one his own, that each of them may pay for a whole Mass And they that
will have yearly Masses, do found yearly Pensions: for never was any private
Mass said for him that gave nothing; they use not to make God for nothing:
Masses are sold for more or less according to the provision that is made; and
if one pay for one Mass, is it any reason that another should equally share
with him? Yea they buy Masses for the souls of young children dying soon
after baptism, which they hold must needs be in Paradise: for if Masses do
no good to them that are dead, yet they profit those that are alive:
Doubtless it is couereousnesse that has hatched this abuse, and superstition
has fomented it.

These men do again reply, although but weakly: for (say they) if no
Communicants offer themselves, must the Sacrifice be therefore discontinued?
Let them hear S. Chrysostom thundering thereupon in the third Homily upon the
Ephesians: (...).
O custom! O presumption! in vain is Sacrifice daily offered, in vain do we
stand at the Altar, and none communicate. And a little after, Whosoever does
not communicate in these mysteries, is impudent and rash in standing by. And
further add, that they do falsely presume, that the holy supper is a Sacrifice,
in that sense which they take the word Sacrifice, as we shall presently see. Now
let us hear the testimonies of the Ancients. Peracta consecratione omnes
communic ent qui noluerint Ecclesiasticis carere liminibus, Sic enim and
Apostoli sta tuerunt and Sancta Romana tenet Ecclesia. Tanta in altario
holocausta offerantur quanta populo sufficere debeant, etc.


The ancient rule of the Church of the City of Rome, which is found in the
second Distinction of the consecration under the name of Anaclet, in the Canon
Peracta, is this, The consecration being ended, let all those communicate, that
will not be excluded out of the bounds of the Church: for so have the Apostles
ordained, and the Church of Rome observes.

And in the Canon Tribus gradibus, of the same Distinction, Let as many
offerings be laid upon the Table, as will serve for all the people to
communicate: and if any do remain, let them not be kept until the morrow.

And in the first Distinction of the Consecration in the Canon Hoc quoque, the
Pope speaks thus: It is ordained that no Priest presume to celebrate the
solemnities of the Mass, if he have not two others that may answer him, and
that the Priest be the third: because when he says in the plural number, The
Lord be with you, and that which he says in secret, pray for me, it is
apparently requisite that answer be made to his salutation.

Justin Martyr in the second of his Apology, The Deacons do disiribute the
bread to every one that is present.

Ignatius in the Epistle to the Philadelphians, (...). Dominica Coena omnibus
debet esse communis.
One loaf has been broken to all. S. Jerome upon the first to the Corinth.
cap. II. The supper of the Lord ought to be common unto all. The Reader may
compare this word, the common Supper, with the private Mass.

The Author of the Constitutions ascribed unto Clement, lib. 2. cap. 61. Let
every one receive the body of the Lord. And so have all the ancient
Liturgies, Accipiant singuli per se Dominicum corpus.
although they be much falsified: yea and some traces thereof are to be seen
in the Mass, where the Priest, though he be alone does always speak as unto
many communicants.

Cum ex more Diaconus clamaret, Si quis non communi at det locum.
Gregory the first, Bishop of Rome, in the second book of his Dialogues, chap.
13. says, that the Deacon according to the custom, cries, if there be any
that does not communicate, let him depart. And this was six hundred years
after Christ, and we could disscend lower. But this suffices against a man
that fears the trial, who being not able to allege against the King of
great Britain, any syllable of Scripture, no nor any of the Ancients that
speak of private Masses, does fly from the matter and desperately runs into
the disputation of the Sacrifice of the Mass. We may let him run, seeing he
betakes himself to his heels; yet let us give him this above his bargain.

Of the Sacrifice of the Mass.
AS all errors go hand in hand, and are linked together, so the opinion of
the Sacrifice of the Mass, has drawn private Masses after it: for after it
began to be believed, that in the Mass the Priest does really sacrifice Christ
Jesus for the price, and ransom of our souls; man's reason witty to deceive it
self, has presumed that this payment cannot but be good, though made in a
corner, and that payment may be made for us without our assistance: for to
celebrate the Sacrament of the Communion which we have together with Jesus
Christ, a communion of many is necessarily required: but to offer a payment
unto God, retchlesse ignorance has held it less requisite for many to be
assistants: this is the reason why this wound must be searched to the quick,
and this abuse carefully discovered; besides, this point troubles us the more,
because to go to Mass, and be a Roman Catholic, are taken in one
signification.

The Council of Trent in the two and twentieth Session declares, that in the
Mass Christ is really sacrificed as a true propitiatory sacrifice for the
sins of the living and the dead: by reason whereof, when the Bishop orders
a Priest, after he has anointed him in sundry places of his body, he lays
his hands upon him, and says, Accipe potestatem offerendi sacrificium Deo
Missasque celebrandi tam pro viuis quam pro defunctis.
Receive power to offer Sacrifice unto God, and to celebrate Mass both for the
living and the dead. So he confirms him a Sacrificer, to sacrifice Christ
Jesus really for a propitiatory sacrifice. And this sacrifiice is called the
Mass, which is celebrated by a Priest clad with aenigmaticall and allegorical
robes, with a thousand feats and gesticulations by tale, and in words not
intelligible; therefore the people use to say, Let us go hear a Mass, but if
one should phrase it thus, as the Apostles do, Act. 2. and 20.
Let us go break bread, or, Let us go to the Lords Supper, he should be
thought either to be out of his wits, or to deserve the Inquisition: for in
this admirable age the language of the Holy Ghost is become either ridiculous,
or prodigious, or unseasonable.

Being then armed with the word of God, let us gently sift out the falsehood,
that here offers it self more then half unmasked, for the errors are
palpable.

1 First we demand of our Masters: who has authorized the Bishops to
establish Sacrificers in the Church of Christ? Here they are silent, and can
never answer to the purpose; and so the Priests are convinced to have no
calling, but an imaginary charge brought into the Church without the
commandment of God: as if one should bring in Fiddlers or Fencers among the
Counselors of State, to make them sit in the Kings Courts: and place
Sacrificers in equal rank with faithful Pastors, and Bishops of the flock.

2 Again we ask of them, who has instituted this propitiatory sacrifice of
the Mass, where Jesus Christ is really sacrificed? They answer, that Christ
has instituted it. Enquire farther, where, and in what words of the
Institution of the Eucharist, they allege these words, Do this in remembrance
of me: An admirable proof; Do this, that is to say, Sacrifice me really under
the forms of the bread and wine, is a Sacrifice propitiatory for the living and
the dead. O fruitful words in consequences, which like ringing bells, may be
made speak answerably to every man's imagination.

3 But let us take them according to their own words: for they themselves
confess, that by these words, (do this) Christ has commanded to do that which
himself did: then must they show us, that Christ in this Sacrament offered his
body for a sacrifice, and there are they grauelled, and put to silence: it is
easy to find what Christ offered to his Disciples, when he said, Take, eat;
but it appears not that he offered any thing unto God.

4 Neither did Christ use any elevation, a Ceremony used in Sacrifices, which
the Priest observes also in the Mass.

5 Also the Apostles perform no adoration: against the nature of every
Sacrifice, which does necessarily require adoration in those that offer.

6 Besides, whosoever does offer unto God, addresseth himself by speech, and
otherwise unto God: but Christ in the whole form of the institution of the
Eucharist, neither addresseth himself unto God, nor speaks to any but his
Apostles.

7 Yea these words, Do this in remembrance of me, do call our adversaries to
a trial: for if Do this, signify Sacrifice me, it then follows, that Do
this in remembrance of me, signifies Sacrifice me in memory of me: which is a
sense absurd and incompatible: for the memorial of a thing cannot be the thing
it self: no man offers a present in remembrance of the present; not would
sacrifice a Lamb in memory of the Lamb; so does he not sacrifice Jesus Christ
in remembrance of Christ.

8 But will we have these words, Do this, expounded? Let us then learn them
of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 11.25.26. Jesus took the cup, saying, This cup is the
new Testament in my blood, do this as often as ye drink it in remembrance of
me; for as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye show the
Lords death till that he come. Then to do this in remembrance of Jesus Christ,
is to eat the bread and drink the cup, to show or celebrate his death.

9 Some thinking here to show their wits, argue thus: Every pouring out of
blood for the remission of sins is a sacrifice: but Christ says that in the
Eucharist his blood is shed for the remission of sins: therefore the
Eucharist is a sacrifice.

Whereunto I answer, that both the propositions of this Argumunt are false;
yea the second is contrary to the Church of Rome. It is false that the shedding
of blood for the remission of sins is a sacrifice, unless this blood be
offered unto God for an Oblation, and with the death of the Sacrifice the blood
whereof is shed. Now here you see not, that Jesus Christ did offer any thing
unto God, nor that he suffered death in the Eucharist. The second proposition
is also false; for it is true that Christ says in this Sacrament, that his
blood is shed, but says not that it is shed in this Sacrament He speaks of the
effusion of his blood upon the Cross, which he was to do immediately after:
for Christ does often speak of his death approaching, as if it were at hand;
as in the tenth of John, ver. 17. I lay down my life, that I may take it up
again. And a little before, I give down my life for my sheep. S. Paul says
in like manner, 2. Tim 4 6. For I am now offered, because he should be
sacrificed soon after: Which is confirmed by the Mass it self, and by the
Latin Translation of the Bible, which the Council of Trent will have only
received, which says, Qui pro vobis effunditur, which shall be shed for you;
expressly translating the present tense by the future, to show that Christ
spoke not of an effusion of blood to be presently made, but to be done soon
after. Bellarmine answers, this shedding might be understood in both tenses;
but I say it could not be, for Christ here gave us not words with double
visages, nor does he by one word signify two effusions of blood so
disagreeable: and beside the Canon of the Mass, and the Roman Bible should
have idly translated the present tense by the future, if it might, and should
be taken in the present tense.

And this is the place where the perplexity of the error appears, which hew
and interferre, that it self is not understood: for our adversaries say, that
under the forms the blood of Christ is shed, but yet runs not out of his
veins: that it is shed and yet stirs not: and howbeit every effusion be a
motion, yet it is an effusion without effusion. And which is more, Effusio est
extra fusio.
they say this Sacrifice is unbloody: whence it follows, that there is no
effusion of blood; that is to say, that it is of blood not bloody, as if one
should say a heat, not hot, or whiteness, not white: so they lead us
blindfolded: for there is nothing that a man will not say, that thinks he
speaks unto beasts; or that will mock God himself.

But especially note, that these Masters say, that the body is also in the cup,
yea in every drop of the cup: so that he which ouerturnes the cup, ouerturnes
the flesh and the bones: so these Doctors by a new Alchymie distill the body of
our Savior: And that they may puzle plain people, As if one should say, the
forms of a man, or of a tre^ in stead of h^s length, or his color.
they say that the blood of Christ is shed under the accidents of Wine, which
they do fraudulently call the forms But we enquire not of them under what the
blood is shed, but whether it be shed or no: for that which is really shed
under another thing, is not there shed the less.

The quality of our redemption, and the only sacrifice of our Redeemer, do
arm us with invincible proofs against this strange error. We demand of these
Masters, whether the sacrifice of the Cross, and the sacrifice of the Mass
be two, or one and the same sacrifice. For fear we should accuse them of
confessing another propitiatory sacrifice beside that of the Cross; they say
that the Mass is the same with the sacrifice of the Cross: but this we may
easily disprove, and prove that the sacrifice of the Cross, and that of the
Mass cannot be one sacrifice: our reasons are

1 First the sacrifice of the Mass, and that of the Cross cannot be one
sacrifice, because the definition of one agrees not with the other: for the
sacrifice of the Cross, is the death of Jesus Christ offered upon the Cross
for our redemption: but the Mass is not the death of Jesus Christ, etc. and
then is not the Mass the sacrifice of the Cross.

2 The proprieties and circumstances differ: the sacrifice of the Cross was
painful, this of the Mass is without pain: the sacrifice of the Cross was
bloody, this is not bloody: one was visible, the other is invisible, and none
does see Christ, who they say is offered: the one has been offered, and is
not reiterable, for Christ died but once: the other is infinitely reiterated,
and in infinite places at one time: that was immediately performed by Christ,
and this is done by the ministry of a Priest.

3 So do they also much differ in virtue and efficacy; for the death of Christ
which he once suffered, was sufficient to redeem the whole world from eternal
damnation: but the Sacrifice of the Mass is prized at a very low rate, for
there must be a great number of them to redeem one poor soul out of
Purgatory: they are sold in the Country for six blanckes, but at Paris they
cost more. The first of the nine days after the Popes death, Lib. 1. Sacrarum
Ceremoniar. Sect. 15. cap. 2.
there are two hundred Masses said for his soul, and upon each of the eight
days following there is one Mass said, to deliver his pontifical soul out
of Purgatory: yea for five hundred years together there are Masses sung for
some deceased persons that have enriched some Monastery; yea scarce fifty
thousand Masses are sufficient for one soul.

4 To be short, seeing the sacrifice of the Cross is nothing but the death of
Jesus Christ, no man will believe, that the Mass wherein Christ dies not, is
the same sacrifice with his death.

5 Hereunto can we have no answer from them to the purpose: for they only
say, that it is the same host, both in the Mass, and upon the Cross, to wit,
the body of Jesus Christ, and therefore that it is the same sacrifice.

I answer, that put the case, that in the Mass Christ be really sacrificed,
as well as on the Cross, yet does it not follow that it were the same
sacrifice: it should indeed be the same thing sacrificed, but not the same
sacrifice. For a sacrifice, to speak properly, is not the thing sacrificed,
but the action of offering: and the very Etymology of the word Sacrifice
imports the doing, or action; which Bellarmine confesses, Lib. 1. de Missa,
cap. 2. where having set down the definition of a Sacrifice,. Primo igitur.
Hoc loco sacrificium accipimus pro action sacrificandi non autem pro victima.
Et lib 2. c. 4.. Secundum Sacrificium est actio, non res permanens.
he says that by Sacrifice he understands the action of sacrificing, and not
the thing sacrificed.

6 Observe farther, that although the death of Jesus Christ, and the Mass
should be the same sacrifice in kind, and that one definition agreed to
either, yet should they not be the same action in number: for it is well known,
that there are in number many Masses: and indeed two Masses do cost more then
one; for were there not many Masses in number, it were very absurd to number
them, as they do that sell them: again, one action done, cannot be the same
in number, with one that is not done: one blow given yeasterday, cannot be the
same in number, with that which shall be given to morrow: else should a thing
to come be past, that is, should be, and should not be. If then Masses do
differ in number among themselves, why shall they not differ in number from the
death of Christ? Seeing that between the death of Jesus Christ, and the Mass
there is more difference then between two Masses, how diverse soever in show?
The matter being thus plain, these Doctors will not deny, that the Sacrifice
of the Cross and the Mass, do differ in number that is, that there is as
much difference between the Mass, and the sacrifice of the Cross, as between
Philip and Alexander: And then it is not the same sacrifice, for Philip and
Alexander are not the same man.

7 Whereupon the Reader may observe, how these men are entangled: they say that
the Mass is the reiteration of the Sacrifice of the Cross; not conceiving
that they do thereby acknowledge that the Mass is not the same thing with the
Eucharist, which Christ celebrated with his Disciples; for that was not the
reiteration of the sacrifice of the Cross, because that was not yet offered:
and they are only actions past, which are reiterated.

8 Yea the sacrifice of the Cross being finished, whosoever afterward would
reiterate the same, should of necessity reiterate the death of Jesus Christ,
and crucify him again: for the sacrifice of the Cross, and the death of
Christ are one, and the same thing.

9 Now were it that proofs of Scripture were of authority among us, this
difference were soon decided. The Apostle, Heb. 10.14. says, (...). Vnica
Oblatione
that Christ with one offering has consecrated for ever them that are
sanctified. Lo then one oblation, and the virtue thereof for ever. And to
exclude all re-iteration, he says in the tenth verse, That we are sanctified
by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ ONCE made: (...).
and more plainly does he exclude this re-iteration about the end of the ninth
Chapter. As it is (says he) appointed unto men to die once, and after that
comes the judgment: so Christ being offered once, shall appear the second
time without sin unto them that look for him, unto salvation. So that
according to the judgment of the Apostle, the offering of Christ can be no
more re-iterated then the death of men: nay he says, that after the death of
men, nothing is looked for but the judgment, so after the offering once made
by Jesus Christ, nothing is expected but his second coming.

10 Which does also prevent the evasion of our adversaries, which say, that the
sacrifice of Jesus Christ cannot indeed be re iterated with blood, but that it
may and ought to be re-iterated without blood: for this cannot agree with the
Apostles comparison, seeing the death of a man killed bloudily cannot be
re-iterated without blood, as it may be semblably affirmed of the bloody
sacrifice of our Savior.

11 Again, this re-iteration without blood of a bloody sacrifice should have
his ground in the holy Scripture; but our adversaries do thence allege
neither commandment, nor example.

12 And it is to be marvelled, that the two third parts of the Epistle to the
Hebrews being spent in speaking of the Sacrifice, and the Priesthood of the
New Testament, and of his prerogatives above the sacrifices of the law; yet in
the whole Epistle is there not one word found, either of this unbloody
sacrifice, nor of the sacrificing Jesus Christ under the forms of bread and
wine. Surely then, or not at all, was it fit to treat thereof. The Apostle
discoursing so largely of the Sacrifice of the new Testament, should he have
forgotten the matter wherein it only consists, if we credit these men?
should he have omitted the most essential point, and principally necessary to
his purpose?

13 But where is the judgment of these great suble Doctors, that perceived
not, that in saying that a bloody sacrifice might be re-iterated without blood,
they do contradict themselves? Who would not laugh if I should say, that a
race might be run over again, without moving out of the place, or that
Coeffeteau does repeat his speech while he holds his peace, or that he
warmes himself again whiles he freezeth? And yet this is it which these
Masters say, who will have a bloody sacrifice re-iterated without blood, a
bloody action done again vnbloudily; and that it is the same action: if one
believe them, he does not believe, for they say, and unsay, and I assure my
self that they believe not themselves.

14 The same Apostle, chap. 9. ver. 22 (and this place is very considerable)
after he has spoken of sacrifices and purifications, concludes with this
general Maxim, without shedding of blood there is no remission of sins. If
then the Mass be an unbloody sacrifice, it procures no remission of sins:
for the Apost to show that he speaks not only of Jewish sacrifices that are
abolished, but also of the present time, speaks in the present tense, saying,
Without shedding of blood there is no remission of sins: And in truth, the
sacrifices of the law were not propitiatory, if they were not bloody, to give
us to understand, that the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ must be with blood, and
that an unbloody sacrifice is not the sacrifice of Jesus Christ. So that then
it follows that the Mass is not the sacrifice of Jesus Christ, and that the
ancient sacrifices were not figures of the Mass, as our adversaries will have
them: for the shedding of blood cannot be the figure of an action without
effusion of blood. Now if under the new Testament an unbloody sacrifice may be
propitiatory, who sees not, that for the same respects the sacrifices without
blood under the law might have bin propitiatory, and had more relation unto the
Mass.

15 Hereunto add the confession of Cardinal Bellarmine, lib. 1. de Missa,
cap. 2. In every sacrifice (says he) properly so called, there is required
some sensible thing that may be offered:. Secundum. In omni sacrificio proprie
dicto requiritur res aliqua sensibilis quae offeratur.
but in the Mass, that which they pretend to offer, to wit, the body of Jesus
Christ, is not sensible, neither does any see, or perceive it: for to say that
it is visible, under the forms of bread which cover it, is to say, that it is
visible, because the forms hide it, and hinder the sight: this is to say, that
they see it, because they see it not; Bell. l. 1. de Missa cap. 12.
howsoever Bellarmine boast of seeing it, for he has no other eyes then
common people have.. Haec sententia verum and reale sacrificium veram and
realem mortem and sacrificium rei immolatae desiderat Gregory of Valence says
the same in the first book of the Sacrifice of the Mass. Cap. 27. l. 1..
Tertio.


The same Cardinal in the seven and twentieth Chapter of the same book,
says, That a true and real Sacrifice requires a real death, or destruction
of the thing sacrificed. Now in the Mass the thing which they say is
sacrificed, to wit Jesus Christ, does not really dye, nor is destroyed:
therefore the Mass is no true and real Sacrifice. To this they reply, and it
is Bellarmines evasion, that the natural essence of Jesus Christ is not
destroyed in the Mass, but his sacramental being. First then (say we) seeing
that the essential being of Jesus Christ is not destroyed in the Mass, it
follows that the natural essence of Jesus Christ is not offered in the Mass;
and then is it another sacrifice then that of the Cross, where he offered his
essential being: Secondly, For it is certain, that that is the destruction of
Christ's natural being, which is the price of our redemption; and then if the
Mass do offer and sacrifice another essence of Christ, then does it not offer
the price of our redemption: Thirdly, Besides, this Sacramental essence is a
mere Chimera; for one man can have but one being, 2. de Consecrat. Can.
Sacrificium This is taken out of S. Austin l. 10. de Ciuit. Dei cap. 5. and
Epist. 5 Scotus in 4. did. 10. Quest 5. Oculi Christi subspecie panis non
recipient obiecta etc. and Quaest. 7. Corpus Christi vt hic non respirat aerem,
etc.. Aly vi verborum Hoc est corpus meum, solum Christi corpus sine anima and
sine sanguine incipit esse inaltari and vi aliorum verborum Hic est sangurs
incipit sanguis solus and seorsim a corpore esse in altari.
because it is the being that makes him to be one man: Fourthly, And seeing the
Sacrament by the definition of the Church of Rome, does signify a holy sign,
then a Sacramental being must signify a being significatiue, which is open
mockery: Fifthly, Yea this Sacramental being of Jesus Christ, which is said to
be in the Mass, cannot be significatiue, or representative; for whatsoever
represents any thing ought to be visible, but this Sacramental being is
altogether invisible: Sixthly, And that which represents a thing ought to
resemble it, but this sacramental being is contrary to the natural being: for
the natural being gives unto Christ longitude, latitude, situation of parts,
power of moving, seeing, speaking and breathing; but contratiwise the
Sacramental being depriues him of all these.

16 I would willingly know if this speech of Bellarmines be allowed also by
their other Doctors, namely, that By virtue of these words, hoc est corpus
meum, the body of Christ begins to be upon the altar without the soul, and
without blood. And that by the virtue of these words, Hic est sanguis: This is
the blood, that the blood begins to be alone, and divided from the body upon
the Altar. For if this be so, the Mass does sacrifice a dead body, but a
living and passive body was offered upon the Cross: therefore is it not one,
and the same sacrifice.

17 Our adversaries being thus urged, and extremely perplexed, at length they
are forced to yield: and as the Stagge being tired, does sometimes yield
himself to the Hunters; so they unable to resist so evident a truth, they
fairly come over to our side, which is a point whereof I pray the Reader to
consider. Our adversaries say, that the sacrifice of the Cross, and the
sacrifice of the Mass are one sacrifice, and that the sacrifice of the Cross
is re-iterated in the Mass; but the truth is so strong, and the evidence
thereof so plain to the contrary, that oftentimes it slips from them, and they
give sentence against themselves: For the Council of Trent, Ses. 22. cap. 1.
says, that Christ has left unto his Church a sacrifice, by which the bloody
sacrifice which he was to make upon the Cross was represented, and the memory
thereof perpetuated. The same Council adds, that the sacrifice of the
Cross, and the virtue thereof is applied unto us by this sacrifice. And this
do we believe, and many of ours have been burned for so saying. And indeed if
the Eucharist be the commemoration and application of the Sacrifice of the
Cross, it is then certain that it is not the same sacrifice, with that of the
Cross, and that it cannot be a sacrifice propitiatory. First, for the
commemoration of a thing is not the thing it self: the commemoration of a
battle is not a battle: the commemoration of a sacrifice is not the same
sacrifice: Secondly, In like manner, the application of a thing is not the
thing it self; the application of a fashion is not the fashion, the
application of a Plaster is not the Plaster, the application of the
propitiatory sacrifice of Jesus Christ, is not the propitiatory sacrifice of
Jesus Christ.

Thidly, Which is most true in matter of payment (for the Sacrifice of Christ
is the payment and ransom for our souls) being clear that the commemoration
of a payment is not the payment: to remember a payment, it needs not to begin
it again; and the Priest does but mock with God, if he think either to pay
him, or redeem us by a commemoration: Fourthly, if the sacrifice propitiatory
of Jesus Christ be applied in the Mass, then certainly it is not re-iterated,
for a thing is not reiterated by the application thereof: a medicine is not
re-iterated by applying it: to re-iterate a writing, or a sacrifice to apply
it, this needs purgation more then refutation.

Let them learn then to speak things in congruity: for they must of necessity
either say that the Mass is neither application nor commemoration of the
Sacrifice of the Cross: or if in that point they be unremovable, let them
confess that it is not the Sacrifice of Christ, nor a sacrifice propitiatory:
Fifthly and finally, if they will needs have that the death of Christ is
applied unto us by sacrificing, they must show out of the Scripture, that God
will have it so applied: We find in the Scripture that Jesus Christ is applied
unto us and that we have communion with him by baptism, Gal. 3.27. 1. Cor. 10
16. Ioh. 14.23. Ephesians. 3.17.
by breaking of bread, by the word, and by faith; but of application by
sacrificing, not a word.

All which already said, is more then sufficient to discover the abuse, and
convince the falsehood. If they will yet have any ouer-measure, to make the
strangeness of their error more plain: Then if the Mass be truly and
properly a Sacrifice, wherein Christ Jesus is sacrificed for a Sacrifice
propitiatory for our redemption, they must of necessity tell us in what action
this Sacrifice consists: and that they show us in the institution of the
Eucharist which is comprised in the Gospel, what were the actions by which
Jesus was sacrificed. Cardinal Bellarmine after he has been a long while
tormented about the matter,. Haec mihi.
in the last chapter of the first book of the Mass, in the end he falls upon
the opinion of Thomas, who says, that the sacrifice consists in these three
things: in the breaking, blessing, and eating of the bread. But he attributes
the principal essence of the Sacrifice to the blessing, or consecration, which
is worthy the examination.

Of the breaking.
Touching the fraction, or the action of breaking the host, it is not only not
of the essence of the sacrifice, but also it cannot be an action necessarily in
the sacrifice: 1. for if by chance the Priest let fall the whole host into the
Chalice, he swallows down both the host and wine together, without any
breaking of it; and yet such a Mass loses not the name of a sacrifice: 2.
Besides, if the breaking were an action of the Sacrifice, it should follow,
that that which were broken in the Eucharist, were sacrificed. Now the holy
Scripture testifies, that Christ Jesus brake bread, and then should Christ have
sacrificed bread; and the bread should be the price of our redemption; which is
a gross impiety. Now that Jesus Christ did break bread, the Evangelists do
tell us, Mat. 26.26. Jesus took bread, and brake it. Likewise S. Paul 1. Cor.
10. The bread which we break; And the whole Church, Act. 20.7. The Disciples
were gathered together to break bread: And this does conformably agree with
the Church of Rome, that mayntaineth it to be still bread before the
consecration. And by the text of the Gospel it is evident that Christ brake
it, before he said, This is my body: Which is the reason why the Romish
Prelates have corrected the Gospel, and will have the bread to be broken after
the words pronounced. For whereas they will have the breaking to be an action
of the Sacrifice, they say well, that should they break the bread after the
words pronounced, as our Savior did, they could not say that they do
sacrifice Jesus Christ, and then their sacrifice propitiatory should be a
sacrifice of bread: thirdly, Therefore can they not find in the institution of
the Eucharist, which is in the Gospel, this fraction which the Priest uses
after the words; which they would have to be an action of a propitiatory
sacrifice: neither can they find in their Mass that breaking of bread, which
Christ used. The chief point is, that when we desire our Masters to tell us
what it is that the Priest breaks in the Mass, they are blancke: for tell me
Mr. Doctors, does the Priest break bread in the Mass? They answer no; for it
is no more bread when he breaks it. Does he break the Lords body? No neither;
for that is impassible, and cannot be broken; it is wholly in every part, in
every crum of the Host: what then? What is there left for him to break? They
say, the accidents of the bread, which soon after they call the forms: that
is to say, the length and breadth of the bread, but not the bread: And as Pope
Innocent the third says, and with him the whole Church of Rome, Innocent. 3.
l. 4. de Mysterijs Missae cap. 11. Est enim hic color and sapor quantitas and
qualitas, cum nihil alterutro sit coloratum aut sapidum, quantum aut quale.
it is of the length, not of the thing that is long: of the color, not of the
thing colored. Let us leave this monstrous Philosophy, and let us only bring
their doctrine to the scale: They said that which was broken in the Mass is
sacrificed. Now the accidents, colors, and dimensions of bread, without bread
are broken in the Mass, and consequently, these accidents are sacrificed and
offered for our redemption. O spirit of slumber that runs headlong into
impiety! And here observe the fruit of these subtilities: fifthly, for to say
that Christ's body is broken under the accidents, and yet continues whole, is
all one as to say, that it is broken, and not broken. Again, we do not ask
of them under what it is broken, but only whether or no it be broken: for
that which is broken under another thing, is broken nevertheless: sixthly,
Which error of theirs is new in the phrase of Scripture, wherein the breaking
of bread, is not an action of sacrifice, but a sign of charity, and pledge of
unity. See Esaias 58.7. Lament. 4.14. Yea, and S. Paul does expressly tell us,
that this is the end of breaking bread in the Sacrament, 1. Cor. 10.6. The
bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? inasmuch
as we which are many, are one bread and one body: for we are all partakers of
one bread. It was also the manner of our Savior, at his ordinary times of
meat, to begin with blessing and breaking of bread, Mar. 6.41. Luc. 24.30.31.
And this I believe, does sufficiently refute this fraction, which they make an
action of sacrifice.

Of the Consecration.
The consecration which they say is performed by pronouncing these words, This
is my body, cannot be said to be either an action of sacrifice, or the essence
thereof: first, for they hold that the Pope cannot err; and Pope Innocent the
third, in the sixth chapter of the fourth book of the Mysteries of the Mass,
holds, that Jesus Christ was not consecrated by these words, This is my
body, but that he was consecrated before by the power of his Divinity. And all
the ancients do maintain, In the book of the Apology for the holy Supper,
cap. 7.
that where declared, by a great number of places.

2 Let us hereunto add, that the essence of a sacrifice consists in the
offering of some oblation unto God: Now by these words, This is my body, which
they say are the consecrating words, there is not any thing offered unto God;
therefore the consecrating words are not of the essence of the sacrifice: And
that there is nothing offered unto God by these words, it is plain: for
Christ in speaking them does not address himself unto God, but speaks, and
offers that which he holds to his Apostles, saying, Take, eat, this is my
body:

3 And if consecration do necessarily import sacrificing, then shall it follow
that the consecration of vessels, and of the Temple was a sacrifice.

4 To proceed, it is certain that in the Mass there can be no consecration
because there is nothing consecrated: for the bread is not consecrated, because
it is no more bread: also Christ is not consecrated, for men cannot consecrate
him, but it is he that does consecrate men unto God. Some Sophister will tell
you, that the consecration is done upon the bread; but will not tell you what it
is that is consecrated. Now we do not ask them whereupon the consecration is
done, but what it is that is consecrated: and there they champe upon the bit,
and know not what to answer.

Of the Eating.
As great or greater an absurdity is it to say that the Sacrifice consists in
the eating: 1. For it is a thing unheard of that to eat, should be to
sacrifice Jesus Christ for a sacrifice propitiatory: secondly And if eating
do, why should not drinking import the same? thirdly, Again, to sacrifice is
to offer and present, but to eat is to receive: so that there is as much
difference between sacrificing and eating, as between giving and taking,
between offering and receiving: for to reconcile these things, is to make
contrary things to be the same, as if one should say, the right hand is the
left, and white is black: fourthly, If to eat were to sacrifice Jesus Christ,
the lay people celebrating their Passover should have been sacrificers as
well as the Priests: fifthly, We know also that the Israelites did often eat
things sacrificed in their private houses: as the woman mentioned, Prou. 7. I
have with me sacrifices of prosperity, I have paid my vows: Whence I gather,
that if eating be sacrificing, it must follow that women did sacrifice in their
houses: which is contrary to the law, and without example.

The sacrifice of the Mass being built on no foundation, and being an Altar
erected against the only Altar, which is the Cross of our Savior: an Altar
newly built upon the ruins of the Gospel: yea being the cross of the Cross
of Christ, and an annihilating of his death; it has not come to pass without
the just judgment of God, that they themselves have let fall the price thereof
so low; employing it for the healing of Horses, the preserving of Sheep, for
blasted corn, and for frost-bitten Vines, as a general salve for every sore.
But Christ Jesus instituted the Supper for a memorial of himself, and to show
forth his death till he come. There is also good reason, why so many Masses are
required to free one single soul out of Purgatory; and why they make this
sacrifice so infinitely inferior in virtue to that of the Cross: which yet
should not be so, if it be the same sacrifice, and consequently the same price
of a redemption: neither does it serve the turn to say, that the sacrifice of
the Cross is of more efficacy, because Christ Jesus did immediately offer it,
whereas this is offered by the mynistery of a Priest: for a payment or ransom,
whether I do immediately pay it my self, or send another to carry, or tell
the money, is of like validity.

I do also exceedingly wonder, that the Church of Rome establishing in the
Eucharist both a Sacrament and a Sacrifice, which are made one action, that yet
it makes so great a difference between them both in virtue and efficacy,
greatly under valuing the efficacy of the Sacrament, saying, that it serves
only for petty sins, which they term venial, and of which a man's
conscience is already discharged: that is to say, it is a plaster for wounds
perfectly healed, Bellar. l. 4. de Eucharist. cap. 17. and 18.
a remedy for evils passed, and a discharge of burdens already unloaded. But
touching the sacrifice of the Mass, the Council of Trent Session 22. cap. 2.
says, that by this Sacrifice the most hey nous sins are remitted: And this
Sacrifice is profitably offered for them that are absent, yea for the dead, yea
for them that make a mock of it; for Masses are sung for Infidels and profane
persons: and this sacrifice is of force (say they) Ex opere opera to, the
disposition of the party for whom the Mass is said, not being necessarily
required thereunto. To what end is all this but to debase the power of a
Sacrament instituted by God, and to enhance the virtue of a sacrifice invented
by man? And because the Sacrament cannot be bestowed upon the dead, but Masses
are sold both for the dead, and for the living? And out of what passage of
Scripture have they extracted so nice a difference between the efficacy of he
one and of the other?

But this is sufficient for soldiers that forsake the field: for Bellarmine
and his associates lighting upon this subject, they wander in large impertinent
questions, which make nothing to the point in controversy: they wind up long
Discourses, to prove that the death of Jesus Christ is a sacrifice; a point
denied not by any, and that the Eucharist is a sacrifice, which is true; but it
is a sacrifice Eucharisticall, that is to say, a giving of thanks, and as it
is called in the Mass, Sacrificium laudis, a Sacrifice of praise. Again they
bring the sacrifice of Melchisedech, and the figure of the Passover, and the
sacrifices of the law, which (they say) prefigured the sacrifice of the new
Testament: with diverse places of the Prophets, especially that of Malachy,
which foretell the sacrifice of the New Testament, with many such like things,
wherein howbeit they deliver the truth, yet do they not help themselves
thereby, because it is all beside the purpose, and comes not near the point
that is controuerted: for although the Mass were the sacrifice of
Melchisedech, and the sacrifice forespoken of by Malachy, and prefigured by the
Passover, yet is it not proved thereby that Christ ought to be really
sacrificed under the forms of bread and wine, nor that the sacrifice of the
Mass is propitiatory for the redemption of souls. Read Bellarmine, who has
compiled two great Books of the Mass, wherein he is copious in impertinent
proofs; but you shall not find in him any answer to the Arguments which I
have formerly alleged, which are the very sinews of the body of this
disputation, and the armor of proof of the holy truth: for none among them
could ever yet satisfy these objections.

And out of him is it that Coeffeteau has collected a number of the Fathers,
whereof some make against him some are untrue, and others impertinent. It makes
against him which he alleges out of Justin Martyr against Tryphon, saying,
Malachy speaks prophetically of the Sacrifices which we offer, Suis
discipulis dans consilium primitias Deo offerre ex suis creaturis, non quesi
indigenti sed vt ipsi nec infructuosi nec ingrati sint: Noui Testamenti nouam
doeuit oblationemq, ua^ Ecclesia ab Apostolis accipiens in (...) niuers^ mundo
offert Deo, ei qui alimenta nobis praestat primitias suoram muneru^.
namely the bread and wine in the Eucharist. Surely if this be a sacrifice of
bread and wine, then is it no sacrifice propitiatory, wherein Jesus Christ is
really sacrificed.

The second place is out of Irenaeus, lib. 4. cap. 32. which Coeffeteau by his
shameful wrangling has falsified. Irenaeus says, Christ counselling his
Disciples to offer unto God the first fruits of his creatures, not because he
has any need of them, but that they might not be unthankful, or
unfruitful, took bread among the creatures which are common amongst us, and
gave thanks, saying, This is my body; and likewise took the cup among the
creatures which are common among us, and said, it was his blood, and has
taught a new offering of the new Testament: which the Church having received of
the Apostles, does throughout the world offer unto God, which bestows upon us
the first fruits of his gifts. From this place does Coeffeteau cut off the
three first lines, which say, that this sacrifice is an offering of the first
fruits of his creatures, that is to say, of bread and wine; and the last line
which affirms the same; for we shall see hereafter, that the manner of the
ancients was for the people to come, and offer bread and wine, and fruit upon
the Table of the holy Supper, which offering was called the sacrifice of the
Eucharist: that is, a giving of thanks.

Concerning the other places which say, that Jesus Christ is offered and
presented, we do readily embrace them, for it is true in sundry respects:
whether they will that he offered himself unto the Communicants, or that they
understand that Christ is offered unto God sacramentally, and in the sign, or
for that in the Eucharist we offer unto God the merit of his death, in that we
do beseech him to accept, and receive the merit of his Sons death for our
redemption.

The last place which he alleges is out of the Council of Ephesus, wherein I
wish that Coeffeteau had carried himself with greater credit: for first, it
is false that S. Cyrill does speak there in the name of the Council of
Ephesus, but it is a piece of a Letter taken out of the Council of Alexandria:
which is indeed a declaration of the eleventh curse of Cyrill against
Nestorius, as Coeffeteau says; but he has concealed the exposition which
Cyrill himself adds, Tom 1. of the Councels of the Colen Edition, page 683.
Number hominis comestione^ nostrum hoc Sacramentum pronuncias? Et irreligiose ad
crassas cogitationes vrges eorum qui crediderunt mentem? and attentas humanis
cogitationibus tractare quae sola pura and inexquisita fide accipiuntur.
Aristophanes Acharnanensibus agens de Lac^daemonijs. (...). Cur ^^lias a^^s
hahent Christiani, nulla templa, nulla nota simulacra? Quid ergosacrifi^ia
cens^^is nulla emn^no esse fac^^nda? Respon. Nulla.
Do thou pronounce that our Sacrament is a humane eating? and do thou
irreligiousty urge the understanding of those that have believed too gross
imaginations? Do thou presume to handle with humane thoughts, things which
are only received with a pure and unsearchable faith?

Now to give light in this matter to the Style, and purpose of the Fathers,
calling the holy supper a sacrifice; we must observe that in the first ages
after Christ, the Christians labored by all means to draw the Heathens unto
Christianity: but the heathen were offended ^t this, that in the Christian
Religion they saw neither Altars, nor sacrifices, nor Images, without which
they thought there was no Religion: whence the old proverb comes, Unto the
Altars; that is to say, as far as Religion and conscience: exclusiuely, as if
there were no religion without an Altar. Celsus the Pagan reproacheth
Christians That they have neither Altars, nor Images nor Temples. In the eighth
book of Origin against Celsus: and in the Dialogue of Minutius Faelix,
Caecilius the Pagan speaks thus: Whence comes it, that the Christians have no
Altars, nor Temples, nor Images to be seen? And in the beginning of the
seventh book of Arnobius, the Heathen speak thus unto the Christians; Do you
think then that there are no Sacrifices to be made? Whereunto the Christians
make answer, Not any. To be then without Altars and Sacrifices did offend the
Heathen, and made Christianity odious.

This is then the reason why they ordinarily used these words of the Table of
the Lord, and the holy supper and the Eucharist, whereof there are infinite
examples: And yet to remove offense, and allure the Heathen by little and
little, they used to call the Table an Altar, and the holy Sacrament by the
name of a sacrifice. And this was discretion grounded on reason: for seeing the
holy Scripture does call our prayers, and alms, and our Religious service by
the name of Sacrifices, Hebr. 13.16. Phil. 4.18.
they have for the same reason called the holy Supper a Sacrifice; wherein we
do not only offer our selves unto God, but do also offer Christ Jesus unto
him, that is, we do beseech God to accept the sactifice of his death, for our
redemption. And this served to draw the Jews, for whose farther content, the
Deacons were called Levites, and the day of the resurrection of Christ was
called the Passover. But that which did especially confirm this word
Sacrifice, was the custom of the faithful, which was before the holy Supper,
to bring unto the Table offerings of bread, and wine, and fruits, whereof such
a portion was set aside; as might serve for the whole assembly to communicate
in the two kinds, and the rest was for the poor: which gifts, and offerings
and alms in the old Testament, yea and sometimes in the new, Heb. 13.16. Phil.
4.18.
are called sacrifices and oblations. Yet whereas they do ordinarily call the
Sacrament, the Eucharist, and the Sacrifice of the Eucharist, that is to say, a
giving of thanks, they give sufficient testimony, that they meant not to make
a sacrifice propitiatory, or really to sacrifice Christ Jesus for our
redemption.

Now that the Alms, Gifts and Offerings of the faithful were called
sacrifices and oblations, none can be ignorant, that is any whit versed in the
Fathers. The Apostles Canons (howsoever supposititous, yet are ancient) do in
the fourth Canon forbid to offer any thing beside ears of Corn, Incense, etc.
S. Cyprian, lib. 1 Epist. 9 commands the Clergy, Locuples and Dives Domnicum
celebrare te credis quae corbonam non respicis quae in Dominicum sine
sacrificio venis, quae partem de sacrificio quod pauper obtulit sumis
Hypodiaconi oblatione, in templo Domini a fidelibus ipsi suscipiant.
That receiving offerings of the peoples contributions, they go not from the
Altar, and the sacrifices: And in his Sermon of Alms: Thou a rich woman, who
think to celebrate the Lords Supper, that regardest not to bring an
offering, that come to the Supper of the Lord without a sacrifice, that
take a part of the Sacrifice which the poor offers. So in the one and
twentieth Distinction, in the Canon Cleros, taken out of Isidore, Let the
Subdeacons themselves receive the offerings of the Faithful. Observe this
custom very plainly set down in Theodoret, in the third book of his
History, chap. 12. and in the fourth book, chap 19.

The Pastor of the Church having before him upon the Table all the presents in
great quantity, made prayer unto God to accept those Gifts, Presents and
immaculate Sacrifices: that he would accept them as sometimes he did the
sacrifices of Abel and of Abraham; that the Angels might carry them into heaven
before God: gifts created by God, blessed and sanctified for ever by Jesus
Christ, etc. Words which continue to this day in the Canon of the Mass, and
which were good and holy when they were said over the Alms and Offerings of
the people. But which are now become ridiculous, and ungodly, forasmuch as the
Priest does say them upon an Host, which he thinks to be Jesus Christ: for to
call Jesus Christ by the name of gifts and offerings, is to speak against the
common sense. To pray, that God would accept this sacrifice, as well as that of
Abel, is to make the sacrifice of Jesus Christ no better then the sacrifice of
a beast. To pray that the Angels may carry Jesus Christ, and present him unto
God, is not to know, that Jesus Christ does not employ any creature to be
presented unto his Father: to call Christ by the name of good things, yea of
things which God creates, and does always bless and sanctify; this is to
mock Jesus Christ, who cannot be called by the name of good things, that God
creates not, nor always sanctifies: And yet to offer these things by Jesus
Christ, that is to say, to offer Christ by Christ, is to be utterly void of
all sense.

Now to know what the Fathers believed in this point, we must search the
places, where they do expressly speak thereof. The nineteenth chapter of S.
Austines book of faith, ad Petrum Diaconum, handles no other matter, where
thus he says, The Universal Church throughout the world cease not to offer
a Sacrifice of bread and wine in faith, and charity: In isto autem sacrificio
gratiaru^ actio atque commemoratio est carnis Christi quam pro nobis obtulit,
and sanguinis quem pro nobis idem Deus effudit.
for in the carnal Sacrifices (of the old Testament) there was a
representation of the flesh of Christ, which he himself being without sin,
was to offer for our sins, and of the blood which he was to shed for the
remission of our sins. But in this Sacrifice (of the Eucharist) there is a
giving of thanks and a commemoration of the flesh of Christ, which he has
offered for us, and of the blood which the same God has shed for us. Observe
that he says, that this is a sacrifice of bread and wine, therefore not a
sacrifice, where the flesh of Christ is really sacrificed. Above all, this word
of Wine is full of force: for the blood of the Lord was never called Wine:
Again, he says that it is a sacrifice of thanksgiving, and of commemoration:
but not of propitiation, or redemption,

The same Father in the three and twentieth Epistle to Boniface, says, When
Easter approaches, we say thus, to morrow, or after is the passion of the
Lord: howbeit he suffered so many years since, and that this passion was but
once: indeed upon the Saboath we say to day the Lord rose again, although so
many years be past since the resurrection. Why is there no body so vain, is
to reprove us for lying, when we speak thus? But because we name those days
according to the resemblance which they have with the days, wherein these
things were done? so that this day is called the same day, which is not the
same, but resembling the same by the revolution of time? Was not Christ once
sacrificed by himself? and yet is he sacrificed unto the people in a sacred
sign, not only at every solemnity of Easter, but also every day: neither does
he lie, who being asked makes answer, that he is sacrificed. For if the
Sacraments have not some resemblance with the things whereof they are
Sacraments, they should be no Sacraments. Now because of this resemblance they
do most commonly take the names of the things themselves. This place ought
very heedfully to be considered. He shows how Jesus Christ is sacrificed in
the Sacrament, and does illustrate the same by two examples, to wit, that it is
all one, as when we say two days before Easter, to day is the passion of Jesus
Christ; and when upon the Saboath we say, to day is the resurrection of Jesus
Christ; not that it is so indeed, but because of the resemblance and
commemoration: for that the Sacraments take the names of the things signified.

Agreeable whereunto is the Canon Hoc est, taken out of S. Austin in the second
Distinction of the consecration; Non rei veritate sed significante mysterio.
the offering of the flesh which is done by the hands of the Priest is called
the passion, the death and crucifixion, NOT IN TRVTH, BUT IN A SIGNIFYING
MYSTERY; In like manner as the Sacrament of faith, by which we understand
baptism is the faith.

The same Doctor in the book of Sentences, gathered by Prosper, alleged in
the same Distinction, says, that Jesus Christ has been sacrificed but once
by himself, and yet he is continually sacrificed in a holy sign. He is not
then sacrificed by himself, or in his own person in the Eucharist. For
stronger confirmation whereof, the ancient Glosses of the Church of Rome, do
add this marginall note, Christus immolatur, id est eius immolatio
representatur, and fit memoria passionis. Christ is sactificed, that is, his
sacrifice is represented, and the commemoration of his passion is solemnized

Crysostome in the seventeenth Homily upon the Epistle to the Hebrews, (...)
after he has said that that which we offer is a figure of the sacrifice,
adds these decyding words of that difference; We always offer the same
sacrifice, or rather, we make a commemoration of that Sacrifice.

Herein does it especially appear that the ancients believed not, that the
body of Christ was really sacrificed, included under the forms, forasmuch as
their opinion was, that the sacrifice was sanctified by the offerers; and that
it was pure according to the purity of the persons that offered. Now Jesus
Christ is neither sanctified nor purified by men. S. Austin against Petilian,
lib. 2. cap. 52. Such as every one is that comes to commenicate, Tale cuiusq,
sacrificium quale est is qui accedit vt sumat. omnia munda mundis
such is his sacrifice: to the pure all things are pure.

The first that directly handled this question at large, was Lombard, lib. 4.
Did. 12. in the letter G. where he resolves this question by the words of S.
Austin and S. Ambrose, in these words: If any ask whether that which the
Priest does, he properly called a sacrifice* or an offering, or whether Christ
be continually sacrificed, or has been sacrificed but once: whereunto we may
shortly answer, that that which is offered and consecrated by the Priest is
called a Sacrifice, and an oblation, because it is the memory and
representation of the true sacrifice, and of the offering made upon the Altar
of the Cross: Christ died once upon the Cross, and has been once sacrificed
in person, but he is continually sacrificed in the Sacrament, because in the
Sacrament there is a commemoration made of that which is once done Wherefore
Austin says, that we are sure that Christ being raised from the dead, dies no
more, yet for fear that we should forget, that which was done but once, it is
done every year for our remembrance, to wit, at all times, and as often as
Easter is celebrated: is Christ therefore slain so often? No, BUT ONLY the
anniuersary commemoration represents that which is already done. Observe this
word Only, that none do say, the Eucharist is indeed the commemoration of
the sacrifice of the Cross, but because Christ cease to be really
sacrificed. Besides, it is not compatible that a thing should be a
representation of it self, and that in the same action there should be both
the sign and the thing signified.

He there alleges also S. Ambrose, who says, 2. de Consecrat. Can. In
Christo: ex Ambrosio in Epist. ad Hebr.
We continually offer: and this is done in remembrance of his death: this is
one self Sacrifice, and not many: how is it only one, and not many? Because
Jesus Christ has been sacrificed only once: but this sacrifice is done for
example of that other.

Thom as Aquinas has followed Lombard, and decided this question, tertia part
Summae, Quaest. 83. art. 1. where he says, that the celebration of the
Sacrament is called a Sacrifice for two reasons; first, because according to S.
Austin, the signs are called by the name of the things signified: secondly,
because by the Sacrament we are made partakers of the death of Christ. He
forgot the reason, which now they say is the principal, to wit, that it is
because that Jesus Christ is really sacrificed under the forms of bread for a
sacrifice truly propitiatory.

ARTICLE X. Of the Communion under one kind.
The KINGS Confession.
ANd such are the Amputation of the one half of the Sacrament from the people.

Hereunto Mr. Coeffeteau opposes the second of the Acts, where (says he) the
Apostles administered this Sacrament under one kind only; for there it is
said, that the faithful continued in the doctrine of the Apostles, and in
fellowship, and breaking of bread. That our chief Doctors confess that this
place must be understood of the Sacrament, and yet there is no mention but of
one kind of bread: unless his Majesty (says he) who adoreth the sufficiency
of the Scripture, will make a supplement of something to be added thereunto. He
adds that Christ is wholly and entier under every kind, and that the people
receive him nevertheless. That the Church by this means has provided against
vnreuerent behauiours: and prevented the heresy of those that believed not
that the blood was together with the body under the kind of bread. He
affirms, that heretofore it was free to receive the communion under one, or
both kinds, because the faithful sometimes carried the Eucharist home to
their houses, and toooke it not but when they might commodiously do it: and
they did it (say they) for the most part under the kind of bread only: and
that Athanasius witnesses, that the Communion Cup was not used out of the
Church: that they communicated among themselves under one kind: that they
might also do it in public. For thus says S. Jerome, Hierom in Apol. ad
Pammachiu^.
Is Christ another in public then in a private house? that which is not to be
tolerated in the Church, is not the rather permitted in a house: that the
Ministers complaining of the mutilation of one kind, have in the mean time
destroyed the essence of the Sacrament, removing the body of the Lord as far
from the Sacrament as heaven from the earth, which is to belie the Son of
God, who says, This is my body, etc.

Before we make answer to the place of the second of the Acts; the Reader
shall observe, The Answer.
that this is the first place of Scripture, which this Doctor has alleged:
wherein his wisdom has failed him; for had he continued not to allege any
scripture at all, an ignorant Reader would have thought it had not been
necessary: but seeing him begin here to speak of the word of God, doubtless
he will wonder, that in so many Controversies handled heretofore, he has
heard nothing alleged out of Gods word. And indeed the doctrine of salvation
was never so profanely handled: for GOD is become suspected, and his books of
faith, have now no credit in controversies. This is a great grace which they
do unto the word of God, if after a Legend of reasons, and humane allegations,
at length some short sentence is casually produced: and not without cause: for
why then is it not more favorable to his Holiness Empire? But let us hear
this place.

In the second of the Acts, ver. 42. it is said that the Disciples continued
together in the Doctrine of the Apostles, and in the Communion and breaking of
bread. It is not there said that the people participated in the Cup; therefore
they communicated only under one kind of bread.

1 This conjecture is too light by a great many grains: and which is more, it
makes against the Church of Rome, which believes, that the Pastors ought
necessarily to take it in both kinds. Now in this passage it is not said that
the Pastors did participate in the Cup, and they are no more mentioned then are
the people: therefore should it follow that the Pastors also did not
participate in the cup.

2 This also is a weak kind of Argumentation, to say, that in the second of
the Acts, there is nothing mentioned beside breaking of bread, that therefore
the Cup was not used. If I should say, that being invited by such a one I have
eaten with him, does it follow, that I have not drunk, although I spoke not of
it?

This error proceeds from ignorance of the scripture phrase, which by the
breaking of bread, and by eating of bread, does usually understand the whole
banquet, and all kind of sustenance. So Genesis 31.54. Jacob inuiteth his
brethren to eat bread. See Genes. 37.25. Matthew. 15.2. and sundry other places.

We cannot be accused by this manner of speakking, to add unto the Scripture:
the sufficiency whereof we defend against our adversaries. For if in this
place there be no mention of the Cup, it suffices that it is spoken of in
other places. And to join diverse places together, which speak of the same
thing, is not to add unto the Scripture. Besides it is not credible, that the
Apostles having so expressly received this commandment, to drink all of the
Cup, would infringe the same. Again, when we speak of the sufficiency of the
Scriptures, our meaning is not that the Scripture recyting a story unto us,
does specify all the particularities of that which happened. Only we say,
that in things which it commands us to believe, and do, it does sufficiently
instruct us unto salvation. Now to know what is to be believed, and done in
this sacrament, we must learn it out of the institution of the same, and out
of the express commandments of Christ and his Apostles.

1 For Jesus Christ instituting this sacrament among his Disciples, said unto
them, Drink ye all of this: That is, Lib. 1. de corpore Christi cap. 15.
as says Paschasius, as well the Ministers as the other believers. They
answer, that all those to whom our Savior spoke were Pastors, and therefore
this commandment was given only unto the Pastors. Which if it be so, by the
same reason also the Pastors only must eat of the bread: for if in these
words, Drink ye all of this, Christ spoke to none but to the Pastors, then
certainly in these words, Take, eat, he speaks also unto the Pastors: and if
this be so, let them tell me where is the commandment which binds the people
to communicate in the bread? For to participate thereof in faith, it must be
that God has so commanded.

2 Also it is false, that the Apostles being with Jesus Christ instructing
them, or administering the Sacrament unto them, held the place of Pastors; for
they were as the flock, assisting him in taking and receiving.

3 Again, the words of Christ, Do this, bound them to do unto their flocks,
as Jesus Christ did unto them: and therefore these words bound them to give it
unto the people in both kinds.

4 But we have moreover the express commandment of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 11.
Let a man (says he) examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread, and
drink of this cap. Does he not speak to the people of Corinth, and as
himself says, cap. 1. ver. 1. To all them that call upon the name of Jesus?
Are not all the faithful commanded to examine themselves, 2. Cor. 13.5? Why
then to drink of the Cup also, for the Apostle joins these things together.
Observe also that he says not, examine your selves when you will drink, as
some Sophisters would have it, but he will have every one to try himself, and
being examined, that he drink of the Cup. He leaves it not at their choice, to
eat without drinking after they have been examined. And if this place bind
them to eat, then why not to drink also, seeing the command is equal?

5 It may not be omitted, that nothing so perplexeth our adversaries, as when
we ask them, whether in the sixth of John, where it is said, If you drink not
my blood, you shall have no life in you, the Eucharist be spoken of: If it be
not spoken of, why do they allege this Chapter to establish their
transubstantiation? If it be therespoken of, why do they deprive the people of
that life, in taking the Cup from them? Neither does it serve the turn to say,
that the people receive the blood together with the Host, by a concomitancy,
for he that so receives the blood, does not drink. Now Christ says expressly,
If you drink not, etc. Furthermore he that takes the blood under the Host,
does not take it as shed for us, and with the sacrament of the effusion of his
blood upon the Cross, which is the manner according to which Jesus Christ
would have every one to participate thereof: by which it falls also to the
ground, which certain Sophisters say, that Christ does not in this place of
Saint John explane the manner of communicating, but declares the substance
thereof: for if Christ in this place speak of the Eucharist, when he
commands his blood to be drunk, then questionless he speaks of the manner
of communicating: for to drink is the manner of receiving.

6 Yea it appears that the Church of Rome believes not, that this
commandment, Drink ye all of this, is given to the Pastors alone, seeing
that Princes have their share also in this privilege: An evident proof that
this Order was brought in to exalt the Clergy above the Layetie, and to make
them companions of Kings, and Princes: which is a cunning like that whereby
they make Emperors and Kings to be Canons of certain Cathedral Churches. And
indeed as the Pope by this slight has desired to advance the Clergy, so has
he withal consulted to advance himself above the Clergy. For he vouchsafes
not to drink as others do, nor to touch the Chalice with his lips, no nor to
touch it with his hand. But a Cardinal holds the Chalice covered, Lib. 2.
Sacrarum Ceremon. cap. 14. Episcopus Cardinalis porrigit calamum quem Papa
ponit in calice in manibus Diaconi existente, and sanguinis partem sugit, etc
out of which the Pope suckes certain gulpes with a quill, and then the
Cardinal does his reverence: which fashion of sucking, having been practiced
some five or six hundred years in certain places of Almaigne as Rhenanus in
his notes upon Tertullian observes, the Pope has reserved only for himself,
that he may exempt himself from the multitude.

7 And to show that the Church of Rome has a spleen to Jesus Christ, and that
S. Paul's commandment displeases them, the Council of Constance in the
thirteenth Session, acknowledges: Quod licet Christus post coenam instituerit
and suis discipulis administrauerit sub vtraque specie panis and vini hoc
^enerabile secramen tum. A little after, Licet in primitiua Ecclesia hoc
Sacramentum reciperetur a fidelibus sub vtraque specie, etc. Cum in nonnullis
mundi partibus quidam temerarie praesumant populum Christianum debere
Sacramentu^ Euchar. sub vtraque specie suscipere. Consuetudo rationabiliter
introducta habenda est pro lege, pertinaciter asserentes oppositum tanquam
haeretici arcendi sunt, and grauiter puniendi inuocato etiam auxilio brachij
secularis Libro de communione laicali, scripto ^n^. 1417.
That Jesus Christ instituted and administered the Sacrament under both kinds:
and that in the Primitrue Church this Sacrament was received by the faithful
under both kinds. Notwithstanding this venerable Council complains, That in
some parts of the world, some rashly presume, that Christian people ought to
receive the Sacraments under both kinds. That is to say, it is rashness, and
presumption to follow Christ. It adds, That the custom [of giving but one
kind unto the people] being brought in upon reason, ought to be held for a
law: that they who hold the contrary are Heretics and to be grievously
punished, yea the aid of the secular power being desired. It wanted not much
that the Council had denounced Jesus Christ for an Heretic, or sent Saint
Paul to the Inqu^sition.

But Coeffeteau will persuade us that this cutting away of the Cup, is
discreetely done, to prevent some irreuerend behauiours. Gerson who was present
in this Council, opens their meaning unto us, and says it is done for fear
that one or other should spill the wine in the Chalice. These people are afraid
to let fall one drop of the wine, but fear not to let fall Gods commandment.
In the year 1503. under Jews the 12. the Host being let fall at Paris in the
holy Chapel of the Palace, the pauement was taken up and put among the
Relics. The Supplement of Nicholas Giles.
And if so be the Chalice should be ouerturned, or if any having drunk should
regurge it, this were enough to stir a whole Country: they run together as
at the cry of fire; they lick the place, scrape the stones, adore the
scrapings and the ashes and put them among the Relics: a superstition not
used in the time of Cyprian, who in his book de Lapsis, reports a Story of a
young Maid, that having drank of the Cup, did put it up again, not speaking
of any such furious devotion. The said Gerson says, that it is done for fear
lest the people should wet their Mustachoes in the Chalice: for they feared
that Jesus Christ should be entirely fastened to every hair, for as much as
they hold that his body is wholly, and entire in every drop. But it were better
that men were without Mustachoes, then want the Sacrament of the blood of
Christ; and at least there is no such danger for women and young people. He
says also that it is done for fear least the wine being kept should wax
sower, or grow flat: but they should be free from this danger, if they did
communicate with the people in the public assembly, not reserving the
Sacraments till the morrow. Expressly contrary to the defense of the ancient
Church, comprised in the Canon Tribus gradibus, in the second Distinction of
the Consecration, where Bishop Clement ordains, that so many offerings be set
upon the Altar, Tanta in altario bolocausta offerantur quanta populo ^ussicere
debeant Quod si remanserint in crast number non reseruentur.
as will serve for the whole assembly to communicate, and if any remain, that
they be not kept till the next day. But how comes it to pass, that Jesus
Christ being included (as they will have it) in the Chalice, does not preserve
it from taking wind, or waxing sharp? seeing they keep Aarons rod, and the
milk of the holy Virgin among their Relics unto this day without corruption?
And why shall not Jesus Christ have the same virtue? To conclude, whosoever
shall here pretend wisdom and discretion, desires to be wiser then Christ and
his Apostles: neither can there be any inconvenience alleged, which Christ
Jesus has not prevented.

Neither is it said to any purpose that the Church of Rome would by this means
stop an heresy, for we must not redress one evil by another, or reform an
error by an abuse, or help the ignorance of men by disobedience unto God. Yea,
we shall hereafter see, that this taking away of the Cup has not prevented
any error, but has heaped up one heresy upon another, and to support their
Transubstantiation, it has made Idolatry against God, to serve for their
tyrannizing over the people.

Touching that which Coeffeteau subioyneth, that in former times it has been
free to take the communion under one or both kinds: it is a plain shift, for
he makes show, not to conceive what the King of great Britain means, when he
says, that the mutilation of the Sacrament is a new invention. For he would
say (and it is true) that in the ancient Church there cannot be found any
ordinance, custom or constitution, that has deprived the people of the Cup:
No, nor any one man, that has made conscience in giving the Cup to the people
requiring it: No, nor any of the people that have been scrupulous in requiring
it: But in stead hereof does Coeffeteau say, that it was free to take it under
one, or both kinds; which makes nothing to the purpose: for we complain that
it is not free to receive both kinds. And yet that which he says, is untrue.

St. Austin in the seven and fiftieth question upon Leuiticus: All that will
have life, are exhorted to drink the blood: Ad bibendum sanguinem omnes
exhortantur qui volunt habere vitam, etc. (...).
none is hindered, and all are exhorted. It was not then free.

Ignatius in the Epistle to the Philadelphians, One bread has been broken
unto all, and one Cup is distributed unto all; then was none exempted. Justin
Martyr in his second Apologitique; The Deacons distribute UNTO EVERY ONE, the
bread, and wine with water. Observe to every one. S. Cyprian who has already
told us of a maid, that after she had drank, cast up the wine, complains in
the third Epistle of the third book, that some either thorough ignorance or
simplicity, In calice Domini sanctificando, and plebi ministrando, in
consecrating the cup, and administering to the PEOPLE, did it not conformably
unto the example of Jesus Christ. Sanguis Abel significat sanguinem Christi,
quo vniuersa Ecclesia accepto dicit Amen.
S. Austin in the sixty five book of Questions, the forty nine Quaest. Tom. 4
The blood of Abel signifies the blood of Christ; which the WHOLE Church having
received, says Amen. He says, the whole Church: not as Coeffeteau. Some
receiving one kind only, and some both kinds: which is either an audacious
falsehood, or very gross ignorance in Antiquity: for even the Canon Comperimus,
in the second Did. of the Consecration, says, that to forbear the Cup is
sacrilege, and a dividing of the Mystery: and therefore ordains that such
Ought either to receive the Sacraments entier, or to be wholly excluded from
them These words Recipiant, Aut integra Sacramenta recipiant aut ab integris
arceantur
and Arceantur, which he uses do evidently prove, that he speaks of the
people, who do not of themselves receive the Sacrament, but from the hand of
the Minister. And this word Arceantur signifies, that they were not admitted,
when they offered themselves: therefore was it not free, as Coeffeteau
affirms.

Who alleges against himself the custom of those that carried home the
bread, which they received in the Church, inasmuch as the Church of Rome has
rejected this custom; having well perceived that this custom of so doing,
does testify, that the ancient Church did not believe transubstantiation: for
the Priest would have thought it a horrible profanation to put God into the
hands of the common people, for them to put him into their pocket, to carry
him home to their houses, exposing him to the danger of a thousand reproaches,
and to the neglect, or contempt of the first commer. Besides by the general
practice of the Church formerly declared, it appears, that if any one did
carry home with him the sacramental bread, yet he communicated in the Cup with
the whole Congregation.

The place which he alleges out of Jerome, is untruly produced, for S.
Jerome speaks not there in any sort of the Communion under one kind; but of
those who being debarred from enting into the Church because they were thought
to be unclean, were made to bring the bread for the Sacrament with them.

Touching the recrimination which he uses, that we have destroyed the whole
Sacrament: we shall see in the Article following how injurious this accusation
is.

ARTICLE XI. Of Transubstantiation.
THe King of great Britain does reckon Transubstantiation also among the
Novelties brought into the Church since the first five hundred years after
Christ.

Against this Coeffeteau alleges only four places out of the Fathers,
whereof the two first are false and suppositious, the third is fraudulently
maimed and mangled, and the fourth is misunderstood.

The first is taken out of the Catechismes of Cyril of Jerusalem, which we
formerly proved not to be Cyrils, (...).
but made by one John of Jerusalem, who lived some four hundred years after,
when the superstition of Relics was in force, which made him say in the
fourth Catechism, that the wood of the Cross was then so grown and
multiplied, that in a manner the whole earth was filled with it.

The second place is out of the book de caena Domini, falsely ascribed 10 S.
Cyprian, as are also all the Treatises. De Cardinalib. operibus; whereof this
is one, to which there is prefixed a Prologue, wherein the Author says that he
has suppressed his name: by which it appears, that the Author of this
Treatise is unknown; yet might this book be purposely alleged had it been
written by any ancient Author that had lived within the first four or five
hundred years, but the style testifies, that it is newly forged, witness
these words: Distributus non demembratur incorporatus non iniuriatur This is
the work of some prentice Friar, that meant to wrong Priscian.

The third place is out of S. Ambrose in the ninth Chapter concerning those
that are newly instructed in the Mysteries, where Ambrose says, that the
benediction changes the nature of the Sacrament, and that it is not that
which nature has made, but what the blessing has consecrated: And to show
that in this action there is a supernatural work, he brings the example of
Airons rod turned into a Serpent: so far does Coeffeteau allege S. Ambrose,
but he does maliciously omit many examples following; by which it appears
that S. Ambrose did not think, that that which was to be admired in this
Sacrament, was the Transubstantiation of the bread. For he adds also these
examples, that Moses divided the red Sea: that the River Jordan turned his
course: that water issued out of the Rock: that the bitter waters of Mara were
made sweet: that Elizeus made Iron to swim upon the water; which were all
works of God, whrein there was no transubstantiation; and which declare that
he believed not that the bread became the body of Christ, so as it was no more
bread in substance: which did plainly appear, for that in the words following
comparing these miracles of the Prophets, wherein God changed the nature of
things, Non minus est nouas res rebus dare quam mutare naturas.
with the change that is wrought in the Sacrament, he says, That it is no
less to add some new things unto things, then to change the nature of things.
Auerring plainly thereby that the bread has received some new thing, without
losing the nature of bread. And we may not think it strange if he say that the
bread remaining bread, has changed it nature. For so a bit of Wax becoming
the Kings seal changes it nature without Transubstantiation, and is not any
more commonly called Wax, even as the common bread becomes holy in the
Sacrament, Vera vtique caro Christi quae crucifixa quae sepulta est. Vere ergo
carnis illius Sacramentum est. Ipse clamat Dominus Jesus, Hoc est corpus meu^.
Ante benedictionem verborum cael^stium alia species nominatur, post
consecrationem corpus Christi significatur.
and by this consecration is often called the body of Christ. Therefore he
further adds, It was the true flesh of Christ which has been crucified, and
buried. This then is as truly the holy sign of the flesh. The Lord himself
cries aloud, this is my body: before the blessing of the heavenly words,
another kind is named, after the blessing the body of Christ is signified.

The last place is out of S. Chrysostom, in his Sermon of the Dedication,
where in his flourishing Discourse after his manner, he heaps up Hyperbolies,
to inflame his Auditory. You which come (says he) think not to receive the
Divine body of a man, but that you receive the very Seraphins of fire, with
their tongues. And a little after, the spiritual fire streameth down from the
table: Transported with the same zeal, he says there, that the mysteries are
consumed by the substance of the body. And so in the five and fortieth Homily
upon S. John: We are mingled and knead with him, we fasten our teeth in his
flesh: All which are hyperbolicall phrases, and such as being hardly taken were
absurd in the very judgment of our adversaries, which make the helps of
devotion to cover Idolatry: for to know what is a Doctors opinion, we must not
take his Oratorious Amplifications, nor Hyperbolical ecstasies, Acceptum pane^
and distributum discipulis, corpus suum fecit dicendo hoc est corpus meum, id
est figura corporis me i. Panem suum corpus appellans, vt and hinc iam eum
intelligas corporis sui siguram pani dedisse. I lle cibus qui sanctificatur per
verbum Dei perque obsecrationem iuxta id quod habet materiale in ventrem abit
and in secessum emittitur.
but out of the places in which they advisedly and expressly treat of this
matter; of which you shall have here some passages.

Tertullian in his fourth book against Marcion, cap. 40. Jesus Christ having
taken bread, and distributed it to his Disciples, he made it to be his body,
saying, This is my body, that is, the figure of my body.

The same in his third book against Marcion, cap. 19. God has so revealed it
in the Gospel, calling the bread his body, to the end that thereby thou may
understand that he has given to the bread to be a figure of his body.

Origin upon the fifteenth of Matthew: That meat which is sanctified by the
word of God and by prayer, as touching the matter, it goes down into the
belly, and is cast out into the draught, and does not sanctify of its own
nature.

Cyprian in his third Epistle of the second book, Vinum fuit quod sanguinem
suum dixit. (...), etc. Non dubitauit dicere Hoc est corpus m^um cum daret
signum corporis sui. Sicut ergo secundum quendam modum Sacramentum corporis
Christi orpus Christi est, Sacramentum sanguinis Christi sanguis Christi est.
Ita Sacramentum fidei fides est. Spiritualiter intelligitur quod locutus sum,
non hoc corpus quod videtis manducaturi estis, and bibituri illum sanguinem
quem fu^uri sunt qui me crucifigent. Sacramentum a liquod vobis commendaui:
Spiritualiter intellectum viuificabit vos.
We find that the Cup which the Lord offered was mingled, and THAT WHICH HE
CALLED HIS BLOOD WAS WINE.

Eusebius in the eighth book of the Demonstration of the Gospel, chap. 1.
toward the end; Jesus Christ gave to his Disciples the signs of the divine
dispensation, commanding them to celebrate the figure of his own body. For
seeing that he did now no longer receive the sacrifices of blood, nor the
slaughter of diverse beasts ordained by Moses, he has taught us to use the
bread for a sign of his body.

S. Austin against Adimantus, chap. 12. The Lord made no difficulty to say,
This is my body, when he gave the sign of his body. Where we see that he
expounds this word Body, by sign of my body.

In his three and twentieth Epistle to Boniface, The holy sign of Christ's body
is after a sort, the body of Christ: and the holy sign of the blood of Christ,
is the blood of Christ; and so the holy sign of faith, (to wit, Baptism) is
faith. Certainly Baptism is not transubstantiated into faith, neither the
Sacrament then of the body of Christ, into the body of Christ. Now we must note
that himself in his tenth book of the City of God, and in the fifth Epistle to
Marcellius, declares that this word sacrament signifies an holy sign.

Upon the ninety eight Psalm, Understand that which I say spiritually; you
shall not eat his body which you see, neither shall you drink the blood which
my tormentors shall shed, I have recommended unto you an holy sign, which
being spiritually understood, shall make you live.

Himself in his third book and sixteen Chapter of Christian doctrine, Nisi
manducauerit is carne^ filij hominis, and non biberitis eius sanguinem --
facinus vel flagitium videtur iubere Figura est ergo, praecipions passioni
dominicae esse communicandum and suauiter atque vtiliter recondendum in memoria
quod pro nobis caro eius crucifixa and vulnerata sit. (...), etc.
Except you eat (says Christ) the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his
blood, you shall have no life in you. It seems that he commands a
wickedness. It is then a figure: which commands us to communicate of the
Passion of our Lord, and quietly and profitably to lay up in our memories that
his flesh was wounded and crucified for us. Observe how he expounds this
Figure, to wit, that to eat the flesh of the Son of man, is to communicate
of his Passion, and to ruminate and meditate thereon carefully in our memories.

Theodoret in his first Dialogue, entitled Immovable, fol. 8. of the Roman
Edition, The Lord has given to the sign the name of his body What can a man
say more expressly? And a little after, He has called the sign his blood.

A little after, Jesus Christ has honored visible signs with the Appellation
of his body, not having changed their nature, but having added grace to nature.
So many words, so many flashes of lightning.

In the second Dialogue, the Eutychien Heretic agrees with Coeffeteau, and
maintains the Tran^ubstantiation of the bread into flesh. But Theodoret does
reprehend him thus: The Mystical signs do not change their nature after the
consecration: for they remain in their first substance and form and figure:
and are visible and to be handled, as before, but they are understood to be
the things which they are made: and are believed and reverenced as being become
that which they are believed to be.

Gelasius above all is excellent in his book of the two natures: Et tamen esse
non desimit substantia vel natura panis and vini and cert e imago and
si^^^itudo corporis and sanguinis Christi in action mysteriorum celebrantur
Certainly the Sacraments of the body and blood of Christ which we receive, are
a divine thing, and therefore also by them we are made partakers of the Divine
nature: and yet notwithstanding, the Substance and nature of the bread, and of
that wine does not let to remain. And surely the Image and semblance of the
body and blood of Christ are celebrated in the action of mysteries.

What more? Let us hear the Canonists of the Church of Rome in a Gloss more
ancient then the Transubstantiation, Caeleste Sacramentum quod vere
repraesentat carnem Christi dicitur corpus Christi sed improprie, vnde dicitur
suo modo non rei veritate sed significante mysterio vt sensus sit, vocatus
Christi corpus, id est significatur Sicut caelestis panis qui Christi caro est
suo modo vocatur corpus Christi, cum revera sit Sacramentum corporis Christi
ill us videlicet quod visibile, etc.
couched in admirable formal terms, upon the Canon Hoc est, in the second
Distinction of the Consecration, thus speaks the Gloss: The heavenly
Sacrament which truly represents the flesh of Christ, is called the body of
Christ: but improperly, and therefore it is so called after a sort, and not
according to the verity of the thing it self, but by a significant mystery:
so that the sense is this; it is called the body of Christ, that is to say, the
body of Christ is signified thereby.

The same Text of the Canon, drawn out of S. Austin, is no less direct to the
purpose: The heavenly bread, which is, the flesh of Christ is after it manner
of speaking called the body of Christ, albeit in truth it be a holy sign of
the body of Christ, to wit of him who is visible, palpable, mortal, hanged on
the Cross.

Add hereunto the ancient customs, diametrally contrary to
Transubstantiation. The Hierom. in 1. ad Corinth: cap: 11.
ancient Christians made a feast, in which they did eat the remains of the
Sacrament. It was also the custom of many places to give those residues to
little children, as Euag. 4. lib. Histo^iae cap* 35 Niceph. lib. 17. cap. 25.
Euagrius and Nicephorus do witness. In other places they burnt them, as
Hesychius teaches in his second book upon Leuiticus, chap. 8. They gave the
bread of the Sacrament into the peoples Eusebius. libr. 7. cap. 8 August. contra
literas Petiliani lib. 9. cap. 30.
hands, and sometimes permitted them to carry it home. They did not make any
elevation of the Host, neither did the people adore it. They did not speak in
those days of that concomitancy, which puts the whole body of Christ into
every drop of the Chalice. In stead of a little Wafer cake which now they lift
up, they covered the Table with bread and wine. To lick up the drops which
fall from the Chalice, to burn the Parings, and to put them up for relics, to
seek for the Host in the vomitings, to celebrate the God-feast, or Corpus
Christi day, and to carry God in procession between two rows of Tapestry, are
customs of which we find no tract or trace in the ancients: who do neither
likewise speak of accidents without subject, of length without any thing that
is long, or of roundnesse and nothing round: no more then of a body without
place, and of a body of Christ far separated from it self, higher and lower
then it self: which also they affirm to be in this Sacrament* figure of it
self, and to be with all his length in each part of the Host, to have a length
without extent, to have all his length in one point which has no length at
all. In a word, there is no mention of a thousand such like prodigious fancies,
which now they believe in the Church of Rome with more respect then the
Gospel, out of which Coeffeteau without doubt would have produced some
proofs, if he had found any, rather then have alleged four miserable places
of the Fathers, falsified and curtalled after his manner.

1 For if he had well weighed the words of the Gospel and of the Apostles, he
should have found that Jesus Christ took bread, and brake it. But the Church
of Rome says, that the Priest does not break bread.

2 He should have found that Jesus Christ took bread, and gave it to his
Disciples. But the Church of Rome holds, that the Priest does not give bread.

3 He should have found that Jesus Christ giving this bread, said that that which
he gave was his body. But the Church of Rome does not believe that the bread
is the body of Christ, but does thus expound these words: This is my body,
that is, that which is under these forms, shall be transubstantiated into my
body. For it is certain, that when Jesus Christ said This is my body, by the
word This, he understood that which he gave. Now the Gospel does witness that
he gave bread: therefore these words, This is my body, do signify as much as
This bread is my body. And so all the ancients do expound them. Now in that
the bread cannot be the body of our Lord in substance, it remains therefore
that it be such by way of Sacrament, and in the same sense, as in the line
following, the Cup is called the new Covenant, or the new Testament.

4 He should also have found, that this Sacrament is a commemoration of Jesus
Christ; It is not then Jesus Christ himself. For the remembrance of a thing,
and that whereof it is the memorial, are diverse things.

5 He should have found that S. Matthew and S. Mark, say that Jesus drank
with his Disciples of the fruit of the Vine: that is, of wine: it was then yet
wine whilst he drank of it. For albeit there were two Cups, as appears by S.
Luke; notwithstanding S. Matthew and S. Mark cannot call the wine of a Cup of
which they do not speak at all, Fruit of the Vine.

6 He should further have seen that Jesus Christ makes no elevation of the
Host, neither do the Apostles adore it, but continue sitting at the Table.

7 He might have seen that. 1. Cor. 10. S. Paul does give us a Paraphrase of
the words This is my body. In these words, the bread which we break, is the
Communion of the body of Christ. But the Church of Rome waxing wroth and angry
against the Apostle, bites and snarles at every word of this clause.

First, the Apostle says that it is bread. The Church of Rome denies that it
is bread.

Secondly, he says that we break bread: on the other side, the Church of Rome
says, that there is no bread broken.

Thirdly, our adversaries being demanded, what that bread is that is broken,
they say it is the body of Christ; and yet the body of Christ cannot be broken.

Fourthly, S. Paul says, that this bread which we break, is the Communion of
the body of Christ: whence it follows against the Church of Rome, that the
bread which is broken, is not the body of Christ, for the participation or
communicating of meat, is not the meat it self.

Fifthly, it by this word Bread, we must understand the body of Christ, as our
adversaries will have it, it will follow, not only that the body of Christ is
broken in the Sacrament, but also that S. Paul should have mocked us in saying,
that, the body of Christ is the Communion of the body of Christ, words very
ridiculous and which our adversaries believe not.

Sixty, The worst is, that the Church of Rome holds, that there is nothing
broken in the Sacrament but the accidents, that is, the roundnesse, color,
taste, and length of the bread: and so she blaspemeth horribly, making the
Apostle to say, that the breaking of colors, roundnesse, and taste of the
bread, is the Communion of the body of Christ.

8 He should have found also 1. Cor. 11. that the Apostle says thrice that we
eat bread: and in the second and the twentieth of the Acts, the Apostles came
together to break bread: where our adversaries are enforced to have recourse
to strange figures, and to make (which is contrary to the Order of time) S.
John interpreter of S Paul. Shifts and euasions which we have refuted in
another place, and have boulted this Dispute to the very branne.

I suppose also, that if Coeffeteau had any good opinion of Jesus Christ, he
would have presumed of him, that being souerainly good, he would not have taken
pleasure, to deliver the Institution of this Sacrament in ambiguous terms: who
will believe, that he that is the light of the world should be the cause of
darkness? whence comes it then that our adversaries bring in a kind of
Mascarado into this holy banquet, when they introduce a douzen of figures and
perplexed terms in the words of this Institution? Figures which we have
handled and discussed in his place. In my Apology for the Lords Supper, chapter 12.
And they who cannot endure that the bread should be called the body of Christ,
because it is the Sacrament of the body of Christ, Epist. ad Bonifacium, 3.
according as S. Austin says, that the Sacraments take ordinarily the name of
that which they signify; yet themselves in the words following (which is
broken for you) admit a like figure, saying, that it is not the body that is
broken, but the accidents and outward signs, and that that which agrees to
the sign, is attributed to the thing signified.

Whosoever shall weigh these things without passion, will not suffer himself
to be infolded in this gross error, which does greatly abase the glory of our
Savior, which makes him to be swallowed up of his enemies: which makes Jesus
Christ to have drunken his own flesh and bones: which says that he may be
eaten of Mice and other vermin: which incloseth him in filthy vomitings, which
makes the Priest sometimes to complain that they have robbed him of his God;
which gives to a Priest, be he never so vicious, more power then to the
Virgin Mary and all the Saints and Angels, who being all put together in one,
cannot make Jesus Christ, seeing that he is already made, and cannot be
produced a new, much less in murmuring certain words over the bread. Which
does overthrow and abolish the humanity of our Savior, and by consequent all
our faith; giving him a body without length: a body which being in diverse
places far a part is by consequent far separated from it self: A body
without position or situation of parts, seeing that they are all together
under one only point, and in every little crumme of the Host. Yea many
contrary bodies, of which one is at the Table with his Disciples, the other in
the stomachs of his Disciples. For the one body is infirm and weak, the
other without infirmity: the one spreading his hands, the other not able to
stir them: the one speaking and breathing, the other not able to speak or to
breath: the one sweating in the Garden drops of blood, the other newly received
into the stomachs of the Apostles, which did neither sweat nor suffer. Which of
these two was our Savior? If he be but one, how is he contrary to himself?
For we have showed else where that the Distinction of diverse respects cannot be
but when onething is compared to diverse things at one time, as when one and the
same man is poor and rich, little and great, in comparison of diverse persons.
But here they apply these diverse respects to the body of Jesus Christ without
comparing him to any other body, nay they oppose him to himself.

That I may not further say, that this doctrine does annihilate the body of our
Lord, by being received into the stomach: for when the forms are altered in
the stomach by the digestion, they say that the body of the Lord is no longer
there, neither yet is it come forth: it must follow then that either it is
reduced to nothing, or changed into something else. Both the one and the other,
are alike blasphemous.

ARTICLE XII. Touching the Adoration of the Host.
THe Confession of the Kings Book does place among the new inventions of the
Church of Rome.

The Adoration of the Host, and the Elevation which is made to have it adored.

This point is important, and which does surprise our spirits with a heaviness
mixed with horror, when at the sound of a little Bell, the Priest lifts up
the bread, and every man prostrateth himself to adore it: Or when the people
does not let to kneel in the dyrt to adore their God, which passes along the
street, enclosed in a Pixe or Box. It had been greatly therefore to have
been wished that Coeffeteau could have produced some commandment of God for
the same, or some example of the Apostles: but that could he not do, neither
has any man done it hitherunto.

He comes therefore to the Fathers, and produces for the same three
passages, the one of Chrysostom in his four and twentieth Homily upon the
first to the Corinth. the other of S. Ambrose in his third book of the
Sacraments, chap. 12. And the last of S. Austin upon the foure-score and
eighteen Psalm. All three exhort the faithful to adore the flesh of Jesus
Christ, and that which is more, to adore him in the Eucharist.

Never did man more abuse his Reader, and he seems to think that we are
beside our selves: for is there any thing in all this which we do not
willingly grant him? Is there any amongst us who has ever denied, that we
ought not to adore the flesh of Jesus Christ? Yea who has ever doubted that we
ought not to adore him in the Eucharist? Ought not God the Father also to be
adored? And what is this to the purpose to enclose Jesus Christ under forms?
He that does adore Jesus Christ in the Eucharist, does not for all that adore
that which the Priest holds in his hand, but he adoreth Jesus Christ which is
in heaven.

Of these three places, that which our adversaries do most press, is the
place of S. Austin upon the foure-score and eyghteene Psalm, where he says
that no man does eat this flesh unless he have first adored it. Nemo carnem
illam manducat nisi prius adorauerit.
An excellent passage. For does not S. Austin speak of the true and serious
adoration? Judas then did not eat this flesh, for he did not adore it.
According to this rule, the Hypocrites who partake of the Sacrament, do not
eat the flesh of the Lord, for they do not adore it. Now what it is to eat
the flesh of the Lord, himself has told us, as has been before alleged;
Lib. 3. de Doctr. Christ cap 16.
That to eat his flesh is a figure which signifies to communicate of his
passion, and to meditate thereof in our memories. And as he speaks in his
twenty six Tract. upon S. John: To believe in him is to eat the bread of
life: Credere in eum hoc est manducare panem vivum^qui credit in eum, manducat
eum.
he that does believe in him does eat him.

We hoped then that Coeffeteau would here have produced the public customs,
to show that it was then the custom to adore the Host which the Priest does
hold up with divine worship, called Latria: but he has not been able to
find any. Dionysius who in his Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, discribeth very
exactly the form of the public service, which was some four hundred years
after Jesus Christ: and the Apostolical constitutions of Clement, where all the
Ceremony of that time is depainted; and the ancient Liturgies, howsoever foully
falsified, do in no wise speak of this adoration of the Host. Theodoret says
indeed that (...), the signs are reverenced. This word Signs shows
sufficiently that he does not speak of divine adoration, which they call Cultus
Latriae. For that should be impiety.

ARTICLE XIII. Touching the Elevation of the Host to have it to be Adored.
THe King of great Britain demanded proofs out of the five first ages, or
first five hundred years after Christ that is to say, as well Scripture as the
ancient Doctors, by which it might appear, that Jesus Christ or his Apostles
made elevation of the host. Hereat Coeffeteau holds his peace, Fol. 50. page
2.
and in stead thereof says that the ancient Church did show the mysteries or
sacraments to the people by drawing a Veil or Curtain from before the Table:
which is true: (...), etc.
and he has learned that out of my book of the Apology of the Lords Supper.
Chrysostom in his third Homily upon the Epistle to the Ephesians: When thou
shall see the double Curtains to be drawn, then think that heaven does open
and enlarge it self. And Dionysius in his Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, The
Bishop discovers and sets out to open view the thing celebrated by the
signs holily proposed. And Basil in like manner in his book of the holy
Ghost, Who is it of the Saints who has left in writing the words of the
prayer, when they show abroad the bread of the Eucharist, and the Cup of
blessing?

This uncovering of the Sacrament was done, (says Coeffeteau) to cause it to
be adored: and as he speaks this without all proof, so does he it most
falsely; and was not able to allege any one authority where mention is made
either of the elevation, or of the Adoration of the host: but in stead thereof
he brings certain passages, which speak of the uncovering of the bread, and
of the drawing of a Curtain.

ARTICLE XIIII. Touching the carrying of God in the Procession.
The KINGS Confession. Pope Vrbane the fourth instituted this feast in the
year 1264.
THe God-feast, or Corpus Christi day, and the walking or Circumportation of
the Sacrament in procession, is of this rank and the King of great Britain
does place it among the Novelties.

Hereupon Coeffeteau fearing the touch and trial makes an honest retreat,
without standing upon his defense: for he only says, Fol 51:
We rank among the holy customs of the Church this fashion of carrying the
body of our Lord in the most solemn supplications and Processions: he tells us
his opinion, and we knew it well enough before. We expected that he should have
taught us not what himself believes, but why he believes it: when this
custom began: who was the author of it: if it have any ground in the word of
God, or in the Fathers. Of all this not a word: a Turk or a Jew might defend
himself in like manner, we believe, we affirm. And should he then set upon a
King by saying so little to the purpose?

ARTICLE XV. Touching works of Supererogation, and of Superabounding
satisfactions, and of the treasure of the Church.
The KINGS Confession.
SVch are the works of Supererogation, which are rightly called, the treasure
of the Church.

The Doctor Coeffeteau answers. We know no such matter. For we call works of
Supererogation, those which have for their object the Evangelical Counsels, to
the which all Christians are not bound: as for a man to sell all his goods, and
to give them to the poor, etc. And of these (says he) we do not make any
treasure, but that which is gathered and laid up in heaven. But as touching the
treasure of Indulgences, Coeffeteau says, that it is composed of the
Superaboundance of the merits of Jesus Christ, and of the Satisfactions of the
Saints, who have suffered more then they deserved, as of the holy Virgin, and
other Saints. God not permitting that any thing of their sorrows or sufferings
should perish, it being a thing just and reasonable that they should serve to
the communion of the Saints, as members of the same body.

In all this not a word of scripture, no authority of the Ancients, The
Answer.
no example of Antiquity: Coeffeteau only tells us his opinion. I might
satisfy him with like reason, by opposing our opinion; but he shall not so
lightly go away with the matter. For this is one of the Cankers of the body of
the Church of Rome; one of the principal pieces of the mystery of iniquity.

The opinion of the Church of Rome, according as Bellarmine does represent it
in the seventh and eight Chapters of his book of Monks, is, that there are
certain excellent works, which are called Counsels of perfection, which God
does not command, but does only counsel; works which as they are more
cumbersome, and uneasy to be done, so also being performed, they are more
perfect, and more excellent then all that GOD has commanded in his Law: more
then to love God with all his heart, and his neighbor as himself: Works to
which a man is not bound, and if he do them not, he is not punishable, but in
observing them he gets a degree of glory above the common sort. Such are
perpetual Virginity, Martyrdom, and the distribution of all his goods to the
poor. But especially the vows of Obedience, of Poverty and Chastity; which
are the three vows of the Monks, whose express profession it is to do
works of Supererogation, by the merit of which they shall gain in Paradise
an eminent degree of glory above the popular Saints, and the Communalty of
souls.

All this being but a swollen Blister of pride, we will prick it and abate it
with the word of God. And indeed a man had need read this often over, before
he shall find any thing relishing of the spirit of God.

1 It is a thing almost incredible, that there are any men to be found which
think themselves to be more perfect, then God has commanded. Seeing that
Jesus Christ, Matthew. 5. does give us this commandment, Be you perfect as your
father which is in heaven is perfect. Is there any man that can be more perfect
then God? For although no man can ever approach to his perfection, yet will he
have us to conform our selves to his example. So that amongst men he shall be
the most perfect, who shall most frame himself thereunto. Now that this is an
express commandment, and a perfection necessarily required, Bellarmine
himself does acknowledge it, chap. 13. of Monks: where notwithstanding he
does maliciously loppe off these last words, Tertio.
As my father which is in heaven is perfect.

2 With like pride, these people will be more perfect then Jesus Christ, whose
righteousness in regard of his humanity, consisted in nothing else then in
doing the will of his Father. And therefore he says, Heb. 10. Here I am, O
Lord, to do thy will. And Galat. 4. He was made subject to the law, to the end
that he might redeem them which were under the law.

3 All the perfection and righteousness likewise of the Angels consists
only in executing the commandments of God, Psalm. 103. You mighty Angels
that excel in virtue, you that do his commandment in obeying the voice of
his words, ye his servants that do his pleasure. It is not found that they do
any works of supererogation. And by that reason the Angelical perfection should
be inferior to the Monastical Me thinks that the Capuchins, by calling
themselves Angels, Arch Angels, Spirits, Cherubin or Seraphin Friars,
illuminated Fathers, etc. have done wrong to their worth and dignity, by taking
names too base for them, and inferior to their Capuchine perfection.

4 I add that this word of Counsel of Perfection, is injurious against the
law of God, and accuses it of imperfection; for it is as much to say that the
law is not a perfect rule of Righteousness, seeing that man, a weak and
sinful creature, can surpass it, and do works much better then it
commands. That wealth is not great which is surmounted by poverty: It is but
a weak and feeble righteousness which can be exceeded by sinners. If besides
the law there have been counsels of perfection, what does thence follow, but
that the law of God is a rule of imperfection?

5 But let us hear a little, what are the commandments of God. Jesus Christ,
Ioh. 13. speaks thus: A new commandment give I you, that you love one
another as I have loved you. Where is the man so much puffed up with his own
merits that can surpass this love? Or love his neighbor more then Jesus
Christ has loved us? He being righteous, having given his life for sinners?
The author of life for mortal men? The Son of God for the slaves of the
Devil to make them his servants, yea his friends, yea his brethren, yea his
Spouse, yea his body, yea one with him? These be depths that cannot be
fathomed, but depths of his love and grace. All the feruor of our charity is
but coldness in comparison of it, how far then from doing any thing over and
above it?

6 God commands in his law that we should love him with all our heart, and
with all our strength: He commands all that we can do; we cannot then do
more then he commands: to say that a man can love God more then he can, is
to say that he can do that which he cannot do. Jesus Christ himself never
loved his Father more then with all his strength. And here the truth is so
strong that Bellarmine in the thirteenth Chapter of his book of Monks, Quod
autem.
after that he had a long time labored and sweated thereupon, is constrained to
correct this commandment of God: affirming, that when God will be loved with
All our heart, and with all our strength, by this word ALL we must understand a
part, as if I should say, that the right side signify h the left, or that
white signifies black. Though this Prelate made no conscience to jest in this
manner in the explication of so holy a sentence, and the most important of all
the word of God, and such as is an abridgement of the whole law: at least he
should have been afraid to bring in the devil into partage with God: for if
God be content with one part of our heart, it follows that a man may give the
other part to the devil.

7 Add hereunto the Commandment of the Apostle S. Paul, Philip. 4.
Furthermore Brethren whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure,
whatsoever things pertain to love, whatsoever things are of good report, if
there be any virtue, and any praise think on those things. I demand then of
these. our Masters, whether the works of Supererogation be things just, or
whether they be virtuous, or things worthy of praise: if they be not, we must
not employ our selves about them: if they be just and praiseworthy, then are
they demanded by the Apostle. They be not then works not commanded, or over
and above the commandment of God. For he does not say, do nothing which is
not just, as Bellarmine speaks lewdly, corrupting the words of the Apostle:
but he commands us to give and apply our selves to whatsoever is just and
virtuous.

8 Now if we cannot accomplish the law, how much less shall we be able to do
more then it commands? If Saint Paul, Romans 7 confess that sin dwells in
him, and that he does the evil which he would not do; and therefore calls
himself miserable man. If S. James acknowledge that in many things we offend
All. Iam. 3 ^. 1. Ioh. 2.
If Saint John says, that If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves.
If Jesus Christ have commanded all the faithful to say every day, forgive us
our trespasses: If David a man after Gods own heart, say, Psalm 143. That in
Gods sight no man living shall be justified. How can we do any thing over and
above, seeing that we fail in that which is necessary? That man is very ill
advised, who being not able to pay his debts, does yet offer great gifts.

9 But I would willingly ask of these Monks, who do more then God requires,
and works more then due, whence they have received the strength and ability to
do them? They answer, from God. Then say I that if God has given them this
power, it is not that it should remain idle and unprofitable, but to the end
to employ it. Then are they bound to do more then the law, seeing that God
gives them strength thereunto, otherwise they should bury the graces of God,
and should frustrate him of his end. Now if they be bound, it is no longer a
Counsel, they are no longer works of Supererogation. For indeed how could
they do more good then they owe to God, seeing that they owe themselves unto
him, and have nothing but of his liberality, and that the good which they do,
does not profit God any thing? Luc. 17.10.
For if he who should do all that God has commanded him is notwithstanding
called by Jesus Christ an unprofitable servant: let some man tell me wherein
and how those men are more profitable unto God, who do many works of
Supererogation?

10 For this cause also we shall never find that the Apostles or their
Disciples ever made any reckoning of their works of Supererogation, and not
commanded: this is that Pharisaicall Leaven which puffs up the hearts, and
sowreth the spirits of men with hypocrisy and presumption. For see here the
words of the Pharisie. Luke 18. I am not like other men, I fast twice in the
week, I give tithe of all that I possess. Works not commanded, (...).
voluntary devotions, traditions and counsels of perfections.

11 And indeed, that we may not remove all this meniall trash of works of
supererogation, as it were to make a longer Lent then other men do: or to
turn over our Paternoster beads oftener: or to have more grains then
ordinary, or to carry great beads like Tennis balls after the manner of
Hermites: or to live by going from door to door, and in the day time to have
the street for his house: or to carry the wallet upon the shoulder full of
slices and gobbets half gnawen, just after the ancient manner of the Priests
of the Syrian goddess described by Apuleius in his 8. Book of the golden
Ass: let us speak only of those works which seem the most specious. They
place in this rank single life or perpetual virginity. But they mistake
themselves greatly, Stipes aereas immo vere and argenteas multis certatim
offerentibus finu recepere patulo: nec non and vini cadum and lactem and
caseos-auidis animis corradent es omnia and in sacculos huic quaestui de
industria praeparatos farcientes.
for there be two sorts of single life, one which is with continency, and
without being tickled with any unchaste desire and which has no necessity of
marrying: The other which boyleth inwardly with heat, having much ado to
contain. This so far is it from being meritorious, that contrariwise it is a
demerite to condemnation. So far is it that such a Virginity should be over
and above the commandment, that it is indeed against the commandment; for
the Apostle S. Paul, 1. Cor. 7 commands such to marry. Epistola ad
Eustochium.
It is better to marry then to burn. And S. Jerome, who confesses that amidds
his Abstinencies did yet feel within himself the fuel of lust as an
incentiue to whoredom, was doubtless bound to marry. But as touching
continent Virginity, the Apostle S. Paul does counsel us to continue in that
estate, as being more free, and having less trouble and fitter for the service
of God, and to study to please him. But for all that he does not recommend
Virginity as a work of Supererogation, but as a condition of life more
commodious to a believing man for the time present. So if I should counsel
some one man in a corrupt age, and in a place wherein vices are contagious, and
virtue is become odious, to live apart, and not to entermeddle with the
public affairs, to the end, that he may serve God with more facility; and to
add liberty to his innocence: should it follow thereupon that I should esteem
a private life, were a work of Supererogation? Bellarm. lib. 2. de Amissione
gratiae cap. 18.. Dicet. Non peccat Magistratus si meretricib' certum locum
vrbis ^olendum attribuat, quamuis certo sciat eo loco ipsas non been osuias.
Potest e^^n permittere minus malum vt maiora impediantur.


Here might be a fit place to represent the inconueniencies of the Vow of
Virginity, and what vices it has brought into the Couents. Thus at Rome, from
whence this ordinance does come, public Stews are allowed and established;
which Bellarmine does maintain to have been wisely established, and compares
in this point the Pope with God. Add hereunto that this vow is undertaken many
times without thinking of this matter, and of which they afterward repent them
by leisure. Many there be that enter into Cloisters and these vows out of
necessity, others out of grief and coffeehouse: and they bear it
accordingly, with impatience. Lastly, I say that in Virginity there are two
things required, first, incorruption of the body; secondly, Chastity in
affections. The first is not a virtue: the second is commanded of God, and
therefore is not a work of Supererogation.

They add hereunto Martyrdom, whereunto if a man do expose himself without
any necessity and does precipitate himself into it without being called
thereunto by God, it is not only not a work of Supererogation, but a very
transgression of the commandment of Jesus Christ, who bids us, that when
they persecute us in one City, to fly into another. It is sufficient for
Christian constancy to bear the brunt when it comes upon us without running
to encounter it: to receive necessary evils and harms without posting after
them. But if we be drawn to Martyrdom, as our Savior Christ said unto S.
Peter, That they should gird him, and lead him whether he would not, Ioh. 21.18.
signifying by what death he should glorify God: Then I say that Martyrdom is
a work of duty, and not in our choice. But that he that should dispense
with himself therein, should be a Traitor toward God, seeing that then there
is no other means of escaping but only by renouncing of the Gospel. And
thereupon we have the express commandment of Christ, Mat. 10. Luc. 9. to
wit, that whosoever shall deny him before men, he will deny him before his
Father. Whosoever then in this case shall seek to save his life shall loose
it. God commands us to love him above all things, therefore above our lives
also. And shall this then be counted a Counsel, whereunto a man is not bound,
which notwithstanding if we do not follow, we are perfidious against God, and
prodigal of our own salvation? True it is that many are saved without
suffering Martyrdom. But so withal that there is none saved unless that he
be prepared for Martyrdom: In which there are these two things: first, the
pains and torments of the body: secondly, the constant perseverance in the
faith. The bodily griefs and pains are not virtues, and therefore cannot be
works of Supererogation. But that which is praiseworthy in Martyrdom is a
firm faith and feruor of zeal, which becomes a victorious Conquer our over
the flame of the fire. Now this faith and this zeal are commanded of God, and
we are bound to strengthen and fortify our selves thereunto. It is not then an
undue work, or a work of Supererogation^ and indeed it is a subtilty of
Satan to place Martyrdom amongst unnecessary works, to the end that a man
should not hold himself bound thereunto.

They further add the sale of all our goods, to distribute them to the poor:
and this is the only example which Coeffeteau does produce unto us, To sell
all that he has.
which is the weakest of all. For so far is it from being a work of
Supererogation, that many times it is not so much as a good work. The words
of Saint Paul are very express, 1. Cor. 13. Though I should give all my goods
to the poor, and have not love, it profits me nothing. This is then a work
which may be done without charity, and by hypocrisy. I add also that he that
should be charged with a great number of children should have a charity
inhumanely indiscreet, if he should give al his goods to the poor: for piety
does not overthrow nature. He that has no care of his family has denied the
faith, and is worse then an Infidel: 1. Tim 5.
for in stead of being charitable, he becomes void of humanity, and natural
affection. A man should have his purse open, but not without bottom that will
hold nothing: neither should a man give his money without reason, as if he
were angry with it. We must further also take heed that our liberalities be
not in the nature of thefts and larcenie, in giving that to one which is due to
another. This distribution then is commendable, if it be done without
hypocrisy, without superstition, and without an opinion of making God indebted
and beholding unto us, and so that it do not divert us from other more
necessary works.

These things considered do furnish us with an invincible demonstration
against this abuse, which thinks that for a man to distribute all that he
has to the poor, is a work more excellent then the fulfilling of the law,
that is to say, more then to love God with all his heart, and his neighbor as
himself. For the things which are always good, are more valuable then those
which are only good Arist. Top. 3.
conditionally, and upon certain considerations. Now the love of God and of
our neighbor, recommended unto us in the law, is always and in all
considerations good. But the distribution of a man's goods to the poor is only
good upon those considerations which I have before represented, and therefore
the love of God and of our neighbor is more of value then it.

This reason is yet stronger: a thing that is good in it self is always
better then that thing which is not good, but in respect of another. Now the
love of God and of our neighbor is good in it self; but the distribution of
all that we possess to the poor, is not good unless it be in respect of our
love to God, and to our neighbor, and therefore our love to God and to our
neighbor is better. Yea I say that all that is praiseworthy in that
liberality which gives all to the poor is charity, which is commanded us in
the law, even so far as to love God with all our heart, and with all our
strength, and to love others as our selves.

It is then in vain, that they allege unto us the commandment of Christ,
Mat. 19. given unto the young man (who said that he had kept all the
commandments from his youth) to whom our Savior replied, If thou will be
perfect, sell all that thou have, and give it to the poor, and thou shall have
a treasure in heaven. For first of all our adversaries are deceived in thinking
this young man had fulfilled the law, seeing that he was covetous, as our
Savior shows, Marc. 10 24. where after that this young man had left Christ,
with purpose rather to keep his goods then to follow Christ, our Savior said
to his Apostles, Children how hard is it for them that trust in riches to enter
into the Kingdom of God? He that trusts in his riches and prefers them
before Christ, transgresses the law, and does not love God above all things.
And indeed Chrysostom in his 64 Homily upon S. Matthew, says that he was
covetous. S. Jerome upon that place says, that he came to tempt Christ, and in
that our Savior Christ loved him, it was a love of compassion, and not an
approbation of his Avarice. Luc. 19.41.
So Jerusalem was full of the blood of the Prophets, and yet our Savior wept
over it, which tears could not be without some love.

Secondly, they abuse themselves in thinking that this is a counsel given to
all: for we have showed that it should be il done oftentimes, to observe it.
But Christ gave this commandment particularly to this young man to discover
his coueteousnesse, and to show unto him how far he was from the
accomplishment of the law; of which he so much boasted: our Savior puts his
finger upon his impostume, to make him to feel his Malady. For Christ who
knows the hearts of men, and the things that are to come, knew well enough
that he would not forsake his goods, and that he was not in disposition to
follow him And indeed no man can deny but that this young man was much to
blame that he rejected Christ's counsel, and refused to follow him. But
according to the doctrine of our adversaries, he is not to be reprehended: for
(say they) it is a counsel of perfection, to which no man is bound. In a word
it is neither said there, nor else where, that in so doing he had done a work
of Supererogation.

But it seems to me that this presumptuous doctrine is not comely in the
mouth of Monks; who do not vow poverty, but rather to be rich. There be many
Monks of great revenues, who live like Princes. Others are poor in their own
particular and private estates, but are rich in common. Their begging and
loitering is fatter to them then the peoples laboring, they gather much money
under the color of Pardons. They never go but to the funerals of rich men:
they sing no Mass but for them that have given them before hand: they fleece
and share even upon the graves, and death it self is made tributary unto them.
But especially I find that their tottering faith, and the profession that they
make of doubting of their salvation, does very ill sort and agree with these
works of Supererogation. But to omit for the present, this doctrine which
preaches Distrust, whereas the Scripture preaches confidence and certainty of
Faith: This doctrine, I say, which teaches us to pray, Our Father which art in
heaven, without knowing whether we be the children of the Devil, or no: And
which accounts it arrogant pride for a man to trust upon the promise of God:
To omit this, I say, let us only consider, how these things can agree; that
men should seek by works of Supererogation to come to a more excellent degree
of glory above other men, and yet in the mean time to doubt, whether
themselves shall be saved or eternally damned. Thus they tremble, seeing Hell
open upon them, while their ambition stretches it self beyond the Kingdom of
heaven. Like unto a man whose ambition a whole Kingdom or Empire will not
suffice, and yet stands in fear to be hanged the next day. Were it not
better to stick to the promises of God, then to live in suspense between the
fear of hell, and the hope of an extraordinary glory, ballancing his spirit
between Pride and Despair? Offending God as much through incredulity as
through presumption? How great then must the terror of conscience, and
trembling of heart be in those men, who content themselves with the bare
keeping of Gods commandments, and also of those that seek unto these men to
borrow Satisfactions, and to buy their Merits.

All this that has formerly been said, is not so to be taken, as though we
did absolutely deny that there are no counsels in the Gospel: the ancient
Fathers do acknowledge as much with us. It is a good and a wise counsel to
abstain from things lawful, as from the use of meats, when our weak brother
is scandalized thereby. It is a wise counsel for a Pastor or Minister to take
no stipend when he can live otherwise, or when it gives occasion to the wicked
to defame the Gospel. It is a wise counsel to a man that has the gift of
continency to abstain from marriage, especially in time of persecution. But
that the observing of them should be a perfection above the law, or that it
should deserve a degree of glory in Paradise above the common rank of Saints,
is that which we have proved to be false, and contrary to the Gospel; and a
doctrine that lifts a man up on high, to precipitate him with a greater down
fall.

Of superaboundant Satisfactions, and of the treasure of the Church.
HIs Majesty of England does upon good ground auerre that the works of
Supererogation are rightly named Thesaurus Ecclesiae: Page 39.
for satisfaction is a kind of work; of which Treasure we must speak
somewhat; and our Discourse thereof tends to these two heads: first, to show
of what (ingredients) this Treasure is componnded: secondly, to what use it is
employed.

The chief part of this Treasure.
1 This Treasure is chiefly compounded (says Coeffeteau) of the superaboundance
of Jesus Christ his merits: in which speech beside the abuse, there is plain
mockery, for he is deceived in thinking that the merits of Jesus Christ can be
divided into parts; and that a part of his satisfaction may be withdrawn
(from the rest) and put into a treasury. The poorest man must be saved by the
death of Christ, and has need of his whole satisfaction. Even as all the
light of the Sun does wholly shine in one place, and wholly shine in another
place, and as all the words of an Orator do at once arrive to the ear of
every hearer, so every believer must necessarily lay hold upon the whole
merits of Christ for his salvation: not as these men dream, one man upon one
part, and a second on another part, by which means Christ may leave certain
portions for the Pope to husband and store up in his treasury: being as absurd,
as if I should seek to save a part of the light, or reserve a piece of the
Orators voice. Were there fewer believers, they should need Christ's whole
satisfaction, and all his merits. And were their number doubled a thousand
times, they should all find in the death of Jesus Christ a full redemption.
Spiritual graces are entirely possessed and without division, and there is no
gathering of broken pieces. Consider farther that every one of us has deserved
an infinite punishment, and therefore that every of us needs a ransom of
infinite value, and such there is none but the alone death of our Savior:
whereupon it also follows, that there can be no distraction of any part of his
merit; for things infinite admit no division.

2 For playner evidence, I ask of these my Masters, to whom Christ Jesus has
offered his satisfaction, and the merit of his passion, and to whom he has
paid this ransom? I suppose they will acknowledge with the Apostle to the
Hebrews, that Jesus Christ has offered this oblation to God, the Father: and
then God has received this oblation satisfactory at his hands: if then he have
accepted it, they must tell me, when he was dispossessed of a part of this
merit, to put it into the Popes custody? Is it lawful for us in matters of
such consequence, and where the participation in the merits of Jesus Christ is
in question to forge Articles of faith without any warrant of Gods word, nay
without any testimony of antiquity?

3 I suppose also, that they will not deny, but the Pope is one of the number
for which Christ Jesus has paid the ransom of his Father. Is it not then a
monstrous imagination to conceive, that any one accepting a ransom for a
multitude of Captives, should turn it back to the hands of some one chief
prisoner to apply it to the rest? which cannot fall under any man's
understanding.

4 Now if any man bring me any reason, why it is necessary that the Pope should
be the Depositary and the Dispenser of a part of Jesus Christ his merit, that
self reason shall be found in the old Testament: for then had the believers
as much need of Gods mercy, and our Saviors bounty: and yet not any of our
adversaries has hitherto dared to affirm, that in those days the high
Priests had the ouer-plus of Christ's merits under their locks, in their
treasuries: for yet they have not been bold-fac'de enough to propose matter so
ridiculous.

5 Now if the merits of Jesus Christ were then only in the hands of God, and
none are partly in the power of the Pope, whence is it that Indulgences are
more freely granted, yea to the very dead, which in those times was not
practiced. It must needs be said that by this these new expedient benefits of
Jesus Christ are far better employed: or that the Pope the Depositary, is
more open-handed then God the proprietary. And in all this where is there any
the least show of Christian religion?

The second part of this Treasure.
The other part of this Treasure is the ouer-plus of the satisfactions of
Saints, and Monks, that (as Coeffeteau says) have suffered more then they
have deserved.

This is a prodigious doctrine.

1 It is to accuse God downright of injustice, to think that he does inflict
a heavier punishment upon a man, then he has deserved.

2 It is an ouer-sleight regard of the grieuousnesse of sin, to imagine that
the afflictions of this life can make satisfaction for sin: satisfaction
being understood for the acknowledgement of a fault, and humble repentance is a
thing both holy and necessary. But our adversaries by satisfaction do
understand the bearing of the punishment, and paying of the ransom for sin,
to satisfy the justice of the Almighty: against which I affirm, that if the
calling of a brother fool deserve hell fire, Mat. 5 If the slaundering of ones
neighbor deserve ashutting out from the Kingdom of heaven, 1. Cor. 6. which
in show are but slight offenses, and do befall the most righteous, when shall
we be able to make satisfaction for one sin of that nature? And if a man be
unable to satisfy the justice of God for his own sins, how shall he have
any surplusage, or superfluity of satisfaction to tender unto him? for this
were to say unto God, thou shall have this above the bargain.

3 But is not this an indignity to join the infinite merit of Jesus Christ in
such sort, as to couple with it Monkish satisfactions, that is, Whippings,
Pilgrimages, wearing of Sacke-cloth, a Cordeliers girdle, and a hood, to patch
up our satisfaction unto God.

4 But who can tell whether God will accept the superfluity of these sufferings
of Saints and Monks in payment for the sins of another? And let it be
granted that S. Frauncis or S. Dominicke have given themselves more lashes,
and suffered more then their sins deserved: Who knows whether God will allow
this ouer-plus unto me, or that it shall be my acquittance before him? Where
is the will of God revealed to this purpose, or where is any example here of
found in the word of God?

5 This opinion shall never enter into any man's understanding, that shall
conceive but as well of God, as of a justice of a poor Village; who will not
set free a Prisoner, condemned to be whipped, because his friend has been
whipped in his stead. Every one shall bear his own burden, Gala. 6.5.

6 But to what end are the superaboundant sufferings of Saints, and Monks
employed to acquit and make satisfaction for us unto God; if the Merit of Jesus
Christ be more then sufficient to deliver us full and whole, and to give God
absolute satisfaction. Some of late desirous to mitigate the matter; say, that
the satisfaction of Saints are accepted by virtue of Christ's satisfaction: but
this comes all to one, for Christ Jesus having plenarily satisfied and paid
for us, gives no power to Saints or Monks to pay a Debt already discharged,
nor to satisfy for that which already he has fully satisfied.

7 And we need not fear that any of their sufferings are lost, seeing God
has rewarded the troubles of the faithful with glory infinitely, greater then
their afflictions, as Saint Paul says, Romans 8. The afflictions of this life
do not match the glory that shall be revealed.

8 Now if our adversaries do aleadge, that the troubles of Monks and Saints
do purchase their eternal glory, how then shall they prove satisfactorie for
an other? Who would not make himself merry, if I should say, that a house
being very cheap, bought for three thousand Crowns, yet that sum employed
in this purchase, should serve to discharge another debt, equalling the same
proportion? And that this money should purchase with the cross, and pay debts
with the pile? With such dark shows do those people shadow over their
Church, and desire to blind the wisdom of God himself.

9 And indeed all humane satisfactions in general are derogatory to Gods
justice, which admits of none but entire payments: made by the benefits of
Jesus Christ, in whom he freely forgiueth all our sins, Colos* 2. whose blood
cleanses us from all sin, 1. Ioh. 1.

This is mere mockery to say, that the benefits and satisfaction of Jesus
Christ are applied by our satisfactions: 1. For one contrary is not applied by
another: one applies not the light in putting out his eyes. A medicine is not
applied by poison? How then shall a free pardon in Jesus Christ be applied by
punishment and torture? How shall the sovereign testimony of Gods mercy be
applied by the execution of his justice? How shall the acquittance of our debt,
discharged by Jesus Christ be applied unto us in making us pay it our selves.
2. Add hereunto, that for proof of a matter of such importance, as is the
mean of applying unto us the merits of Jesus Christ, at least some passage of
Scripture should be alleged. 3. As also a Plaster is not applied by a
Plaster, so one satisfaction is not applyable by another. 4. Faith, the Word,
Baptism, and the holy Supper are the means appointed in the holy Scripture,
Ioh. 14.23. Ephesians 3.17. Gal. 3.27. 1. Cor. 10.26.
to apply Jesus Christ unto us; but the application of him by satisfactorie
punishments, is not any where mentioned.

1 But above all we desire to know, who has put the sufferings of Saints into
the Popes Treasury? 2. When this distribution had this beginning? 3. How we
may be secured, that God will rest satisfied with this payment? 4. Whether the
Pope has also stored up in the Treasury of the Church, the afflictions and
travels of Noah, of Abraham, of Jacob, etc. 5. And why the high Priests made no
division of them to the faithful in their times? 6. Where the superaboundant
satisfaction of the Patriarchs has so long time lay hidden without any
employment? 7. Especially, how it comes to pass, that neither Christ nor his
Apostles, nor their Disciples, nor the ancient Church for many ages, have
spoken any word of this Treasure; nor distributed by Indulgences the remainder
of humane satisfactions, nor celebrated any Iubile? For we must observe that
Cardinal Caietan in the beginnlng of his book of Indulgences, acknowledges
that in the whole course of Antiquity, there is not any thing found concerning
Indulgences. Gabriel Biel in the seven and fiftieth Lecture upon the Canon of
the Mass, affirms the same; and enquiring the reason why they are so common
now a days, answers himself well to the purpose, with the words of Christ,
Act. 4. It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the Father
has put in his own power. So he learnes us to be sober. Durandus, Anthony,
and Roffensis affirm the same.

S. Cyprian indeed in his Sermon. de Lapsis, and Tertullian in his book of
Chastity, and c. 1. of his book Ad Martyrs, speaks of Martyrs held in durance
for the Gospel, at whose intercession the Bishop received excommunicate and
repentant persons into the Church: But, 1. These Martyrs were living, and 2.
did employ their meditation to the Bishop; not their superaboundant
satisfactions unto God. 3. The Pope did not rake their sufferings into his
Storehouse. 4. And then every Bishop inflicted or released penalties, and
excommunications among those of his own flock, without expecting any
directories from the Bishop of Rome. 5. And yet this custom of releasing
penance, enjoined to offenders, at the instance of Christians imprisoned for
the Gospel, Cypriau. Sermon. de Lapsis. Mandant aliquid Martyrs fieri? Si
insta, Si licita etc. Nemo fratres dilectissimi, infamet Martyrum dignitatem.
is condemned by S. Cyprian, in his Sermon De lapsis. He wills that none give
way to the requests of Martyrs, if their demands be unjust; and says, that
this recourse had unto them did turn to their discredit. Tertullian goes
farther, for in the two and twentieth Chapter of his book of Chastity, he
complains that many did of purpose cause themselves to be committed, that so
they might have means to become intercessors for some one or other of their
friends, or rather Violantur viri and faeminae in tenebris plane ex vsu
tibidimum notes. Et pacem ab his quaerunt [paenitentes] qui de sua
pericletantur. Suf ficit Martyri propria de^icta purgasse. Ingrati velsuperbi
est in all os quoque Spargere quod pro magno fuerit consecutus. Quis alienam
mortem sua soluit nisi so lus Dei filius?
to play the wantons with such women as were prisoners in the same Ward, and in
the end makes this conclusion, That it is enough for a Martyr to have purged
his own sins: It is a sign of ingratitude, or of pride, to divide among
others, that which has been bestowed upon himself, as o great favor: Who
has made his own death the price of auother man's life, but only the Son of
God?

Now to the end that every one may know how injurious these sufferings and
satisfactions of men, imaginarily heaped into this Treasure, are unto Jesus
Christ, and his benefits: we must understand that Pope Clement the sixth, in
the extrauagant Vnigenitus, speaking of the merits of Jesus Christ in the
Treasury of the Church, says, Ad cuins thesauri cumulum beatae genetricis and
omnium electorum merita adminiculum praestare noscuntur.
that The merits of the mother of God and of all the elect do serve as helps
to increase this Treasure: As if the merits of men did so assist the merits
of Jesus Christ, that this Treasury could not be filled, if the merits of men
were detectiue. Bellarmine makes the case worse, for in consideration of these
satisfactory sufferings of Saints, which he says are allowed unto us, and
which the Pope turns to the forgiving of our sins; he affirms that the
Saints are after a sort our Redeemers: in the first book of Indulgences, the
fourth chapter.

Touching our own satisfactions, his speech drives to this point, That besides
our own, there is no actual Satisfaction, and that Christ has not actually
satisfied for us, but only has given power to our satisfactions. This is to
affirm, that the Apostle is deceived, in saying that Jesus Christ is given a
ransom for us, 1. Tim. 2. seeing he does only enable us to pay our ransom, and
make our own peace: so in the second book of Indulgences, Si quis post
gratiam reconciliationis adeptam: adbuc sit reus luendae paenae temporatis, is
non ne essario egetur meritis Christi. Et poteret nou requirere tantem
liberalitatem contentus ipse laboribus suis.
the first chapter although he attribute some power to the death of Jesus Christ
yet he says, That if after a man has obtained the grace of reconciliation, he
have not yet satisfied for temporal punishment (such as is the torment of
Purgatory) that such a one does not necessarily want the merit of Jesus, and
that he may forbear to seek so great a largess at Gods hands, but content
himself with the merit of his own end uours. As if he should say unto God,
thou would acquit me, but I will not have it so: for my own troubles and
afflictions shall make thee satisfaction. These men have courage in them
indeed, they dare neglect even Christ himself: for it is not good to be too
deeply engaged to him; and it is a credit for a man to satisfy for himself:
whence it follows, that the devil, that makes long satisfaction with
everlasting torments, shall purchase the more credire. Besides it is a goodly
ambition to give unto God more then we owe him, by performing these
supererogatory satisfactions; for so it is to be feared that God finding
himself indebted to such a number of Friars may be in danger of turning
banckrupt. O spirit of blasphemy, and profanation of the Gospel! O
wonderful patience of the Lord! But now let us take a view how this
superfluity of satisfaction of the Saints is distributed.

The Pope opens this Treasure, and drawing thence spiritual graces, Of the
distribution of the treasure of the Church.
does variously make distribution of them: sometimes he gives particular
privileges to certain Orders, and Fraternities. So Pope Sixtus quintus in the
year 1586. In the book of Indulgences granted to the Cordeliers printed at
Paris by Iean le Bouc 1597.
the seventh of May, granted to all those of the Order of the Cordeliers; that
on the Eve of Palme-sonday, and on Midsomer Eve, and on the Eve of Io.
Port-latin shall say five Pater-nosters, and as many Aue-Maries, a Pardon for
all their sins, beside the power of easing one soul in Purgatory. And in as
bountiful a manner has the Pope granted to the Order of the Friars Carmelites
a privilege, that they shall continue in Purgatory no longer then the
Saturday after their departure.

Sometimes again the Pope disperseth certain holy grains, and hallowed
Crosses, the saluting of which with an Aue-Mary, does purchase a Pardon for a
hundred years, or peradventure a plenary Indulgence. Our Kings Ambassadors
coming from Rome, do ordinarily bring with them such gratifications.

His Holiness is also pleased to send unto diverse places certain privileged
Altars, upon which if a Mass or two chance to be uttered, they redeem a soul
out of Purgatory. The Church of the Feuillans at Paris has this privilege,
that every Mass that is there sung for the dead on the Monday or Wednesday
does redeem a soul from Purgatory; for the Masses said on other days, have
no such virtue in them: to which purpose Mr. Coeffetean could have alleged
some place of S. Paul, but that he bethought him not of it.

Moreover the Pope opening this Treasure, does now and then grant certain
liberatory Bulls from Purgatory, in favor of some persons of quality, and at
the instance of their parents: which Bulls are paid for in Ducats of the
Chamber: at the end whereof there should not be written Datum Romae, dated at
Rome, but venditum Romae, sold at Rome. For there is no reason, that this
treasure should be opened for the soul of every monilesse beggar.

But the most ordinary manner of this distribution is, that the Pope sets down
some proportion, or number of Pardons for certain Churches, in some more, in
some less. We have a book expressly written of Roman Indulgences, printed at
Rome by Iulio Accolto, Ann. 1570. out of which take this example among a
thousand others. In the month of February upon Septuagessima sunday, for going
the Station unto S. Lawrence without the walls, there is granted a plenary
Indulgence, beside a pardon for eleven thousand years, and forty eight
Quarentaines, and remission of one third part of all sins, and the redemption
of a soul out of Purgatory. This is one of the high Holy Days. Upon the
Wednesday after S. Lucy, being Ember-weeke, the Station is to S. Maryes the
greater, for which an Indulgence is granted for eight and twenty thousand
years, and as many Quarentaines, and remission of one third part of sins,
yea and a plenary pardon for all sins. The same book says, that for each
days repair to S. Eusebies Church, a pardon is undoubtedly granted for
threescore and eighteen thousand years, and as many Quarentaines; and that on
every All Saints day, there is in all the principal Churches six thousand
years of an infallible pardon.

But especially his Holiness does grow prodigal in the dissipation of this
Treasure in the year of Iubile, which is now celebrated every five and
twentieth year, having made a kind of circle of sin, as it were a solar
revolution of the forgiving of sins, then Indulgences fly thick abroad, and
the Pope does freely and fully pardon all sin: the place of this Iubile, are
the Stations at Rome, provided that they be resorted unto for thirty days,
whether of consecution, or intermission it matters not: then Pilgrims flock
from all parts, and one Nation envying another quarrels, and blows are often
exchanged among them: the next year after, his Holiness conueyes the Iubile
over the Alps, and withal sendes the same spiritual favors to two, or three
places in France, and so in Spain. Now if death chance to take any out of
the world in this year of Iubile, no question but he goes straight to
Paradise: but he that unfortunately dies the year before, his lot is to fry
in Purgatory, and must miss of this pontifical bounty, unless the Pope by a
special pardon do privilege him from this fire.

But hence arise sundry other inconveniences, for in places not above fifty or
a hundred leagues from the place where the Iubile is kept, such as are well
horsed, and have money in their purse, do easily obtain pardon for their
sins; but he that has neither horse, nor money for his journey, is excluded
from this great happiness: for why is he so beggarly? Or wherefore should he
want horse flesh? Or why is he such an Ass, that he should not find himself
a good pair of legs? and therefore shall have no remission of sins.

And therefore it is a goodly matter to dwell at Rome, and be at the Wellhead
of these pardons, without running so far after them; neither is it credible
that any that dwells at Rome, unless he be a very lob, should go to Purgatory,
for there is the spring of spiritual graces: and a man may every day get five
or six hundred years of Pardons, which is forsooth a gallant provision at the
years end. Let the Reader take his counters and cast up the reckoning.

Now if any shall atrest a Pilgrim traveling toward the Iubile, this is a
case of special reservation, and from a sin of this high nature, none of
this side the Alps can give absolution: Bulla de Caena Domini de casibus
reseruatis.
marry for murder or adultery, or such sins as offend only the law of God,
and hinder not the Popes profit, the matter is more easy: for we must
observe, that in the Bulls of pardon, this clause is ordinarily inserted that
these Pardons are granted manus porrigentibus adiutrices, to such as put forth
helping hands: for which purpose there are Trunckes and Chests set at the
gates, and every one is exhorted to spit in the Basin. These high days of
Pardon are even the Faires of Babylon, and by these the bank of mony-changers
is set up anew in the Temple, which Christ ouerturned. And indeed if you
should say ten times as many prayers, and that with far more zeal and
devotion, in any other Church, then where these Indulgences are affixed, you
should notwithstanding go without any Pardons: for they are fastened to
certain places, for fear lest these contributions being divided, and passing
through many hands, would vanish into nothing. So that the King of great
Britain does both justly and elegantly say, that this abuse is rightly called
the treasure of the Church.

Now to prove that the Pope has intelligence with God, and that he has
precisely calculated his reckoning with him, he does often limit his Pardons
with a subtilty full of merriment. As at Paris in the porch of a Chapel
belonging to the Friars Feuillands, in the Suburbs of St. Honorius, there is a
long list of Pardons to be seen, which among other things tell us, that on
every day of Lent a Pardon may be obtained for three thousand, eight hundred,
three score and seven years, and two hundred and seven quarentaines of days:
there are many of the same stamp.

But I long much to know, that if a man some few days before the day of
judgment should get a hundredth thousand years of Pardon, whether these
Pardons should any thing avail him. Again, if a man needing a Pardon but for
ten thousand years, should obtain a Pardon for a hundred thousand, what
should become of the other fourscore and ten thousand: but above all the rest,
it is a point furmounting our capacity, how these Pardons, that do plenarily
forgive all sins, and should besides remit a third part of a man's sins, and
yet further give another eighteen thousand years of Pardon: as if one should
say, that the Pope pardons all our sins; and many of our sins besides: It
makes me also to wonder very often, why the people do so zealously flock to
the Iubile at Rome, seeing they may as easily, and at all times obtain a
plenary Pardon for all their sins.

I forbear at this time to judge bad (I speak it with grief and with
commiseration) whether in this whole Argument there be any the least footestep
of Christian Religion to be discerned: or whether coueteous gain did ever
trample godliness under foot in a viler manner.

ARTICLE XVI. Of the baptising of Bells.
The KINGS Confession.
THe King of great Britain proceeds to these words: The baptising of Bells,
and a thousand other tricks: But above all, the worshipping of Images. If my
faith be weak in these, I confess I had rather believe too little then too
much. And yet since I believe as much as the Scriptures do warrant, the
Creedes do persuade, and the ancient Councels decreede; I may well be a
Schismaticke from Rome, but I am sure I am no Heretic.

Mr. Coeffeteau answers, Fol 51.
that it is no baptism that they give unto Bells, but only a plain blessing,
which notwithstanding the common people do call baptism for the resemblance of
some Ceremonies therein: but it is not of simple people, but of learned men,
that we must learn the belief of the Church.

The Answer.
This answer of M. Coeffeteau is more mannerly then that of Cardinal
Bellarmines, who writing against his Majesty's book, tells the King that it is
an impudent slander: he might have spoken more ciuilly to a King: for if we
wrong them in calling their consecration, and benediction of bells by the name
of baptism, this imputation should be laid upon the people of the Romish
Church, which have so named it, or rather upon their Bishops and Priests, that
by a Player-like profanation, have practiced the same Ceremonies upon bells,
and galleys, which they use in baptism: for in the blessing, and exorcising of
a bell, they give him godfathers and godmothers, which hold the rope in
their hands: the Suffragan asks certain questions of the bell: they cloth
him in white, sprinkle him with holy water, and salt: the Bishop or his
Suffragan annoints him with oil, with many signs of the Cross, praying God
that he will grant power unto this bell against the secret assaults of the
devil; against thunder and tempest, and for the comfort of souls departed;
then after the singing of certain Psalms, he is newly marked again with seven
crosses without, and four crosses within, which are made upon the Crisme with
the Bishops or his Suffragans thumb, who at every cross repeates these
words; Consecretur and Sanctificetur Domine signum istus in nomine Patris and
filij and spiritus sancti: In all this Ceremony there is nothing wanting but
the word, Baptism, save that it is done something more diversely. The same
Ceremony is practiced upon galleys, when they launch them into the Sea, and for
what offense they have condemned this Sacrament unto the galleys, I do not
understand.

He that shall well understand the great virtue of bells, will not wonder at
all, if the people of the Romish Church have thought that baptism does of
right belong unto them; since that one peale has power to carry souls into
heaven, and especially the souls of rich men: for if a rich legacy be given,
all the bells in the town shall ringe a requiem for the soul departed: but the
poor shall have leave to die without any sound. And it is presumed that some
bells have more virtue then others; for they are not rung all at one rate. So at
Paris there are bells some at four Francs, some at five, and some at six. For
it is not credible, that any will buy the sound of one bell dearer then
another, but upon opinion of reaping a greater benefit thereby.

It is not then without great reason that Durandus in his rationale, and other
illuminated Doctors do find so many mysteries in bells, saying, that the
clapper of the bell is the tongue of the Preacher: that the rising of the bell
is the contemplative life, and the falling down is the life active: Boniface
8. au cap. Almamater adijcimus. De sententia excomm. In Sexto Grego. 9. Tit 39.
De sent excomm.
that a ringe of Iron is fastened to the end of the Bel-rope, to show that the
Crown is not obtained until the race be finished; which is the cause why
Boniface the eighth, and Gregory the ninth have forbidden the ringing of Bells
in proscribed or interdicted Churches, unless by special leave they be
licensed to toll an Aue-maria. During the interdiction, none but low Masses are
said, the doors being shut, and without sound of Bell.
And these observations the Apostles would not have omitted, if they had had
the keeping of the Bells in the Temple of Jerusalem: which then were not rung
all the year long, but now a days they are only speechless upon good
Friday, whereof there is some mystical reason, which comes not within the
compass of my understanding.

ARTICLE XVII. Of the Relics of Saints.
The KINGS Confession.
TOuching the Relics of Saints, if I had any such that I were assured were
members of their bodies, I would honorably bury them, and not give them the
reward of condemned men's members, which are only ordained to be deprived of
burial: But for worshipping either them or Images, I must account it damnable
Idolatry.

Unto this does Doctor Coeffeteau oppose four passages of the Fathers,
alleging S. Jerome dissputing against Vigilantius for the Relics of Saint
Ambrose in his Sermon of S. Nazarius, and S. Celsus, saying in many places that
he honors the bodies of Saints: S. Chrysostom who in his Homily of S.
Iuuentius and Maximus, says, that men do visit and adorue their Tombs, and
touch their Relics with faith, to the end they may receive some blessing
thereby: S. Augustine in the two and twentieth book of the City of God,
speaking of three persons that were cured with the touch of certain Relics.
He alleges no one testimony of holy Scripture; it has no voice in the
Chapter: and yet he skips at once over the first four hundred years after
Christ; for the auncientest of these four wrote about the end of the fouth
age.

1 To begin then with the word of God: We read in the old Testament that the
bodies of the holy Patriarchs have been enterred, Genesis 50.25.
and buried in the Sepulchers of their Fathers. Joseph when he died, gave order
that his bones should be kept till their departure out of Egypt: for he desired
that the keeping of his bones, should be an instruction to continue the hope of
their deliverance: but of any worship done unto his bones, there is no mention
at all.

2 When Moses died upon the mountain of Nebo, Deuteronomy. 34.6.
God would not suffer the Israelites to know the place of his burial: the
reason being doubtless a fear, that they would have Idolatrously abused his
body.

3 In the first book of Kings, chap. 13. God raised a dead man by the virtue
of Elizeus his touching of the dead body, the Lord intending by this Miracle to
authorize the doctrine of his faithful servant. But we find not at all, that
the body of Elizeus was for this taken out of his grave: neither that the
people did kneel to his bones, that they brought any offerings unto it, or
that they kissed or carried it in procession.

Kings, cap. 23 King Josias forbids the digging up of the bones of a deceased
Prophet but will have them left in the Sepulcher. He does not then command any
transportation of his bones, or to yield any veneration or worship, or
oblation or adoration.

Acts, there are cures wrought by touching of the Kerchiefes brought from S.
Paul; yet is not the linen put apart for a relic, nor is there any ceremony
done vntoit. For the Miracles were not wrought by any virtue of the linen, but
by the power of God, who by these Miracles confirmed the preaching of his holy
Apostle.

6 Therefore, Esaias 8.19.20. the Prophet having reproved those that went from
the living to the dead sends us to the law, and the testimony, if we will have
the light of heaven to shine upon us.

7 To be short, our adversaries find not one syllable in the word of God, nor
any example of any religious service, or adoration of Relics. For it is
untruly affirmed by Bellarmine, that the Scripture allows the religious
worship performed to our Lib. de reliquijs sanctorum cap. 4. Ad tertium.
Seriptura approbat cultum Sepulchri, and fimbrie Christa, Item vmbrae Petri
sudariorum and semicinct^orum Pauli.
Sauiors Sepulcher, and to the hemme of his garment, and to Peter's shadow, and
Paul's Kercheifes. How should it approve that whereof it makes no mention at
all? Why does he not allege some passage of Scripture, wherein the worship or
veneration of the linen, or shadows, or Sepulchers is mentioned? who will be
persuaded, that a learned man affirming a matter so full of untruth, should
have any conscience in him. So in the beginning of the third Chapter, he
falsely alleges these words out of the eleventh of Esaias, ver. 10. His
Sepulcher shall be glorious: for it is in the Hebrew, his rest shall be
glorious: whereunto let this be added, that there is no word in that place of
any worship performed to this Sepulcher.

Now that the point in difference between us may be understood, we dispute
not whether the bodies of Saints, and Martyrs may be reserved respectively, or
in case their Sepulchers were indecently placed, or ridiculously exposed to
profane insolences, whether it be lawful to remove their bodies to some
other place: for thus far we agree. And his Majesty of England protests
that if he certainly knew any Relics, which were indeed the body of any
Saint, he would honorably bury them, and keep them with respect; for if men
do curiously affect the sight of the monuments of ancient Kings, or pagan
Emperors, who should be so profane, as not to desire the sight of the Tombs
of the Apostles, and of those sacred lights, whose glory shines even after
their death? Or who in this regard would not be touched with a loving respect
to them, and their memory? But the question is, whether we must perform any
service to these Relics? or must adore them? or speak to things without
life, or offer unto bones, or clothes? or whether God have commanded to lay
them upon Altars, or carry them in procession? For the Conuenticle held at
Nice, Page 104 of the Colen Edition Ossa, cineres, pannos, sanguinem, sepulera
denique martyrum adoremus.
about the year 789. which the Church of Rome reckons for a general
Council, in the fourth Act wills, that the bones, ashes, and the rags be
adored. And Bellarmine in the fourth chapter. Quod autem. Chrysostemus Sermon
in Sanctos Iuuentium and Maximum dicit, Tumulos Martyrum adoremus
of his book of Relics, proves the adoration of Relics by these words of
Chrysostom in his Sermon of Iuuentius and Maximus, Tumulos Martyrum adoremus:
Let us adore the Monuments of Martyrs: but the words in Chrysostom, are
Tumulos Martyrum adornemus, Let us adorn the monuments of Martyrs: which is a
horrible falsification: but this is ordinary with the Cardinal; whereof
Coeffeteau himself is even ashamed, for alleging the same passage, he
translates it faithfully, Fol. 55. page 2.
Let us adorn their monuments. The same Cardinal about the end of the second
chapter says, We adore not Relics as God: then by his own confession, he
worshippeth Relics, but it is with an inferior adoration.

Now we require our adversaries to show us some commandment of God, or some
example out of the holy History for this adoration, and religious worship: for
whatsoever distinction of worship they may produce, is always such a service
and religious worship, as God has not commanded, and is consequently
comprised under that worship which S. Paul condemns, Coloss. 2. calling it
(...), that is, will worship, or voluntary devotion.

And there can be no Religious worship how mean so ever, but turns to an
abuse, when it is transferred to a dead thing: Since that the Church of Rome
does speak to these relics, and salutes the Napkin, the Spear, the Tears,
the Cross, saying, Aue sancta facies, etc. And Aue lignum triumphale. And he
that shall observe with what zeal the people is carried to the Adoration of
these Relics, shall find that the service of God in comparison thereof is
key-cold. At Paris, when the Caskets of S. Geneueifues, and S. Marcellus
Relickes, being carried about, come to meet each other, the people are made to
believe, that the bearers have much ado to pluck them asunder, they be such
sociable Relics and loving bones, that they should have been lodged in one
Tomb to give them contentment; In this solemnity it is a wonder to see the
zeal of the people, and with what a tumult they throng and press to come
near to it. All the Angels together have not the one quarter of this honor.
And the Souls of Moses, Abraham, Noe, etc. are much less honored then Saint
Francis breeches, or a piece of his Pilgrims staff.

It is to small purpose to say that this is done in honor of the Saints. For
it should first be showed, that God has commanded it: Secondly, we ought to be
well assured, that the Saints are well pleased with this service. Add further,
if a King should put off his Doublet, I think there is no man (unless he have
his wits crazed) that would salute it, much less to say unto it, God save thee
Doublet; as they do in the Church of Rome, where men say, I greet thee O
tear; And God save thee O triumphall wood. If you salute any thing in honor
of Jesus Christ, or of whomsoever, it ought in reason to understand what you
say.

And here we have the first strength of antiquity on our side, Eusebius in the
fourth Book, Nullus ad Aegyptum meas perferat reliquias, ne vano corpus honor
scruetur. Ne vituperati ritus a me (vt nostis) etiam circa me seruentur
obsequia -- Vos igitur humo tegite, vos patris operite corpusculum. Et illud
quoque senis vestri custodite mandatum, vt nemo praeter vestra^ dilectionem
locum tumuli mei nouerit.
Chapter fifteen of his History, speaking of the Martyrdom of Polycarpe,
says that the Christians were charie of his Ashes, and that they had procured
them to be buried; but he does not speak of any service, or Religious
worship, or adoration done to the ashes. Saint Athanasius, in the life of S.
Anthony, is most pregnant to this purpose, where he says, that these were the
last words of Anthony when he lay dying; Let no man carry my Relics into
Egypt, for fear lest my body be honored with vain honor, for fear least
Obsequies, and Funeral solemnities (which I have blamed as you know) be
practiced upon my self; For I am especially returned to this place to avoid
it; do you then hide and cover this poor body with earth, and observe the
commandment of your aged father, that no man beside your selves, know the
place where I am buried. Out of this place appears, that the Christians even
from that time, were excessiuely given to honor the bodies of the believers
that died: And we must not think, that S. Anthony was afraid that the
Christians would adore him for GOD after his death. For Bellarmine does
acknowledge that which indeed is a truth; That * it was never heard that any
Christians did confer Divine honors upon the Relics of Saints. The custom
of the ancient Church, was to bury the bodies of Martyrs, and not to put them
in Caskets out of the ground to carry them about in Procession. In the eight
Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, the Christians do there bury Steven
without mention of any service done unto his body. The same was done to
Polycarpus, as Eusebius witnesses. Saint Ambrose had appointed the place,
which was under the Altar or the Communion Table for his burial, as appears
by his last Epistle; for in those days the Altar was most commonly a Table of
wood, easy to be removed, so that the pauement underneath might well be
broken up to lay a dead body. Gaudens autem quae aderat multitudo corpora
Sanctorum diligenti tradidit sepulturae.
Victor in his third Book of the Vandals persecution, The multitude did with
joy and withal diligence, lay up the bodies of the Saints in a Tomb. The Poet
Prudentius, about the end of his Hymn upon Eulalia,

Relliquias Cineresque sacros,
Seruat humus veneranda sinu.
And in the beginning of the Hymn next following,

Bis nouem noster populus sub vno
Martyrum seruat cineres sepulchro.
Theodoret in the first Book of his Story, Chapter eighteen, does
sufficiently show, that the Christians Cap. 4 de relliq. Sanct. Dices. Nuaquam
est auditum apud Christianos ot aliqui sanctorum reliquijs d^uinos honores
detulerint.
then knew not what it meant, to yield Religious worship to Relics, in that
he says, that Constantine having recovered the nails of our Saviors Cross,
set some of them in his Helmet, the rest he thrust into the Bit of his Horses
bridle: That is, he put two * in his Head piece, and the other two in the
Bridle. Thus did this venerable Horse chew Relics. What it was that moved
this Emperor to do it, is another matter: But I say that the Bishops of
that time, would never have suffered that to have been done, if they had
thought that any Religious service or adoration had been due to those Nails.

In the mean while, it is a thing to be wondered at, how these Nails having
been lost for three hundred years space, were thus found altogether so fit
to the purpose. And how Helena the Emperors mother could discern them from
the Nails of the two thieves, and how the fourth Nail was lost. For the
Cross had in the middle a little Plautus Mostellaria Act 2. Vt affigantur bis
pedes bis brachia. Irenaeus l^bro secundo cap 42. Vnum in medio vbi requ^escit
qui clauis affigitur. Super hanc tabulam tanquam hominis s^antis sacrae affixe
sunt plantae.
boorde, upon which the feet of the malefactors to be Crucified, were set,
and each foot was Nailed a part, and so also our Savior way Nailed, as Justin
Martyr teaches in his Dialogue against Tryphon: and Ireneus lib. 2. Cap. 42.
Nazianzen in his verses of Christ suffering, And Theodoret before alleged.
But especially Gregory of Tours in his book of the praise of Martyrs: And
therefore it was a negligence in Helen that she did not imploye her self to
find out the fourth nail. (...). For there were four Nails, Cypriani liber
nothus de passione, Clauis sacros pedes terebrantibus.


It is a thing also to be wondered, how the nails were found in the same place
with the Cross; Seeing that the custom of the Aunciens was to bury together
with the bodies of malefactors, Inueniuntur ossa inserta catenis, and implicita.
the chains and yrons wherewith they suffered, as appears in Plinies
Epistles, lib. 7. Epist. 27. where he recites the stories of a Ghost that
appeared to the Philosopher Athenodorus. And in Chrysostom in his Oration
against the Gentiles. And Welserus In co^mentarijs rerum Vindelicarum.
confirms it in his seventh book of his Commentaries of Ausbourge.

In the mean time it appears by the place of Athanasius, heretofore
alleged, and by the simplicity of Constantine, that this abuse began from that
time to slide on and increase, which was so far grown in some places 400.
years after Christ, Noui multos esse sepulcrorum and picturarum adoratores.
Noui multos esse qui super mortuos luxuriosissime bibant.
that S. Austin in his first book de Moribus Eccles. does greatly complain of
it. I know (says he) that there are many that adore Sepulchers and Pictures; I
know that there are many that drink at large over the dead: The same Austin in
the 28. chapter of his book of the labor of Monks (for in those days they
had each man his trade) complains of some gadders up and down, Membra
martyrum, Si tamen martyrum.
carriers about of relics, which they reported to be the limbs of Martyrs:
Yea, says he, if so be that they be members of Martyrs.

The ancient Christians in the three first ages were wont to warm their zeal
by the imbers of the Martyrs; And because they had no Temples, they assembled
together in the Church-yardes; where the Tombs of the Martyrs served them for
(...).
tables to administer the Lords Supper; This being at the first done only as
occasion and the present opportunity would permit, was afterward made a law.
For in the fifth Council of Carthage, the Altars are called Monuments or
Tombs: Where is to be noted, that the Council complains, that many such
false monuments were erected upon dreams and vain illusions, and commands
to pluck them down, if the tumult of the people shall not hinder them: which
shows that superstition was already grown strong in this point. Gregory
Bishop of Rome in the first book of his Dialogues chap. 2. speaks of one
called Libertinus, who always carried about a hose of S. Honorate. In those
times, our Kings planted their whole Religion in founding of Monasteries and
getting Relikes together thinking by these means to be saved. King Dagobert
took away all the Relics from the other Saints, to enrich the Temple of S.
Denis, S. Rusticus, and S. Eleutherius; whereupon there fell out great strife
and debate among the Saints, if we believe the Chronicles of France. For the
Saints whom he had robbed and riffled, as S. Hilarie, S. Fremin, etc. adjoined
themselves to the Devils, See this Story in Nicolas Gilles anno 645. and it is
taken out of Turpin.
and craved their help to carry the soul of this good King to hell; But he
call ed to the Saints, whom he had enriched, for succor, who so valiantly
resisted the other Saints and the Devils, that they plucked away his soul from
them, and carried it into Paradise. Now a days many superstitious persons are
ashamed of their relics and mock at them; And yet for all that, it is held
for an absolute and inviolable Decree, that every Altar must have his Relics
underneath it, otherwise they cannot consecrate. For after the Introite of the
Mass, the Priest bowing himself over the Altar, asks of God pardon of al
his sins, through the merits of those Saints, whose bones lie hid under the
Altar. This greatly avails to strike the people with a superstitious horror,
and astonishment of heart, and with a trembling devotion, it being done out of
singular wisdom, and upon great consideration. For it is credible that when
Christ did administer his last supper, that he closely conueighed under the
table, some bones of Samuel, or some tooth of Sampsons Asses law bone; And if
Christ did not seek salvation through their merits, it was because those old
Saints were worse stored and provided of merits, then they whom the Pope has
Canonized for Saints, as S. Juniper, or S. Thomas of Canterbury, defender of
the crown of England.

Concerning the Fathers, whom Coeffeteau opposes hereunto; Chrysostom,
Ambrose, and Austin, are of the mind that the bodies of the Saints ought
indeed to be honored, and their sepulchers beautified and adorned. But what is
this against the King of England, who says as much. As for those miracles which
were done at those Sepulchers, of which S. Austin speaks, God by them did
authorize the doctrine of the Gospel, which his faithful servants had uttered
in word, and signed with their blood. Such were the miracles wrought by the
touch of Elizeus his body, and by the Kerchiefes of S. Paul: But it follows
not thereupon, that they adored or yielded any religious service to those
Relics. Unless perhaps we must adore the shadow of S. Peter's body, as
Bellarmine will have it: Bell. lib. de reliquijs cap 4. Ad tertium. Scriptura
approbat cultu^ vmbrae Petri.
of which shadow doubtless some piece may be found stored up among the
Relics, as well as at Cour-chiuerni near Blois they keep the Labor of S.
Joseph, when he cleft wood, for he was a Carpenter.

Howbeit there be two things which I will not here dissemble; the one is, that
Heretics at that time, Doctores haereticos maxim doctrinae suae fidem
onfirmasse, mortuos suscitasse, de bil^s reformasse, futura significasse vt
Apostoli crederentur. Nunquid non Africa sanctoru^ Martyrum corporibus plena
est? Et tamen nusquam hic scimus talia fieri.
did more miracles as Tertullian witnesses lib. 3. against Marcion cap. 3. and
in his 44 chapter of his Prescript. where he says, that the Heretics did
raise the dead, heal the sick, foretell things to come. The other is, that
the place in S. Austin De Ciuitai. Dei lib. 22. cap. 8. is to be suspected For
he speaks of miracles done in Africa, and near unto Hippo, where he was
Bishop, by touching the Relics of Saints. Whereas himself Epist. 137. says
that in some places of Italy, as at Nola and at Millan, such miracles were
done near unto the monuments of the Saints: but that in Africa there were not
any wroght in any place; And that which is more to be observed, is, that this
Epistle was written to the people and clergy of Hippo, who would easily have
controuled him, if such miracles had been wrought in Africa; What shall we now
believe? Here is S. Austin who says in one place, that many miracles were done
in Africa near unto the place of his abode; by the Relics of Saints: In
another place he says there were non done at all. Surely the writings of the
Fathers passed through certain ages, horribly darkened with ignorance, in which
some malicious men took a pleasure to falsify them. And indeed by the course
of Story of the ages following a man may observe, that by how much the more
ignorance increased by corruption of doctrine; by so much the more miracles
were wrought. Read the Dialogue of Gregory the first, and you shall see that
Christ did nothing in a manner, and in comparison of the miracles then wrought.
Gregory himself in the fourth book of his Dialogues chap. 41. wondereth at
it, and propounds this quetion to himself: Quid hoc est quaeso, quod in his
extremis tem poribus tam multa de animabus clarescunt quae ante latuerant?
How comes it to pass that in these latter times so many things are
revealed unto us, touching the souls of the dead, which before were bidden.
For then in those times, men talked of nothing but of Ghosts that appeared,
which exhorted men living to give to the Church. And it was yet but the sixth
hundredth year of Christ, so much had the Prince of this world gotten in short
time.

That which Coeffeteau most makes bragges off, and sets it out with fairest
color, is the testimony of S. Hierome, Epistola ad Riparum aduersus
Vigilantium. Ergo Petri and Pauli immundae sunt reliquiae?
who has written two Epistles in defense of the Relics of Saints, against
Vigilantius who did oppugn them. But there is no affinity between their
quarrel and ours. For Hierome accuses Vigilantius for accounting the Relics
of Saints unclean, a thing which we never affirmed; nay the King of England
speaks of them with great respect. He says further, Epist. 2 aduers. Vigil.
Sanctoru^ reliquias proijci in sterquilinium: vt solus Vigilantius ebries and
dormiens adoretur.
That Vigilantius would have the relics of Saints cast out upon the dung
hill, that himself alone though druncke and asleep might only be adored.
Have we ever said so? Or is there any of us that would only be adored? But as
touching the question, whether Relics be to be adored, S. Hierome in the
Epistle before alleged, does flatly deny that they ought to be adored: Nos
autem non dico Martyrum reliquias, sed ne Solemn quidem and Lunam non Angelos
non Archangelos colimus and aaoramus.
We do not adore, I do not say only, the Relics of Martyrs; But neither
Sun nor Moon, for Angels nor Archangels: Where is to be seen that he
would have it esteemed less strange to adore the Sun, then Relics. Which
makes us to suspect the place in his Epistle to Marcella, of falsehood: where
he exhorts her, Samariam pergere, and Iohannis Baptistae, Helisaei quoque and
Abdiae pariter cineres adorare: to come to Samaria and to adore the ashes of
John Baptist, Elizeus, and Abdias. Howsoever, if he would have been believed,
he should have grounded his saying upon the authority of the word of God:
according to the rule which himself gives upon the 23. chapter of S. Matthew.
Because, says he, Hoc quiae de Scripturis non habet authoritatem pari
facilitate conte^nitur qua probatur. Lib. de Reliquijs Cap. 3.. Gregor. Lib. de
Reliquijs c. 3.. ex Africa.
this is not grounded upon the authority of the Scriptures, we may as easily
reject it, as they prove it.

The place of Gregory Nyssenus which Bellarmine produces is false. We have
heretofore showed the falsehood of that Oration upon Theodorus; As also that is
false which he says, that the fifth Council of Carthage forbids any Altar
to be dedicated without Relics. The Council does not speak in that place,
of all Altars, but of the monuments of Martyrs, which the believing Christians,
assembling themselves together in the Church-yeards, used in steed of Altars.
And because that for want of true monuments, they sometimes erected in honor
of true Martyrs, false devised sepulchers, the Council commands them to be
plucked down. It is a thing incredible how the works of this Cardinal do
swarm with untruths. The other places which he alleges do neither speak
of adoration, nor religious worship.

Suborning of counterfeit Relics.
But the maine point is, that through tract of time, and the malice of men, the
question is now changed. For in those times, while the sufferings of the
Martyrs were yet fresh in men's minds, and their Relics certainly known;
men disputed upon some ground and subject, how far they were to be honored:
But now a days they thrust upon us fained Relics, counterfaite merchandise,
as a mere Artifice for gain: Relics which they are wont ^o show in dark
places, and that by uncovering them either by halfes or not at al; making the
seely people to rest content by bare seeing of the box or casket, causing them
to kneel unto them with troubled devotion: And if they depart out of th^se
Oratories without offering, or paying, it will be thought heresy or
ingratitude.

Some Relics there are merely forged to mock and abuse the world: And Burgos
in Spain there is a Crucifix, whose bearde they cut every month, and pare his
nails, and these parings are said to be of great virtue. At Rome there is
kept in S. John's Church in Lateran, the circumcised foreskin of Christ, as
also the very Altar at the which John Baptist did say divine service in the
wilderness, as witnesses the book of Romish Indulgences printed at Rome. Our
Pilgrims bring home, out of Galizia, the feathers of certain hens which are
of the race of that cock, that crew to S. Peter when he denied his master: In
S. Sulpitius Church in Paris, there is a stone of that fountain wherein the
Virgin Mary washed the swathing-clothes of Christ newly borne. There was showed
unto my self at S. Denis, Judas his Lantern, which doubtless is a piece of
great virtue. As also Aarons rod, which by that reckoning must needs have
lasted three thousand and six hundred years without rotting; and yet our good
masters confess, that the consecrated hosts do finnow and grow moldy, the
presence of Christ in them, cannot save them from putrefaction. Men go to
Collein to worship the bodies of the three Kings that never yet were. The
author of the book called Opus imperfectum upon S. Matthew, attributed to
Chrysostom, says that they were of those whom they called Magi, wizards, or
soothsayers, and that they were twelve in number. Their names Gaspar, Melchior,
and Balthazar, do show that it was the invention of some Almaine Monk, for
the two first are high dutch names. That good and faithful servant of God
Theodore Beza, whom God has now gathered to his Saints in glory, in his book
against Baldwine, reports of himself that he saw at Tours a cross laden
with rich stones which the people adored at the Passion; amongst the rest there
was an Achates or an ancient Agate stone which the people kissed, and that
himself beholding the ingrauing, he found it to be a Venus weeping over her
Adonis lying by her. And further, that to Lewis of Bourbon, Prince of Condee,
being in the same Town, there was brought amongst other Relics an arm of
silver, which being opened, there was found within it a knave of spades with a
love ditty. And that at Bourges there was found in a casket of Relics a
little wheel turning round upon a staff, having a little scroule written
about it.

When this wheel about shall turn
My love with me in love shall burn.
How can a man reconcile S. John of Angerie, with Amiens and Arras, seeing that
these three Towns do brag that they have the head of Saint John Baptist?
How many houses might there be built, with that which is said to be the wood of
the true Cross? Or who could reckon the thorns of Christ his Crown? Or the
milk, or the hair of the Virgin Marie? In England only in the beginning of
the reformation of religion, there were found above a bushel full of S.
Apollonies teeth. And always the basin to receive the offering, is at hand.
We see many Churches founded by this means. What semblance of these things
was there amongst the ancients, nay was there ever any grosser cosenage in all
the Heathen Paganism? In all this abuse of Relics, find me out any Relic
or remnant of Piety, or any trace of Christianity.

ARTICLE XVIII. Of Images.
The KINGS Confession.
But for worshipping either them or Images, I must account it damnable
Idolatry. I am no Iconomachus; I quarrel not the making of Images, either for
public decoration, or for men's private uses: But that they should be
worshipped, be prayed to, or any holiness attributed unto them, was never
known of the Ancients: and the Scriptures are so directly, vehemently and
punctually against it, as I wonder what brain of man, or suggestion of Satan
durst offer it to Christians, and all must be salued with nice Philosophical
distinctions: As, Idolum nihil est: And, they worship (forsooth) the Images of
things in being, and the Image of the true God. But the Scripture forbids to
worship the Image of any thing that God created. It was not a nihil then that
God forbad only to be worshipped, neither was the brazen Serpent, nor the the
body of Moses a nihil, and yet the one was destroyed, and the other hidden for
the eschewing of Idolatry.

Master Coeffeteau answers, Fol. 57.
that the Church of Rome does not believe that there is any Deity in Images,
nor does worship them, nor make any petition unto them, or repose any
confidence in them: but does only honor them for that which they represent:
Just as the men of Reuben and Gad, and the half tribe of Manasses beyond
Jordan, Ios. 22.
erected another Altar beside the Tabernacle, only for amemoriall for their
posterity, but not for the offering of sacrifices. So Coeffeteau says, that
the Church of Rome does not erect Images unto Saints, that they should be
accounted either Gods, or Images of God, nor to offer sacrifices unto them: but
to testify that we are not deprived, or separated from the Communion of our
holy brethren, that dwell beyond Jordan in the Land of promise. That as in
civil Gouernements, Statues are advanced for those that have spent their lives
in the defense of the Commonwealth, both for honor and example: so for the
same purposes are Martyrs adorned with triumphant Statues: that they are fair
Church ornaments: and that thereby we make protestation that we live in the
same Church, and in hope to attain the same society.

He adds thereunto the testimony of the Fathers, alleging one of the
second age, Lib. de pudic. c. 7.
to wit, Tertullian speaking of an Image in a Chalice; two of the fourth age,
First Gregory Nyssenus, Secondly Basil, speaking of the Images of certain
Saints engraven upon a seeling, and Painted upon the Walls. Lib. 5. byst. c.
21.
Three other Authors of the fifth age, namely, Sozomen who speaks of the
Image of Jesus Christ, broken by Julian, the broken pieces whereof were brought
afterward into the Church; and the Poet Prudentius and Paulinus, speaking of
Painting in Churches.

And farther he adds that the distinction of an Image and an Idol, is
grounded upon the Scripture. That the Cherubins were Images, and not Idols.
That an Idol either presents things that never were in being; or
represents them in the nature of a God. Which does no way agree to the Images
of Saints who have had a true being, and whom men do only honor as the
servants of God.

That the brazen Serpent was broken, and the body of Moses concealed, for that
the Jews were humorouslie inclined to Idolatry, and would readily have
acknowledged Moses for their Savior, and worshipped, and burnt incense unto
the brazen Serpent. And that therefore Ezechias did religiously break it: but
that he meddled not with the Cherubins in the Temple, because this was abused,
but those were not: Whereupon Coeffeteau concludes, that the abuse, not the
Images, is to be blamed, the good use of them being not forbidden, especially
in Churches.

This is the substance of his discourse,

In the second Council of Nice, Pope Adrian writing to Tharasius Bishop of
Constantinople, speaks thus, Act 2. Imagines omnium Sanctorum beatitas vestra
colere and adorare pergat.
Let your beatitude continue to serve and adore the Images of all Saints. This
commandment is repeated through the whole Council above twenty times. These
words are to be found in the seventh Act. Virginis Mariae Deiparae
intemeratae quin etiam gloriosorum Angelorum and omnium Sanctorum has quoque
adorandas and salutandas putamus. Qui vero non est ita animatus, sed circa
venera^darum imaginu^ adorationem laborat and dubitat, cum anathematisat sancta
and venera^da nostra Synodus.
We hold that the Images of the pure Virgin Marie, the mother of God, and also
of the glorious Angels, and of all Saints, are to be adored and saluted. That
if so be any be otherwise minded, and do waver and be of a doubtful opinion
concerning the adoration of venerable Images, our holy and reverend Synod does
anathematise him. And which is more, in the first Act of this venerable
Council it is declared, (...).
that a Church without Images is nothing worth. Which is again affirmed, that
to oppose Images is the worst of all heresies. In the fourth Act it is said,
that Vt etiam meo iudicio cum sanctis Eua^gelijs and venera^da cruce aequi
ua^eant.
Images are equivalent to the holy Gospels. And in the eight Act it is
ordained, that Imaginibus adorationem ex hibeant -- quemadmod^ typo venerandae
and viuificae crucis and sanctis Eua^gelys.
such adoration be used unto Images, as is unto the venerable, and quickening
Cross, and the holy Gospels. In the same fourth Session, speaking of the holy
Hystories of Abraham, and of the Martyrs, it says, that mayor est Imago quam
oration, An Image is of more excellency then prayer. In the fifth Act, the
entire body of the Council pronounces, Ecclesia sentit no^ omnino esse
corporis expertes and muisibiles, veru^ tenus corpore prae dito and aerio sieve
igneo.
that the Church holds that the Angels are corporal, and not invisible, but
that they have subtle bodies compounded of air, or fire. And throughout the
whole Council is the worshipping of Images commanded. Now this Council in the
Church of Rome is most authentical, is styled Canonical, and confirmed by the
Popes; and it is to be believed that such a Council cannot err: which is as
much as can be said of the holy Scripture.

Bellarmine with other of their Doctors following this decision, does teach
that Images are religiously to be worshipped, and adored. Who directly opposes
that which Coeffeteau says, that Images are worshipped Simply for that which
they represent. For Bellarmine in the 21. chapter of his book of Images, sets
down this maxim in Capital letters, that the Images of Christ, and the
Saints, Imagines Christi and Sanctoru^ venerandae sunt, no^ solum per accidens
vel improprie sed etia^ per se and proprie tita vt ipsae termine^t veneratione^
vt in se considerantur, and non solum vt vicem gerunt exemplaris.
ought to be worshipped, not by accident only, or improperly, but properly, and
by themselves, so that the worship of them is determined in the Images, as they
are considered in themselves, and not according to the patterns which they
represent. And about the end of the 22. chapter. The usual worship performed
unto external Images, is considered properly, and in themselves. So the
worship done to Images, does evidently show that they reverence the Images for
themselves. For among the diverse Images of one Saint, one is covered with dust,
another is cladd in silk, and is often in change of raiment: and some have
offerings tendered unto them, and some have none; and which ^s more, the Images
of the self same Saints have diverse names: there is our Lady of Virtue, our
Lady of Joy, our Lady of good news, our Lady of Snow, whose festival day is
in Italy celebrated in the month of August, and he that should call our Lady
of Virtue, by the name of our Lady of Joy, should be reputed a blockhead, or
that he had been at Geneua And so doubtless when one censeth an Image, or
kindles lights, or clothes it with apparaile, or offers unto it; or when one
speaks to a piece of wood, or to the painting in a cloth, I see not how the
Saint is more honored thereby: for he meddles not with the perfumes; and when
the stones are polished, he sees not a whit the clearer. He takes no delight in
seeing the Images clothed, or naked; nor does he gather up any of the
offerings, but they are all for the Curates, and Vicars. And if any should
speak to the picture of a King, the King would not esteem himself honored
thereby.

And if Images which do but doubtfully resemble the countenances of Saints,
must be worshipped, then why should not the Bible be adored, wherein the power
of God is most certainly represented?

Now if his Majesty of England speak of this abuse, as an abomination, what
would he say if he had been an eyewitness of that superstitious madness,
wherewith the poor multitude are inflamed? if he had seen behind an Image of
stone, cladde in silk, a poor naked picture, standing for the Image of God?
if he had seen the people marching in procession before Lent toward the Image
of our Lady, for leave to eat butter? if he had seen the rule practiced,
which the Tridentine catechism sets down approving such as say a Pater noster
before the picture of S. Dominicke, or S. Barbara? Cap. de Oratione, Editionis
Lonaniensis p. 483. Cum ad imaginem sancti alicuius quis Dominicam orationem
pronunciat, ita tum sentiat se ab illo petere vt secum oret.
if he had seen troops of Saints in Churches diversely apparailed, among which
some are but very basely cladde, and some Saint having a hog by his side,
some other a dog, etc, and these creatures to have a share in the perfume,
and to be equally adorned with lights? He that should break an arm of one of
these liuelesse Images, shall be thought to have committed a greater fault,
then if he had broken the heads of a hundred living men; howbeit the Image
might be mended, when the men could have no amends. This abuse is boundless,
and here superstition adds madness unto their blindness. For the living
Image of God falls down before the Image of a dead man. He among them that
should see a church without Images, would think himself in a new world: or
he that should see Images vnworshipped, would persuade himself he were among
Devils.

Such as blush at this abuse, and speak thereof more nicely, (as Coeffeteau
does) they say that Images do help our devotion; but whence then is it, that
they may not be seen in Lent, which is the time of devotion, and what devotion
is there, without, nay against the commandment of God?

Others say, that they are ignorant men's books, and they say the truth, for
they keep them in ignorance. So Habacuc cap. 2. calls them teachers of lies:
the mischief is, that whiles the Churches and public places, are filled with
these books for the ignorant, they keep away the Scripture, which might have
made them learned, and cured their ignorance, they amaze the people instead of
instructing them, they quicken the sense, but dull the conscience, they kindle
their wax-lights, while the Candle of Gods word is hid under the bushel of an
vnknowledge language: and by this means are men turned into stones, having
stones for their instructers. And this is an old trick of policy, to busy
the people with plays, and public shows, while their liberty is undermined,
Tacitus in Iulio Agricola. Paulatim discessum ad del inimenta vitiorum porticus
and balnea, and conuiuiorum elegantiam. Id apud imperitos humanitas vo cabatur.
cum pars ^eruitutis esset.
so dealt Alcibtades by the Athenians, and so (as Cor. Tacitus witnesses) the
Romans dealt in great Britain. The same cunning has been used by the Pope,
who has built his Hierarchy upon the ruins of the Roman Monarchy, he sets
the people gazing on paintings, and spectacles, while he does insensibly change
the doctrine of salvation, to make it serviceable to his Lordlinesse.

They allege the Images of the Cherubins made by the Commandment of God,
which makes very much for our side: for they were fastened in the Sanctuary,
where the people came not at all, for God concealing them from the sight of the
people, prevented their Idolatry. Whence appears the strange boldness of
Bellarmine, in the 12. Chapter of his book of Images, Imagines Cherubin super
arca^ existentes necessario adorabantur ab ijs qui arcam adorabant.
where without any purpose, he presumes to affirm, that the Israclites did
worship the Cherubins with the Arc. If so be the Jews worshipped not the
Angels, how would they have worshipped their Images? he should first then have
proved, that the people of God worshipped the Angels in the Temple, or
addressed their prayers unto them. And had the children of Israel worshipped
the Arc (as he falsely supposes) may it thence be concluded that they
worshipped the Cherubins placed on the Arc? he that saluteth the King, does he
salute his hat, or his habit? this has neither reason, nor likelihood.

Neither was the brazen Serpent worshipped, or adored, for as soon as the
people began to perform any worship unto it, Ezechias brake it in pieces, now
it is impossible that the Israelites should have thought, that this piece of
brass was God, the wit of man was never so blunted: but they performed a
respective service unto the Serpent, because of the power of God, whereof that
was a memorial.

These men mend not their market by telling us, that they worship not the
Images of false Gods as did the Paynims: but the Images of the friends and
servants of God, for Idolatry is called in the Scripture adultery, and an
adulterous woman cannot be excused in saying that she betakes not her self to
her husbands enemies, but only to his friends, and in so ticklish a point,
and whereof God is so ^ealous, we must be grounded upon the commandment of
God: and to make it appear, that God would have us to worship the Images of
his servants, or that we should yield them some religious service, or bow our
knee before them, and not shiftingly to shun the question, in showing that it
is lawful to make pictures, whereas the question is concerning the service
that ought to be performed unto them.

Being thus urged, in place of alleging the commandment of God, they bring us
a distinction of Latria and Dulia, and cast these greek words like a handful
of sand in the peoples eyes. It would be easy for us to show by a great number
of greek authorities, that Dulia belongs also unto God, 2. Chron. 12.8.
Which is the 4. c. in the greek. And 1. Sam. 7. (...). Observe also that S.
Austin by the word Dulia vndersta^ds not religious worship, but a civil
reverence, yielded unto men alive.
yea unto God only when it signifies religious service; and that Latria is
often referred unto men. But this matters not, inasmuch, as the service and
inferior adoration, which they attribute unto the Saints, and to their Images,
is always a religious service, and a voluntary worship, tending to the
attainement of salvation. Therefore they are perpetually foiled, seeing they can
neither prove, that this inferior worship belongs unto the Saints, or to
their Images, nor that God has commanded that any religious service should be
yielded unto their Images.

They being unfurnished with proofs out of the word of God, they fly unto
miracles, and that they have done of late. For the second Council of Nice
says, that ^ct. 4. Quamobrem miracula a nostris imaginibus non eduntur? cui
sane ita sit resposum. Miracula non creditibus data sunt.
then none were made. Lib, de imaginibus cap*. Quid quod*
Bellarmine tells of a Devil that promised a Heremite that he would trouble him
no more, upon condition that he would promise him not to worship any longer
the Image of the Virgin Marie. The Image of our Lady of Montferrat in Spain,
that fell from heaven, was painted by S. Luke, who was a painter, (...). Act.
19.35.
if these men may be credited. Which S. Hierome in his catalogue has omitted.
S. Paul says, that he was a Physician. But the Church of Rome has made him a
painter since he went to heaven, Coloss. 4.13.
whence also come our Images. Certainly we may well say that Clemens
Alexandrinus, and Tertullian would not have thought the Art of painting to be
wicked, and unlawful, if they had known S. Luke had been a painter: and it
is strange that the ancient writers make no mention of his Images: and where
were they all the four first ages, that the Churches of the Christians were
without pictures?

With like abuse do they auerre that our Lady of Loretto drawn by the same
hand, There is one also made by S. Luk at Rome in S. Mary's in Porticu.
Villamont. l 1, c. 14. and one at S. Iustines at Padua made also by S. Luke.
was carried by Angels through the air, together with the chamber wherein she
was kept, from Nazaret into Italy, in the year 1369. for this fable is of no
greater antiquity. And it is strange how the ancient Christians which were in
Syria, neglected that chamber, and that Image of such excellency: and how that
image could subsist among the spoils of the Turks and Saracens, which turnde
all things vpside down, and that it should not be seen, till after fourteen
hundred years: and that the Angels had not bethought themselves of
transporting it sooner. And that so rare a story should not have any author
worthy the naming. To this Image has Pope Sixtus the fourth granted an
indulgence of eleven thousand years, for saying a short prayer of three lines,
which is publikelie sold. By reason of the multitude of offerings in his time,
the farming thereof was enhanced to a price incredible, but the gains are now
shrunk to the one half.

There is much ado made at Rome about the picture of Christ, which he sent
unto King Agbarus, drawn upon a piece of linen: concerning which the first
that made any mention is Euagrius, whose story determines about the sixth
hundred year of our Lord. Which is doubtless a matter admirable; that none
has mentioned it before, and that Eusebius, who near the end of the first
book of his history speaks at large of this Agbarus, and of certain
Epistles sent from him unto Christ, and from Christ unto him, has not a word
of this picture. And yet notwithstanding Gelasius Bishop of Rome, in the
fifteenth distinction of the Decrees, and after him Isidore, account these
Epistles fabulous, and Apocryphal: Since that Eusebius makes him speak
erroneously to Thadeus the Apostle, sent unto Agbarus, saying that in the death
of Jesus Christ, his Deity was diminished. (...).
And which is more, if this history of Agbarus were true, then had S. Paul
told an untruth, saying 1. Cor. 2.8. that none of the Princes of the world knew
in his time the wisdom of the Gospel.

That other picture of the holy Veronica, invented a while after, is of the
same stamp; which being carried in procession in the time of Innocent the
third turnde topsie turuie of it self, casting his beard upward, as Matthew
Paris reports. Matt. Paris in Henrico 3. page 279.
For expiation whereof the said Pope granted an indulgence of ten days, for at
that time they were not given by thousands.

It would be an endless piece of work for any to make report of the images
that have spoken, or sweat, or bowed the head in sign of consent. Read
Caesarius a Monk of the order of the Cist^rtians, his book of miracles. In
the Abbey of Saint Guerlicou in Berrie near the town of Bourg-Dieu, upon the
way of Romorantin, such women as would be got with child, are stretched along
upon the image of this S. Bennet after such a manner, as modesty may not report.

In fine, not to tire the reader with thousands of the like abuses, if we may
believe these our good Masters, it is certain that the images of Saints do
more miracles, then ever the Saints themselves did.

Concerning these miracles we offer them the choice, whether they will have
them accounted true or false: if they be false, we are not bound to believe
them: and then there is collusion. For now adays these miracles are nothing
but coniuring of devils, with many tricks, aspersions, crossings, exorcismes,
giving power unto words and signs: or it may be, the curing of one that is
but counterfeit lame or sick. But to give sight to one that is borne blind,
or to raise one from the dead that has been buried, etc. are matters which
their cunning could never contriue. And the Lieutenants, and Judges in
Criminal causes, howsoever, of the Romish Religion, have often discovered and
punished such impostures: Consider farther, that as the ancient Christians did
glory, that the Devils and Oracles were dumb in their presence: Read M
Marescots Book, concerning Martha B^ossier and the History of Matthew
So these miracles could never be wrought before us: for if we stand by, the
devil loses his fencing tricks.

Nevertheless, to deal fairly with these men, let us grant, that these
Miracles are not counterfeit. For the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2. foretells, that
the son of perdition shall come with signs and Miracles. And Christ, Mark
13. says, That false Teachers shall come, and work signs and wonders,
whereby to deceive. And Mat. 12. A naughty and adulterous generation seeks a
sign. If we teach no other Doctrine then Christ and his Apostles have
delivered, the Miracles which they have wrought do sufficiently confirm our
teaching: Besides we know that Heretics in old time, did as many, and more
Miracles, then they which taught the Orthodoxe faith.

Being foiled then about these Miracles, they have recourse, to the testimonies
of the Fathers, Mast. Coeffeteau says, that Tortullian in the seventh Chapter
of his Book of Chastity, teaches that in the Primitive Church, there were
Images engraven in Chalices: this is false, For Tertullian in this place,
speaks not of the Picture of Jesus Christ, nor of any Saint or Angel; but he
speaktth of a Chalice, whereon was graven a Shepherd, bearing a sheep upon
his shoulder: which was no Image of Christ, but an Emblem of his office, as
men do usually picture the virtues: and had the people worshipped this
Picture, Lex coniungens, neque* similitudinem little quae in caelo sunt, and
quae in terra, t^to muado e^^smodi artibus interdixit. Hermogenes pingit
illicite, nubit assidue: Legem Dei in tibidinem defeadit, in artem contemnit,
bis falsarius, and Cauterio, and Stylo.
they would have drawn it elsewhere in a place more eminent. Now Tertullian
was so far from the worshipping of Images, that he held it simply unlawful
to make any Image. So in his Book of Idolatry, cap. 4. The Law conioyning
things, as not to make the likeness of any thing in heaven, or in the earth,
or in the Sea, has forbidden such trades throughout the whole world. And in
his Book of Spectacles, cap. 23. God forbids to make the resemblance of any
thing, how much more of his Image? And therefore does he reproach Hermogenes
the Painter with his Art, as being full of abomination.

Coeffeteau alleges also a place of Gregory Nyssen taken out of the Oration
concerning Theodore the Martyr, which we have heretofore disproued as false,
and yet there is no speech of worshipping Images, no more then in the Oration
of S. Basil, concerning the Martyr Barlaam, where there is only mention of
Painted Histories, and the representing of the sufferings of the Martyrs; in
which Painted works, the Executioners, and Soldiers horses are also
represented, and if the story required, Christ was also drawn in the Picture:
but of worship performed to these Painted stories, or to any Image, there is no
manner of mention.

Besides it is to be observed, that if this were then practiced in the
Churchyards of Cappadocia where Basil was, or in some Church within his
Bishoppricke, yet we find not that this custom was brought into other
countries. For Prudentius, and Paulinus alleged by Coeffeteau, lived a
hundred years after, and they speak only of the History, and not of any
worship.

He alleges also Sozomen lib. 2. cap. 20. where he speaks of an Image of
Christ in Caesaria, broken by Julian the Apostata, the pieces whereof were
brought into the Church by the Christians, wherein his understanding fails him,
for thereby it appears that this Image was not in any Church, and that no
worship was done unto it. Now we speak here of Images set up in Churches, and
which are there worshipped. Eusebius is the first that mentions this Image,
lib. 7. cap. 17. of his History, whom Coeffeteau neglected to allege. For he
says, that this Image was made by that Heathen woman, whom Christ cured of a
bloody issue. Luke 8. Matthew. 9.
Afterward he says, That none should wonder, if such of the Heathen as Christ
healed made such things, in as much as we have seen the Pictures of the
Apostles, Paul and Peter, yea and of Christ himself drawn in colors, to be
kept in Tables; which the ancients did out of an Heathenish custom, which was
to honor those in like manner, whom they esteemed their deliuerers. Observe
here, that he calls it an Heathenish custom, and being begun by some of the
Heathen that were healed by Christ, or his Apostles, they desired to honor
them after the manner of the Heathen. We must also understand, that this Image
was not in any Church, but in a corner of the street, and that the Christians
were so far from giving any honor unto it, that they knew it not to be there
For Nicephorus in the tenth of his History says, Temporis enim diuturnitate
and obliuione interciderat, cuiusnam ea statua formam referret and cuius rei
gratia ib^ esset callo cata Quod namque simulacrum sub dio astaret, non parum
corpus eius est immutatum. and imbres ex superioribus locis limum secum
t^ahentes statuae ipsi aggesserant.
That through age and forgetfulness it so decayed, that it could not be
discerned whose Picture it was, or for what end it was set up, for this Image
was spoiled because it stood uncovered, and the rain had made much He speaks
this because the houses in Capadocia, were covered with Earth, and so are at
this day, witness Busbeck in his Voyage of Amasia (...).
earth to fall from the houses upon it. And he adds that in the end it was
known by the subscription, all which proves, that it was some Image made after
the heathen manner, sent thither for some public ornament. But of Images in
Churches, or of their worship, there is no such news.

These are the places which Coeffeteau has taken out of the ninth Chapter of
Bellarmines Book of Images: Having done wisely in omitting the place of
Gregory Nazianzene, where Bellarmine commits a notorious falsehood. He says
that in the forty ninth (he would say) fortieth Epistle, Gregory lamenting
because the Town of Diocaesatia was to be destroyed, wherein he had adorned a
Church with great magnificence, he adds; Nequeenim si statuae deijciantur hoc
nos excruciat, etiam si aliquando excruciat. The truth is, that the Emperor
being incensed against the Town of Diocaesaria for some offense (which
Gregory in this Epistle attributes to the insolent behavior of certain
children) did threaten to ruin it, and the Emperor had already taken away the
Statues of the Emperors, which he had in the Town: As we have an example in
the insurrection at Antioch, where the people enraged against Theodosius the
Emperor, they pulled down his Statues; concerning which Chrysostom has diverse
Homilies: and indeed Gregory calls them (...), as Chrysostom does:
otherwise, had he spoken of Images in Churches, he would with Zonaras,
Damascene, and Cedrenus, have called them (...). And there is not so much as a
word of that which Bellarmine says, namely, that he speaks of Images in
Churches, for indeed he speaks thereof contemptuously, in these words. For it
is not very irksome, although it grieve us, if the Statues be pulled down, and
do you not think that I speak hereof, for I am busied about affairs of more
moment.

With like falsehood does he allege the Liturgy of Chrysostom, in which
Pope Nicholas, and the Emperor Alexius, borne many ages after Chrysostom, are
named. There also, and often elsewhere does he allege the supposed Oration of
Gregory Nissen upon Theodore.

So in the twelfth Chap. he falsely alleges Basil against Julian, the Liturgy
of Chrysostom, and Austen in his third Book of Christian Doctrine, and the
questions of Athanasius, which are so full of untruth, that Athanasius
himself is alleged: And Cyrils Catechismes, heretofore convinced of
falsehood, and certainly he that shall take the false Allegations out of
Bellarmine, shall not leave one half part behind. The other places are
impertinent, for one part speaks of historical Pictures out of Churches in
private houses: As S. Austin lib 1. de consensu Evangelist. c. 10. Lib. 22.
contra Faustum cap. 73.
and not any where mentions the worshipping of Images. Which is the point in
controversy.

All this being overthrown, let us rely upon the commandment of God, which
says, Exodus 20. Thou shall not make any graven Image, nor the likeness of any
things which are above in heaven, or below in earth, nor in the waters under
the earth. Thou shall not bow down before them, nor worship them.

The distinction which they make here between an Image, and an Idol, makes
their confession very clear, that they are not pleased with this
commandment, since they have taken it out of their Hours and Offices, Thou
shall worship one God alone, and yield him perfect love. Thou shall not swear
in vain by God, etc.
which they give abroad among the poor multitude; and that they put the Law
of God into meetre, where this commandment is wholly left out. So the Council
of Ausbourg, which is in the latter Tome of the Councels, held in the year
1548, turns the commandments into high dutch, as they ought to be set forth
to the people, wherein there is not a word spoken of Images, nor of the
likeness of things in heaven, etc, Now to make up the number of ten
commandments, they cut the tenth in two parts, and make the coveting of
another man's wife to be the ninth. Whence it follows, that there is no ninth
commandment in the twentieth of Exodus; for it is thrust into the middle of the
tenth, and put after the coveting of our neighbors house.

The Reader shall then have matter of very mature consideration. For were
there words ever pronounced with more majesty then the law? the law written by
the finger of God? the law pronounced by his mouth with fire, and tempest, and
a terrible sound, to terrify the creature with a sacred astonishment? would
any believe that worms of the earth should presume to correct this law, and
charge it with superfluity? this cannot possibly receive sufficient
aggrauation. Christ says, that heaven and earth shall sooner pass away, Matthew.
5.
then that one jot of that law should not be accomplished: and lo, these are
then men that raze out whole periods, yea, that commandment which the Lord
delivered with greatest majesty, calling himself a jealous and a mighty God,
adding thereunto his threatenings, and promises unto a thousand generations.

Being then convinced of impiety, they fall to grammatical disputations, and
say, it must be translated, Thou shall not make any graven Idol, and not
Image: that an Idol is the representation of a false thing, and the object of
Idolatry: but that Images do represent true things. I confess that in French
an Image, and an Idol are diverse things: but the law of God was not
promulgated in French, but in Hebrew: wherein the word Pesel signifies a graven
Image, and so the Romish Bible translates it, Non facies tibi sculptile, Thou
shall not make a graven, or carved Image. And Deuteronomy. 4, 16. it is, for fear
that ye defile your selves, and make unto you Pesel, that is, an Image, as the
Roman Bible expresses it. And so Esaias. 40.19. and many other places. Iustine
Martyr in his dialogue against Tryphon, translates it as we do, Thou shall
not make an Image, (...) etc.
or the likeness of any thing in heaven above, or in the earth beneath. And I
am of opinion that Tully understood the Greek and Latin almost as well as the
Iacobins. Yet in the first book de finibus, he speaks thus: Images which
they call Idols, Imagines quae Idola nominant quorum incursione non solum
videamus, sed etia^ cogitemus.
by meeting with whom we see and consider, etc. Tertullian in the understanding
of these things is not inferior to any of the ancients; and yet he takes and
Image, and an Idol for the same thing, in his book of Idolatry cap. 3. Idos
in greek signifies a figure, or representation, whence comes the diminutiue
Idolon, which signifies a little form, or fashion; and therefore every little
representation, or figure, must be called an Idol. If then it be absurd in
French to call the Cherubins Idols, in Greek it shall be no absurdity at all.

But what need we dispute, whether we ougth to say, Thou shall not make any
graven Image, or Idol, seeing it is added, nor any likeness, or resemblance
what soever? And that it is also forbidden, to kneel, or bow down before it,
or at all to worship it? and consequently this Dulia is forbidden, which
signifies nothing else but worship?

Therefore, neither had the Israelites the pictures of Abraham, or Jacob, or
David in the Temple, or in their Synagogues being men that deserved to be
worshipped, and adored, at least as well as S. Dominicke, or S. Guerlicon, or
their good S. Francis: They being far from yielding them worship or adoration.

Neither had the primitive Christians any of them, and when in the fifth age
they began to have them in Church-yardes, in some places they made nothing but
painted hystories, without any worshipping of them.

We have heretofore seen that Tertullian condemns alike all kinds of
painting, yea without any reference to religion.

Clement of Alexandria has the like in his Protrepticon, where speaking of
Painting and Caruing he says, We are altogether forbidden to practice this
deceitful Art. And he discourses very largely thereof, in his sixth Book of
his Stromata.

Irenaeus Frenaeus lib 1. Cap. 23. and 24. Etiam imagines quasdam depictas,
quasdam de reliqua materia fabricatas habent, dicentes forman Christi factam a
Pilato.
reckons it among the abuses of the Gnostickes, That they had certain Painted
Images, and others made of other stuff, saying that it was the Picture of
Christ made by Pilate. Epiphanius says the same, Lib. 1. Tom. 2. Haeres. 27.

Origin in his eight Book against Celsus, We ought to Dedicate unto the Lord,
not Images made by the hands of Craftesmen, but framed by the word of God,
which are virtuous examples.

In the Dialogue of Minutius Faelix, Caecilius a Pagan does ask of the
Christians, Cur nullas aras habent Christiani? Templa nulla? nulla nota
simulacra?
Whence it comes that the Christians have no Altars, no Temples, no Images that
are observed?

The testimony of the Historian Lampridius, in the life of Alexander Seuerus,
is remarkable, who says that in favor of the Christians, Quod and Adrianus
factitasse fertur, qui Templa in omnibus ciuitatibus sine simulacris iusserat
fieri, quae hodie idcirco quia non habent numina dicuntur Hadria^, quae ille ad
hoc parasse dicebatur. Sed probibitus est as his qui consulentes sacra
repererunt omnes Christianos suturos siad optatato euenisset.
The Emperor Adrian commanded that in every City, Churches should be built
without Images, which at this day are called Adrians Churches, because they
have no Gods in them; which they said he made for that end; to wit, to pleasure
the Christians.

Saint Austen in his Book of Heresies cap. 7. speaking of the Carpocratian
heretics. Coleban^^^magines I^^^^^^as adorando and in^ensum ponendo.
They worshipped the Images of Christ, adoring, and burning incense unto them.

Amphilochius Bishop of Iconia, reports in the second Synod of Nice, Non enim
nobis sanctorum corporales vultus in tabulis coloribus vultus in tabulis
coloribus effigiare curae est quoniam his opus non habemus, sed politiae
illoru^ virtutum memores essedeb emus.
We take no care of coloring in Tables the corporal visages of the Saints,
for we have nothing to do with them, but we ought to call to remembrance
their virtuous conuersations.

Saint Austen upon the hundred and thirteen Psalm, expounding these words of
David, that Idols have a mouth and speak not, eyes and see not, that they are
the work of men's hands, makes this objection, that the Church has also
instruments made with men's hands, but he answers, that this is true, Et sane
profecto ista instrumenta vel vasa quid aliud quam opera manuum hominum?
veruntamen nuaquid os habent and non loquuntur? etc.
But have these instruments mouths and speak not? Or eyes and see not? Do we
address our Prayers to them, etc. Surely he could not have spoken thus, if he
had had Images in Churches, or if Images had been a part of the Churches
mooueables.

The same Father in his first Book, Noui multos esse sepulchrorum and
picturarum adoratores.
De moribus Ecclesiae Catholicae cap. 34. complaining of the superstition of
certain Christians, that in Churchyards did kneedle before the Tombs of the
Martyrs, and before the Painted Histories of their sufferings, says, I know
some who worship Sepulchers and Pictures, I know many that drink largely
over the dead. It is not credible that these Christians thought these Images to
be Gods, for Christians never called a Saint God, and much less his Image,
this is the reason why Bellarmine cap. 16. says that S. Augustine was as yet
but a nouice in Christianity, when he wrote this, and that afterward he
changed his opinion, when he was better instructed.

Placuit picturas in Ecclesia esse non debere ne quod adoratur in parietibus
depingatur.
The Eliberin Council held at the same time as was the first of Nice, in the
thirty and six Canon, says, It is ordained that there be no Pictures in
Churches, for fear least that which is worshipped and adored, be Painted in
the Walls. The Jesuit Sanders, in the second Book of the worship of Images
cap. 4. says, That then it was necessary, but that now the matter is without
danger, as if man's nature were now adays not so prone unto Idolatry. Others
say, that this Council forbids the Painting of Pictures upon walls, but not the
having of them in Frames; with which conceit the Council meets, not only
forbidding Painting in walls, but ordaining also that there should be no
Painting in Churches. It has been ordained (says the Council) that there
be no Painting in the Church, but if Painted frames be fastened to the walls,
are they not in the Church?

In the second Tome of S. Ieromes Epistles, there is an Epistle of Epiphanius,
which Jerome himself has vouchsafed to Translate into Latin; whereof observe
these words. Cum ergo hoc vidissem in Ecclesia Christi contra authoritatem
scripturarum, hominis pendere imaginem, scidi illud. Et magis dedi consilium
custodib^eius loci, vt pauperem mortuum eo obuoluerent -- Et deinceps
praecipere eiusmodi vela quae contra religionem nostram veniunt non appendi.
As I was in a Village called Anablata, seeing as I walked along a burning
lamp, and perceiving that it was a Church, I went in to pray, and found in the
porch a veil hung up colored, and painted, having in it the picture as it
were of Christ, or some Saint, for I do not well remember of what: having then
seen that in the Church of Christ, there was hung up the Image of a man,
contrary to the authority of the Scriptures, I rent it, and advised the
keepers of the place to bury some poor dead body in it. He adds, that he
sent another veil without any Image, for recompense of that which he had
torn, to content the keepers that murmured at it: after that he says, I pray
you that in the Church of Christ such veiles be no more hung up, which are
opposite to our religion. And this same Epistle is in the same words alleged
in the Council of Paris, held under Jews le debonaire, in the year 824 that
none may think it a piece of new forgerie.

Gregory of Tours speaking of the Baptism of King Clouis and his children,
witnesses that the adorning of Churches, was to hang the Church with veiles,
or white linen. Of which S. Ambrose speaks, Epist. 33. and this custom does
yet continue in Lent. An evident proof that then they had no Images; for to
what end should they then keep them covered? and this was about the year of
our Lord five hundred.

Out of Monsieur Pithou his library, who was a man rarely learned, we have
the Council of Paris against Images: wherein King Jews le debonaires, and the
French Bishops, do make remonstrances unto Pope Eugenius, who defended Images
tooth and nail. For the Popes laid handfast upon this occasionn, to shake off
the yoke of their master the Emperor of the East, under a color that he pulled
down Images.

Not long before in the year 794. Charlemaigne assembled the Council of
Franckford, against the worshipping of Images; Adonis Chronicon. in an 795.
Abbas Vspergensis in anno 793. Hinemarus Remensis lib. 20. co^tra Episc.
Iandunensem. Matthew. Westmonasterie^s. in hyst an. 793. Auentinus. Annonius
Regino, Vignier. etc.
wherein the second Nicene Council was condemned, before which Council of
Nice a general Council was held at Constantinople in the year 750 where
there were three hundred and thirty eight Bishops; some parts of which Council
are alleged in the second Council of Nice, howsoever maimed, yet stronger
then that which those Nicence Bishops opposed against it.

About the year 600. Serenus Bishop of Marsilia pulled down all the Images
found in Churches, because the people worshipped them: Greg. Epist. 109. ad
Serenum Episc. Massiliensem and lib. 9. Epist. 9.
and it is not by any means credible, that the Christians accounted Images for
Gods, or worshipped them as God. Nor do we find that the said Serenus erected
them again, notwithstanding he was controuled by Gregory Bishop of Rome.

Petrus Pithoeus in praefatione in hystorias Miscellas a Paulo Aquilegiensi
Diacono collectas. Nuper adm^d^m nostri homines imaginosi esse coeperu^t.
And indeed Monsieur Pithou has good ground to say, that the Frenchmen,
began very soon after to be addicted unto Images. For Anastasius keeper of
the Library, one superstitiously given, in the preface to the second Council
of Nice, says, that the Gauls had not yet received Images, because the truth
was not yet revealed unto them; that is to say, more then eight hundred years
after Christ. And Nicetas Choniates in the second book of the reign of
Augustus Angelus says, that the Armenians did gladly receive the Almaines,
because Apud Alemannos and Armenios Imaginum adoratio aeque interdicta est,
among the Almaines and Armenians, the worshipping of Images was forbidden
alike. For Charlemaigne had so far rejected the worshipping of Images, that
he himself wrote a book against it, which is yet extant. And soon after
Agobardus Bishop of Lions compiled a great volume against Images, which is also
extant, and newly printed at Paris.

To conclude, whosoever shall diligently read the scornful inuectiues of the
primitive Christians, flouting the Images of the ancient Pagans, shall find
that their reprehensions had been ridiculous, if the Christians had then had
Images in their Churches; as when Lactantius lib. 2. cap. 4. does call the
Statues in the Pagan-temples, Grandes puppas, great babies, and when cap. 2. he
says that the Images of the Gods are of no use, if they be present, and that
if they be in heaven, then we should rather direct our prayers toward heaven.
And when S. Austin upon the 113. Psalm, says, that they draw the devotion of
the people, in that they have a humane shape, and are set in some high room.
And doubtless the Infidels would have returnde the reproof, and reproach to
the Christians, and to their Images of the Saints, and the worshipping of their
Statues; which they do not. But we have heretofore heard that they ask the
Christians for what cause they have no Images, that any could see.

ARTICLE XIX. Of the Image of God.
The KINGS Confession.
YEa, the Image of God himself is not only expressly forbidden to be
worshipped, but even to be made. The reason is given, that no eye ever saw
God; and how can we paint his face, when Moses (the man that ever was most
familiar which God) never saw but his back parts? Surely, since he cannot be
drawn to the viue, it is a thankelesse labor to mar it with a false
representation, which no Prince, nor scarce any other man will be contented
with in their own pictures. Let them therefore that maintain this doctrine,
answer it to Christ at the latter day, when he shall accuse them of Idolatry;
And then I doubt if he will be paid with such nice sophistical Distinctions.

For answer whereunto Coeffeteau says, that the Images of God are not made to
represent his essence, but only to express the forms wherein he has
appeared. That none is so brutish to believe that any can paint an essence
immortal, infinite, etc.

I expected that M. Coeffeteau would have produced some commandment of God;
for his ground of the Images of God; or some place to show that God was
pleased, to have his Images made, seeing they are not made to represent his
essence: at least some ancient example either true, or false, after his old
manner. But here is none of these, he only says that Images do not express
his being. I answer that this may be said as well of the Images of men, yea of
beasts: for their pictures do not represent their essence, and never was any
man so unreasonable as to think that the essence of any thing could be
expressed in a picture. Then in like manner do I say, that if these Images be
not the Images of God, because they represent not his essence, then the Images
of Saints are not their Images, because they represent not their essence. And
indeed not the vulgar people only, but the Doctors also do call such pictures
the Image of God, and the Trinity, The title of the eight chapter of
Bellarmines book of Images, is this, That the Images of God are not forbidden.
Now there is no picture, which has not some resemblance with the pattern, and
every Image is a likeness. Therefore, our adversaries must hold that there is
some assimilation, and resemblance between God, and his Images, for if there
be none, they are not the Images of God.

Now these Statues and pictures are to be seen in all their Churches, and in
the beginning of the Bibles printed at Rome by the authority of Sixtus Quintus
and Clement 8. yea, they serve for signs at Tavern doors, they use to say
Master N. lodges at the Trinity: and his horses are set at Gods-head, a matter
ridiculously profane, and reproachful to Christian Religion.

It appears also that these Images of God, are not made to represent the
forms wherein God has appeared, for they commonly picture God in a
pontifical Throne, in the habit of a Pope with a triple Crown, and a Papal
robe; as if you should say, behold Pope Julius granting pardons. There wants
nothing but a fan of a Peacockes tail on either side, surely God never
appeared in this habit, it makes me wonder whence it comes; that the Images of
the Trinity are commonly dusty, and Spiders playing about them, but the Images
of our Lady, and of the Saints, are diapred, and trimply appaireled: me thinks
in regard of the Papal habit, at least they should be neatly kept.

It is true that God appeared unto Daniel in the shape of an old man, for he
knew well that Daniel would not Idolatrously abuse the vision, but when he
speaks to the children of Israel, he suffered them not to see him in any
likeness, for fear (says he) least ye corrupt your selves in making a
representation of any figure, of Male, or Female Deuteronomy. 4.16. And me thinks
when they object this apparition in the figure of an old man, they knock
themselves on the fingers. For did the Church then upon this occasion represent
God in that figure? can it be found that after that time the Image of God was
painted in the Temple, or in the Synagogue? And if the faithful in those days
did it not for what reason shall we have license to do that which they thought
unlawful. God does that which seems good to his wisdom, but to us it
belongs to do what he commands, for his commandemen^, and not his actions
must be the rule of our Religion. If he command the Israelites to spoil the
Egyptians, or Abraham to sacrifice his Son, does it follow that we must
therefore break his law, by the imitation of these examples? if a wooden old
man that people call God the Father, must be worshipped, because it resembles
the old man that appeared unto Daniel, why should we not much rather worship
old men alive, which do much more resemble him?

This is the reason why some Doctors of the Church of Rome, as Abulensis,
Durand, and Peresius do condemn these Images: Yea, the second Nicence
Council how corrupt soever, yet condemns them in the sixth and seventh Acts.
Nicephorus a later and superstitious Author, lib. 18. cap 53. says, Imagines
patris and Spiritus S. effigiant quod perquam absurdum est.
The Armenian Heretics do paint the Image of God the Father, and the Holy
Ghost, which is most absurd. Nec id ipsum quod sed^re pater dicitur, flexis
poplitibus fieri putandum est. Ne in illud meidamus sacrilegium, quo execratur
Apostolus eos, qui commutauerunt gloriam in corruptibilis Dei in similitudinem
corruptibilis hominis. Tale en m simulacrum Deo nefas est Christiano in templo
collocare, multo magis in cord.
Saint Austen in the seventh Chapter of his Book of Faith, and of the Creed,
says thus, When it is said that the Father sits, we must not think that he
has Legs to bow, for fear we fall into that sacrilege, for which the
Apostle detesteth those that turned the glory of the incorruptible God, into
the similitude of a corruptible man, for to erect any such Image unto God in
the Church, is a thing unlawful for a Christian, and much more in his heart,
etc. He does not only say that it is unlawful to desire to represent his
essence, but to make an Images of God sitting, his hammes bowed in the
similitude of a man: which is the fashion of the Images of God which are made
in these days. Now, no man that has any drop of free judgment can make
himself believe, that any Christian ever thought to represent the essence of
God by such Pictures, seeing they cannot express the essence of man.

In brief, by this abuse does God show unto us, into what headlong courses man
runs when he forsakes his holy word, and that after the shipwreck of piety,
he loses even his very reason, for the Lord having created man in the Image of
God, Lo here are men that make God in the Image of man: as if they would
exchange good turns with him. And indeed his Majesty of England says true,
that the meanest man would not be so resembled, for what man would be
represented in the shape of a Pismiere, or of a Frog: and yet between an Ant
and the greatest Monarch, there is some proportion, and between things finite,
the distance cannot be infinite; but between the shape of a man that is
finite, and the Majesty of God which is infinite, there can be no proportion.
besides, the distinctions and excuses which they bring forth, are school
distinctions, not understood by the common people, whose minds are fixed on
that which they see, and seeing every day in their Parish Church a God of
stone, clothed like a Pope, must needs imagine very gross things, and such as
are very injurious to the eternal Deity.

ARTICLE XX. Of the Cross.
The KINGS Confession.
But Christ's Cross must have a particular privilege (say they) and be
worshipped ratione contactus. But first we must know what kind of touching of
Christ's body drew a virtue from it, whether every touching, or only touching
by faith? That every touching of his body drew not virtue from it, is more then
manifest. When the Woman in the bloody flux touched him, she was healed by her
faith: Luke 8.
But Peter then told him that a crowde and throng of many people then touched
him, and yet none of them received any benefit or virtue from him. Judas
touched him many and many a time, besides his last kiss* so did the villains
that Buffeted and Crucified him, and yet I may safely pronounce them accursed,
that would bestow any worship upon their relics: yea we cannot deny but the
land of Canaan it self (whereupon our Lord did daily tread) is so visibly
accursed, being governed by faithless Turks, full of innumerable Sects of
heretical Christians, and the very fertility thereof so far degenerated
into a pitiful sterilitie, as he must be accursed that accounts it blessed.
Nay, when a certain Woman blessed the belly that bare Christ, and the breasts
that gave him suck: Luke 11.28.
Nay rather (says he) Blessed are those that hear the Word of God and keep
it. Except then they could first prove that Christ had resolved to bless that
tree of the Cross, whereupon he was nailed, they can never prove that his
touching it could give it any virtue. And put the case it bad a virtue of doing
Miracles, as Peter's shadow had, yet does it not follow, that it is lawful to
worship it, which Peter would never accept of. Surely the Prophets that in so
many places curse those that worship Images, that have eyes and see not, that
have ears and hear not, would much more have cursed them that worship a piece
of a stick, that has not so much as any resemblance or representation of eyes
or ears.

To this M. Coeffeteau opposes not the commandment of God, Coeff. fol. 65.
but the authority of Chrysostom in his Sermon of the adoration of the Cross,
who says, The Cross and his picture ought to be worshipped. In like manner
Prudentius the Poet, and Paulinus Bishop of Nola, and Ambrose, who speak of
the worshipping of the Cross, that Judas kiss, or the touching of the
executioners, and the touch of the Cross is not al one because the mouth of
the one, and the hands of the other were living mem-bers of those Reprobates,
that committed the most detestable crime in the world; but the Cross was a
dead thing, and a harmless instrument of our Sauiors death: that this worship
is not done to the wood, but to him that was fastened thereunto, and sanctified
it by his touching of it: and again, that the representation of the chief
mystery of our salvation does make it venerable: which cannot be said of the
land of Canaan, because it was no particular instrument of our salvation.

The Doctor is not willing to leave his good custom of paying us with
falsehoods. Chrysostomes Sermon of the adoration of the Cross, which says that
the Cross, and the effigies thereof are to be worshipped is suppositious, and
not found in Greek among Chrysostomes works. Gretseri notae in orationes de
cruce, page 601. Hanc orationem neque in Augustana bibliotheca reperimus, neque
aliunde nancisci potuimus.
Ioachimus Perionius has set forth in Greek and Latin, what himself
pleased: but Gretser a Jesuit, who has very lately inserted it among other
orations that speak of the Cross, says that he has made diligent search for
the manuscripts of Chrysostom. in the Libraries at Bauaria, and Ausburg; and that
the has neither found it there, nor any where else.

Coeffeteau adds, that Prudentius writing against Simmachus says, that the
Christians bowed their knees before the Cross to worship it: and yet this is
false. He could not allege the words, but the verses of Prudentius are these.

-- Tunc ille Senatus
Militiae vltricis titulum, Christique verendum
Nomen adorauit, quod collucebat in armis.
Which sounds in English to this sense,

Then did the Senate grave adore
The title of Christ's name divine,
Which the reuengefull Army bore,
And did in glorious banner shine.
The meaning is that the Senate having seen a Roman banner, which they called
Labarum, whereupon the name of Christ was written for an inscription in this
form did worship this title, and the venerable name of Christ. But of adoring
the cross he makes no mention.

He further says, that S. Ambrose in the Oration made upon the death of
Theodosius, speaking of Helena that put one of the nails of the Cross in
Constantines crown, Sapienter Helena egit quae crucem in capite regum leuauit,
vt crux Christi in r^gibus adoretur.
says, that she did wisely in advancing the Cross above the heads of Kings,
that in Kings the Cross of Christ might be worshipped. Let us here resolve
that this Oration, as also others of the third Tome, be adjudged counterfeit by
Erasmus a man of good judgment in the reading of the Fathers. And indeed it is
not credible that S. Ambrose should speak so ridiculously, as to Illum qui
sicut Scarabeus clamauit vt persecutori^ s^is peccata donaret.
compare Christ Jesus crying on the Cross to the beetle fly a base creature,
and that cries not, as the Author of this Oration does: yet, being granted
to be true, does Coeffeteau still show himself a falsifier both of the words,
and of the sense: of the sense: for these words, Vt crux Christi in regibus
adoretur do signify, that Kings being adored, the cross by that means might
be adored: whereby it is evident that he speaks of a civil adoration, because
he makes it one with that which is performed unto Kings: now the question is
here of religious worship. Secondly, Coeffeteau does curtaile this place with
like falsehood, suppressing the words following, which do explane what is meant
by the Cross. This is no arrogance (says he) but piety, when it has
reference to the redemption: he speaks then of worshipping the redemption, and
not a wooden Cross. In like manner has Coeffeteau dissembled the precedent
words, which are wonderful plain: Helena adored the King, Helena regem
adorauit no^ lignu^ vtique, quia Gen tilis est hic error and vanitas impiorum.
and not the wood, for this is a heathenish error, and a vanity of the ungodly.
But she worshipped him that was hanged on the wood. This licentious
falsifying, and clipping of the Fathers is horrible: if our Doctor durst
falsify the Scripture with like liberty, he would questionless allege some
passages therehence.

Concerning Paulinus who lived in the fifth age, Crux enim pisius columna est
generis humani. In ipsa columna aedificata est domus eius. Ego crucem dico, non
lignum sed passionem.
and al others that speak of honoring, or reuerencing the Cross, yea or if
there be any that speak of adoring it, S. Jerome upon the 95. Psalm gives us
a general rule, whereby to expound such places. His Cross (says he) is the
Pillar of mankind, upon this Pillar his house is built: now by the Cross I
understand not the wood, but the passion. The same Father upon S. Matthew, lib.
4. cap. 23. complaining that certain women carried about them some words of
the Gospel written in little rolls of parchment, and superstitiously
worshipped the Cross. Some odd huswiues among us (says he) use to do this
with little Gospells, Hoc apud nos superstitiosae quaeda^ mulierculae factitant
in paruulis Euangelijs and in crucis ligno and istiusmodi rebus (quae habe^t
quidem zelum Dei sed non secundum scientiam.)
and the wood of the Cross, and such like things, which have the zeal of God,
but not according to knowledge. What would he have said, if he had seen any to
speak to a piece of wood, and to salute the Cross, as if it understood them?
saying to it, Aue lignum triumphale, hail triumphant wood. And, O aue crux,
spes vnica, auge pijs iusticiam, reisque dona veniam. Hail Cross our only
hope, increase righteousness unto the faithful, and pardon the sinful: as
our adversaries do.

For I ask to whom they speak: do they speak to Jesus Christ? why, he is
neither called wood, nor Cross: do they speak to the Cross: why, that
understands them not: do they speak to the Cross in honor of Christ? or do
they worship the Cross, with a relative adoration, having reference unto
Jesus Christ? then should that whereunto they speak in honor of Christ,
understand what they say; and he that should speak to the timber of the Kings
chair in honor of the King, would be taken for a fool: neither should the
King be more honored thereby: and to give a relative worship unto the Cross,
is to worship the Cross: we may not worship a dead thing, to honor Christ
thereby; nor must we honor God, by transgressing his commanndement.

Now our adversaries tell us of twosorts of Crosses which must be worshipped:
one is the true Cross, which nevertheless is not now a Cross, because it
has been cut out into little pieces: the other is the image of the Cross,
such as are the common Crosses.

Concerning the true Cross, the Author of the Catechismes falsey ascribed unto
Cyrill of Jerusalem, in the fourth Catechism says, (...).
that this wood is so grown, and multiplied, that in a manner, the whole
conntrey is full of it: I think one may build a City of it: for as time and
experience makes menwiser, so have the Christians at length thought good to
have some little chip of the true Cross in their chest, or about their neck,
as a holy defensatiue against devils. Whence it appears, that the Apostles,
and the Christians in their time, that might each of them have had a cut of the
true Cross, and yet left it whole and untouched, without any search for it,
for 300. years together, were either more barren in invention, or colder in
devotion. In the year 1239 John naming himself King of Jerusalem, who was
afterward Emperor of Constantinople, being hunger-starued for want of money,
began a traffic of relics, and sold great store of them to the western
Princes, that were not so subtle as himself: he sold the Crown of thorns to
King Jews the ninth, and the true Cross to the Venetians, which the said King
Jews bought of them again, making them gainers half in half: he bought also
the sponge wherewith they offered drink unto Christ; and the iron of the
spear, wherewith S. Longis pierced his side, and recovered his sight thereby.
The holy Chapel of the Palace, was purposely built for the reservation and
the adoration of these relics.

Touching the worship and adoration of this Cross, Thomas 3. part. Quaest.
25. Art. 3. Alexander. 3. part. quaest. 30. art. vltimo. Caietanus in Thoma^ 3.
part. quaest. 25. art. 3. Bonauentura. Marcellus Almain Carthusianus, Capreolus
in 3. did. 9. Henr. Quod libetico 10. q. 6. Namclantus in Epist. ad Romans cap.
1.
I find that all the Doctors of the Church of Rome, ( Bellarmine, and some
inferior Jesuits excepted) do agree, that the true Cross ought to be
worshipped with Latria, that is to say, with the very worship which is given to
God himself. An abominable Doctrine, giving to a dead creature as great
worship as unto the high God; which cannot be excused, that this worship of the
Cross has relation unto God, or is referred unto Jesus Christ: for to adore
Jesus Christ, and to adore the Cross in honor of Jesus Christ, must needs
be two different adorations, We must not in honor of God, adore the creature
with honor equalling the worship of God; for in seeking thus to honor God, we
shall dishonor him; reproach him by such worship; by such respect disrespect
him; neglect him by such service: in a word, this is to make ex opposito
appositum, to descend in clyming, and to get heat by freezing. Besides, what
honor, or respect soever you may show unto the King, it can never be made
good, that any can honor him the more, by giving like reverence to his chair,
or his cloak: the chief point is, that if such worship of the Cross be
lawful, then has God commanded it. For we may not adore any thing, but what
he has commanded us to adore: and here are our adversaries tongue-tied, and
allege no one word of Gods commandment.

This is the reason why Cardinal Bellarmine thinks it better to say, that the
Cross ought to be worshipped with an inferior adoration: wherein he plainly
confesses, that the adoration of the Cross differs from the adoration of
Jesus Christ, in that it is inferior: and so his meaning is that the dead
creature be worshipped in it self, and with a differing worship from that by
which Christ is worshipped, Secondly, he does thereby confound the
understanding of the poor people, who when they fall down before the Cross,
think of performing no more then one worship: but Bellarmine will have them to
perform two services, one to Christ, and the other to the Cross, and in the
one instant to cut their devotion in two pieces, dividing their thoughts
between two kinds of worships. It were extremely absurd to hope, that he,
or any other should produce any commandment of God touching this religious
worship subordinate to the worship of Christ; without saying, that the people
adoring a piece of the Cross, must assuredly believe that it is a piece of the
true Cross, and that it is not suppositious: whereof notwithstanding there can
be no assurance.

For the other kind of Cross, which is the Image of the Cross in wood, or
silver, the Church of Rome does worship that also: and at the elevation
thereof, they say, Ecce crux, adoremus. And therefore Cardinal Bellarmine in
the thirtieth chapter of his book of Images, speaks thus: We worship all
Crosses,. Ad quartum. Omnes cruces adoramus quia omnes sunt imagines verae
crucis.
because they are all Images of the true Cross: yea the bare Crosses without a
Crucifix. We worship (says he) the Cross, yea without Christ crucified.

All which is a Medley of absurdity with impiety. For none worshippeth the
Image of the Cross with like worship, as he does the true Cross: and if
the true Cross be to be adored with a worship subordinate to that yielded to
Christ, then behold three sorts of religious worship. Now if we must adore a
Cross without a crucifixe; for that it is an Image and resemblance of the
Cross; why do they not worship the bars of windows, or the Sayle-yardes of
Ships, seeing they resemble the Cross of Christ? Why shall we not worship all
the nails, and all the linen clothes in the world, seeing they better
resemble the nails which pierced our Savior, and the linen clothes that
wrapped him in his infancy? Whereunto if any object, that these common nails
and linen, are not in any consecrated place, nor appointed to that end, nor
purposely made to serve as Images, or memorials of the Passion, or birth of
Christ: I answer, that this is to grant as much as we desire, and to fall into
the like impiety: for this is to affirm, that common nails and ordinary
linen ought to be worshipped, if they were carried into some holy place, and
appointed to serve for the resemblance, or commemoration of Christ's passion;
which our adversaries will be unwilling to grant: And wherefore then do they adore
all manner of Crosses, yea without crucifixes, as soon as they are put into some
holy place, and ordained to represent the passion? For if the question be of
the touching, the linen touched the body of Christ as near as the Cross; yea
I say, that the nails and Iron of the Spear touched him nearer, even to the
very heart: and then whence is it, that the nails and Iron of the Spear put
into a holy place, are not adored as well as the Image of the Cross? And where
is the adoration of this Image commanded by God?

To be short, I say that if any should do obeisance, or speak unto the kings
cloak, although the king did wear it, he should nevertheless be thought to be
beside himself. How much more if he spoke to the cloak, or did obeisance to
it, when it is hanged upon a hook? And yet how much more, if he should salute
or talk to the picture of this cloak? In like manner I say, that if any had
saluted the Cross, whiles our Savior was fastened thereunto, or had spoken
unto it, he would have been thought to have been mad, although his
salutation had been relatiuely made unto Christ. How much more then if he had
saluted it alone, Christ not being thereon? And how much more, if he had
saluted or spoken to the picture, or Image of this Cross? especially to a bare
Cross without a crucifixe, as at this day the Church of Rome does? Certainly
no words can sufficiently express the absurdity of this abuse.

So Coeffeteau does give no manner of satisfaction to that which his Majesty of
England does object: namely, that if the Cross ought to be worshipped because
it touched Jesus Christ; then Judas his mouth, and the hands of those that
buffeted him, and the land of Canaan whereon he walked, which is at this day an
example of Gods curse, ought also to be worshipped.

Coeffeteau answers, that the reason is not alike, because the lips of Judas,
and the hands of the executioners, were their living members that touched him
sacrilegiously: but the Cross was a dead thing, and a guiltless Instrument of
the death of our Redeemer. This is but a bare shift: for first, if our Saviors
touching had made dead things adorable, it should much more have made profane
things holy. Our adversaries have also forged a fable of one S. Longis, that
with hate and insultation pierced his side, and thereby became a Saint. And
secondly, the Cross (as Coeffeteau says) is not to be worshipped the more,
for that it was a dead thing: Thirdly, the water wherewith Christ was baptized,
obtained no life thereby, and (to speak with Coeffeteau) it was an innocent
Instrument of his baptism; and did touch Christ, and yet was never adored
Fourthly, our adversaries (as I suppose) would not worship the empty Chalices,
although they did believe that the blood of Christ, yea his whole body had
been therein. They will not adore the Priest, albeit he have often eaten God,
and that he come to take Christ a fresh into his stomach: Fifthly, the whips
wherewith Christ was bloudied, were harmless Instruments of his sufferings,
yet we find not that ever Christian worshipped them: Sixthly, nothing touched
Christ so near, as the nails and spear that pierced him, and they were also
harmless Instruments of his passion, and yet the primitive Christians never
worshipped them. Constantine put two of them into his Helmet, and of two others
he made a Bitte for a Horse; wherein he had some seeds of superstition: yet
had Constantine adored these nails, he would have caused them to be put into
the Church, rather then to have put them into the mouth of a Beast, and left
them hanging on a post in the Quirry: Ambros. de obitu Theodosu Theodor.
Histor. Lib 1. cap. 18 (...).
and yet Theodoret and Ambrose approve this action: Seventhly, if the nails
touched the body of Christ nearer, and his foreparts deeper then the Cross,
why do they not adore the Image of the nails, and yet they adore the Image of
the Cross, yea without a crucifixe?

Coeffeteau adds, that there is more in the Cross besides the touching, for
it is a representation also of the death of Jesus Christ. If he speak of the
true Cross, it is not true that it represents the death of Christ. For that
of the Cross, which they worship now adays, is but little pieces of worm
eaten wood, which have neither figure nor fashion of the Cross. But if he
speak of the Image of the Cross in silver, or paynting, it is false that
Christ ever touched it. And if these Crosses be without crucifixes, they do
not resemble the passion. For there is no Image of the passion, where there is
no Image of him that suffers; it may be some remembrance but no resemblance.

The Reader shall also note, that Coeffeteau omits that excellent observation
which the King makes touching the bodily touch, and the touch of faith; and the
example of the woman that touched the hemme of Christ's garment, as also the
example of that woman that said, Happy is the womb that bare thee; together
with the reason which he does excellently draw, from the person and the shadow
of Peter: and the comparison of Images condemned by the Prophets, which have
eyes and see not, ears and hear not, with the Cross which has no
resemblance of eyes or ears. This Doctor suffers all this sweetly to slide a
way, and honestly holds his peace; having of set purpose (in my opinion) made
his book a foil to give luster to the King of great Britains book.

After all these abuse, these our Masters have the good grace, to accuse us of
misprision of the Cross of Christ, who say with the Apostle, Galat. 6. God for
bid that I should rejoice in any thing but the Cross of our Lord Jesus. Our
adversaries talk of the Cross of Christ, but we practice it; they paint it,
we bear it; they glory in some pieces of the Cross, but we in suffering for
his name; they paint it on walls, and we print it in our hearts: many carry it
tossing upon their body, whose belly is an enemy of the Cross of Christ. Let
us learn then to fasten our affections to his Cross, and to crucify our old
man with him. But for the worshipping of Crosses of gold or silver (for the
metal is honored) we say with the ancient Christians in the Dialogue of
Minutius Foelix, Cruces nec colimus nec optamus, We neither worship, nor wish
for Crosses. He does us wrong that thinks, that we reject this sign and
memorial of the passion, we only wish the abuse and Idolatry to be reformed.

ARTICLE XXI. Of Purgatory.
AS for Purgatory and all the trash depending thereupon, The KINGS Confession.
Jubilees, Indulgences, Satisfactions for the dead, etc, Lib. 2 de Purg. cap. 7.
it is not worth the talking of; Bellarmine cannot find any ground for it in
all the Scriptures. Only I would pray him to tell me if that fair green Meadow
that is in Purgatory, have a brook running through it, that in case I come
there, I may have hawking upon it. But as for me, I am sure there is a Heaven
and a Hell, praemium et poena, for the Elect and Reprobate: How many other
rooms there be, John 14.
I am not on God his counsel. Multae sunt mansiones in domo Patris mei, says
Christ, who is the true Purgatory for our sins: But how many chambers and
anti-chambers the Devil has, they can best tell that go to him: But in case
there were more places for souls to go to then we know of, yet let us content
us with that which in his Word be has revealed unto us, and not require
further into his secrets. Heaven and Hell are there revealed to be the eternal
home of all mankind: let us endeavor to win the one and eschew the other;
and there is an end.

In this point of such great consequence, wherein the benefits of Christ, and
the cleansing of our sins are handled, it were very behoouefull for Mr.
Coeffeteau to bring some proofs out of the word of God, whereunto the King of
great Britains words do bind him, seeing he reproacheth Cardinal
Bellarmine with ignorance of any one passage of the Scripture whereon to ground
his Purgatory: and therefore he calls the other Doctors to assist the
Cardinal, and supply this default.

In steed whereof Coeffeteau rusheth upon the Fathers, and says, that the
Fathers have prayed for the dead, and that prayer for the dead were to no
purpose if there were no Purgatory. He alleges the testimony but of two
Fathers Chrysostom and S. Austen: for touching Cyrils Catechismes, we have
already convinced them of falsehood.

To these allegations he adds neither reason, neither answers the
objections made by his Majesty of England, much less does he bring any proof
of Scripture; but only sets down his opinion in certain timorous and
ambiguous terms: he says, that Christ is the true sacrifice expiatory for our
sins, and that his blood is our true purgation: but that this primarie
Purgation is applied unto us by the fire of Purgatory: that the first causes
do not exclude the second; and that souls are purged in the Purgatory fire,
by a power given thereunto by the blood of Christ. That the Scripture does
expressly make but two places, for souls to remain in, after this life, but
when it speaks in this manner, the meaning is of places eternal. But that
Purgatory is a place, where they continue but for a time; to wit, until they
have satisfied the justice of God, and that they are cleansed from those
corruptions which hinder them from entering into the heavenly Jerusalem. And
therefore (says he) we acknowledge no Purgatory after the resurrection, or
the last judgment: that no man thinks (faith Saint Austen) that there be any
Purgatory pains, but only before the last, and dreadful judgment. But of
giving satisfaction to the Kings reasons, or defending Bellarmines flowery
field, we hear no news. He has not undertaken the one, and he is ashamed
of the other.

This being one of the vlcerous fistula's of the body of the Romish Church, it
does deserve a deep search, and diligent examination: and herein we must
declare,

1 The belief of the Church of Rome. 2 The doctrine of the Scripture. 3 The
judgment of the Fathers, either not
understood, or fraudulently alleged by Coeffeteau.

The opinion of the Church of Rome.
THe Church of Rome holds, that the subterrane Region is divided into four
lofts; the lowest whereof is Hell, the next Purgatory, the third Limbus
puerorum, and the last Limbus Patrum, which now stands empty. In this building
the lowest chambers are the hortest, contrary to the course of nature. Beside
Purgatory does Cardinal Bellarmine place a verdant field diapred with
flowers, where the souls are refreshed in passing out from this fire; grounded
upon the opinion of Dionysius Carthusianus, an Author of great authority. In
the seventh chap. and second book of Purgatory.


This purging fire is grounded upon this maxim drawn from the unwritten Word,
that Christ by his death and sufferings, has freed us from the fault, and from
the punishment of sins before baptism, This is clearly expounded in the
Tridentine Catechism in the chap. of penance.
baptism, but that it does not discharge us from the punishment of sins
committed after baptism: for which we must satisfy the justice of God both
here, and in Purgatory: that no unclean thing enters into Paradise, and
therefore we must be purged first that this purging fire is one of the means
whereby to apply the satisfaction of Christ unto us. This fire shall last till
the day of judgment, and that it is far hotter then our ordinary fire; all
the torments of this life being nothing in comparison thereof; and that seven
years torment must be endured for one sin: which is the reason why the Pope
does grant pardons of fifty, and of a hundred thousand years, for according
to the wound, must the plaster be the broader. Thence is it that they pray
for such as have been dead eight hundred or nine hundred years, supposing
them to be yet in this fire.

Nevertheless the mercy of the Popes does often mitigate this punishment: for
they have erected certain privileged Altars, at which whosoever says a set
number of Masses, does deliver what soul he will out of Purgatory. Which makes
me to wonder, why they that do continually singe Masses for one that has
been dead five hundred or six hundred years, have not the wit to say some
Masses for him upon these privileged Altars, whereby they might determine his
torments.

The Pope does also grant certain Bulls, by which he delivers some
particular soul out of Purgatory at the instance of his parents, if they be
persons of quality. For he bestows not these spiritual graces upon mean
souls, unless it be upon the day of his Coronation, on which in S. Peter's
place he disperseth pardons among the multitude, for two or three thousand
years.

There are also certain privileged persons which either come not there, or
immediately go out again, although they are laden with as many sins as
other men, Iacobus de Rampont Carmelitarum praesentatus, and Metensis Carmeli
alumnus disputauit has Theses sub auspicijs sapientissimi Domini nostri
Bartolomaei Girart Nauarrici.
as the Carmelite Friars, which have this privilege of being in Purgatory no
longer then the Saturday following their departure. Which privilege the
Carmelites of Paris have lately published in certain Theses printed, octo
Octobris, 1601. And Doctor Cayer stoutly defends this privilege in his book
entitled, Le four de Reuerbere, to the end whereof the Carmelite Doctors have
adjoined their subscriptions. Those also which die immediately after they have
been at the Iubile, go not at all into Purgatory: and those which the Pope
exempteth by his Indulgences from this purging fire, are excepted from the rule
of the Gospel, which says, Of a truth thou shall not depart thence, until
thou have paid the uttermost farthing.

This purging being ended, then the souls after a little refreshing taken in
the field of Flowers which is of one side, go directly into Paradise.

In the time of Gregory the first, six hundred years after Christ, this
Purgatory was in another place: for the said Pope in the fourth of his
Dialogues, places the Purgatory of some souls in Bathes, of others under the
leaves of trees, and some under ice. Petrus Damianus speaks of a soul that
had his Purgatory in a River; and it is to be presumed, that to wash himself
the cleaner, he went against the stream of the water.

The first Council of the Romish Church, that contrived this matter of
Purgatory into an Article of faith, was the Florentine Council in the last
Session, held in the year 1439. where it was decreede against the Greek
Churches, which denied and do still deny this fire, that a Purgatory must be
believed: indeed former Councels do speak of prayer for the dead; but we
shall prove that this prayer that has been used for the dead, does make
against this Purgatory.

The decision of this difference by the word of God,
1 IN the first place it is to be wondered that God who in his law appointed
sacrifices, and expiations for all sorts of sins and pollutions, even for the
leaprosie, issues of blood, and the touching of the dead, that he ordained
neither expiation, nor sacrifice, nor satisfaction for souls in Purgatory.
The faithful in those days wept over the dead, but never mingled their tears
with prayers for their deliverance from this fire. Did God suffer the faithful
then to make a complete and full satisfaction? Had he then less care for his
children then he has now? Had he then no privileged Altar? Had he then no
worship for the dead? Had he then no Church-treasurie, wherinto the Priests
might gather the satisfactions of Noah or Abraham, to give some part thereof
to these roasted souls? There appears no such matter, or that God had yet
bethought himself of it. And yet the Church had continued four thousand
years, when Christ came into the world: for touching that in the twelfth
chapter of the second of Maccabees, besides that we have proved in the fifth
Article, that the book is Apocryphal, we shall hereafter see, that the prayer
for the dead, which is there mentioned makes against Purgatory.

2 In the Gospel, and the writings of the Apostles there is no show of this
matter; no Indulgences granted for the dead, no prayer for any departed, nor
any commandment to pray for them, nor any color whereby it may be gathered
that the souls of the faithful are yet in torments.

3 Contrariwise we find many examples of men that by death have entered into
Paradise, and have been gathered (to their Fathers) in peace: good old Simeon
was promised that he should depart in peace after that he had seen the
Messiah, Luke 2. Saint Paul says, that after he had fought a good fight, there
was nothing left for him, but to receive a Crown of glory, 2. Tim 4. The soul
of Lazarus ( Luke 16.) was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom, where he
was comforted, while the wicked rich man was tormented; but of going in, or
coming out of Purgatory, there is nothing spoken.

Christ says unto the good thief, To day shall thou be with me in Paradise:
then he went not to Purgatory; for first, his faith could not deserve this
privilege, for he had no other faith then that which Christ gave him, for it
can be no merit to receive grace from God: Secondly, And he that gives
Paradise to him that had but a weak faith, does consequently say, that if we
have a strong faith in Christ, we shall not go to Purgatory: Thirdly,
besides, no virtues can be satisfactory punishments, but should rather mitigate
the penalty; so then faith, which is a virtue cannot satisfy the justice of
God, which requires punishment satisfactory: Fourthly, if any shall call this a
privilege to be exempted from Purgatory, he is bound to produce some other
examples, to prove that others do ordinarily go into Purgatory: Fifthly,
Again the torments which he then suffered, could not be his Purgatory, for
our adversaries say, that this satisfaction must be voluntary, and done with a
purpose to satisfy God: Now this thief was brought to his punishment against
his will, and had no intention to satisfy Gods justice, to free himself from
Purgatory: Sixthly and lastly, there is no proportion between the bodily pains
of a few hours, and a fire that lasts thousands of years: out of all
peradventure Purgatory was crucified with this thief.

4 The Angel of the Lord, Apoc. 14.13, says thus: Blessed are the dead which
die in the Lord, Amen, So says the spirit, that they rest from their labors,
and their works follow them. If they rest from their labors, they do not
fry in a burning fire: He that shall read the whole chapter, will confess
that he speaks not only of Martyrs, who are not mentioned in any part
thereof, but of those that keep the commandments of God, and the faith of
Jesus. For if Martyrs alone die in the Lord, in whom do the rest of the
faithful die?

5 The Prophet Esaias, cap. 57. v. 1, 2. says, that the righteous is taken away
from the evil to come, and that he rests in peace. S. Paul, 2. Cor. 5.1.
says, that if our earthly Tabernacle bec destroyed, we have an house eternal
in the heavens: And the Apostle, Heb. 9. says, that it is appointed for all
men to die once, and after that comes the judgment. Why then do they forget
to mention Purgatory, which is between them both.

6 In the eighteenth chapter of Ezechiel, God says, that if the wicked shall
turn from his sins which he has committed, he will no more remember his
iniquities: is this to remember them no more, to plague them with a long, and
burning fire, and to make the sinner pay the uttermost farthing?

7 In the twentieth of S. Matthew, all the laborers which wrought in the Lords
Vineyard, received their salary at the end of the day, which is this life, and
when they had done their work. But the Church of Rome delays their payment
for many hundreds and thousands of years.

8 S. Paul Romans 3. says, that we are freely justified by our redemption in
Christ Jesus: and Col. 2. he says, that God (...), (...).
has freely forgiven all our sins: for the word imports as much: for if it
be freely, there is no requisition of satisfactory pains in a burning fire.
In like manner he says, all our sins, that we may know that God does not
pardon by halfes.

9. But it is principally considerable that every purgatory, Coeffet. fol. 71.
page 2. They are purged from their uncleanness which hindieth them from
entering into Paradue.
or purgation does presuppose some spots, or pollutions to be cleansed: and our
adversaries say, that these spots are the sins for which we have not
satisfied. Now in every sin (say they) there are two things, to wit, the
crime, and the punishment: then we ask them, which of those two is purged
there; it cannot be the crime: for they themselves say, that Christ has set us
free from all crimes: and S. John in his first Epistle, chap. 1. says, that
the blood of Christ does cleanse us from all sin. Now sin to speak
properly is nothing but the crime, for the pa^ne is no sin, but the
punishment of sin: so also it is impossible that the punishment should be
purged in Purgatory, for the punishment is not a spot, and therefore needs no
cleansing; for to be punished, is not to be purged: and the whip, or gallows
are no purgation of a theft, or a murder.

10. Observe farther, that our adversaries hold, the souls in Purgatory, are
absolutely righteous, and sin no more: whence it follows, that Purgatory is
a purging of spots that are not committed: for to bear the punishment of by
past offenses, is no purgation: for this torment cannot be named a Purgatory,
but a Cruciatory, or a Vindicatory: seeing souls are there tormented, but not
purged of any spot, or pollution, of which they have none.

11. The worst is, that this punishment by fire after the fault is wholly
forgiven, does wither and disparage Gods justice: for thereby they teach that
God punishes those which are not culpable: seeing none is punished with
satisfactory pains, but for his fault: the fault then being removed, and
remitted by Jesus Christ, there is nosatiffactory pain left: as Tertullian,
cap. 5. de Baptismo, has, where there is no guilt, there is no punishment.

12. This is to make God a mocker, as if he should say, I pardon thy offense,
but I will punish thee: I acquire thee of the debt, but not of the payment.

13. S. Paul, Ephesians. 4. commands us to forgive one another, as God has
forgiven us in Christ. Now we must forgive them that have offended us, without
any reservation of punishment satisfactory, and we ought not to punish when we
have pardoned them. God then does forgive us after the same manner: for if God,
when he had pardoned us, should require satiffactory sufferings of us, the
Apostle proposing the pardon which God does grant us for an example, should
open a gate for revenge after we had been recon^^ed.

14. Whereunto add, that Christ has not otherwise borne our sins, then he
has borne the punishment of them: and if he have borne that satisfactory
punishment: which we owed unto Gods justice, was it not to discharge us
thereof? As S. Austen in his 37. Sermon de verbis Domini, says, Christ in
taking upon him the punishment, and not the guilt, has abolished both the
sin, and the punishment.

Observe in this whole discourse, that when we speak here of punishments, we
always understand punishment satisfactory, by which, Fol. 71. page 8.
(as Coeffeteau says) The sinner does satisfy the justice of God: and such a
punishment and the forgiving of sin, are incompatible: but there are other
punishments, which are fatherly corrections, and saving exercises, which God
inflicteth, not to draw satisfaction for that which is past, but to make us
wise for after times: Non exigens supplicium de peccatis, sed ad futura not
corrigen.
as Chrysostom says in his Homily of confession, and repentance. Corrections
are not reuenges, and medicines are no satisfactions: for so was David punished
after his offense was pardoned. 2. Sam. 12. we agree well with our adversaries
that his sinwas the efficient cause of his punishment: but we differ about the
final cause. They say, that it was to satisfy the justice of God, and we say
it was to cure the injustice of David: they say, that God punished him as a
judge, but we say, that he corrected him as a father.

So that the punishments which serve for the amendment of the sins, agree
well with the pardon of the sin: just as to forgive an injury received from a
brother, and yet to strike him being fallen into an apoplexy to awake him, are
things compatible. But to pardon the sin, and yet to extort satisfaction by
punishments, whereby the sinner is not bettered, and then when he needs no
premonition for future times, is a matter unjust, yea contradictory, as the
reasons formerly alleged do demonstrate.

15 Let us then press the matter a little harder; and let Coeffeteau tell us,
whether Jesus Christ be an In^ercessor and Mediator for the souls which are in
this fire. Will he dare to say, that our Savior has quitted the office of a
Mediator for these souls? Or if he be still their Mediator, and do still
intercede for them with his Father, why are they not delivered from this so
long and fearful fire at his intercession?

16 I ask him farther, whether Christ have not satisfied by his death for the
pains of Purgatory, and whether he have not paid sufficient for our
ransom: for if he have paid sufficient, why will not God receive his payment,
for as much as it amounts unto? Why should he abate any thing of the price of
his sons death? The Apostle, Heb. 7.25. says, that Jesus Christ is perfectly
able to save them that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them. Being then fully able to save us, and wholly to acquit
us, why shall he not do it? Shall his love be less then his power? Would he
suffer his brethren, his members, his Spouse to be for many ages in a fire as
hot as Hell?

Here me thinks I hear Coeffeteau muttering something that discouers more
weakness in him: Fol. 70. page 2.
He says that Christ is the true expiation, and purgation of our sins, but
that the fire of Purgatory is a means whereby this original purgation upon
the Cross is applied unto us. O monstrous opinion! that the merits of Christ
should be applied by burning, and tormenting us in fire. For confutation
whereof, observe these unanswerable arguments.

1 I say then that not our adversaries, but the sacred Scripture must prescribe
us the means of enjoying Christ and his benefits; and the means which are
therein offered unto us, are faith, Ephesians. 3.17. The Sacrament of Baptism,
Galat. 2.27. The bread broken in the Lords Supper, 1. Cor. 10.16. The word of
God, Romans 10.17. And if so be, they will add their Purgatory, they must show
some place that says, that God would have the merits of his son applied unto
us by a fiery torment.

2 But who will believe that the benefits of Jesus Christ are applied unto us
by a mean, that is opposite to this benefit? Does any apply a medicine by
poison? Or the light of the Sun by putting out the eyes? How then do they
apply unto us the benefits of Christ, which is the remission and cancelling of
our debts, in forcing us to make payment? Will they have a pardon to be applied
unto us by our punishment? Or will they have the merit of Christ, which is the
supreme testimony of Gods mercy, to be applied unto us by the execution of his
justice? Christ has suffered torments to deliver us from torment, but (these
men tell us) the application of the fruit of this deliverance consists in our
torments: this impiety is basely absurd.

3 Moreover the means whereby to lay hold on this grace must be active, and
apprehensiue of Jesus Christ, not a passion, or torment, as these our Masters
will have it, who will perforce be fried in Purgatory, and not be so much
beholding unto God.

4 Lastly, the means of applying or apprehending a thing, must differ from the
thing applied or apprehended: no man applies one plaster, or medicine by
another: nor consequently the satisfaction of Christ by another satisfaction.

This is also a plaster without salve, and that which Coeffeteau says, Fol.
71. page 1.
astonisheth the simple people, that in the fire of Purgatory, souls are
purged by that power which the blood of Christ has imprinted in it. His
meaning is, that the blood of Christ gives power to the fire of Purgatory to
satisfy Gods justice, and to purge our sins. This he only says, not
proving it by Scripture, and it is against common reason: for the blood of
Christ does not give power to any thing in the world to pay a debt, that is
paid already, and to satisfy for that, for which himself has made full
satisfaction. God exacteth not two payments for one debt, especially when the
first payment (made by Christ) is more then sufficient.

But he is mightily ouer-seene in mixing fire and torment with the graces of
God, turning in the midst of this fire, the blood of the eternal son of
God. For if it be Gods mercy, to enable any one to satisfy his justice by
suffering of torments: Thence shall it follow, that they that suffer most,
receive most mercy from God, and that the Devils are his favorites, from whom
he draws a full satisfaction.

Then al these reasons which he proposes without Scripture, are but matches
without brimstone, that cannot kindle this imaginary sire, that has been
purposely invented for lucre. The Bishop of Rome having built this burning
prison, that himself might be the Iaylor, and let out souls by his
Indulgences, and merchandise of Masses, which are as profitable to the Priests,
as unprofitable to the dead: which does clearly discover both abuse, and
tyranny. For if the Pope be able, either by power of Jurisdiction, or by way of
Suffrage (as they term it) to bring souls out of Purgatory; why does he
deliver no more thence? Why does he leave so many thousand souls to lie down
in this sire, being able to set them free? But that he heedes not: for should
he bring out the souls that have burned there for many ages, an infinite
number of Masses, and other gainful services would fail, and every one would
say, the Pope will presently deliver me; and therefore I need not beggar my
children to erect Masses after I am dead.

The opinion of the ancient Fathers, touching prayer for the dead, and
Purgatory.
Mr. Coeffeteau's opinion is, that whosoever prays for the dead, presupposes
a Purgatory; wherein he is deceived. For many have prayed, and do pray for
the dead, that believe no Purgatory: first, the Author of the second book of
Maccabees, cap. 12. ver. 43. speaks of Judas Maccabeus his prayer for the
dead: but he says, that he did it, having reference unto the resurrection,
Doing herein (says he) justly, and religiously to think of the resurrection.
Then Judas prayed not, that they might go out of Purgatory, but that they
might rise again unto salvation: secondly, and indeed, the Greek Church that
before the sack of Constantinople was greater then the Church of Rome, does
unto this day pray for the dead, and yet deny a Purgatory: thirdly, S. Austen
wrote a whole book of care to be taken for the dead, but in the whole book
you shall not find one word of Purgatory: fourthly, Epiphanius accuses
Aerius of heresy, for refusing prayer for the dead, and refelleth him by all
the reasons that he is able: yet makes no mention of Purgatory. Certainly it
is a place, whereof no speech was made for a long season: fifthly, Dionysius
Areopagita lib. de Hierarchia Ecclesiastica, reasoning of the vtility of prayer
for the dead, does not only make no mention of Purgatory (and yet the place
was proper for it) but also continually presumes, that they who are prayed
for, are in happiness, and that they are set forth for example of such as are
alive, and the subject of charitable actions: sixthly, S. Cyprian, Lib. 5.
Epist. 4 and Lib. 3. Epist. 6. speaks of offerings and prayers for holy
Martyrs, and Saints departed, that yet were not believed by any to be tormented
in the fire of Purgatory. For it was the manner of the ancient Church to pray
for the Patriarchs, See the Constitutions of Clement, lib 8. cap. 18.
Offerimus pro is qui tibi placuerunt a seculo pro sanctis Patriarchis,
Prophetis, etc.
Prophets and Apostles; of whose happy estate it were impiety to make any
question: seventhly, Chrysostom, Homil. 37. in Matthew. says, that they called
the Pr ests to pray for the dead: and yet there he says, that the party for
whom they pray, is arrived in the haven, and that to be vexed for him, is to
desire to draw him out of the haven into the storm again. A place which our
adversaries have falsified, having translated (...), fields of flowers; and so
have sent souls into fields of flowers, in stead of sending them into the
harbor: eighthly, S. Auston in the thirteenth chapter of his ninth book of
Confessions, prays for his mother Monica, Damascen says the same of
Falcouilla, a Hea^hen woman delivered out of hell by the prayers of the first
Martyr
and yet he says, that he believes, that all his peritions are already
granted, to wit, that she is out of pain, and that God has forgiven all her
debts. Of Purgatory he speaks not a word: ninthly, Damascen in his Sermon of
the dead: and after him Tho. Aquinas, Durandus, and Richardus, Thom. in 4.
Did. 45. quaest. 2.
do testify that the soul of Traian a heathen Emperor was delivered our of
hell by the prayers of Pope Gregory. Gabriel Biel holds the same, in the
fifty six Lecture upon the Canon of the Mass, and Ciacconus has particularly
written an Apology for this Story: This Pope then prayed not for Traians soul,
to the end he might bring him out of Purgatory.

10 In the Mass there are among many new patches some ancient clauses; and
among others the Memento for the dead: of which these words are a part: The
Reader shall note, that in this place where the two letters N N are, the Priest
does softly name some persons deceased, for whom their parents have paid.
Memento Domine famulorum famularumque tuarum N N. qui nos praecesserunt cum
signo fidei and dormiunt in somno pacis. That is, Remember Lord thy servants
which have gone before us with the sign of faith, and do sleep in the rest
of peace. The words are very remarkable, clearly euidencing that when these
prayers were made, Purgatory was not believed; but it was believed that the
souls did sleep in a peaceable rest, waiting for the resurrection, and that
in this sleep they received some joyful refreshing by their prayers that were
alive.

11 But above all, have I often wondered at the form of the prayer ordinarily
used for the dead: for it makes no words of Purgatory; but only desires of
God, that the souls of the dead may be delivered from everlasting death, and
from the last judgment. Libera Domine de morte aeterna in die illa tremenda.
Quando caeli mouendi sunt and terra. Cum veneris iudicare saeculum per ignem
Tremens factus sum, etc.
Observe this whole prayer, Deliver O Lord from eternal death in that
dreadful day, when the heavens and the earth shall be moved, when thou shall
come to judge the world by fire: I fear and tremble, when the trial, and
wrath to come shall be at hand; this day of wrath, of calamity and misery, this
great and wonderful bitter day. And note, that this prayer, wherein the soul
of the departed is brought in, apprehending that it shall be sent to Hell at
the day of judgment, is said also for the soul of the Pope, Lib. 1. Sacrarum
Cerem. Sect. 15. cap. 1.
in the solemnization of his obsequies, by which it appears, that there is
some fear, that he may be in hell; but of Purgatory there is nothing
mentioned, no more then in all the public prayers of the Church of Rome for
the dead: for they only crave deliverance from eternal death: and to rise in
glory; as in this, Absolve quaesumus Domine animam famuli tui N. ab omni
vinculo delictorum vt in resurrectionis gloria inter sanctos and electos tuos
resuscilatus respiret.
I beseech thee O Lord to loose the soul of thy servant from the bond of all
his sins, that being raised up among the Saints I may rejoice, and be lifted
up in the glory of the resurrection, which is the prayer for the dead in the
second book of Machabees, made only for the resurrection.

12 What will we have more? let our adversaries be judges in this cause: do
not the Priests oftentimes take money for saying Masses, and service for young
children, dying soon after Baptism, which yet they believe not to be either
in hell, or in Purgatory? do they this through ignorance, or auari^^? for want
of science, or of conscience? for by the^^ own rules, the prayers made for
children are to no purpose, forasmuch as they are in Paradise. By these many
examples it appears that many do pray for the dead without believing purgatory:
and that Coeff. by admitting no prayer for the dead, but only to draw men out
of purgatory, conde^neth not only the ancient Church, but also the Romish and
the second book of Macchabees, which himself does rank among the sacred
canonical books.

This shall more evidently appear unto us, when we shall have learned what was
the opinion of the Fathers, touching the condition of the dead, and to what end
they prayed for them.

The common opinion of the most part of the Fathers is, that the souls of the
faithful after they are gone out of the body, do not yet enjoy heavenly
beatitude: but either they remain in the earthly Paradise, as Irenaeus
teaches in his fifth book, About the end of the book.
and Origin in his second book de principijs: else they lie in hell, or in
some hidden receptacles until the day of the general resurrection, before
which they shall not see God. And although sometimes they be forced through the
truth, to say that the dead after the departure of the soul from the body do
enter into heavenly felicity yet for the most part they are carried away with
the current of the common opinion.

Constituimus omnem animam apud inferos sequestrari in diem Domini. Quae infra
terram iacent neque ipsa sunt digestis and ordinatis potestatibus vacua. Locus
enim est quo piorum animae and impiorum ducuntur, etc. Omnes in vna communique
custodia detinentur donec tempus adueniat quo maximus iudex meritorum faciat
examen.
Tertullian, chap. 55. of his book of the soul: We hold for certain that
every soul is sequestered into hell until the day of the Lord. He says the
same more at large in his fourth book against Marcio^^, c. 34.

Nouatian in the first chapter of his book of the Trinity: those things which
are under the earth are not without their powers and well digested orders, for
it is the place whither the souls of the faithful as well as of the wicked
are led, as feeling already the fore-apprehensions of the judgment to come.

Lactantius in his seventh book, c. 21. let no man think that the souls are
judged immediately after death, for they are all detained in one common prison
until the time come that the great Judge bring them to an examination of what
they have deserved.

Victorin? the Martyr says, upon Apo. 6. that S. John saw under the Altar the
souls of the Martyrs and them that were slain: expounding these words under
the Altar, Sub ara id est subterra.
that is to say, under the earth. He then places the souls of Saints and
Martyrs under the earth.

Haec humanae lex necessitatis est, vt sepultis corporibus animae ad inferos
descendant. Quam descensionem Dominus ad consummationem very hominis non
recusauit
S. Hilarie upon the Psalm. 138. It is the law of necessity whereunto men are
subject, that the souls should descend unto hell after that the bodies are
buried, which descent Jesus Christ himself did not refuse, to show him self a
complete man. He does not say Haec lex fuit, but Haec lex est, to the end that
a man should not say that he speaks of the souls of the old testament. He
further says, that it is an humane necessity which Jesus Christ did undergo
to show himself to have bin truly man to the end that none should be exempted
therefrom. He says the same upon the second Psalm.

Chrysostom upon Matthew, Hom. 32. speaks thus to those who prayed and wept
over the dead. I know that thou will answer that it is to the end that the
deceased may find rest, and the Judge favorable, and thou think that thou
ought to weep for these things: but do thou not see how thou art his
hindrance? seeing that thou beleeuest that he is retired into the haven, and
yet thou raisest great surges against him. Read also Hom. the 39. upon the 1
Cor and the 28. upon the Epistle to the Hebrews.

S. Augustine in some places puts the souls of the faithful immediately
after death in heavenly bliss; but most commonly being carried away by the
common opinion of his time, he deferreth their entry into heaven until the
resurrection, and lodges them in certain receptacles that are hid and shut up
until the last day, Upon the Psalm. 36. he says, that the soul departed from
the body, shall not be in the kingdom of heaven, but with Lazarus in Abraham's
bosom: then he adds: Post vitam banc paruam nondum eric vbi erunt sancti
quib. dicetur venite benedicti. Nondum ibis eris, Quis nescit? Tempus quod
inter hominis mortem and vltimam resurrectionem interpositum est animas abditis
receptaculis continet, etc.
after this short life thou shall not presently be in that place where the
Saints are, to whom it shall be said, Come ye blessed, etc. Thou shall not
yet be there, who knows not this?

In his manual to Laurentius, chap. 108. The time which is between death and
the last resurrection, retains the souls in certain secret receptacles
according as each man shall be worthy of rest or affliction: such like things
he utters in his 9. book of Confessions, cap. 3. and in the 12. of the
City of God, chap. 9. and in his third Epistle to Fortunatian.

Euthymius upon Luke 16. says, that the narration of Lazarus is a parable, by
which is designed unto us what shall be done in the last judgment: and upon
chap. 23. he says, that none of the righteous has yet received the promises:
where also John Hentenius a Monk of the order of S. Jerome, has noted in the
margent that Euthymius being a greek follows the error of the greeks.

Likewise Theophilact imitater of Chrysostom upon Hebrews the 11. The Saints
have obtained nothing of the heavenly promises.

Bernard himself was tainted with this error: for in his third Sermon of all
Saints, he makes three lodges of the souls. Primum in tabernaculis, Secundum
in atrijs, Tertium in Coelis. The first in Tabernacles, meaning the body. The
second in halles or antichambers. The third in heaven. He calls these
receptacles by the name of Halles.

We have also alleged the text of the Mass which says, the souls for
which we pray, do quietly sleep out the time.

They who omit Pope Ioane, do reckon this John for the 22.
Which is that which moved Pope John 23. to maintain, that the souls shall
not see God before the day of Judgment, as Gerson witnesses, Sermon. de Pasch.
and Johannes Villanus in the 10. book of his Story. And Erasmus in his Preface
upon the fifth book of Irenaeus. Johannes coactus opera Theologorum Parisiorum
ad palinodiam coram Galliarum Rege Philippo non sine buccina.

This is then one reason why the Fathers allowed prayer for the dead: seeing
that they thought that their souls were either in hell, or else did sleep, or
lay in certain receptacles: in a word, that they were yet in suspense, and in
doubt of their salvation, and that in those cells and dortours, they received
some comfort and refreshing by the prayers of the living.

Tertullian has his opinion apart, for he would have men to pray for the dead,
to the end that they might rise the sooner. For he believed that the
resurrection should not be all in one day. And in the last chapter of his book
of the soul: he makes this to be a punishment of the faithful, who have
sinned more then others, that they shall rise later. Modico quoque delicto mora
resurrectionis expensa. And pursuing his opinion he would have the wife to pray
for her deceased husband, and Refrigerium ei adpostulet and in prima
resurrectione consortium: that she pray for his release and refreshing, that
she may rise with him in the first resurrection. In the tenth chapter of his
book of Monogamie.

Another reason why they prayed for the dead, was, that they believed that the
faithful at their departure out of these places of durance, were to be purged
and singed as it were by the fire of the last judgment, some more, some less.
These good Fathers, who were drenched in this error, trembled with an
apprehension of it: calling the fire of the last day which should purge the
souls, the flaming sword placed at the entrance of Paradise.

Iustos cum indi cauerit Deus igni eos examinabit. Tum quorum peccata vel
pondere vel numero proeualuerint perstringentur atque amburentur.
Lactantius, lib. 7. cap. 21. When God shall have judged the just, he will try
them by fire: then they whose sins shall have prenailed, either for weight or
number shall lightly pass through, and feel the fire.

S. Ambrose upon Ps. 36. Igne purgabuntur filij Leui, igne Ezechiel, igne
Daniel. Sed and by etsi per ignem examinabuntur dicent tamen. Transiuimus per
ignem and aquam.
The sons of Leui shall be purged by fire; Ezechiel also and Daniel: and
although they shall be examined and tried by fire yet they shall say, we have
passed both through fire and water. He makes the most holy Saints to pass
through this fire, and speaks in the future tense, they shall be purged, to
the end we should not think that he speaks of a purgation already passed.

And Sermon. 20. upon Psalm. 118. Omnes opor tet transire per flam mas sieve ille
Johannes Euangelista sieve ille sit Petrus etc.
ALL must pass through the flames, were it John the Evangelist, whom our
Savior loved or were it S. Peter, etc. He speaks manifestly of a fire which
yet is not, and which is prepared for all men.

In his book of Widows, he calls the Christian virtues: Aurum quod Iudicij
die nequeat ignis exurere. Gold which the fire shall not be able to wast in the
day of judgment.

S. Hilarie upon Psalm. 118. in the pause Gimel, declaring how many things
besides Baptism, do serve to purge our sins, sets down the holy Ghost
that does sanctify us, Emundatio quae nos Sancti Spiritus sanctificet aduentu:
Iudicij igne nos decoquat.
and the fire of the last judgment, that does refine and purify us. And in
the same place, he makes the Virgin Mary with the rest of the Saints to pass
through this fire of the last judgment, saying: An cum ex omni otioso verbo
rationem simus prae stituri, diem iudicij concupiscimus in quo nobis est inde
fessus ille ignis obeundus, inquo subeund a sunt grauia illa expiandae a
peccatis animae supplicia? St in iudicij seueritatem capax illa Dei vir go
ventura est, desiderare quis aude bit a Deo iudecari?
Seeing that we shall give an account of cuery idle word, do we desire the
day of judgment, in which we shall paesse through that indefatigable fire, and
in which we shall undergo those grievous torments by which the souls are to
be hallowed and cleansed from their sins? And a little after: If that holy
Virgin her self be to suffer the severity of that judgment, who will dare
desire to be judged of God? And upon Matthew 2. To them that are Baptized by the
holy Ghost, there yet remains that they be made perfect by the fire of the
last judgment.

S. Austine de Ciuit. Dei lib. 20. cap. 25. exempteth some souls from this
fire. By this which has bin spoken, it seems evidently to appear, that in
that judgment, Ex his quae dicta sunt videtur enidentius apparere in illo
iudicio quasdam quorundam poenas purgatorias suturas.
some shall be punished by these Purgatory pains. Now it appears both by
the drift of the place, and by the title of the Chapter, that he speaks of
the day of the last judgment. So in the 16 book, chap. 24. This fire (which
appeared to Abraham) signifies the day of judgment, which shall discern what
earnall men are to be saved by the fire, Significatur isto igne dies iudicij
dirimens carnales per ignem jalhandos, and igne damuandus.
and who to be condemned in the fire. But upon the. 1. Cor. 3. he speaks of
this fire of Purgatory doubtfully saying, that it is a thing hidden, and of
which a man may well doubt. And lib. 21. cap. 16. he says, Non redarguo, quia
for sitan verum est. I do not gainesay it, for peradventure the thing may be
true.

Origin was the inuentor of this fire; a man condemned by other of the Fathers,
for that he did not acknowledge Hell nor eternal fire; and holds that the
devils and wicked men shall after a time of Purgation be finally saved. But in
this he has been followed, that he holds that the purgation of souls
begins at the day of the resurrection, and is done by the fire of the last
day of judgment.

That is the Purgatory of the Fathers, of which S. Jerome speaks in the last
lines of his Commentary upon Esaias, and upon the 46. of Ezechiel; and Gregory
Nyssenus in his Oration of them that are fallen asleep.

For so far were they from believing that the souls separated from the body,
were purged by the fire, before the day of judgment, that even a good many of
them have thought, that the soul sequestered from the body could not suffer any
harm; Neque pati quicquam potest anima sola sine stabili materia id est carne.
And in his book, de Testimonio animae cap. 4.
neither be tormented without the body. So Tertullian in Apologet. cap. 48. The
soul alone cannot suffer any thing without solid matter, that is without
flesh. And this is the reason why he thinks the resurrection necessary, to
the end that the soul may be tormented; saying indeed that the punishment of
the soul without the body should be unjust, seeing that they have sinned
together. Gregory Nissen Orat. 3. of the resurrection of Christ, says in like
manner: Animam vero per se separatim ignis nunquam attigerit, nec tenebrae
quidem ei molestoe fuerint vt pote quae oculis caret.
The fire can never touch the soul, separated from the body, neither can the
darkness be troublesome unto it, forasmuch as it has no eyes. -- Atque
idcirco consentaneis his considerationibus and ratiocinationibus compellimur ad
comprobandam resurrectionem mortuorum.
-- And for these forcible reasons we are induced to embrace the resurrection
of the dead.

It would be infinite here to produce (that which we have elsewhere done) the
authorities of the Fathers, who affirm that there are but two places for the
souls, to wit, Heaven for the damned, and Paradise or a place of rest for the
Believers: and that the souls immediately after their departure out of the
body, go into a place of rest, or into celestial glory. Read above the rest
the Sermon of S. Cyprian, de mortalitate. And his Treatise against Demetrius;
the book of S. Ambrose, de bono mortis. The Oration of Gregory Nyssenus, Of
the that sleep. Epiphanius in his second book of Heresies, Heresy 39. which
is of the Cathari or Nouatians. S. Austen in his fifth Hypognosticke. In his
fourteen and eighteenth Sermon, de verbis Apostoli, and in diverse other
places: This place of Austin shall suffice for all; in his book of the vanity
of the world, Cum anima a corpore euellitur statim aut in Paradiso pro meritis
bonis collecatur, aut certe pro peccatis in inferni Tartara praecipitatur. Nec
est vllus vlli medius locus vt possit esse nisi cu^ diabolo, qui non est cum
Christo
chap. 1. Know that when the soul is separated from the body, it is in an
Instant placed in Paradise for its good works, or cast into the pit of hell for
its sins. A place which has seemed to our adversaries, so strong, that in
their last Edition printed at Paris, they have put these words in the Margent,
Vbi nunc Purgatorium? What is now become of Purgatory? And as touching that
point, that there are but two places, these be his words in his book of
sins, and the remission of them, chapt. 28. There is no middle place for any
man, insomuch that he that is not with Christ, can be no where else but with
the devil. Tertium penitus ignoramus, immo nec esse in scripturis sanctis
inuenimus.
And in his second Hypognosticke: we are altogether ignorant of any third
place, neither do we find any at all in the holy Scriptures. Let not any man
say, that he speaks only of places eternal that are to continue for ever:
for he says in express words, penitus, not at all; not excepting any thing.
And you shall not find that S. Austin, either in this place or in any other,
makes this Distinction of places eternal and temporal for the souls; seeing
that S. Austin in those places does of purpose dispute against the Limbus
puerorum, and relecting all temporary places, he acknowledges no other third
place.

Out of all that hitherto has been spoken, I draw these two conclusions: 1.
The one is, that the Fathers being so unresolved in this point, and so tainted
with erroneous opinions, which our adversaries reject as well as we; they are
no way fit to be Judges to decide this matter: 2. The other is, that the
prayers which they make for the dead, are condemned by the Church of Rome,
seeing that it receives no other prayer for the dead, but that which is made
to ease the souls in Purgatory: and by consequent also does reject the
prayers of the Ancients, for the resurrection, and refreshing of the souls
that lie and sleep in their supposed receptacles: As also the prayers used in
the ancient Church, for the Saints and Martyrs. Whence the Reader may inform
his judgment with what care and circumspection the Fathers ought to be read,
seeing it is so hard a matter to understand their terms, and to find out
their meaning. But we now live in an admirable age, in which all the world is
become learned without study, and in which they who scarcely understand their
Pater noster, speak of the Fathers both Greek and Latin, with an incredible
assurance. Among these, such men as Coeffeteau is, do easily bear sway, and
do Lesson and Lecture them at large. See here a notable proof hereof, which we
have not hitherto touched.

Coeffeteau alleges this passage out of S. Austin, Pol. 71. page 2.
de Ciuit. Dei, lib. 21. cap. 16. Let no man think that there are any
Purgatory pains, but such as be before the last and fearful judgment.
These words seem very plain, and such as may easily make an ignorant man to
rest upon them: but the iugling cousenage is manifest; for if he had but
turned the leaf, he should have found that S. Austen speaks of such
purgatory and expiatory pains as a man suffers in this life, and before his
death: We confess (says he) that in this mortal life there be certain
purging pains, Nos vero etiam in hac quidem morrali vita esse quasdam poenas
purgatorias cimfitemur, non ijs qui affliguntur quorum vita non inde fit
melior, vel polus inde fit peior: sed illis sunt purgatoriae qui illis coerciti
corriguntur.
but they are purgative only to those who being chastised and exercised by
them, they become bettered and amended thereby. And cap. 26. The FIRE OF
AFFLICTION shall burn away such delights, and earthly loves, as are not
condemnable, by reason of the bond of Matrimony. To which fire also belong the
loss of friends and kinsfolk, and all other calamities which take away these
things from us. Yea the very next lines before this place cyted by Coeffeteau
show, that he speaks of a clensing, done in the life present, for he says,
He that desires to escape the everlasting pains, let him not only be
baptized, but also let him be justified, that so by forsaking the devil, he
may betake himself to Christ's side. Hereunto he will have certain purging
pains to be added, without waiting for the day of judgment. So likewise S.
Cyprian, lib. 4. Epist. 2. calls that affliction of an offender, whom the
Church does for a long time detain among the Penitents, a purging fire. But
above all S. Austens irresolution in this matter, is very considerable, who
sometimes, as in the sixteenth chapter before alleged, says, that besides
the Purgatory-paines of this life, there are others after this life: sometimes,
as chapt. 26. he says, that he doubts whether it be so or no, and it may be
that it is true. In many other places he says plainly, that there is none at
all; and that the souls are in an instant transported into heaven.

ARTICLE XXII. Of Anarchy, and of the degrees of superiority in the Church.
AFter the refutation of so many abuses, the King of great Britain sets
down for the shutting up of his confession the Article of the Monarchy of the
Church, and of the primacy of the Pope, the which his Majesty affirms to be
the chief of all other Controversies, and indeed upon just cause, for all
other errors serve to uphold this: superstition helps to support tyranny.
Other points there are, but this is that for which we dispute. Whosoever shall
examine al our Controversies, with a judgment not forestalled, nor
pre-occupied, shall find that every error is a pillar of the Popes Empire,
and a prop of his Dominion, and that the Articles of Faith have been skilfully
bended and fitted to the advantage of his Holiness.

To this may be also added, that if the Pope cannot err in the decision of
doubts: the case is then clear, without further difficulty. Neither shall it
be needful hereafter to assemble Councels, nor to search into Scriptures, but
only to consult this Papal Oracle, and so to content our selves with what it
determines.

It is therefore upon just cause, that his Majesty says this point is the
principal Controversy, and therefore insisteth upon it, more then upon any
other, and therein displayeth the admirable ability of his wit, of which I
confess, I am rather a learner then a defender, having first learned to speak
of him, before I did speak for him.

But before he enters into the matter, he says, that to have Bishops in the
Church, is an Apostolic Institution, and appointed by God, and says, that he
has always abhorred Anarchie: and that in heaven the blessed spirits are
distinguished by diverse degrees, and that the very devils themselves, are
digested and parted into Legions, and have their Princes; that by the same
reason, no humane society can subsist without this order, and difference in
degrees: and thereupon complayneth of certain turbulent persons that have
persecuted him, even from his mothers womb, pursuing his death before he
entered into life.

But who these persons were, that with so hasty murder would not have expected
his birth, it is best known unto his Majesty: and it is not to be doubted,
but they have been punished according to the laws. And for such any
punishment is too little. But it is true that there is nothing so turbulent as
an Anarchy, in which there is no Master, because every one is such a one, where
every one by being too free becomes a slave: for in a State it is better to
be under an ill Master, then under none at all; and Tyranny is more tolerable
then such a freedom which under the title of liberty, introduces
licentiousness, and this licentiousness brings in extreme servitude. So is
it in Families and Commonwealths, in Armies, yea even amongst the Angels
themselves; yea if we descend to Bees, and Cranes, we see not these meaner
creatures without a natural policy, and a kind of superiority.

The Church is no way exempt from this order in which God has established
Pastors and Bishops, and above them Assemblies, which the ancient Church
called Synodes and Councels; of which it is likewise necessary, that some one
should be President to direct and order the businesses.

But if one demand, what differences of degrees these should be, or whether
one man should have superiority over one only flock, or over many? It is
another question, and tends nothing to the kings purpose, which is only to
withstand the Monarchy of one single man over the universal Church. For
admitting it should be yielded, that in every Country and Province, there
ought to be one sovereign Prelate: It would not follow thereupon, that
therefore there must be one Monarch over all Prelates, or one head of the
Universal Church, no more then if a man by proouing that a Monarchy is the
most exact form of Government, should by that conclude, that therefore there
must be one Monarch over the whole world. No, there are no shoulders of
strength enough to bear so great a head: the providence of no one man can
stretch or extend it self so far, or divide it self into so many pieces:
Such Countries as are placed under an other Hemisphere, and fall under the
tyranny of Lieftenants and officers, over whose government a careful eye
could not be had. The same inconvenience or rather much greater would be in the
Church: for besides this difficulty, pride is much more pernicious in Divine,
then in humane things. And it would be very hard that any man should climb so
high, but that his head would be giddy: for if pride get in amongst beggars,
whom we see quarrel and contest, whilst whilst they sit ridding themselves of
vermin, how much more would it fasten it self to such a height of glory,
which inuesteth a weak man, and many times a vicious, with the title of the
head of the Church, which title the Scripture gives not but to the only Son
of God.

Now the end and scope of the government of the Church, and of Ecclesiastical
Discipline, is the peace of the Church, the reformation of manners,
suppressions of scandals, and the conservation of the purity of doctrine: to
which end I conceive we may attain by different ways. And he should be rash,
that would tie all other Churches to that exterior Ecclesiastical policy,
which is practiced in his own Country; or by a peevish presumption prescribe
his particular example, for an universal rule. Far is it from the charitable
opinion of the King of England, who toward the end of his book declares, that
he no way intends to condemn those Churches, which hold a differing form of
government, since in the grounds, and in all the points of doctrine, we fully
agree with the English Churches, which are our brethren in our Lord Jesus,
members of the same body, sensible of our common greefes, and whose quarrel we
esteem to be our own, as persons tending to the self same end, and by the
self same way, though clothed perhaps in colors differing. For the suspicion
of Mr. Coeffeteau, is ill grounded, when upon the protestation which the King
of great Britain makes, that he disliketh the Puritanes, he infers, that
his confession of faith, published in Scotland, was a supposed confession, made
by the Scottish Ministers, in which they make him speak like a Puritan; for
that confession agrees in substance with that which the same King inserteth
into his book: the defense whereof we undertake. But if in Coeffeteau his
opinion, to pray to God only, in the name of Jesus Christ, to deny the fire
of Purgatory, to reject the Popes Indulgences, to pray in a known tongue, and
to abstain from Idolatry; if this be to be a Puritan, there is none of us
that had not rather be a Puritan with the Apostles, then be impure with the
Bishop of Rome. So that his Majesty by the same wisdom, by which he prudently
governs his Kingdoms, can well discern in this matter of Ecclesiastical
government, betwixt such of his subjects, as oppose themselves merely for
contradiction, and whose heat is accompanied with contempts: from such who
though they differ somewhat in opinion, yet walk in obedience and with a good
conscience, desiring nothing more then the establishment of his Throne, and are
ready to lay down their lives for his service: such are the faithful
Ministers, who carefully employ themselves to root out those tares which Satan
sows whilst we sleep, and to pull up Popery out of men's hearts; the increase
whereof being nourished by our petty discords, cannot choose but be a weakening
to the greatness of Kings, and the diminution of their Empire: for it is
certain, unto himself in England, so many subjects his Majesty does gain
unto his Crown, seeing that according to the rules of Popery, a King is an
usurper, if he be not approved by the Pope, and that his subjects are bound to
rebel, as soon as the lightnings of the Vatican have been cast forth upon any
sovereign Prince. And seeing that also the Cardinal Bellarmine dares to
affirm, and to maintain, that England is part of the Popes Demaines, and that
the King is Feudatory and Vassal to the Bishop of Rome. It is to be presumed
that his Majesty has sent him his picture, drawn out of the Apocalips, to pay
him his Arrearages, and to yield homage to his Lord in chief.

These things considered, the best means to be revenged of so great an injury,
is to give order, that the people be carefully instructed, and that the
Country Churches be not unprovided of faithful Pastors, who may watch
carefully over their Flocks, and may expound plainly the benefits of Jesus
Christ, and the doctrine of the Gospel: In presence of which, Popery does
vanish and fall down, as DAGON fell before the Arc of the Covenant.

ARTICLE XXIII. Of the Popes Supremacy.
ANd for his temporal Principality over the Signory of Rome, The KINGS
Confession.
I do not quarrel it neither, let him in God his Name be Primus Episcopus
inter omnes Episcopos, and Princeps Episcoporum, so it be no otherwise but as
Peter was Princeps Apostolorum. But as I well allow of the Hierarchy of the
Church for distinction of Orders (for so I understand it) so I utterly deny
that there is an earthly Monarch thereof, whose word must be a Law, and who
cannot err in his Sentence, by an infallibility of Spirit. Because earthly
Kingdoms must have earthly Monarchs: it does not follow, that the Church
should have a visible Monarch too: for the world has not One earthly temporal
Monarch. Christ is his Churches Monarch, and the holy Ghost his Deputy: Reges
gentium dominantur eorum, vos autem non sic. Luke 22.25.
Christ did not promise before his ascension to leave Peter with them to direct
and instruct them in all things, but he promised to send the holy Ghost unto
them for that end. John 14.26.


And as for these two before cyted places, whereby Bellarmine makes the Pope
to triumph over Kings, Matthew. 18.18.
I mean pasce oues, and Tibi dabo claues: the Cardinal knows well enough,
that the same words of Tibi dabo, are in another place spoken by Christ in the
plural number. And he likewise knows what reason the Ancients do give, why
Christ bade Peter pascere oues: and also what a cloud of witnesses there is,
both of Ancients, and even of late Popish writers, yea diverse Cardinals, that
do all agree, that both these speeches used to Peter, were meant to all the
Apostles represented in his person: Otherwise how could Paul di^ect the Church
of Corinth, 1. Cor. 5.4.
to excommunicate the incestuous person cu spiritum suo, whereas he should then
have said, cumspiritu Petri? And how could all the Apostles have otherwise used
all their censures, only in Christ's name, and never a word of his Vicar? Peter
(we read) did in all the Apostles meetings sit amongst them as one of their
number: And when chosen men were sent to Antiochia from that great Apostolic
Council at Jerusalem, ( Acts 15.) The text says, Act. 15.22, 23.
It seemed good to the Apostles and Elders, with the whole Church, to send
chosen men; but no mention made of the Head thereof; and so in their Letters no
mention is made of Peter, but only of the Apostles, Elders and Brethren. And
it is a wonder, why Paul rebukes the Church of Corinth for making exceptions
of persons, because some followed. Paul, some Apollos, some Cephas, if Peter
was their visible Head! 1. Cor. 1.12.
for then those that followed not Peter or Cephas, renounced the Catholic
faith. But it appears well that Paul knew little of our new doctrine, Galat.
2.
since he handles Peter so rudely, as he not only compares, but prefers
himself unto him. But our Cardinal proves Peter's superiority, Gal. 1.18.
by Paul's going to visit him. Indeed Paul says, he went to Jerusalem to
visit Peter, and confer with him: but he should have added, and to kiss his
feet.

To conclude then, The truth is that Peter was both in age, and in the time of
Christ's calling him, one of the first of the Apostles: in order the principal
of the first twelve, and one of the three whom Christ for order sake preferred
to all the rest. And no further did the Bishop of Rome claim for three
hundredth years after Christ: subject they were to the general Councels, and
even but of late did the Council of Constance depose three Popes, and set up
the fourth, And until Phocas days (that murdered his master) were they
subject to Emperors. But how they are now come to be Christ's Vicars, nay, Gods
on earth, triple crowned, Kings of Heaven, earth and hell, Judges of all the
world, and none to judge them; Heads of the faith, Absolute deciders of all
Controversies by the infallibility of their spirit, having all power both
Spiritual and Temporal in their hands; the high Bishops, Monarchs of the
whole earth, Superiors to all Emperors and Kings; yea, Supreme Vice-gods,
who whether they will or not, cannot err: how they are now become (I say) to
that top of greatness, I know not: but sure I am, We that are Kings have
greatest need to look unto it. As for me, Paul and Peter I know, but these
men I know not: And yet to doubt of this, is to deny the Catholic faith,
Nay, the world it self must be turned vpside down, and the order of Nature
inuerted (making the left hand to have the place before the right, Bellar. de
Romans Pont. lib. 1. c. 17.
and the last named to be the first in honor) that this primacy may be
maintained.

Thus have I now made a free Confession of my Faith: And (J hope) I have fully
cleared my self from being an Apostate, and as far from being an Heretic,
as one may be that believes the Scriptures, and the three Creedes, and
acknowledges the four first general Councels. If J be loath to believe too
much, especially of Novelties, men of greater knowledge may well pity my
weakness; but J am sure none will condemn me for an heretic, save such as
make the Pope their God, and think him such a speaking Scripture, as they can
define heresy no otherwise, but to be whatsoever Opinion is maintained against
the Popes definition of faith. And I will sincerely promise that when ever any
point of the Religion I profess, shall be proved to be new, and not Ancient,
Catholic, and Apostolic (I mean for matter of Faith) I will as soon
renounce it: closing up this head with the maxim of Vincentius Lirinensis,
Libello aduersus haereses.
that I will never refuse to embrace any opinion in Divinity necessary to
salvation, which the whole Catholic Church with an vnanim consent, have
constantly taught and believed even from the Apostles days, for the space of
many ages thereafter without interruption:

This discourse being nothing else, Fol. 74.
but a rich piece of tyssue wrought full of Demonstrations, and the very
language of truth in the mouth of a King; deserved an exact answer. But M.
Coeffeteau not daring to confront the King to his face, does treacherously
assail ^im side-wise: for in stead of satisfying his proofs drawn out of
holy Scripture, he entrencheth himself in his hold of custom, and produces
some testimonies of men.

He says then that Basil writing to Athanasius advises him to advertise the
Church of Rome of certain schisms that happened in his country, Epist. 32.
to the end that he by interposing his authority might send learned and able
men to extinguish those divisions which troubled the East. But withal he should
have added, (...).
that Basil does not entreat him to show forth his power in punishing the
obstinate and refractarie, but only (...), to reprehend and admonish the
froward men of our country. For as touching the title of Head of the Church,
S. Basil in the same Epistle does so qualify not the Bishop of Rome, but
Athanasius Patriarcke of Alexandria, in these words: (...)
we thought that we could not better give entrance to our affairs, then by
having recourse to your perfection, as to him who is the universal Head, and
by winning you to be counselor and conductour of our Actions. Now he thus
speaks, not because Alexandria was the first Sea, but because there was not
then any Bishop, who did not willingly give precedence to Athanasius because of
his virtue. As for the priority of the Bishops-sea, it appears by his 50.
Epistle that S. Basil thought it due to Antioch, when he exhorts Athanasius
to adioyne himself to Miletius, Patriarcke of Antioch, of whom he says,
(...) that it is he, who as we may so say, sits as ruler over the whole
Church. And says also, He so calls the Bishop of Rome.
that the Bishops of the West give consent thereunto: it is a thing
remarke-able above the rest, that S. Basil, purposing to address himself to
the Bishop of Rome, that he should lend his help to pacify some differences
stirred up in Asia confesses in one of his Epistles, that men are deceived to
hope for any succor from thence, and taking offense at his pride, he
accounts all such deputations idle, and to no purpose. For in his 10. Epistle
to Gregory Nazianzen, after he had advised him to take heed that he used no
requests or intreatyes toward the Bishop of Rome, (...).
for fear lest he wax proud thereupon, he adds these words; If the wrath
of God continue, what help shall we receive from these Westerlings, who
neither know the truth, neither can they endure to be taught it.

Coeffeteau subioyneth, that S. Chrysostom, being banished and driven from
his Bishoppricke, he had recourse to Pope Innocent, and implored the assistance
of his authority. But he should also have added, that Innocent taking the
defense of Chrysostom in hand, wrote two Letters which are found in Sozomen,
lib. 8. cap. 26. The first of which is nothing but a Consolatorie Epistle to
Chrysostom, exhorting him to patience, without promising him any assistance;
which he would doubtless have done, if it had bin in his power to have
re-established him into his charge. The second Letter was written to the people
and Clergy of Constantinople, in which there is no commandment given to
restore Chrysostom to the possession of his charge, but only a complaint of
infringing the Canons of the Church, and an advise to summon a general
Council Sozomen further adds in the 28. chapter, Ioannis hosts apud
Constantinopolim hanc rem quasi in contumeliam eius imperij fieret calumaiati
sunt, and vt illi tanquam transmarini imperij turbator s ablegarentur
eff^cerunt. tum etiam vt ipse Iob^na^s etiam vlte^^us, P^^y^atem scilicet,
exulatum transferretu^ pro. urarunt.
that the Deputies sent by the Pope to solicit Chrysostomes restitution, were
sent back without prevailing any thing, and were further * accused toward the
Emperor Arcadius, as having meddled in this business with contempt of the
Empire, and as troublers of the state of the transmarine Empire. And indeed
were the cause why Chrysostom was sent farther away into banishment. So little
did men then care for the Counsels or aduertisements of the Bishop of Rome. So
also al his intercession was only by way of advise and request, and not by
commandment: neither shall you find that S. Chrysostom or his successors,
did ever demand the Bishop of Romes Letters of Inuestiture, or ever received
the Pall from him.

Our Doctor adds, Lib. 3. cap. 7.
that Julius the first restored Athanasius Patriarch of Alexandria; Paul Bishop
of Constantinople, and many others; because, says Sozomen, that the care of
all things belonged to the Bishop of Rome, by reason of his Sea, he restored
their Churches to each of them. It would be in vain, to expect from this
Doctor, any passages faithfully alleged: the course and order of the story
shows, that they were not restored at all, and that the Eastern Churches
made little account of the Bishop of Rome. For in the lines following it
appears, that the Eastern Bishops did nothing at all, of what Julius wrote
unto them, but returned Letters of mockery, taxing his pride. They spoke
indeed honorably of the Church of Rome, by reason of the greatness of the
City, and because that the Apostles had taught there, but withal they add,
Tamen indignati sunt se posteriores ideo far quod magnitudine Ecclesiae
superarentur, idque cum virtute and viuendi instituto long superiores essent.
That they were moved with indignation, that they should be thought to be of a
lower rank, under a pretense that their Church was not so great; seeing that
if they respected virtue or government of life, they were far before the
Church of Rome. And to the end that the Bishop of Rome should not be doing with
their affairs, they tell him that they intermedled not with his, And that the
Bishops and Priests of the East, their predecessors, did not oppose themselves
to the Bishop of Rome, when he cut off Nouatus from the Church. And further the
same Sozomen, cap. 10. witnesses, that the same Oriental Bishops deposed
Julius Bishop of Rome, with Osius, Maximus, and others. They were indeed
Arrians, and proceeded unjustly against Julius, who defended the truth; but yet
we shall not find that this has been reckoned among the errors of the
Arrians, that they did not acknowled^e the Bishop of Rome to be head of the
Church. They were ignorant of the true nature of Jesus Christ, but they well
knew what was the Ecclesiastical policy, and how far the bounds of the
Bishop of Rome did extend. And if it be found in story, that Julius Bishop of
Rome wrote his Letters, to re-integrate any expulsed Bishops into their
Charges; we find also that Liberius Bishop of Rome, Scribunt literas Faelici
tum Ecclesiae Romanae Antistiti, and Clero eiusdem Ecclesiae, vti Liberium
recipiant and ambo pariter Ecclesiam Apostolicam administrent.
being put from his Bishopric, is sent back with the letters of the Eastern
Bishops, and by their commandment re-established, as Sozomen witnesses lib.
4. cap. 14. And yet this is not taken up for a proof of superiority of the
Eastern Bishops over the Bishops of Rome; but to testify the mutual help
which the Churches lend one to another in their necessities: no more then when
we read in the story of Socrates, l. 7. cap. 33. that Cyrill of Alexandria
deposed Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople, and that Nestorius degraded Cyrill:
as also that John of Antioch, and Cyrill condemn and excommunicate one
another: this is not a proof of Superiority. So S. Hilary Bishop of Poictiers,
in the fragments of his Epistles oftentimes says, Anathema tibi a me Liberi:
and so excommunicateth the Bishop of Rome, without any pretense of Superiority
over him.

As for that which Sozomen says, that the Bishop of Rome had the care of all
Churches by reason of the dignity of his Sea; this is true not only in the
Bishop of Rome, but also of all the Patriarchs. Thus have we heretofore seen
that Basil says, that Athanasius Patriarch of Alexandria had the care of all
Churches, as Basil had of his particular Church, and that the Patriarch of
Antioch was over the whole body of the Church. We have also but even now
produced an example, in which the Bishops of the East, show to have had care of
the West. But this point has need of more clear demonstration.

To fetch the matter then a little higher, we must understand, that from the
first Nicene Council, held Anno 328. the Histories do make manifest, that in
the ancient Church Bishops had precedence each of other, according to the
dignities of their Cities; which precedence was without any Superiority or
Jurisdiction over one another. No more nor less then the Counselors of the
Court, go in rank according as they were admitted, although they be equal
in charge. Or as when Christian Princes, or their Ambassadors meet together
to deliberate of the affairs of Christendom, one has precedencie and place
before another, yet without rule or dominion one over another. So fared it with
the Patriarchall Seas: there was the Bishop of the first seat: the Bishop of
the second, and so in order. The Bishop of the first Sea was the Bishop of
Rome, for the dignity of his City, because it was the seat of the Empire: the
Bishop of the second seat was he of Alexandria, because it was the greatest and
mightiest City of the Empire, next after Rome: then followed Antioch and
lastly, Jerusalem, which had more the name, then the power and authority of a
Patriarch; because it self was subject to the Metropolitan of Cesarea.

Now to prevent, least any under the title of preseance or the first seat,
should presume to challenge and usurp Dominion over his fellows: the third
Council of Carthage, Canon 26. ordains, That the Bishop of the first Sea, Vt
primae sedis Episcopus non appelletur Princeps Sacerdotum aut summus Sace^dos
aut aliquid huiusmodi, sed tantum primae sedis Episcopus.
shall not be called Head or Prince of the Priests, or high Priest and Bishop,
but only Bishop of the first Sea, acknowledging it to be for order sake, and
not for Superiority.

But after that the abode and ordinary residence of the Emperors began to be
in Constantinople, together with the forces and strength of the Empire: the
Bishop of Constantinople did then equal himself with the Bishop of Rome, and
held himself in nothing inferior to him. Whereupon came in the Ordinance of
the Council of Chalcedon, which says, Canon 28. that, The hundred and fifty
Bishops of the Council of Constantinople, well-beloved of God, have given to the
seat of new Rome (which is Constantinople) the same prerogatives with ancient
Rome. Judging it according to reason, that the City honored with the Empire
and the Senate, and which has the same Privileges with ancient Rome, ought
of right to be magnified as much as she in Ecclesiastical matters, being the
next in rank after her. Where you see that the Council puts a priority in
order, with an equality in power: And this priority because Rome had been the
seat of the Empire before Constantinople; whereupon is to be noted, that Leo
Bishop of Rome denies that his deputies consented to that Article, as
appears by the nine and fifty and sixty of his Epistles: but the Council
for all that does not let to go forward; and I think that six hundred and
thirty Bishops (for so many there were at the Council of Chalcedon) are more
to be credited then the Bishop of Rome alone. And that which is more, you shall
find the Canon set down at large in the sixth general Council. Which has
moved the Canonists to falsify this Canon: for in the two and twentieth
Distinction, in the Canon Renouantes, in stead of these words, Etiam in
Ecclesiasticis, they have put non tamen in Ecclesiasticis, which is a manifest
imposture and corruption.

That little pre-eminence then which the Bishop of Rome had, from the time of
the Council of Nice, and a long while after, was only in consideration of the
Nobleness and greatness of the City. For so also the Patriarchs and
Metropolitanes were at the first ordained, according to the dignities of their
Cities, as appears in the Canon Prouinciae, in the ninth Distinction. And
indeed the Archbishop of Rauenna, though it be almost situated at the gates
of Rome, yet would he never yield to acknowledge himself inferior to the
Bishop of Rome, during the time that the Exarch, which was the Emperors
Lieutenant, made his abode in Italy. Which also appears, in that the Popes
Boniface and Celestine, who lived in the time of S. Austen, being desirous to
have drawn to themselves the Appeals of Africa, and to have played their
Masteries out of Italy; they allege nothing to the Council of Africa, where
this matter was debated, not any text of Scripture, nor the power given by
Christ to S. Peter, but only the ordinance of the Council of Nice, of which
they produced certain forged Canons. Which falsehood of theirs being detected
and convinced by confronting it with the Originals brought in place, the Bishop
of Rome had the foil, and lost the cause. And hereof we have the whole
Council for witness, in which Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, and S. Austen
Bishop of Hippo were present; who together with the rest of their fellows,
wrote letters to Celestine, which are inserted into the Council, and which
speak to the Bishop of Rome in this manner: The Fathers have most wisely and
justly provided, that all affairs should be decided and ended in the places
where they arise. Neither will the grace of God be wanting to any place,
through which equity shall prudently and constantly be acknowledged, and
embraced of the Ministers of Christ, seeing also that it is permitted to every
man that receives any greeuance from his delegated Judges, to appeal to a
Provincial, or indeed to a general Council, unless perhaps any man shall
think that God may give ability to some one man to examine things uprightly,
which he will not vouchsafe to a multitude assembled in a Council. Or how can
a Sentence or judgment be of force, that is given beyond the Sea, where
necessary witnesses cannot be present, either by reason of sex, or infirmity of
old age, and a thousand other hindrances? For to tell us, that there ought
Deputies [Legates a Latere] to be sent unto us as coming from your Holiness
side, it is a thing which we do not find to have been ordained by any Synod
of the Fathers; for those Articles which you sent us a while agone by our
fellow and Companion Faustinus, as being of the Council of Nice, we could not
find it so in the true Copies sent unto us by Cyril and Atticus, etc. Forbear
also to send us your Clerks, men ready to serve every great man's turn, or
indeed any that shall ask them; n="*" Nolite concedere ne fumosu^ typhum
seculi in Ecclesia^ Christi v deamur inducere.
least it seem that we go about to bring this worlds smoakie pride and
hautinesse into the Church of Christ, which bears the light of simplicity,
and the brightness of humility before those who desire to see God. After these
checkes given to the Bishop of Rome, they publicly denounce and give him
warning, that he revoke and withdraw his Deputy Faustinus out of Africa;
afterward they salute him, calling him Sir and Brother. Domine frater.
This Epistle is a precious Jewel of Antiquity, and I wonder how so excellent
a piece could escape the hands of these falsifiers and Spongers of the
Fathers. Now they, who read this Lesson to the Bishop of Rome, who already
began to be somewhat tickled with presumption, were Aurelius Bishop of
Carthage, and S. Austen, and all the Bishops of Africa. For which cause
Boniface the second, in an Epistle which is found in the second Tome of the
Councels, says, that Aurelius and his fellows had separated themselves from
the Church of Rome, being waxen proud through the instigation of the Devil.
In the 20. chapter of my Apology for the Supper of the Lord.
An Epistle which witnesses, that S. Austen died excommunicated out of the
Church of Rome, which also we have elsewhere defended against Coeffeteaus
accusations.

Neither was this the first ordinance, by which these Bishops sought to stifle
the growing tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, whereby he labored to draw the
appeals of the causes of Africa to himself; his purpose being, that they who
were condemned in Africa by the Councels, might make their appeal over the
Sea, that is, into Italy: For these same Bishops in another Council assembled
at Mileuitum, in the two and twentieth Canon, say: If they [who are condemned
by the neighbor Bishops] think that they may appeal from their judgment,
Quod si and ab cis prouocandum putauerint non prouocent nisi ad Affricana
Concilia, vel ad Primates prouinciarum suarum, ad Transmarina autem qui
putauerit appellandum a nullo intra Affricam in communione suscipiatur.
let them not appeal any whither else then to the Councels of Africa, or to
the Primates of their Provinces. But whosoever shall appeal beyond the Sea,
let him not be admitted to the Communion, by any in all Africa. These men
feared never a whit, least there might come from Rome a lapse upon their
Benefices, or a deuolution to the Pope: they did not expect from him the
Archbishops Pall, nor the Cardinals Hat, nor any liberality of consecrated
grains, nor feared they his excommunication, whose power in those days passed
little further then mount Apennine. And here out of this Discourse the Reader
shall further learn, that this very Canon is found in the Roman Decrees, in
the second Cause, in the Canon Placuit, but wholly corrupted and miserably
falsified, for after these words, Whosoever shall appeal beyond the Sea, let
him not be received by any to the Communion; there is a piece of another
stuff, and another color unhandsomely patched on, unless he appeal to the
Sea of Rome: Nisi forte Romanam sedem appellancrit.
how could this exception be allowable, seeing that this Canon of the Council
was expressly made against the Sea of Rome? So is it also against the truth and
evidence of all the Coppies.

Yea so far are the ancient customs and ordinances from giving any
Jurisdiction to the Bishop of Rome over other Patriarchs, that here is a flat
Canon of the Council of Nice, recyted by Ruffinus to the contrary, in his
first book and fifth chapter, They ordain also that in Alexandria, and in the
City of Rome, the ancient custom be kept, to wit, Et vt apud Aleandriam and
in vrbe Roma vetusta consuetudo seruetur, vt vel ille Aegypti, vel hic
suburbicarum Ecclesiarum solicitudinem gerat.
that he of Alexandria have the care of Egypt, the Bishop of Rome of all
suburbicary Churches, that is, of all the Cities that were under the authority
and civil jurisdiction of the city of Rome. These Fathers did liberally cut
him out a large share, as the times then were, but scant enough according to
his ambition as now it is.

S. Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, wrote many Epistles to Cornelius Bishop of
Rome, al which bear this inscription, Cyprian to Cornelius his brother sends
greeting: which had bin a great irreverence if Cornelius had bin head of the
Universal Church, or if he had had power of Jurisdiction over S. Cyprian. So
likewise: in the fourth book of Socrates, cap. 11. the Eastern Bishops, who
write to Liberius Bishop of Rome, Socrates lib. 4. cap. 9. Domino fratri and
collegae nostro.
call him nothing but Brother and Companion, yea they speak like Masters, for
qualifying themselves the Catholic and Apostolic Church, they denounce
Anathema against the Council of Ariminum, without expecting the judgment, or
the will and pleasure of Liberius. Thereupon Leo the first, This is the Title
of the three first Epistles.
albeit he speak big in his Epistles, nevertheless he commonly takes no
other Title to him but only this, Leo Bishop of the City of Rome to such and
such sends greeting.

See here a notable Example: The ancient custom of the Church was, that the
penitents should confess their faults aloude in the face of the Church. But
the Church being grown into wealth and riches* many men refused to undergo
this shame, Sozom. l. 7. c. 16. Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 19.
and judged it intolerable. To give them content herein, an order was
established that every Church should have a Penetenciary Priest, who should
receive their confessions in secret. This order having been every where
received: Nevertheless Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople abolished this
custom throughout all the East, without asking the Bishop of Romes counsel,
who also did not reprehend him for it: and this has ever since so remained.
Thereupon I say, that if Nectarius had been subject to the Bishop of Rome, he
would never have undertaken so great a matter without his advise, and contrary
to his example, Should a Bishop of Paris or Lions be borne withal now adays,
if of his own authority, without advise from the Pope, he should put away
auricular confession out of his Bishopric: Here are other examples. It
appears by S. Austens 118. Epistle to Ianuarius, This Epistle is found in the
1. Tome of the Councels, in the page 461. of the Collen Edition.
that in Rome they fasted on the Satterday, but at Millan they did not so.
Damasus Bishop of Rome, writing to S. Jerome, complayneth, that the service,
and the singing in the Church of Rome, was performed with ill grace and
unseemly, and with too great simplicity, and requesteth Jerome to teach him the
custom of the singing and service of the Greek Church, that he might bring it
into the Church of Rome. Is it credible that the Church of Rome would have
dayned to be the Disciple of other Churches, and to correct her faults by the
example of her neighbor Churches, if she had ruled and governed all other
Churches, as she does to this day? S. Jerome in an Epistle to Euagrius,
shows, that the custom of other Churches touching Deacons was better then
that of Rome, which he says, was but a City from whence pride first sprunge.
So the Canon Aliter in the 31. Distinction, says, That the Tradition of the
Eastern Churches is one, and that of the Church of Rome another; for there the
Priests and Deacons do marry, but here not. And this Canon is attributed to
Pope Steven, to whom Cyprian writes. Socrates, lib. 5. cap. 21. makes a long
Bed-roule of diverse Church-customs, and shows how different the Churches were
in the observation of Fastes, of the marriage of Churchmen, and of the days of
public Assemblies; which diversity is an evident proof that they were not
all governed by one only universal head, otherwise they should all have been
conformed to the Ordinanances of the Church of Rome.

So shall we also find that the Churches of Asia, of Syria, and of Egypt, are
called Catholic and Apostolic Churches, and yet they are never called
Roman.

Especially it is manifest, that the Church of Rome, in those days did never
give the definitive sentence, or that her judgments were esteemed irrefragable
not to be gainesaid, forasmuch as we find examples of some causes, judged by
the Bishops of Rome, which the Emperors have caused afterward to be judged by
other Bishops, for the better examination of the matters. S. Austen in his 162.
Epistle, and Eusebius. lib. 10 cap. 5. report, that the Donatists demanded
Bishops of the Emperor Constantine, to judge their Controversy: and that at
their request the Emperor commanded Melchiades Bishop of Rome, and Rheticus
Maternus and Marinus his associates, to take notice of their Cause: by whose
judgment the Donatists having been condemned, and they not willing to stand
to their sentence, the Emperor commanded that their cause should again be
heard and judged more exactly at Arles by other Bishops in a greater assembly,
and that there the sentence of the Bishop of Rome and of his fellows should be
sifted and examined: and it is found that the Bishop of Rome did complain for
that the Emperor would not that men should stand to his judgment, but did
quietly remit the whole matter to be tried and examined by other Bishops.

It appears chiefly in the convocation and the holding of Counsels, how
little the power of the Bishop of Rome was, in comparison of that which is
given now adays. Damasus Bishop of Rome summoned a Council at Rome, whereunto
he inuiteth the Eastern Bishops, who were assembled at Constantinople, from
diverse places, pressing them earnestly to meet together at Rome, to deliberate
of common affairs: but the Bishops of the East refused to be present, and
excused themselves by letters to Damasus, Ambrose, etc. whom they call their
Brethren and Colleagues, saying, These letters are found in the 1. Tome of the
Councels, in the p. 484. of the Collen Edition, and in Theodoret, lib. 5. cap 9.
that they had no commission from their Churches, to pass any further then
Constantinople, and that they were not provided for that journey, and therefore
had only sent their brethren and companions, Cyriacus, Eusebius, and Priscian,
to let them understand their minds, which was a good will of peace and union
In the end they conclude their Epistle with these words, God preserve you (our
dear sons) in health and safety. Deus vos fitij reuerendissimi conseruet
in^o lames.
Where are the Bishops now a days, that dare call the Pope their son? That
would be taken either for beastly mockery, or plain flattery, seeing that now
the least of his Titles is to be called most holy Father, not content with holy
Father, which is the Title that Christ gives to God his Father, Ioh. 17. ver.
11. These Bishops then keep themselves at Constantinople, and there hold their
Council; over which was President Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople; and they
leave Damasus, and Ambrose, and the Bishops of Italy, to hold their Council at
Rome. I beseech the Reader to weigh that which I am now about to say, that is,
that the Council held at Constantinople, and called without the advice of the
Bishop of Rome, and whereat he had not so much as any one Deputy, is held for
a general Council, and one of the first four. But the Council which Damasus
kept at Rome, is not held but for a particular Council, and which indeed is
scarcely named. And verily in the succeeding Councels that followed, they were
wont to recite the Canons of the Council of Constantinople, but never made any
mention of the Roman Council.

The example which follows, is no less direct to the purpose. Leo Bishop of
Rome assembleth a Council at Rome: he writes to the Emperor Theodosius the
younger, and n="*" This is the 23. Epistle of Leo.
beseeches him very instantly, that it would please his Majesty to call a
Council in Italy. These be the terms of the Councels request. Omnes
mansuetudinem vestra^ cum gemitibus and lacrymis supplicant sacerdotes?
generalem Synodum iubeatis intra Italiam celebrari.
All the Priests do beseech your Clemency with sighs and tears, that you
would command a general Council to be celebrated in Italy. But Leo and his
fellows were denied their request. In the end the Synod was assembled at
Chalcedon, which Synod Leo seeing that he was not able to transport it into
Italy, besought at leastwise that it might be deferred. But the Emperor
Martian, Theodosius successor, would not gratify him in that, but the Council
was held at Chalcedon for the ease and commodity of the Bishops of Asia, as was
the Emperors pleasure. Whereat Leo complayneth in his one and fortieth Epistle
to Martian, and in the nine and fortieth to Pulcheria the Empress, in such
sort notwithstanding, that he submitted himself thereunto, and sent thither
his Deputies by their commandment.

Socrates the historian, lib. 7. cap. 11. observes that the Bishops began to
go beyond the bounds of their charge even in the time of Theodosius the
younger, the son of Arcadius, and that they already began to make themselves
Princes in secular affairs, and that the Bishop of Alexandria having begun, he
of Rome followed his example. These be his words, There brake forth a great
flame of envy against the Nouatians, Cum Episcopatus Romanus non aliter atque
Alexandrinus quasi extra sacerdotij fines egressus ad secularem principatum
erat iaw ante delapsus.
the Bishoppricke of Rome having past the bounds of Priesthood, after the manner
of that of Alexandria, and having carried it self forward to a secular
Princedome.

One of the subtle tricks of the Bishops of Rome was, never to be present at
general Councels, for fear least some one of the other Patriarchs should
take place before him; even so far that Vigilius Bishop of Rome, being in the
City of Constantinople, whilst the fifth general Council was held there,
Vigilius notwithstanding refused to assist, and to be present, for fear least
Menas Bishop of Constantinople should take the precedence. With such a like
cunning, when any Bishop of Asia, or Egypt, or Greece, was chosen by joint
consent of a general Council to be President therein, the Bishop of Rome
well perceiving, that his Deputies could not have the first place, entreated
him who was chosen to be President, to keep his place, and to represent his
person; as he did Cyrill in the first Council of Ephesus, who notwithstanding
this counterfeit Commission, would not have let to have been President of the
Council: As well as did Dioschorus, who was President in the second Council
of Ephesus, without being Legate of the Bishop of Rome, and where the Bishop of
Rome had his Deputies, who did not contest for the first place. The issue and
the end indeed of the Council was turbulent, but yet it was lawfully assembled
according to the usual form, and there was good order kept in the first
Sessions. So Menas and Euticheus Patriarchs of Constantinople sat Presidents
in the fifth Council of Constantinople, albeit Vigilius Bishop of Rome were in
the same Town: which doubtless was the cause why he refused to be present at
the Council: All which notwithstanding after the close and conclusion of the
Council, he approved the Acts.

Read carefully the second Council of Nice, and you shall see, that in
reckoning up the Bishops, who were assisting thereat, he who has translated
the Acts of the Council, has oftentimes placed (to gratify the Pope) the
Deputies of Rome the first; yet notwithstanding the whole action of the
council does plainly show, that they were not Presidents at all: they speak
almost never a word, and they give in their opinions sometimes amongst the
rest. But Tharasius Patriarch of Constantinople speaks to every matter,
governs the whole action, pronounces the conclusions, and is chief
President in the Council.

And to come up a little higher, the most famous Council that ever was, was
the first Council of Nice; in which surely the Bishop of Rome was not
President: but if we will believe the testimony of Athanasius who was there
present, Hosius Bishop of Corduba in Spain, sat in the first place. His
testimony is reported by Theodoret in the second book of his story, and
fifteenth chapter, where he says, that there was no Council held, wherein
Hosius was not President: And this he speaks agreeable to that which the
same Athanasius says in his Epistle to them that live in the desert. The first
speaker was Eustachius Bishop of Antioch, who sat at the Emperors right hand;
Which has made some men to think that he was President: but it appears not
throughout the whole action that the deputies of Rome did any thing. In the
Tomes of the Councels, though made for the Popes greatest advantage, yet Hosius
subscribeth the first, and the deputies of Rome under him. And least any man
should say that he was the Bishop of Romes Legate, he subscribeth apart in
these words, Hosius, Episcopus Cordubensis, Ita credo. Then the deputies of
Rome subscribe apart. Victor and Vincentius Presbyteri vrbis Romae pro
venerabili Papa Syluestro subscripsimus. For if they had been all three
deputies for the Bishop of Rome, they would thus have subscribed, Hosius,
Victor, and Vincentius pro Syluestro, etc. And Hosius should rather have taken
this title, then to be qualified only Bishop of Corduba, etc.

Whosoever has never so little looked into the stories, knows that the
Bishops of Constantinople, considering that the dignity of the sea of Rome
came, for that Rome had for a long time been the seat of the Empire; and
seeing that the Empire was now translated to Constantinople, have labored to
have themselves to be credited and preferred before the Bishop of Rome. Even so
far forth, that John the Bishop of Constantinople, whom Greeks call S.
John the Almosner, began under the Emperor Mauritius about the year six
hundred, to call himself the first and chief Bishop, and Oecumenicall Bishop,
that is to say Universal. Whereupon Gregory the first, Bishop of Rome does not
complain that John did set footing upon the Sea of Rome, or that he did him
any wrong by usurping that which belonged to the Bishop of Rome: but says,
that this was a new Title, and That he which will be called universal Bishop is
the forerunner of Antichrist, because that in the Pride of his heart, he
prefers himself before others. Now the intent of this John was not to have
denied the others to have been Bishops also: but he said that he was the first
and above the rest. And indeed this John's successors continued this title, and
are so called in Zonaras and Cedrenus. And further in the second Council of
Nice, the second Action: there is an Epistle of Adrian Bishop of Rome, wherein
he calls n="a" Dilecto fratri Tharasio generali Patriarchae.
Tharasius Bishop of Constantinople universal Patriarch. Howbeit Gregory in
his Epistles, thinks that he who will be universal Bishop, does by
consequent ruin the Bishopric of others, and seeks if not directly, yet at
leastwise by consequence, to be the only Bishop: the Bishopric of others,
after that, being nothing else but a bare name without substance, as is the
charge of Bishops under the Papacy. Thus has God plucked out of the mouth of
Gregory the condemnation of his Successors; for this good man was not aware
that in so speaking, he called Boniface the third his Successor, the
forerunner of Antichrist, to whom the Emperor Phocas gave the title of
universal Supremacy, within a while after the death of Gregory. And yet for
all this the Bishops of Constantinople, would never acknowledge themselves
inferiors to the Bishop of Rome; no nor those of Antioch and Alexandria, until
that the Turks and Saracens having overthrown all the rest, the Bishop of
Rome only finding in our Kings soft spirits, and that they were little seen
and versed in Divinity, drew from them huge liberalities, persuading them to
whatsoever he would, even to subject their Crowns unto him, and to pill and
rifle their Kingdoms, and to take upon him n="b" Gregor. in Registro l. 4.
Epist. 32. and Epist. 24. and Epist. 36. and Epist. 38. and li. 6. Ep. 30. Ad
Mauricium etc.
those Titles, of which we shall speak anon. He that will see how much the
Pope has exalted himself, let him compare the four first Councels, where all
things are passed by common voices, with the Council of Florence, in which
they gave power and authority to the Pope, to make new articles of faith: And
with the latter Lateran Council, in which all is referred to the will of Pope
Leo the tenth, who there is called the divine Majesty, the corner stone laid
in Sion, the Lion of Judah, the King and Prince of all the world, whom all the
Kings of the earth ought to adore. To such Councels the Pope does willingly
afford his personal presence, because he does there rule and domineere with
absolute authority: but in the ancient Councels he refused to be present,
because there he should have found Bishops as stout and as strong, and as
ambitious as himself. Add hereunto that in the general Councels, they used
the Church of Rome and her Bishop no otherwise then they did their particular
Churches. So in the six general Councels, re-assembled at the Palace: Pope
Honorius is condemned for an Heretic. And the thirteenth Canon does by name
condemn the Church of Rome, because it disalowed the marriage of Priests. And
further in the 55. Canon the Church of Rome is expressly forbid to fast any
more the Satterdy and the Sunday, upon pain of incurring the rigor of the
Canon of the Apostles which says, This is the 65. Canon of the Apostles.
If a Clerk be found fasting on the Satterday or the Sunday (one only
excepted) let him be deposed; Or if he be a Layman, let him be excommunicated.
Would they thus have spoken, if they had believed the Pope to have been their
Superior, or the Church of Rome chief over other Churches, and that it could
not err?

That the Passages of the Fathers alleged by Coeffeteau for the Primacy of S.
Peter are partly false, Fol. 77. and 78.
partly maimed, and partly impertinent.

FRom this point Doctor Coeffeteau passes over to the Primacy of S. Peter:
Fol. 76.
howbeit before he comes thereto, he gives in passing by a blow to his
Holiness, affirming, that he is not Lord over any Town: thus does he dispute
the Souerainty of the City of Rome. We leave themselves to clear this doubt,
and end this Process.

He alleges then for the Primacy of S. Peter the 11. Homily of S.
Chrysostom: and that very falsely; for in all the Homily there is no mention
of S. Peter, nor of his Primacy. But Bellarmine did deceive him, out of whom
Coeffeteau copied his allegations.

This other is like it. S. Cyprian (says Coeffeteau) affirms, Hoc erant
vtique and caeteri Apostoli quod Petrus pari consortio praediti and honoris and
potestatis, sed exordium ab vn^tate profici^ cit^r v^ ^^^^^sia vna monstretur.
that the other Apostles were certainly the same that S. Peter was, fellows
and partners of his honor, and of his power: but the beginning proceeds from
Unity: and therefore the Primacy was given to S. Peter, the true reading is
this, the Apostles inde de were the same things that S. Peter was, having ONE
EQVALL SOCIETY In honor and in power, but the beginning was made by one, to
show the unity of the Church. Coeffeteau has razed out the word EQVAL which
troubled him, and has clapped on a Tail of a sentence, which is not in Cyprian,
and therefore the Primacy was given to S. Peter.

S Cyprian had said a little before, that Jesus Christ after his resurrection
gave a like power to his Apostles, and yet to show the unity of the Church, he
so disposed by his authority, that the fountain of this unity should begin
from one. That is to say, that he gave to all his Apostles an equal power: but
to show that the Church is one, he gave his power first unto one, namely to
Peter, and afterward gave equal power to the rest.

With like falsehood he deals with S. Jerome, Fol. 78. page 2.
lib 1. against Iouinian whom he thus alleges, One is chosen among the
twelve, to the end that there being one head established, all occasion of
Schism might be taken away. At dicis super Petru^ fundatur Ecclesia licet id
ipsum in alio loco super omnes Apostolos fiat, and cuncti claues regni coelorum
accipiant, and ex aequo super eos Ecclesiae fortitudo solidetur^sed vnus
eligitur, vt capite constituto seismatist ollatur occasio.
But he omitteth the words that went before, thou tellest me that the Church
is founded upon S. Peter, notwithstanding that the same is done upon all the
other Apostles, and that all do receive the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, and
that upon them the stability of the Church is EQVALLY grounded: whence
appears, that the Head and chief of which he speaks, is nothing else but a
superiority in rank, without any Jurisdiction and power over his fellows,
seeing that they had all the Keys alike, and were alike the foundations of the
Church. Which may serve (to the end we may not trouble our selves with
examining the rest of his falsifications) for solution of all the rest of
Coeffeteaus quotations, in which S. Peter is called head and first among the
Apostles.

S. Austen indeed in the beginning of his second book of Baptism, which
place Coeffeteau alleges, calls S. Peter the first of the Apostles, but he
says also in the same place, that for all that he did not presume that the
new-commers, Nee Petrus que^ primum Dominus elegit, and super quem aedificauit
Ecclesia^ suam, cum secum Paulus de circumcisione disceptaret, postmodum
vindicauit sibi aliquid insolenter aut arroganter assumpsit vt diceret se
primatum tenere and obtemperari a nouellis and posteris sibi potius debcri.
and latter Apostles were to yield him obedience. The same S. Austen, as he is
alleged in the 24. Cause, Quaest. 1. Canon Quodcunque, speaks thus: S.
Peter when he received the Keys, represented the Church: if then all the good
were signified in the person of Peter, so were all the wicked also signified in
the person of Judas. Seeing then that S. Peter was the same among the faithful,
that Judas was among the wicked, it follows, that as Judas was not the head
of the wicked, to have power and Jurisdiction over them, but only was the most
remarkable among them: so S. Peter should be such a one among the believers.
He might have had perhaps a priority either in age, or in virtue, or in zeal,
or in eloquence, or in preseance, and taking the first place: but yet without
Dominion or power of Jurisdiction. As touching that which sometimes he says,
that the Church is founded upon S. Peter; we shall see hereafter, that he
retracted that over sight afterward: and we have heard before S. Jerome to
have said that the Church is Equally founded upon all the Apostles. As for that
which he says, that he that is without the Communion of the Church is to be
accounted profane, and that he that is without the Arc shall perish in the
flood, the same may be said of every other Church which holds the true
Orthodox Doctrine, yea of the least of the faithful, for that a man cannot
separate and withdraw himself from him, but by renouncing the truth: Now in
the quarrel which then was in debate, Damasus maintained the truth and sounder
opinion.

Whether the Pope may err in faith or no.

TO that which the King of great Britain denies, that there is any Monarch of
the Church on earth, whose words ought to be held for laws, and who has the
gift to be able not to err; Fol. 80.
Coeffeteau thus answers: We know that the Pope is a sinful man, as another
man is, and therefore may err in Doctrine and Manners if we consider him in
particular: but in the quality of S. Peter's Successor, he cannot teach any
thing contrary to piety. This is it which is commonly said, that the Pope
indeed may err as he is a man and a particular Doctor, but not as he is Pope:
Or that he may err in manners, but not in faith: Cap. licet. titulo 2 de
Constitutioni. in 6.
They say also, that he may err in the question de facto, but not in the
question de Iure. For (as Boniface the eighth says) the Pope has all law and
right in the chest of his breast.

A man had need of a good stomach to digest this: And I do not see how all
this can agree. For first if the Pope may err in the question of fact, it
follows also that he may err in the question of Right, seeing that the one
depends upon the other: if he may be ignorant, whether Jesus Christ came into
the world, or whether he died for us, he may also be ignorant whether we ought
to believe in him or no.

So likewise if he may err in manners, it follows that he may teach false
doctrine: for to lie and to speak against his conscience, is certainly a
defaillance in manners. If then the Pope cannot be ignorant of the true
doctrine, and yet through malitiousnesse will bury the truth, wilfully to
deceive, to what end serves this truth hidden in the Popes understanding, if
the people in the mean time be fed with lies? But this is an absurdity above
the rest, to think that the Pope may err as man, or as a particular Doctor,
but not as Pope: for why does not the Pope correct the doctor? Or when Pope
Boniface or Clement do err as Boniface, but not as Pope, why does not
Boniface ask counsel of the Pope? why does he not consult himself? why
does he not betake himself from his private chair to the Popes Seat, to the
end to change his opinion? If the Popes divine knowledge be tied to his Chair
or Papal habit, it follows that when he rises from his seat, or puts
off his Robes, Titulo. 2. de Constitutionib. cap. licet. in 6.
that withal he strippeth himself out of his knowledge: And that Boniface the
eight was to blame to enclose the Popes knowledge in his breast. Shall we
think that these men have a desire to be credited, and that by these pleasant
distinctions, they do not mock the Pope?

Put the case that all this may be reconciled, and that the Pope may be
contrary to himself, and worse then himself, and at one instant both
Heretic and an Orthodox; what does all this avail the people, seeing that in
what sort soever the Pope teaches, whether as Pope or as Doctor, he will
always be believed? Neither can the people discern these subtle Distinctions.

Neither may we omit that the Pope upon Maundy Thursday does excommunicate all
Heretics; whence it should follow, that if himself be an heretic, as man,
he is also excommunicate, and consequently is out of the Church: and so it
should come to pass, that the man may be out of the Church, but the Pope be
within it; which is as if I should say, that the King at the same instant is
within his Palace as King, but without it as man; or that Coeffeteau is at the
same time in the Refectory or dyning-hall as Friar, and without as man; so that
a man shall find him in two places at once.

It was then a great unhappiness to the ancient Fathers to have been
ignorant of this Distinction, and to have assembled so many Councels, so long
and so painful for the deciding of differents in Religion, seeing that they
needed only to have addressed themselves to the Bishop of Rome, and to entreat
him not as man, or as Doctor, but as Pope to pronounce the sentence, and give
decision of the Controversy. Whence also it follows, that then the Popes had
but small zeal to the public good of the Church, seeing that they refused to
be present at general Councels, which were the special places in which they
ought to have put on this their Infallibility. As also when the Roman Bishop
had given his advise by his Deputies, the Councels did not forbear for all
that, to sound and examine the matter to the bottom, and to hear the opinions
of others.

Howbeit Coeffeteau produces this Scripture, to show that the Pope cannot
err; he says that our Lord said to S. Peter, I have prayed for thee that thy
faith should not fail. Whence he concludes, that the Pope cannot err in
faith. Surely we have no greater proof of the patience of God, then that he
suffers his holy word thus to be abused: for first, is there any mention here
of the Pope? Is all that that was spoken to S. Peter spoken also to the Bishop
of Rome? If that be so, then must we needs say, that that which our Savior
said to Peter, Mat. 16. he said also to the Pope, Get thee behind me Satan:
Secondly, add that which we will hereafter show, that the Pope is not the
Successor of S. Peter, unless it be as sickness succeeds health: Thirdly,
and albeit this had been spoken to the Pope, yet by these words Christ does
not promise to S. Peter that he should not err at all in faith; for it is one
thing not to fail, another thing not utterly to fall away. There be many that
miss and fail, but yet do they not wholly miscarrie; whence ensues, that
though Christ should have prayed for the Pope, that his faith should not
utterly fail, yet can he not for all that be exempted from power of erring:
Fourthly, if the Successors of S. Peter enter also upon this virtue of his,
never to err, then should the Bishop of Antioch who styles himself Peter's
Successor, be exempted also from erring: Fifthly, seeing that Saint John, S,
Paul, S. James, etc. were no less exempted from this power of erring then was
S. Peter, why should not their Successors inherit the infallibility of the
rest of the Apostles, as well as the Successors of S. Peter: Sixthly, but
without any more ado, let us look upon the place, and read with one breath
the verses following, and we shall find that Christ in that place did foretell
to S. Peter his fall and denial, and promises that his faith should not
utterly be vanquished in that temptation: that was then personal and peculiar
to S. Peter; yet so that our Savior would have his fall and rising again, to
serve to confirm his brethren. Here by the way the Reader may note, that this
Passage and Text of Scripture is the only foundation that the Church of Rome
can find, to prop up the Popes infallibility, which is as if a man would plant
and rear up an huge Colossus upon Reeds, or from a thing of nothing to make a
long chain of Consequences to depend.

Wherefore Coeffeteau being put off from Scripture, he has recourse to the
Fathers, and says, that S. Cyprian is bold to say, that the Church of Rome is
that, to which treachery and false hood can have no access. Cyprian thereby
understands that it cannot be the refuge of perfidious men, neither can they be
received there to find shelter; which is true of every Orthodox Church: for
Cyprian varied from the Bishop of Rome upon the point of Rebaptization of
heretics; which is an evident proof that he did not believe that the Bishop
of Rome could not err: and indeed in the Epistle to Pompeius (written after
that which Coeffeteau alleges) he says that Stephen Bishop of Rome was in
an error, Stephani errore^ denotabis -- inter caetera, vel superuacanea vel ad
rem non pertinentia, vel sibi ipsi contraria, quae imperite atque improuide
scripsit.
and that he had written many things idle and contradictory, very ignorantly
and unwisely. It is not material to enquire whether Cyprian were in an error,
or no; it is sufficient, that Cyprian thought that the Bishop of Rome was
subject to err and to mistake.

Our Doctor adds S. Jerome, who in his third Apology against Ruffinus, says,
That the Roman faith, Romanam fidem Apostolica voce baudatam istiusmodi
praestigias non recipere.
commended by the voice of the Apostle does not admit any such iuglings. (For
so is it read, and not as Coeffeteau does falsely allege it) The Tricks of
which he speaks, were, to put the title of a good Author to an evil book;
so that this place is neither to the purpose, nor yet faithfully alleged: and
if it were to the purpose, yet does he not say, that the Church of Rome or her
Bishop cannot err in faith, but says that the Faith which S. Paul commended
in the Romans, could not subsist together with such impostures; for the faith
which S. Paul prayseth in them was the true faith, which does not approve of
any seducing. The same may be said of the faith of the Ephesians and
Thessalonians, to whom the same Apostle gives the same testimony as well as to
the Romans, to wit, that their faith was spread abroad in all quarters. 1.
These. 18.

Now that S. Jerome did not believe that the Bishop of Rome could not err in
the faith, in hoc habetur detestabilis quod Liberium Romanae vrbis Episcopum
pro fide ad exilium pergentem primus sollicitauit, ac fregit and ad subscripti.
onem haereseos compulit.
it appears by this, that in the Catalogue of Ecclesiastical writers, he
thus speaks of Fortunatianus: In this he is accounted detestable, that he was
the first that solicited Liberius Bishop of Rome, who went into banishment for
the faith, and made him to yield, having induced him to subscribe to Heresy.
And in the same Catalogue he calls Felix Bishop of Rome, Arrian, as does also
Socrates, lib. 2. cap. 2.

S. Hilary in his fragments, lately published by Monsieur le Feure, does often
excommunicate Liberius, in these terms: Anathema tibi a me Liberi. For having
subscribed to the Confession of the Arrians framed at Sirmium: (...).
S. Athanasius an inward friend to Liberius, in his Epistle to them that lived
in the Desert, after that he had greatly commended Liberius, he says, that
after two years banishment, he yielded and subscribed. As also the Arrians
would never have given him Letters to restore him to his Bishopric: Tomo 1.
Council. p. 431. Ingressus Liberius in vibe^ 6. Nonas Augusti consensit
Constantio haeretico -- and perse^^ utio magna fuit in vrbe Roma.
if he had still persisted in the true faith. Damasus in the Pontifical
alleged in there. Tome of the Councels, says, that Liberius being re-entred
into the City consented to the Emperor Constantius an Heretic, and that
upon his arrival there happened a great persecution at Rome.

Liberatus a great flatterer of the Bishops of Rome, has written a book,
which is found in the second Tome of the Councels; where in the two and
twentieth Chapter is produced an Epistle of Vigilius Bishop of Rome, written to
the Eutychian Heretics, in which he declares himself an Eutychian, and
denies two natures in Christ, even so far as to excommunicate those that say
the contrary.

Honori the first is condemned for a Monothelite heretic by three Councels
which our adversaries call General, to wit, by the sixth, seventh, and eighth,
that is to say, by a thousand witnesses; the Deputies of Rome then and there
present never gainsaying it.

On the contrary, his Successors Agatho and Leo the second do there accurse
and detest him for having polluted the Sea of Rome through his heresy. Who
will believe that these Popes would have defamed their own Sea with a false
accusation? Or that so many witnesses had been ill informed? seeing that even
in these Councels the Epistles of Honorius, in which he defends heresy, are
produced and alleged. And although they should have condemned him unjustly,
yet it appears hereby, that they held it in those times for a thing certain,
that the Bishop of Rome might err.

Bellarmine in his fourth book de Pontifice Romano, makes no difficulty to
say, Potest dici Pontificem ex ignorantia lapsum esse.
that Pope Gregory the third, who taught, that a man whose wife was through
sickness become unfit for the duties of marriage, might take another woman,
had erred and failed through ignorance.

John the two and twentieth believed and taught that the souls of the
faithful did not see God be fore the resurrection, as we have proved
heretofore by many witnesses.

John the three and twentieth out-stripped and exceeded them all; for he denied
the immortality of the soul, and maintained that there was neither Heaven nor
hell. For which cause, besides many other crimes laid down in the eleventh
Session of the Council of Constance, he was deposed from the Papacy by the
same Council, whose words are these: JOHN the three and twentieth has often
and many a time, in the presence of diverse Prelates, and other honest men of
worth, said, held, determined, and obstinately maintained by the instigation of
the devil, that there is no life eternal, nor any other after this life; yea
and has obstinately said and believed, that the soul of man dies together
with the body, and is extinguished as that of brute beasts; and has said, that
a man once dead, shall not rise again the last day. And to the end that no man
may doubt of the truth of the Accusation, it is a little after added, that it
is publicly and notoriously known. Note also, that the Council, before that
it deposed him, acknowledged him for lawful Pope, and all the Church of Rome
does reckon him among the number of Popes.

Furthermore that prodigious Canon, which begins Si Papa in the fortieth
Distinction, after it has said, Si Papa suae and^ fraternae salut s negligens
innumerabiles popules secum ducit primo mancip io gehennae, cum ipso plagis
multis in aeternum vapulaturos, huius cu pas istic reprehendere praesumit
mortalium nullus. etc.
that though the Pope should draw with him an innumerable multitude of souls
into hell, there to be everlastingly tormented, yet no man should presume to
reprove him; because he that judges all men, ought to be judged of no man:
Adds this exception, Nisi deprehendatur a fide deuius; unless he be found to
have swarued from the faith.

Passages of Scripture touching this matter.
THe King of great Britain alleged against the Ecclesiastical Monarchy these
words of our Savior, Luc. 22. The Kings of the Nations rule over them, but it
shall not be so among you. Coeffeteau answers, that hereby Christ sought
only to take away Ambition from his Disciples; But I say, that it was not
only his meaning to take from them ambition, but all such occasions as tend to
ambition, together with the fuel of contentions and pride: for the word of
God forbids both the evil, and the occasions of evil. Now that the
Monarchy of the Church does nothing but puff up the hearts of those that are
climed up to it: there is none that doubts, but such as are hired to flatter,
or have not much troubled themselves with the reading of histories, whereof we
shall produce some proofs hereafter: yea Leo Bishop of Rome, in his 82.
Epistle confesses this fault to be in himself, and after he had spoken
against those Bishops that hunt after Lordship and authority, he adds these
words, meipsum quodenimodo in Culpam trahi sentio: I find my self in a sort
drawn into this fault. And further, the words of Jesus Christ herein are very
express: for after he had said The Kings of Nations rule over them, he says
not, take you heed, that you desire not Souerainty in the Church, but thus he
says, It shall not be so among you. As if he should say, they bear rule, but
you shall not bear rule, he forbids not only the desire of Dominion but
Dominion it self.

Coeffeteau adds, that when Jesus Christ went up into heaven, he did in such
sort substitute a visible head, as that he has not bereaved himself of the
title and quality of Monarch, and that he is a more perfect and absolute head
then the Pope, but of less virtue and power then the holy Ghost, whereof he
does well to aduertize us: And surely in my opinion Jesus Christ is much bound
unto him.

The words of S. Luke, 22. I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not,
have already been sufficiently examined, and so has that saying of S. Jerome,
lib. 1. against Iouinian, cap. 14.

There so loweth after that, Controversy about the Keys, which the Pope
causes to ringe so loud, still grounded upon this false supposition, that he
is the Successor of S. Peter, not only as Bishop of Rome, in which sense the
Ancients understood it, but also in the charge of Apostleship, and as the
universal head of the Church, which never any Father either believed or
thought: Albeit that, that which was spoken to S. Peter, does nothing at all
belong to the Bishop of Rome; yet we will examine the words. Jesus Christ
then, Mat. 16. after Peter had confessed him to be the Son of the living God,
says, Blessed art thou Simon the son of Iona, for flesh and blood has not
revealed this unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven: And I say unto thee,
that thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church, and the gates
of hell shall not prevail against it: And I will give thee the Keys of the
King dome of heaven, and whatsoever thou bindest on earth, shall be bound in
heaven, and whatsoever thou loosest on earth shall be loosed in heaven. Mr.
Coeffeteau produces this saying, Fol. 85.
for to Establish the Primacy of S. Peter over the other Apostles, but he
shows not how, nor wherein, nor alleges he any proofs at all.

It is peradventure, because Christ has said, Thou art Cephas, and that Cephas
signifies the Head: If a man will believe Pope Anaclet in the two and
twentieth Distinction, Can. Sacrosa^cta. Cephas id est caput and principiu^.
with a profound and complete skill in Grammar.

It may be also that it is because he said to Saint Peter, Thou art Peter, and
upon this Rock will I build my Church: Whereupon they infer, that the Church
is founded upon S. Peter: But I say, that these words import no such matter,
for he says not, Thou art Peter, and upon thee Peter, but upon this Rock,
that is to say, upon Jesus Christ, whom he confessed a little before, and who
is oftentimes termed a Rock, And it is evident, that our Lord does manifestly
distinguish between Petrus and Petra, the person of Peter and the Rock, and
especially it is to be observed, that in Greek (...) is a word of a double
sense, for it is both the proper name of a man, and it does also signify
Rock, whereof it follows, that the allusion would have carried a far
better grace, if S. Matthew had said (...). But the spirit of God, that guided
the hands of the Apostle, chose rather to let go that ornament of speech, for
preventing of error, and says (...), expressly distinguishing the person of
Peter from the Rock.

For if the Church be founded upon S. Peter, it must needs be done, either
upon his person or upon his Doctrine, that was all one with the rest of the
Apostles: and in this respect, they are all Foundations alike: if upon his
person, then as soon as he is dead and another in his place, the foundation of
the Church is changed, and it may be, much for the worse. Likewise when the
Papal Sea has been many years void (which has often happened) the Church
of God has then been without Foundation. Furthermore if the question be of
the first and most principal Foundation: S. Paul 1. Cor. 3. says, No man can
lay another Foundation, then that which is already laid, which is Christ Jesus:
And that makes S. Peter to call him the chief Cornerstone. 1. Pet. 2.
And if the Apostles be at any time called Foundations, it is in respect of the
Doctrine that they teach: And for this reason the holy Scriptures make them
equally Foundations, as Ephesians. 2. verse. 20: Being builded upon the Foundation
of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
Cornerstone. And Apocalip. 21.14. The wall of the City (which is the Church)
had twelve foundations, in which were the twelve names of the Apostles of the
Lamb. Since then they be all foundations, who can show any place of the word
of God, that makes one of the Apostles a Foundation above the rest.

The Fathers have understood it thus: Origin upon Matthew. 16. If thou think
(says he) that the whole Church was founded upon Peter only, Quod si super v.
number illum Petru^ ta^tum existimas aedificari totam Ecclesiam quid dicturus es
de Iohanne filio tonitrui and desingulis Apostolis. Omnibus Apostolis and
omnibus per fectis fidelibus dictum videtur. Petra Christus qui donauit
Apostolis suis vt ipsi quoque petrae vocentur Tu es Petrus, etc.
what will thou then say of John the son of Thunder, and of all the other
Apostles? And he urges much these words, Upon this Rock I will build my
Church, as spoken to all the Apostles, yea further, to all the faithful: This
seems (says he) to be spoken to all the Apostles, and to all the perfect
faithful, for they are all stones or Rocks, and upon them is the Church
builded.

S. Jerome in his first book against Iouinian, The Church (says he) is
founded upon S. Peter, albeit in an other place the same is also built upon the
other Apostles, and the strength thereof is equally grounded upon them all.

Vnica est faelix fidei p^tra, Petri ore confessa.
Hilary in his second book of the Trinity, It is the only blessed stone of the
faith, confessed by the mouth of S. Peter. And in his sixth book, Upon this
Rock of the Confession the Church is founded.

S. Ambrose upon the nine and thirtieth Psalm, Quod Petro dicitur caeteris
Apostolis dicitur, That which was said unto S. Peter was said unto the rest of
the Apostles also.

Cyril in his fourth book of the Trinity, expounding the same place, says,
Opinor per Petram nihil aliud quam inconcussam, and fir mis^mam discipuli fidem
voluit, I think that by the Rock was nothing else meant, but the firm and
constant faith of the Disciple.

S. Augustine, in his 124. Treatise upon S. John, expounding these words,
Super hanc ergo petram quam confessus es aedificabo Ecclesiam meam. Petra enim
erat Christus Quid est supra hanc petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam? Super hanc
fidem Super id quod dictum est Tues Christus filius Dei viui. Bellar. lib. 1.
cap. 10. Addo Augustinum ex sola ignorantia Hebreae linguae deceptum esse.
faith, Upon this Rock that thou have canfessed will I found my Church. And
upon the Epistle of S. John, his 10. Treatise and 60. Sermon upon the words of
our Lord: What means this, Upon this Rock will I build my Church? Surely
thus much is meant; Upon this faith, upon this that has been said, Thou art
that Christ the Son of the living God. And forasmuch as he had said in other
places that the Church was founded upon Peter, he recalleth himself in his
first book of retractations cap. 21. Because, says he, that Jesus Christ said
not unto him, Tu es petra, Thou art the Rock; But, Tu es Petrus, Thou art
Peter: Now this Rock, says he, is Christ. Which Bellarmine unable to deny
thought it better to affirm that Augustine erred for want of knowledge in the
Hebrew tongue.

Chrysostom upon Matthew. 16 Upon this Rock, that is, upon the faith of this
confession, And in this Sermon upon the Pentecost, (...).
he has said upon this Rock and not upon Peter, for he has not founded his
Church upon men, but upon faith: and what faith was this? Thou art Christ, etc.

Eusebius Emissenus in his homily upon the Nativity of S. Peter, expounds
these words in this manner: I will build my Church upon that stone which thou
beginnest to lay in the Foundation of faith, upon that faith which thou
teach, saying, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God. For the Apostle
agreeing with this opinion, says, That none can lay any other Foundation then
that that is laid Jesus Christ.

What say the Councels hereunto? In the Council of Calcedon, Super hanc
confessionem robora ta est Ecclesia Dei and fidem.
page 223. of the Edition of Collen, upon this Confession (which Peter has
made) and upon that faith is the Church grounded.

Super hanc petra^ id est super meipsu^ qui significor per petram aedificabo
Ecclesiam meam.
Nay the Gloss of the Canon-Doctors themselves upon the goodly extrauagant,
Vnam sanctam says, Super hanc petram id est super meipsum qui significor per
petram, aedificabo Ecclesiam meam Upon this Rock, that is to say, upon my
self that am the Rock, and am signified by the Rock, will I found my Church.

Read the exposition of Lyranus upon Matthew. 16. for it agrees fully with
this, and sets it down in express terms.

But it may be Coeffeteau alleges this passage or sentence, because it
says, I will give thee the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever
thou bindest on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shall lose
on earth shall be losed in heaven.

By the Kingdom of God, the Gospel ordinarily does understand the Church of
God upon earth, and consequently the Keys of the Kingdom of God signify the
Church, to bring men into the Church, or exclude them from it. This is chiefly
done by preaching the word of God, which our Lord for that cause, Luc. 11.
calls the key of knowledge unto which Preaching is annexed, the power of
admitting sinners to repentance, and to the peace of the Church, when they are
come to receive the word and submit themselves unto it: or if they are
impenitent to shut them out from the communion of the faithful.

This same power is signified by the words of binding and losing: for we are
naturally in the bonds of Satan, but the preaching of the Gospel freeth and
delivers us, when by faith we apprehend it; by which the children of Abraham
are unbound, whom Satan has fettered, Luc. 13. ver. 16. And if any man oppose
himself against this word, either by unbelief or of a profane humor: by the
same preaching; first generally propounded, and after particularly applied to
the impenitent sinner by Ecclesiastical censure, the judgments of God and his
curse, are denounced unto him: the which holds the sinner bound, and are unto
him as chains, by which Satan leads him captive, and draws him with an
insensible violence into perdition, unless by his earnest repentance he free
himself of those bonds, and return to God. Here then Jesus Christ shows,
that God ratifieth in heaven both the reception of a repenting sinner, and the
rejecting of him that is impenitent; and wills, that during his obstinacy, by
which he dispiseth the Church, he be held as a Publican, and an heathen, Matthew.
18.17.18.

We are then to learn, whether this power was given to S. Peter alone, or to
all the Apostles: I say, that that which was promised to S. Peter, Matthew. 16.
was also promised to all the Apostles: the eighteenth of the same Evangelist,
ver. 18. Verily I say unto you that whatsoever you shall bind upon earth,
shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever you shall lose upon earth the same
shall be losed in heaven.

2 Assuredly it is a most ridiculous presumption, to think that any man now
adays does better understand the words of Jesus Christ then the Apostles did:
But it is more then evident that the Apostles did never suppose that by these
words of Christ, any superiority was given to S. Peter: for had they so
believed, they would never after that have contended amongst themselves for
pre-eminence as they did, Luke 22. but one day before the death of our Lord.

3 Above all things this is to be noted, that Jesus Christ does not here give
unto Peter the power of binding and losing, but only promises to give it him,
which he performed after his resurrection. John 20. in which place he gives
like power to all his Disciples, saying: Receive ye the holy Ghost, to whom
soever you shall forgive their sins, they shall be forgiven, and look whose
sins ye retain, they shall be retained. Now to understand how far the
gift of any charge extends it self, we must not so much respect the promises
made, as the actual donation, and the manner how it is received.

4 Doubtless if by these words Jesus Christ had given unto S. Peter power over
the other Apostles, he would have commanded them to obey S. Peter, and to
acknowledge him for their Superior, which is not found in any place of
Scripture.

Now that Jesus Christ gave the Keys and power of binding and losing to all
the Apostles, Putas soli Petro dantur a Christo claues coelorum and nemo ali
bea toru^ accipiet cas? Si aute^ common est inter omnes quod dicitur, dabo
tibi claues reg ni coelorum, quomodo non omnia quae superius sunt dicta ad
Petrum omnium videantur esse communia?
it does appear not only by the reasons before alleged, but also by the
testimony of ancient Fathers. Origin upon the sixteenth of Matthew, the first
Treatise, How then (says he) has Jesus Christ given the Keys only to S.
Peter: And shall not the other receive them also? Or if that which is said, I
will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, be also common to all
the other; why should not as well also all that that goes before, and that
which follows after be common, though it were spoken to Peter?

Hilary in the fixth book of the Trinity, speaking to the Apostles, Vos o
Sancti and beati viri ob fidei vestrae meritum claues regai coelorum and
ligandi and soluen d^ius in terra adepti.
O ye blessed men that by the merit of your faith have the Keys of the
Kingdom, and the power to bind and lose, And then he further says, Hear
the Lordsaying, I will give thee the keys, etc. That which is spoken to Peter,
is spoken to the Apostles. Audi dicentem Tibi dabo, etc. Quod Petro dicitur
Apostol's dicitur.


S. Jerome in his first book against Iouinian: All the Apostles receive the
Keys of the Kingdom of heaven.

Cum and illud vnus pro omnibus dixerit, and hoc cum omaib. tauquam bersonam
gerens ipsius vnitatis acceperit. Ideo vnus pro omnib. quia vnitas est in omnib.
S. Augustine in his 218. Tract upon John says, S. Peter spoke these words
for all, and received the answer with all the other, as representing the
unity in his person, and therefore one received it for all, because there was
one unity amongst them all.

In the Council of Aix, under Jews the courteous, the people is brought in
speaking thus of the Clergy in general: By whom we are made Christians, Tom.
3. Council. page 416. per quos Christiani sumus qui claues regni coelorum
habentes quodommodo ante diem iudicij iudicant.
Who having the Keys of the kingdom of heaven, do after asort Judge before
the day of Judgment. In the Council of Paris under Jews and Lotharius
Emperors, the third book and eight chapter, the Bishops of France speak
thus; This may easily be understood by the words of the Lord, Quod ex verbis
Domini facile intelligere possunt, quibus beato Petro cuius vicem indigni
gerimus ait Quaecunque liga ueris etc.
when he said to Peter, Whose place we vnwrothily occupy, whatsoever thou
bindest, etc. you see that they be all called the Successors of Peter, and
that they enjoy his place. And chap. 3. they give those titles unto Priests,
They are the strong Pillars, upon whom the whole multitude of believers being
founded, Cap. 9. Ipsi sunt Ianitores quibus claues datae sunt regni coelorum.
Fol. 84. p. 2.
are by them vpheld and supported. Again, they are the Porters, unto whom the
keys of the kingdom of heaven are given. But the Priests of France dare not
speak now adays in this style.

To be short, the case is so clear, that Coeffeteau is constrained to
confess, that the Keys were given to all the Apostles: but he says not with
so large extent, as they were to Peter. See then the issue of this difference:
all our adversaries acknowledge, that the Keys were equally given to all the
Apostles, but not in so high a degree, as to S. Peter, being demanded where
they find this difference: Or if there be any place of Scripture where Jesus
Christ gives the Keys to S. Peter more then to the rest: here they are as
dumb as fishes, and when they come to the very exigent and issue of the
matter, they bleed at the nose, and cannot produce any kind of proof from the
word of God. Coeffeteau only alleges Hilary, which is to bring in man's
testimony against God: and yet he speaks not any thing that either
contradicts the Gospel or us, for he only says, that S. Peter is the
Foundation of the Church, and that he has the Keys, but he says not that he
has them more then the rest of the Apostles. And if that Coeffeteau
acknowledge that the Keys are given to all the Aposties, let him show me in
what place of scripture: for there is not any place in the Gospel, that
speaks of the giueing of keys but this only: and here is no speech made of
two kinds of giving the keys.

Besides it is easy for us to prove, that the Pope does unjustly diminish the
power of the Keys, given to all Bishops and Priests; for since they be all
Successors of the Apostles, they ought to have the same Keys which the
Apostles had. Whence it follows, that God says to all the faithful Pastors
of the Church, in the person of the Apostles, That whatsoever they shall bind
on earth shall be bound in heaven. But the Pope corrects this, and says unto
them, whatsoever you lose shall not be unbound; for there are certain great
offenses which are called Cases reserved: the absolution whereof lies not in
your power, but is a privilege peculiar unto me. Understand now what these
grievous sins are, that are thus reserved to the Pope, Is it Paricide,
Incest, treason against Princes, murder, or blasphemy against God? No such
matter; that is ever pardoned by every Bishop; for such sins are but against
the law of God: but the sins that be out of their power are these; See the
Bull de caena Domini which is of cases reserved to the pope.
If any man hinder them that go to Rome for Pardons, if any man be an intruder
into any Benefice, or office Ecclesiastical, if any have purloyned the goods
of the Church, or if any have offended the Sea Apostolical; the absolution of
such horrible sins as these are, is no where else to be had, but at Rome:
These are the cases reserved. For, to offend the Pope, or to bereave him of his
profit, is matter far more heinous then to offend against the Majesty of
God. And in the book of the Penitentiary Tax, in the chapter of Absolutions,
the falsifying of Letters Apostolical, is taxed at seventeen groats, whereas
for a man to company with his mother, but at five groates only.

Seeing then that about this inequality of the Keys, which gives a
superiority to S. Peter above the other Apostles: our adversaries cannot defend
themselves by any authority out of the holy Scripture: let us see whether we
can furnish our selves with any places directly against it.

1 I say then, that if the Apostles had not the Keys of heaven, nor the power
to bind and lose, but subordinately under S. Peter: the Apostle S. Paul should
have spoken very unadvisedly in saying 2. Cor. 11.5. I think that I have not
in any thing been inferior to the rest of the Apostles: when he says (in
any thing) he admits no exception.

(...)
2 Add hereunto, that if he had been subject to S. Peter he should much have
forgotten himself when Galat. 2. he said that there was no difference between
him and those that seemed to be the chief; for then there must needs have
been great difference betwixt their charges.

3 And again this that he speaks is yet much more, That those who were in
the greatest account among the Apostles added nothing unto him, whereas
doubtless S. Peter would at the least have given authority to S. Paul's charge,
if it had depended from the authority of S. Peter.

4 But cheefely that which Paul adds is worthy of consideration, that the
charge of preaching to those of the uncircumcision was in as large a manner
committed unto him, as that of the circumcision was unto Peter: See here how
they parted the labor betwixt them; it fell unto S. Peter's lot to preach unto
the Jews, and S. Paul's to preach unto the Gentiles: a thing that would be
ridiculous and strange now a days, if any Bishop should seek to divide the
charge of governing Churches, between him and the Pope: or should send the
Pope to preach in Almaine or Spain to convert the Jews.

5 It is also worth the noting, that S. Paul in the same place, verse 9. naming
those three Apostles, James, Cephas and John; places Cephas, which is Peter,
after James. Now in these our days if a man should speak thus, The Bishop of
Lions, the Bishop of Rome, and the Bishop of Ambrun, men would hold him for a
mad man. But S. Paul in setting Peter between others, he shows that he had
not yet learned that S. Peter was chief of the Church universal, or that he
had jurisdiction over the rest of the Apostles.

For their last assault and encounter, they produce the words of Jesus Christ
unto Peter, Feed my Lambs; which words they have made wonderful fruitful,
and full of many consequences: for thus they expound them, Thou Peter and thy
Successors, Popes of Rome, feed you alone all my lambs, and do you take
upon you a sovereignty over all other Pastors. How many strange and venterous
Glosses are here on the Text? And how have they peeced out this latchet, to
make it reach home? For though Jesus Christ do expressly command Peter to
feed his sheep, yet he excludes not the other Apostles: They are all called
Pastors: and all faithful Bishops and Ministers, are enjoined to feed the
Church of God, Acts 20.28. True it is that S. Peter was Pastor of all the
sheep of Jesus Christ throughout the world, but so were likewise the other
Apostles: For S. Paul also 2. Cor. 11. verse 28. says, that he has the care
of all Churches: their charge was to walk and to have an eye every where, for
thus says Jesus to them all, Acts 1. And you shall be witnesses unto me to the
very ends of the earth: And hereupon S. Augustine is very plain in the
thirtieth chapter of his book of the christian combat, When the Lord says
unto Peter, Cum dicit Petro amas me? pasce oues meas, idem dixit and caeteris.
Love thou me? feed my sheep, he says the same unto all. But why speaks
he to him alone? Because not long before he only had denied him: He only that
fell had only need to be raised up, and to be re established in his charge:
for otherwise a man might well have called his Apostleship into question And
why does he rehearse the same words unto him thrice? Because he had denied the
Lord three times: as many falls, so many restorings: These be not raisings of
him unto dignity, but strengthnings of his infirmity. As says S. Augustine,
Treatis. 123. upon S. John. A triple denial is recompensed with a threefold
confession, Redditur negationi trina confessio, ne minus amori lingua seruiat
quam timori, etc.
to the end that his tongue might serve him no less to declare his love, then
it had done in disclosing his fear.

In the mean time, albeit all the Apostles had a general care over all
Churches, yet this does not hinder, but that each of them might have a peculiar
charge, besides their general: S. Paul was charged with instructing the
Gentiles, and S. Peter with teaching the Jews, and it appears not that this
his commission was at any time changed, and that in stead of being the special
Teacher of the Jews, he was made Bishop of Rome. Besides that, his dwelling at
Rome could not well have sorted and agreed with the teaching of the Jews, Act.
18.11.
who now were banished from Rome under Claudius the Emperor, which was the very
time of S. Peter's preaching: during which time, he visited the Jews
scatteredinto Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Bithinia, and into all Asia, as
appears by the first verse of his first Epistle. This was somewhat too far
from his Bishopric of Rome, and nothing suitable with the dignity of the
Monarch of the Universal Church.

We will not here contend whether S. Peter were ever at Rome: for albeit this
History be full of darkness, yet I am enclyned to believe, that he suffered
Martyrdom at Rome, because Tertullian, Eusebius, and others do affirm the
same: But yet the daylight is not more clear, then it is evident that stayed
there but a very small time, and not twenty five years, as our adversaries do
calculate. One proof shall serve to be added to those which are alleged by
others.

We grant then that S. Peter and S. Paul did suffer Martyrdom at Rome, upon
one and the same day, as Eusebius and some others affirm. This being so, we
will show most plainly, that S. Peter had not yet been at Rome three years
before his death. For S. Paul being to depart from Corinth to go toward
Jerusalem, wrote an Epistle to the Romans, as appears by the subscription of
his Epistle dated from Corinth; and by the five and twentieth verse of the
fifteenth Chapter, Now I go up to Jerusalem. His voyage to Jerusalem is
described in the 18, 19, and 20. chapters of the Acts unto the 15. verse of the
21. chapter: Seven days after his arrival he is taken, and to avoid the
violence of the Jews, he appealeth unto Caesar: when he came to Rome he
preached there two years, Acts 28.30. and there suffered Martyrdom, as we may
easily gather out of the 2. Timothy, Chapter 4. verse 6. and by the
subscription of the Epistle. From whence it appears, that the Epistle to the
Romans could not be written above three years before his death: and not to be
too strict, let us admit that it might be 4. years: let us now show, that S.
Peter had not been at Rome, when S. Paul wrote this Epistle; for that is
proved by the fifteenth chapter of the said Epistle to the Romans, where
Saint Paul says that he is resolved to go to Rome, whereof he renders this
reason, to wit, I study to set forth the Gospel, not in those places where
mention has been already made of Jesus Christ, to the end (faith he) that I
build not upon another man's foundation. He presupposes then that neither S.
Peter nor any Apostle, had till that time, laid nay foundation in the Church of
Rome, otherwise S. Paul going thither soon after, should have built upon
another groundwork. The renown and credit, and the mutual conference and
conversation of the Christian strangers with the Romans had sown the
Christian Religion at Rome: but before S. Paul's coming thither, there was not
any form of a Church governed, S. Paul laid the first foundation as is
manifest by the place alleged.

This being thus gained, let us end the rest of the combat: The Kings Majesty
of England has advisedly noted, that the Apostle S. Paul did excommunicate the
incestuous person of his own authority, the spirit of the Corinthians joining
with his spirit, without making or meddling with S. Peter's spirit: Coeffeteau
here answers, that by the spirit S. Paul meant not authority, but knowledge
and declaration of will, as Beza expounds it: I answer, that this
declaration of will, was done by virtue of the power and authority which he
had, as he adds in the words following, In the name of our Lord Jesus and by
his power: so calls he that power which Christ had given him, and which he
denies to have received from any man, Gal. 1. v. 1. and chap. 2. v. 6. n="*"
They which were the cheef brought nothing unto it.
But (says Coeffe^eau) it is not necessary at all times to express all the
functions of the Church, nor the Primacy of S. Peter, it being sufficient to
believe it. Then say I, if he omitted it in this place, and never thelesse
believed it: you must then show us some other place wherehe confesses that he
believed it.

Coeffoteau goes further, and says, Coeff. fol. 89.
That in the Letters of the Council of Jerusalem, the decision was made by the
authority of the whole Assembly, without speaking of Peter, Acts 15.23. because
the Letters were sent in the name of all the company: n="*" The apostles and
the Elders and brethren, to the brethren that are of the Gentiles in Antiochia.
Besides it is sufficient, that elsewhere S. Peter is called chief, by the
Oracle of truth, and that Peter himself speaks first.

To this I say, that if in these days a Council, where the Pope were present,
should write Letters to decide a Controversy, it would be thought very
strange, if in those Letters there were no mention made of the Pope. Again, we
cannot find that the Oracle of truth did ever give unto S. Peter any power or
Jurisdiction over the other Apostles. Furthermore in this Council Peter spoke
as a man that gave his advise or judgment but it was James that spoke last,
and pronounced the final decision, as President in the action.

But among all the reasons alleged by the King of great Britain, that is
most witty and forcible, which is drawn from the first chapter of the first to
the Corinthes, which has not been yet noted by any other. S. Paul had founded
the Church of Corinth, and had labored mightily: but after his departure from
them, they fell to faction and partaking, one saying, I am of Paul, another of
Apollo, and another of Peter. Those that said they were of Paul, had a desire
rather to become his followers, then Peter's: it appears then, that S. Paul
had not taught them to acknowledge S. Peter to be his Superior, and to be the
head of the universal Church; for if he had so taught them, they would never
have resisted and withstood that his instruction: Neither is it possible that
any man would oppose himself herein against S. Paul, thinking in so doing, to
become his Disciple, or that he would not believe him, to the end he might
become his follower. This is not only absurd, but it is also impossible: from
this argument so aptly collected, Coeffeteau being unable to comprehend the
force thereof, is driven to shifts and querkes clean from the purpose.

To as little purpose is it, when he says that Calvin speaking of the
Controversy between Paul and Peter, Coeff. fol. 90.
Gal. 2. did not infer a Preference of S. Paul before S. Peter, but only an
equality, for his Majesty does not intend a pre-eminence of S. Paul above S.
Peter in general, but only in this particular action; Forasmuch as justly to
reprehend, is a thing more noble then to be reprehended, and to teach better
then to learn: I also add that it is very likely, that if S. Peter had had
his Cardinals about him, or a guard of Swyssers and Light Horsemen, See
Crysostome upon chap. 1. to the Galathians.
he would not have suffered S. Paul to have withstood him to his face. But
follow on the line and leauell of S. Paul's purpose, (...).
and it will lead you directly to the truth, that S. Paul's drift was to meet
with, and to prevent the mis-regard which some had of his Apostleship, which
some held to be of an inferior rank, because he was none of the twelve, but
came after them. Against this opinion of theirs, he justly armeth himself, and
says in the very beginning of his Epistle, that he is an Apostle not of men,
nor by man, but by Jesus Christ: where he teaches us sufficiently that he had
no commission from S. Peter And chap. 2. verse 6. (he says) that they that
seemed to be in estimation added nothing unto him. He says that the charge was
divided between him and Peter: to him were the Gentiles committed, even as to
Peter, those of the circumcision: that James, Peter and John, who were
accounted the Pillars gave, him the right hand of Fellowship: that he withstood
Peter to his face, when he came to Antioch, Petrum solum nominant and sibi
comparat quia primatum ipse accepit ad fundandam Ecclesiam, se quoque pari modo
electum vt primatum haberet in fundandis gentis um Ecclesijs.
and went not the right way to the Gospel. And all this was spoken to make his
charge equal with the rest of the most excellent Apostles, and not as
Coeffeteau dreameth, to be an example of humility to his Superior, and of
liberty in place of an inferior: indeed S. Ambrose upon this place, gives to
S. Paul and S. Peter, an equal sovereignty, saying, he names Peter only, and
compares him with him, because he received the Primacy to found the Church,
and says, that Paul was in like manner chosen to have the superiority in
founding the Churches of the Gentiles. And again he says, And a little after.
Vt dignus esset habere primatum in praedicatione gentium sicut and habebat
Petrus in praedicatione Circumcisionis.
to the end that Paul might he well worthy to have the Primacy in preaching to
the Gentiles, as Peter in preaching to those of the Circumcision. Now lest any
man should say, that S. Peter had also the Primacy over the Gentiles, he
adds, Paulus gratiam primatus gentium sibi soli vendicat concessam a Deo:
Paul challenges that the Sovereignty over the Gentiles was by the favor of
God granted to him alone. By this it appears with how small credit
Coeffeteau alleges Ambrose upon this place. Chrysostom upon the same text
of the second to the Galat. compares S. Peter to S. Paul in these words: Paul
after so many and so mighty effects, (...).
having no need of S. Peter nor of his instruction, but being equal unto him
in dignity; for I will at this present say no more. He would perhaps have
said, that Paul was greater then he, as says Origin, Homily 3. upon Numbers,
that S. Paul was the greatest of the Apostles; whence it follows, Ipse ergo
Paulus Apostolorum Maximus, qui sciret multos esse etc.
that if Chrysostom, or any other call S. Peter the first or chief of the
Apostles, he understood it either in age or in order of place, and not in
Jurisdiction over the rest of the Apostles, otherwise these Fathers should have
contradicted themselves: and as for rank and precedence S. Paul seems little
to have regarded that too; for he names S. James before S. Peter, Gal. 2. ver.
9. James, and Cephas, and John, 1. Cor. cap. 9. The brethren of the Lord and
Cephas, As also does S. John, cap. 1. verse. 44. saying, Philip was of
B^thsaida, the town of Andrew and of Peter.

In like manner when Jesus sent them to preach, two and two together, S. Peter
was coupled with another as his fellow in that holy labor: And in Acts 8. the
Apostles sent Peter and John to preach in Samaria. Oh what a goodly matter
would it be now, adays if an Assembly of Bishops should send the Pope and a
companion joined with him, to preach in Swisser-land, or in the valley of
Augrogne? I think sure Mr. Coeffeteau would not like well of it; who avoiding
this point, answers nothing to that which his Majesty of England affirms,
to wit, that the Bishops of Rome have always been subject to the Councels,
and that the Council of Constance not long ago, using this authority did
depose three Popes: but he therein shifteth and betaketh himself to those
Titles which the Pope assumeth, and which the ancients do give unto him.

Of the Titles of quality of the Roman Bishop, and whether he be S. PETER'S
Successor, or no.
Mr. Coeffeteau confesses to the King of England that the Pope is called GOD,
Coeff. fol. 93.
and that he is a God on earth, but in the same sense that the Scripture
calls Kings and other Potentates Gods. But this is a faint and trifling
excuse, and much contrary to his Holiness meaning.

For in the old Testament the title of God is expressly given unto Princes in
the plural number; but to attribute unto himself the name of GOD in the
singular, is a thing that no Christian Prince or Prelate ever did. The Bishop
of Rome is the first that has usurped this title in this later age.

The new Testament also, attributes the name of God in the singular, to none
but the sovereign God, 2. Cor. 4.
or else Satan, whom the Apostle calls the God of this world, because in
this world he seeks to set footing into Gods room: and the Pagan Emperors
have also taken upon them the Title of God, Sueton. in Domitiano cap. 13.
Dominus Deus noster fi^ fieri in b^^. Martialis l. 5. Epig^. 8. Edictu^^ Dom ni
D^^que nostri.
as Domitian and Bassian Caracalla. And so the Pope in the Canon, Satis, Did.
96* And in the Gloss of the Extrauagant, Cum inter, he is called Dominus Deus
noster, the Lord our God. And in the last Council of Lateran, Sess. 9. Diuinae
Maiestatis tuae conspectus, The beholding of your divine Majesty. And in the
first book of holy Ceremonies, Sect. 7. cap. 6. The seat of God, that is to
say, the Sea Apostolical. And so likewise Steuchus the Popes Library Keeper in
his book of Constantines Donation, Seeds, Dei, id est seeds Apostolica
says, that Constantine held Syluester for God, and ador auit vt Deum, and
worshippted him as God. In Italy at the gate of Tolentine, there is this
inscription, Paulo 3. Optimo Maximo in terris Deo, To Paul the third the best
and greatest God on earth. Of this there are infinite examples.

Now that the Pope is not called God in the same sense that Kings are called
Gods in the Scripture, appears by this, that he does not only attribute unto
himself the name of God, but also those very honors and preheminences that
belong unto none but God alone, for he will be worshipped on earth as God. The
last Council of Lateran, Session 3. and Session 10. says, that the Pope ought
to be worshipped of all people, and does most resemble God. And lest a man
should think that it speaks of a civil kind of worship, it expounds it
self, and shows with what worship it should be worshipped, to wit, with the
same adoration that is spoken of, Psalm 72. Ador abunt eum omnes reges terrae,
All the Kings of the earth shall worship him: where the Psalmist speaks of
that adoration which is due unto Jesus Christ, as Tertullian teaches, lib. 5.
against Martion, cap. 9. And so does the Poet Mantuan understand it that
speaks thus of the Pope:

Ense potents gemino, cuius vestigia adorant
Caesar, and aurato vestit imurice Reges.
That is,

His power has two swords in store,
Him Emp^rours serve and do adore:
Kings in Robes for Princes meet,
Of gold and Purple, kiss his feet.
The Histories of these later ages are full of examples of this adoration of
Popes. Sigonius lib. 9. Populum diuisa per vicos pecunia ad ador andum inuitant.
In the second Tome of the Councels they would persuade the Emperor Justinian,
that he ought to adore Pope Agapet. But the most remarkable adoration is that
which is given unto him in the Conclaue presently after his election; for so
soon as he is named Pope by the Cardinals shut up in the Conclaue, he is
stripped out of his ordinary habites, and there are others given him: amongst
other things read hose and read shoes, having a Cross of gold, a red
girdle with buckles of gold, a red bonet and a rochet. And thus being armed
at all points with his red cloak and triple Crown, See this Ceremony
described in the first book of the Ceremonies Sect. 1. cap. 6.
glittering with Diamonds, they lift him up as a sacred body, and set him on
the Altar; there the Cardinals kiss his hands and feet. This is vulgarly
called among the Italians Adoratione; which is the more to be noted, because
they set him upon the Altar, which is the place where they place their
Masse-god, and it is the place appointed for divine adoration. So that this
manner of adoration cannot be taken for civil adoration. By this also it is
evident, that forasmuch as Kings are more mighty and powerful then Popes in
civil causes: if this were a civil worship, then consequently they ought the
rather to be worshipped. But they are so far from being worshipped, as that
themselves are enforced to worship the Popes. And if a King should call
himself God, it should little avail him to allege places of the old
Testament, where Princes are called Gods; for that would no way serve his
turn, but that among Christians he would be accounted a blasphemer: for now
the Pope takes this Title upon himself exclusiuely, shutting out al other
Princes: because with him it carries a religious sense, and that imports
adoration. Again, Princes in respect that they are called Gods, do not
arrogate to themselves a liberty of being free (...) reprehension, or of being
judged of any man, as does the Pope in the Canon Satis, did. 96. the words
whereof are these: It is evidently showed, that the Pope can neither be bound
nor unbound by any secular power; Satis euidenter ostenditur a seculari
potestate nec solui prorsus nec ligari pontificem quem constat a pio principe
Constantino quem long superes memorauimes Deum appellatum, cum nec posse Deum
ab hominibus iuiudicari manifestum sit.
because we know he has been called God by that religious Prince, Constantine
before mentioned, and God cannot be judged by man. He excludes Princes from
the Title of Gods, to reserve it to himself: and approving the saying of
Constantine that called him God, he infers thereupon that the Pope cannot
be judged of any man. But let us note by the way that Constantine said in the
Council of Nice, speaking to all the Bishops there present, You are Gods: but
he never spoke this particularly to the Bishop of Rome.

In consequence also of this Title the Pope calls his Decrees and Canons
Oracles: Oracle signifies the answer of God, Extra de Maioritate and obed.
Titulo 33. cap. Per tuas.
Romans 3.2. and 11.4. With like modesty he terms his Decretall Epistles
Canonical Scriptures, Did. 19. in the Canon, In Canonicis, the inscription
whereof is this; Inter Canonicas Scripturas Decretales Epistolae connumerantur,
The Decretall Epistles are numbered among the Canonical Scriptures. He
boasts himself to have all power in heaven and upon earth, in the last
Council of Lateran, Sess. 9. and 10. and attributes it unto himself in his
book of sacred Ceremonies, Sect. 7 Cap. 6. according to which power Innocent
the third, in his Bull Adliberandam, In retributionem iustorum salutis aeternae
pollicemur augmentum
which is at the end of the second Council of Lateran, gives unto Pilgrims
that came from beyond the Seas an increase of glory above the rest.

Among all these I find none so odious, as that Title which he takes of being
the Spouse of the universal Church, which belongs particularly to Jesus
Christ, as S. Paul says, 2. Cor. 11. For I have married you unto one man, to
present you as a chaste Virgin unto Christ. Extrauag. de immunitate Eccles.
Tit. 22. Capite Quoniam in 6
And yet this is the quality which the Pope takes unto himself in more then
thirty places in his Decrees and Decretals, and in the last Council of
Lateran. And to the end you may know his books, in what sense he is called the
Spouse of the Church, Bellarmine who wrote at Rome, Ac ne forte.
l. 1. de Romans Pont. c. 9. says, that the Pope is the Spouse of the Church,
etiam Christo excluso, Christ being excluded. And albeit Christ were not
excluded, yet in matter of marriage, we are not accustomed to accept of a
Deputy.

Whosoever would here heap up places, in which both the Pope and his
flatterers attribute unto him, that he is above the law and above all right;
and that he may dispense against the Apostles, nay against the Gospel it
self: that likewise he has power to dispense with oaths made unto God, and a
thousand things of the like nature, whereby he sets himself above God;
might well of these things compose a great volume, and grieve the heart of the
godly Reader, who is touched with a zeal of Gods house: But this shall suffice
to show that Coeffeteau wrongeth the Pope much in saying, that he is called God
only in that sense that Princes are, that is to say, for civil
considerations: for in all that is abouesaid, there is no one thing spoken of
civil respect, all is built upon consideration of Religion, I should have said
against Religion.

And as little grace has he in defending the Popes triple crown, when he is
driven to say, that the title of Majesty is very fit to be given to the holy
things. For certainly S. Peter was far more holy then the Pope, and
consequently ought to have had the greater Majesty: and yet neither Peter nor
any other Prelate, many ages after him, did ever wear three crowns, or
adorned their heads with Diamonds. This luster well becomes worldly Majesty,
but not spiritual holiness, which ought to shine in virtues and not in
precious stones, and to appear rather in Martyrdom then in pomp, and to
edify men's hearts, in stead of dazeling their eyes: yet all the Majesty of
Kings was never comparable to this worldliness: never did any of them think
it fit to wear three Crowns: The only name of this Head-tire teaches us
what to judge: for in Italy it is called It regno, The Kingdom: and the book
of holy Ceremonies does ordinarily so call it, to show that the Pope wears
that Crown as a King, and not as a Bishop or Pastor of the Church. The mark
of the Bishopric in the Church of Rome, is the Pastoral staff, which they
call the Crosier. But the Pope carries none such, as Innocent the third
teaches us in his first book of the mysteries of the Mass, cap. 42. Because
says he, S. Peter sent his Crosier to Eucharius Bishop of Treuers, which is
there kept for a relic. The first Author of this Fable is unknown, but it was
devised to persuade the people that S. Peter having laid aside his Crosier,
wore the triple Crown as Monarch of the earth, of hell, and of heaven or as
governor of Asia, Affricke and Europe.

Now it is not without cause that this Crown is called the Kingdom, because
the Pope quallifieth himself with the Titles of King and Monarch: The last
Council of Lateran, Sess. 10. speaks thus to the Pope, The Empire of your
Holiness: and Sess. 9. Regale Romanorum Pontificum genus, The Royal race of
the Roman Bishops, Imperium Sanctitatis verstrae. Papa Sacerdos and Rex.
and in the 3. Sess. The Pope is Priest and King: and in the first Session he
is called Princeps totius orbis, Prince of the whole world: and therefore he
preaches no more. Sometimes he says Mass on some solemn day, but in that
Mass he causes himself at sundry times to be adored: If any King be present,
he must hold the Napkin, but it must be upon his knee, as did King Charles the
eight to Pope Alexander the sixth.

And for his better reading in the Missall, he has a Cardinal that poynteth
to the letters with his finger, Liber sacrarum Cerem. l. 2. sect. 1
as men use to teach young children; he then changes his Hose and Shoes many
times, he sucketh the Chalice with a reed: at his going away he swells and
puffs up his cheeks, and gives the benediction by blowing upon them, as
though he gave the holy Ghost.

As touching the Titles of Head of the faith, supreme Judge of all
Controversies, which his Majesty of England vpbraydeth the Pope withal,
Coeffeteau passes that over, and speaks nothing, as thinking it a thing not
able to be maintained: So does he disclaim that Title of Monarch of the world,
condemning therein the Council of Lateran before alleged, that calls him
King and Prince of the whole world. And we have before produced certain Theses
lately disputed of at Naples, and dedicated to the Pope now reigning, Paulo 5.
Vice-Deo Christiani orbis monarch.
wherein he is called Vice-God, Monarch of the Christian world.

Titles of greater Antiquity.
THese new titles being thus taken away, Coeffeteau comes on with a fresh
supply, and brings such as are more ancient; and herein he craves the
assistance of the Fathers: but first he racketh and tortureth them, and by
strayning constrayneth them to speak things against their will.

The first place is out of Tertullian, cap. 1. of his book of chastity,
Pontifex scilicet Maximus Episcopus Episcoporum dicit, ego and moechiae and
fornicationis delicta poenitentia functis dimitto. O edectum cui ascribi non
potest bonum foctum.
where he calls the Bishop of Rome Sovereign Bishop, Bishop of Bishops. The
Reader that will give himself leisure but to look upon the place, shall find
that Tertullian speaks this by way of flouting and mocking the Bishop of
Rome, for these are his words: Yea indeed the chief Bishop, the Bishop of
Bishops says thus: I forgive the sins of Adultery and Fornication, to those
that have performed their due time of Penance. O Edict, upon which a man may
write, It was the custom of the ^^omanes to write over their Edicts B. F.
Bonumfactum, a good deed. Sueton. in Iulio cap. 81. and in Vitellio cap. 14.
Plautus Poenulo. Banum factum edicta vt seruetis mea.
THAT SHALL BE WELL DONE. Besides, we know not whether he spoke of the Bishop of
Rome, or of the Bishop of Carthage a Metrapolitane in Affricke: but howsoever
cap. 21. he follows the Bishop of Rome far more plainly, faying* If
because the Lord said unto Peter, upon this Rock I will build my Church,
therefore thou pretendest that the power to bind and loose is derived unto
thee, that is to say, to every Church that has an affinity or neerenesse with
S. Peter: who art thou that changest and ouerthrowest the manifest meaning of
Jesus Christ, Si quia dixerat Petro Dominus, super hanc petram etc. id circo
praesumis and ad te deriuasse soluendi and alligandi potestatem qualis es
euertens atque commutansmanifestam, Domi^^, intentionem personaliter hos Petro
conferentem?
who conferred the same personally unto Peter?

The next is S. Jerome, who calls the Bishop of Rome sovereign Priest, a
name which the Ancients give to every Bishop, as does also the Greek word
(...). The name also of a Foundation of the Church is common the all the
Apostles, as we have showed, and to all their true Successors. S. Jerome says
not, that the Bishop of Rome is the only Foundation of the Church: and if he
should have so said, he would surely have been suspected of flattering his
Bishop, as being himself a Roman Priest; which nevertheless did not hinder
him in an Epistle written to Euagrius, to affirm that all Bishops are of
equal dignity, and to place the Bishop of Rome but in equality with others.
The place is very remarkable: In what place soever (says he) a Bishop be,
whether he be at Rome, at Agubium, at Constantinople, at Rhegium, at
Alexandria, or at Tanis, he has one and the same priesthood; the power of
wealth or baseness of poverty, makes not one Bishop higher or lower then
another. In brief they are all the successors of the Apostles. But thou will
say unto me, how comes to pass, that at Rome, a Pressed is received to his
charge upon the testimony of one Deacon? To this objection, propounded to the
end to have all other Churches ruled after the example of the Roman, he
answers thus: Why bring thou me in here the custom of one town? why do
thou bring in a small number, by whose means pride is crept in among the laws
of the Churches.

In the third place he alleges S. Augustine saying: That in the Roman
Church, the principality of the Apostolic Sea has always flourished. If he
had read the ancient histories, he should have learned that antiquity gives
also this principality to the Churches of Antioch, Alexandria, and of Jerusalem.

Sozomene chap. 16. of his book eleventh, speaking of the Council of Nice,
Fluic Concilio interfuere in Episcopis qui seeds teneba^t Apostolicas Macarius
Hierosolymorum Antistes, etc.
At this Council were present amongst the Bishops, that held the Apostolic
Seas. Macharius Bishop of Jerusalem, Eustance Bishop of Antioch, and Alexander
Bishop of Alexandria, (...) Ruffinus lib. 2. chap. 21. says, that Damasus at
Rome, Timothy in Alexandria, and John in Jerusalem, reestableshed the Seas
Apostolic.

In Theodoret lib. 5. chap. 9. the Church of Antioch is called the most ancient
Church and of all the most Apostolic; and presently after, the mother of all
the Churches, as it is likewise called in many other places.

Coeffeteau after these adds a falsehood: he says that the Council of
Chalcedon acknowledges the Bishop of Rome to be head of the Church, and the
first of all other: and this is found in the 16 Session. But note that it is
not the Council which speaks thus, but Paschasin deputed from Rome, who
pleads his own cause: and yet this hindered not this Council from making a
Canon expressly declaring and defining, that the Bishop of Constantinople is
equal with him of Rome in all things, yea even in causes Ecclesiastical: the
Canon has been produced by us before.

He further says, that Irenaeus chap. 3. lib. 3. does attribute unto the
Church of Rome, a principality more powerful the^ unto others: which is most
false, and an evident corruption of the place: Irenaeus speaks of the
principality and power of the city; for being the seat of the Empire, the
faithful of all Churches, had necessary occasions to repair thither. The
words are these: Ad hanc Ecclesiam propter potentiorem principalitatem necesse
est omnem conuenire etc. Ecclesiam: unto this Church by reason of the more
mighty principality it is necessary that every Church should resort. As if I
should say, that all the Churches of France should come to that of Paris,
because there is the principality and power of the Realm: and yet can I not
for all this say, that the faithful ministers of the Church of Paris, have a
principality over the rest.

Saint Cyprian in the third Epistle of his first book, does directly call the
Church of Rome the principal Church, because in all the West there was no
Church so great, or so remarkable as it He says that the unity of Priesthood
came from thence, because his opinion was, Hoc crant vtique and caeteri
Apostoli quod Petrus, pari consortio and honoris and potestatis, sed exordium
ab vnitate proficisc it ur vt Ecclesia vna monstretur.
that albeit the Apostles were all equal in power and honor, yet S. Peter was
entertained into his charge, some small time before the other Apostles, Jesus
Christ having a determination to begin from one, to the end to show the unity
of the Church, as he says in his treatise of the simplicity of Prelates: He
believed then, that S. Peter, who for a season held the sacerdo tall dignity
alone, to testify the unity of the Church, had been at Rome, and that from
thence Christian religion spread it self into the West. Now in this Cyprian
goes about to soften and to gratify the Bishop of Rome, to the end to prepare
him the better to taste, and to brook the checkes and reproves which
afterward he adioyneth, whereby he proves to Cornelius, that he has no power
at all over Affricke, and that he neither could nor ought to receive the causes
of those whom the Bishops of Affricke had condemned: for (says he presently
after) seeing it is ordered among us all, and that it is a thing just and
reasonable, that every man's cause should be examined where the crime was
committed, and that unto every Pastor there is allotted a portion of the
flock, which each one ought to govern, and lead, as being to render an
account unto the Lord of his carriage and behavior: there is no reason, that
those whom we guide should run from one place to another, and through their
fraudulent rashness, seek to break the concord of Bishops friendly knit
together: but that they should there plead their causes, where they may have
accusers and witnesses of their crimes, lest it fall out that some desperate
and forlorn persons should think, that the authority of the Bishops of
Affricke, who have condemned them, should be less then others, their cause
has been already examined, the sentence has been already pronounced. To
conclude, he maintains that Cornelius may not take knowledge of any causes
determined by the Bishops of Africa without accusing them of lightness, and
vustaydnesse, and so trouble the peace and quiet of the Church. This is the
cause that made Cyprian to gild his pill, and to extol the dignity of the
Church of Rome, before he would show him, that he ought not to thrust himself
into the affairs of other Churches.

For it is diligently to be noted, that those among the ancient Fathers, that
affirm that the Bishop of Rome is successor to Peter, do thereby understand
that he is successor in the charge of Bishop of Rome, but not in the
Apostleship. After this sort also the Bishops of Ephesus were successors to S.
John and S. Paul: the Bishops of Jerusalem successors to S. James, so far as
these Apostles were Bishops of Ephesus and Jerusalem: but they never were
successors to the Apostleship, and to the government of the Church Universal.
Nor is there any reason why the Bishop of Rome should be successor to Peter in
his Apostleship; and yet the Bishop of Jerusalem should be only successor to
S. James in his Bishoppricke. Besides, the Bishop of Antioch, more ancient
then the Bishop of Rome, has always been called the successor of S. Peter:
and why should it not be as well in the Apostleship and government of the
Universal Church? If you will say that Peter has taken away the prerogative
and pre-eminence from Antioch, and has transported it to Rome, we utterly deny
it; and thereof no proof worthy the receiving can be brought. If they further
say that Peter dyed at Rome. I will also say, that Jesus Christ dyed at
Jerusalem: And why should not Christ his death at Jerusalem, have in it more
power and virtue to make the Bishop of Jerusalem chief of the Church, then the
death of S. Peter at Rome to confer this great dignity upon the Bishop of
Rome?

I leave it likewise to the Readers, to judge who after the death of Peter
ought of right to be the chief of the Universal Church. For S. James lived
yet at Jerusalem, after S. Peter was dead. And the Apostle S. John out-liued
him 32 years, Eusebius in his Chronicle says, that Peter and Paul died the
year of our Lord 69. and that S. John dyed at Ephesus in the year 101.
according to the account of Eusebius and Irenaeus. Is it a thing to be
believed that S. John, the Disciple whom Jesus loved, who leaned on his breast,
unto whom he recommended his mother at his death; whose writings are divine
oracles; as the Revelations in the Apocalips do witness; that he should be
inferior to Linus the Disciple of Paul? and indeed, our aduer saries themselves
have inserred into the first Tome of their Councels, certain Epistles, which
they say were Clements Bishop of Rome, amongst which there is one to S. James
Bishop of Jerusalem: and thus it begins: Clemens to James brother of the
Lord, Bishop of Bishops, governing the holy Church of the Hebrews which is in
Jerusalem, Clemens Iacobo fratri Domini Episcopo Episcoporum.
yea all the Churches which are founded every where by the providence of God.
And a little after he calls him his Lord: words which witness that Clemens
acknowledged James for his superior, and chief of all the Bishops of the world.

We grant then willingly, that the ancient Bishops of Rome, before the
corruption of Doctrine and usurpation of the Monarchy in the Church, were
successors of S. Peter in the Bishoppricke of Rome only, even as the Bishop of
Corinth was successor to S. Paul: but withal we add this, that through the
corruption of Doctrine which has by little and little crept into the Church of
Rome (every age having added and contributed thereunto) he is now wholly and
justly fallen from that succession. For he may not in no wise be called Peter's
successor, who oppugneth the Doctrine preached by S. Peter, and who in the
Chair of verity does establish a lie. The Turk may not be called successor
to the Emperor of Greece, albeit he be seated in his place, seeing that he is
rather his subuerter. I would have one show me that ever S. Peter preached any
other purgatory then the blood of Jesus Christ: or any other satisfaction to
the justice of God, then his obedience: any other sacrifice propitiatory, then
his death. That ever he gave pardons for an hundred thousand years, or drew
souls out of Purgatory with bulls and indulgences: that he ever degraded
Emperors: that he took away from the people the reading of the holy
Scriptures, or the Communion of the Cup: or that he commanded the worshipping
of Images, and public Service to be said in an unknown tongue: or that he
ever constrained other Bishops to take from him letters of Inuestiture, and to
pay unto him Annates: Or that ever S. Peter was called God on earth, the Spouse
of the Church, and caused himself to be worshipped: or that ever he sung
Mass, or commanded the Host to be adored: or that ever he left off preaching
the Gospel, or quitted the Crosier-staffe, to take unto him a triple Diaderne:
If, I say, they can show me that S. Peter ever did these things, then though
the Pope were Bishop but of one Village alone, I will willingly acknowledge him
for S. Peter's Successor, but still in the Bishopric only, and not in the
Apostleship, which ended in his person, and is not derived unto his Successors
in particular Churches.

THus does the confession of the King of Englands faith remain firm and
unshaken, against which Coeffeteau has armed himself with humane testimonies,
being utterly destitute of any authority out of the book of God. For as they
that are ready to drown, catch hold on any thing, so these men in a desperate
cause embrace all defenses, but least of all, those that be good. Again,
whatsoever this Doctor alleges out of the Fathers, is found to be either
false, or clipped, or utterly counterfeit. This payment is not current,
especially to such a Prince who has consecrated his pen to the defense of
the truth. But this is not to be imputed to Coeffeteaus disability, but to the
unlawfulness of the cause, unto which we have in such sort satisfied, as
whosoever shall examine my work, he shall find an answer to Bellarmines
book also, which he has not long since made against the said book of the
King of great Britain, with more weakness and less dexterity then
Coeffeteau has done.

There remains the last part of his Majesty's book, wherein with a strain
of admirable wit, assisted by the spirit of God, he opens the book closed
with seven seals: and piercing into the secrets of sacred Prophesies, he
finds in the seat of Rome the full accomplishment of the Apocalypse. When hate
and bitterness shall be extinguished through time, Posterity shall admire both
the work and the person, and looking back into ages past for the like
pattern, shall not be able to find any thing to be compared with it. We will
not fear then to enter into these darkenesses under so great a guide: for it
is hard either to stumble or to stray, where so fair a Torch does light and
shine before us. But we must here take breath a while before we enter into this
task: For the sudden death of our King like a great crack of Thunder
benummeth our hands with astonishment, and troubles our spirits with grief
and anguish. Let us then give place to necessity, and leave to write, that we
may have leisure to lament: and let Posterity carefully bethink it self of
remedies, and hold it for a thing most certain, that he that sets light by
his own life, is master of another man's; and that there is nothing so forcible
to make us to contemn our own lives, as this new doctrine, which by the
murder of Kings opens the way to the Kingdom of heaven.

FINIS.
Faults necessarily to be corrected. The first number notes the Page, the
second the Line: The letter R. stands for Read, L. signifies the line in
the same PAGE.
PAge 13.25. r. Siloe. 14.20. r. Enfant. 17.19. r. Armies. l. 24. r. these.
20.15. r. villainies. 42.13. for that r. as. and l. 19. r. State. 49.25. r.
things that appear are more feared, etc. 56. l. vlt. r, retorted. 62.2. r.
infinity of businesses. 71.3. for or r. and. 74.2. r. differents. 79.24. r. in
the Books of the Acts and Charters. 81.1. r. See, and in the margent, paulum
and annixus. 82.1. r. whom. l. 3 r. give it. l. 20. r. Ostia. 84.25. r.
deuolued. 90.27. r. Ruota 91.4. r. fifth part, or fifth penny. 95.14. blot out
he, l. 25. r. Distinction. 97.23. for alleged r. already. 99.18. make it
560.100.26. r. no ways for now adays. 101.24. for take r. make. 102 17. r.
above. 104.24. for Sins r. Sums. 106.25. r Bellisarius. 107.20. r. Conon.
108.4. r. debonnaire. and l. 7. for to r. do. 110.1 for penalty r. priuity.
119.12. Consiglio. l. 17. r. retchlesse. 125.7. for which is r. with. l. 11. r.
Augustine. l. 25. for as r. and. in the margent Ponticus verunnius. 127.20. r.
different. 136.24. blot out kind. in the marg. r. communia debere. 140.9. r
messieurs. l. 12. r. of for or. 147.15. r. received them. 158.2. r. or no more.
160.25. r. Nattiers. 161.1. blot out the. 168.4. r. Doctors. l. 17. madonna.
27. Letanies. 169.22. for Fathers. r. salvation. 173.11. r. the brecz-flies.
174.9. r. discourse l. 19. r. she for he. 177. l. the last, r. Antonine. 178
27. r. places for phrases. 180.18. r. as not being. 182.18. r. lauour. l. 20.
r. washed. 188.18. r. but says 193.11 r no prescription. 197.27. for toward r.
over us. 203.20. r. out of the 217.23. for over turns r. powers out of. l.
the last r. therefore. 221.1. blot out the. 229.28. r. they saw well that if
they should break. 261.3. for tongues r. Fire-tongs. 281.11. r. commanded.
300.1. r. meditation. 301.8. for defective r. wanting. 305.4. r. another.
307.22. blot out that. l. 23. r. should 308.1. blot out bad. 309.25. r. with.
l. 28. r. istud. 349.14. for if r. though. 369.28. r. Suppositions.


