THE LAMENTABLE AND TRVE TRAGEDY OF M. ARDEN OF FEVERSHAM IN KENT. Who was
most wickedlye murdered, by the means of his disloyal and wanton wife, who
for the love she bare to one Mosbie, hired two desperate ruffins Blackwill and
Shakbag, to kill him. Wherein is showed the great malice and discimulation of a
wicked woman, the insatiable desire of filthy lust and the shameful end of
all murderers.

Imprinted at London for Edward White, dwelling at the little North door of
Paul's Church at the sign of the Gun, 1592.

The Tragedy of M. Arden of Feueshame.
( Enter Arden, and Francklin) Franklin ARden cheer up thy spirits and droup
no more
My gracious Lord ye Duke of Sommerset;
Has freely given to thee and to thy heirs,
By letters patents from his Majesty:
All the lands of the Abbey of Feuershame.
Here are the deeds sealed and subscribed with his name and the kings,
Read them, and leave this melancholy mood

Arden. Francklin thy love prolongs my weary life,
And but for thee, how odious were this life:
That shows me nothing but torments my soul,
And those foul objects that offend mine eyes,
Which makes me wish that for this vale of Heaven,
The earth hung over my heed and couerd me.
Love letters past twixt Mosbie and my Wife,
And they have preuie meetings in the Town:
Nay on his finger did I spy the Ring,
Which at our Marriage day the Priest put on,
Can any grief be half so great as this?

Fran. Comfort thy self sweet friend it is not strange,
That women will be false and wavering.

Arden. I but to dote on such a one as he
Is monstrous Francklin, and intolerable.

Francklin. Why, what is he?


Arden. A Botcher and no better at the first,
Who by base brocage, getting some small stock:
Crept into service of a noble man:
And by his servile flattery and fawning,
Is now become the steward of his house,
And bravely sets it in his silken gown.

Fran. No noble man will countnaunce such a pesant,


Arden. Yes, the Lord Clifford, he that loves not me,
But through his favor let not him grow proud,
For were he by the Lord Protector backed,
He should not make me to be pointed at,
I am by birth a gentle man of blood,
And that injurious riball that attempts,
To vyolate my dear wives chastity,
(For dear I hold her love, as dear as heaven)
Shall on the bed which he thinks to defile,
See his disseuered ioints and sinews torn,
Whylst on the planchers, pants his weary body,
Smeard in the channels of his lustful blood.

Fran. Be patient gentle friend and learn of me,
To ease thy grief, and save her chastitye:
Entreat her fair sweet words are fittest engines
To race the flint walls of a woman's breast:
In any case be not too Ielyouse,
Nor make no question of her love to thee,
But as securely, presently take horse,
And ly with me at London all this term
For women when they may, will not,
But being kept back, straight grow outrageous.

Arden. Though this abhorres from reason yet i will try it
And call her forth, and presently take leave: How Ales,

Here entes ales. Ales. Husband what mean you to get up so early.
Summer nights are short, and yet yo rise ere day,
Had I been wake you had not rise so soon,

Ard. Sweet love thou know that we two Ovid like
Have often chid the morning, when it began to peep,
And often wished that dark nights purblind steedes,
Would pull her by the purple mantle back:
And cast her in the Ocean to her love.
But this night sweet Ales thou have killed my heart,
I heard thee call on Mosbie in thy sleep.

Ales. It Is like I was a sleep when I named him,
For being awake he comes not in my thoughts:

Arden. I but you started up, and suddenly
In steed of him: caught me about the neck.

Ales. In steed of him? why, who was there but you,
And where but one is, how can I mistake.

Fran. Arden leave to vrdge her over far.


Arden. Nay love there is no credit in a dream,
Let it suffice I know thou love me well.

Ales. Now I remember where upon it came,
Had we no talk of Mosbie yesternight.

Fra. Mistres Ales I hard you name him once or twice,


Ales. And thereof came it, and therefore blame not me


Arden. I know it did, and therefore let it pass,
I must to London sweet Ales presently.

Ales. But tell me do you mean to stay there long?


Arden. No longer there till my affairs be done,


Fran. He will not stay above a month at most.


Ales. A month aye me, sweet Arden come again
Within a day or two, or else I die.

Arden. I cannot long be from thee gentle Ales,
Whilst, Michel fetch our horses from the field,
Franklin and I will down unto the key:
For I have certain goods there to unload,
Meanewhile prepare our breakfast gentle Ales,
For yet ere noone well take horse and away,

Exeunt Arden, and Francklin. Ales. Ere noone he means to take horse and away:
Sweet news is this, Oh that some ayrie spirit,
Would in the shape and liknes of a horse
Gallope with Arden cross the Ocean,
And throw him from his back into the waves.
Sweet Mosbie is the man that has my heart:
And he usurps it, having naught but this,
That I am tied to him by marriage.
Love is a God and marriage is but words,
And therefore Mosbies title is the best,
Tushe whether it be or no, he shall be mine,
In spite of him, of Hymen and of rytes. Here enters Adam of the Flourdeluce.
And here comes Adam of the flourdeluce,
I hope he brings me tidings of my love.
Now now Adam, what is the news with you?
Be not afraid my husband is now from home.

Adam. He whom you wot of Mosbie Mistres Ales,
Is come to town, and sends you word by me,
In any case you may not visit him.

Ales. Not visit him?


Adam. No nor take no knowledge of his being haere


Ales. But tell me is he angree or displeased.


Adam. Should seem so for he is wondrous sad.


Ales. Were he as mad as rauing Hercules,
I Will see him, I and were thy house of force.
These hands of mine should race it to the ground:
^^iles that thou would't bring me to my love.

Adam. Nay and you be so impatient I Will be gone

Ales. Stay Adam, stay, thou were wont to be my fr^d
Ask Mosbie how I have incurred his wrath,
Bear him from me these pair of silver dice:
With which we played for kisses manya t^me,
And when I lost, I wan, and so did he:
Such winning and such losing, Ieue send me,
And bid him if his love do not decline,
Come this morning but along my door:
And as a stranger, but salute me there,
This may he do without suspect or fear.

Adam. I Will tell him what you say, and so farewell.


Exit Adam. Ales. Do, and one day I Will make amends for all:
I know he loves me well, but dares not come,
Because my husband is so Ielious:
And these my marrow prying neighbors blab,
Hinder our meetings when we would confer.
But if I live that block shall be removed,
And Mosbie, thou that comes to me by stelth
shall neither fear the biting speech of men,
Nor Ardens looks, as surely shall he die,
as I abhor him, and love only thee. Here enters Michaell.
Now now Michaell, whether are you going?

Michael. To fetch my masters nagge,
I hope you will think on me.

Ales. I But Michaell see you keep your oath,
And be as secret, as you are resolute.

Michaell. I Will see he shall not live above a week.


Ales. On that condition Michaell here is my hand
None shall have Mosbies sister but thy self.

Michaell. I understand the Painter here hard by,
Has made report that he and Sue is sure.

Ales. There Is no such matter Michaell believe it not,


Michael. But he has sent a dagger sticking in a heart,
With a verse or two stolen from a painted cloth:
The which I here the wench keeps in her chest,
Well let her keep it, I shall find a fellow
That can both write and read, and make rhyme too,
And if I do, well, I say no more:
I Will send from London such a taunting letter,
As shall eat the heart he sent with salt,
And sling the dagger at the Painters head.

Ales. What needs all this, I say that Susan's thine


Michaell. Why then I say that I will kill my master
Or any thing that you will have me do.

Ales. But Michaell see you do it cunningly.


Michaell. Why, say I should be took, i will nere confess,
That you know any thing, and Susan being a Maid,
May beg me from the gallous of the Shriefe.

Ales. Trust not to that Michaell.


Michaell. You can not tell me, I have seen it I,
But mistres tell her whether I live or die.
I Will make her more worth then twenty Painters can,
For I will rid mine elder brother away:
And then the farm of Bolton is mine own.
Who would not venture upon house and land?
When he may have it for a right down blow.

Here enters Mosbie. Ales. Yonder comes Mosbie, Michaell get thee gone,
And let not him nor any know thy drifts. Exit Michaell.
Mosbie my love,

Mosbie, Away I say, and talk not to me now.


Ales. A word or two sweet heart, and then I will,
It Is yet but early days, thou need not fear.

Mosbie. Where is your husband?


Ales. It Is now high water, and he is at the key.


Mos. There let him be, hence forward know me not.


Ales. Is this the end of all thy solemn oaths?
Is this the fruit thy reconcilement buds?
Have I for this given thee so many favors.
Incurd my husbands hate, and out alas,
Made shipwreck of mine honor for thy sake,
And do thou say hence forward know me not?
Remember when I locked the in my closet,
What were thy words and mine, did we not both
Decree, to murder Arden in the night.
The heavens can witness, and the world can tell,
Before I saw that falshoode look of thine,
Fore I was tangled with thy tysing speech.
Arden to me was dearer then my soul,
And shall be still, base pesant get thee gone.
And boast not of thy conquest over me,
Gotten by witchcraft, and mere sorcery.
For what have thou to countenance my love,
being descended of a noble house,
And matched already with a gentleman,
Whose servant thou may be, and so farewell.

Mos. Ungentle and unkind Ales, now I see
That which I ever feared, and find too true:
A woman's love is as the lightning flame,
Which even in bursting forth consumes it self,
To try thy constancy have I been strange,
Would I had never tried, but lived in hope.

Ales. What needs thou try me, whom thou never found false


Mos. Yet pardon me for love is Ielious,


Ales. So list the Sailer to the Marmaids song,
So looks the trauellour to the Bau^liske,
I am content for to be reconcilde,
And that I know will be mine overthrow.

Mos. Thine overthrow? first let the world dissolve,


Ales. Nay Mosbie let me still inioye thy love,
And happen what will, I am resolute,
My saving husband hoordes up bags of gould,
To make our children rich, and now is he
Gone to unload the goods that shall be thine,
And he and Francklin will to London straight.

Mos. To London Ales, if thoult be ruled by me,
We Will make him sure enough for coming there.

Ales. Ah, would we could.


Mos. I happend on a Painter yesternight,
The only cunning man of Christendoome:
For he can temper poison with his oil,
That who so looks upon the work he draws,
Shall with the beams that issue from his sight,
Suck venomme to his breast and slay him self,
Sweet Ales he shall draw thy counterfeit,
That Arden may by gaizing on it perish

Ales. I but Mosbie that is dangerous,
For thou or I, or any other else,
Coming into the Chamber where it hangs, may die.

Mos. I but we will have it covered with a cloth,
And hung up in the study for himself.

Ales. It may not be, for when the pictur's drawn,
Arden I know will come and show it me.

Mos. Fear not we will have that shall serve the turn,
This is the painters house I Will call him forth,

Ales. But Mosbie I Will have no such picture I:


Mos. I pray thoe leave it to my discretion. Now, Clarke Here enters Clarke.
O you are an honest man of your word, you serud me well,

Clark. Why sir i will do it for you at any time,
Provided as you have given your word,
I may have Susan Mosbie to my wife:
For as sharp witted Poets, whose sweet verse
Make heavenly gods break of their Nector draughts,
And lay their ears down to the lowly earth:
Use humble promise to their sacred Muse,
So we that are the Poets favorite,
Must have a love, I, Love is the Painters Muse.
That makes him frame a speaking countenance.
A weeping eye that witnesses hearts grief,
Then tell me Master Mosbie shall I have her?

Ales. It Is pity but he should, heel use her well.


Mosbie Clarke heers my hand my sister shall be thine,


Cla. Then brother to requite this courtesy,
You shall command my life my skill and all.

Ales. Ah that thou could be secret,


Mosbie. Fear him not, leave, I have talked sufficient,


Cla. You know not me, that ask such questions:
Let it suffice, I know you love him well,
And feign would have your husband made away:
Wherein trust me you show a noble mind,
That rather then you will live with him you hate,
You Will venture life, and die with him you love,
The like will I do for my Susans sake.

Ales. Yet nothing could enforce me to the deed,
But Mosbies love, might I without control,
Enjoy thee still, then Arden should not die:
But seeing I cannot, therefore let him die.

Mos. Enough sweet Ales, thy kind words makes me melt,
Your trick of poisoned pictures we dislyke,
Some other poison would do better far.

Ales. I such as might be put into his broth,
And, yet in taste not to be found at all,

Clarke. I know your mind, and here I have it for you,
Put but a dram of this into his drink,
Or any kind of broth that he shall eat:
And he shall die within an hour after.

Ales. As I am a gentle woman Clarke, next day
Thou and Susan shall be married.

Mos. And i will make her dowry more the^ i will talk of Clark,


Clarke. Yonder Is your husband, Mosbie i will be gone.


Here enters Arden and Francklin. Ales. In good time, see where my husband
comes,
Master Mosbie ask him the question your self.

Exit Clarke. Mos. Master Arden, being at London yester night,
The Abbey lands whereof you are now possessed,
Were offered me on some occasion,
By Green one of sir Antony Agers men:
I pray you sir tell me, are not the lands yours?
Has any other in^^rest herein?

Arden. Mosby ^^at question well decyde anon,
Ales make ready my ^^ekfast, I must hence. Exit Ales.
As for the lands mosbie they are mine,
By letters patents from his Majesty:
But I must have a Mandat for my wife,
They say you seek to rob me of her love,
Villain what makes thou in her company,
She Is no companion for so base a groom.

Mosbie Arden I thought not on her, I came to thee,
But rather then I pocket up this wrong.

Francklin. What will you do sir?


Mos. Revenge it on the proudest of you both:


Then Arden draws forth Mosbies sword. Arden. So sirrah, you may not wear a
sword,
The statute makes against artificers,
I warrant that I do, now use your bodkin,
Your spanish needle, and your pressing Iron,
For this shall go with me, and mark my words,
You goodman botcher, it is to you I speak,
The next time that I take thee near my house,
In steed of Legs I Will make thee crall on stumps.

Mos. Ah master Arden you have inturde me,
I do appeal to God, and to the world.

Fran. Why can thou deny, thou were a botcher once,


Mos. Measure me what I am, not what I was.


Ar. Why what art thou now, but a Velvet drudge,
A cheating steward, and base minded pesant.

Mos. Arden now thou have belcht and vomited,
The rancorous venom of thy mis-swolne heart,
Hear me but speak, as I intend to live
With God, and his elected saints in heaven,
I never meant more to solicit her,
And that she knows, and all the world shall see,
I loved her once, sweet Arden pardon me.
I could not choose, her beauty fyred my heart,
But time has quenched these ouerraging coals,
And Arden though I now frequent thy house,
It Is for my sisters sake, her waiting maid
And not for hers, may thou enjoy her long:
Hell fyze and wrathful vengeance light on me,
If I dishonor her or iniure thee.

Ard. Mosbie with these thy protestations,
The deadly hatred of my heart is appealed,
And thou and I Will be friends, if this prove true.
As for the base terms I gave thee late,
Forget them Mosbie, I had cause to speak:
When all the Knights and gentlemen of Kent,
Make common table talk of her and thee.

Mos. Who lives that is not touched with staunderous tongues,


Fra. Then Mosbie, to eschew the speech of men,
Upon whose general brute all honor hangs,
Forbear his house.

Ard. Forbear it, nay rather frequent it more.
The world shall see that I distrust her not,
To warn him on the sudden from my house,
Were too confirm the rumor that is grown.

Mos. By faith my sir you say true,
And therefore will I soiourne here a while,
Until our enemies have talked their fill.
And then I hope they will cease, and at last confess,
How causeles they have inturde her and me.

Ard. And I will ly at London all this term,
To let them see how light I wey their words.

Here enters Ales. Ales. Husband sit down, your brekfast will be could,


Ard. Come M. Mosbie will you sit with us,


Mos. I can not eat, but i will sit for company.


Ard. Sir Michaell see our horse be ready.


Ales. Husband why pause ye, why eat you not,


Ard. I am not well, there is something in this broth
That is not wholesome, did thou make it Ales?

Ales. I did, and that's the cause it likes not you, Then she throws down the
broth on the ground.
There Is nothing that I do can please your taste.
You were best to say I would have poisoned you,
I cannot speak or cast aside my eye:
But he Imagines, I have stepped awry.
Here Is he that you cast in my teeth so often,
Now will I be convinced, or purge my self,
I charge thee speak to this mistrustfull man,
Thou that would see me hang, thou M of bye thou,
What favor have thou had more then a kiss
At coming or departing from the Town?

Mos. You wrong your self and me, to cast these douts
Your loving husband is not Ielious.

Ard. Why gentle mistres Ales, cannot I be ill,
But you will accuse your self.
Franckline thou haste a box of Methridate,
I Will take a little to prevent the worst.

Fran. Do so, and let us presently take horse,
My life for yours ye shall do well enough.

Ales. Give me a spoone, I le eat of it my self,
Would it were full of poison to the brim.
Then should my cares and troubles have an end,
Was ever silly woman so tormented?

Arden. Be patient sweet love, I mistrust not thee,


Ales. God will revenge it Arden if thou do.
For never woman loved her husband better, the^ I do thee,

Ard. I know it sweet Ales, cease to complain:
Least that in fears I answer thee again.

Fran. Come leave this dallying, and let us away.


Ales. Forbear to wound me with that bitter word,
Arden shall go to London in my arms.

Arden. Loath am I to depart, yet I must go,


Ales. Will thou to London then, and leave me here,
Ah if thou love me gentle Arden stay,
Yet if thy business be of great Import
Go if thou will I Will bear it as I may.
But write from London to me every week,
Nay every day, and stay no longer there
Then thou must needs, least that I die for sorrow.

Arden. I Will write unto thee every other side,
And so farewell sweet Ales till we meet next.

Ales. Farewell Husbaud seeing you will have it so.
And M, Francklin, seeing you take him hence,
In hope you will hasten him home I Will give you this

and then she kisseth him. Fran. And if he stay the fault shall not be mine,
Mosbie farewell and see you keep your oath.

Mosbie I hope he is not Ielious of me now.


Arden. No Mosbie no, hereafter think of me,
As of your dearest friend, and so farewell.

Exeunt Arden, Franklin, and Michaell. Ales. I am glad he is gone, he was about
to stay.
But did you mark me then how I brake of?

Mosbie. I Ales, and it was cunningly performed,
But what a villain is this painter Clarke?

Ales. Was it not a goodly poison that he gave?
Why he is as well now, as he was before.
It should have been some fine confection,
That might have given the broth some dainty tasty,
This powder was to gross and populos.

Mosbie But had he eaten but three spoonefulles more,
Then had he died, and our love continued.

Ales. Why so it shall Mosbie, albeit he live,


Mosbie. It is impossible, for I have sworn,
Never hereafter to solicit thee,
Or whylest he lives, once more importune thee.

Ales. Thou shall not need I will importune thee.
What shall an oath make thee forsake my love?
As if I have not sworn as much my self,
And given my hand unto him in the church,
Tush Mosbie oaths are words, and words is wind,
And wind is mutable: then I conclude,
It Is childishnes to stand upon an oath,

Mos. Well proved Mistres Ales, yet by your leave,
I Will keep mine unbroken, whilst he lives.

Ales. I do, and spare not his time is but short,
For if thou be as resolute as I,
We Will have him murdered, as he walks the streets:
In London many alehouse Ruffins keep,
Which as I hear will murder men for gould,
They shall be soundly fed, to pay him home:

Here enters Green. Mos. Ales what is he that comes yonder, know thou him


Ales. Mosbie be gone, I hope it is one that comes
To put in practice our intended drifts,

Exit Mosbie. Gre. Mistres Arden you are well met,
I am sorry that your husband is from home,
When as my purposed journey was to him,
Yet all my labor is not spent in vain:
For I suppose that you can full discourse,
And flat resolve me of the thing I seek.

Ales. What is it master Green? If that I may
Or can, with safety, I will answer you.

Green. I heard your husband has the grant of late,
Confirmed by letters patents from the king,
Of all the lands of the Abbey of Feuershame,
Generally entitled, so that all former grants,
Are cut of, whereof I my self had one,
But now my interest by that is void,
This is all mistres Arden, is it true nor no?

Ales. True master Green, the lands are his in state,
And whatsoever leases were before,
Are void for term of Master Ardens life:
He has the grant under the Chancery seal.

Gre. Pardon me mistres Arden, I must speak,
For I am touched, your husband does me wrong:
To wring me from the little land I have.
My living is my life, only that
Rests remainder of my portion.
Desire of wealth is endless in his mind,
And he is gredy gaping still for gain,
Nor cares he though young gentlemen do beg,
So he may scrape and hoorde up in his poutche,
But seeing he has taken my lands, I Will value life:
As careless, as he is careful for to get,
And tell him this from me, I Will be revenged,
And so, as he shall wish the Abbey lands
Had rested still, within their former state.

Ales. Alas poor gentleman, I pity you,
And woe is me that any man should want,
God knows it is not my fault, but wonder not
Though he be hard to others, when to me,
Ah master Green, God knows how I am used,

Gre. Why mistres Arden can the crabbed churl,
Use you unkindly, respects he not your birth?
Your honorable friends, nor what you brought:
Why? all Kent knows your parentage, and what you are

Ales. Ah M. Green be it spoken in secret here,
I never live good day with him alone:
When he is at home, then have I froward looks,
Hard words and blows, to mend the match withal;
And though I might content as good a man,
Yet does he keep in every corner trulles,
And weary with his trugges at home,
Then rydes he straight to London, there forsooth
He reuelles it among such filthy ones,
As counsels him to make a way his wife:
Thus live I daily in continual fear:
In sorrow, so dispairing of redres
As every day I wish with hearty prayer,
That he or I were taken forth the world.

Gre Now trust me mistres Ales, it greeueth me,
So fair a creature should be so abused.
Why who would have thought the civil sir, so sollen,
He looks so smoothly now fie upon him Churl,
And if he live a day he lives too long,
But frolic woman, I shall be the man,
Shall set you free from all this discontent:
And if the Churl deny my intereste,
And will not yield my lease into my hand,
I Will pay him home, what ever hap to me,

Ales. But speak you as you think?


Gre. I Gods my witness, I mean plain dealing,
For I had rather die then lose my land.

Ales. Then master Green be counseled by me
Indaunger not your self, for such a Churl,
But hyre some Cutter for to cut him short,
And here is ten pound, to wager them with all,
When he is dead you shall have twenty more.
And the lands whereof my husband is possessed,
Shall be intytled as they were before.

Gre. Will you keep promise with me?


Ales. Or count me false and periurde, whilst I live,


Gre. Then heeres my hand I Will have him so dispatched,
I Will up to London straight, I Will thither poast,
And never rest, til I have compast it,
Till then farewell.

Ales. Good Fortune follow all your forward thoughts Exit Grene.
And whosoever does attempt the deed,
A happy hand I wish and so farewell.
All this goes well, Mosbie I long for thee
To let thee know all that I have contrived,

Here enters Mosbie and Clarke. Mos Now now Ales what is the news,


Ales. Such as will content thee well sweet heart,


Mos. Well let them pass a while, and tell me Ales,
Now have you dealt, and tempered with my sister,
What will she have my neighbor Clarke, or no?

Ales. What M. Mosbie let him woo him self,
Think you that maids look not for fair words,
Go to her Clarke she is all alone within,
Michaell my man is clean out of her books.

Clarke I thank you mistres Arden, I will in,
And if fair Susan, and I can make a gree,
You shall command me to the uttermost,
As far as either goods or life may streatch. Exit Clark.

Mos. Now Ales lets bear thy news?


Ales. They be so good, that I must laugh for joy,
Before I can begin to tell my tale,

Mos. Lets hear them, that I may laugh for company


Ales. This morning M. Green, dick green I mean,
From whom my husband had the Abbey land,
Came hither rattling for to know the truth,
Whether my husband had the la nds by grant,
I told him all, where at he stormd a maine,
And s^^ore he would cry quittance with the Churl,
And if he did deny his enterest
Stabbe him, whatsoever did befall him self,
When as I saw his choler thus to rise,
I whetted on the gentleman with words
And to conclude, Mosbie, at last we grew
To composition for my husbands death,
I gave him ten pound to hire knaves,
By some devise to make away the Churl:
When he is dead, he should have twenty more,
And repossesse his former lands again,
On this we greed, and he is ridden straight
To London, to bring his death about.

Mos. But call you this good news?


Ales. I sweet heart, be they not?


Mos. I were cherefull news, to hear the churl were dead,
But trust me Ales, I take it passing ill,
You would be so forgetful of our state,
To make recount of it to every groom,
What? to acquaint each stranger with our drifts,
Cheesely in case of murder, why it is the way,
To make it open unto Ardens self.
And bring thy self and me to ruin both,
Forewarnde, forearmde, who threats his enemy
Lends him a sword to guarde himself with all.

Ales. I did it for the best.


Mos. Well, seeing it is don, cherely let it pas.
You know this Green, is he not religious?
A man I guess of great devotion.

Ales. He is.


Mos. Then sweet Ales let it pas, I have a drift
Will quiet all, what ever is amiss.

Here enters Clarke and Susan. Ales. Now now Clarke, have you found me false?
Did I not plead the matter hard for you?

Clarke. You did.


Mos. And what, Wilt be a match,


Clarke. A match, I faith sir I the day is mine,
The Painter, lays his colors to the life,
His pensel draws no shadows in his love.
Susan is mine.

Ales. You make her blushe.


Mos. What sister is it Clarke must be the man?


Su. Stresteth in your grant, some words are past,
And happily we be grown unto a match,
If you be willing that it shall be so?

Mos. Ah master Clarke, it rests at my grant,
You see my sister's yet at my dispose,
But so you will grant me one thing I shall ask,
I am content my sister shall be yours.

Clark. What is it M. Mosbie?


Mos. I do remember once in secret talk,
You told me how you could compound by Art.
A crucifix impoysoned:
That who so look upon it should wax blind,
And with the sent be stifeled, that ere long,
He should dye poysond, that did view it well.
I would have you make me such a crucifix,
And then I Will grant my sister shall be yours.

Cla. Though I am loath, because it touches life,
Yet rather or I Will leave sweet Susans love,
I Will do it, and with all the haste I may.
But for whom is it?

Ales. Leave that to us, why Clarke, is it possible*
That you should paint and draw it out your self,
The colors being balefull and impoysoned,
And no ways prejudice your self with all?

Mos. Well questioned Ales,
Clarke how answer you that?

Cla. Very easily, I Will tell you straight,
How I do work of these Impoysoned drugs,
I fasten on my spectacles so close,
As nothing can any way offend my sight,
Then as I put a lease within my nose,
So put I rubarbe to avoid the smell,
And softly as another work I paint,

Mos. It Is very well, but against when shall I have it,


Cla. Within this ten days,


Mos. I will serve the turn.
Now Ales lets in, and see what cheer you keep,
I hope now M. Arden is from home,
You Will give me leave to play your husbands part.

Ales. Mosbie you know whose master of my heart,
He well may be the master of the house. Eeunt,

Here enters Green and Bradshaw, Brad. See you them that coms yonder M. Green?


Gren. I very well, do you know them?


Here enters Black Will and Shakebagge. Brad. The one I know not, but he
seems a knave,
Choesly for bearing the other company:
For such a slave, so vile a roge as he,
Lives not again upon the earth,
Black-will is his name I tell you M. Green,
At Bulloine he and I were fellow soldiers,
Where he played such prankes,
As all the Camp feared him for his villainy:
I warrant you he bears so bad a mind,
That for a croune heel murder any man.

Gre. The fitter is he for my purpose mary.


Will. Now now fellow Bradshaw,
Whether away so early?

Brad. O Will times are changed, no fellows now,
Though we were once together in the field,
Yet thy friend to do thee any good I can.

Will. Why Bradshawe was not thou and I,
Fellow soldiers at Bulloine:
Where I was a corporal, and thou but a base mercenarye groom?
No fellows now, because you are a gouldsmith,
And have a little plate in your shop,
You were glad to call me fellow Will,
And with a cursy to the earth,
One snatch good corporal.
When I stole the half Ore from John the vitler.
And domineered with it, amongst good fellows,
In one night.

Brad. I Will, those days are past with me.


Will. I but they be not past with me.
For I keep that same honorable mind still,
Good neighbor Bradshaw you are too proud to be my fellow,
But were it not, that I see more company coming down
The hill, I would be fellows with you once more,
And share Crowns with you to.
But let that pas, and tell me whether you go.

Brad. To London Will, about a piece of service,
Wherein happily thou may pleasure me.

Will. What is it?


Brad. Of late Lord Cheiny lost some plate,
Which one did bring, and soulde it at my shop,
Saying he served sir Antony Cook,
A search was made, the plate was found with me,
And I am bound to answer at the syse,
Now Lord Cheiny solemnly bowen,
If law will serve him, hele hang me for his plate,
Now I am going to London upon hope,
To find the fellow, now Will I know
Thou art acpuainted with such companions,

Will What manner of man was he?


Brad. A lean faced writhen knave,
Hawk nosde, and very hollow eied,
With mighty furrows in his stormye brows,
Long hair down his shoulders curled,
His Chinne was bare, but on his upper lip,
A mutchado, which he wound about his ear,

Will. What apparel had he,


Brad. A watchet satin doublet all to torn,
The inner side did bear the greater show,
A pair of thread bare Velvet hose seame rent,
A wosted stockin rent above the shoe,
A livery cloak, but all the lace was of,
It Was bad, but yet it served to hide the plate,

Will. Sir Shakebagge, can thou remember
Since we trould the boule at Sittingburgh,
Where I broke the Lapsters head of the Lion
With a Cudgill stick?

Shak. I very well Will.


Will. Why it was with the money that the plate was sold for
Sir Bradshaw what will thou give him
That can tell thee who soulde thy plate?

Brad. Who I pray thee good Will,


Will. Why it was one Jack Fitten,
He Is now in Newgate, for stealing a horse,
And shall be arrainde the next life.

Brad. Why then let Lord Cheiny seek Jack Fitte^ forth
For I Will back and tell him, who robbed him of his plate,
This cheeres my heart M. Green, I Will leave you,
For I must to the I Will of Sheppy with speed,

Green Before you go let me entreat you
To carry this letter to mistres Arden of Feuershame,
And humbly recommend me to her self.

Brad. That will I M. Green, and so farewell.
Here Will, there is a Crown for thy good news.

Exit Bradshawe. Will. Farewell Bradshaw,
I Will drink no water for thy sake, whilst this lasts:
Now gentlemen, shall we have your company to London.

Gre. Nay stay sirs, a little more I needs must use your help,
And in a matter of great consequence,
Wherein if you will be secret and profound,
I Will give you twenty Angels for your pains.

Will. Now? twenty Angels? give my fellow
George shakbag and me, twenty Angels,
And if thoult have thy own father slain,
That thou may inherit his land, we will kill him,

Shak. I thy Mother, thy sister, thy brother, or all thy kin


Gre. Well this it is, Arden of Feuershame,
Has highly wronged me about the Abbey land,
That no reuendge but death will serve the turn:
Will you two kill him, hoeres the Angels down,
And I will lay the platform of his death:

Will. Plat me no platformes give me the money,
And i will stab him as he stands pissing against a wall,
but I Will kill him.

Sha. Where is he?


Green. He is now at London, in Aldersgate street,


Shak. He Is dead, as if he had been condemned
By an act of parliament, if once Black Will and I
Swear his death,

Gre. Here is ten pound, and when he is dead,
Ye shall have twenty more:

Will. My fingers itches to be at the pesant,
Ah that I might be set a work thus through the year,
And that murder would grow to an occupation:
That a man might without danger of law,
Zounds I warrant, I should be warden of the company,
Come let us be going, and well bate at Rochester,
Where I Will give thee a gallon of Sack,
To hansell the match with all. Exeunt,

Here enters Michael. Mich. I have gotten such a letter,
As will touch the Painter, And thus it is.

Here enters Arden and Francklin, and hears Michaell read this letter. My
duetye remembered Mistres Susan, hoping in God you be in good health, as I
Michaell was at the making hereof. This is to certify you, that as the Turtle
true, when she has lost her mate, sits alone, so I mourning for your
absence, do walk up and down. Poules, til one day I fell a sleep and lost my
masters Pantophelles. Ah mistres Susan abbolishe that paltry Painter, cut him
off by the shinnes, with a frowning look of your crabed countenance, and think
upon Michaell, who druncke with the dregs of your favor, well cleave as fast
to your love, as a plaster of Pitch to a gald horse back Thus hoping you will
let my passions penetrate, or rather impetrate mercy of your meek hands, I end.

Yours Michaell, or else not Michaell.


Ard. Why you paltrie knave,
Stand you here loytering, knowing my affairs,
What haste my business craves to send to Kent?

Fran. Faith friend Michaell, this is very ill,
Knowing your master has no more but you,
And do ye slache-his business for your own?

Ard. Where is the letter sir, let me see it, Then he gives him the letter.
See master Francklin, here is proper stuff,
Susan my maid, the Painter, and my man,
A crew of harlots all in love forsooth,
Sir let me hear no more of this.
Now for thy life, once write to her a word, Here enters Green, Will, and
Shakebag,
Will thou be married to so base a trull.
It Is Mosbies sister, come I once at home,
I Will rouse her from remaining in my house:
Now M. Francklin let us go walk in Paul's,
Come, but a turn or two and then away, Exeunt.

Gre. The first is Arden, and that's his man,
The other is Francklin Ardens dearest friend,

Will. Zounds I Will kill them all three,


Gre. Nay sirs, touch not his man in any case,
But stand close, and take you sit standing,
And at his coming forth speed him:
To the Nages head, ther'is this cowards haunt,
But now I Will leave you till the deed be don: Exit Green

Sha. If he be not paid his own nere trust shakebagge,


Will. Sir Shakbag, at his coming forth
I Will run him through, and then to the blackfreers,
And there take water and a way.

Sha. Why that's the best, but see thou miss him not.


Will. How can I miss him, when I think on the fortye
Angels I must have more.

Here enters a Prentise, Prentise. It Is very late, I were best shute up my stall,
For here will be old filching when the press comes forth of Paul's.

Then lettes he down his window, and it breaks Black Wills head. Will. Zounds
draw Shakbag draw, I am almost killed.


Pren. Well tame you I warrant.


Will. Zounds I am tame enough already,


Here enters Arden, Fran. and Michael. Ard. What trublesome fray or mutany is
this?


Fran It Is nothing but some brabling paltry fray.
Devised to pick men's pockets in the throng.

Ard. If nothing else? come Franklin let us away. Exeunt


Will. What mends shall I have for my broken head?


Pren. Mary this mends, that if you get you not away
All the sooner, you shall be well beaten and sent to the counter. Exit
prentise.

Will. Well I Will be gone, but look to your signs,
For I Will pull them down all.
Shakbag my broken head greeues me not so much,
As by this means Arden has escaped. Here enters Green.
I had a glimse of him and his companion.

Gre. Why sirs, Arden's as well as I,
I met him and Francklin going merrilly to the ordinary,
What dare you not do it?

Will. Yes sir we dare do it, but were my consent to give again,
We would not do it under ten pound more.
I value every drop of my blood at a french Crown.
I have had ten pound to steal a dog,
And we have no more here to kill a man,
But that a bargane is a bargane, and so forth,
You should do it your self.

Gre. I pray thee how came thy head broke,


Will. Why thou see it is broke, do thou not.


Sha. Standing against a staule, watching Ardens coming,
A boy let down his shop window, and broke his head.
Whereupon arose a braul, and in the tumult
Arden escapt us, and past by unthought on.
But forberance is no acquittance,
Another time well do it I warrant thee.

Gre. I pray thee will make clean thy bloody brow,
And let us bethink us on some other place,
Where Arden may be met with handsomely.
Remember how devoutly thou have sworn,
To kill the villain think upon thine oath.

Will. Tush, I have broken five hundred oaths,
But would thou charm me to effect this deed?
Tell me of gould my resolutions fee,
Say thou see Mosbie kneeling at my knees,
Offering me service for my high attempt:
And sweet Ales Arden with a lap of crowns.
Comes with a lowly cursy to the earth,
Saying take this, but for thy quarterige,
Such yearly tribute will I answer thee.
Why this would steal soft metled cowardice,
With which black Will was never tainted with.
I tell thee Green the forlorn trauailer,
Whose lips are glewed with summers parching heat,
Nere longd so much to see a running brook,
As I to finish Ardens Tragedy.
See thou this goare that cleaves to my face?
From hence nere will I wash this bloody stain,
Til Ardens heart be panting in my hand.

Gre. Why that's well said, but what says shakbag?


Shak. I cannot paint my valor out with words,
But give me place and opportunity,
Such mercy as the staruen Lyones
When she is dry sucked of her eager young:
Shows to the pray that next encounters her,
On Arden so much pity would I take.

Gre. So should it fair with men of firm resolve,
And now sirs seeing this accident,
Of meeting him in Paul's has no success:
Let us bethink us on some other place,
Whose earth may swallow up this Ardens blood. Here enters Michaell.
Se yonder comes his man, and wat you what,
The foolish knave is in love with Mosbies sister,
And for her sake whose love he cannot get,
Unless Mosbie solicit his suit.
The villain has sworn the slaughter of his master,
We Will question him, for he may stead us much:
Now now Michael whether are you going?

Mic. My master has new supt,
And I am going to prepare his chamber.

Gre. Where supt M. Arden?


Mic. At the Nages head, at the 18 pence ordinarye,
Now now M. Shakbag, what Black Will,
Gods dear lady, how chance your face is so bloody?

Will. Go too sir, there is a chance in it.
This sawcines in you will make you be knocked.

Mic. Nay and you be offended i will be gone.


Gre. Stay michael you may not escape us so.
Michael I know you love your M. well.

Mic. Why so I do, but wherefore vrdge you that?


Gre. Because I think you love your mistres better,
So think not I, but say, in faith what if I should?

Shak. Come to the purpose Michael, we hear
You have a pretty love in Feuershame,

Mic. Why have I two or three, what is that to thee?


Will. You deal to mildely, with the pesant, thus it is,
It Is kowne to us you love mosbies sister.
We know besides that you have taken your oath,
To further Mosbie to your mistres bed.
And kill your M. for his sisters sake.
Now sir, a poorer coward then your self,
Was never fostered in the coast of Kent.
Now comes it then, that such aknaue as you
Dare swear a matter of such consequence?

Gre. Ah will.


Will. Tush give me leave, there is no more but this,
Since thou have sworn, we dare discover all,
And had thou or should thou utter it,
We have devised a complat under band
What ever shall beside to any of us:
To send thee roundly to the devil of hell.
And therefore thus, I am the very man,
Marked in my birth hour by the destynies,
To give an end to Ardens life on earth,
Thou but a member, but to whet the knife,
Whose edge must search the closet of his breast,
Thy office is but to appoint the place,
And train thy M. to his tragedy.
Mine to perform it, when occasion serves.
Then be not nice, but here devise with us,
Now and what way, we may conclude his death.

Sha. So shall thou purchase, Mosbie for thy friend
And by his friendship gain his sisters love.

Gre, So shall thy mistres be thy fauorer,
And thou disburdned of the oath thou made.

Mic. Well gentlemen I cannot but confess,
Since you have brdged me so aparantly,
That I have vowed my M. Ardens death,
And he whose kindly love and liberal hand,
Does challenge naught but good deserts of me,
I will deliver over to your hands.
This night come to his house at Aldersgate,
The doors I Will leave unlocked against you come.
No sooner shall ye enter through the latch,
Over the thresholde to the inner court.
But on your left hand shall you see the stairs.
That leads directly to my M. chamber.
There take him and dispose him as ye please,
Now it were good we parted company,
What I have promised, I will perform.

Will. Should you deceive us, twould go wrong with you,


Mic. I will accomplish al I have reuealde,


Will. Come let us go drink, choler makes me as dry as a dog


Exeunt Will, Gre* and Shak. Manet Michaell. Mic. Thus feeds the Lamb
securely on the down,
Whilst through the thicket of an arber brake,
The hunger bitten Woulfe orepryes his hant,
And takes advantage to eat him up.
Ah harmeles Arden how, how have thou misdone,
That thus thy gentle life is leueld at,
The many good turns that thou have don to me,
Now must I quitance with betraying thee.
I that should take the weapon in my hand,
And buckler thee from ill intending foes.
Do lead thee with a wicked fraudfull smile,
As unsuspected, to the slaughterhouse:
So have I sworn to Mosby and my mistres.
So have I promised to the slaughtermen.
And should I not deal currently with them,
Their lawles rage would take revenge on me,
Tush I will spurn at mercy for this once.
Let pity lodge where feeble womenly,
I am resolved, and Arden needs must die. Exit Michaell.

Here enters Arden and Fran. Arden. No Francklin no, if fear or stormy threts,
If love of me, or care of womanhoode,
If fear of God, or common speech of men,
Who mangle credit with their wounding words,
And cooch dishonor, as dishonor buds.
Might soyne repentance in her wanton thoughts,
No question then but she would turn the lease,
And sorrow for her desolution.
But she is rooted in her wickedness
Perverse and stobburne, not to be reclaimde,
Good counsel is to her as rain to weeds
And reprehension makes her vice to grow,
As Hydraes head that perished by decay.
Her faults me think are painted in my face.
For every searching eye to over reed.
And Mosbies name, a scandale unto mine.
Is deeply trenched in my blushing brow.
Ah Francklin Francklin, when I think on this,
My hearts greese rends my other powers,
Worse then the conflict at the hour of death.

Farn. Gentle Arden leave this sad lament,
She will amend, and so your greefes will cease
Or else shele die, and so your sorrows end.
If neither of these two do happily fall,
Yet let your comfort be, that others bear
Your woes twice doubled all with patience.

Ard. My house is irksome, there I cannot rest.


Fra. Then stay with me in London, go not home.


Ard. Then that base Mosbie does usurp my room,
And makes his triumph of my being thence.
At home, or not at home, where ere I be.
Here here it lies, ah Francklin here it lies,
That will not out till wretched Arden dies.

Here enters Michaell. Fra. Forget your greefes a while, here coms your man,


Ard. What a Clock is it sir?


Mic. Almost ten.


Ard. See see how runs away the weary time,
Come M. Franklin, shall we go to bed.

Exeunt Arden and Michaell. Manet Francklin. Fran. I pray you go before, I Will
follow you,
Ah what ahell is fretfull Jealousy?
What pity moning words? what deep fetched sighs?
What grievous groans? and ouerlading woes,
Accompanies this gentle gentleman.
Now will he shake his care oppressed head,
Then sir his sad eis on the sollen earth,
Ashamed to gaze upon the open world.
Now will he cast his eyes up toward the heavens,
Looking that ways for redress of wrong,
Some times he seeks to beguile his grief,
And tells a story with his careful tongue.
Then comes his wives dishonor in his thoughts,
And in the middle cutteth of his tale.
Dowring fresh sorrow on his weary lims.
So woe begone, so inlye charged with woe,
Was never any lived and bare it so.

Here enters Michaell. Mic. My M. would desire you come to bed.


Fra. Is he himself already in his bed?


Exit Fran. Manet Mic. Mic. He is and feign would have the light away,
Conflicting thoughts encamped in my breast
Awake me with the Echo of their strokes:
And I a judge to censure either side,
Can give to neither wished victory.
My masters kindness pleads to me for life,
With just demand, and I must grant it him.
My mistres she has forced me with an oath,
For Susans sake the which I may not break,
For that is nearer the^ a masters love,
That grim faced fellow, pittiles black Will,
And Shakebag stearne in bloody stratageme,
Two Ruffer Ruffins never lived in Kent,
Have sworn my death if I infrindge my vow,
A dreadful thing to be considred of,
Me thinks I see them with their bolstred hair,
Staring and grinning in thy gentle face,
And in their ruthles hands, their dagers drawn,
Insulting ore there with a peck of oaths.
Whilst thou submissiue pleading for relief,
Art mangled by their irefull instruments.
Me thinks I hear them ask where Michaell is
And pittiles black Will, cries stab the slave.
The Pesant will detect the Tragedy.
The wrincles in his foul death threatening face,
Gapes open wide, like graves to swallow men.
My death to him is but a merryment,
And he will murder me to make him sport.
He comes he comes, ah M. Francklin help,
Call up the neighbors or we are but dead

Here enters Fran. and Arden. Fran. What dismal outcry calls me from my rest?


Ard. What has occasiond such a fearful cry?
Speak Michaell, has any iniurde thee?

Mic. Nothing sir, but as I fell a sleep,
Upon the thresholde leaning to the stairs.
I had a fearful dream that troubled me,
And in my slumber thought I was beset,
With murderer thieves that came to rifle me.
My trembling ioints witness my inward fear.
I crave your pardons for disturbing you.

Ard. So great a cry for nothing, I nere heard.
What, are the doors fast locked? and al things safe?

Mic. I cannot tell, I think I locked the doors.


Ard. I like not this, but I Will go see my self,
Nere trust me, but the doors were all unlocked.
This negligence not halse contenteth me.
Get you to bed, and if you love my favor,
Let me have no more such pranckes as these
Come M. Francklin, let us go to bed.

Farn. I be my Faith, the air is very cold, Exeunt
Michaell farewell, I pray thee dream no more.

Sha. Black night has hid the pleasurs of yt day. Here enters Will, Gre* and
Shak.
And sheting darkness ouerhangs the earth,
And with the black fold of her cloudy robe,
Obscure us from the eiesight of the world,
In which sweet silence such as we triumph.
The laysie minutes linger on their time,
Loath to give due audit to the hour:
Til in the watch our purpose be complete,
And Arden sent to everlasting night.
Green get you gone, and linger here about,
And at some hour hence, come to us again,
Where we will give you instance of his death.

Gre. Speed to my wish whose will so ere says no,
And so i will leave you for an hour or two. Exit Gre.

Will. I tell thoe Shakebag, would this thing were don,
I am so heavy that I can scarce go:
This drowsines in me bods little good.

Shake. Now now Will, become a precissian.
Nay then lets go sleep, when huges and fears,
Shall kill our courages with their fancies work,

Will. Why Shakbagge thou mistakes me much,
And wrongs me to in telling me of fear,
Were not a serious thing we go about,
It should be slipped, til I had sought with thee:
To let thee know I am no coward I,
I tell thee Shakbag thou abusest me.

Sha. Why thy speech bewraied an inlye kind offeare.
And favored of a weak relenting spirit.
Go forward now in that we have begone.
And afterward attempt me when thou dare.

Will. And if I do not heaven cut me of,
But let that pass, and show me to this house.
Where thou shall see I Will do as much as Shakbag.

Sha. This is the door, but soft, me thinks it is shut.
The villain Michaell has deceived us,

Will. Soft let me see, shakbag it is shut indeed.
Knock with thy sword, perhaps the slave will hear,

Sha. It will not be, the white liuerd pesant is gone to bed
And laughs us both to scorn.

Will. And he shall by his mirriment as dear,
As ever coistrell bought so little sport,
Here let this sword assist me when I need,
But rust and canker after I have sworn:
If I the next time that I mete the hind,
Loppe not away his leg, his arm or both,

Sha. And let me never draw a sword again,
Nor prosper in the twilight, cockshut light,
When I would sleece the welthie passenger,
But ly and languish in a loathsome den:
Hated and spit at by the goers by.
And in that death may die, vnpittied.
If I the next time that I meet the slave,
Cut not the nose from of the cowards face,
And trample on it, for this villainy.

Will. Come lets go seek out Green I know hele swear


Sha. He were a villane and he would not swear,
I would make a pesant swear amongst his boys.
That nere durst say before but yea and no.
To be thus slouted of a coysterel.

Will. Shakbag lets seek out green, and in the morning
At the Alehouse butting Ardens house,
Watch thee out coming of that prick eard cur,
And then letme alone to handle him. Exeunt.

Here enters Ard. Fra. and Michaell. Ard. Sir get you back to billensgate,
And learn what time the tide will serve our turn,
Come to us in Paul's, first go make the bed,
And afterward go harken for the floude. Exit Michaell.
Come M. Francklin, you shall go with me.
This night I dreamed that being in a park,
A toil was picht to overthrow the dear,
And I upon a little rising hill,
Stood whistely watching for the herds approach,
Even there me thoughts a gentle slumber took me,
And sommond all my parts to sweet repose.
But in the pleasure of this golden rest,
An ill thewd foster had removed the toil,
And rounded me with that beguyling home,
Which late me thought was pitched to cast the dear,
With that he blew an evil sounding horn,
And at the noise an other heard man came:
With Fauchon drawn, and bent it at my breast.
Crying aloud thou art the game we seek,
With this I wakt, and trembled every joint,
Like one oscured in a little bushe,
That sees a lion foraging about,
And when the dreadful forest King is gone,
He pryes about, with timorous suspects
Throughout the thorny casements of the brake,
And will not think his person daungerles.
But quakes and shewers though the cause be gone.
So trust me Francklin when I did awake,
I stood in doubt whether I waked or no:
Such great impression took this sond surprise:
God grant this vision bedeeme me any good.

Fran. This fantassie does rise from Michaels fear,
Who being awaked with the noise he made,
His troubled senses, yet could take no rest.
And this I warant you procured your dream.

Ard. It may be so God frame it to the best,
But often times my dreams presage to true.

Fran. To such as note their nightly fantasies,
Some one in twenty may incur belief,
But use it not, it is but a mockery,

Ard. Come M. Francklin well now walk in Pau'es
And dyne together at the ordinary,
And by my man's direction draw to the key,
And with the tide go down to Feuershame,
Say, M. Francklin shall it not be so?

Francklin. At your good pleasure sir,
I Will bear you company. Exeunt.

Here enters Michaell at one door. Here enters Grene, Will, and Shakebag, at
another door. Will. Draw Shakbag for heers that villain Michael,


Gre. First Will lets hear what he can say,


Will. Speak milkesope slave, and never after speak.


Mic. For Gods sake sirs let me excuse my self.
For hear I swear by heaven and earth and all,
I did perform the outmost of my talk,
And left the doors vnbolted and unlocked,
But see the chance Francklin and my master,
Were very late conferring in the porch,
And Francklin left his napkin where he sat,
With certain gourlo knit mit, as he said
Being in bed, he did bethink himself,
And coming down, he found the doors unshut,
He locked the gates, and brought away the keys
For which offense my master rated me,
But now I am going to see what floode it is,
For with the tide my M. will away.
Where you may frons him well on Kaynum down,
A place well sitting such a stratageme.

Will. Your excuse has some what molysted my choler,
Why now Green it is better now nor ere it was,

Gre. But Michaell is this true?


Mic. As true as I report it to be true.


Shak. Then Michaell this shall be your penance,
To feast us all at the Salutation,
Where we will plat our purpose thoroughly.

Gre. And Michael, you shall bear no news of this tide
Because they two may be in Kaynu^ down before your M.

Mic. Why I Will agree to any thing you will have me.
So you will except of my company. Exeunt.

Here enters Mosby. Mos. Disturbed thoughts dryues me from company,
And dryes my marrow with their watchfulnes,
Continual trouble of my moody brain,
Feebles my body by excess of drink,
And nippes me, as the bitter Northeast wind,
Does check the tender blosoms in the spring.
Well fares the man how ere his cates do taste
That tables not with foul suspicion:
And he but pines amongst his delicats,
Whose troubled mind is stuffed with discontent.
My goulden time was when I had no gould,
Thought then I wanted, yet I slept secure,
My daily toil, begat me nights repose:
My nights repose made daylight fresh to me.
But since I climbd the top bough of the tree,
And sought to build my nest among the clouds.
Each gentle stary gaile does shake my bed:
And makes me dread my downfall to the earth,
But whether does contemplation carry me.
The way I seek to find where pleasure dwells,
Is hedged behind me that I cannot back,
But needs must on, although to dangers gate:
Then Arden perish thou by that decre.
For Green does err the land and weed thee up,
To make my harvest nothing but pure corn.
And for his pains I Will heave him up a while,
And aftersmother him to have his wax.
Such bees as Green, must never live to sting.
Then is there Michael and the Painter to,
Chrefe actors to Ardens overthrow:
Who when they shall see me sit in Ardens seat,
They will insult upon me for my mede,
Or fright me by detecting of his end.
He none of that, for I can cast a bone,
To make these curres pluck out each others throat,
And then am I sole ruler of mine own:
Yet mistres Arden lives, but she is my self,
And holy Churchrites makes us two, but one,
But what for that I may not trust you Ales,
You have supplanted Arden for my sake,
And will extirpen me to plant another:
It Is fearful sleeping in a serpents bed.
And I will cleanely rid my hands of her. Here enters Aes.
But here she comes and I must flatter her.
How now Ales? what sad, and passionat?
Make me pertaker of thy pensiuenes:
Fire divided burns with lesser force.

Ales But I will damn that fire in my breast.
Till by the force thereof, my part consume, ah Mosbie.

Mos. Such deep pathaires like to a cannons burst,
Dischargde against a ruinated wall,
Breaks my relenting heart in thousand pieces,
Ungentle Ales thy sorrow is my sore,
Thou know it well, and it is thy policy,
To forge distressefull looks, to wound a breast,
Where lies a heart, that dies where thou art sad,
It is not love, that loves to anger love.

Ales. It is not love, that loves to murder love.


Mos. How mean you that?


Ales. Thou know how dearly Arden loved me.


Mos. And then.


Ales. And then conceal the rest, for it is too bad,
Least that my words be carried with the wind.
And published in the world to both our shames,
I pray thee Mosbye let our springtime wither,
Our harvest else will yeald but loathsome weeds.
Forget I pray thee what has past betwix us,
For now I blushe and tremble at the thoughts,

Mos. What are you changde?


Ales. I to my former happy life again.
From title of an odious strumpets name,
To honest Ardens wife, not Ardens honest wife,
Ha Mosbye it is thou have rifled me of that,
And made me slaundrous to all my kin:
Even in my forehead is thy name ingraueu,
Ameane Artifiecer, that low borne name,
I was bewitched, woe worth the haples hour,
And all the causes that inchaunted me:

Mos. Nay if thou ban, let me breath curses forth,
And if you stand so nicely at your fame:
Let me repent the credit I have lost,
I have neglected matters of import,
That would have stated me above thy state:
Forslowde advantages, and spurnd at time.
I Fortunes right hand* Mosbie has forsoohe,
To take a wanton gi^lote by the lest.
I left the Marriage of ^n honest maid,
Whose dowry would have weyed down all thy wealth,
Whose beauty and demianor far exceeded thee.
This certain good I lost for changing bad,
And wrapped my credit in thy company.
I was bewitched, that is no theme of thine,
And thou unhallowed have enchaunted me:
But I will break thyspels, and excirsimes,
And put another sight upon these eyes,
That showed my heart, a raven for a dowe.
Thou art not fair, I vieud thee not till now,
Thou art not kind, till now I knew the not.
And now the rain has beaten of thy gilt,
Thy worthles copper shows thee conterset.
It grieves me not to see how foull thou art,
But maddes me that ever I thought thee fair,
Go get thee gone, a copesmate for thy hyndes.
I am too good to be thy favorite.

Ales. I now I see, and too soon find it true,
Which often has been told me by my friends:
That Mosbie loves me not but for my wealth,
Which too incredulus I nere believed.
Nay hear me speak Mosbie a word or two,
I Will byte my tongue, if it speak bitterly:
Look on me Mosby, or I Will kill my self,
Nothing shall hide me from thy stormy look:
If thou cry war, there is no peace for me
I will do penance for offending thee,
And burn this prayer book, where I here use,
The holy word that had converted me,
See Mosbie I will tear away the leaves.
And all the leaves, and in this golden cover,
Shall thy sweet phrases, and thy letters dwell,
And thereon will I chiefly meditate,
And hold no other sect, but such devotion,
Will thou not look? is all thy love ouerwhelmde?
Will thou not hear? what malice stopes thine ears?
Why speaks thou not? what silence ties thy tongue?
Thou have been sighted, as the eagle is,
And heard as quickly as the fearful hare:
And spoke as smoothly as an orator.
When I have bid thee hear, or see, or speak.
And art thou sensible in none of these?
Weigh all thy good turns, with this little fault,
And I deserve not Mosbies muddy looks.
A fence of trouble is not thickened still,
Be clear again, I Will nere more trouble thee,

Mos. O no, I am a base artificer,
My wings are feathred for a lowly sight,
Mosby fie no, not for a thousand pound,
Make love to you, why it is unpardonable,
We beggars must not breath where gentiles are.

Ales Sweet Mosbie is as gentle as a King,
And I too blind, to judge him otherwise,
Flowers do some times spring in fallow lands,
VVeedes in gardens, Roses grow on thorns.
So what so ere my Mosbies father was,
Himself valued gentle by his worth.

Mos. Ah how you women can insinuate,
And clear a trespass with your sweet set tongue,
I will forget this quarrel gentle Ales,
Provided I Will be tempted so no more:

Here enters Bradshaw, Al. Then with thy lips seal up this new made match


Mos. Soft Ales for here comes some body.


Ales. How now Bradshaw, what is the news with you


Brad. I have little news but here is a letter.
That M. Green importuned me to give you:

Ales Go in Bradshaw call for a cuppe-of bear. Exit

It Is almost suppertime, thou shall stay with us.

Then she reads the Letter. We have mist of our purpose at London, but shall
perform it by the way, We thank our neighbor Bradshaw.

Yours Richard Green.




How lykes my love the tennor of this letter?


Mos. Well, were his date complete and expired.


Ales. Ah would it were,
Then comes my happy hour.
Till then my bliss is mixed with bitter gall.
Come let us in to shun suspicion.

Ales. I to the gates of death to follow thee. Exeunt.


Here enters Green Will and Shakbag. Shak. Come Will, see thy tools be in a
redynes?
Is not thy Powder dancke,
Or will thy flint stryke fire

Will. Then ask me if my nose be on my face,
Or whether my tongue be frosen in my mouth.
Zounds here is a coil, you were best swear me on the intergatories, how many
Pistols I have took in hand,
Or whether I love the smell of gunne powder,
Or dare abide the noise the dagge will make,
Or will not wincke at flashing of the fire.
I pray thee shackbag let this answer thee.
That I have took more purses in this down,
Then ere thou handledst pistols in thy life.

Sha. I happily thou have picked more in a throng.
But should I brag what booties I have took,
I think the overplus that's more then thine,
Would mount to a greater sum of money,
Then either thou, or all thy kin are worth.
Zounds I hate them as I hate a toade,
That carry a muscado in their tongue.
And scarce a hurting weapon in their hand.

Will. O Groene, intolerable,
It is not for mine honor to bear this.
Why shakbag I did serve the King at Bulloyne,
And thou can brag of nothing that thou have done.

Shak. Why so can Jack of Feuershame,
That sounded for a phillope on the nose:
When he that gave it him hollowed in his ear.
And he supposed a Cannon bullet hit him.

Then they fight. Grene. I pray you sirs list to Esops talk,
Whilst two stout dogs were striving for a bone,
There comes a cur, and stole it from them both,
So while you stand striving on these terms of manhood,
Arden escapes us and deceive us al.

Shake. Why he begun.


Will. And thou shall find I Will end.
I do but slip it until better time.
But if I do forget.

Then he kneels down and houldes up his hands to heaven. Grene. Well take your
fittest standings, and once more
Lime your twigs to catch this weary bird,
I Will leave you, and at your dags discharge
Make toward like the longing water dog,
That coucheth til the fowling piece be of:
Then ceazeth on the pray with eager mood,
Ah might I see him stretching forth his limbs,
As I have seen them beat their wings ere now,

Shak. Why that thou shall see if he come this way,


Gre. Yes that he does shakbag I warrant thee:
But braul not when I am gone in any case,
But sirs be sure to speed him, when he comes,
And in that hope I Will leave you for an hour. Exit Gre.

Here enters Arden Fran. and Mic. Mic. Twere best that I went back to Rochester,
The horse halts down right, it were not good
He travailed in such pain to feuershame:
Removing of a shoe may happily help it.

Ard. Well get you back to Rochester, but siirra see ye overtake us ere we come
to Raynum down,
For it will be very late ere we get home:

Mic. I God he knows, and so does Will and shakebagge,
That thou shall never go further then that down,
And therefore have I pricked the horse on purpose,
Because I would not view the massacar. Exit Michaell.

Arden. Come M. Francklin onwards with your tale,


Fran. I assure you sir, you task me much,
A heavy blood is gathered at my heart,
And on the sudden is my wind so short:
As hinders the passage of my speech.
So ferse a qualme yet near assailed me:

Ard. Come M. Francklin let us go on softly,
The anoyance of the dust, or else some meat,
you eat at dinner, cannot brook you:
I have been often so, and soon amended.

Fra. Do you remember where my tale did leave?


Ard. I, where the gentleman did chek his wife.


Fran. She being reprehended for the fact.
Witness produced that took her with the deed,
Her glove brought in, which there she left behind,
And many other assured Arguments:
He husband asked her whether it were not so.

Ard. her answer then, I wonder how she looked,
Having forsworn it with such vehement oaths,
And at the instant so approved upon her,

Fra. First did she cast her eyes down to the earth,
Watching the drops that fell amain from thence,
Then softly draws she forth her hand kercher,
And modestly she wypes her tear staind face:
Then hemd she out to clear her voice should seem,
And with a majesty addressed her self,
To encounter all their accusations.
Pardon me M. Arden I can no more:
This fighting at my heart, makes short my wind.

Ard. Come we are almost now at Raynum down,
Your pretty tale beguiles the weary way:
I would you were in state to tell it out.

Shak. Stand close Will I hear them cumming.


Here enters Lord Cheiny with his men. Will. Stand to it Shakbag, and be
resolute,


Lord Che. Is it so near night as it seems,
Or will this black faced evening have a shower?
What M. Arden, you are well met,
I have longd this fortnights day to speak with you,
You are a stranger man in the i will of Shepny,

Ard. Your honors always bound to do you service,


Lord Che. Come you from London and nere a man with you?


Ard. My man's coming after,
But here is my honest friend that came along with me.

Lord Che. My Lord protectors man I take you to be


Fran. I my good Lord, and highly bound to you,


Lord Che. You and your friend come home and sup with me.


Ard. I beseech your honor pardon me.
I have made a promise to a gentle man,
My honest friend to meet him at my house,
The occasion is great, or else would I wait on you.

Lord C. Will you come tomorrow and dyne with me
And bring your honest friend along with you:
I have diverse matters to talk with you about.

Arden. Tomorrow well wait upon your honor,


Lord C. One of you stay my horse at the top of the hill
What black Will, for whose purse wait you?
Thou will be hanged in Kent, when all is done.

Will. Not hanged, God save your honor.
I am your bedesman, bound to pray for you,

Lord C. I think thou nere saidest prayer in all thy life,
One of you give him a crown,
And sir leave this kind of life.
If thou be tainted for a penny matter,
And come in question surely thou will trusse,
Come M. Arden let us be going,
Your way and mine lies four mile together. Exeunt

Manet Black Will and Shakbag. Will The Devil break all your necks, at 4 miles
end,
Zounds I could kill my self for very anger.
His Lordship chops me in, even when
My dagge was leaueld at his heart.
I would his crown were molten down his throat,

Sha. Arden thou have wondrous holy luck,
Did ever man escape as thou have done.
Well I Will discharge my pistol at the sky,
For by this bullet Arden might not die.

Here enters Green. Gre. What is he down, is he dispatched?


Sha. I in health toward Feuershame, to shame us all


Gre. The Devil he is, why sirs how escapt he?


shak When we were ready to shoot,
Comes my Lord Cheiny to prevent his death.

Grene. The Lord of heaven has preserved him.


Will. Preserved, a fig, the L. Cheiny has preserved him
And bids him to a feast, to his house at shorlow:
But by the way, once more I Will meet with him,
And if all the Cheinies in the world say no,
I Will have a bullet in his breast to morrow,
Therefore come Green and let us to Feuershame.

Gre. I and excuse our selves to mistres Arden,
O how shele chafe when she hears of this.

sha. Why i will warrant you shel think we dare not doit


Will. Why then let us go, and tell her all the matter.
And plat the news to cut him of to morrow. Exeunt.

Here enters Arden and his wife, Francklin and Michaell. Ard. See how the howrs
the gardeant of heavens gate
Have by their toil removed the darksome clouds.
That Soll may well deserve the trampled pace,
Wherein he wount to guide his golden car,
The season fits, come Francklin, let us a way.

Ales. I thought you did pretend some special hunt,
That made you thus cut short the time of rest.

Ard. It was no chase that made me rise so early,
But as I told thee yesternight to go to the I Will of Sheppy:
There to dine with my Lord Cheiny.
For so his honor late commanded me.

Ales. I such kind husbands seldom want excuses,
Home is a wild Cat, to a wandering wit,
The time has been, would God it were not past,
That honors title nor a Lords command,
Could once have drawn you from these arms of mine,
But my deserts, or your deserves decay,
Or both, yet if true love may seem desert,
I merit still to have thy company.

Fran. Why I pray you sir, let her go along with us,
I am sure his honor will welcome her,
And us the more, for bringing her along.

Ard. Content, sir saddle your mistres nagge.


Ales. No, begde favor merits little thanks,
If I should go, our house would run away,
Or else be stolen, therefore I Will stay behind.

Ard. Nay see how mistaking you are,
I pray thee go.

Ales. No no, not now.


Ard. Then let me leave thee satisfied in this,
That time nor place, nor persons alter me,
But that I hold thee de rer then my life.

Ales. That will be seen by your quick return.


Ard. And that shall be ere night and if I live.
Farewell sweet Ales, we mind to sup with thee. Exit Al.

Fra. Come Michaell are our horses ready?


Mic. I your horse are ready, but I am not ready,
For I have lost my purse,
With six and thirty shillinges in it,
With taking up of my M. Nagge.

Fra. Why I pray you let us go before,
Whilst he stays behind to seek his purse.

Ard. Go too sir, see you follow us to the i will of sheppye,
To my Lord Cheynyes where we mean to dine.

Exeunt Arden and Francklin. Manet Michaell. Mic. So fair whether after you,
For before you lies, black Will and shakebag,
In the broom close, to close for you,
They Will be your ferrymen to long home, Here enters the Painter.
But who is this the Painter, my corriual,
That would needs win M. Susan.

Clark. How now Michael how does my Mistress,
And all at home?

Mic. Who susan Mosbye? sheis your Mistres too


Cla. I How does she, and all the rest?


Mic. All Is well but susan she is sick,


Cla. Sick, of what disease?


Mic. Of a great fear.


Cla. A fear, of what?


Mic. A great fever.


Cla. A fever God forbid.


Mic. Yes faith, and of a lordaine too,
As big as your self.

Cla. M. Michaell the spleen prickles you.
Go too, you carry an eye over mistres susan.

Mic. I faith, to keep her from the Painter.


Cla. Why more from a Painter, then from a serving creature like your self.


Mic. Because you Painters make but a painting fable of a pretty wench, and
spotle her beauty with blotting.


Cla. What mean you by that?


Mic. Why that you Painters, paint lambs, in the lyning of wenches peticots
And we serving men put horns to them, to make them become sheep.

Cla. Such another word wilcost you a cuffe or a knock


Mic. What with a dagger made of a pensell?
Faith it is too weak,
And therefore thou to weak to win susan.

Cla. Would susans love lay upon this stroke,


Then he breaks Michaels head. Here enters Mosby Green and Ales. Ales. I Will lay
my life, this is for susans love,
Stayed you behind your M. to this end?
Have you no other time to brable in
But now when serious matters are in hand?
Say Clarke, have thou done the thing thou promised?

Cla. I hear it is, the very touch is death.


Ales. Then this I hope, if all the rest do fail,
Will catch M. Arden,
And make him wise in death, that lived a fool.
Why should he thrust his sickle in our corn,
Or what has he to do with thee my love?
Or govern me that am to rule my self,
Forsooth for credit sake I must leave thee.
Nay he must leave to live, to live, that we may love,
May live may love for what is life but love?
And love shall last as long as life remains,
And life shall end, before my love depart.

Mos. Why what is love, without true constancy?
Like to a pillar built of many stones.
Yet neither with good mortar, well compact,
Nor semell, to fasten it in the joints.
But that it shakes with every blast of wind,
And being touched, straight falls unto the earth,
And buries all his haughty pride in dust.
No let our love be roc^es of Addamant,
Which time nor place, nor tempest can a sunder.

Gre. Mosbie leave protestations now,
And let us bethink us what we have to do:
Black Will and shakebag I have placed,
In the broom close watching Ardens coming,
Lets to them, and see what they have done. Exeunt

Here enters Ard. and Fra. Ard. Of ferry man, where art thou?


Here enters the Ferriman. Fer. Here here, go before to the boat.
And I will follow you.

Ard. We have great haste, I pray thee come away.


Fer. Fie what a mist is here.


Ard. This mist my friend, is mystical,
Like to a good companions smoaky brain,
That was half dround with new ale over night.

Fer. I were pity but his stull were opened,
To make more Chimny room.

Fran. Friend what is thy opinion of this mist.


Fer. I think it is like to a cursed wise in a lytlehouse,
That never leaves her husband till she have driven him out at doors, with a
wet pair of eyes,
Then looks he as if his house were a fire,
Or some of his friends dead.

Ard. Speaks thou this of thine own experience,


Fer. Perhaps I, perhaps no: For my wife is as other women are, that is to say,
governed by the Moon.


Fran. By the Moon, how I pray thee?


Fer. Na thereby lies a bargane.
And you shall not have it fresh and fasting.

Ard. Yes I pray thee good ferryman.


Fer. Then for this once, let it be midsommer Moon,
But yet my wife as another moon.

Fran. Another Moon.


Fer. I, and it has influences and Celipses.


Ard. Why then by this reconing, you sometimes
Play the man in the Moon.

Fer. I but you had not best to meddle with that moon
Least I scratch you by the face, with my bramble bush,

Ard. I am almost stifled with this fog, come lets away


Fran. And sir as we go, lets us have some more of your bold yeomandry.


Fer. Nay by my troth sir, but flat knavery. Exeunt.


Here enters Will at one door, and Shakbag at another. Sha. Oh Will where art
thou?


Will. Here shakbag, almost in hels mouth,
Where I can not see my way for smoke.

Sha. I pray thee speak still, that we may mete by the sound, for I shall fall
into some ditche or other, unless my seete see better then my eyes.


Will. Did thou ever see better weather to run away with another man's wife,
or play with a wenche at potfinger.


shak. No this were a sine world for chandlers,
If this weather would last, for then a man
Should never dyne nor sup without candle light,
But sir Will what horses are those that past?

Will. Why, did thou hear any?


Sha. I that I did.


Will. My life for thine, it was Arden and his companion
And then all our labor's lost,

Sha. Nay say not so for, if it be they, they may happily loose their way as we
have done
And then we may chance meet with them.

Will. Come let us go on like a couple of blind pilgrims


Then Shakebag falls into a ditch. Sha. Help Will help, I am almost drowned.


Here enters the ferryman. Fer. Whose that, that calls for help?


Will. I was none here, it was thou thy self.


Fer. I came to help him that called for help,
Why how now? who is this that's in the ditch?
You are well enough served, to go without a guide such weather as this.

Will. Sir what companyes has past your ferry this morning


Fer. None but a cupple of gentlemen, that went to dyne at my Lord cheyneis.


Will. Shakbag did not I tell thee as much?


Fer. Why sir, will you have any letters carried to them


Will. No sir, get you gone.


Fer. Did you ever see such a mist as this?


Will. No, nor such a fool as will rather be bought then get his way.


Fer. Why sir, this is no hough monday, you ar deceiud
What Is his name I pray you sir?

Sha. His name is black will.


Fer. I hope to see him one day hanged upon a hill.


Exit Ferriman. Sha. See how the Sun has cleard the foggy mist,
Now we have mist the mark of our intent.

Here enters Grene Mosbye and Ales. Mos. Black Will and Shakbag, what make you
here
What is the deed don? is Arden dead.

Will. What could a blinded man perform in arms?
Saw you not how till now, the sky was dark,
That neither horse nor man could be decerned,
Yet did we hear their horses as they past.

Gre. Have they escapt you then, and past the ferry?


Sha. I for a while, but here we two will stay.
And at their coming back meet with them once more,
Zounds I was nere so toylde in all my life,
In following so slight a task as this.

Mos. Now camst thou so beraide?


Will. With making false footing in the dark,
He needs would follow them without a guide.

Ales. Here Is to pay for a fire and good cheer
Get you to Feuershame to the flower deluce,
Andrest your selves until some other time.

Gre. Let me alone, it most concerns my state.


Will. I mistres Arden this will serve the turn,
In case we fall into a second fog.

Exeunt. Grene Will and Shak. Mos. These knaves will never do it, let us give it
over


Ales. First tell me how you like my new device?
Soon when my husband is returning back,
You and I both marching arm in arm,
Like loving friends well meet him on the way.
And boldly beard and brave him to his teeth:
When words grow hot, and blows begin to rise,
I Will call those cutters forth your tenement,
Who in a manner to take up the fray,
Shall wound my husband hornesbie to the death.

Mos. Ah fine devise, why this deserves a kiss. Exeunt.


Here enters Dicke Reed and a Sailer. Sayler. Faith Dick Read it is to little
end.
His conscience is too liberal, and he too nigardly.
To part from any thing may do thee good.

Read He is coming from Shorlow as I understand,
Here i will intercept him, for at his house
He never will vouchafe to speak with me:
If prayers and fair entreaties will not serve,
Or make no battry in his flintye breast. Here enters Fra. Ard. and Michaell.
I Will curse the carle and see what that will do.
Se where he comes, to further my intent,
M. Arden I am now bound to the sea,
My coming to you was about the plat of ground,
Which wrongfully you detain from me.
Although the rent of it be very small,
Yet will it help my wife and children:
Which here I leave in Feuershame God knows,
Needy and bare, for Christ sake let them have it,

Ard. Francklin hear thou this fellow speak?
That which he craves I dearly bought of him,
Although the rent of it was ever mine.
Sir you, that ask these questions,
If with thy clamarous impeaching tongue
Thou rail on me, as I have heard thou do,
He lay thee up so close a twelve months day,
As thou shall neither see the Son nor Moon,
Look to it, for as surely as I live,
I Will banish pity if thou use me thus.

Read. What wist thou do me wrong, and threat me too?
Nay then I Will tempt thee, Arden do thy worst,
God I beseech thee show some miracle,
On thee or thine, in plauging thee for this.
That plot of ground, which thou detaines from me,
I speak it in an agony of spirit,
Be ruinous and fatal unto thee:
Either there be butcherd by thy dearest friends,
Or else be brought for men to wonder at.
Or thou or thine miscary in that place.
Or there run mad, and end thy cursed days,

Fra. Fie bitter knave bridle thine envious tongue,
For curses are like arrows shot upright,
Which falling down light on the suitors head.

Read. Light where they will, were I upon the sea,
As often I have in many a bitter storm,
And said a dreadful suthern flaw at hand,
The Pylate quaking at the doubtful storm,
And all the sailors praying on their knees,
Even in that fearful time would I fall down,
And ask of God, what ere betide of me,
Vengeance on Arden, or some misevent,
To show the world, what wrong the carle has done,
This charge I Will leave with wy distresfull wife.
My children shall be taught such prayers as these,
And thus I go but leave my curse with thee.

Exeunt Read and Sayler. Ard. It is the raylingest knave in christendom,
And oftentimes the villain will be mad,
It greatly matters not what he says,
But I assure you, I nere did him wrong.

Fra. I think so M. Arden.


Ard. Now that our horses are gone home before,
My wife may hapely mete me on the way,
For God knows she is grown passing kind of late,
And greatly changed from the oulde humor
Of her wounted frowardnes.
And seeks by fair means to redeem old faults.

Fra. Happy the change, that alters for the best,
But see in any case you make no speech,
Of the cheer we had at my Lord Cheineis,
Although most bounteous and liberal,
For that will make her think her self more wronged,
In that we did carry her a long,
For sure she grieved that she was left behind,

Ard. Come Francklin, let us strain to mend our pace,
And take her unawares playing the cook. Here enters Ales and Mosbie.
For I believe she will strive to mend our cheer.

Fran. Why there is no better creaturs in the world
Then women are, when they are in good humors.

Ard. Who is that? Mosbie, what so familiare?
Injurious strumpet, and thou ribald knave,
Unt wine those arms.

Ales. I with a sugared kiss, let them untwine.


Ard. Ah Mosbie, perturde beast, bear this and all.


Mos. And yet no horned beast,
The horns are thine.

Fran. O monstrous, Nay then it is time to draw.


Ales Help help, they murder my husband.


Here enters Will, and Shak, Sha. Zounds who iniures M. Mosbie.
Help Will I am hurt.

Mos. I may thank you Mistres arden for this wound,


Exeunt Mosby Will and Shakbag. Ales. Ah Arden what folly blinded thee?
Ah Ielious harebraine man what have thou don,
When we to welcome thy intended sport.
Came lovingly to mete thee on thy way.
Thou drewst thy sword enraged with Ielousy,
And hur^e thy freende,
Whose thoughts were free from harm.
All for a woorthles kiss, and joining arms.
Both don but mir^ely to try thy patience.
And me unhappy that devised the Jest,
Which though begone in sport, yet ends in blood.

Fran. Mary God defend me from such a Jest.


Ales. Could thou not see us friendly smyle on thee.
When we joined arms and when I kissed his cheek.
Have thou not lately found me over kind?
Did thou not hear me cry they murder thee.
Called I not help to set my husband free:
No, ears and all were witcht, ah me accursed,
To lincke in lyking with a frantic man,
Hence forth I Will be thy slave, no more thy wife:
For with that name I never shall content thee.
If He merry thou straight ways thinks me light.
If sad thou satest the sullens trouble me.
If well attyred thou thinks I will be gadding,
If homely, I seem sluttish in thine eye.
Thus am I still, and shall be whill I die,
Poor wench abused by thy misgovernment,

Ard. But is it for truth, that neither thou nor he,
Entendedst malice in your misdemeanor.

Ales. The heavens can witness of our harmles thoghts


Ard. Then pardon me sweet Ales,
And forgive this fault:
Forget but this, and never see the like.
Impose me penance, and I will perform it:
For in thy discontent I find a death,
A death tormenting more then death it self,

Ales. Nay had thou loved me as thou do pretend,
Thou would have marked the speeches of thy friend,
Who going wounded from the palce, he said
His skin was peirst only through my devise,
And if sad so row taint thee for this falt,
Thou would have followed him, and seen him dressed,
And cryde him mercy whom thou have misdone,
Nere shall my heart be cased till this be done.

Arden. Content thee sweet Ales thou shall have thy will
What ere it be, For that I iniurde thee
And wronged my friend, shame scourges my offense,
Come thou thy self and go along with me,
And be a mediator twixt us two.

Fran. Why M. Arden, know you what you do,
Will you follow him that has dishonourd you,

Ales. Why can thou prove I have been disloyal.


Fran. Why Mosbie traunt you husband with the horn,


Ales. I after he had reuyled him,
By the iniuryous name of periurde beast,
He knew no wrong could spyte an Ielious man,
More then the hateful naming of the horn.

Fran. Suppose it is true, yet is it dangerous.
To follow him whom he has lately hurt,

Ales. A fault confessed is more then half a mends,
But men of such ill spirit as your self.
Work crosses and debates twixt man and wife.

Ard. I pray the gentle Francklin hold thy peace,
I know my wife consels me for the best,

Ard. I Will seek out mosby, where his wouud is dressed,
And salve his haples quarrel if I may.

Exeunt Arden and Ales. Fran. He whom the devil drives must go perforce,
Poor gentleman how sone he is bewitched,
And yet because his wife is the instrument,
His friends must not be laush in their speech, Exit Fran.

Here enters Will shakabage and Green Will. Sir Green when was I so long in
killing a man.


Gre. I think we shall never do it.
Let us give it over.

Sha. Nay Zounds well kill him.
Though we be hanged at his door for our labor.

Will. Thou know Green that I have lived in
London this twelve years.
Where I have made some go upon wodden legs,
For taking the wall on me,
Diverse with silver noses, for saying,
There goes blackwill.
I have cracked as many blades,
As thou have done Nutes,

Gre. O monstrous lie.


Will. Faith in a manner I have.
The bawdie houses have paid me tribute,
There durst not a whore set up, unless she have aggreed
with me first, for-opning her shop windows.
For a crosee word of a Tapster,
I have pierced one barrel after another, with my dager,
And held him be the ears till all his bear has run out,
In Temes street a brewers carte was like to have run
over me, I made no more ado, but went to the clark
and cut all the natches of his tales,
and beat them about his head.
I and my company have taken the Constable from his watch,
And carried him about the fields on a coltstaffe.
I have broken a Sariants head with his own mace,
And build whom I list with my sword and buckler.
All the tenpenny alehouse would stand every morning,
With a quart pot in his hand,
Saying will it please your worship drink:
He that had not done so had been sure to have had it is
Singne pulled down, and his latice borne away the next right
To conclude, what have I not done it cannot do this,
Doubtless he is preserved by Miracle.

Here enters Ales and Michaell. Gie. Hence Will, here comes M. Arden.


Ales. Ah gentle michaell art thou sure their friends


Mic. Why I saw them when they both shoke hands,
When Mosbie bled, he even wept for sorrow:
And raild on Francklin that was cause of all.
No sooner came the Surgen in at doors,
But my M. took to his purse, and gave him money.
And to conclude, sent me to bring you word,
That Mosbie, Francklin, Bradshaw, Adam fewle,
With diverse of his neighbors, and his friends,
Will come and sup with you at our house this night.

Ales. Ah gentle Michaell, run thou bak again,
And when my husband walks into the fair,
Bid Mosbie steal from him, and come to me.
And this night shall thou and Susan be made sure,

Mic. I Will go tell him.


Ales. And as thou go, tell John cook of our guests,
And bid him lay it on, spare for no coast. Exit Michaell.

Will. Nay and there be such cheer, we will bid our selves
Mistres Arden, Dick Green and I do mean to sup with you,

Ales. And welcome shall you be, ah gentlemen,
Now must you of your purpose yesternight?

Gre. It Was long of shak^bag that unlucky villain.


Sha. Thou do me wrong, I did as much as any.


Will. Nay, then M. Ales, I Will tell you how it was,
When he should have locked with both his huts,
He to a bravery florisht over his head
With that comes Francklin at him lustely
And hurts the slave, with that he slinks away,
Now his way had been to have come hand and feet,
one and two round at his costerd.
He like a loose bears his sword point half a yard out
of danger, I lie here for m^ life.
If the deui^l come, and he have no more strength then sense
He shall never beat me from this ward,
He stand to it, a buckler in a skillful hand,
Is as good as a castle.
Nay it is better then a sconce, for I have tryde it.
Mosbie perceiving this, began to faint.
With that comes Arden with his arming sword,
And thrust him through the shoulder in a tryce.

Ales. I but I wonder why you both stood still.

Will. Faith I was so amazed I could not strike.


Ales. Ah sirs had he yesternight been slain,
For every drop of his detested blood,
I would cranime in Angels in thy fist.
And kissed thee too, and hugd thee in my arms.

Will. Patient your self, we can not help it now,
Green and we two, will dog him through the fair,
And stab him in the crowd, and steal away,

Here enters Mosbye. Ales. It is impossible, but here comes he,
That will I hope invent some surer means.
Sweet Mosbie hide thy arm, it kills my heart.

Mos. I mistres Arden, this is your favor,


Ales. Ah say not so for when I saw thee hurt,
I could have took the weapon thou letst fall,
And cunne at Arden, for I have sworn,
That these mine eyes offended with his sight,
Shall never close, til Ardens be shut up,
This night I rose and walked about the chamber.
And twice or thrice, I thought to have murthred him,

Mos. What in the night, then had we been undone,


Ales Why, how long shall he live?


Mos Fraith Ales no longer then this night.
Black Will and shakbag, will you two
Perform the complot that I have laid.

Will. I or else think me as a villain.


Gre. And rather then you shall want,
He help my self.

Mos. You M. Green shall single Francklin forth,
And hold him with a long tale of strange news:
That he may not come home till suppertime.
I Will fetch M. Arden home, and we like friends.
Will play a game or two at tables here,

Ales But what of all this?
Now shall he be stain?

Mosbie Why black Will and shakebag locked within the countinghouse,
Shall at a certain watchword given, rush forth,

Will. What shall the watch word be?


Mos. (Now I take you) that shall be the word.
But come not forth before in any case.

Will. I warrant you, but who shall lock me in?


Ales. That will I do, thou'st keep the key thy self.


Mos. Come M. Green, go you along with me.
See all things ready Ales against we come.

Ales. Take no care for that, send you him home. Exeunt Mosbie and Green.
And if he ere go forth again, blame me,
Come black Will that in mine eyes art fair,
Next unto Mosbie do I honor thee,
Instead of fair words and large promises,
My hands shall play you goulden harmony,
Now like you this? say, will you do it sirs?

Will. I and that bravely too, mark my device.
Place Mosbie being a stranger in a chair,
And let your husband sit upon a stool,
That I may come behind him cunningly,
And with a to well pull him to the ground,
Then stab him till his flesh be as a sine,
That done bear him behind the Abbey,
That those that find him murdered, may suppose
Some slave or other killed him for his gold.

Ales. A fine device, you shall have twenty pound,
And when he is dead, you shall have forty more.
And least you might be suspected staying here,
Michaell shall saddle you two lusty geldings.
Ride whether you will to Scotland or to Wales.
He see you shall not lack, where ere you be.

Will Such words would make one kill 1000. men.
Give me the key, which is the counting house?

Ales. Here would I stay, and still encourage you,
But that I know how resolute you are.

Sha. Lush you are too faint hearted, we must do it.


Ales. But Mosbie will be there, whose very looks,
Will ad vnwounted courage to my thought,
And make me the first that shall adventure on him,

Will. Lush get you gone, it is we must do the deed.
When this door oppens next look for his death

Ales. Ah, would be now were here, that it might oppen
I shaling more be closed in Ardens arms,
That like the snakes of black Tisiphone,
Sting me with their enbraceings, mosbies arms
Shall compass me, and were I made a star,
I would have none other spheres but those.
There is no nedor, but in Mosbies lypes,
Had chaste Diana kissed him, she like me
Would grow love sick, and from her watrie bower,
Fling down Endimion and snath him up:
Then blame not me, that stay a silly man,
Not half so lovely as Endimion.

Here enters Michaell. Mic. Mistres my master is coming hard by,


Ales. Who comes with him.


Mic. No body but mosbye.


Ales. That's will michaell, fetch in the tables,
And when thou have done, stand before the countinghouse door.

Mic. Why so?


Ales. Black will is locked within, to do the deed.


Mic, What shull he die to night?


Ales. I michaell*


Mic. But shall not susan know it?


Ales. Yes for shele be as seereete as our selves.


Mic. That's brave, I Will go fetch the tables.


Ales. But michaell hark to me a word or two,
When my husband is come in lock the street door:
He shall be murthred or the guests come in. Exit mic, Here enters Arden and
Mosbie.
Husband what mean you to bring mosby home?
Although I wished you to be reconciled,
It Was more for fear of you, then love of him,
Black Will and Green, are his companions,
And they are cutters, and may cut you short,
Therefore I thought it good to make you friends.
But wherefore do you bring him hither now,
You have given me my supper with his sight,

Mos. M. Arden me thinks your wife would have me gone.


Arden. No good M. Mosbie, women will be prating,
Ales bid him welcome, he and I are friends.

Ales You may enforce me to it, if you will.
But I had rather die then bid him welcome,
Die company has purchest me ill friends.
And therefore will I nere frequent it more.

Mos. Oh how cunningly she can dissemble.


Ard. Now he is here you will not serve me so.


Ales. I pray you be not angree or displeased
I Will bid him welcome seeing you will have it so,
You are welcome M. Mosbie will you sit down.

Mos. I know I am welcome to your loving husband,
But for your self, you speak not from your heart.

Ales. And if I do not, sir think I have cause.


Mos. Pardon me M. Arden, I Will away.


Ard. No good M. Mosbie.


Ales. We shall have guests enough, though you go hence


Mos. I pray you M. Arden let me go


Ard. I pray thee Mosbie let her prate her fill,


Ale. The doors are open sir, you may be gone.


Mic. Nay that's a lie, for I have locked the doors.


Ard. Sir fetch me a cup of Wine.
I Will make them friends.
And gentle M. Ales, seeing you are so stout,
You shall begin, frown not, I Will have it so.

Ales I pray you meddle with that you have to do.


Ard. Why Ales? how can I do too much for him,
Whose life I have endaungered without cause.

Ale. It Is true, and seeing it was partly through my means
I am content to drink to him for this once.
Here M. Mosbie, and I pray you hence forth,
Be you as strange to me, as I to you
Your company has purchased me ill friends.
And I for you God knows, have undeserved
Been ill spoken of in every place.
Therefore henceforth frequent my house no more.

Mos. I Will see your husband in dispight of you,
Yet Arden I protest to thee by heaven,
Thou nere shall see me more, after this night.
I Will go to Room rather then be forsworn.

Ar. Tush I Will have no such vows made in my house.


Ales. Yes I pray you husband let him swear,
And on that condition Mosbie pledge me here.

Mos. I as willingly as I mean to live.


Ard. Come Ales, is our supper ready yet?


Ales. It will by then you have played a game at tables,


Ard. Come M. Mosbie, what shall we play for?


Mos. Three games for a french crown sir,

And please you.


Ard. Content.


Then they play at the Tables. Will Can he not take him yet? what a spite is
that?


Ales Not yet Will, take heed he see thee not?


Will. I fear he will spy me, as I am coming,


Mic. To prevent that, creep betwixt my legs


Mos. One ace, or else I lose the game.


Ard. Mary sir there is two for failing.


Mos. Ah M. Arden (now I can take you)


Then Will pulles him down with a towell Ard. Mosbie, Michaell, Ales, what will
you do?


Will Nothing but take you up sir, nothing else.


Mos. There Is for the pressing Iron you told me of.


Sha. And there is for the ten pound in my sleeue,


Ales. What, groans thou? nay then give me y^ weapon,
Take this for hindering Mosbies love and mine.

Michaell. D Mistres.


Will Ah that villain will betray us all,


Mos. Tush fear him not, he will be secret,


Mic. Why do thou think I will betray my self?


Sha. In South warke dwells a bonnie northern less,
The widow Chambley, i will to her house now,
Ind if she will not give me harborough,
He make booty of the queen even to her smock.

Will. Shift for your selves we two will leave you now


Ales. First lay the body in the countinghouse.


Then they lay the body in the Countinghouse. Will. We have our gould mistress
Ales, adieu,
Mosbie farewell, and Michaell farewell too. Exeunt

Enter Susan. Susan. Mistres, the guests are at the doors.
Hearken they knock, what shall I let them in?

Ales. Mosbie go thou and bear them company. Exit. M.
And susan fetch water and wash away this blood,

Susan. The blood cleaves to the ground and will not out


Ales. But with my nails i will scrape away the blood,
The more I strive the more the blood appears:

Susan. What Is the reason M. can you tell?


Ales. Because I blush not at my husbands death.


Here enters Mosbie. Mos. Now now, what is the matter? is all well?


Ale. I well, if Arden were alive again.
In vain we strive, for here his blood remains,

Mos. Why strew rushes on it, can you not,
This wench does nothing fall unto the work.

Ales. It Was thou that made me murder him,


Mos. What of that?


Ales. Nay nothing Mosbie so it be not known.


Mos. Keep thou it close, and it is impossible,


Ales. Ah but I can not, was he not stain by me,
My husbands death torments me at the heart.

Mos. It shall not long torment thee gentle Ales,
I am thy husband, think no more of him.

Here enters Adam foul and Brad, Brad. Now now M. Arden? what ayle you weep?


Mos. Because her husband is abroad so late.
A cupple of Ruffins threatened him yesternight,
And she poor soul is afraid he should be hurt.

Adam It nothing else? tush hele be here anon.


Here enters Green. Gre. Now M. Arden lack you any guests.


Ales. Ah M. Green, did you se my husband lately,


Gre. I saw him walking behind the Abbey even now,


Here enters Francklin. Ales. I do not like this being out so late,
M. Francklin where did you leave my husband.

Fra. Believe me I saw him not since Morning,
Fear you not hele come anon, mean time
You may do well to bid his guests sit down.

Ales. I so they shall, M. Bradshaw sit you there,
I pray you be content, I Will have my will.
M. Mosbie sit you in my husbands seat.

Michaell Susan shall thou and I wait on them,
Or and thou says the word let us sit down too.

Su. Peace we have other matters now in hand.
I fear me Michael al will be bewraied.

Mic. Tush so it be known that I shall marry thee in the
Morning, I care not though I be hangde ere night.
But to prevent the worst, I Will by some rats bane.

Su. Why Michael will thou poison thy self?


Mic. No, but my mistres, for I fear shele tell.


Su. Tush Michel fear not her, she is wise enough.


Mos. Sir Michell gives a cup of bear.
M. Arden, heers to your husband.

Ales. My husband?


Fra. What ailes you woman, to cry so suddenly.


Ales. Ah neighbors a sudden qualm came over my heart
My husbands being forth torments my mind.
I know some thing's amiss, he is not well.
Or else I should have heard of him ere now.

Mo. She will undo us, through her foolishnes.


Gre. Fear not M. Arden, he is well enough.


Ales. Tell not me, I know he is not well,
He was not wount for to stay thus late.
Good M. Francklin go and seek him forth,
And if you find him send him home to me.
And tell him what a fear he has put me in.

Fra. Ilyke not this, I pray God all be well Exeunt Fra. Mos. and Gre.
I Will seek him out, and find him if I can.

Ales. Michaell how shall I do to rid the rest away?


Mic. Leave that to my charge, let me alone,
It Is very late M. Bradshaw,
And there are many false knaves abroad,
And you have many narrow lanes to pas.

Brad. Faith friend Michaell and thou say true,
Therefore I pray thee lights forth, and lends a linck

Exeunt Brad, Adam, and Michael. Ales. Michael bring them to the doors, but do
not stay,
You know I do not love to be alone.
Go Susan and bid thy brother come,
But wherefore should he come? Here is naught but fear.
Stay Susan stay, and help to counsel me.

Susan. Alas I counsel, fear frights away my wits,


Then they open the countinghouse door, and look upon Arden. Ales. See Susan
where thy quandam Master lies,
Sweet Arden smeard in blood and filthy gore.

Susan. My brother, you, and I, shall rue this deed.


Ales Come susan help to lift his body forth,
And let our salt tears be his obsequies.

Here enters Mosbie and Green. Mos. Now now Ales whether will you bear him


Ales. Sweet Mosbie art thou come?
Then weep that will.
I have my wish in that I joy thy sight.

Gre. Well it houes us to be circumspect.


Mos. I for Francklin thinks that we have murthred him.


Ales. I but he can not prove it for his life,
Well spend this night in daliance and in sport.

Here enters Michaell Mic. O mistres the Mayor and all the watch,
Are coming toward our house with glaues and bills.

Ales. Make the door fast, let them not come in,


Mos. Tell me sweet Ales how shall I escape?


Ales. Out at the back door, over the pyle of wood.
And for one night ly at the flower deluce,

Mos. That is the next way to betray my self.


Gre. Alas M. Arden the watch will take me here,
And cause suspicion, where else would be none.

Ales Why take that way that M. Mosbie does,
But first convey the body to the fields.

Then they bear the body into the fields Mos. Until to morrow, sweet Ales now
farewell,
And see you confess nothing in any case.

Gre. Be resolute M. Ales, betray us not,
But cleave to us as we will stick to you,

Exeunt Mosbie and Grene. Ales Now let the indge and iuries do their worst,
My house is clear, and now I sear them not.

Susan As we went it snowed all the way,
Which makes me fear, our footesteps will be spyed.

Ales Peace fool, the snow will cover them again.


Susan But it had done before we came back again.


Ales Hark hark, they knock,
go Michaell let them in. Here enters the Mayor and the Watch.
Now now M. Mayor, have you brought my husband home

Mayor, I saw him come into your house an hour ago


Ales. You are deceived, it was a Londoner,


Mayor Mistres Arden know you not one that is called black Will.


Ales I know none such, what mean these questions


Mayor. I have the counsels warrant to aprehend him


Ales. I am glad it is no worse.
Why M. mayor think you I harbor any such?

Ma. We are informd that here he is.
And therefore pardon us, for we must search.

Ales I search and spare you not, through every room,
Were my husband at home, you would not offer this, Here enters Francklin.
M. Francklin what mean you come so sad.

Fra. Arden thy husband, and my friend, is slain,


Ales. Ah, by whom? M. Francklin can you tell?


Fra. I know not, but behind the abbey,
There helyes murthred in most pittious case,

May. But M. Francklin are you sure it is he,


Fra. I am too sure, would God I were deceived.


Ales. Find out the Murthrers let them be known,


Fran. I so they shall, come you along with us.


Ales. Wherefore?


Fran. know you this handtowel and this knyfe?


Su. Ah michael through this thy negligence.
Thou have betrayed and undone us all.

Mic. I was so affraide, I knew not what I did,
I thought I had thrown them both into the well.

Ales. It is the pigs blood we had to supper.
But wherefore stay you? find out the murthrers.

Ma. I fear me you will prove one of them your self.


Ale. I one of them, what mean such questions.


Fra. I fear me he was murthred in this house.
And carried to the fields, for from that place,
Backwards and forwards may you see,
The print of many feet within the snow,
And look about this chamber where we are,
And you shall find part of his giltles blood,
For in his slipshoe did I find some rushes.
Which argues he was murthred in this room.

Ma. Look in the place where he was wont to sit.
See see his blood it is too manifest,

Ales It is a cup of Wine that michaell shed.


Mic. I truly.


Fran. It is his blood, which strumpet thou have shed,
But if I live thou and thy accomplices,
Which have conspired and wrought his death,
Shall rue it.

Ales Ah M. Francklin God and heaven can tell,
I loved him more then all the world beside.
But bring me to him let me see his body.

Fra. Bring that villain and mosbies sister too,
And one of you go to the flower deluce.
And seek for mosbie, and apprehend him to. Exeunt

Here enters shakebag solus. Sh. The widow chambly in her husbands days I kept
And now he is dead, she is grown so stout
She will not know her old companions,
I came thither thinking to have had
Harbor as I was wount
And she was ready to thrust me out at doors,
But whether she would or no, I got me up,
And as she followed me I spurnd her down the stairs,
And broke her neck, and cut her tapsters throat,
And now I am going to sting them in the Temes,
I have the gould, what care I though it be known?
I Will cross the water and take sanctuary.

Exit shakbag. Here enters the Mayor, Mosbie. Ales, Francklin, Michaell and
Susan. Mayor See M. Arden where your husband lies.
Confess this foul fault and be penitent.

Ales Arden sweet husband, what shall I say?
The more I found his name, the more he bleedes.
This blood condemns me, and in gushing forth
Speaks as it falls, and asks me why I did it,
Forgive me Arden, I repent me now,
And would my death save thine, thou should not dye,
Rise up sweet Arden and enjoy thy love.
And frown not on me when we mete in heaven,
In heaven I love thee, though on earth I did not,

Mayor Say Mosby what made thee murder him,


Fra. Study not for an asnwer, look not down
His pursse and girdle found at thy beds head,
Witness sufficiently thou did the deed.
It bootles is to swear thou did it not,

Mos. I hired black Will and Shakebagge, Ruffynes both,
And they and I have done this murthrous deed,
But wherefore stay we?
Come and bear me hence.

Fran. Those Ruffins shall not escape,
I will up to London, and get the counsels warrant to apprehend them. Exeunt.

Here enters Will. Will. Shakebag I hear has taken sanctuary,
But I am so pursued with hues and cries,
For petty robberies that I have done,
That I can come unto no Sanctuary.
Therefore must I in some Oyster bote,
At last, be feign to go a board some Hoye.
And so to Flushing there is no staying here,
At Sittinburgh the watch was like to take me.
And had I not with my buckler couerd my head,
And run full blanck, at all adventures,
I am sure I had nere gone further then that place,
For the Constable had 20 warrands to apprehend me,
Besides that, I robbed him and his Man once at Gades hill,
Farewell England, I Will to Flushing now. Exit Will.

Here enters the Mayor, Mosbye, Ales, Michaell, Susan, and Bradshaw. Mayor.
Come make haste and bring away the prisoners.


Brad. M. Arden you are now going to God,
And I am by the law condemned to die.
About a letter I brought from M. Green,
I pray you M. Arden speak the truth,
Was I ever privy to your intent or no?

Ales What should I say?
You brought me such a letter.
But I dare swear thou knew not the contents.
Leave now to trouble me with wordly things.
And let me meditate upon my savior Christ,
Whose blood must save me for the blood I shed,

Mos. How long shall I live in this hell of grief?
Convey me from the presence of that strumpet.

Ales. Ah but for thee I had never been strumpet
What can not oaths and prote stations do?
When men have opportunity to woe.
I was too young to sound thy villainies.
But now I find it, and repent too late.

Su. Ah gentle brother, wherefore should I die.
I knew not of it, till the deed was don.

Mos. For thee I mourn more then for my self,
But let it suffice, I can not save thee now,

Mic. And if your brother and my Mistres.
Had not promised me you in marriage,
I had nere given consent, to this foul deed.

Mayor Leave to accuse each other now,
And listen to the sentence I shall give.
Bear Mosbie and his sister to London straight,
Where they in smithfield must be executed.
Bear M. Arden unto Canterburye,
Where her sentence is she must be burnt.
Michaell and Bradshaw in Feuershame
must suffer death.

Ales Let my death make a mends for all my sins,


Mos. Fie upon women, this shall be my song,
But bear me hence, for I have lived to long.

Susan Seeing no hope on earth, in heaven is my hope.


Mic. Faith I care not seeing I die with Susan.


Brad. My blood be on his head that gave the sentence,


Mayor To speedy execution with them all. Exeunt


Here enters Francklin. Fran. Thus have you seen the truth of Ardens death
As for the Ruffins, Shakbag and black Will,
The one took Sanctuary, and being sent for out.
Was murthred in Southwark, as he past
To Greenewitch, where the Lord Protector lay.
Black Will was burnt in flushing on a stage.
Green was hanged at Osbridge in Rent.
The Painter fled, and how he dyed we know not.
But this above the rest is to be noted,
Arden lay murthred in that plot of ground,
Which he by force and violence held from Read.
And in the grass his bodies print was seen,
Two years and more after the deed was done
Gentlemen we hope you will pardon this naked Tragedy,
Wherein no filed points are foilted in,
To make it gracious to the ear or eye.
For simple trusth is gracious enough:
And needs no other points of glosing stuff.

FINIS.

