THE PRINCIPAL POINTS OF THE FAITH OF THE CATHOLIC CHVRCH.

Defended against a writing sent to the King by the 4. Ministers of Charenton.

BY THE MOST EMINENT.

ARMAND IHON DE PLESSIS CARDINAL DVKE DE RICHELIEV.

Englished by M. C. Confessor to the English Nuns at Paris.

AT PARIS.

By SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY, Printer to the King.

M.DC.XXXV.

THE AVTHORS ESPIST. TO THE KING.
SOVEREIGN, Knowing well that it beseemes a Bishop to speak in the behalf of
the Church and his King and seeing that the writing of the Ministers of
Charenton made bold to address it self unto your Majesty both against the
Catholic Church and by consequence, against your Majesty since that being her
eldest son, her interests are yours, I judged it to be my duty not to remain
silent, especially amongst such as triumphed, upon this occasion, as though
forsooth, they had borne away some glorious victory over the Faith of our
Ancesters.

This was that (Sovereign) which invited me to employ my vacant time, to make
the Church her innocence appear as glorious in your Majesty's sight, as she
has been represented unto you blameworthy: and the Belief of her Accusers as
pernicious, as they strive to have it esteemed holy.

In the performance hereof I will use the greatest moderation that I can
possibly; desiring, that as our Belief, and theirs with whom I am to deal,
are contrary, so may also our manner of proceeding be. And in lieu of the
bitterness by which they impose upon us sundry calumnies, we may render to them
truth accompaigned with such sweetness that if they dispense with their
passions, they may receive occasion of content.

Thence they shall know that our design is, to do them good, not evil: to
cure, not to wound them: and that we are so far from hating them as they
pretend, that we do unfeignedly love them, and in such a measure, as that we
hate not their Doctrine but by reason of the love which we bear unto their
persons: being a thing impossible, that a man should not have in horror, the
kinfe that murders his friend, and the poison which bereeues him of life.

We love them (Sovereign) in so full a measure of Charity, that insteede of
wishing their hurt, as they misconceaue, we most humbly petition to your
Majesty to enrich them with your Royal favor, by endeavoring efficaciously
to root up the errors which have taken deep root in their hearts, and to
procure their conversion. And that they may not conceive that under pretext of
their Good, it is their hurt that I aim at; and, that speaking of their
conversion, I would incite your Majesty to force them unto it; I will assure
your said Majesty, that the sweetest ways are those, which I apprehend most
convenient to reclame christian souls from error: Experience reaching us,
that offentymes, violent remedies serve only the more to exasperate the
maladies of the mind. By this means your Majesty corresponding to the
glorious title of MOST CHRISTIAN, purchased by the piety of your
Predecessors, shall publish your self the most famous king in the world, and
shall more and more establish a constant peace and repose in your dominions. It
being indoubtedly true, that it is a thing incomparably greater to gain
souls, then to conquer Kingdoms: And by how much more your subjects shall be
united to God, by so much shall they be more surely addicted to your Majesty's
service.

Now whereas, in the deseases which do affect the parts noble, remedies are to
be applied which are proper unto them; observing, that besides that heresy is
as poison which of its own nature tends to the seasure of the heart, the
Ministers, have particularly addressed their writing to your Majesty which is
the heart that does quicken this flourishing Realm, though I know, yea it is a
thing known to the whole world, that the soliditie of your faith preserues it
from all peril, yet I conceived that my duty did engage me, to present unto
him the Antidote which I hope will be so much more agreeable unto him, as my
design, is to testify unto him by this action, that all the endeavors of my
life, shall never have other aim then his service. It is the Protestation that
he makes who is

DREAD SOVEREIGN, Your Majesty's, Most humble, most obedient, and most loyal
subject and servant ARMAND BISHOP OF LVCON

TO THE READER.
Having learned of S. Augustine that it is a mere folly to speak without
proof in matter of religion; Aug. l. 2. contra lit. Pitiliani cap. 29.
and seeing that the writing, which moved me to undertake this defense of the
principale points of Faith, touched all questions, without proving any one, I
was long time of opinion, that it rather merited to be despised then answered.

But having understood (as it is the custom of the weak to tryumphe at small
matters, and by cunning out of feigned adua^tages, to publish victories which
they obtained not) that the pretended Reformers of these parts, sent abroad
this writing with a flourishing vogue, and diuulged every where, that it was an
Arsenall, which within a little compass comprised all the engines requisite
utterly to ruin the truth of Catholic religion; and considering with S.
Hilaire by how many guiles, Hilar. in Psalm. 64.
and subtilties heresy strives to peruerte faith, I judged it better to
reply, then pass it over in silence, and here upon I resolved to undertake
this defense.

My purpose is to discover.

That the Ministers of Charenton. are ill grounded in all their pretentions.

That they have all the reason in the world to commend our Kings, and no
occasion at all to complain thereof as they do.

That their Belief is not hared for the reasons they allege, though worthy
of hatred, for many others, which cuningly they conceal.

In conclusion, that the Catholic Church, her Ministers, and all those whom
they accuse, remain free from the crimes which they impose upon them.

To effect this, I have divided this book into 19. chap. in the first 14. I
satisfy the Ministers writing from point to point. The other five are spent in
deducing the reasons for which their doctrine ought to be abhorred of all the
world.

The Reader may please to know, that studying brevity in this my answer, I
have no intent, to heap together all that might be said upon every point, and
yet say enough too to make it impossible for our adversaries, to shake or move
what I shall establish.

Further let him know, that as often as I can possibly, I make use of their
confession of Faith with whom I deal, and of the testimony of their own
Authors, so that, without blushing and Lying both at once, they shall not be
able to call in question the truth which I publish.

I had tied my self to the only confession of their Faith, if I had found it
as complete and entire as full of defectes. But whereas they co^tayne not half
the points which are in controversy betwixt us and those too which they
co^tayne being expressed in an obscure, and reserved manner, I was forced to
have recourse to their Authors; to Calvin and Luther amongst the rest, whose
authority they cannot reject. Not Caluins, because they make themselves his
followers in a peculiar manner; gathering out of his works, their confession,
their Church-prayers, their Catechism, and the form of administering, their
Sacraments. Nor Luthers, Coelum lib. de Arb no^t Pigkiu^. Witak. ad rationem
Campians.
since they esteem him the Apostle who reestablished the purity of the
Gospel, and accnowlegde that those who embrace his doctrine, do but make up
one Church together with them.

I beseech the Ministers that if they answer me, they do it ingenuously, and
give satisfaction to each point of this book, so that I may take as confessed
all which they do not contest. I conjure, them that in their answer, they do
either ingenuously confess what we hold, or at least, that they make their own
defense without ambiguitie in words. If they give us clearly to understand what
their belief is, we shall be greatly obliged unto them, since we have
ordinarily more difficulty to fish it out then to confute it: Hieron. ad
Ctesiph. cont. Pelag. Ecclesiae victoria est vos aperte dicere quod sentitis.
which thing S. Hierome had experienced in his time speaking to Heretics in
these terms. It is a victory to the Church, for you to express in clear
terms what you hold.

To conclude, the Ministers may please not to esteem they have answered
sufficiently, if, when I have alleged a passage of their anthours for a
thing, they produce another of them who affirms the contrary; because they
cannot thence conclude, that they taught not that which I pretend, but only
confirm that it is the customarie proceeding of Heretics to contradict one
another.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE Gentle Reader.
THis excellent piece in the opinions of all that read it, was the first sallie
of that excellent wit whom all that knows admires, and who knows him not
that loves a subject of admiration? To comply with a holy and inbred hatred
against Heresy (which from his childhood he always perceived in himself, and
found with years to grow upon him) he made a retreat from the affairs of the
Church and the state to serve them both more profitably. In that short leisure
he conceived and brought to light this: conceived also an other, to wit a
sum of all controversies, (which I have had the honor to see) wherein he has
drawn all the grounds of Catholic faith into form, making against them the
best objections that could be found in any Author, and solued them also in
form. This he performed with such assiduitie, and earnestnes of study, that
his domestikes who were eye-wittnesses of it, will speak as much in favor of
his singular industry, as others of his incomparable fulness of wit. Howbeit
being by the interests of the Church called back from his perito his sword,
Morinus a Pr. of. the Cong. of the Orat. of Jesus in his Ded Ep. 1631.
he had not time to put it out to public view. But as I am a stranger in
France, so am I a stranger in the knowledge of his praises. Take them then from
such as know them. As learned they are able to judge: as Religious their
judgment will be impartial: and I, least I might mar their testimonies,
will make them speak in their own words.

Vostre eminente capacite qui n'a rien d'egal que vostre piete, De Barrault
Archbishope of Arles. Praised for his eminent capacity, equal piety, and
Learned Works. Pauline a Pr. of the society in his Ep. to the Card. 1631.
que vous auez tant de fois employe, and employez encore tous les iours si
vtilement a la gloire de Dieu, and au bien des ames. Et un peu apres. Les
doctes liver; que vous mistes au iour, qui ont instruit and edify toute la
France.

De liberalitate tua loquentur alij, qua tantis in fortunae copijs ac tantis
opibus nihil est tuum. Quid porro moderationi tuae par est tantis in honoribus?
haec ornabunt inquam alij, and animi tui victorias, He extolls him for
Liberality Moderation. Counsel.
and sagacissimae mentis praesensiones, and consilia, and dicta and facta
persequentur tua, quibus vt omnes omnium retro saeculorum sapientes facile
antecedis, ita nullam posteris, non dicam assequendi, sed laudandi dumtaxat,
and ornandi tui modum reliquisti.

Vnum esse timendum bonis omnibus arbitror, Pauline a Pr. of the society,
1631. He extolls him for his incomparable virtue Fidelity. Piety Prudence.
Justice. singular Wit. Counsel. Labor. Industry. Rob. Denyaldus Decanus.
1633. commends him for the Knowledge of divine and humane things.
ne hanc tantam and tam inusitatam terris, supraque genus hominum excelsam
virtutis indolem, denique Caelum nobis inuideat. Tua fide ac pietate,
prudentia, iustitia, virtute denique tua stas, haec caelestia sunt. Nihil
vspiam in terris tibi par habemus ingenio, cor silio, labor, nauitate, tanto
inquam caelum grauius timendum est. Sed vniuersae Galliae, and Ludouico Iusto
petenti nihil non indulgere caelites possunt.

Duplicem in te Heliae and Helizei Prophetarum spiritum, rerum puta diuinarum
and humanarum cognitionem, vsumque contemplantes, atque copiosa caelestis
gratiae charismatacum Ecclesiastica purpura Ludouici Christianissimi fauorum
circundata varietate, laudantes, votis pientissimis apprecamur.

Is quaerendus opinor, and asciscendus Patronus fuit, primum minime profanus
homo, sed sacra, and huius argumenti simili dignitate praeditus: tum acerrimi
idem ingenij, Petauius Pr. of the society. Prayseth him for his excellent Wit
and judgment. The same co^mends him for his love toward Religious. Petauius
Kal Apr. 1627. Pereyroles Minime 4. Kal. October. 1630.
qui capereista posset, ac de ijs causa veluti cognita iudicaret.

Ex ea societate sum quae se tibi cum alias semper beneuolentiae nomine
obstrictam meminit, tum nuper summis suis temporibus recreatam, per te modo
sospitem, and incolumem esse profitetur.

Per te fieret purpura clarior religio auctior, and Ecclesiae status solito
augustior: nam quae prius in varijs Gallia plagis sordes contraxerat ob
Babilonios, puta haereticos, inductis postmodum mutatoriis, ac reformatis tuo
consilio aetatis nostrae corruptelis, iam primaeuus se ingerit auitae pietatis
cultus, and verus emicat religionis habitus.

Nec tantum vidisti and prouidisti, The same Author.
sed etiam splenduit tuorum operum fulgor irradians, luxit lux tua coram
hominibus, quae de aureo caudelabro per septem lampades, id est, per omnimodo
lucis exempla coruscans non nisi homericos latet oculos.

Cuinam potius quam tibi consecrandus erat, qui domi militiaeque tot praeclara
facinora edidisti, Morinus a Pr. of the Cong. of Orat. of Jesus commends for
him prowess and patience, and for many famous acts performed in peace and in
War.
qualia nec a maioribus nostris, nee a maiorum nostrorum auis atauisque edita
fuisse accepimus. Tam prospero autem and foelici successu haec a te perpetrata
sum, vt bonorum omnium spes long superatae sint, desideria coequata, and
improborum calumniae coruscante virtutis and patientiae tuae splendore penitus
extincte.

Cuius nomen eruditione, The same Author commends him for his learning and
eloquence.
eloquentia librisque aduersus Ecclesie hosts conscriptis vniuersam Galliam
gloriosissime peruasit.

In Ecelesie igitur conseruationem, Patrie salutem, and literarum decus, The
same Auth. Praises him for conseruing the Church his contrie, and learning.
res hactenus inauditas and opinionum hominum incredibiles perpetrasti.

Un seul escrit de peu de cahiers: mais un pressis de ce qu'il y a de
substantieux en tous les livers saints, Guillebert in his Ded. Epis. to his
Para. upon S. Paul 1631. He prefers him in this little Work before Perron,
Bellarmine, and Many other famous and learned Prelates.
ayant eu plus d'efficace en l'esprit des vns and des autres, que tous les gros
volumes ensemble de ces illustres Prelates, de Saints, de Bellarmin, de du
Perron, and d'vne multitude incroyable de tres-celebres Docteurs, la conversion
qui s'en est ensuiuie des plus signales, auec la fuite ignominieuse de ces
quatre supposts de l'heresie, nous asseurent que vous l'auez terrassee.

Qui te non nouerit, Petauius in one of his Ded. Epis. to the Card Prayseth him
for learning and oloquence.
potest ex editis a te libris coniecturam capere, quos partim instituendis
Catholicis, partim confutandis Horeticis erudite ornateque scripsisti.

Idem denique vt quae sunt priora omnibus attingam Ludouicum Regem impulit, The
same commends him for his fidelity and prudence in the King his affairs,
Whose judgment of the Card. he reputes as Gods.
te vt adhiberet in regno gubernando curarum omnium consiliorumque participem,
ac tuae fidei ac prudentiae grauissima queque committeret. Cuius de te
Principis iudicium, non solum vt iusti, non vt sapientis solum, sed vt
innocentis ac Deo chari, propeque familiaris; sictanquam a iustitia ipsa, a
sapientiae, ab innocentia, postremo ab ipso Deo, profectum debet videri.

Intelleximus eo te spectasse pridem, These same commends him for the purity
of his intention in the Catbolike cause.
quod and nondum perfectare, ac ne suscepta, aut deliberata quidem pre te
tuleras, vt ciuilibus pariter ac Ecclesiasticis rebus Galliae compositis, The
4. Paragrafes following are found in a better of the Religious (cited below) to
my Lord. Card. wherein they commend him for his care and diligence to divert
disunion from the Children of the Cath. Church, and to repress the insolence
of her enemies: for his many obligations to the Church and his contrie. for his
upright inte^tions and prudence which guide his designs: for bis zeal of
justice: for taking his last counsel from no other then God himself: for his
constancy in not permitting the vanishing blasts of calu^nte shake his
affection to serve the Church, and to endeavor the peace of Cristendome.
liber vbique Catholicae fidei campus aperiretur.

L'experience que nous auons des fautes precedentes, qui ont presque rendules
maladies incurables, augmente in finiment l'admiration que merit votre soin
and vostre bon-heur a diuertir les moindres occasions de des-vnion enter les
enfans de l'Eglise, and de n'en perdre aucune de celles qui peuuent seruit, a
reprimer l'insolence de ses ennemis. En quoy vous n'apportez pas seuleme^t vne
indicible vtilite a nostre siecle, mais aussi vous preseruez la posterite de la
contagion de ces maux qui croissent auec l'age, and trauaillant pour
l'Eternite, vous laissez a ceux d'apres nous des antidotes excellens, and des
rares instructions. fol. 40.

Que s'il nous est permis de prendre part en la reconnoissance de tant
d'obligations que vous ont l'Eglise and la France: and si pour nostre
consolation nous osons augurer l'accroissement du bien futur, par la reueue de
celuy que le public a receu and recoit de vous tous les iours: nous pouuons
dire, Monseigneur, pour vne verite si claire dans l'approbation generale, F.
Nicholas Genesis of the Domicains.
qu'en la taisant il y auroit autant de subject de nous accuser d'injustice
oud'ignorance, F Eustake of S. Paul assifia^t to the R. F. General of the
Fueill F Careat Prior of the great Convent, of the Aust.
qu'en la publiant nous sommes exempts du blasme de flaterie, ou de credulite.
fol. 40.

Or laissant aux autres a dire tant de genereuses actions, que vous auez
contribue a cette felicite, F. P. Gueret Corrector of the Minimes of the place
Royal in Parts.
nous ne pouuons obmettre en ce lieu la reconnoissance que merit la droite
intention and la prudence qui guident vos desseins, Low is de la Salle
Superieur of the house of the Professed of the Society of Jesus at Paris.
and les rendent heureux. C'est ce zele de la Justice a laquelle appartient ce
que l'on doit a Dieu en la religion, and au prochain par la protection du bon
droit, Stephen Binet Rector of the Coll. of Clairmont of the Society of Jesus.
F. Claude le Petit Gardie^ of the Cordeliers in Paris.
qui a conduit vos entreprises auec tant de subjet d'admiration, qu'il semble
que es euenemens ont souuent surmonte vos pensees. Ce qui done a cognoistre,
qu'apres que vous auez preueu tout ce que l'entendement humain peut conceuoir,
F. M. Doles the first Lector and Doctor of Divinity at the Cordelers in Paris,
and F. Bonauenture of the Mother of God Prior of the Discalced Carmelites of
Paris.
vous auez pris vostre dernier conseil auec Dieu, qui vous a fait esperer and
obtenir des chooses si importantes a son service. fol. 42.

Ce nous sera beaucoup d'honneur de marcher de loin apres vous, and d'imiter
selon nostre condition vostre fermete, and ne permette point que le ve^t
passager de la calomnie esbranle vostre forte affection de seruir a l'Eglise,
F. Michael Fouet superior of the Augustins of the Convent in S. Germains
suburbs.
and de contribuer vos soins pour appaiser les troubles de la Chrestiente, F.
Leon de Paris Gardien of the Capueins of the Convent of S. Honorie. Fr.
Archangell of Paris Gardien of the Capucins of S. Iameses. Fr. Baltazar
Langlois Prior of the Dominicains of S. James street. F. Renault de Vault Prior
of the great Convent of the Carmelites of Paris Doctor of Divinity.
ou nous prenons un interest bien plus sensible, qu'en ce qui nous pourroit
concerner.

THE PRINCIPAL POINTS OF THE FAITH OF THE Catholic Church.
DEFENDED AGAINST the vvriting directed to the king by the four Ministers of
Charenton.
THE FIRST CHAP.
MINISTERS.
SOVEREIGN LORD
The knowledge which we have of the mildnes of your natural disposition makes
us hope that you will hear us in our just complaints: and that to give
judgment in an importa^t cause, you will not be satisfied with hearing the
accusation. Again, the greatness of your courage, and the vigor of your wit
which out run time, and outstripe your age, and whereof God has already made
use to restore peace to France, fills your subjects with hope to see Peace and
Piety flourish, and Justice maintained, under your reign.

ANSWER.
ONe may see that by experience in the first lines of your writing, which is
frequently noted by ancient historians, Arrius in ep. ad Constant. apud Sozom.
lib. 2. c. 26. Nestoriani tom. 3. Conc. Ephesians. c. 18.
that it is an ordinary thing with such as err in Faith, to charm the ears
of Princes with specious words, that they may with more facility, make glide
into their hearts, and imprint therein, the opinions which they profess. You
extolle his Majeste thinking under the sweetness of a truth, to make him take
down that which is depraved in your beleifs, and to couch under fair
appearances the serpent which does distroy souls, as that Aegiptian hid the
aspe under figues which slew her. The qualities which you attribute unto the
king do truly appertain unto him; nor have I indeed any thing to do upon
this subject, but to approve the praises wihich you asscribe unto him, and
withal, to add to them; every one knowing, not only the strength of his
wit, and the fulness of his courage, but further, the soliditie of his
judgment, the inbred goodness of his nature, his piety toward his people, and
zeal in point of Religion. Yet in truth one that would be rigorous,
considering that Respons. ad epist. Luth.
Henry the eight, king of England, whom you so highy esteem, co^temnes the
praises which Luther, whom he condemns of heresy, ascribes unto him; might
propose unto his Majesty to impose silence upon you, or at least to stop his
ears against that, which, even with truth, you speak to his advantage. But I
will nether endeavor the one nor the other; the vehement desire and hope I
conceive of your conversion, There is nothing said in this Chapter of the
Ministers inuiting the king to judge of their cause, answer being made thereto
in 3. Chap.
oblige me to treat you more mildly. I will content my self to discover unto
him your craft which consists in thinking to please him in every thing, to
thend you may please him in this point, and upon this I dwell, praising you for
the praises you give him according to your duty, each subject being obliged to
speak and think well of his king.

CHAP. II.
MINISTERS.
You have, SOVEREIGN, in your kingdom many thousands making profession of the
old Christian Religion, and such as Jesus Christ did institute it, and the
Apostles did publish, and put it down in writing: who for this cause have
suffered horrible persequutions, which yet could never impeach their continual
loyalty to their sovereign Prince, yea when the necessity of the kingdom
called, they ran to the defense even of those kings who had persequuted them.
They, (DREAD SOVEREIGN) served Henry the great, your Father of most glorious
memory for a Refuge dureing his afflictions; and under his conduct, and for
his defense gave battaills, and at the peril of their lives and fortunes,
brought him by the point of the sword to his kingdom maugre the enemies of the
state. Of which labors, damages, dangers, others then they reap the revvard:
for the fruit which we reap thereby, is, that we are constrained to go serve
God far from Towns: that the entry to any dignities is become to us, for the
most part, impossible, or at least, full of difficulty: That our newborn
children, who are carried a far of to Baptism are exposed to the rigor of the
weather, whence many die: that we are hindered to instruct them: yet that which
does most aggreeue us, is, that our Religion is diffamed and denigrated with
calumnies in your Majesty's presence, while yet we are not permitted to purge
our selves of those imputations in the presence of the said Majesty.

ANSWER.
IT is the custom of those that are tainted with error, to brage most of that
which they least have, and to boast of it in adua^tagious words which are
ordinary with them as S. S. Hieron Osea cap. 10. Spumantibus. verbis rume^t
Hierome does remarke. This truly is your proceeding, while you sum up by
millions your followers in France, though now they be reduced to a far less
number. Imitating herin the Donatists, who, though but few in number, brought
down to a part of Affrike, and that a little one too, did yet make brages of
the multitude of their followers. You make use of a deceit, yet easy to be
discovered: you see that the scripture and all the Hieron. tentra Lucif.
Fathers make the Catholic Church the lawful Spouse of Jesus Christ, more
fruitful then any adulterer: whereupon you attribute to your selves many
brethren: but in vain, it being clear, even unto the blind, that the number
of yours are no more considerable, in respect of the kings other subjects, then
all those that are of your profession in the whole world, being compared to
those who in all christendom live under the laws of the Roman Church. That
this is so, it is easy for me to prove, by the same argument which S. Aug.
cap. 3. de vnitat^ Eccles and lib. de Past. c. 18.
S. Augustine makes use of against the Donatists for the universal Church,
making only appear that your belief has no place in diverse towns and
places of this kingdom, where the Catholic Church is, and that yet the
Catholic Church is found in every place where profession is made of your
religion, so it is not strange, that when Calvin 2. Colos. 2. v. 19. videmus vt
modo procer sit ac amplun Papae regnused prodigios. magnitudine vrgeat. Et in
Praef. lib. de libero arbit. Nos exiguun sumus home number manus illi (Papistae
ingentem faciunt exerc^ tum.
some of your own men do compare the number of their followers with the
number of Catholics, they confess that theirs is but small, the other very
great. For the rest, though it were true that you could count your selves by
millions; that you were spread over all France, yet should you get no great
advantage, S. S. August sermon. 2. in Psalm. 36.
Augustine compareing you, by good reason, to smoke, which does vanish so much
the sooner, by how much it is greater and more dilated abroad.

From the multitude of your brethren you make a passage to the antiquity of
your religion, professing it to be Christian, and such as Jesus Christ did
institute it, and as the Apostles did publish and put it down in writing: upon
which I will obserne four things.

First I say, that either your meaning is that you have the ancient doctrine of
the Church, though received of new; or that you had and conserved il from all
ages by an uninterrupted succession. If the first, (albeit indeed it is false)
suppose it were granted you, it were yet unprofitable, the ancient and true
doctrine being insufficient, if a man have not the Church, which have he
cannot, unless he have continually retained the true doctrine. If the second,
after you shall have spent much labor to prove your assertion, yet shall you
gather no other fruit there of, then to show your antiquity bounded with the
term of one age, whereas that of the Church of Jesus Christ, has sixteen ages
upon its head. It is true that your religion is ancient in a certain sense,
since, as we shall se hereafter, it is compounded of diverse heresies, which were
condemned in the primitive Church, yea even from the time of the Apostles, but
you cannot style it ancient as though the body of your belief; all the
substance of your faith, had from former ages been believed: it being evident
that the Article of justification by special faith, which is a part of the
life of your religion, was unknown before the age in which we live: I add
this word special, because, though Eunomius, and other more ancient Apud S.
Aug. haeres. 54. Et lib. de fid and oper. c. 14.
Heretics, said, that man was justified by only faith, speaking of
dogmaticall Faith, yet none before Luther held that this justifying Faith did
consiste in the special apprehension that each one of the faithful made of
the Justice of Jesus Christ, which is applied by the belief they have to be
justified. For the rest, you being able to name none, who, before Luth. tom. 7.
Primus fui cui Deus ea quaevobis praedicata sunt reuelare dignatus est.
Luther, made profession of your whole belief: Luth. tom. 2. in formula Missae
ait. Nostram rationem colen de Deum per Missam fuisse velerem and inolita^,
suam verorecentem and insuetam Luth. tom. 2. ad Princip. Bohem. Deus hoc
tempore lucem sui Eua^gelij rursus accendit. Luth. tom. 5. in cap. 1. 1. ad
Corinth. Absque sua opera nullum verbum neiota quidem de Euangelio fuisset
auditum.
and that great prophet of your Law, boasting in plain terms, that he was
the first to whom God vout safed to reveal what he preached; and further
clearly accnowledging the manner of serving and honoring God in the Mass, to
have been ancient, and to have taken root; and confessing his, of the
contrary side, to be now and unaccustomed; saying moreover, that God in his
time, had lightened of new the light of the Gospel, which without him one
iota had not been heard of. And Again a Calvin assureing us that it was he,
that first undertook the cause of the Gospel, which is, the first who
shevved the way to others; who can affirm that your religion has more then an
hundred years of antiquity? None, as I conceive, Calu. in 2. defens. contr.
Vuestphal. ait de Luthero quod causam Euangelij agere caeperit and viam primus
demonstrauerit.
will dare to think it, especially if they reflect upon that which one of your
brethren of the same Age with Luthere, secretary of the Elector of Saxony,
first Abettour, says, such a confession was never made, not only within these
thousand years, Spalat. in relat. confess. August. Cont. Epistolam
fundamentalem cap. 4.
but even since the worlds creation, nor is the like confession found in any
history, in any Father, in any Author.

Secondly I say, that imitating Luther, who puts the word Catholic out of the
Creed, you do not in this place attribute it to your religion, knowing in
your consciences, that the name Catholic (a name of so great weight that it
even retained S. Augustine in the Church) does in no sort appertain unto you.
It appertaynes not-vnto you, as it does determine that of all Christian
societies, which contaynes the greatest multitude, as I have already shown.
Nor yet as it signifies universality and diffusion, whether we regard times,
or places, it being evident: both because you derive not your origin from
Jesus Christ and his Apostles by an uninterrupted succession of your
predecessors, who have subsisted in all times; and withal for that you are
reduced to so narrow bounds, that you cannot be said to be spread over the
greatest part of the world.

Thirdly I say, that since you are, no Catholics you cannot be termed
Christians, if the Fathers may be believed; for Pacianus Epist. 1. Christianus
mihi nome^ est, Catholicus cognomen illud me nuncupat, istud ostendit.
S. Pacian says that the name of Catholic is the surname of Christians, and
Catholica Ecclesia nomen propriu^ est huius sanctae Ecclesiae matris omniu^
nostrum.
S. Cyrille, the proper name of the holy Church of Jesus Christ. You cannot
truly be Christians because as we have shown, your belief is heretical, and
consequently, wholly opposite to Christian religion, which cannot be such: for
which cause Tertullian, S. Cyprian, S. Athanasius, S. Augustine and others
affirm, Lib. de pudicitia Lib. 4. ep. 2. Sermon. 2. cont. Arr. Lib. de great.
Christ's. c. 11.
that an heretic is not to be termed Christian.

Fourthly I note, that you do impertinently sustain that your religion was
instituted by Jesus Christ; published and put down in writing by the Apostles,
sithence, being heretical, as I have already said, and as shall be made
manifest in the 16. Chap. of this book, it is contrary to the institution of
Jesus Christ: and that, (seeing at manifestly contradicts the scripture in
diverse points, as I will presently justify,) though it be easy for you to
affirm, that it is conformable, to that which the Apostles left in writing,
yet will you find it impossible to verify the same, or to hinder a man to
accnowledge the contrary.

The scripture says, that Jacob. 2. verse 24. Operibus iustificatur homo and
non ex fide tantu^. Confession Francoise article 20 Nous croyous que nous
sommes faits participans de ceste Justice par la seule foy.
a man is not justified by faith only; you say, that he is justified by only
faith, which is found in no part of the scripture. Do you not then contradict
the Scripture? you do it so openly in this point, Confess. Heluet. c. 15.
docemus peccatorem iustificari sola fide Luth. in cap. 22. Genesis Jacob delirat.
Deuteron. 30. circumcide cor tuum and cor seminis tui vt diligas Dominu^ Deu^
tuum in toto cord tuo and in tota anima tua Psalm. 118. David ait, in toto
cord meo exquisiui te. Et 3. Reg. 14. sequutus est me in toto cord suo. Et 4.
Reg. 23 dicitur de losia quod reuersus est ad Dominum in omni cord suo, in
tota anima sua and in vniuersa vitasua. Call. 2. Inst. c. 7.. 5. neminem
Sanctorum extitisse dico qui corpore mortis circundatus ad eum dilectionis
scopum pertigerit vtex toto cord, ex tota mente, ex tota anima, ex tota
potentia Deum amaret. Paraeus lib 4. de iustif. c. 11. Talem dilectionem (ex
tota anima, ex tota mente, ex omnibus viribus) nemo sanctorum habuit, vel
habere in hac infirmitate potest, manet quidem in Sanctis aliquid (...) and
hypocriseas. Math. 26. Marc. 13. Luc 22. 1. Cor. 11.
that Luther not being able to reconcile the place of S. James, with that which
he taught, says, that this great Apostle dotes.

The scripture says, that we may love God with all our heart; you say that none
can love God with all his heart. This is not found in all holy writ. Do you not
then contradict the holy scripture?

The scripture says, that the Eucharist is the body and blood of Jesus Christ,
En la form d'administrer les Sacreme^s. Contentons nous d'auoir le pain and le
vin pour sign and tesmoignage. Et en leut Ca techisme, au traite de la Cene.
Tu n'entends pas done (dema^de le Ministre) que le corpse soit enclos dedans le
pain, and le sang dedans le Calice? Non (respo^d l'enfant) mais au contraire.
Et cap. 1. Pet. 3. v. 21. saluos facit baptisma.
and that with addition of such words, as design the true body, and true
blood. You say, that it is not the body and blood of Jesus Christ, but only
the figure, the sign, and testimony, which is not found in any part of the
holy pages: Do you not then contradict the scripture?

The scripture says, that baptism saues us, that we are washed, regenerated
by the lauer of water. You say, that baptism does not save, does not cleanse,
does not regenerate, but that it is only a Symbol of our salvation,
clenseing, and regeration, which is not found in all the bible, do you not
then contradict the scripture?

5. The scripture says that Priests remitt sins: you say, Ephesians. 5. v. 26. Vt
illam sanctificaret mundans lauacro aquae. Joan. 3. v. 5. Nisi quis renatus
fuerit ex aqua. Melancthon in locis cap. de signis. Non iustificant signa, vt
Apostolus ait, circumcisio nihil est, ita baptismus nihil est, participatio
mensae Domini nihil est, sed testes sunt (...) diuinae voluntatis erga te. Calu
4. Instit. c. 14.,. 17. Cauendum ne in errorem nos abducant quae ad
amplificandam sacramentorum dignitatem paulo magnificentius a veteribus scripta
sunt, vt scilicet arbitremur latentem aliquam virtutem Sacramentis annexam,
affixamque esse; quo ipsa per se Spiritus sancti gratiam nobis conferant cum
hoc tantum illis diuinitus iniunctum sit munus testicari nobis acsancire Deiin
nos beneuolentiam. Matthew. 18. v. 18. Quacumque ligaueritis super terram erunt
ligata and in caelo, and quacumque solueritis super terram erunt soluta and in
caelo.
that they do not remitt sins, but only that they bear testimony that they
are remitted, which is found in no place of the holy scripture, do you not
then contradict the Scripture?

6. The scripture says, that if a virgin marry she sins not: you say, that
the just man offends in all his works, Joan. 20. v. 23. Quorism remiseritis
peccata, remi^tu^ti. eis, quorum retinuericis, retenta sunt.
which is not found in all holy writ; Do you not then contradict the
Scripture?

7. The Scripture says, that there be some of the wicked and reprobate, Calu.
Instit. 3. cap. 4.. 23. Absolutio quae fidei seruit, nihil aliud est quam
testimoniu^ venia ex gratuitae euangelij promissione su^ptum. 21. Corinth. 7.
si nupserit virgo non peccauit. Luth. art. 2. Iustus in omni opere binopeccat.
idem Calu 3. Instit. c. 12.. 4. Omnia hominum opera si su a dignitate cense
antur nihil nisi inquinamenta sunt and sordes, and quaiustitia vulgo habetur,
ea apud Deum mera est iniquitas Joan 12. v. 42. multi crediderunt in eum, sed
propter Pharisaeos non confitebamtur vt e Synagoga non ei cerentur: dilexerunt
enim gloriam hominum magis quam gloriam Dei. Act. 8. v. 13. Tunc Simon and ipse
credidit. Calu. 3. Instit. c. 2.. 9. and 10 talibus fidei testimonium
tribuitur, sed per catechesin. Item, verum haec fidei seu vmbra seu imago, vt
nullius est momenti ita indigna est fidei appellatione. Luc. 8. v. 13 Quia ad
tempus credunt and in tempere tentationis recedunt.
who believe in Jesus Christ: you say, they believe not, but that they have
only a shadovve of Faith, which is not found in all the scripture; do you not
then contradict Scripture?

8. The Scripture says, that there are some, Calu. 3. Instit c. 2. 11. Nu^quam
disperit semen vitae electorum cordibus insitu^ and in harmon. Matthew. 1 v. 20
fidem quam semel insculpsit piorum cordibus euanescere and perire impossible
est.
who for a time have faith, and believe not in another time: you say, that
there are none who believe for a time, and loose their faith in another, but
that he that believes once, never loses his faith, which is not found in all
holy Scripture: do you not then contradict Scripture?

9. The scripture says, if thou will enter into life keep the commandments:
you say there is no need to keep the commandments, Matthew 10. v. 19. Si vis
ad vita^ ingredi serua mandata.
yea that even to say so, is to deney Jesus Christ and to abolish his Faith,
which is not in all the holy scripture; Luth. 2. Gal. Papistae docent, fides in
Christum iustificat quide^, sed simul seruare opertet etiam praecepta Dei, ibi
statim Christus negatus and fides abolita est Heb 6. v. 4. Quisemel
illuminatisunt, gustauerunt etiam donum caeleste and participes factisunt
Spiritus S. v. 6. Et prolapsi sunt rursus renouari ad paenitentiam rursus
crucifigentes sibimetipsis filium Dei. Calu. 3. Inst. c. 2.. 11. cit. nunquam
disperit semen vita electorum cordibus insitum.
yea that even to say so, is to deney Jesus Christ and to abolish his Faith,
which is not in all the holy scripture; do you not then contradict the
scripture?

10. The scripture says, that some being once illuminated and having tasted
the heavenly gift, do fall, crucifying again to themselves the son of God.

You say that those that are once partakers of the holy ghost, cannot fall from
his grace, which is not found in all scripture; Joan. 1. v. 29. tollit
peccatu^. Isa. 44. v. 21. deleui vt nube^ iniqnitates tuas and quasi nebulam
peccata tua.
do you not then contradict the scripture?

11. The scripture says, that God does take away and blot out sin as a
cloud, remoues our iniquities from us, as far as the East is from the west;
makes us more white then snow: you say, Psalm. 10.2. v. 12. Quantum distat ortus
ab occideute long fecit a nobis iniquitates nostras.
that he nether takes away nor blots out sin, but only does not impute it;
that he does not make us more white then snow, but that be leaves in us the
fault, and filth of sin, which is not found in all holy scripture; Psalm. 50.
super niuem dealbabor.
do you not then contradict the scripture? Luth. art. 2. aliud est omnia
peccata remitti, aliud omnia tolli: baptismus omnia remittit, sed nullum
penitus tollit.


12. The Scripture says that Beatitude, is a salarie, are ward, the
day-pennie of the workmen, a crown of Justice: you say, that it is a mere
liberality, and no reward, Calu. in antid. sess. 5. manet vere peccatum in
nobis: Apostolus fideles his verbis non eximit a cu p^, sed ta^ um reatu
liberat. Paraeus de amiss. great. cap. 7. Plurima peccata etiam morta^ia manent
in iustificatis. Kemnitius 1. part. tit. de reliquiis peccati. immundities.
(peccati) etiam in renatis haeret. Confessio Gallica art. 11. affirmamus
concupiscentiam etiam pest baptismum esse vere peccatu^ quod ad cuipam attinet.
Catechismus Palati. quaest. 126. Omnia peccata nustra in nobio etiam nunc
haerent. Vnitak. lib. 3. de Concupisc. c. 3. remissio non omne^ actu tollit
culpam. Matthew. 5. v. 12. Merces. Philip. 3. v. 14. Brauium. Matthew. 20. v. 9.
Denarius. Primo Cor. 9. Coronam incorruptam. 2. Timot. 4. v. 8. corona
iustitiae. Calu. 3. Iustit. c. 15.. 4. ipsa beat^tudo mera est Dei benificentia
and in antid. sess. 6. c. 17. Quod vitam aternam faciunt mercede^ in eo abillis
dissentio.
which is not yet found in any passage of holy scripture; do you not then
contradict the Scripture? Certainly you do, as I could make appear by a
number of other places, Paraeus 4. de iustif. c. 11. and 13.
if I did not judge it sufficient to have showen it in these twelve points,
Prescript. c. 38. lib. de haeresi.
which do appear in the eyes of all the world as the true Symbol of your
faith.

What will you say, Sirs, to these manifest contradictions? That they are no
contradictions because the scripture is to be understood figuratively? will
you fly to that fraud remarked by Tertullian in the Valentinians, by S.
Augustine in the Priscillianists; by other Fathers in other Heresiarkes; by
your selves in the Anabaptists. If you do so, S. August. lib. contr. Faustu^.
l. 3. de doctr. Christ. c. 10. si animu^ praeoccupauit alicuius errerts
opinioquicquid alater assernerit scripturae, figuratum homines arbitra^tur.
I will say unto you with S. Augustine. What? when we read scripture, do we
forgett the knowledge we have of our own tongue, do we loose the memory of
our manner of speaking? Ought the scripture to speak to us in any other manner
then that which is known unto us, and which is ordinary amongst us? I will
add further with the same saint, that as soon as the opinion of any error
has once prepossessed their mynds, they esteem all to be figures, which the
scripture says to the contrary.

Moreover, without touching those places in particular whereof there is question,
I will make manifest to all men by two general arguments, that your evasion is
of no force both because there is none who does not accnowledge, that it is
impossible that God should teach us so many and so great mysteries of our
Faith, not by that which they are, but contrariwise, by that which indeed they
are not, it being only the part of an impostor, to speak the contrary to
that which is indeed, in a matter of importance; and also because you cannot
infer out of scripture that which you believe in the points which we handle,
save only by the addition of a humane principle (as we shall see herafter)
which is altogether unjust, since in that, you prefer your own reason before
scripture, not believing what it expressly teaches, but the contrary which
it says not, save only by a discourse grounded upon a principle drawn from
your own brain, to wrest that to your own sense, which you accnowledge in
truth to make for us.

We have sufficiently examined these points; S. Aug. sermon. 9 inter
Parisienses. Meletiani apud Epiphan. haer. 68. vide Baron. an. Christi 2.5.
August lib 2. contra Petil. c. 23 Non baptizantur san guine suo nis. qui
occiduntur prepter iusti tiam te prius est quaerendum propter quid paetimini
and postea quiae pa timini. Caprian. l. de vnitate S Aug. Epist. 61. and l. 3
contra Cresc. c. 4^. Matryre^ nonsa. ^^ poena sed causa.
let us pass to your persequutions. None can be ignorant that the devil has
his Martyrs; and Lies have so Zealous Advocates, that they will power out their
bood in their defense. wherefore I will not stand to verify it, it shall
suffice only to note by the way, that since none can pretend glory for his
sufferance for a religion, unless he first prove that it is true: and that as
reason, and all the Fathers do teach us, it is not the pain but the cause
which makes the Martyr, while it is not yet proved that yours is the true
Religion, but contrariwise being a thing manifest, that it is false, you can
draw no advantages from your persecution, unless it be to discover your selves
to stand attainted of a double crime, to wit, error and obstinacy. Your
sufferances nether give testimony for your piety, nor for your courage, but
contrariwise, (following S. Augustine) that you are cowardly. S. Aug. lib. 1.
contra, Gaud. c. 33. Quisquis pro part Donati vel simbriam vesti. menti
perdiderit cor non habet. Cyprian. l. de unit. Eccles. Non erit illa fidei
corona sed poena perfidiae.
They are not crowns of your faith, but, according to S. Cyprian, punishments
of your perfidiousnes.

Having spoken of your persecutions you represent your fidelity and services,
such, if we believe you, that even the king who persecuted you, (to use your
own words) had fully tasted the favorable effects thereof. To what purpose is
it to make those indebted unto you, to whom you owe all that you are? To what
end is it to brag that you were a refuge to that great king in his
afflictions and crosses? Why do you represent his crown fastened upon his
head by the cement of your blood spilt in many battaills, Frenchmen being no
strangers in France, that is, not being ignorant of what past therein? I cannot
see to what end you so magnify your services, if not to give way to all the
world, to condemn you out of their own knowledge; for there are none at all,
be they never so sharp sighted, be they never so diligent in running over
history, that can find out, the services you have rendered under Francis the
first, and Henry the second, who are those under whom, you may pretend with
most show of reason to have been persecuted, since under their reign endeavor
was used to stiff your error in its birth, unless it be, that as there are
some who deem they do well when they do no evil, you repute it service not
to have disserued, which yet would not be the wining of your cause it being
certain, that if a man be obliged to any one for an evil he did not, it is to
him who had power to do it, and it is evident, that in the reign of those
first kings, if you had a will to hurt, your infancy did not second you with
power to put it in execution.

And if from the reigns of these kings, one pass to those of Francis the
second and Charles IX. and that you pretend to have served them, the
conspiracy of Amboise against the first, and the Bataills of Dreux, S. Denis,
Iarnac and Moncontour against the last, the enterprise which was made at Meaux
to seize upon his person, are they to be counted in the number of services?
Since you make show to have rendered good for evil, there is no question of
seeking place of excuse to those actions, but in case one should press you to
it you should never be able to fetch out the stayne which they fastened upon
your Predecessors foreheads. And as little can you cover it by your blood spent
in a bloody day, since, this action following the others, one may well auerre
that it was caused by those, but never that those were caused by it. And
concerning Henry the third, the services which he received from you, will
appear by those which you afforded to his successor, the Battaill of Coutras,
the taking of many towns and diverse other actions, clearly demonstrating that
in serving the one, you did bad offices to the other.

Thence it appears in deed that your predecessors had served Henry the
Great, marry that which goes amiss for you, is, that it appears withal,
that they served him not as king, but as Favorer of their sect, since their
services went before his comeing to the Crown, while yet he did openly favor
them, at which time they could not lawfully assiste him against their king,
and that since the royal scepter fell into his hands, which was the time
indeed in which they were to die for him, yet, abbeit he were their king,
because, having embraced the Catholic faith, he stood not in matter of religion
Promotour of their Cause, their fire became ice, whose coldness he felt, as with
his own mouth he witnessed, at the seige of Amienns. You cannot without
temeritie affirm that you were his refuge, but with verity one may auerre
that you were cause, why he stood in need thereof: you cannot say that you were
cause of his prosperity, but well may you be said to have been the cause of
his misfortunes: for who had been more prosperous, or in greater assurance then
he, if you separating him from the Church, had not put him in a way to loose
his kingdom and life, amidst the hazards of war, where a thousand thousand
times he exposed himself, in a way to be deprived of his earthly Crown
together with that of heaven. He that should have cast a man headlong into the
sea with intention to drown him, and after conceauing his conservation
profitable to himself, lends him his hand to fetch him out of the peril in
which he had put him, can draw no great glory from that action. If you
contributed any thing to the establishment of this great king, who having
been cast down by some of yours from the Peters-shippe of the Church, into the
sea of error, was co^stituted in most emine^t danger, it is only in this
sense; and yet it is so little too, that you ought not to put it to account. In
steed of serving him, you serve your selves of him; he fought for you, not you
for him; and so far were your arms. and power from ^aysing him to the Crown,
that nothing did so powrefully concur to establish him, as the abiureing of
your errors which had put him in peril: and yet he stands indebted to you for
all, by your own account: whereupon I cannot but apply unto you what was said
of Moab in Isaie. We have heard his pride, Isa. 6.
his pride and arrogancy greater then his power. Lo in a few words how yours
have served the kings, whom, in lieu of pointing them out by odious names, you
ought to style your benefactours, since it was under them, that you began to get
footing in this kingdom in liberty, and that they have made favorable Edicts,
which even to this day you enjoy.

If I have brought upon the stage the comporteme^ts of your Predecessors (all
trespasses being personal) it was not to impute their faults to you, but
only to take notice by the way, upon the occasion which you administered, of
what has past, leaving to such as are addicted to reading, to take a more
ample View of them in our Histories. And so far am I from desireing to
denigrate you with the faults of your forerunners, that on the contrary side,
I conceive, and hold for certain, that the king, under whose authority we all
live, shall receive so good services, both of the nobility, who gives ear
unto you, and the common people, who follow you, and of your selves, that France
will have occasion, to bury in oblivion the actions of your forefathers, which
were prejudicial unto it. In the interim, you will license me to tell you,
that although yours had served, as you pretend, yet by the vanity you take
therein, you make your own recompense, whereas you were elsewhere sufficiently
rewarded. wherein you commit a double fault, to wit an extreme vanity, and
withal a gross misaccnowledgme^t, complaining of set purpose, of his
Majesty's Predecessors, in lieu of expressing a true feeling of the notable
obligations by them heaped upon you. It is the part of a subject to serve,
without voyceing his services, leaving the accnowlekgment and publishing thereof
to the Prince: If the Prince come short of our just expectation, yet has a man
no actio^ of complaint against him. If a man compain he is blameworthy, and
consequently much more if he complain, while he has cause to commend. The
Reader shall judge whether those that have been admitted by their kings to
establish a new Chair in a state; to erect a new ministry who ly contrary to
that which they accnow ledge to be the tiue Ministry of the Almighty; who
have full liberty to make profession of a Belief directly opposite to theirs:
who are admitted, to offices, dignities and estates; who by the benefit of the
kings bounty enjoy no small number of towns and Castles for their safety,
though all the rest of the French do absolutely rely upon his faith the true
and sole Refuge of subjects; finally, if those who have large pensions, who
receive grate benefits, in whose favor very aduantagious Edicts are made, and
inuiolably kept, the Reader I say shall judge, whether such people have cause
to complain of their kings, and tacitly to accuse them of ingratitude while
they declare them selves laden with injuries, for reward of their services. If
the Anabaptists had afforded as much assistance to some one of your Princes for
the recovery of his Estats, as you pretend to have afforded to Henry the
Great, would you counsel him to permit them more liberty then you enjoy in
France? Or inioying so much, would you admit of their complaints, for that
they did not iaioy equal liberty with you?

To conclude, I appeal to your own consciences, not only whether all the
Princes which profess your belief, but whether even any of the^ do so treat
curs in their States; no I will demand yet less, I ask not whether ours
receive benefits, whether they bear offices, whether they be preferred to any
degree of honor, it is too much, I will yet fall lower, and only ask, if
they have liberty given to profess our religion, not openly, but even in
secret, with assurance of their life? Bezae Epist. 4. Non dubitamus
(Magistratus) optimoiure in praefatos Anahaptistas gladiu^ strinxisse. Bezade
haeret. puniend. lib. integro. Idem Epist. 1. est he mere diabolicum dogma
sinendum esse vnu^quemque vt si voler pereat.
After you shall have wellpondered the question which I have put unto you, you
will be able to return me no other answer, save only, that some grace they
receive in such States, to wit, that of Martyrdom which we do most highly
prise. And indeed your authors do teach that Heretics are to be bainshed
and punished, and that liberty of conscience is diabolical, whence you do
prohibit it us, in all places where you have power. While yet there is a fair
difference betwixt your condition and ours: you are Nouellists, and
consequently they whose possession you impeach might justly have hindered the
exercise of your new belief, Luther and your own Authors teaching, Luth in
1. ad Galat. Luth. ^pu^ S. e^d l. 5.
that so it ought to be done, and practicing accordingly. We are possessours
possessing a doctrine which the Apostles left us, by an uninterrupted
transmission from hand to hand, and therefore we cannot be lawfully repelled,
unless we be first condemned by a general Council, which is so far from ever
having been done, that even the Princes which embrace your religion have not
yet condemned us, with any show of justice, since we have never yet been heard:
herin you use their cunning, who having given occasion of complainte, complain
first, Colloque de Poissy, Conference de Fontainebelleau.
making show of aggreeuance in the same thing: although indeed this liberty
is not denied you, and we are exceeding glad that it is given you, knowing well
that as many combats as we fight shall be as many Lawrells for us, and
victories for the Church. And desireing nothing more, then, (by diligently
observing the Edicts made in your favor,) to meet with the occasions, wherein
we may bring a way, to the advantage of Truth, new spoils over your errors.

CHAP. III.
Section I.
MINISTERS.
FOr if this were permitted us, we would make him clearly see, that our
religion is hated because it admitts no other rule of salvation, then the word
of God contained in holy writ; nor other head of the universal Church then
our Savior Jesus Christ; nor other Purgatory for our sins then his blood,
nor other sacryfice propitiatory for our sins then his death and passion;
nor other merit before God then his obedience offered up for us to his
beauenly father.

ANSWER.
THe first thing which we are to mark in this point, is the Art by which you
use to gain men's hearts, and to alienate them from the Catholic Church in
which we live. You represent your belief hated for many reasons by which
notwithstanding you pretend to make it commendable before God and man. You will
have it to be hated, for sustayning, in points controuerted between us, that
which makes most to Gods honor, and for condemning in our Faith, that which
you hold unworthy of his perfection. In this you imitate the old Heresiarkes,
who opposed the principal points of Catholic religion, under pretext of
conseruing Gods honor more entire. For this reason, the Schismatikes, as S.
Cyprian delivers, Apud Cyprian. ep. 55. Hilar. l. 2. de Trinit. solicit nimium
ne patrem filius ab eo natus euacuet. Marc. 2. Quis potest demittere peccata
niss solus Deus. Matthae 9.
under color of exalting God his mercy, communicated with the christians who
had sacrificed to Idols, before they had showed a lawful repentance. For the
same cause, the Arians, as we read in S. Hilarie, denied that the son was
consubstantiall with the Father, least the dignity of the Father might have
been exhausted by this honor of the son. For the same, the Jews would not
have Christ to have power to absolve from sin; rendering that honor to God,
that it might be reserved to him alone. For the same, as we find in S. Amb. l.
1. de poenit. cap. 2. Aiunt (Nouatiani) se Domino defer reueremia^ cui solt
remittendorum criminum potestate^ resernent.
Ambroise, the Nouatians denied that the Church had the same power. For the
same, says S. August. l. 32. contr. Faust. Quiae ta ia ibi sunt quae Christa
gloriam decolorent.
Augustine, the Manichies, denied certain books of the scripture, which they
said contained things which stained the luster of the glory of Jesus Christ.
To be short, diverse others took this colorable cloak, yet were they all
condemned by the Fathers, and most justly; because God in the establishing of
christian Religion did not search that which was most honorable unto him self,
especially in our judgment, but that which was most profitable unto us, as we
see planely in these words, Philip. 2. v 7.
he did for us exinaniee himself taking the form of a servant. That of the
greater or less honor which does accrue unto God, is but a bad way to
establish one article of Faith, and destroy another. Vvher upon Hill. l. 1. de
Trinit. Religiese impius, and l. 4. irreisgiosam de Deo selt ^tudinem.
S. Hilarie terms the Arians, who use that way of proceeding, Religiously
wicked, people who do irreligiously serve God. Other grounds are necessaire.
We must know what the Church teaches us: and those that are so careful of
Gods honor, ought to be very careful to be in structed in it, least they
iniure him in deeds, whom they honor in words; which they do in expressing
things otherwise then they are indeed, it being certain, as says Cassian. l.
1. de Incarnat. Quod non dicitur it ae vt est etiamsi honor videatur contumelia
est.
Cassian disciple of S. Chrysostom, that that which is not expressed as it is,
though it seem honorable, is indeed a true contumely. That which is true,
be it of what kind it will honors God, because he would have it so, and that
all his wills are to his own advantage. But what is false, though in appearance
aduantagious, turns to disadvantage. And though many things bear no
proportion with the greatness of the Almighty, yet have they connection with
the infinite perfection of his love, and Charity, which appears so much the
more perfect and accomphished by how much, in virtue thereof, he descends to
things more low and abject. And therefore, it is an abuse to allege gods
honor to dazzle and blind the people. Yet this you do, while you represent
your Religion hated for five points, which you esteem honorable for him, as
being honorable, in your opinion, to Jesus Christ: which is but yet so in
appearance only.

Hereupon I am forced to tell you with Tertul. l. de pudic. c. 2. talia and
tantae sparsilia eoru^ quious and Deo adulentur and sibi lenocinantur,
effoeminantia magis quam vigora^tia disciplina^.
Tertullian, that those little shifts, by which you become flatterers of God,
and your selves, do rather weaken then strengthen discipline. So considering
Religion in the shape you represent it, me thinks I see, not a chaste wife, but
a strumpet, (set out with sundry adulterate colors to seduce the world, and
kill you) come from you and become mistress of your life: which moves me, to
the end I may deliver the people from error, to undertake to wash her face,
unmask her, and discover her deformity; following the example and foot stepps
of the Prophet who speaking of an Idolatrous Nahu. 3. Propter mu. titudinem
fornicationu^ meretricis speciosa and gratae and habeutis maleficiae quae
ve^didit gentes in fornicationibus suis and faemiliaes in maeleficiis suis,
Reuelabo pudenda tua in facie tua and ostendam gentibus nuditaetem tuam and
regnis ignominiam tuam.
nation uses these words. For the abundance of the fornications, of a fair
charmeing and mischievous strumpet, who has sold nations in her formcations,
families in her devilish prankes, I vvil discover thy shame in thy face, and
will show thy nakedness to all nations, and thy ignominy to kingdoms. Which
I will do so much the more willingly, because I have learnt of Council. in
psalm. 36. Tanto magis debemus commemorare vanitatem haereticorum quanto magis
quaerimus salutem eorum.
S. Augustine, that by how much more we desire the salvation of Heretics, by
so much more we ought to endeavor to make the vanity of their error appear.

SECTION II.
We would make it clearly appear unto him that our religion is hated,
because it admitts no other rule of salvation, then the word of God contained
in holy scripture.

ANSWER.
IT is false that your Religion is hated for that it admitts no other rule of
salvation then the scripture: but true it is that it is worthy of hatred for
the diverse abuses which it committs in Scripture.

That we teach no other rule of salvation then scripture, will be manifest to
any that knows, that these words, an other rule, do importe in proper speech,
a Rule of a diverse kind (as I will hereafter prove in the ensuing Section) and
withal, an entire rule, as I will presently make appear, following your own
tenets, who will not admit the Gospel of S. Matthew, to be an other rule
then that of S. Mark, considering they are but two parts of the same Rule, and
that this word rule simply taken, signifies a complete rule: for as S. Basile
says a Rule admitts no addition: but things that are imperfect, are never
rightly instiled by the name of Rule. Now we nether admit Rule of any other
king then the scripture, nor yet any complete rule other then it; yea we call
it the complete rule of our salvation, for two reason: both because it
contaynes immediately and formally the substance of our Faith, all the articles
necessary (necessitate Medij) for man's salvation: and also, because it does
mediately comprehend all that we are to believe, in that it does remitt us to
the Church to learn the same which it assures us is infallible. Hence it
follows, that we draw that truth out of the scriptures, which we receive by
the mouth of the Church, if reason may prevail, which teaches, that whosoever
ever deputes another to speak for him, speaks mediatly by his mouth; and if,
Aug. lib. 1. cont. Cresco. c. 33. Quamuis huius rei certe de scripturis
Catholicis non proferatur exemplum, earundem tame^ scripturarum etiam in hacre
a nobis tenetur veritas cum hoc facimus quod vniuersae placuit Ecclesiae quam
ipsarum scripturarum comme^dat authoritas. Etsimi lia lib. de unit Eccles. c.
22.
S. Augustine, who delivers it in express terms, may gain belief: Albeit,
says he, one can produce no example of scripture concerning this matter, yet
hold we in it, the truth of the same scripture, since we do that which is
conformable to the universal Church, whom the authority of the self same
scripture does commend unto us. Behold in what esteem the Scripture is with
us, for which cause we also are to be esteemed. Now we will see whether by
reason of it, you deserve not hatred, though, not in that sense in which you
say you are hated for it. But before we come to that point, permit me, I
beseech you, to extenuate a little the glory you hunt after in establishing the
Scripture the only rule of your salvation, by making you share it only with
diverse Here tikes who before your time sustained the same opinion.

So said the Manichies. I can in no sort, says Fortunatus in Aug. l. cont.
Fortunatum. Nullo genere recte me credere ostendere pessum nisiea^dem side^
scripturarum authoritate firmauerim.
S. Augustine, make appear that I rightly believe, unless I confirm my Faith
by the authority of Scripture. So says the August. l. de natura and great. c.
39. Credamus quod legimus and quod non legimus nefas credamus ad struere quod
de cunctis etia^ dixisse sufficiut.
Pelagians in the same Author. Let us believe, says Pelagius, what we
read, and what we read not, let us believe it unlawful to be established.
Let this suffice in all other matters. So the Aug l. post Collationem. Nos sola
portamus Euig lia. Item concio. 1. in Psalm. 32. Nos sola offerimus Euangelia.
Donatists in the same Author, saying, we bring with us, and present the
Ghospells only. This was that which Eranistes aimed at, whom Apud Theod. in
Dialog. immutabilis. Ego enim soli diuinae scripturae fidem habeo.
Theodoret brings in, in his Dialogues, where condemning all reasons, he says.
For I believe in the Gospel only. So Lib. 2. cont. ipsum cap. 1. Fratribus
nobiscum constitutisin sancto Euangelio.
Petilianus writing to his brethren under this title: to our brethren
constituted together with us in the holy Gospel. So the Maximianists;
expressing them selves in these terms fighting with us in the truth of the
Gospel. Finally, so the Arians, Apud S. Aug. In veritate Euangelij nobiscum
militantibus.
who were so wedded to the Scripture, that they would not only admit no sense,
but even no word which was not comprised therein, rejecting this word (...),
because it was not found there. Council. Nicenum.
All these ancient Heresiarkes condemned by the Church and by your selves, had
the Scripture as frequently in their mouths as you. They termed themselves
Evangelical men, like you. They made the Scripture the only rule of their
Faith, as you do: yet whereas they did it in words not in deed, as was
fitting, but in publishing its name they abused the authority thereof they were
condemned by the Church; their doctrine was judged worthy of hatred, as yours
also is, and will be, I am confident, by the judgment of the whole world, when
I shall have made manifest, that you abuse the scriptutes to your own ends.

It is truly worthy of hatred; because, under pretext of scripture, the written
word of God almighty, 1. it does reject his word not written. 2. a great part
of the written word. 3. it clearly contradicts, in many passages, that which
it does admit. 4. corrupts it in diverse parts. 5. and lastly, it makes the
word of men pass for the word of God, yea even the word of every Idiot,
establishing upon them the principal articles of your Faith.

1. Worthy of hatred because it rejects the word of God not written.
If he be worthy of hatred, who in establishing a thing, destroys that
without which it cannot subsiste, and which is also commanded by it: your
doctrine is by a just title hateful for the Scripture, which whilsts it
extolls, it destroys the Traditions commanded by the same Scripture, and
without which it can in no sort subsiste. That holy writ cannot subsiste
without Traditions, it is most clear, since by them only we know, that the
books of Scripture which we have, came unto our hands pure and entire, such as
they proceeded from the mouth of the holy Ghost. You believe as an article of
Faith, that you have those books pure and entire. wherefore, either the written
word affirmethit; (which indeed is not so) or not affirming it, it follows,
that some other word not written does teach it us; or else we believe that with
a divine Faith, which God never spoke; a thing most absurd, seeing that the
word of God is the only fundation of our Faith. That Traditions are commanded
by the Scripture, the second to the Cap. 2. Tenete traditiones quas didicistis
sieve per sermonem sieve per Epistolam nostram.
Thessalonians makes manifest, where the Apostle speaks so clearly of
Traditions of Faith not written, that even Vvhitat controu 1. q. 6. c. 10.
Respondeo Noui Testamenti Canone^ non fuisse tune editu^ at que constitutu^ cum
Paulus hanc Epistola^ scriberet.... no^ sequitut ergo quando Apostolus scripsit
ad Thessalon. tum omnia necessaria non sunt scriptae ergo nec postea.
your own men confess, that at he time when S. Paul wrote, there were such
like traditions, which since, are inserted in holy Write. A thing indeed
easily said, but hardly persuaded, especially to such as consider, that it is
not to be found in all holy scripture, that those things which were not yet
written while S. Paul wrote that Epistle, were afterward put down in writing.

2. Worthy of hadted because it reiects part of the Vvritte^ word of God.
Conc. Carthag. 3. Can. 47. Trullan. can. 2. Romans sub Gelaesio. Trident.
By what authority do you reject many of the books of Scripture, which the
Church, at diverse times, in diverse Counsels, in diverse parts of the world,
in Greece, Italy, Afrique, and Germany; defines to be canonical and divine.
What a senseless thing is it, that you of your own head should establish
canons, having nether Father who does declare, nor Council that does define
(which is to be noted) the Canon of the books of holy scripture, according to
your way? The presumption which you use in opposing your judgment against the
judgment of the ancient Fathers, and the authority of the Church, is truly
worthy to be hated.

3. Worthy of hatted because it contradicts the scripture.
He that opposes what he ought religiously to follow, is he not worthy of
hatred? And ought not all men to follow the scripture? You make profession of
doing so, and yet, directly to deney what it affirms, and believe the
contrary to that which it teaches in express terms (as I have proved in the
precedent Chapter) is not this to contradict it? If a man can be said to
esteem him whom he often belyes, you esteem the scripture; and if one can
hold that for a Rule, to which he frequently opposes his judgment, you do
undoubtedly hold the scripture for the rule of your salvation. For plainly to
affirm that a thingis not, whereas the scripture says it is, what other thing
is it then to give the lie to the scripture, and to have a judgment opposite
to the judgment thereof?

4 Your corruptions in the scripture are so perfp cuous, Worthy of hatred
because it corrupis the Scripture.
that even your own men do reprehend them. Did not Charles du Mullin who is
famous amongst you for this cause say, that Molinaesus in suatranslatione Noni
Testaementi. Caluinus in sua Harmonia textum Euangelicum desutare facit sursum
versum vt res ipsaindicat, vim infert literae Euangelicae and illam multis in
locis transponit. and in super additlitterae.
Calvin in his Harmony, puts the text of the Gospel topsie turuie, as the
thing it self makes manifest; violates the letter of the Gospel; transposeth
it in many places; adds to it. And speaking of Beza his translation says he
not, Idem Molinae. ibidem, de facto mutat textum.
that indeed he changes the text? And does not Castalio in defensione suarum
translationum ait, Quo omnes eius (Bezae) errores noiarentur magno volumine
opus esse.
Castalion going on in the same sense affirm, that it would require a great
volume to put down all his error? To conclude, that Great king, whose wit
did as far surpass yours, as his person did indignity all his subjects, the
king of great Britaignie, whose judgment ought to be taken for the whole
Church of England, both because you esteem him the head thereof, and for that
it is not credible that he would publish opinions which that Church holds not.
Says not this Prince in the conference at Hampton Court, that the very worst
version of the Bible was that of Geneua; and further, that he found, the notes
of the Geneua Bible, vvonderfull partial, false, seditious, and too much
smelling of the designs of a most dangerous and perverse mind.

5 That you have the true canon of scripture: Worthy of hatred because it
makes the word of men pass for scripture.
That the books which you allow of, are not corrupted: That the body of
Jesus Christ, is only figuratively in the Euchariste: are not these the
principal articles of your Faith? And that your only and absolute Faith, that
is, the Faith by which every one of the Faithful believes to be justified, by
the apprehension of the justice of Jesus Christ, does justify you, is it not
the ground work and soul of your Religion? And yet whereate these tenets
found in the holy Scripture? Formal and express passages, (such
notwithstanding, the ratification of your confession does oblige you to
produce) there are none. Toutes lesdites Eglises Francoises approuue^t and
ratifient la susescrite confession on tous ses chefs and articles comme estant
entiereme^t fondee sur la pure and express parole de Dieu.
You have recourse to consequences, which yet are not grounded upon two divine
Principles contained in the Scriptures, but upon two Principles, whereof of the
one is drawn from your own brain. which does clearly demonstrate (unless I
deceive my self) that you propose the word of men for the word of God which is
found in holy Writ, since that according to your own tenet, your faith can
have no other fundation then scripture. Lets see whether I be a Liar.

In the third Article of your Conf. you put down for an article of Faith, that
the canon of scriptures, is the only rule of Faith; you further accnowledge
that all the books contained in the said Canon, proceeded from the mouth of
the holy Ghost, and are conserved in their original purity, besides those you
accnowledge none. But by what syllogism conclude you this? in the margent of
the next Article you cite sundry passages of this nature. The pure and
unspotted word of God; Psalm. 12. v. 7. Psalm. 19. v. 8.
The Law of God immaculate. The Testimony of God Faithful, giving vvisdome
to little ones. The Precept of our Lord clear enlightening the eyes. Out of
these passages, which do not affirm in express terms that the books you
admit of are canonical, you would by consequence infer it, you form the
mayor of your argument as follows.

The Law of God (say you) is immaculate pure and unspotted.

But all the books which we hold for Canonical, and no others, are immaculate
pure and unspotted.

Ergo They alone and no others are the Law of God. Whence, I pray you, do you
draw your Minor? Does the Scripture affirm that these books, and no other are
pure and immaculate? verily no. Who does auerre it then? You of your own
brain. This proposition therefore is humane, and withal false; which yet I
will not now prosequute, being sufficient for my present purpose, to show that
this principle is but the words of men. Whence it follows, that either your
word passes for Gods word; or that your Faith in this point, which vertually
compriseth all the rest, (since now the question is touching the Scripture,
which you will have to be the only fundation of Faith) is not divine, but
only humane: whence it clearly follows that it is of no other kind, every
conclusion being of the same nature with the more imperfect part of its cause.
But now let us speak of the Euchariste.

You hold as an article of Faith that the words of consecration ought to be
understood figuratively, so that the body of Jesus Christ is not really under
the species of bread, as we sustain it is. The proofs that you bring of your
Faith, are diverse passages of holy Scripture, which teaching, as you dream,
things that are incompatible with the real presence of Christ in the
Eucharist, do clearly show, that the words of consecration are figurative.
Let us see some of your Arguments.

One body cannot be in two places by Gods omnipotency, to wit, in heaven, and
in the Eucharist which is in earth.

But the scripture teaches that the body of Christ is in heaven till the day
of Judgment.

Ergo it is not in the Euchariste.

The Mayor not being found in all the scripture, it is the word of men, and
consequently it is clear, either that you make it pass for the word of God; or
else that your conclusion cannot be divine and infallible, for the reason I have
touched above. Now let us examine what your Faith is.

You believe that every one of the faithful is justified by that faith whereby
he certanely persuades him self that he is justified in Christ Jesus. Paraeus
l. 3. de iustif. c. 1. l. 1. c. 10.
One of your modern Authors forms this syllogism.

Who so ever believes in the son of God shall be saved.

But I believe in the son of God.

Ego I shall be saved.

Not to dispute of the Mayor (suppose that it were in the scripture, though in
deed in your sense it is not.) The Minor can in no sort be found therein: for
it is not said in any place, that Luther for example, Calvin, Beza, Pereus and
others believed, whence it is evident, even according to your selves, that it
is the word of men, and not of God, whose whole word you will have to be
written.

Now having made manifest how you use the scriptures, all men, I dare assure my
self, will greatly wonder with what face you dare so highly magnify the
scripture in words which in deeds you so horribly wrong. But they will cease
this admiration, if they call to mind how ordinary a thing it is for heretics
to serve them selves of the scripture and to wrong it withal; nay which is
worse, they are in some sort necessarily constrained to do both. To serve them
selves of the scripture: because the true religion being grounded upon the word
of God, it is necessary for every sect that pretends a true religion, to
pretend also scripture wherein it is contained. To wrong the scripture: because
it is manifestly necessary, that that which of its own nature is good, as it
is, must needs be changed, before we can draw any evil out of it, as error
for exemple. And indeed we find both these things observed in the Fathers. For
Vincentius Lyren. c. 35. Sieve enim apud suos, sieve aliencs, sieve public, sieve
in sermonibus, sieve in libris, sieve in co^uiuijs, sieve in plateis nihil vnquam
de suo proferu^t quod non etia^ scripturae verbis adumbrare conentur.
first, they wittnes that upon all occasions, at all times, upon all subjects,
heretics have still the scripture in their mouth, and do brag of the
authority thereof; because Tertul. de resurrectione aliu^de scilicet loqui non
possent de rebus fidei nisi ex literis fidei.
they cannot give a more apparent color to their faith, then the words of
faith, nor Ambr. Com. in Tit. Haeretici illi sunt qui per verbaee legis legem
impugnant and prop^ium sensum verbis astruunt legis, ve peruersitate^ mentis
sine legis authoritate commende^t.
more speciously impugn the law then by the law it self, nor more highly
commend their malice, then by the authority of that which is deuoyde of all
evil. And again, they show that the source of heresies is the Aug. tract. 18.
in Joan. Neque enim natae sunt haereses and quaedam dogmatae peruersitatis
illaquiantiae animas and in profundum praecipitaentia: nisi dum scripturae
bonae intelliguntur non been and quod in eis non been intelligitur etiam temere
and andacter asseritur.
wrong which is done to the scripture, deriuing their generation from its
corruption, Aug. de unit. Eccles. c. 15. cauenda est caliditas Haereticorum
volentium conuertere verba Dei a veritate propter quam dicta sunt
adperuersitatem in qua ipsi sunt.
converting ordinarily the words of truth in favor of which same truth they
are uttered, into errors and falsities in which they themselves live the
August. 3. de Baptis. ad imaginem enim phantaesmatum suorum cum quibus volutars
carnalis anima delectatur conuertit omnia Sacramenta and verba librorum
Sanctorum.
mysteries and words of holy writ into the forms and shapes of their own
fancies, accomplishing that, which the Apostle in the 2. to the Corinthians,
observes in false Prophets, who are to walk in the ways of craft, and to
corrupt the word of God.

SECTION III.
MINISTERS.
NOr other head of the universal Church then Jesus Christ our Lord: Nor other
Purgatory of our sins then his blood, Nor other propitiatory sacrifice for
our sins, then his death and passion; Nor other merit before God then the
obedience which he offered to God the Father for us.

ANSWER.
We sustain that there is no other head of the universal Church then Jesus
Christ, no other Purgatory of our sins then that of his passion; no other
merit then his obedience; and therefore it is false that you are hated, for the
considerations which you pretend. Marry you are worthy of hatred for
deceaseing and abusing the people: while you make them believe that what you
teach in this behalf is to the glory of Jesus Christ, and what we sustain is
injurious and prejudicial to the same, which is false, as I will make
distinctly appear, by the examination of all these points one after another.

That we establish no other head of the universal Church then Jesus Christ,
is evident even by the Pope himself, who yet you say is interessed in the
matter, who declares that there is but one only God. Therefore, Bonifacius in
extrauagante Vnam sancta^ de maio. and obedie^tia. Itaque Ecclesiae vnius and
vnice vnum corpus, vnum caput non duo capitae quasi monstru^ Christus videlicet
and Christi Vicarius. Petrus eiusque successor.
says S. Boniface VIII. there is but one body and one head of one only Church
(not two heads, as though it were a monster) to Wit Jesus Christ and his
Vitair, S. Peter and his successor.

True it is we sustain, that there are other persons distinct from the person
of Jesus Christ, who bear under him, by his virtue and power, the name and
condition of head. Yet this does not hinder Christ from being the only head
of the universal Church, since scripture, Fathers and reason teach us, that
there is a maine difference, betwixt this proposition, There is no other head
then Jesus Christ, and this, no other then Jesus Christ is the head of the
Church together with him, because this last (no other then Jesus Christ is the
head of the Church together with him) excluds every man which is not Jesus
Christ, from having any part in quality of head. And that the first
proposition which says (there is no other head then Jesus Christ) does only
import, that though many do partake of the name and nature of head, yet is it
by subordination of one to another.

The scripture does clearly teach us this distinction, in the second of the Et
murus ciuitatis habe^s fundamenta duodecim, and in ipsis duodecim nomina
duodecim Apostolorum Agni.
Apocalypse, and in the second to Verse. 20. Superaedificat, super fundamentum
Apostolorum and Prophetarum.
the Ephesians, where it says plainly that others then Jesus Christ are the
fundation of the Church. And in the first to the Corynthians 3. Chap. saint
verse. 11. Fundamentum aliud nemo potest ponere praeter id quod positum est quod
est Christus Jesus.
Paul delivers in express terms, that there is no other fundation of the
Church then Jesus Christ. Whence it is evident that these propositions are to
be taken in a diverse sense; because otherwise they would be incopatible, as
being contradictories. Hence it is that amongst the works of saint In Apocal.
21 Necrepellit nos a nostro intellectuillud quod Apostolus dicit fundamentum
aliud nemopotest ponere, etc. Non enim aliud fundamentum est Petrus, aliud
Christus Jesus quia Petrus membrum est Christi. etc.
Ambrose, to wit, in his treatise upon the Apocalipse, we see that this passage
where the Apostle affirms that there is no other fundation then Jesus Christ,
does not hinder S. Peter from being a fundation: because being a fundation, as
he is a member of Jesus Christ by subordination unto him, he is not another
fundation. And this was that which S. S. Leo ep. 89. Hunc enim in consortium
indiuiduae vnitatis assumptum id quod ipse erat voluit nominari.
Leo aimed at, when he said, that Jesus Christ admitted S. Peter into the
society of an individual unity and would have him to be called that which he
was; Whence it is manifest that the nature and name of (Petrae) a rock, a
fundation, a head, does so agree and belong to S. Peter, as that yet Jesus
Christ remaynes the only rock, the only fundation, the only head, since
S. Peter does not impeach the individual unity. This is his aim again,
whilst in another place he brings in Jesus Christ, saying to S. Peter, S.
Le^serm. ^. in a^iuer suae ^^ssumptionis. C^m ego sim (...) is (...) quoque
Pe^ra es, quia ^ea virtute solidaris, vt quae inthi potestate sunt propria sint
^ibi ^necum partic^patione communia.
Albeit I am the inviolable Rock, yet thou art a Rock too, because thou art
supported and confirmed by my virtue, to the end that those things Which are
proper to me by power, might be common to thee by participation. To the same
purpose S. Aug. in Psalm. 86 and cum dicuntur duodec^m portae Jerusalem and vna
porta Christus and duodecim portae Christus quia in duodecim p^rtis Christus.
S. Augustine affirms, that there are twelve gates of Jerusalem which is the
Church, to wit the twelve Apostles, though there is indeed but one Gate,
which is Christ Jesus, because, says he, Christ is in those twelve gates, for
as much as those twelve are subject unto Christ, and do subsist in him alone.

And in very deed reason does teach us, that diverse things subordinate one
to another, do no ways destroy their unity. Which is evident in this, that
the instrument is not termed another cause then the principal cause, in
virtue whereof it works. The Mason and his hammar are not two causes of the
house, but one only. The man and the sword which kills, are but one only
cause of death: whence it is manifest, that whereas S. Peter, does only
participate of Head by reason of the subordination and reference he has to
Jesus Christ, it does not any way hinder Jesus Christ to remain the only head
of the Church; like as the power of Governor in a Lieutenant, does not
constitute two Governors, the Lieutenant participating only of that power of
government by subordination to the Governor. Nor is it to the purpose to say,
that a Lieutenant does not infer two Governors, because he bears not the
name of Governor, since it is not the name that makes the thing: and again to
find a true similitude in the things we speak of, it is only requisite, that
like as the power of a Lieutenant is subordinate to that of the Governor, so
the power which S. Peter inioyes in the Church, may be subject and subordinate
to Christ's power in the same Church. That the Lieutenant is not instiled
Governor, causes no chang at all in the nature of the thing, but does only
show an accidental difference, to wit, that the Lieutenant and Governor do
often chance to meet together, in the same town or Province whereof they have
the government: whereas Jesus Christ in his own species does never meet with
his Lieutenant in the visible government of the Church. And hence it is, that
though we do not asscribe the name of Governor to his Lieutenant, to the end
we might avoid confusion (otherwise being both together how should the one be
discerned from the other) yet do we justly attribute the title of head to the
Pope, where the said inconvenience can have no place.

Yea Calvin himself upon that passage of S. Matthew, Nolite etc. be not called
Rabbis For one is your master Christ. Let no man says he, stick or trouble
himself about words. Christ cares not how they be entitled who undertake the
instruction of others. So there is one only Pastor, and yet he admitts many
Pastors under himself, so that he may have preeminencie above them all and by
them he alone may govern the Church. And a little after. The true sense is,
That then the paternall honor is falsely attributed unto men, when it obscures
Gods glory: which happens as often as a mortal man independently of God, is
esteemed father. And in another place, having objected unto himself, that the
scripture commands that God only be called Father, he says, I Answer, that
Paul does in such sort take the name of Father, that he does not abragate, or
diminish the least particule of Gods glory. It is a common proverb, that what
is subordinate does not repugne. Such is the name of Father in Paul being
compared to God. God alone is the Father of all the faithful yet he admitts
the Ministers, Whom he imployes therein, to the participation of his own
honor, Without derogating from the same. God therefore was the spiritual
father of Tymothie, and that his only father too, properly speaking, but
Paul, Who was Gods minister in begetting Tymothie, does by a certain right of
subordination chalence to himself the title. And again: It is an ordinary
thing that as far forth as God does exercise his power in creatures, so far
does he transcribe his own names unto them. So he is our only Lord and
Father, and yet fathers and Lords are they too, Whom he daignes with this
honor, Whence it is, that as well Angels as Judges are called Gods. You hear
how Christ cares not by what name they be called, who undertake to preach and
teach: That he is so the sole Pastor, that he admitts many under him: That to
call a man Father does not obscure the glory of God. Unless he be so called
independently of God. That things subordinate do not repugne. That by the
right of subordination S. Paul did chalence unto himself the name of Father.
That the name of God, is customarily ascribed unto creatures, so far forth as
by them he does exercise his power. Finally that the very name of God is
translated unto men and Angels. And why may not we by paritie of reason
affirm the same of the word head?

Certainly we may affirm the same, and we learn it of the Apostle, who
writiting in the 1. to the Cor. 12. Chap. 1. Corin^^. (...). v. 21.
That there is a head in the Church, Which cannot say unto the feet, I have no
need of you, does clearly demonstrate, that he speaks of some other head
then Jesus Christ, since he might have used that manner of speech to the
Faithful, whose assistance indeed he did not stand in need of. It is evident
therefore, that the Pope may be called head of the Church, though yet we
accnowledge no other head then Christ. And if happily any Author express him
by the name of another head, he is to be conceived to have spoken of another
head subordinated, even as the instrument, is somtymes termed another cause
then the principal Agent.

Now we must endeavor to manifest unto all men, that it is no ways
prejudicial unto God, that another with, and under him, should be the visible
and ministerial head of the universal Church. Which may be shown by sundry
reasons: for why should it rather derogate from the dignity of Jesus, that
another with and under him, should be the head of the Church, then prejudicial
to the Majesty of God. who is the supreme and principal head of the Church,
that Christ as man, under him, should partake of the nature and power of head,
since it seems to be more disaduantagious to God that Jesus Christ, as man,
should be under him, head of the Church; then prejudicial to Jesus Christ to
admit another man to be Head under him, for so much as he himself is man.

Again why should it more repugne, that another man should be called head of
the Church together with Jesus Christ in the law of grace, then in the old law:
in which, though Jesus Christ was the head of the Church, yet was the High
priest also called by that name, as the holy scripture does remarke, and Calu.
4. insl. cap. 6. Magdeburg. cent. 1. l. 1. c. 17.
Calvin does acconwledge.

Further, since Jesus Christ is king, Psalm. 1.
and no less king of the faithful, then head of the Church, how does the
kingly power, wherewith he endowes kings stand with his own royal Majesty, if
the participation of the name of head, be repugnant to the power which is in
Christ? And why, he being Joan. 10.
Pastor, 1. Petr. 3.
Bishope and Joan. 8.
light of the world, does it not diminish his honor, to constitute under him,
other Pastors, Bishops, and lights of the world, if it be absurd that any
other then he should be held Head of the Church? We may add to this, that
whereas in the scripture, it is not found Christ alone is Head of the Church,
but only, that Christ is head 2. Coloss. ^. and 2.
of the Church, and whereas Gods is Matthew. 19.
only good, only 2. Machab. ^.
just, only Apoc. 15.
holy, why do you grant, that both the name and nature of good, just, holy,
may be fund in others then God, and yet that the name and nature of head
belongs to God alone. Wherefore, since Christ is not only called Pastor: but
Joan 10. Erit vnu^ ouil^ and vnus pastor.
one Pastor, which imports, one only Pastor, as vnus Deus one God signifies
one only God in holy Writ, why do you ascribe the essence of Pastors to
others, and not that of head?

Now whereas things ranged in a certain order and subordination, cannot be said
to be contradictorie; by consequence the authority of S. Peter, ought not to
be esteemed prejudicial to the dignity of Christ, to which it is not only
subordinate, but inferior and subject by many degrees.

Inferior in its extent, since Christ is head of Angels and men, as it
appears by the ^. of the Ephe. and the first to the Collos. The Pope is only
the head of the Church of men, whereas Christ is the head universally of all men
as well those that reign above in heaven, as those who live below in earth;
being the Head of the Church Militant, even comprehending therein the Pope
himself, S. August. in Psalm. 86. Quemadmodu^ aeperte dicitur Sanctus
Sanctorum: si^ figurate dicitur fundamentum fundament^^um.
whence he may justly be called Head of the Head, as S. Augustine instiles him
the fundation of Fundations. But the Pope is not head over himself, but only
over the rest of the body of the Church.

Inferior in point of dignity: sinco Christ is not only the head which does
direct, but also which by his grace, does infuse life, by whom, as we read in
the 2. to the Collos. the whole body does grow into the augmentation of God.
And the Pope ^sa head which does not infuse life, but directs only: whereas
Christ ^s the Principal head, of himself, with power of excellency, by which
^e instituted the Sacraments; iustifies without sacraments, and finally
disposes of all things in the Church, as in his own proprieties: But the Pope
is only the Vicaire of Christ and the ministerial Head of the Church, nor is
he endued with that power of excellency, nor indeed with any at all, but such
as Christ imparts unto him.

Inferior, in the extent of time, being Christ was head from all eternity,
whereas the Pope is Head only in time.

Inferior, To conclud in respect of necessity, since Christ is the
essential Head, without whom the Church is not able to subsiste one only
moment: But the Pope is so head of the same, that without him it could for a
time subsiste. Moreover, the Church is the body of Christ, not of the Pope. For
Christ being as it were the Hypostasis and basis of this body, he supports all
the members thereof, and works all in all. He sees by the eyes, hears by the
ears, teaches by his Doctors, baptiseth by his Ministers; by all he does
all. which does not suite with the Pope. Noe man now, in my judgment can
apprehend S. Peter's authority in the Church to be prejudicial to that of
Jesus Christ, since it is wholly of another nature and rank then his, and his
withal, inferior and subject to it. Nor can the name of head, any more
prejudice Christ, since names do add nothing to the nature of things, nether
do they signify the same nature, or equal power with the diverse subjects to
which they are attributed, since even the least similitude and conformity, is
sufficient, to allote the same names to subjects of sundry natures. Finally,
if Christ be injured, for that, he being the head of the universal Church, yet
the name and nature of Head is conferred upon S. Peter, his Lieutenant and
Vicaire general over the whole Church; why is there not also injury done unto
God, he being as well the head of every particular Church, when the same
honor is done to his Lieutenants therein? Or if, as well in the one case as the
other, his honor be diminished, why do you, in conseruing him from one
injury, permit another to come upon him? You will happily deney your selves to
be called the Heads of your Churches: but the answer is frivolous, Saenderus
de Schismate Anglican. Ribadeneira de codem. Du Chesne in hist Anglic. in vitae
Elizabeth.
since deney you cannot, that your brethren in England do accnowledge the king
of great Bri^anie to be the Head of the whole Church of England; yea and that
which deserves a diligent remarke) as well te^porall as spiritual. Whence may
be gathered, that either the dignity of the Pope, does not in any sort derogate
from the dignity of Christ; or if it do derogate, the same honor also in the
king of England does derogate from Gods hononr. But if granting the one, you
do yet impugn the other, I demand, (supposing that you mean not to have
your own will to stand for a reason) a reason of the disparitie. Nor will it a
white avail you, to deney the paritie, by affirming, that a particular man is
sufficient to govern a particular Church, yet not an universal Church:
because the question here is not, of the actiuitie or extent of one man's power,
but only to know, whether, Christ being the head of the Church, one should
contumeliously wrong him, by establishing an other head thereof. which does
cleately show a paritie betwixt a Particular head being compared to Jesus
Christ as such; and an universal head compared unto him in the same nature and
quality of universal head. Now whether one man be of sufficient ability to
govern the whole Church, is a new, yet a easy question to be decided, since
that which a man performs by the help of a friend, himself is said and
esteemed to do.

But that I may cut of all euasions, ^ demand of you, whether, if the whole
Church, which you brauingly pretend to be reformed, were in England, whom you
hold to be the head of it, would be also in your opinion the head of the
universal Church? If you grant this, why should a quality which is not
injurious in his person, be injurious in the person of Peter? But if you deney
it render a reason of your negation. It is not, in that the essence or nature
of Head, is, in genere, or generally speaking, contumelious, since you grant it
to a prince whom you honor: Nor is it, for that one only is not sufficient to
govern the universal Church, because following that supposition the Church is
reduced to such circumstances, that it does not exceed the ability of one man
to govern it since one man actually in that extention does govern it. And
therefore it is manifest, that that which we teach is not injurious to Jesus
Christ: or if it be, impertinently then do you sustain the part of a
Plaintiue in a crime, wherein you your selves will be convinced as culpable.
Which yet will be made more evident, by the ensuing articles, where I will
endeavor to show that it is a greater advantage of honor, to produce a thing
by the assistance of another (though one man alone be able to produce it)
permitting another to have share in the glory, which he could reserve to
himself alone, and will make appear by consequence, that it is more honorable
to Christ Jesus, who alone is able to govern the Church yea thirty Churches,
if so many there could be, to let others share in this government, then wholly
to reserve it to himself. And even at this present I will give you a scantling
of it, in that which by the light of faith you have seen, to wit, that God
did repute it a greater laud and glory, to have constituted Christ, as man,
the Head of the universal Church under him, then to have retained, and
reserved all that dignity to himself, without communicating it to any other.

In conclusion I would in treat the Reader, diligently to observe the
Ministers subtlety, which is of this nature; that whereas there are two sorts
of questions. The one. Whether the Pope be the Head of the universal Church.
The other whether supposing him to be the head of the universal Church, he
ought to be called another head of the Church then Jesus Christ, or not. In
like manner: whether good works be meritorious, and supposing them to be
meritorious whether that merit ought to be termed another merit then that of
Jesus Christ? Whether the works of pennane do cleance from sin; and
supposing they do cleance from sin whether they ought to be called another
cleanceing or purgatory then the blood of Jesus Christ? whether the rite and
celebration of the Eucharist be a true sacryfice; and supposing it to be a true
sacryfice, whether it is to be called another sacryfice then that of the
Cross? Of which two questions, the first belonges to the nature and being of
the thing and is of Faith. The second, respects the name only, and is not of
Faith, S. Aug. contr. Iulianum cap. c.
and therefore, as S. Augustine says, may be disputed pro etcon amongst
Catholics Doctors, without impeachment to Faith.

In these questions, this is the Ministers craft. They pass the first which is
of faith ouerin silence; The other, which is not of Faith, they discuss. To
the end that by rejecting these forms of speech. There is another head of the
Church then Christ: another merit, then Christ's merit: another sacryfice, then
the sacryfice of the Cross etc. they may carry away the Reader to believe,
that none is head of the Church but Christ: and finally that no action but that
which Christ performed upon the Cross was a sacrifice.

And be it that following some Catholic Doctors we may use those kinds of
speech, either meaning, that there is another head of the Church then Jesus
Christ, another merit; another sacryfice; etc. not of another kind, but of
another order only: or else, that there is another person then Jesus Christ,
who is head of the Church; other works, meritorious; another actions,
sacryfice, etc. In which sense sum times I call the Euchariste another
sacrifice then that of the Cross; and good works, other meritorious works
then those of Jesus Christ.

But for as much as I observed, that the Ministers by this slight of impugnig a
manner of speech, aimed at the utter destruction of certain Articles of Faith:
I thought good to grant them, that we were not barely to sustain that there is
another head; another merit; another sacryfice etc. thereby to make evident,
that whether we grant, or we deney them this manner of speech, yet can they
thence draw no advantage against that which is of Faith?

SECTION IV.
MINISTERS.
NOr other Purgatory for our sins, but his blood.

ANSWER.
IF by the word Purgatory, you understand not the place where, but the cause
whereby we are purged from our sins, we entirely join hands with you: for in
that sense we teach, Aust. l. 2. cont. Crescon. c. 12. Mundantur homines
baptism^. mun^a^tur and ver^o veritatis, mu^dantur and sacrificio con^riti
cordis, mu^dantur and ^leemosynis, mu^dantur and ^^sae charitate.
that there is no other Purgatory, then in the blood of Christ.

We say indeed with S. Augustine, that there are other things, as, baptism;
the word of truth; the sacryfice of a contrite heart; alms deeds, and Charity,
which do purge and purify men's souls: but whereas they do cleance us, nether
by their own virtue, nor by the means of any other thing, which is distinct
from the blood of Christ, but by the power and virtue thereof, and that in a far
different manner, to wit, inferior and subordinate to that, by which he does
first purge us, one ought not to call it another purgatory: because diverse
Purgatories, for the reasons already alleged, import a purifying (diuersi
generis) of another kind, while yet, no such thing is found in man's
justification, there being nothing at all which can purge us, but by the force
and efficacy of the blood of Jesus Christ. This blood it self, of it self
does expiate our crimes, as being the only and proper prise of our sins, and
that whereby our debts are cancelled. But the word of God, Penance, Faith,
Charity, and such like, do not of themselves expiate, but by the virtue which
does reside in the blood of Christ, but by dependancie of that; but by power
derived from it. They do not purge as the prise of our sins, but as
dispositions and instruments, instituted to the end the efficacy of the blood
of our savior Jesus Christ might be applied unto us which does plainly show
that all these purging prepartiues, though they be of another order or degree,
yet are they of the same kind, and by consequence, that there is but one
purgatory.

Both you and we do jointly hold, that sins are forgiven by the sole and
only mercy of God; yet dare none deney but the same sins are remitted by the
blood of Jesus Christ, which is the fruit and effect of this divine mercy, and
the glorious instrument by which it is applied unto us: so In like manner, when
we say that sins are forgiven by the blood of Christ, there is no repugnance,
to say also that they are remitted by faith, and the Sacraments which are the
wholesome and blessed effects of this blood, and instruments appointed to apply
it unto our wounds. Vvherin if we iniure God, how will you purge your selves of
the same crime? for as we sustain that sins are cleanced by Sacraments which
apply unto us the prise of our saviors precious blood; so likewise, you hold
that by Faith sins are abolished. Whence it is, that though we do greatly
differ in the number of the means, which by such application, do blot out
sins, yet we agree in the substance of the thing we here defend, which
consists in this, that we jointly confess, that some things there are which
do cleance us by the communication of the merits and efficacy of our saviors
blood. Nor will it avail you to say that you do far differ from us; for
that we would have faith to concur to justification, by way of a disposition,
whereas you hold that it concurrs no otherwise, then that as a hand receaues
what is presented, so faith does apprehend or lay hand upon justification which
the blood of Christ did entirely produce, For this is said only, and has no
sufficient ground. And again, if there be any thing found which does derogate
from the merit of that blood: it is not to be judged that it is that
preparatiue concurse of merits, whereby it is applied: but even what ever does
concur, as your faith, by any way of application, as though it were not
suitable to the worth of this blood that it of it self should apply it self.
And so, even your concurse of faith does no less derogate from the virtue of
Christ his blood then the concurse of Sacraments, because you hold faith to be
the means, without which that blood can no ways be communicated. But even
you your selves, when you please, do accnowledge diverse means, by which the
satisfaction of Christ is is applied unto us: Molinaeus in suosento par 1.
artic. 19.
for thus says Molins. Behold the means which the word of God does present
unto us, whereby we may apply unto our selves Christ. First Baptism, then the
sacred suppar, and lastly faith. Some times also you do ingenuously teach,
with us, that the temporal pains due unto our sins, are mitigated by our
works, which in very deed is to accnowledge our works to be expiatorie, or
to contain in them an expiating virtue. Conf. August. cap. de Confess.
Conf. Augustana. And withal you are to know, that sins are often punished
with temporal punishments even in this life, as David and sundry others were
punished, and we hold that these pains are mitigated by good works and all
kind of penance. So teaches S. Paul: if we would judge our selves, we should
not be judged. Further, Art. 11.
we accnovvledge what by good works our calamities are lessened, acording to
that of Isaias. Confessio Saxonica.
Conf. Saxonia. Albeit temporal punishments are especially mitigated through
the son of God, yet we teach withal, that punishments are lessened by means
of our whole conversion, since S. Paul does say, if we judge etc. We Cap. de
Purgatorio.
are not to call in doubt, says the same, but that saints have their fire of
purgatory in this life, as the examples of David, Ezechtel, Jonas and others,
give testimony. The same also does the Respons. ad argum.
Apology Conf. Augustanae, In assert. art 2.
Luther, and In Catechesi cap. de satisfactione. Et in locis cap de
satisfactione, and in disput. tom. 4. p. 529. and sequentib.
Melancton teach: By how much we are more severe toward our selves, says
even 1. Instit. c. 3. 15. etc. 23. 4.
Calvin himself, by so much are we to hope for a more easy encrie to Gods
mercy. And verily, it is impossible that the soul struke with the horror of
judgment, should not prevent gods wrothfull hand, by exacting punishment at
her own hands, and a little after, to appease Gods wroth, we our selves do
exact punishments at our own hands for trespasses committed.

But verily so far is the doctrine of the Catholic Church, from drawing a
coutumelie upon the merit of the blood of Christ, that contrariwise, even as he
should be esteemed injurious to Gods mercy, who should say that our sins are
so abolished by the means thereof, that they should not in any sort stand in
need of the blood of Jesus Christ, which yet was disposed by the same divine
mercy, as its instrument, so should one do an injury to the blood of Jesus
Christ, to hold that our sins are so cleanced by it, that Faith and
Sacraments, which the son of God instituted in his blood as fit instruments
to apply it unto our souls, did not at all cleance them. Men are injurious to
their Redeemour, when they change (be in under what ever color of his honor)
what by himself was established for their salvation. And therefore Catholics,
(as it is clear by what we have said) being freed from the aspersions and
crimes which tacitly you impose upon us of preiudicing the merit of the blood
of Jesus Christ, it is discovered that your selves are guilty thereof.

But me thinks I hear you say that the difficulty of the question consists
in this, to wit whether it was the will of Jesus Christ that his blood shoud
be applied, by the means we assign. To which I reply: first, that at least
it is manifest, that what we teach in this point, is not of its own nature
impossible, as being injurious to Jesus Christ, which notwithstanding you
pretend, and do daily fill the peoples ears with the noise of it. And then, I
will make clear to all the world, that whosoever believes the scripture, and
gives credit to the Fathers, must necessarily believe that there is some other
thing besides the blood of Christ, which does purge, though in the virtue and
efficacy thereof: for the Act. 3. and 15. Ad Romans 3. ad Ephesians. 3. ad Titum 3.
1. Petr. 1. 1 Jacob. 2. Prou. 15 and 16.
Scripture in diverse passages in most formal terms says, that we are purged,
purified, justified, cleanced by faith, by works, by Sacraments: and that the
Cyprian. de lapsis and epist. 26. and 55. Tertul. de poenit. cap. 3. Origin. in
Leuit. cap. 15. Aug. in Enchir. and lib. 1. de symb. c. 6. Hieron. de obitu
Fabio. Ambr. ep. 82. and de Elia and ieiunio. c. 22.
fathers grounding upon holy Writ, teach in a hundred places, that by
Baptism, Penance, tears, works, Marcyrdome, sins are purged, washed,
cleanced, removed, redeemed, blotted out abolished, consumed, expiated. And in
diverse others, that God is appeased by works, that he is made propitious by
works. In a word, as S. Lib. de Elia c. 20. Habemus plura subsidia quibus
peccata nestra redimamus. Et alibi multis locis.
Ambrose says that we have diverse means by which we redeem our sins. And
sundry remedies by which we are washed and purged of our offenses.

SECTION V.
MINISTERS.
NOr other sacryfice, propitiatory for our sins, then his death and passion.

ANSWER.
THat we teach no other propitiatory sacryfice then that of lesus Christ, the
reason which above we deduced at large, does make good; the word, other,
signfying a thing of a diverse kind, when it is taken absolutely, as the
Ministers in this place do take it. So that the Euchariste cannot be called,
other, then that of Jesus Christ upon the Cross: because being subject to
that, and deriuing from it its force and efficacy, it is not of a diverse kind,
but only of another order, as being far inferior; not by reason of the
Host, which is the same, but in regard of the effects, and the visible actio^
by which it is immediately offered. This is yet more confirmed in that we do
accnowledge the sacryfice of the Eucharist to be one and the same with that of
the cross by a triple identitie. Both by reason of the host offered, which is
one in both; it is one host, says Ambr. in Heb. 10. Vna est hostia non multae.
S. Ambrose, and In Heb. 10.
Primasius, and not many hosts. We offer still the same, says In Hebr. 9.
eumde^ semper offerrimus, non nunc quidem alium sed semper eundem.
S. Chrysostom not now another, but alvvayes the same. And also by reason, of
the prime and principal offerer which is Jesus Christ, now Jesus Christ is
offered, says lib. 1. de officiis c. 48. Nunc Christus offertur sed offertur
quasi homo, quasi recipiens passionem, and offert se ipse quasi Sacerdos, vt
peccata nostra dimittat.
S. Ambrose, as man: suffering passion, and as priest he offerrs himself, to
the end he may pardon our sins. And lastly by reason of the manner of the
oblation which is like; for even as Jesus Christ truly dyed upon the Cross,
and as his blood was really separated from his body: so is he dead in the
Eucharist in appearance as we will explicate more fully in the sixth Chapter.
Whereupon Cypr. ep. 63. Amb. lib de officiis cap. 48. Alex. Papa ep. ad omnes
Orthodoxos. Isych. l. 2. in Lenit. c. 8. Nyssen. erat. 1. de resurrect. Chrysostom
hom. 24 in 1. Cor. Greg. l. 4. dialog c. 38. and hom. 37. in Euang.
the Fathers call the sacrifice of the Eucharist the passion of Jesus Christ:
the renewed passion of Jesus Christ: yea further they say, he is slain, and
as it were suffers his passion, for though he nether die nor suffer indeed, yet
does he both die and suffer in a mystical manner. And therefore, grounding upon
this triple identitie, we fear not to say with Hom 2. in 2 ad Tim. Oblatio
eadem est.
S. Chrysostom; that the sacryfice of the Cross and the Eucharist is one and
the same sacryfice; and with In cap. 8. ad Heb. Clarum est nos non aliud
sacrificium offerre.
Theodorete, that it is manifest that we offer no other sacryfice then that of
the Cross.

And that the propitiation of the sacrifice of the Eucharist, does not destroy
the propitiation of the sacryfice of the cross, it is evident, in that it is
not opposite unto it, but contrariwise, is substituted, subordinate, and of a
far lower degree: the sacryfice of the Cross being propitiatory of it own
virtue as the proper satisfaction for our offenses; whereas the Eucharist is
only propitiatory in virtue of the sacryfice of the Cross, the fruit of
whose propitiation it applies unto us. The oblation of the Mass is not
propitiatory, as though the sacryfice of the Cross were not alone sufficient
to appease Gods wroth, and to make him become propitious: but it is only
propitiatory in virtue of the plentuousnes of the sacryfice of the Cross,
whose virtue is so great, that it can communicate a part thereof to others, and
the will of the sacryficed is such, that as he is able, so also he is willing
to communicate it. Establishing his glory, not in reserving the whole
propitiation of the sins of man to the sacryfice of the Cross, but also in
imparting some part thereof, to the sacryfice which men do celebrate as his
ministers, in memory of his passion. And like as he who has an excellent
fruit tree, shows himself far more liberal, if making a present of his ripe
fruit, he add also a young shoot thereof which of it self may yield fruit:
so Jesus Christ, is much more bountiful, in bestowing upon men not only the
fruit of his propitiation which sprung from his own person in the sacryfice
of the Cross, but even another sacryfice which as an excellent shoot, is able
to bring forth fruits like to those which we gathered upon the tree of the
Cross. Vvher fore, so far is the propitiation of the sacryfice of the
Eucharist, from preiudicing the propitiation of the sacryfice of the Cross,
that on the contrary side it makes the perfection and excellence thereof more
gloriously appear. Whence it follows that you are truly worthy of hatred, by
reason of the calumnies which you falsely impose upon us making us odious to
your adherents; as though, forsooth, we taught some thing in this point
prejudicial to Jesus Christ.

Nor is this all, you are in this be half worthy of hatred for a reason much
more odious then that which I have mentioned above.

You make a remonstrance that you are hated for sustayning that there is no
other propitiation then that of the death and passion of Jesus Christ: but you
are indeed worthy to be abhorred, for holding that the blood and death of
Jesus Christ is in no sort propitiatory; that his death, and precious blood
have not appeased Gods wrath toward mankind: that there was yet need of a more
excellent price; and that this price was the torments of a lost, banished, and
damned man, which with a sacrilegious mouth you blasplemously affirm that
Christ endured in his soul. Damnable doctrine! not of men but of devils! not
from Heaven or earth, but issuing out of Hell, whither they that hold it,
justly deserve to be condemned, unless they root that doctrine out of their
heart, and with their tongue publish a contrary. Of these crimes I accuse you,
with what justice I shall make appear. Nothing had been done, says Calu. 2.
Instat. c. 1.. 10. Nihil actum eratsi corporea tantum morte defunctus fuisset
Christus, sed aliud maius and excellentius pretiu^ fuisse, quod diros in anima
cruciatus da^nati and perditi hominis pertulerit.
Calvin, (you know for how great and admirable a prophet Danaus in Anti-Bell.
Bezaep. 6.
you esteem him) if Jesus Christ had died only a corporal death; but it was
a greater, and more excellent price to have suffered in his soul the cruel
tortures of a damned and lost man. In this torment, says Beza in Lucam 22. v.
44. In hoc cruciatu pisita est nestra pacis and cum Deo recenciliationis summa.
is placed the sum of our Peace and reconciliation to God. To satisfy in the
name of sinners, says your 10. Sunday.
Cathechisme, it was necessary that he should feel that horrible distress in
his own conscience, as though he had been forsaken of God, yea even, as
though God had been wrothfull against him. That is to say, it was necessary,
that he should have bendamned, as your ensuing words do more clearly convince,
signifying his dolours in the word, damnation, and saying, that what is
perpetual to others, whom God in his wroth punishes, was only temporal in
him. Vvherby is apparent that according to your opinion Christ Jesus suffered
the pains of the damned, and this to satisfy for the sins of man, as though
his death had not been of sufficient valor.

Scarpus de iustif. contro. 16.
Yea one of your own men relates that there were diverse Protestants of opinion
that those places of scrip. wherein Christ was said to die for us, were not to be
understood of a corporal death, but only of the sense of Gods wroth nor
indeed did his corporal death contribute any thing at all to the expiation of
sin; nor was it therefore to be esteemed as a part of satisfaction for sins.
Some peraduentures, may here apprehend that you will betake your selves to your
old solution which consistes in the liberty you take at your own liking, to
reject all authority, and at your pleasure, to deney your own Masters. Yet
seeing, that Vvhitakere, Vvittat. l. 8. cont. Durand. sect. 18 Caluinus
verissime secri sit nihil actum fuisse si mortem tantu^ corporea^ Christus
obiisset.
one of your prime moderns, insteede of using this evasion, seconds and
sustaynes Calvin in his blasphemy, saying, that he wrote most truly, that
nothing had been done, if Jesus Christ had only suffered a corporal death.
(Nor can I doubt but you will imitate him therein, and therefore take his, as
your answer,) I demand of you, whether so many pricking thorns, so many
stripes, spittings, blows, derisions, nails, and to comprehend all in a word,
that innumerable number of pains to which was annected the ignominious and
cruel death of the only son of God, did contribute nothing to the salvation
and redemption of mankind? What does occur in Sctiptures either more
frequently, or clearly, then that we are redeemed by the blood and death of
Christ? Matt. 26. this is my blood which shall be povvredout for many for the
remission of sins. Heb. 9. Christ an high Priest by his own blood entered in
once into the Holyes, eternal redemption being found. And again in the same
place, if the blood of oxen sanctifies to the cleansing of the flesh, how much
more shall the blood of Christ, cleanse our conscience from dead works. and
Apoc. 5. Thou have redeemed us to God in thy blood. In the 7. to the Ephesians. the
first chap. to the Coloss. In the first of S. Peter the first Chapter. In the
first of S. John first Chapter. In the first Chapter of the Apoc. it is said,
that we are sanctified, washed, cleansed, by the blood of Jesus Christ. In S.
Matthew, S. Marc, Matthew. 26. Mars. 22. Luc. 22. Cor. 11.
S. Luc and S. Paul, Jesus Christ says. This is my body, given delivered
broken for you. Heb. 10. we are sanctified by the oblation of the body of Jesus
Christ, and in another place, by one oblation he has consummated the
sanctified for all eternity. The scripture says that we are redeemed by the
blood, which he shed for the remission of our sins. That he does cleanse our
conscience of dead works, that by him we are purged and washed, that, the body
of Jesus Christ is delivered and given for us, that by him we are sanctified.
You contrariwise say, that nothing had been done, without the interposition of
some other thing. To which must we give credit? to the mysteries of the
scripture, or to your blasphemies? in refutation Vvherof I will spend no more
time, since they are of the same kind with those of which S. Hierome speaks,
when he says, that to discover them, is to vanquish them, there being noe
need to convince that which by it own confession is blasphemous.

SECTION VI.
MINISTERS.
NOr other merit before God then the obedience which he offered up to his
father for us.

ANSWER.
THat it may be perspecuously understood what is in this place in controversy
betwixt us, we are first to note, that there is a greare difference betwixt
saying, there is no other merit but the merit of Christ, and, there are no
meritorious works but the works of Christ. For he that affirms that there
are no other meritorious works but those of Christ, does exclude the works of
men from all merit: but he that says that there is no other then Christ's
merit, is to be understood, not that the works of men are of no merit, but
that they have no efficacy but in virtue of the merits of Christ, since it is
manifest, by the reasons above alleged in the like case, that diverse actions
which have subordination amongst themselves, do not establish diverse merits.
Your religion is not hated for the first point, that is, for that it does
teach, that there is no other merit before God, but Christ his obedience: for,
as we have said, that we grant; but by reason of the second, for as much as you
teach that this obedience of Christ does contribute no force to any man, whereby
he may merit: pretending, forsooth that this is prejudicial to, the dignity
of Christ, and derogating from the price of his merits, which is not so.

And that we hold no other merit then the obedience of Jesus Christ, it is
evident because, as we have shown out of Scripture, Fathers, and by the light
of reason, these words an other metit, importe a merit of another kind, which
has no subordination to the merits of Christ, which is not found in our case,
since we openly confess that men's works, are of no merit at all but in virtue
of those of Jesus Christ; and consequently, according to us, speaking simply
and absolutely, the obedience of Christ is the only merit of the whole world.
And indeed the works of the just, following the phrase of Isa. 26. Omnia
opera nostra operatus es in nobis. 1. Cor. 10. Idem vero Deus qui operatur
omniainomnibus. Matthew. 10. No^ vos estis quiloquimini sed spiritus Patris
loquitur in vobis. 2. Cor 13. An experimentum quaeritis eius que in me loqui
tur Christus. 1. Cor. 5. Non ego sed gratia Dei mecum. Galat. 2 Viuo ego ia^
non ego, viuit vero in me Christus.
Scripture, and holy Aug in psalm. 83. Christus oratin nobis vt caput nostrum.
Petrus Chrysologus sermon 11. Deus in te ieiunat in te esurit. Bern. l. de amore
Dei est. Tuteipsum amas in nobis.
Fathers, being termed the works of God, of the Holy Ghost, yea of Jesus
Christ, so that the scripture, to attribute them absolutely to God, deneys them
to be ours, no man can even with any show of reason affirm, that the merit of
our actions, is any other then the merit of Jesus Christ.

Now that the meritorious works of men do not any ways derogate from the
merit of Christ, is manifest by this, that if it were so, our prayers and
impetrations would be imurious to the prayers and impetrations of Christ, for
there is paritie of reason in both. Again it is clear in this, that when
Calu. 2. Instit. c. 17.. 1. Inscite opponitur Christi meritum misericordiae
Dei, regula enim vulgaris est quae subalterna sunt non pugnare.
Calvin observed, that diverse deneyed the merit of Christ, because they
apprehened it repugnant to grace, he affirmed that they did foolishly find
opposition in those two things, grounding himself upon this axiom quae
subalterna sunt non repagnant that things subordinate have n^ repugnancy. And
Calu. 3. Inst. c. 20.. 27. Ac tametsi fideles vltro citroque preces pro
fratribus apud Deum offerunt hoc nihil vnicaa Christi intercessioni derogare
ostendimus simul ea subnixi tam se quam alios Deo commendant. Item. 19.
Quanqua^ interim and suae Sanctis intercessiones relinquuntur, quibus alij
alioru^ salute^ mutuo inter se Deo commendant, de quibus meminit Apostolus, sed
tales quae ab vnica illa dependea^t, tantum abest vt delibent ex ea quippiam.
Nam vt a dilectionis affectu scaturiunt quae nos vltro citroque amplectimur,
ceu vnius corporis membra; ita etiam ad capitis vnitatem referuntur, etc. Cap.
14.. 18. and 19.
for the same reason, he deneyed that the intercessions of the faithful did in
any sort derogate from the intercessions of Christ, because, says he, those
depend of these and are subject unto them: and therefore nether do our merits
derogate, or are they repugnant to the merits of Christ being subordinate unto
them, no otherwise then his own merits is subordinate to his grace; our
prayers and impetrations to his. Whereupon he deneys that the justice of works
is opposite to the justice of Faith, because that, is subject to this. In the
same place, and for the same reason, he sustaynes that the hope of salvation,
which is conceived by good works, is not contradictorie to the hope of
salvation, which we demand through the mercy of God. But hence it is yet more
manifest, that, as the merit of Christ, does not diminish the glory of Gods
mercy toward us, (for that argues no impotencie in his mercy, as though of it
self it were not powerful enough, to restore us what we have lost) but
contrariwise Christ's merit, does commend and extolle the force of the dinine
mercy, when it makes apparent, that the divine mercy was not content, to have
brought us again in to grace and favor with God, but moreover, it would have
Christ to merit this grace for us, which did farsurpasse that. For none can
doubt but one that should have lost all his fortunes, should be far more
obliged to him who would redeem them, to the end to render them unto him; then
to him, who would otherwise render them, not taking the pains to redeem them.
Wherefore the merits of men do not lessen the merits of Christ; nor argue taem
of insufficiency or impotencie, as not being powerful enough to restore unto
us what we had lost: for it is a clear thing, that whereas they are of an
infinite value, even every least part thereof, could have merited all. But
contrariwise men's merits do openly proclaim the virtue of Christ his merits:
fos, as the mercy of God, did bountefully bestow upon us the merits of Christ;
so Christ's merits do impart unto us, ours; and make a more ample demonstration
of his goodness and glory, in that he would not only merit that for our
benefit, which we of our selves were not capable to merit, to wit, remission of
the fault, and satisfaction for the eternal pain, but moreover he would have
us to merit those things (as the increase of grace) together with him, which
do not exceed the capacity of our merits. Which is so far from depressing,
that it does even extolle his glory, since that there is nothing more
glorious, then to admit another, freely and of our own accord, into the
participation of that glory, which we could have reserved to our selves alone.
Thus does Christ proceed with us as well in this as in that which he does
impetrate for us: because he would not only merit that alone whereof we were
incapable, as the first inspirations to good; but he would also merit strength
for us, to demand and obtain some things with him: which is a far greater
favor: for in that, he does not only impart unto us the fruit of his prayers
but also bestows upon us the virtue thereof; that is, he did not only make us
capable of receiving what he produced, but also granted unto us power with him,
to produce, and withal to receive some thing. The same happens in the
production of natural things, where God, who of himself is able to produce all
things, does yet practice that absolute power, in the production of those
things, which are beyond the reach, and actititie of second causes, as for
example, the creation of the world, of Angels, of reasonable souls, and leave
them to contribute their virtue to all other things that are not placed without
their spheere, to manifest thereby the excess of his bounty, and to acquire
unto himself a larger proportion of honor, by making them not only partakers
of the effects which flow from his power, but of force withal to produce them
with him: being a more honorable thing unto God to endow second causes with
force to cooperate in some things with him, then to leave them without all
action in his productions, as though they were altogether incapable of the
same. Howbeit the (ratio) or essence of merit which is found in the actions of
men, proceeds not from the substance of their work, but from the grace alone
which they receive by the metit of Jesus Christ, as S. Augustine observes,
saying, that the merits of the just are merits, because they are just, that is,
for that they proceed from persons justified, and grateful unto God, by means
of his grace which is in them, who will think that our merits which are the
effects of the grace of Christ alone, do disparage the glory of the merits
of Christ? yea who will not planely discover, that the merits of men do
redound to the glory of Christ his merits? No otherwise then the splendor of
rich gemmes, and the brightness of the moon and stars, which are effects of
the sunn's Light, do augment his glory, so far are they from diminishing it!
Which moved Brentius to say, In Apologia, Confess. Vvitemberg. cap. de
contritione.
that we extolled Christ with too great praises, while we auerre, that he
merited that our works should be meritorious. And another Author, Ericcius l.
4. de Eccles. c. 4.
of no small note, confesses, that in this thing we make Christ his glory
wonderful illustrious.

Whence it is manifest, that our merits are so far from iniuring tho merits of
Christ, that they even turn to his greater glory. And indeed, since the
operations of the members belong to the head, because this commands them, and
imparts virtue toward their productio^, how should the dignity of the works
of the members of Jesus Christ our Head, become rather contumelious then
honorable unto him? By every one of our actions, says In cap 6. Zachariae.
Saluator in singulis corona^ acci
S. Hierome, our head is crowned. Our good works being gifts of God the
Father, effects of the Holy Ghost the principale Agent, fruits of the passion
of Jesus Christ, the end for which he suffered, the act of the children of God,
and those who are participant of his divine nature; in conclusion, being rather
works of God, then of men, as the Matthew. 20. 1. Cor. 15. Gaelaet. 2.
holy scripture does teach us; who will repute the dignity of such works
contumelious to God? Yea who will not rather judge those contumelious to God
the Father, the Holy Ghost, to Iesu^s Christ, his sufferances, who like to your
selves, impugn the merits of good works, since by impugning them, they do
truly impugn the gifts of God; the operations of the H. Ghost; the fruits of
our saviors passion; the effects of grace, in fine, the dignity of good
works which proceed rather from God then from men? Who will not in
contemplation hereof judge your religion worthy of hatred, yea even of horror;
and ours for the contrary, praise worthy? And therefore it is apparent that if
your doctrine be hated in respect of that which it teaches touching merit, you
cannot, as you pretend, draw any advantage from it, but contrariwise it turns
to your disadvantage, since it is hated, not for sustayning a thing which is
aduantagious, but prejudicial to Gods glory. Which happens not only in this
point, but in all the rest of the points of this Chapter.

It is truly hated for sustayning things prejudicial to God, not only in that
you deney, as I have already shown, the works of Saints to be meritoriours;
but, which is more (and indeed a thing causing horror) because your Prime
Authors, whose doctrine you embrace as distending down from heaven, deney
that the works of Jesus Christ are meritorious. I confess, says Calvin, 2.
Instit. c. 17.. 1. Equidem fateor, si quis simpliciter and per se Christu^
opponere vellet iudicio Dei, no^ fore merito locum quiae non reperiretur in
homine dignitas quae posset Deum promereri.
that if any would oppose Jesus Christ, simply and nakedly considered in
himself, to God's judgment, there were no place for merit, because there is
no dignity found in man which can merit God. Whence is planely gathered, that
you repute not the works of Jesus Christ meritorious before God for their own
dignity and worth, but only by means of God's favorable acceptance thereof.

There rests no more to be done in this Chapter, but to beseech the Reader, as
I instantly do, to note by the way, that though you would be thought to have
no other aim in these Articles but God's honor and glory, yet is it but a
cloak you take, under which your end is to seek your selves, freeing your
selves in this world, from all the pain and difficulty which is found in
doing well.

For why do you establish the Scripture the only rule of your salvation, but
to deliver your selves from obedience to the Church, and from subjection to
Traditions which are manifestly contrary unto you, imitating herin that,
Tertul. praescript. c. 17. Necessario ^^lunt agnos^^^ ea per quae reuincuntur.
which Tertullian, notes in the Heretics of his time, when he says, that
they will in no sort accnovvledge that whereby they are convinced?

To what end do you deney that S. Peter was the Head of the universal Church
under Jesus Christ, but only to cast off the subjection to his Successors
authority, even as Rebels, to be freed from the Viceroys authority, would
deney that any other but the king had power over him?

Why will you have the blood of Christ only to purge you, but only to avoid
pain and trouble, and to be subject to no satisfaction?

What reason have you to deney the merit of good works, but only to flatter
your own sloyth; and to be obliged to no paines-taking for the obtaining of
Paradise showing your selves herin Epicures shollers, who for love of ease, l.
8. Conf. c. 16. Negauit tractus meritorum.
as S. Augustine notes, denied the course of merits.

Why do you reject the propitiation of the sacryfice of the Mass, but by
banishing all other propitiation, save that of the sacryfice of the Cross, to
take a way all conceit that we ought to endeavor to make God propitious? You
have Gods honor in your mouth, but your private interest in your heart: two
specious ways by which you draw poor sooles to your belief, but to their
own perdition, which is indeed that which you will purchase to you and yours,
who cannot die in your errors, but withal they perish eternally.

CHAP. IIII.
Section. I.
MINISTERS.
Your Majesty should also see that we are hated, because we would have the
people themselves to know the ways of salvation, in lieu of referring
themselves totally to others by an affected scrupule, and voluntary ignoronce
which is covered with a cloak of obedience and docilitie: and to this effect
we would have the people to hear and read the holy Scripture in a tongue
known to all; and that public service should be done in your subjects
Vvlgaire tongue, that they might be instructed thereby. And that henceforth God
should not be suspected by men, as though his word were a dangerous book from
which the people ought to abstain: For France stands obliged unto us in this,
that we have published holy Writ in the french tongue (which formerly was an
unknown book) and that we have given the children a sight of their Fathers
Will which was hertofore hidden from them.

ANSWER.
YOu continue the guiles which you used in the precedent Chapter, while you
represent your selves as men laden with hatred for certain considerations
which in your conceit might purchase you love. Having insinuated your selves
into the hearts of the people by pretending Christ's interest, you have recourse
to their own, with more facility to entice and gain them to your selves. You
promis them wondres, and make show of great obligations: while yet you do but
delude, deceive, and lead them to their perdition: impose upon us: manifestly
contradict your selves: condemn in us, what your selves practice: brag of
things which belong not to you; and affect novelties.

A word is not a vvordexcept in as much as it signifies and expresses the
conceiptes of him that speaks: and for this reason the scripture, to speak
properly, is not the word of God, but by reason of the senses which makes us
know the conceits or counsels of God. Hieron. Basil. and alij Patres passim.
Whit. ad rationem
And since reason, the Fathers, and the common consent even of your own men, 2.
Campiani. Ipsa vis and res and quidammodo anima Sacrarum literarum in sententia
consistit. Recte Hieronymus non in legendo sed in intelligendo scripturae
c^nsistunt. Et alibi, non in verbis Scripturarum est Euangeli^m, sed in sensu.
do urge you to grant that the holy scripture does principally consiste in the
sense, not in the bare letter, (though it contain the one and the other) I
shall with facility make manifest unto all the word, that you do but deride
the people. Because while you proteste to permit them the full and entire
knowledge thereof, you grant them no more liberty in point of sense, then the
Catholic Church does her children: for though all yours have perminion to
read the Scripture, yet is it not lawful for any of them to explicate it in
any other sense then that of Calvin, or your own as is made manifest by
sundry examples, and peculiarly by that of the institution of the Euchariste,
where none can explicate these words This is my body, otherwise then
figuratively.

Vvherin you resemble those that promising a great treasure, give only the
sight of the coffer wherein it is kept. Nay you give not yet so much, for
doubting of the translation of the scripture, and ingeniously Whit. cont. 1.
q. 2. c. 7. Nullam nos editionem nisi Hebrateam in (...), and Grae c^in n^^o
Tes^un ento authenti^am fa^^^us.
confessing that there is no version at all authentical, that is, of
sufficient credit, the people have just reason, not only to doubt of the sense
of the scripture which you deliver, but even of the very letter of the version
which you propose unto them, and consequently of their salvation; it being a
clear case, that they can have no greater assurance of that then they have of
the means whereby you would conduct them thither. He that promises children
fruit to eat, and yet gives them only Amands which they cannot crake, does
but mock them: yea he mockes them doubly when the Amands are not true but
conterfeit only: So do you doubly delude those who believe you in a matter of
importance; since that the letter of the Scripture which you give them, is not
authentical; not do you permit them of themselves to gather out of it the
true and natural sense which in their judgment it contaynes. You mock them
verily and deceive them both at once.

You deceive them, because under the name of the word of God, you present unto
them the word of men, since you deliver them the scripture changed by man's
invention, and interpreted against the sense which the words bear as I have
already shown; and that, as In 1. Gal. Interpretatione peruersa de Eua^gelio
Christi, hominis fit Euangelium, aut quod peius est diaboli. Luther lib. de
Missapriuata.
S. Hierome notes, The Gospel of Jesus Christ, is made the Gospel of men by a
perverse interpretation, yea which is worse, the Gospel of the Devil,
because, (will I add) use is made of it to establish untruth and error,
whereof he is the father. And this may be more justly auerred of yours, then of
any other; because in certain passages you observe the sense which Luther
received of the Devil in a visible shape. You delude the people by persuading
them that of all the exterior means useful for our salvation, the reading of
the Bible is the only certain one: which is manifestly false, for otherwise
the blind which cannot read; simple and ignorant people who have no learning,
could not be amongst the number of the faithful. They that were Christians
before the Gospel was written; they that believed in the time of Lib. 3. c. 4.
S. Ireneus, as he himself is witness, in Carist Jesus, without paper and ink,
were not of the faithful. They again, who understand not the hebrew and
greek tongue were not capable of faith, since, according to you, no version is
authentical, nor can faith be attained unto but by a means which is
infallible. But if you reply that such people may receive it from the mouth of
their Pastors who do faithfully preach unto them the word of God: it follows
then that the Scripture is not the only externe means to obtain Faith, since
you your selves adioyne this second, which cannot be sufficient for some,
unless it were so for all the rest. And in deed what reason is there so to ty
and restrain the word of God to paper, to the character and letter, that it
can no further be a means of salvation, then it is contained under these
signs? Have they any force of their own nature? If not, why is not the word
of God in the heart and mouth of the Church, and her Pastors, an assured means
of salvation? You deceive the people, not only by persuading them that the
reading of Scripture is the sole means of salvation, but moreover in teaching
them that it is a sufficient means, and that none ought to look after any
other: which is evidently false for two reasons: first because the Scripture
teaches that faith comes by hearing, and that it has so absolute a
dependence of it, that without it, faith cannot be had. How, says Romans 10. v.
14. Quomodo credent ei que^ non audieru^t? Quomodo aut^m audient sine
pradicante? ergo fides ex auditu.
saint Paul, shall they believe him whom they have not heard? and how shall
they hear without a Preacher? Therefore faith is by hearing. Vvherby we see
that reading only is not a sufficient means of faith, since according to the
Apostle no man can have assurance either of the letter, or of the sense of the
Scripture unless he learn of the Church how it is to be understood.

Secondly, because if this means be sufficient for all the world, the Fathers
of the Church, the Lutherans, Anabaptists, and others, who with great care and
diligence made use of it, erred not in the fundamental points of faith as in
your writings you vpbrade them. But if you affirm that reading alone, is only
sufficient in quality of an externe means, and that there is further required
an inward illustration of the holy Ghost which is not in them that err: I
demand a text of holy Scripture affirming that Calvin and his followers, had
this interior illustration rather then the others: if you can produce no such
text; I demand why you believe it without Scripture? Again, I demand by what
exterior or interior sign you can be assured to have this illustration of
the holy Ghost in the understanding of these words This is my body, more then
the Catholics, or Lutherans? Finally since reading only is not sufficient
without this internal illustration of the holy Ghost, if you cannot by some
infallible argument prove that you are assured of this illustration, I beseech
you to accnowledge that you have no certainty of the sense of Scripture, nor
consequently of your faith.

Finally why does the Eunuke (who had the holy Ghost, and readd diligently that
place of Isaye, where the passion of our savior is cleary foretold, being
asked by Philippe one of the Deacons whether he understood what he readd,
answer, Act. 8. Et qu^modo possum si non a^^ quis ostenderit mihi.
how can I unless some show it me? If to understand the Scripture a man be to
rely upon the interior illustration of the holy Ghost, you cannot say as some
times you do, that your meaning is not, that every one should understand all
the Scripture, but Whit. de perspicuit. script. c. 1. Nostrum axioma est omnia
quae sunt ad salutem necessaria opertis verbis in scripturis prop^^^.
only, that which is necessary unto salutation, because the passage which the
Eunuke confesses he understands not, concerns not the passion of our
savior Jesus Christ, which is the fundation of man's salvation. Nor will you
affirm that the Eunuke was ignorant, since the simple are as well to understand
that which is necessary to salvation as the learned. Nor indeed ought he to
be rancked amongst the ignorant, whom Hieron. ep. 103. Ego nec sanctior sum hoc
Eunucho, nec studiosior, and tantus amator legis diuinaeque scientiae, cum
libru^ teneret ignorabat eum, quem in libro nesciens venerabatur.
saint Hierome represents so studious, and so great a lover of the law, that he
himself was not more addicted thereunto.

That the Scripture is not easy to all men, it self does witness, and the
Fathers do teach. It self does witness; 2. Petr. 3. In quibus sunt quaedam
difficilia intellectu, quae indocti and instabiles deprauant, sicut and
caeteras scripturas ad sua^ ipsoru^ perditionem.
for saint Peter says that in saint Paul's Epistle, there are certain things
hard to be understood which the unlearned and unstable deprave as also the rest
of the Scriptures to their own perdition. The Fathers do teach us the same.
The Scriptures of the law, says Aug devtil. ered. c. 6. An istae scripturae
legis planisssmae sunt, in quas isti quasi zulgo expositas impetum faciunt.
saint Augustine, are they most clear? And when a certain person told him
that he readd and understood the Scripture of himself, he said. Is it so? Thou
dare not adventure upon Terentianus Maurus Without the help of a Master; An
infinity of Authors are required to the understanding of each Poet, and yet
thou dare interprise the reading of holy Write without a Guide, and pass thy
indgement upon it without a Master. For the same reason Et cap 7. Terentianum
Maurum sine Magistre attingere non auderes Asper, Ceonutus, Donatus, and alij
innumerabiles requirunturvt quiesbet Poetae possit intelligs, tu in eos libros
qui sancti diuinarumque rerum pleni sunt sine duce irruis, and de his sine
piaeceprere audes far sententiam.
saint Hierosine apprehends it very pernicious, that an old Trott, a
Dotterell, a sophistical pratter, any one adventures upon the Scripture,
Wears it out, begins to reach before they have yet learnt it. And Hieron.
Epist. 103 ad Pauli. Hanc (scripturam) garrula anus, banc delirus senex, hanc
vniuersi praesumunt, lacerant, docent antequam descent. Cap. 1. and 2. Duplici
modo munire fidem suam Domins adiuuante deberet, primum scilicet diuinae legis
authoritate, tum deinde Ecclesiae Cathoiteae traditione: quiae videlicet
scripturam laeramproipsasua altitudine non vno ecdemque sensu vniuersi
acciptunt.
saint Vincent. Leir says that to avoid heresy, and to be established in the
true faith it is necessary to adioyne the Tradition of the Church to
Scripture: because the Scripture by reason of its depth, is not understood of
all in one and the same sort. Therefore it is evident, that the Scripture alone
without the explitation of the Church, does but afford us a part of the rule of
faith: and that you, who promis every one the knowledge of his salvation, of
himself, do promis him, to speak with the 1. Timot. 6.
Apostle, a knowledge of a false name, and push him on to know more then is
behouffull, in steed of containing him within the terms of a modest
knowledge, and teaching him with Contra Epistolam fundam cap. 2. Catera^ quippe
turbam non intelligendi viuacitas, sed credendi simplicitas tutissimam facit.
saint Augustine, that the simplicity of believing, not the viuacitie of
understanding, is the peoples assurance. You have words at will: but your
proofs are thinnesowen. And indeed you do nothing else but delude the people,
as I have said, and is evident, deceive them, lead them to perdition.

He that finding a blind man in a bad and rockie way, takes from him his staff
and Guide not furinshing him with another does plainly discover that his
design is the poor man's destruction. Every one then must needs clearly
discern that you deceive the people and lead them to their ruin, because
depriving them of their ordinary guide, which is the Church, you provide them
not of another. And it is manifest that you committ them to no sufficient
Guide, both because the blind, simple and ignorant, can make no use of the
Scripture for their own direction: and also because your versions not being
authentical, as you confess, the Scripture which you use, can be no
sufficient rule of salvation, even to the learned.

That the Church is the true Guide, if saint Augustine be believed, whom
Luther. in defensio, verbo, Caenae, Meosaneiudicio post Apostolos Ecclesia now
habuit meliorem Augustino. Calu. 3. Instit. cap. 3.. 10. Ex Augustino sumant
lectores si quid de sensu antiquitatis certi habere volunt.
you accnowledge to be a faithful witness of antiquity, it is a clear case:
August epist, 16. Ait rectissima^ discipli namesseveimperiti nita^tur
authoritate Ecclesia.
It is a most orderly discipline, says this great light, that the ignorant
should rely upon the authority of the Church. There is nothing so behouffull
for a soul as to obey, Cone. 2. in Psalm. 70. Nihil tamexpedit anima quam
obedire.
he adds in another place. Contra Eplani fundam, cap. 5. Egovero Euangelio nen
crederem. nisime Catholicae. Ecclesia commoueret authoritas.... qua infirmatae
iamnec Euangelio credere potero.
And again, I would not leleeue the Gospel unless the authority of the
Catholic Church did move me thereunto, and after that: which authority being
thaken, I should not give credit to the Gospel; where it is manifest that he
speaks of himself as a Catholic, not as a Manikie. These words do make a
clear demonstration, that the Church is the true guide of the faithful; nor
indeed can it be called in question if we consider that the holy Ghost
declared it the pillar and strength of truth: that the Fathers August contra
Epistolam fundam. c. 5. Epist. 118. l. De vtilitate cred. c. 15. and altbi
passim. Iren. l. 3. c. 3. and 4. Hieron. contra Luciferi.
do accnowledge it to be infallible; and that Calu. 4. Instit. c. 1.. 10.
Neque enim parui momentiest, quod vxcatur columna and fundamentum veritatis and
domus Dei, quibies verbis significat Paulus ne intercidat veritas Deiin mundo
Ecclesiam esse fidem eius custodem. Etc. 2.. 2. Vere Ecclesia columna est ac
firmamentum veritatis. Whitaker. cont. 2. q. 4. c. 1. Nos dicinsus eam quae est
Christi Ecclesia. In absolute necessariis non posse errare. Id. contra 1.
quaest. 3. c. 5 and 7. Fateor and nos and haraticos cogi and conuinciposse
authoritate Ecclesia, necasio argumento externo validius ac fortius premi
hareticos.
yours also allow it to be such in points necessary to salvation. And who
would now say that a child were not to hear and follow the documents of a
mother most loving to her children, and who in things concerning their
salvation, can teach them nothing but truth? We are bound to hear the Church.
I will shortly bring your own Authors to make it good. Now let us examine,
whether, as I have said, you do not impose upon us.

You do openly impose upon us, while you make your followers believe, that we
make a general prohibition of the scripture, as being a dangerous book. It is
true we are not of those, whereof Tertul. Prascript. c. 41. Omnes tume^t, omnes
scientia^ pollice^tur, ipsa mulieres haveticae audent docere contendere, etc.
Tertullian speaks: they are all puffed up with pride, they all promis
knowledge, yea the very hercticall Women dare undertake to teach and dispute.
We are not of that sort of people of whom Traet. 47 in Iean. Nihil sic amant
isti, ac scientiam promittere and sidem rerum verarum, quas parunls creed we
pracipiuntur, velut imperitiam deridera.
saint Augustine affirms, that they are taken with nothing so much as to
promis knowledge, and laugh at the belief of true things which the children
were taught to believe, as though it had been a mere ignorance. We have no
affinity with Pelagius, who will have women to read Scripture, as Hieron dial
1. contr. Pelag.
saint Hierome does note, and condamne him for it. We are not of your humor
who judge the scripture so easy to be understood, that you make no difficulty
to command all the world to read it. In a word, we cannot allow of your ways
in making Idiots, ignorant persons, and women, their own Doctors and
Prophets. Yet is it false to affirm that we prohibit the scripture as a
perilous book, we do not so far forgett the respect which we owe to the
spirit that did dictate it: nor disaccnowledge the happiness and truth which it
proposes unto us. Marry we do boldly affirm, that the Scripture, such as
you propose it, that is, changed, or taken according to the letter, without
giving its true sense, the knowledge whereof depends upon the Church her
declaration, is dangerous for those, who either by ignorance, vanity, or
malice, would rashly make use of it.

And in this we do nothing, to which we are not moved, by the Scripture, the
Fathers, and your own men. By the Scripture 2. Corin 3. Litera occidit. 2. per
3. Quae indocti and instabiles deprauant ad suam ipscrum perditionem.
saying in express terms, that the letter does kill, and that the unlearned
do deprave it to their own perdition. By the Fathers, Lib. de resurrect carn.
c. 40. Haereses esse non and perpe vam scriptura intelligi possent. Hilarious l.
2. de Trinit. Vigiltus Martyr. l. 2. contr. Eutych.
Tertullian saying, that there could be no heresies at all, if the Scripture
could not be ill understood. and saint Hilatie, showing by sundry examples,
that they sprung from the false interpretation of the scripture. By your own,
Luther confessing, that the scripture is the Heretics book.

If it be commendable in a careful mother to take the knife out of her child's
hands with which through want of years and discretion he might hurt himself,
and to give it to one of more ripnes to use; you ought rather to praise, then
blame us, since we prohibit the Scripture in a vulgaire tongue, to some that
might abuse it, and permit it to such as may reap commodity by it.

That we permit it to some, it is apparent by the very confessions of Whit.
controu. 1. q. 2. c. 13. Papista hac in re certam exceptionem rationemque
temporum locorum and personarum haberi volunt. Item Status quaestionis
huiusmodiest, vtrum vernacule versiones scripturarum sint omnibus promiscue
praponendae, permittendae vel non: illinegant, nos affirmamus.
your own men, who do accnowledge, that in this we make exception of persons,
times, and places, and that the question berwixt you and us is not whether any
can read them or not: but whether we do indifferently permit all to read
them or no: which we affirm; says whitakere, and they (meaning Catholics)
deney that it ought to be done.

The exception which we make of persons, consists in this, that we permit such
only to read scripture, as are able to turn it to their own profit, not
such, as would use it to their own damage.

The exceptions which we make of times and places, consists in this, that we
easily permit it in time of heresy, and in places that are pestered with it,
as in Germany, France, England, Scotland, Polonie, where it is lawful for
Catholics freely to read Scripture: marry in places where error has not
gotten footing, there is no such liberty.

To those it is freely permitted: both because being daily and hourly assalted
with Scripture, reason would that the use of it should be permitted them, that
they might defend themselves with the same weapons wherewith they are opposed,
while the Scripture well understood does heal the wounds received by the
evil understanding thereof, as the Scorpion is a cure for her own stinging:
and also because (since notwithstanding the persuations and ill examples of
error they stand firm in point of Faith) it is to be hoped they will not
abuse this reading; especially since questions of Faith being daily handled in
sermons, they understand the explication of passages which are abused to the
disadvantage of truth.

But to these, to wit the contries where this necessity has no place,
license is not easily granted: because the people not being iustructed by the
Preachers touching the sense of Scripture in points controuerted, they may more
casely be mistaken.

And in this, The Church imitates her Spouse Jesus Christ, who revealed
mysteries and secrets to his Apostles, S. Aug-Concio 1. inpsal. 36. Non solum
sicut magister aliquid docuit, sed sicut magister aliquid no^ totum tanqua^
magister enim sciebat and docere quod proderat, and non docere quod aberat.
so far forth as he judged necessary, As Master says saint Augustine, he
taught some things, not all things: as Master he knew how to teach that which
might be profitable, and not that which might be hurtful. In like manner the
Church permitts some thing, not all: she distributes the sense of Scripture,
which does profit, to all men: but to some prohibits the letter which might
hurt. And in this again she follows the example of the good mother, who
crakes the nutt for her children, that they may eat the kirnell: or feeds
them with her milk, till they be able to digest more solid meats. But you
in steed of imitating these good examples follow the Pharisees, who, as
Isadore Pelusian observes, though they cared not whether they accomplished the
law of Moses or not, yet they would make show of it, and would have every one
to have the book in their hands. You resemble a lewd woman, who speaks so
much more of chastity, by how much she does less practice it. You imitate the
serpent who threw Eve out of Paradise, persuading her, Genes. 3.
that she should be so far from dying by eating of the forbidden tree (as it
is written) that contrariwise she should be like unto God, knowing good and
evil: for you persuade the people, that they will be so far from falling into
heresy by reading the the holy scripture, which yet the Church does teach
them, that they will by that means become great Divines.

And by their own help alone find out their own salvation therein, which
draws many headlong into error. This is all the obligation that the people
have unto you which is like to that of a mother, who through negligence or
malice, leaves a knife wherewith her child does kill himself.

Now let us see whether you do not contradict your selves. Your contradictions
are manifest; for after you have licenced all sorts of people to read the
bible, and taught them that it is easy to be understood even by the simple
people, and that they may clearly know their salvation thereby, without any
other assistance then that which the holy Ghost imparts unto them interiourly;
yet you teach in other places that the scriptures are difficult; that the common
people must consult with the learned; and refer themselves to their Pastors,
not being capable of themselves to make use of the holy Scriptures. Pride,
contempt, or enuey, says l. 4. Instit. c. 1. 5. Multos impellit superbia vel
fastidium, velaemulatio vt sibi persuadeant priuatim lege^do and medita^do
seposse satis proficere.
Calvin, moves some to persuade themselves, that they may make sufficient
profitt by reading the scripture privately: and Item, Nobis quodex Paulo
citauimus tenendum est, Ecclesiam non aliter edisicari, quam externa
praedicatione.
a little after, we must observe that which we cited out of S. Paul, that the
Church is only edified by external preaching. There is, says he in Calu l. 1.
Inst. c. 14. Nostri officijest libonter ignorare quae non conducunt. Et 3.
Instit. c. 21.. 2. Neque vero nos pudeat aliquid in ear nescire, vbi est
aliqua docta ignorantia.
another place, a certain learned ignorance. We do not say, says V^hitak.
co^trou. 1 q. 4. c. 1. Non dicimus quod scriptura per seita aperta sit. et sine
interpretatione sufficiat ex se ad omnes controuersias fidei dirimendas.
whitakere, that the scripture is of it self so clear, that without
interpretation it is sufficient of it self to end all controversies of Faith:
because the ignorant, says the Ibid. q. 5. c. 9. Imperiti quia non possunt,
vti recte his mediis debent illi alios peritiores adire.
same author, are not able to make use of those means (which he mentionned
before) they must have recourse to the more learned. Is not this to aggree with
us and to contradict your selves? Is not this to condemn in us what your
selves do pactise? Is it lawful for you to teach that the Church and her
Pastors ought necessarily to be heard; that the Church is not edifed but by
preaching, while you judge us blame worthy for holding the same thing? Why do
Capito ad Farellu^ in ep. Call. ep. 6. Fraeprorsus excussit-multitudo, quae
assueta est and educata propemodum ad licentiam. Nam clamant teneo satis
Euangelij, ipse scio legere, quorsum mih^ tua opera? praedica volentibus
audire, etc.
you preach, if credit be not to be given to the Church and her Pastors? why
do you impose upon us that we affect a voluntary ignorance, seeing we teach
no other thing in this point, but that which we are taught by the holy
Scripture and Fathers, and your own authors confess? You do continually
blame us, yea even in those things, in which we are laudable according to your
own Principles: and if the crimes wherwhich you load us, be crimes indeed,
they are found in you, not in us.

You say we bring God into suspicion with men: but it appears that we are
innocent and you guilty of this accusation; for how could one make God more
suspected unto men, then by representing him, as your Authors, Luther. de
seru. arbit. Aliter de Deovel voluntate Dei nohis praedicata, reuelata. oblata
culta, and aliter de Deo non praedicato, non reuelato, no^ culto disputandum
est. Item, Non vult mortem peccatoris verbo scilicet, vult aute^ illam
volu^tate illa imper scrutabili.
Luther, Call. de praedestina. volu^tas illi (Deo) alia tribuitur quam ea quae
abipso in lege patefacta est.
Calvin, and Beza de aetern. Deipraedestina Dicimus quandam Dei esse
voluntate^ nobis patefactam qua^dam vero occultam. Sic Aphorism. 14. and 20.
Martyr. in epist. ad Romans cap. 1. Quod enim attinet ad peccatum, fatemur Deum
illud nolle, si eim voluntatem spectemus, quae nobis legibus diuinis and sacris
literis est declarata: sed quod omnino and absolute peccatum non velit, minime
concedemus. Calu 3 Instit. c. 23.. 9. Excusabiles peccando haberi volunt
reprobi, quia euadere nequeunt peccandinecessitatem, praesertim cum ex
Deierdinatione inticiatur huiusmedi necessitas: nos vero inde negamusexcusari,
quandoquidem Deiordinationi sua constet aequitas. Paraeus l. 2. de amiss. great.
Necessario quidem, sed tamex votuntarie, and iustissimo iudicio Dei peccat
creatura. Zuingl. lib. de prouid. c. 6. At, inquies coactus est (Latro) ad
peccandum, permitto, inquam coactum esse.
all the rest do, as having two wills wholly contrary: the one revealed in
scripture, whereby he desires man's salvation, not his sin, and damnation: The
other hidd, whereby he desirs the sin and damnation of man, yea necessitates
and forces him there to. Do not such blasphemies make man suspect God? none
can deney it, they do indeed; and make your belief, whereby they are taught
it, abominable in the sight of God. Your belief is, and you ought to be
suspected by men, not only upon this occasion, but also, because they do
continually hear from you, that, which they find to be contrario, and that you
often vaunt of that, which belongs not to you.

And indeed to what end do you brag that you were the first that presented
the scripture unto France in a vulgar tongue; since you confess your selves
in the preface of the Bible printed at Geneua the year 1588. that it had been
translated from the time of Charles the V. as our Annalles do witness. To
what purpose will you make France stand indebted to you, as though you had
brought her to the sight of her Fathers will which was hidden from her till
then: for so far are you from having right to this glory, that contrariwise
you are liable to blame, for having violently deprived her of it, by taking
away the body and blood of Jesus Christ, Luc. 22. Hic calix nouum est
testamentu^ in meo sanguine.
which he himself calls his will and Testament? Is it to give a will, to give
the figure and shadow thereof? Is it to give a Will, to give it corrupted? to
give it so as it cannot be understood? So give you the Eucharist to the
people. so do you putt the scriptures into their hands; so do you enlarge
them with liberty in that kind! Let us now examine what benefit the people can
reap by having their public service in french.

SECTION II.
IN this point, as in diverse others, you show your selves lovers and authors
of novelty, for it is evident that since the Latin Church was founded by the
Apostles, it always made use of this tongue in her liturgies, yea even after
the invasion of the Goths deprived the people of the use thereof. Having thus
conserved it, while it was now no more their natural tongue, what reason does
urge us at this time to change it? The Church is too old and you too young to
teach her speak a new language. It is most reasonable, that as the belief of
the Church is one in all nations, so public prayer should be performed in a
tongue common to all.

Why did not the Munster. prafat. su^ grammatica Syriacae and Chaldaicae.
Iunius praefat. ante Nouum Testamentum Trimelij dicu^t tempore Christi linguam
Iudaeoru^ fuisse Syriacam.
Jews (having corrupted their language by the long continuance of the
babylonicall captivity, and the communication they had with sundry nations
speaking commonly Syraick) leave of to continue their office in the Hebrew
tongue? If it had been an unlawful thing, Jesus Christ would have reprehended
them; yea his not reprehending them was the approbation of their and our fact.

The Jews, Grecians, and Abissins do their service at this day, in no
valgaire tongue. The Nestorians do theirs in Chaldaicke, though taey speak
the tongue of diverse rations where they live. You say that all the common people
ought to understand, and yet those of your sect which are in Bearne,
Languedocke, Prouence, and Gasconie understand french no better, then the common
people who live within the compass of the Catholic Church, do Latin. While
notwithstranding the Ministers in those parts do their service in french, and
not in the language of those Provinces.

It is not necessary, nor always profitable that the people should know all:
Marry necessary it is, that the celebration of some of the highest mysteries,
be not made common to them, their devotion being augmented thereby. For this
reason amongst Leuit. 16. Nullus hominum sit in tabernaculo qua^do Pontifex
Sanctuarium ingreditur vt roget pro se and pro domo sua and pro vniuerso catu
Israel. donec egrediatur.
the Jews none entered into the Sancta Sanctorum with the high Priest. Yea Luc.
1. Et omnis multitudo populi erat orans foris horaince^si.
saint Luke, notes some sacryfices, at which, by the divine institution, the
common people assisted not, but remained without, not seeing nor understanding
any thing that passed.

CHAP. V.
SECT. I.
MINISTERS.
YOur Majesty should also see that we are hated for proposing a doctrine which
does teach one to die with peace of conscience, and assurance of salvation
grounded upon God's promis in Iesuschrist, whereby he does promise that all
simers who seriously repenting convert themselves unto him, and believe in
Jesus Christ shall not perish, but shall have eternal life. which trust in
Jesus Christ celiuers the faithful departing this life, from the horror of
Hell, and from that making, whereby it is thought that a man scapes good cheap,
though he go into the fire of Purgatory, to be burnt and tormented therein for
the space of many ages. From which torment notwithstanding, they are held, in
part, or in whole, to be freed, who give part of their means to the Church,
and they also to whom it pleases the Pope to distribute Indulgences: for by
that gate got trading into the Roman church and ingenious avarice made the
ignorance of the poor people tributarie to it self.

ANSWER.
Catholic Doctors do teach, that since God does promise remission of sins
to converted sinners, such as feel no remorse of conscience, which may make
them esteem their repentance defective, ought to have peace of mind, and are
morally certain of their salvation. And therefore it is not true simply to
affirm, that your doctrine is hated for teaching men to die with peace of
conscience, and assurance of salvation: well might you auerre that it is worthy
of hate for teaching that this certainty of salvation, which the faithful may
have, is not only moral, but even infallible, as proceeding from divine
faith, which is the doctrine that the Church condemns, and you sustain. None
can know, says the Sess. 6. c. 9.
Council of Trent, by certainty of Divine faith, which is not subject to
decei^t, that he has obtained the grace of God.

Behold, sirs I pray, the true reason for which we may say unto you with In
Ezech. 11. Vae his haeresibus hisque doctrints quae requiem pollicentes and
omnem aetatem sexumque deci. piuni.
S. Hierome: accursed be the heresies, and doctrine, which promiseng repose,
deceive all ages and sexes. And with the Ierem. 4.
scripture, that which it affirms of false Prophets, that having peace in
their mouth, in effect they have it not. Peace, Peace, and there is no peace.
For one may truly say that you deceive the people, seeing you do assure them
that this certainty is of Faith, and yet following your own principles, it
has not in scripture sufficient grounds.

For tell me. (o Miristers) I beseech you; to you Ispeake in your own
particular, where do you find in scripture, in express terms, that one of
you, for example Peter du Moulin, is assured of his salvation? If you find it
not, how do you believe it as an article of faith: since you do not hold the
word of God barely, but the express word of God to be the fundation of Faith,
as appears by the testimonies of many Calu. Epist. contra Pr^centorem Lugd.
Nihil eredendum est quod non expressum sit in scripturi^. Vvhital. controu. 1.
quaest. 4. c. 1. Omntae quae sunt ad salutem necessaria apertis verbis in
scripturis pro. poni nostrum axioma est. Luth. lib. cont. Reg. Ang Nullum
articulum sciat a me admitti nisi apertis scripturae verbis munitum. The King
of Eugland in his (...). First Assure your conscience upon the faundation of
the most expressevuord of God: Sadol desacrif. c. ^. Nos expressa seripturae
sacrae testimonia efflagita mus.
of yours; and particularly by the The Ratification of the ffrench Confession.
All the ffrench (harches approve and ratify the above mentioned Confession in
all these heads and articles, as being vuholy grounded upon the pure and
express vuord of God.
ratification of your confession of faith, signed by the most famous men of
your religion, and the most learned Ministers that were then amongst you:
wherein you say that your faith is grounded intirly upon the pure and express
word of God.

You will easily grant that this which I demand is not expressy contained in
scripture: but that you draw it thence by consequence. This answer will
appear frivolous for diverse reasons. First I ask you, out of what passages of
the scripture you prove, that it is sufficient to make a thing to be believed
by divine faith, that it be inferred out of scripture by discourse and
consequence, as though forsooth, faith were discursiue and not a simple habit
like to that of Principles, because as it gives present consent to its object,
by reason of the evidence thereof: so faith without reasoning does forthwith
embrace the word of God, which is its object, by reason of infallible authotihe
of him who does reveal it. If you find this supposition in scripture; we are
in the wrong; if not; you are ill grounded in your faith: for it is evident
that this Principle, to wit, that it is sufficient to make a proposition to be
an Article of faith, that it be inferred out of seripture, is purely human,
and no^ divine.

Further, put case it weretrue, and made good by scripture, that an inference
were a valide fundation of faith, yet according to your selves, this would
only have place in consequences drawn out of two divine Principles which are
both contained in the scripture; seeing it is evident, that one of them being
humane, the certainty of the conclusion cannot be divine: seeing that every
conclusion is of the same nature with the more imperfect part of its cause; and
that that whereby a thing is known, ought to be better known then the thing it
self. So that if the Principle whereby a conclusion is known, be only known
by a humane knowledge, the conclusion cannot be known by a more perfect
knowledge.

Wherefore albeit, that even an inference of this nature and kind, might serve
for a valide fundation of our faith, yet were it nothing to your purpose,
since in the sillogisme by which you conclude the assurance of your salvation,
even admitting of your own ac count, there is but one of the Premises divine,
contained in the scripture, that who soever believes is justified, the other
which affirms that you believe, being merely humane, as not being mentioned in
all the scripture, nether in express terms, nor yet by consequence.

I add, that though it were granted, which yet is false, that a conclusion
drawn out of two principles, the one divine, the other humane, might be a
sufficient motive to oblige us to believe: yet should not that be but in
regard it were drawn by a company of wise and learned men, no man being of
so weak a discourse, as to think a conclusion drawn by an ignorant person,
or an Idiote who knows not what belonges to a good inference; drawn, I say,
from a Principle which he alone tinowes, is a sufficient and valide fundakon of
divine and infallible faith.

And yet in these terms are you. A poor plough man upon his deathbed can not
be sure of his salvation, unless he infer it by consequence ont of a
Principle known to himself alone, since none but himself knows, whether he
have truly faith.

Nor does it suffice to say that in this behalf he is interiourly guided by
the holy Ghost, who assures him of faith. Because in that case, we were to
admit of another word of God not written; and given not to the Church, but
only to every particular man, who^ by that means you make solewittnes and
Judge in his own cause. Which you cannot with any appearance sustain, since,
contrary to your own principles, you should admit of another rule of
salvation besides the scripture: whereas also there is none but will confess,
that though the express words of scripture were not necessary to ground an
article of faith, yet in all reason should they be requisite to ground that by
which you believe you have faith: since that is the only fundation of your
salvation, the end and scope of all those articles which are expressed in holy
scripture, which do only aim at the justification of man.

Is it likely that God who made the scripture, to teach us thereby the means to
become just in his sight would expressly have put down an hundred articles for
example, the belief whereof iustifies us not, (and which, according to you
might be believed by the Devils, and by Hypocrites,) and yet would not
expressly put down that, by the belief her of walone you teach, that we are
justified, and that wherein you place the essence and fundation of your
religion; and which is the crook the Calu. 3. instit. c. 2.. 16. Hicpraecipuus
fidei cardo vertitur.
stern and Vvhita^. contro. 2. q. 6. c. 3. Articulus iustificationis nostra
vide tur omnium praecipuus, and maxim fundamentalis vipote in quo salutis
nostrae prorae and puppis consist it. Caluinus respons. ad Sadolet. page 125.
sublatae eius (fidei iustificantis) cognitione and Christi gloria extincta est
and abolita religio and spes salutis penitus euersa, dogma ergo istud quod in
religione su^mum erat dicimus a vobis fuisse deletum.
puppe thereof, to use your own words: but left it to the discourse and
inference of every man, be he learned or ignorant; be he an I diote or such an
one as has no knowledge of the rules which he is to follow to make a good
consequence. Let us see your arguments.

Who ever does seriously repent, convert himself to God, and believes in
Jesus Christ is justified and shall not perish.

I Peter do seriously repent, and believe in Jesus Christ and.

Ergo I am justified, and shall not perish.

Suppose the Mayor to be in scripture, yet the Minor is not found in it, since
no mention is made of Peter in it, since no mention is made of Peter in thew
scripture: hobeit it is only known to Peter sole wittnes in his own cause.
And therefore the certainty of the conclusion which imports that Peter is
saved, for two reasons cannot be in fallible: both because it depends of a
medium which is humane, and fallible of its own nature; and again because
this medium depends upon the knowledge of an ignorant fellow.

Nay further, it follows by this argument that every one believes by divine
faith that he is just, before he knows that God does say so, which cannot
possibly be Gods' word which is the only object of Faith.

That this follows, I show it. Peter, for example knows not that God calls
him just, but only by means of a syllogism drawn out of scripture; now the
Minor, of this syllogism supposes Peter both to repent and to have says,
which faith consistes in believing that he is justified by the apprehension of
Christ his justice; true therefore it is, that Peter believes that he is just,
before he knows that God says so.

It is therefore manifest out of your own principles, that your faith is not
infallible but human, and vain too. Nor have you any thing by wh^h you may
distinguith it from the faith of a reprobate: for though according to you, he
can have no faith, yet he believes, as well as you, that says is in him, and
that thereby he is justified. Let us now see what the scriptures and Fathers say
upon this subject.

(...) Romans 11. T^^ ^^tem fiae stas^ sed (...) force (...) tibi par^as.
Thost stand by faith, says the Apostle, be not too wise, but fear, least
God may not spare even thee. C^m meru and trem^re (...)
And again, with fear and trembling work your salvation. Which does plainly
show that we are not sure by assurance of divine faith, of our salvation, for
otherwise the Apostle should incite us to infidelity, in exhorting us to fear
least that might not happen, of which we were certain, as though he should
say, sear that there may be no resurrection, or that there is no life
everlasting: which yet divine faith does oblige us to believe.

Now as for the Fathers, since that in diverse places, and diverse forms of
speech they do clearly deliver what we sustain against you, if your doctrine
be true, you must needs accuse them of error.

Thou ought not be secure that thy sins are remitted, says S. Greg. l ^.
Ep. 22. Secura esse non debes de^peccatis demissis.
Gregory. We know not, says S. Amb. sermon 5. in Psalm. 118. nescimus v. trum
peceata nostra maneant.
Ambrose, whether our sins remain. We do greatly offend through ignorance,
says In Consti^. Monast. c. ^. Mu^^ peccamus quand^ nescimus.
S. Basile. We know not our own works, says Cheysost. Hom. 11. in 1. Corinthians. Non scimus operae nostra.
S. Christome. We know not whether our justice remain, Aug. in Psalm. 48. Quod
non iustitia nostra maneat aut an habeamus bonam conscientiam.
says S. Augustine, or whether we have a good conscience. The just are
uncertain of perseverance, Aug. 11. de ciuit. c. 12. Iusts sunt iucertide
perseuerentia.
as the same Doctor affirms in diners places, and with him S. Ambrose. Who of
the faith full dare presume that he is of the number of the predestinate? De
Correp. and gratias. 13. Quis fidelium praesumaise esse in numero
praedestinatoru^.
says the same in another place. The opinions of all these fathers condemn
you. Yet if all these suffice you not, give care to Bernard. sermon. 1. de 70.
Scriptura re^lamat vt quis dicat. Ego de electis sum, and quod Deus praestet.
fiduciam and neget certitudinem, and quod impossible sit nosse quales futuri
sumus. Epist. 107. Quod habeamus spem de beatitudine, non securitatem. Et sermon.
2. de Oct. Pas^^. nem^ scit vtrum sit dignus amore, certitudo omnino nobis
negatur.
S. Bernard who, you Illyric. in Catalo. uest. verit. l. 14. Bernardus fuit a
Deo exs itatus.
say, was raised by God. The scripture, says he, will have no man to say I am
one of the elect; He adds further: that God gives us confidence, but denies us
assurance. And that it is impossible to know what shall become of us: that we
hope for Beatitude, but are not sure to attain unto it: in fine that none
knows, to use the Apostles words, whether he is worthy of love; and that
certainty is altogether denied us. What more express words can be produced,
to establith our Belief, and to overthrow yours, then those which that great
saint, and glory of France, uses?

We will now only make your own condemnation proceed from your own mouth,
by showing you to your advantage, that you have certain lucide interualles,
which argue you to be true Heretics, that is, following Ad Tit. 3. proprio
iudicio condemnatos.
S. Paul's phrase, condemned by your own judgment? He are therefore Calu. 3.
Instit c. 20.. 11. Fiduciam non iu^^^go quae s^lutam omni anxietudinis sensu
mentem suaeui and perfecta quiet demulceat, nam ita plaecide acquiescere eo
rum est qui rebus cunctis ex voto fluentibus nullae tanguntur cura, nullo
desiderio viuntur nulo timore astuant.
Calvin and diverse others of your Authors. Calvin, I understand not a
confidence, which does flatter the soul, freed from all sense of anxietie,
with a sweet and perfect repose: for it belongs to them only to enjoy so
perfect repose who are touched with no care, possess a with no defire,
agitated with no fear. Faith, says the same in 3. Instit. c. 2.. 37. Ffide,
varijs dubitationibus impellitur, vt raro sedate sint eorum mentes saltem non
fruantur tranquillo statu. Et in Romans 5. Nusquam est sic animus stabilitus and
quin multum haereat dubitatione.
another place, is assaulted with many doubts, so that the minds of the
faithful are rarely at rest, at least they enjoy not a seatled tranquillity
Pet. Mart. tit. de iustif. a. dubitatio illa qua timemus supplicium aeternum,
in animis nostris vtrunque haeret.
Peter Martyr in his common places; Those doubts by which we dread eternal
pains, does still in a centaine sort stick to our heart. Controu. 4. de
Iustif. Non est fides in maxim fidelibus immunis a dubitatione.
Scarpius a scottish Minister who lived in France. Faith in the most faith full
is not freed from fear. In Cathol. reform controu. 3. c. 1. Docemus quod cum
certitudine nostra salutis co^iuncta esse soleat aliqua dubitatio in cordibus
nostris, quodque nemo hominum tam sit securus salutis suae vt non aliquando
dubitet de illa.
Parkins an English Minister: we teach, that together with the certainty of
our salvation a certain doubt is wont to inhabit our hearts: and that no man
is so sure of his salvation, that he does not sometimes doubt of it. Nullus
viator sit certitudinaliter sine reuelatione sibi de hoc facta se esse
praedestinatum, and nes se esse in gratia.
John Hus: No Pilgrim knows certainly, that he is predestined, nor
consequently that he is in state of grace, unless he have had a peculiar
revelation thereof. Noman, sarth Luth. Thesi 30. Nullus securus est de veritate
suae contritionis, multo minus de consequutione plenaria remissionis. Et Tract.
10. praecept, incertum est homins number sit in statu salutis nec ne. Et Epist. ad
Episc. Mogunt. Nec per gratiam Dei infusem fit homo securus desalute, ^d
s^mperin ^more ac tremore iu^e^ and salu^^m nostram operari Ap^stolus.
Luthere, is assured of the truth of his contrition, much less that it was
follo wed with a plenarie remission of sins, and in another place, man is
uncertain whether he is in state of salvation, or no. Again, man is not
assured of his salvation even by the infused grace of God; but the Apostle
commands us to works our salvation with fear and trembling. In Anti-Bellar.
Fatetur quod eorum certitudo non est absoluta quaelis est in historica fide,
aut quae nullam dubitationem patiatur.
Vorstius confesses that they have not an absolute certainty such as is found
in fide historica but a credible persuasion in history, which does fight with
that, perpetu all disquiet and doubt of the soul.

Does it not hence appear that you are doubtful of your salvation, and
consequently, that you have no divine faith since that by the doctrine of your
18 Sunday.
Catechism, Faith is a true, certain, and firm knowledge of God's love
toward us; whereas that which you have, is nether certain nor firm, since it
is obnoxious to doubt, as your own Authoursdoe grant? But I will allege no
more passages to prove that your selves confess that you are not sure of your
salvation, it being enough to show that you teach, that even Jesus Christ
himself, (o abominable and detestable blasphemy!) was not sure thereof.

Seeing he did offere up himself to God, says your Catechism, 10. Sund^^
to satisfice in the name of sinners, he was to feel in his conscience that
horrible distress, as though he had been abbandoned of God, yea as though God
had been offended with him. This abisse, says Calvin, In Harmon. Gall. Matthew.
26. (...)
and horrible confusion of damnation, did rudely and to the quick torment him
with dread and anguish. And again, ^. In^tit c. ^6. (...) 1^ in Franc. Death.
he was necessarily to fight against the forces of Hell, and as it were in a
single combat, to wrestle with the horror of eternal damnation?

But to what purpose do you insinuate, that we by means of Purga^^rie,
escape the horror of hell at an easy rate; and by temporal, are freed from
eternal pains: since we nether teach, nor believe, that we are delivered by
those pains, but by penance and Gods grace: yea and we require far more, then
you, to our delivery, who by one only act of faith, hold your selves to be
absolutely freed both from fault and pain, that God exactes no other pains at
your hands, to satisfy his justice.

To wit, it is in your market, that the salvation of souls is sold good
cheap: and where to save them at too low a rate, you loose them. Again, what
a kind of peace of conscience, and certain security of salvation is that,
which the express words of scripture do not show, albeit your principles
exact the same: which relyes upon a humane principle, and that known to one
only, be he learned or unlearned: which also is gathered by humane inference;
and that by such men too, as do not knowor think of the laws of a
consequence; which finally is contrary to the scripture, the Fathers, yea even
your own Authors. Bolsecus in vita Caluini, Arenius. Seblusselbourg l. 2.
Theolog. Calvin.
The chief whereof Calvin, that your famous Prophet, dyed in deep
desperation, if we will give credit, not only to the Lutherans, whom you do
accnowledge for your brethren, and whose testimonies (which is to be noted)
were never authentically refuted, but even to his own followers, yea those who
did familiarly converse with him. Dare you yet affirm, that your religion does
teach men to die in peace, with infallible assurance of salvation, while the
scripture, Fathers, and your own Doctors, do teach the contrary?

Your peace of conscience is a true perturbation, and your assurance of
salvation, is indeed, a maine doubt what shall become of you after your
departure. The peace and tranquillity, which can be had in this life, is placed
in that confidence of hope, which, according to the counsel of the Apostle, it
behoues every good christian to have. We are saved says he, by hope. And this
peace is not found, Romans 8. v. 24. Spe salui facts, suissus.
save in the Catholic Church, where you ought to seek it, imitating the dove,
which was forced back to the Arc whence she flow, not finding elsewhere a
place wherein she could repose.

Thus you ought to comport your selves, and not rashly, as you do, to reject
her doctrine, whom you ought to credit and reverence as your dearest mother.

And indeed what find you reprehenfible in her discipline, while she teaches
that sins are to be redeemed by alms deeds? The scripture affirms it in
express words, and the Fathers do unanimously aggree in it. Luke 11. give
alms, and all thnigs are clean unto you. Daniel 4. Redeem thy sins by alms
deeds. Tob. 12. Alms deeds do free from death. There is no doubt, says Aug.
Sermon. 2. de ver. Apost. oratronibus sanctae Ecclesiae and sacrificio salutari
and eleemosynts non est dubium montuos adiuuari. 2. Hom. 41. in 1. Corinthians.
Iuneturmertuus non lach^^mis sed pr^^ thus, sup^ lieation^ (...) eleemo^^^
S. Augustine, but that the souls departed are assisted by the prayers of the
Church, the healthful sacryfice, and alms deeds. And S. Ch ylostome, the
deceased is helped, not by tears, but by prayers, by supplications, by alms
deeds. The Fathers are full of the like sentences, which for breuities sake I
will omit.

SECT. 2. OF INDVIGENCES.
NOw concerning the power of Indulgences, which consistes in remitting the
pain of sin out of the Sacrament, by the merits of Jesus Christ, and of his
saints. Why do you find it strange, that the Church in this age does chalance
the power thereof, which, as practice makes apparent, she stood always possessed
of, huaing even in her in fancy pardoned pains canonical and
Ecclesiastical? Did not S. Paul remit the pain, which the chusch had
enjoined the 2. Corinthians. c. 2. Cui autem aliquid donastis, and ego: nam and ego
quod donaui, si quid donaui propter vos in persona Christi.
incestuous Corinthian? Does not the Epistle of the Eutycians produced in the
Act. 1. Superuenit and salutaris dies passionis and sacra nox and
resurrectionis festiuttas, in qua quid m and plurimis peccatoribus a sanctis
patribus nostris damnationes soluuntur.
Council of Chalcedone make mention, that it was the custom in Easter time to
pardon sinners the pains which were due unto their crimes? Is not this that
which Cyp. lib de lapsis. Potest ilie (Deus) indulgetiam dare sententiam suam
potest ilie deflectere: paenitenti, reganti potest clementer ignos^ere, potest
in accepeum refer quidquidpre talious and petterint marryres, and secerint
face dotes.
S. Cyprian would say, he, to wit God, can give indulgence, he can qualify
his own sentence, he can clemently pardon the suppliant offender, he can
approve what so ever the Martyrs have demanded, or Priests have done in their
favor. It does manifestly appear by these words, that Martyrs did demand of
the Church remission of pains inflicted upon the faith full; and that the
Church did sometimes grant their requests. Does not Cap. 22. At tu iam in
martyrs tuos effundis hanc potesta^om.
Tertul. also aim at this in his book de Pudicitia when after he had made a
long discourse of the remission of sins by Jesus Christ, he vpbrayded the
Church, from which he was then f^^llen, that she imparted this power to her
Martyrs?

And indeed, since the Church has power to impose canonical pains, it were
most absurd to say that she could not remitt them, it being manifest in common
reason, that this power does necessarily accompany that.

If you say that the canonical pains which the Church remitted, were not
enjoined to expiate the guilte of our crimes before God, but only to satisfy
the Church offended by the scandal of sin; reason, the testimony of holy
Fathers, and your own confessions shall condemn you. Reason, in that the
satisfact on enjoy aed, was not for public crimes only, whereby the Church
suffered scand all; but for those also, which because they were secret, came
not to the knowledge of the church. Which Cyp. lib. de lapsis Plus delinquit
qui euadere se paenam criminis, si non palam crimen ad misit. Hoc adeo pro.
ficit vt sit minor culpa non vt innoce^s conscientiae. Nec cesset in agenda
paenitentia atque in doa mini misericordia deprecanda, ne quod minus esse in
qualitate delicti videtur in neglecta saetisfactione cumuletur.
S. Cyprian and Sozom. l. 7. hist. c. 16.
Soxomene do witness. Whence it follows, that the pain which was remitted
by way of Indulgence, was imposed, not to satisfy the Church only, but God
also.

Again the pains which had been enjoined and were remitted were somtymes
performed in private, as Gennadius lib. Eccles. dogm. c. 53.
Gennadius assures us. Somtymes also they were enjoined for light offenses, as
S. Cyp. sermon. de laps. cit.
Cyprian witnesses; and they were imposed, to appease Gods wroth by penance,
and to move him to pardon us. so much the more willingly, by how much we did
less spare and pardon our selves, Tertul. l. de paenitentia c. 9. Us
paenitentia Deus mitigetur, and in quantum non perpercerim mibi, in tantum mihi
Deus paercat.
says Tertullian. That Christ by satisfaction might be overcome, and by
satisfaction our sins might be redeemed, says S. Epist. 55. vt exoretur
satisfactionibus Christus, ^isatisfactionibus delicta redimantur.
Cyp lan, That Christ should blot out sins formerly committed; and least the
punishment of sins should be reserved to the end, that is, to the next world,
says S. Enchirid c. 68. Deleat (Deus) iam facta peccata Et cap. 66 Ne peccata
reseruentur in finem.
Augustine.

Now all these considerations had no place in the satisfactions which were done
unto the Church, for those were not enjoined for private sins, nor for sins
of less moment, nor yet were they done in private: nor, as you would have it,
to pacify God by penance, or to obtain mercy ^f Christ; nor yet that God
should blot out sins already committed, and should not reserve them to be
punished in the next world. And thesfore the pains which were imposed, were
not imposed to satisfy the church alone.

True it is, happily you will say, that canonical pains were remitted by the
Church, and some also there are which are satisfactorie; yet whereas they are
not all of that kind, it follows not that they which were remitted by the
Church, were of that kind. To this lanswere, first that this evasion has no
other ground then your own error. Further, where as reason will, that he that
has power to impose a pain, should have also power to remitt the same, it
planely follows that if the Church impose pains, which are satisfactorie
before God, it can also absolve from them. Again, your cause is manifestly
condemned by the Fathers. Because treating of those punishments which the
church remitted by Indulgences, they somtymes refer the very same to God. So
does Tertull. Tertul. de pudicit. c. 22. Sufficiat martyripropria delictae
purgasse. In grati vel saperbi est in altos quoque spargere quod pro magno
fuerit consecutu^. Quis alienam mortem sua soluit nisi solus Dei filius?
proinde qui illum aemularis donande delicta, si nihil ipse deliquisti plane
patere pro me: si vero peccatores, quomodo oleum faculae tuae sufficere vt mihi
and tibi poserst?
in the place above cited. where impugning the Catholic truth in nature of an
heretic, he evidently shows that the question was of those pains which were
due unto God for sin. Who, says he, does authorize man, to bestow the things
which are proper to God. Let it suffice a martyr to have expiated his own
offenses. It is the part of anvngrarfull or proode person, to lavish that out
to others, which himself received as a thing of greatest prise. Who is he that
redeemes the death of another with his own death, save the only son of God?
Thou therefore who wilst imitate him in remitting sins, if thou thy self be not
delinquent, endure for me: marry if thou thy self be delinquent; how do
thou think that the oil of thy small Lamp can be sufficient both for thee
and me.

The words do planly show, that the pains which were remitted in the primi
tiue Church were due unto God, not to men; and that indulgences of that nature
were wont to be conferred without the Sacraments: because, as we are to mark,
they were done by virtue of the sufferance of Martires, whereas Sacraments have
all their force from our saviors passion. Why does Tertullian, (after he had
spoken of the pains, which are remitted by Jesus Christ) exprobate the Church
for asscribing the same power to her Martires unless he did accnowledge the
pains pardoned in favor of the Martires, to be the very same with those
which Christ pardoned, to wit, those which are satisfactorie in the sight of
God? Why did Theophilactus, expounding those words of S. Paul, who did use
Indulgences toward the incestuous Corinthian, say, that In 2. Corinthians. c. 2.
In persona Christi, hoc est, secundum and coram Christc, and tanquam illo hoe
inbente aec veluti eius vicem gerens dimisi.
when, he pardoned him, he did it, in the person of Christ, as by Christ his
command, and as the vicegerent of Christ, unless the pains which that great
Apostle did remitt, were satisfactorie before God? This truth is so
perspicuous, that your own authors condemn you for condemning it. Which is
manifest by kemnitius, b. Kemnitius part. 4. exam. tit. de Indulgentiis p. 112.
Talia sunt quae salua fide (scilicet protestantium) necpossunt nee dehent sicut
sonant accipi est intelligi.
upon Whom you put so high a rate, Who When he had cursatily expounded, what
the Church and Fathers, for the most part, had written of this subject,
ingenuously confesses, that it cannot be Expounded literally and as the words
importe, without the overthrow of your religion in this behalf Whence we have
even by your own confessions, that the faith which you do impugn, is the
self same which the ancient fathers of the church fought for. And if the Conc.
Nicenum can. 11. Chalced. Acta.
Church in her primitive purity used that power, why may she not now also use
the same? Do you hold it sufficient to improve this power to produce some
abuses which you pretend has crept in? By this artifice you shall one'y gain
to your selves in the opinion of all men the imputation of being of the nature
and disposition of those whom. Oration 3 de Eunomianis
S. Grego: Nazian: compares to flies, saying, they for sake the sound, and
adheare to the vlcered parts of the body, especially your Vbitat. controu. 1.
quae 2. c. 14. Abu sus rei non rollit vsum siusdem.
own men confessing, that the abuse of a thing does not take away the use of
the same. Wherefore the power of Indulgences is grounded upon scrpture, Fathers,
and the practice of the ancient Chruch, yea even upon your own men's
confession. The use of them is holy, and if it open a gappe to traffic, it is
to a spiritual traffike of the merits of Christ and his saints by which he
does inrych the faithful people, by honest and lawful means; nor does
avarice cause any other discommoditie in this point then that which is befallen
you, in so much as it was the first motive that caused Luthere to question this
power of the Church; and which consequently made him Tributarie to the Devil.

CHAP. VI.
SECT. 1.
MINISTERS.
YOur Majesty should also see that we are hated, because in the holy sacrament
of the last supper we speak and do, as Jesus Christ did with his disciples:
for since all do confess what Jesus Christ did and that nothing was to be
reprehended in his institution, the Pope might make an end of all the
contentions and troubles sprang up amongst Christians upon this point if he
would reduce the holy supper to the form in which Jesus Christ did celobrat
it, speaking and doing as he did, deposing all disputes and centayning our
selves with in the sobriety prescribed by the word of God. By this means all
should communcate nor should we have any more private Masses. There should be
no elevation of the host: No oblation of sacrifice: Every one should
communicate under both kinds.

ANSWER.
You are of those men that would never loose if their own plea might be taken.
Christ celebrated the mystery of the Euchariste in a Dining room you in the
Church; he at night you in the morning: he after supper; you before dinner he a
little before his death; you along ty me before yours: he in unleavened you in
leauened bread: he with men alone: you with men and women promiscuously; he
once in his whole life: you ofen in yours. he after he had washed the Apostles
feet whom he did communicate; you without observing this ceremony which yet
ho expressly Si ergo laui pedes vestros dominus and magister, sic and vos
debetis alter alteru^ lauare peaes exemplum dedi vobis vt quemad, medum ego
fect vobis ita and ves factatis.
commanded: he according to the ancient custumelyng; you standing upright, he
permitting his Apostles, if they pleased, to talk together, you commanding
silence: he breaking the bread; you cutting it; he blissing the bread; you
omitting the same. Is this your imitation of Christ in every thing? Now whereas
the scripture is the rule of your actions, produce some one passage by which
you are warranted to change, in so many circunstances, what Jesus Christ
performed, since you are in every thing to follow his footstepps and example.
But if you reply, that you are bound to observe the essential parres of the
mysteries done by Jesus Christ, yet are permitted to change that which he did
in indifferent things; it rests that you prove out of scripture why these
things which you change are more of that nature, then those which you condemn
us for changing. Or if you cnnnot do it, Lib. 2. contr. aduersa legis. Hoc
vanitas and non ueritas dicit.
confess that your words, are, as S. Augustine says, vanity, and not
verity, and that unjustly accusing us, you justly condemn your selves. True
it is we ate in tirly and thoroughly to follow our saviors example in that
which is intrinsicall and substantial in the mysteries: in this all disputes
and contention being laid aside, we are bound to contain our selves with in
that sobriety and moderation which he prescribed, and are to do and speak as
he did. And. I would to God you did so, then should you confess that the
substance of the Euchariste is the body and blood of our savior Jesus Christ,
Matthew. 62. Accepit Jesus panem and benedixit acfregit, deditque dicipulis suis
and at, accipite and comedite Hoo est corpus meum.
and not a mere energicall figure of them both. For to what end does the a
scripture deliver in words most express, not once only, but four times, by
the mouths of three Evangelists, and one Apostle that the Eucharist is the
body and blood of Jesus Christ, Marc. 14 Accepi^ Jesus panem and benedicens
fregit and dedit eis, and ait sumite. Hoe est corpus meum.
without ever saying, in any one place that it is not his body, but only a
figure; if it intend to have us believe the oue which it says not and not the
other which it affirms? If scripture ought to be the rule of faith, Luc. 22.
Accepto pane gratias egit and fregit and dedit seis a^cens, Hoc est ^^rpus meu^
quod pro vo^is datur hoc ^atise mmed ^ommemerationem. 1. Corint 11. Dominum
Ieumin qua nocte tradebatur, accepit panem and gratias agens fregis and dixst,
accepite and manducate. Hoc est corpus meum quod pro vobis ^^adetur.
we are necessarily bound to believe that the Eucharist is the body and blood
of Christ which it so often affirms: nor ought we to believe that it is not
the body and blood of Christ, since that is not found in all scripture: nor yet
do we ever find, that it does frequently and clearly affirm that a thing is
that which it is not, with out expressing in sum other place, that it is not
the said thing.

If the scripture be instituted to teach us the connsells of God and of his
son Jesus Christ, who by it speaks unto us, who will ever be induced to
believe, that the scripture to teach us that the sacrament of the Euchariste is
bread and wine, not the body and blood of Christ who, I say, would ever
imagine, that to move us to this belief, it should so frequently inculcate
that it is the body and blood of Christ, and yet never once pronounce that it
is nether of them? Who will ever frame this judgment of it, unless such as
having their brains inuerted, will have every thing to be understood
preposterously and aganist the sense; one contrary by another; and the
negation of a truth, by the affirmarion of the same. Christ is no mo^ker of
men; nor is he ignorant of the usual manner of their speech: he tells them not
one thing, to move them to believe another. Wherefore seeing he does so planely
tell the Apostles that what he gave them in the Eucharist to eat was his body,
nor could he find words in which he could more clearly deliurer himself, there
can be no doubt made, but he delivered his own very body unto them; other
wise it must needs be said that either he deludes men, Aug. l. 33. contr ffaust
c. 7. Quid ergo eum legimus obliuiscimur quemadmodum loqui soleamus?
Anscriptura Dei aliter nobiscum fuerat quam nostro modo loguutura
yea and that in a matter of greatest moment to salvation; or verily, that he
was ignorant how to express his mind unto them.

Whereupon you will give me leave to make that demand to you in this occasion
which as I noted above, St Aug, made to the Donatistes in the like occurrence.
Why when we read do we forgett how we are wont to speak: aught the
scripture of the Almighty to use any other manner of speech to us then our
own?

And whereas Jesus Christ does say plainly and expressly that he gives us his
body, delivered for us, then which words we can desire none more significatiue
none more clear, to move us to believe that it is his own true body, what can
hinder you to believe, that it is his true body which he gives unto us? Would
you have him to have said, this is truly, really, properly, substantially, my
body. If some one of these aduerbes were necessarily to be added to manifest
the truth of the thing affirmed, we should not be obliged to believe the most
part of the principal mysteries of our faith, which notwithstanding you
believe as well as we; to wit, that Christ was borne of a virgin; that he
suffered and dyed: for in delivering these truths the scripture makes use of
none of those Aduerbes: nor had it any more express terms then those which it
used to signify the presence of the body of Christ in the Euchariste.

As therefore, if one doubted whether a thing appearing a far of were truly a
man, it were not necessary, to give assurance of the same, to add these
words, truly, really, but it were assurance nough to say absolutely, it is a man
(for as the Philosophers hold, this word, true, Verum non additenti.
adds nothing to the thing) so likewise, that Jesus Christ might show his body
truly to be in the Eucharist, it is sufficient to affirm it in plane words,
taken in their own signification. Which was especially to be done here, where
he does not only say, this is my body, but also, my body given and delivered
for you, which words do design the true body of Christ, which alone was
delivered for us. Howbeit it is evident, that the nature and being of a thing,
is more clearly expressed by such words as affirm directly what it is; then by
others which do only point at it under a certain name, without affirming
expressly that it is that thing, under whose name it is signified; and
consequently, we have more reason to believe, that the Euch r^st is the body of
Jesus Christ, because the scripture says directly that so it is; then to
believe that it is bread because the scripture signifies it under the name of
bread; especially since it adds Ep^^hites to this name of bread, which remove
it from its own signification; and contrariwise when it affirms that the
Eucharist is the body of Jesus Christ, it says it with restrictions, which do
confine as it were, and straig^ly ty the word body to signify the true body of
Christ.

The names of things do not infer the things themselves, unless they be
employed to express the being of the things. For example, Christ is said to
be Apoc. 5. v. 5.
a Lion, a 1. Corinthians, 10. v. 4.
Rock, a Joan. 15. v. 1
vine a Joan. 10. v. 7.
doree by analogy and similitude only, for as much as the effects, not the
nature of these things are in Christ. Psalm. 175.
Manna is termed bread in holy scripture, though it contain not the
substance of bread.

If in one place the scripture command us to communicate; and in another it
propose unto us the fruit of communion, and in some pass g s also declare the
end: were it not an affected blindness, to undertake to infer out of those
places, what the Eucharist were, and not rather to draw it out of the places
where the institution thereof is contained? I mean, out of these express
words, this is my body, which God pronounced of set purpose, planly to declare
what the Eucharist was, Lib. de Religio cap. de E^^d^^.
and yet Zuinglius openly professes, that he depends not upon these words this
is my body, but upon this only proposition, the flesh avails nothing. If I
should propose these two propositions, a man is a reasonable creature; and
this, a man is borne to serve God: I lo more clearly express the nature of a
man by the first, then the second: for by the first I do distinctly explicate
his being by his essential parts: Whereas by the second I do only declare,
to what that being has relation, and to what end it is produced. Yet you will
needs run the contrary way, sustayning contrary to all reason, that
Jesus Christ did more clearly express, what the Eucharist is, when he did
only declare Luc. 22. Hoc sacite in meam comm^^orationem. Fr^. Cori^th. 11.
Quottes cunqueman. ducabitis panem hune and calicem bibetis, mor^en. domini
^^nunciabitis.
its end, then when he did establish, and express it nature and being.

Nay you do yet worse. For you do not only choose rather to gather your
belief out of the words of the scripture, which show the Joan. 5. Qui manducat
hunc parem, viuet in ae^ernum.
effect, the Luc. 22. and 1 Corinthians. 11 cit.
end, or the Panis ^uem ego da^e ^aro me^ est.
promises of the Eucharist, then those wherein are taught the first institution
thereof (by which notwithstanding all the rest which concern this mystery
ought to be explicated: but you do even ground your faith upon discourses
which make no mention thereof: As for example, when you infer that
Jesus Christ cannot be really in the Sacrament, because the scripture teacheh
us, Ephesians. 4^
that he is asc^nded into heaven, and that we ought not to look him under the
symboles of the Eucharist, because it is written that Marc. 14. Joan. 12.
we shall not always have him with us. What reason, I pray you, nay what
appearance or show of reason is there to say, that the scripture speaks more
clearly what the Eucharist is, when it speaks not of it at all, or at least
but indirectly, then when it undertakes expressly to explicate its nature and
being.

If diligent notice be taken of the large difference, which is betwixt your
manner of proceeding and ours, I doubt not, but by comparison, we should have
quickly gained our cause, by the judgment of the whole world. For why should
we rather believe that Christ is true God; that he assumed hamane nature; that
he suffered death and passion, and other the like mysteries, upon the
scriptures simple affirmation thereof; then that the true body of Christ is in
the Eucharist, it being confirmed by the express word of God, and that with
such restrictions, as do oblige us to understand by this word body, the true
body of Jesus Christ? Why should not credit rather be given to the words of the
son of God, then to the conclusions which you gather out of two principles
whereof the one indeed is scripture, yet speaks not of the Euchariste, nor of
its substance; and the other is purely humane, destitute of all probation? A
man must nether have eyes nor brains in his head, to give more credit to your
imaginations, then to the words of Jesus Christ; and follow rather your
deceip^fall infere^ces, then the express words of the Gospel. In things that
belong unto God, says Lib. 1. de p^cc^t. merit. c. 20. In Dei r^bus dominum
audiamus non ^oniecturas, suspiciouesque mort^l^^^.
S. Aug. let us give ear to our Lord, and not to the conjectures and dreams
of mortals.

Having now hand^ed this first truth, now let us hear the Pastors of Gods
church, those especially of the first ages. Do not they say that the
Euchariste, An^^^s. l. 6. de ^a^ram c 1. Si ut Chri^lus verus Deuteronomy, i^a
ve^^aro. Cy^^s A (...) and saluie.
is the true and proper body of Christ. truly and properly the H^lar. 8. de
Trints. Sie^im vere verhum caro factam est, and nos vere verbum carnem cibo
dominico sumimus. Justinius in Apolog. Theophyl. in Matthew. 26.
blood of Christ. That Hilar. 8. de Trinit. in nobis carnalibus manentem per
ca^ne^ Chri^tum habemus.
Christ i^ in us by his flesh? That the Cyril. Hi^rosol. Catechis. 4 hic qus
vi^e^ur a nobis non est nobissed corpus Christi, and vinum non vinum sed
sanguis Christi. Ambro l. 4. de Sacrament. Damasc. 4 defide etc. 14. Nec vero
panis and vinum corporis Christi sigurasunt, aebsit en^m hoc, verum ipsummet
domini corpus.
Eucharist is not bread, wine, a figure, but the body and blood of Christ? That
the Cyrillus tract. 10. in Joan. Non negamus recta nos side charitateque symera
Christo spiritualiter coniungi, sed nullam nohis naturalis coniunctionis
rationem secundum carnem cum illo esse, id profecto per^^ ^amus, idque diuinis
scripturis omnino alienum (...) Augu^^ l^. ^. con^^^ aduersa. seg. c. 9. Fidelt
cord atque ox sus^pimus mediatorem (...) and hominum Christum Iesum.
body of Christ is not only rec^a^ed by faith and Charity, but even with the
mouth? That Christ is Ambros. l. 3. de spirit. sancto c 12. Carnem Christi in
mysterijs adoramus quam Apostoli in domino Jesus adorarunt. Aug l 10. contra
sfaus^am c. 13.
adored in the Euchariste? That his Chrysostom. l. 3. de saerdot. O ^. ^raculum^ o
D^^ be^ignitat^ inqus sursu^ s^d^^ cum Patre, eodem temporis momento omnium
manibus per^ractatu^.
body being in the Eucharist, is also in many other places?

How is it possible that they should posituely say what we believe, and that in
so diverse kinds of speeches, a^^ of them express, clear, and directly
opposite to the words which you use to destroy it, if they had believed what
you believe? That cannot be said, unless one would imagine, that the holy
fathers, to deceive us, would say one thing, and believe another.

Nay none dare so much as think it: but contrariwise we have great occasion
given to accnowledge the divine providence, because, whereas it is sufficient to
teach a truth, to affirm, and auerre it to be so in ordinary terms,
according to the customarie manner of expression: God to whom all things are
present, foreseeing the extreme assaults which would be made against his
Church in the dreadful mystery of the Euchariste, thought it not sufficient,
that the holy Fathers should only simply affirm the real presence of the
body of Jesus Christ therein; but further, he would have them to teach it in a
form of speech, quite opposite to that, by which he foresaw this truth would
be denied, Epist. ad Argentin.
which is so clear, that though Luthere employed six years to enable
himself to explicate the words of the institution of the Euchariste,
figuratiuly, as he him self confesses, yet he accnowledgeth that he was not
able to do it; condemns those that do it as heretics; and confesses the
real presence of the body of Jesus Christ; wherein he is followed by the
Confession of Ausbourg the first of all yours.

SECT. 2. OF THE SACRIFICE.
THe truth of the body of Jesus Christ being thus established, the truth of the
sacrifice, which you reject, cannot be called in question. For if Jesus Christ
be truly present in the Eucharist, as I have sufficiently though succinctly
proved, it follows, that he is truly sacrificed, as presently I will
demonstrate and you your selves confess. Granting says vrsimus, the opinion
of the corporal presence, the papisticall adoration and oblation, with the
romish mass, must also be granted.

Sacrifice is no other thing then a real oblation, (offered to God alone) of a
thing permanent and subject to sense, changed withal, and ordained to
testify, and profess, that we accnowledge his sovereignty over us.

But the celebration of the Eucharist which Jesus Christ instituted under the
shape and liknes of a thing without life, is such an oblation.

Therefore such an oblation is a sacrifice.

Now that the oblation whereof ^e speak, is a thing permanent and subject to
sense, is easily proved, since the body of our saniour is offered under a shape
which is within the reach of sense.

But if you contend that Christ is not visible because he cannot be seen, I
reply with the Fathers, Chrysostom. hom. 84. in Matthew. Ipsum vides, ipsum
tangis, ipsum comedis. Et l. 3. De Sacerdot. Qui cum Patre sursum sedet in ipso
temporis momento manibus omnium pertrectaiur.
that we see him, we touch him, though not in his own shape and species.
Whence is rightly concluded that we cannot discern him, not that we cannot see
him: which is manisest by the example of a man wholly covered with a Lions
skin, whom indeed we should not discern; marry see him and touch him every
man might.

Now that the thing is changed in this kind of oblation: so far forth as is
requisite to profess and publish Gods supreme power, and that it is
instituted to that end, is the thing I am to prove, which I will distinctly and
planely verify.

The mutation which is made in the Eucharist, consists in this, that Christ who
subsists in h^auen in his own living form is placed in earth, as a dead man,
under the shape of bread and wine. That he is put under the species of bread
and wine, is already shown; and that in that state, he existes under the
species and liknes of a dead man, is evident, for that diverse ways he is
deprived of appearance of life, nor does a man discover any virall action in
him: and also because by the force and virtue of the sacramental words, his
body and blood is put under separated species; as by the death which he
suffered on the Cross, they were really separated. Finally, because the
species under which he is vayled, are commestible, nor is it the custom to
eat flesh which is not dead.

And that this mutation does sufficiently declare Gods soueraignetie over us, I
prove. The mutation which happened by the true death of Christ, had such
prower, as is manifest by the sacrifice of the cross. Therefore, that mutation
which is made in the Eucharist has the same force; The consequence is
verified, because all those things are found in the Euchariste, for which the
mutation which happened in the sacryfice of the cross, did publish the
sovereign authority which God has over us. I will endeavor to make it as
plane and intelligible as the difficulty of the matter will permit.

It is certain then that sensibilitie, and the nature or essence of a sign,
are annexed to accidents and species, not to substances; which of their own
nature are not subject to sense, that is, what soever does signify, signifies
by the favor and means of accidents. For example, a man is not known, but by
speech, motion, and other accidents. Now it is evident, that sacraments and
sacryfices, are of their own nature visible signs; and that their essence
consists in signifying hidden mysteries sensibly to men. Wherefore it is
manifest, that it imports not, whether Sacraments and sacryfices, whose nature
is to signify, be placed in species adjoining to their substances, or else in
species separated from them; for whereas every thing can subsiste when it has
all that is essential to it, they will easily conserve their being without
the help of substances, which contribute nothing to their Essence. Whence it
follows that death is no otherwise apt to signify the supreme dominion of
God, then in regard of its external species, in so much as one discouers no
accident testifynig life. Now Christ as he is in the Eucharist, appears to be
dead, as he was upon the Cross; and consequently has all that he had upon
the Cross, in point of a sensible sign, apt to make demonstration of the
sovereignty of God, which is all that is required to a sacryfice. For it is
certain, that as a living body in appearence, by the virtue of some
charactere, might be made capable to signify as much as a living body indeed,
could signify: so a living body appearing dead, by the virtue of Christ's
words, may be a sign of all those things, which a creature truly dead, were
apt to represent.

And indeed it is a thing which nether Catholics nor you can doubt of. Not
Catholics, because the Eucharisse under the species of bread is no less a
Sacrament, then though the substance of bread were joined with its species.
Joan. 3. v. 14.
Not you, since that brass under the species of a serpent, was as proper a
sign of the death of Christ, as though the true substance of a serpent, had
been joined to the appearance of the same.

Now we must see whether this mutation which is apt in it self to testify
Gods soueraignetie, were a so instituted to that end.

Which is apparent, in that, to judge that God has determined a thing to some
certain end, it is sufficient to prove that he endowed it with all things
necessary to that end, it being an v^ whorthy thought, to conceive that God
who does nothing in vain, yea who ordaines every thing to its end, should yet
have instituted some one thing, most apt to signify that which notwithstanding
he would not have it to signify.

Ard verily if this manner of gathering the institution of a thing to some
certain end, be not sufficient, we have no means to know whether the
Eucharist be a Sacrament, it not being said in all the scripture, that it is a
Sacrament, but only by our inference, for that it has all things necessary
to a Sacrament. Howbeit the greake text both of the three Evangelists and of S.
Paul, which text only you admit to be authentical, bear these senses Lus.
22. v. 20. Matthew. 26. Marc. 14. Ibid. v. 19.1. Corin, 11. v. 24.
powered out, given, broken, in the present tens: and Luc. 22. cit. Locis cit.
it is.
S. Luke, applies the word powered out to the chalice: which shows planly that
the effusion whereof he spoke, is made in the Euch rist, where only the chalice
is to le found. Whereupon Irs 1. Cor. homil. 24.
S. Chrysostom speaking of this breaking, says this may be seen in the
Encharist, but upon the cross it cannot; And In 4. Cor. 11.
Calvin, her I interpret (frangi) to be broken, to be putt for (immolari) to
be sacrificed. And therefore who willdoubt but mention was made, of a gift, a
powreing-out, of a breaking, in a word, of a sacryfice, offered unto God, since
all these things are done for us (as the scripture in plane terms does
witness) and nothing can be offered for man's salvation but to God a lone? To
what purpose did the scripture add so many epethites signifynig a sacryfice
without interposing any one word which might move us to conceive the contrary,
but to give us to understand, that the body and blood of Christ is in the
Eucharist, as a true Host? They are truly in it, and a true sacryfice is the
Eucharist, seeing it has all the parts that are essential to a sacrifice.
What ans^ere I pray you will you return me to this? Will you reply, that if it
be enough to put a creature, under the apparences and species of death, and so
to offer it to God, to make a sacryfice, the Picture of Jesus Christ offered up
to God would be a sacryfice.

To this I answer, that in such an oblation, one could not affirm that there
were any sacrifice either of Jesus Christ, or of his Picture. Not of
Jesus Christ, because he would so nether be effectually and truly dead nor yet
in Appearance, whereas yet it is necessarily required that the thing signified be
present, one of these two ways. Not of his Picture, because though it were
present, yet should it not be distroyed, or changed at all. Now it happens not
so in the Eucharist: for Jesus Christ is present in it, and suffers death in
appearance, for as much as he does veil himself in a dead species, which he
does Sacramentally unite unto himself; even as being the Word he clothed
himself with humane shape, which he did unite unto himself hypostatically or
personally. And theifore when we say, that it suffices, to sacryfice a liunig
creature, that it be put under the species of death: our meaning is not, that
it should be put so by way of representation, as though it were purtraited
dead: or else, (being represented living) as though it were contained under the
only species of the dead picture; because in every sacrifice the presence of
the thing is requisite, because the oblation of the sacryfice is accomplished
by the delivery of that which is offered and sacrificed. But our meaning is,
that the living creature, should in it self, be covered with the species and
appare^ces of death, and so be offered to God. This reason does (a priore) or
demonstratiuely show, that the celebration of the Euchariste is a true
saciyfice: How beit the brevity which I have proposed unto my self, shall not
hinder me to produce another reason thereof.

It is said in the Tu es sacerdos in cternum.
109. Psalm that Christ is a Priest for ever; which the Hebrae. 7. v. 17. and
13.
Apostle also repeates confirming that he is a priest for ever. In nether of
the places is there any condition adicyned, which might draw these words Priest
and Preisthoode, from their proper significatior; yea contrariwise there are
some which do restravne them more clesely to it, while the kingly Prophere
adds, that the son of God is a Priest according to the order of
Melchisedech, who was truly a Priest, and offered sacrifice; and that
preisthood also was conferred by God on Jesus, with on Psalm. 10.9. Iuras it
Domtur^ and non paemitel^ teum.
oath that he should never bedepriued of it; and finally that the Heb. 7 v. 3.
Asstu tlatus autem filto Det manet (...) in ^^ernum.
Apostle says, that Melchisedech was a figure of Jesus Christ, in that he
remained priest for all eternity. Therefore Jesus Christ mioyes as yet tiue
Preisthood as it was co^ferred upon him; and like as Melchisedech, was
continually a true Priest, without ever being destitut of power to saciyfice;
so must also Jesus Christ be eternally, without ever loosing the power of
sacryfycing; and consequently there is even to this day a true and proper
sacrifice.

You will deny the consequence lknow, which yet I will easily prove, by the
stro^gest of all proofs, to wit by the definition of Preisshood left us by S.
Paul confirmed by the holy fathers, auowed by yours, which definition requrres
the power of sacry ficing as an essential part.

S. Paul. Heb. 5. defines him that is endowed with preisthoode, by relation to
sacrifice Omnis pontifex constituitur in his quae suntad Den^, vt offerat dona
and sacrisicia.
every Bishope, says he, graece A (...), chosen out of men, is ordained by
men, in the things which belong to God, that he should offer gistes and
sacrifices for sins. And the 8. to the Omnis Pontifex ad offerendum munera
and hostias constituttur.
Hebrews where he speaks not of the Bishops of the old Testament, as your aut
hours will have that of the 5. chapter to be understood, but of Jesus Christ,
whom he calls a Bishope. Every Bishope, says he. is ordained to offer gistes,
in greek (...), sacrifice, concluding thereupon, that since l. Christ is
Priest, he must necessarily also have some host to offer, that power being of
the essence of preisthoode. Which appears most manifestly out of these
passages, as also by the testimonies of the holy fathers, and of your own
authors, who openly teach, that S. Paul did in those places define
Preisthoode, and ascribed the power of sacrificinge unto it.

Chrysostom. hom. 8. in 5. Heb. Apostolus definit quid sit sacerdos.
The Apostle, says S. Chrysostom upon the first place of S. Paul to the Heb.
does define what a priest is: and upon the second place Et in 8. Hebra. Hom.
14. Sacerdos non est absque sacrificio, opertes ergo quoque eum habere
sacrificium.
a priest, says he, it not without a sacrifice. The Apostle, says S. Amb. in
5. Hebrae. desinit quid sit Pontifex. Item commune es^t Christo and ei qui ex
hominibus constituitur vt offerat dona and sacrificia.
Ambrose upon the first place of his Epistle to the Hebrews, does define what
is a priest. and a little after, It is common to Christ, and to him who is
constituted by men, to offer gifts and sacrifices.

The Bishopes of the old law, says Amb. in 8. Hebrae. Pontifices veteris
testamenti statuti sunt offerre muuera and hostias Vnde necesse est saluatorem
nostrum habere aliquid ad offerendum pro nobis.
the same Father, upon the 8. chap of S. Paul to the Hebrews, were ordained
to offer gistes and hosts and, whence it follows that it was necessary that
our savior I.C. had some thing to offer up for us. It belongs to a Bishope,
says Theodoret in 8 Hebrae. Proprium est Pontificis offerre dona. vniuersorum.
Theodorete upon the latter place, to offer up the gifts of all men. A Priest,
says Theophyl. in 8. Hebrae. Sacerdos sine hostia non est, necesse ergo erat
and hunchabere quiddam quod offerret.
Theophilacte upon the same place, is no Priest without an host: It was
therefore necessary that he should have, meaning Christ, what to offer.

This first sentence, says. Calvin upon the same place, is worthy of remarke,
which teaches, that no Priest is ordained but to offer gastes. Preisthoode,
says your Cathech me, is an office, and an authority to appear in the
presence of God to obtain grace and favor, to appease his anger, by offering
up a sacryfice which is acceptable unto him. Therefore the po^er to sacrifice is
esse^^iall to preisthoode, by the definition of the Apostle, by the explication
of the Fathers, and your own men's confessions.

And if prower to sacrifice be essential to Preisthoode, it follows
evidently, that Christ who is even to this present a true Priest, has also
power to sacrifice, and to offer even or his day, a true facrifice, which in
show is another then that which he offered upon the crose, because upon the
cross he could not die again. We have therefore what we demand, e Repon. 15.
Sunday.
for weonely sustain that in the new law there is another sacrifice then that
of the cross to be offered by the Ministers of the new Testame^r. Which is
most manifest, for whereas Christ cannot offer sacrifice in heaven, he must
necessarily offer by his Ministers in earth, seeing he has another sacrifice
then that of the cross. And this is that which all the Fathers do witness.

Christ is yet Priest, says Theod in psalm. 109. Sacerdos nunc est Christus non
ipse aliquia offerens sed vocatur caput eorum qui offerunt.
Theodorete, not that he himself offers any thing, but he is called the head
of them that offer. Albeit I. C. says S. In sal. 38. Easi Christus nune non
videtur offerre, tamen ipse offertur in terris cum Christi corpus offertur, tmo
ipse offerre manifestatur in nobis cuius sermo sanctificat sacrificium quod
effertur.
Ambrose, is not now seen to offer, yet he is offered in earth, when the body
of Christ is offered, yea we accnowledg that he himself offers, whose word
sanctifies the facrifice which is offered. We affirm, says In 7. ad Hebrae
dicimus Chrisium cum aeternus sit and immortalis are vera semper esse
Srecrdorem nem and none quidim semper se^^^tip ^^m pro nobis of f rre creditur
per mini^^^es suos.
The ophilacte, that Christ, being eternal and immortal, is alwaystruly a
Priest: for we believe that even to this present he does daily offer up himself
for us by the hands of his Ministers. Nor would he, says In c. 6. Heb. neque
enim de ea quae semel facta est a Deo oblatioue and hosts dixisset in aetarnum,
sed respicions ad praesentes sacrificos per qutsme lic Christus sacrificat and
scar ficatur, qui etiam in mystica cana modum ill a tradidit huinsmods
sacrifily.
Oecumenius, have affirmed, by reason of that oblation and host which he once
only offered, that Christ was a priest for ever but he had an eye to the
sacrificers which now are, by whose means I. C. does both sacryfice and is
sacry ficed, haeuing taught them in his mystical supper the manner of such a
sacrifice.

You will peradventure grant, that it is essential to preisthood to sacryfice,
but not to sacrifice at all times: wherefore, to iustile Christ a priest now, it
is sufficient that he could once sacrynce, as he did upon the cross. I answer
that if power to sacryfice be essential to preisthoode as I have already
proved; it follows thereupon, that it must aggtee to it at all times: seeing an
essential compound cannot subsiste but by the sustance of all its essential
parts. For example a man cannot subsiste without the, ratio formalis, formal
cause of a reasonable creature, without both body and soul joined together. It
remaynes therefore, that I. C. being at this present Priest, must have power to
offer another sacrifice, then that of the cross, which also is manifest out of
S. Hierom saynig, not only that a Pressed ought to sacryfice, but that he does
continually offer sacryfice for the people.

Your are not able to anoyd the force of this argument, but by sustayning that
Christ is not now truly a priest, save only (to use schooe terms) by
ampliation for so much as he was truly a pressed; and also metaphorically and
anologically, because the virtue and force of his ^^c^yfice, is yet in vigor,
since he lives for all eternity, and offers for us in heaven his prayers to
God almighty. But admitting Christ to be a true Priest, as we have proved him
to be; and confessing also that power to sacryfice is essential to
preisthoode, it carries no show of reason to say that the eternity of the
fruit of a sacrifice, suffices to make preisthood eternal, though deprived
of power to sacryfice: for it is most manifest that a thing cannot be eternal,
unless its essential parts be also eternal. And if it were lawful to
infer the permanencie of preisthood out of the permanencie of the fruit of
the sacryfice, by the same reason I would also infer, that an hundred years
after the decease of a king, or Magistrate, there charge were permane^t in
their own persons, since the fruit of their gouuernement does survive. And
therefore this fruit serves to no other end but only to testify that I. C.
had preisthoode and that by virtue thereof he had offered a sacryfice of an
infinite value, but in no sort to show that he has preisthood as yet. That I.
C. saues us for all eternity, imports, that hes is an eternal savior, not a
Priest; since save us he could without being a Priest. Decumenius ncap 6. ad
^ebraeos.
And this truth was so familiarly known to the Fathers, that some of them do
expressly deny that the eternity of preisthoode does agree with I. Christ, by
reason of the sacrifice of the Cross: teaching that it aggrees unto him by
reason of the sacryfices, which he daily offers, and daily shall offer till the
end of the world, by the hands of his Ministers.

If no more then the fruit of a sacryfice be required to the eternity of
priesthood, it follows that the fruit of a sacryfice is the essence of
preifthoode: nay more, that nothing else is essential unto it, which is most
absurd. In conclusion, this truih of the sacryfice, is taken either for the
virtue which the sacrifice has to justify, or for the effect of this verue
which is our justification. In the first acception it is a quality of a
sacryfice: in the second, it is an effect of this quality; and therefore
howsoever you take it, of the essence of preisthoode it cannot be, since it is
the effect of the same, in so much as it is the effect of the sacryfice, and
that no effect can be the essence of its cause. It cannot be of the essence,
because what so ever is essential to a thing, becomes the same thing with that
of whose essence it is, which cannot be said of the effect and the cause which
are necessarily distinguished. Finally it cannot be of the essence, because the
cause does preceede its effect, whereas a compound preceedes not its esse^tiall
parts. Preisthood is not the virtue and force of the facrynce, but the virtue
and force of facryficing. As for example Roya^tie is not the fruit and
commodity which we receive by government; but the power to govern. And
therefore, since I. C. inioyes preisthood for ever, he has also power to
sacryfice for ever, It being a thing most evident that the preisthoode cannot
be erernall, while the power of sacryficing, which is essential unto it, is
temporal. Nor will it be to the purpose for you to say, that whereas Christ
does continually offer up his payers to God for mankind, he does also
continually offer sacrifice, for since the conditions necessarily required to
the essence of a true sacryfice, cannot suite with prayers, as we have showed
out of the definition, the oblatio^ of prayers, cannot be a true sacryfice. And
this is so clear and manifest, that, when as the scripture calls Christ an
eternal priest, it ascribes that dignity unto him by reason of a true
sacryfice. Wherefore the fathers also of the primitive Church would have the
Eucharist, whereby preisthood does now appertain to Christ, to be a Cyp. Epist.
51. vtique lle Sacerdos clea Christi uero sungiur, qui id quod Christus fatit,
mitatur and ^aerificium ^erum and ^lenum tunc offert in Ecclesta Deo Fat^^, si
sic ineeptat offerre secundu^ ipsum Christum videat obtulisse.
true, a Aug. l. 10. cent. ffaust. cap. 20. Huit ^^mo veroque sacrificio falsa
cesseru^t.
most true, a Aug. l. de sp. and lit. c. 11. In iplo verissimo and singulari
sacrificio (Alisse) demino Deomosteo gratias agere admonemur.
greatest, a Aug. l. 10. cent ^^aust. c. 10. cit.
full, Nazian. (...), Ape^^^. Quaian them modo externu^ illuc sacrificium
magnorum mysteriorun antitypu^ ips (Deo) offerry aeuderem?
external, and Aug. l. de spir. and lit. ^^ 11. cit.
singular suerisice; and Aug. l. 20. de ciuit. c. 10 inillud Apocalyp. 20.
erunt sacer dotes Dei and Christ's. and.
(...) priests, to be true priests, in the proper and natural signification of
the word. Nor would they affirm this, unless they accnow ledged this truth to
have been delivered by Christ, his Apostles, and holy scripture. But of this,
since none can doubt, we will pass to another point.

SECT. III. OF THE ELEVATION OF THE HOST.
IT it be lawful to offer sacryfice, as I hope I have sufficiently proved, why
should it be unlawful to ereuate the host, since that this elevation does
properly signify the oblation thereof? In the old law, as is to be seen in the
8. of Leuit. and else where, the priest did eleuate what he offered, and we have
it by a clear collection our of Basil. lib. de Spir. S. c. 27. Dogmata quae in
Eccle sia praedicantur quaedam habemus and doctrina seriptorum prodita quaedam
ex Apostolotum traditione in mysterio id est in occulio tradita recipimus
quoru^ vtraque parem vim babent ad pietatem. Inuocationis verba quum ostendum
nis Eccle^^ and popu^m b^ne^tionis quis actorum in ipto nobis liquit? Lib. 4.
hist. Drat. 20.
S. Basile the great his liturgy who was instiled by b Theadorete, and S. c
Gregory, of Naziancene, the light and sun of the world, that we hold this
custom from the Apostles time: for in his said Liturgy, mention is made of
this elevation in words of this nature: when the Deacon saw the Priest extend
his hands, and touch the sanctified bread to make the holy Elevation, he
says, let us attend. Which thing also is diligently observed by those authors
which have made expositio^s upon the liturgies, as by Nicholas Cabasilas who
says: And he also approaching unto the Table, having taken into his hands, and
showen the quickening bread; he calls those that are worthily about to partake
of, it as it were, saying. Behold the bread of life which you see: And Germane
the Patriarche of Constantinople says thus upon the same subject: and that the
priest does lift up the heavenly bread, and make the sign of the cross thrice
in the air with the venerable and quickening bread, it does intimate and.

And indeed what cause was there of calling this elevation in question, since
it is mentioned in the ancient liturgies of S. Basile and S. Chrvsostome? and
S. Denis also the Apostle of our France delivered the same? In a word, this
point is so clear, that you have no other cause to co^test against it, but
only in so much as it is sustained by the Catholic Church, which you love to
impugn. which is manifest by the testimony of one of yours, ^spinian. histo.
sa^^im.
affirming, that Luthere for no other reason did impugn the Elevation, but for
hatred of Catholics, and does accnowledge it to be such, that by good right it
ought to be Retinen^^m esse eleationem hi vhi vt npiae prohieiur, and abolendam
vbi vt ni cessaria prcipitur.
retained and observed, where it is prohibited as impious. There be also others
of yours who place it amongst the (...), which are nether commanded nor
prohibited: finally others confess that it was in use in the primitive Church,
as they make good by the testimonies of the Fathers. Where upon Vvitemberegenses
refutation^ Orthodoxi consensus p 101. Eleua. tionem ren adiophora^ quaea Chris
nec praecept nec prohibi sit omnes ir telligentes and pios fateri^^ non dubium
est Et Hosp^^nian. par 1. Histo. l. 2. fo 31. In prim^tiua Ecclesisymbola
Eucharistica paululum eleuata and populo ostensa fuetunt.
we are moved diligently to defend and conserve it, and the rather, because, as
you affirm, it was the counsel of your first father; or if it please your
worp. that we should change it, since Dionysj Ecclesiae Hierar. cap. 3.
Chrysostomihomil. 36. in 1. Corinthians. and hom. 3. ad Ephesians. and Basilij Lib. d
sp. s. c. 27. c. Romans 4. v. 15.
S. Paul teaches us that where there is no law, there is no transgression,
produce I beseech you one passage of the scripture which does prohibit it;
which if you cannot perform, confess at least, that the Church is endowed
with sufficient power to institute the same: for d S. Augustine holds, it to be
a mere madness, to contend that that is not to be done, which the Church is
accustomed to do through the universal world. Whereto e one of yours also does
assent, in these words, that any may be compelled and convinced by the
authority of the Church, and that heretics are not more forcibly and
efficatiouly urged by any external argument.

SECT. IV. OF MASSES WHERE THE ASSISTANTS DO NOT COMMVNICATE.
BY this same rule you will loose this cause too, I mean the question which
you move about private masses, (...) Epist. 118. (...) Vvhitat. ^ontrou. 1. q.
(...) cap. 5. and ^^. ffateor and ^os and haere^^cos cogi and ^onuinci pos^^
author ^ta^e ^^elesiae, ^ec alto argumento ex^e ^^o v^^^di^s ac for^ius pre^^i
^areticos.
as you please to term them, and communion under both kinds, in both which
kinds, the Church did many years ago practice, what we now practice. How beit
I will briefly touch both those points, hoping to make manifest that you are
as ill grounded in those, as in the others which we have already examined.

There is no man that does not ingenuously confess, that the celebration of
the Euchariste, when the people do communicate is more perfect, then that,
where they communicate not: common reason conuinceth that to all the world;
both because the fruits of the sacrifice are more fruitfully communicated when
the host is consummated by the assistants, worthyly disposed, then when it is
not received by them: and also, because this mystery, being both a sacrament
and a sacryfice, is more perfectly accomplished, when it is not only offered
to God in sacryfice, but also imparted to the people as a sacrament. For these
considerations the ancient canons, and Fathers, do inuit, exhort, yea command
christians to communicate at the masses which they hear, and the Council of
Trent does expressly desire it. Sess. 2^.
Where for if you pretend no more but that it were better that the faithful
should communicate all at the masses they hear, we do loyne hands with you.
And in this cause, in lieu of condemning the good and wholesome doctrine of the
Church, in this point, as in all the rest, you should complain of the
indeuotion of the people since it is their coldness that is cause of their not
communicating, not the Pastors fault. But ^f your bent be to condemn the
masses, where the assistants communicate not, to be unlawful, we must oppose,
and with great reason in all men's judgment, since none are found who justify
your pretentions, and condemn ours.

If the masses where the people communicate not were unlawful, it must needs
be because the oblation of the Euchariste, as it is a sacrifice, should be
necessarily annected to the participation of the people in the Eucharist, as it
is a Sacrament; which could only come to pass two ways, other by reason of
the nature of the sacrifice, or because God would have it so. By reason of the
sacrifice, it cannot be, since it is manifest that its being does not depend
of the participation of the assistants: none did eat of the holocausts which
were wholly co^sumed^ none did participate (after the manner we spe^ke of) of
that which was ordained by Moses for the remission of sins, Leuit. 6.
for, as it is written, priests alone had liberty to eat of it. N^y in the
sacryfice of the Cross which was offered for us all, none at all did
participate in that manner, in which our adversaries would oblige us to partake
in the Eucharist. Nether can one affirm, that Jesus Christ would have no
masses celebrated without communicants, there nether being any formal law, nor
express word in all the scripture, whence you will have all the truths of
faith to be derived, whereby we may gather it.

You will happily say that Christ in his last supper communicated his Apostles,
and consequently that we are bound to imitate him by distributing the Eucharist
to the people. But this proves no more but that the people may communicate,
that it is to be desired that they would communicate, and that, when they will,
it should not be refused them: but it imports not, that we are bound to thrust
the Eucharist upon them against their will, and that we are not to celebrate,
unless they communicate. For who is able to sustain, that in case the
Apostles had not communicated, our savior had not celebrated the Euchariste?
Who dare affirm that it was Gods will that so glorious a mystery should have
depended upon the will of another, and that the indeuotion of the common people
should make the Pastor indeuoute?

But I would willingly ask you, since you make our saviors imitatio^ an inuio
lable law unto you always to communicate the people, Cap. de Euchar. Ad rectam
Eucharistiae actionem requiruntur ad minus duo, ^idelices Minister bucharistiae
benedicens, and ^s cui Eucharistiae Sacramertum dispensatur.
why does it not oblige you also to communicate all the people? Which yet you
do not: for the Confession of Witemberg is content that one only should
communicate; and again, many are present at your suppers who communicate not.
In a word seeing S. Paul does tell us, that where there is no law, there is no
transgression, and that sin is a trangession of the law: and seeing you
produce no place of scripture which condemns us, you your selves stand guilty
of the fault, not in this respect only, but in many others.

First by the custom of the Church: for Hom (...) in Ep. ad Ephesians.
Frustrahabetur quotidiana oblati^, cum nemo sit qui simul participe^.
S. Chrysostom confesses that in his time there was such a negligence amongst
the people, that there were many oblations made whereof none did partake: and
A^br. 5. de Sacram. c. 4.
S. Ambrose does witness the same, speaking of the Grecians, who he says were
wont to communicate but once a year.

Secondly by the confession of your own Authors: for Perkinsus in ^rohlem de
Mis ^a priuata. Te^^ore Walfridi ^i^^entur caepisse soliteriae missae and
tempore Gregori^.
Perkins does accnowledge that the custom of saying mass wherein the people
communiecated nor, was observed in the Church, even from the time of walfride
and Gregory the great, that is, a thousand years ago, whence it is manifest
that it has been observed in all times, since none can show the beginning
thereof.

Thirdly by your men for The history of false Martyrs in ^n thelife of john
Hus. The memory of ^o. Hus ought to be in holy esteem amongst all the
faithful.
John Hus, whose memory is famous amongst you, says planly, witness Luth.
colloq. conu^^alibus.
Luthere, that this custom is not unlawful.

SECT. V. Of Communion under one kind.
TO improve and reject the ancient customs of the Church, as you do, without
alleading any law for their condemnation, is to condemn your selves. You cry
out Anathema against us, because we communicate under one kind only, which yet
has been in all times practiced in the Church: you persuade the people that we
do them a great injury in not permitting them both the kinds, whereas you
produce no law, which prohibites (as an unlawful thing) what we practice.

And that this, many ages ago, was the custom of the Church Ser. de Laepsis.
S. Cyprian, S. De obitu Satyri.
Ambrose, and Lib. 2. de vxore Euzeb. l. 6. c. 39.
Tertulian, who lived in the second, third, and fourth age, do deliver, Lib.
de Lapsis.
witnessing that the primitive Christians conserved the Euchariste in there
houses, under the only species of bread, to have access to it at all hours,
upon sundry occasions, whether it were in time of sickness, to prepare
themselves to Martirdorne, or for same other respect. Further it appears out
of S. Cyprian who notes particularly, that Children were communicated, under
the only species of wine: as also out of S. Basil Epist. ad Caesaream August.
Basile who witneseth that such as lived solitarily in the wilderness
communicated under one kind. Manifest therefore it is by these authorities,
that the custom of communicating under one kind has been obseruerdin the
Church above twelve hundred years, and that, which is worthy to be noted,
without all opposition either of Geekes or latins, till John Hus his time.

Nay further, whereas in the a Acts of the Apostles, where mention is made of
the Communion of the Church, he speaks only of the breaking of the bread, we
have just occasion to conceive, that this custom was not only introduced in
the times of the forenamed Ancients, but even in the Apostles time. Again
whereas the Fathers are of opinion, that our savior after his resurrection,
gave the Euchariste to his disciples in Emaus under the only species of
bread, we have reason to believe, moved by their testimony, that it was the
custom in the very time of Jesus Christ. Howbeit none can doubt, but that the
communion under one kind, has been practiced in the Church from the second and
third age. If you did produce any law which did prohibit this use, we should
do amiss to transgress it: But you have produced none, nor are the
authorities whereon you rely of any weight or moment against us. As for the
passage of S. John the 6. it auayles you not, both because, according to you,
it is not understood of the Euchariste, save in the beginning only; for in the
end of the same Chapter, Calu. ^n 6. Joan. v. 53. Non recti Beh^r^^ cum hoc
testimon^^ probarent, vsum calic i^ pr ^^missum de^ere ^mnibus esse.
he mentiones that bread only, whereof it is said that it gives life
everlasting: and also because that Calvin himfelfe blames the Bohemia^s for
indeuouring to prove out of that text, that the Chalice is to be imparted to
all men.

If you produce that of S. Paul where he speaks of the Euchariste, 1. Corinthians. 11.
it will no ways advantage your cause, yea contrariwise, it will prejudice it,
since after he had related the institution of Jesus Chr. speaking of the eating
of the Euchariste, he speaks of it with disjunction, saying, who shall eat or
drink, whence it appeates that it is not necessary to receive both the knids
together.

If you object our Saviors example, it will be in vain, since you your selves
confess, that it is not necessari to imitate him in eueri thing, and place:
that it is another thing to instruct Priests as Priests what they are to do,
Act. ^.
and another thing ^o teach the^ what they ought to make the people practice;
and that the Apost. themselves distributed this Sacrament, without making
mention of any thing but bread.

You will allege without doubt that place of S. Matthew 26. Matthew. 26.
Drink ye all of this, which Calvin extolls so much. But that will make as
little to your purpose as the rest, because in that passage Jesus Christ
speaks to his Apostles only, as S. Mark shows, Marc. 14.
saying, they all drank of it, which word all did pla^ly design the Apost.
only, since they only dra^ke of it.

It may be you will object, that if Jesus Christ by these words, Drink ye all
of this, mean only the Apostles, then by paritie he speaks of them only,
when he says, Eat ye all of this, and co^seque^tly, the faithful should not
be obliged to communicate. But your consequence is false, 1. Corinh. 11. v. 28
Probet autem se^psum homo and sic de pane illo ^edat and de calice bibat.
because, albeit in that place, this word, eat, was only addressed to the
Apostles, yet is it sufficient that the communion of the faithful is commanded
else where, to wit, in the sixth of S. John, and in the first Epist. of S. Paul
to the Cor.

We could sufficiently defend our selves by the sole title of our possession,
and your weakness, which is so great that you cannot convince us, though by
conde^ning us, you are obliged thereunto. But we will not insiste upon this
point, it being an easy task to manifest, that we nether wrong the people,
nor yet iniure the Sacrament; yea on the contrary side, that that which we
teach is aduantagious to both: and that your doctrine is injurious to both, as
also to the institution of Jesus Christ. We do no wrong to the people, because
the body and blood of Jesus Christ being as well under one kind as both; and
the signification of the Mystery remaining entire, the people receive Jesus
Christ as truly under one kind, and with as great beneciction of heaven, as
under both. Nor do we iniure the Sacrament, because the essence thereof does
not absolutely require the two kinds, but that it may subsist under one only,
without loosing any esse^tiall part: sithe^s it does possess in one, the body
and blood of Jesus Chapter and innoyes all the significatio^s which belong to its
essence; the species of bread most fitly signifying the nourishment of the
soul by grace, and the union of the faithful in one body together with their
head, for as much as it nourishes, and its mass is composed of many corns of
wheat.

Now having shown, that the communion under one only kind, is nether
injurious, to the people nor to the Sacrament. I will not stay there, but
further I will make manifest, that it is profitable and honorable to both. To
the Sacrament, because it preserues it, if not from injuries, at least from
indecencies contrary to the honor and reverence due to the Sacrament, and yet
are most obuious: for it is manifest that if the species of wine were
communicated to all men, they could not avoid sheding of it. To the people:
because if it were still necessaire to give both the kinds, it could not easily
be keept to communicate the people at all times, all mome^ts, all occurences:
for besides that a sufficient quantity of wine, is not every where found to
communicate the faithful, there are also some that do so loath wine, that they
cannot only not drink it, but not so much as smell it. Whence we may well
gather that Jesus Christ did not establsh the necessity of communicating under
both kinds, (...) Brentius in ^polo confess. ^itemb. Martyr. (...) Corinth. 10.
and (...) ^mo Buce^^s in colloq. ^atisbonensi co^^sist esse indif^rens sumere
^^am vel vtra^quespecie^ idemque concesserunt Thcologs Protestants in Colloq.
Augustano. Vade Hospin^an. part. 2 histo. an. 1536. Et in concordiae discordi
cap. 41. Coccium lib. 6. do Eucharist. c. 3.
since he cannot oblige us to impossibilities. And therefore diverse of your
authors do grant, that this has place, and is true in abstemious persons.

But it is you indeed who iniure the Sacrament, and people; while you deptiue
them both of the real and true body of Jesus Christ, which we do carefully
preserve for them; and you, giving only the appearrences to the people under
the species of bread and wine, are justly by Luthere compared to one who having
supped up the meat of the egg, does carefully gather up the shell to the
people to eat.

Further, you are most injurious to the institution of Jesus Christ, Beza
Epist. ^. Rite celebrabitur (Coenae Domini) siquod panis aut vini vicem vel vsu
communi, vel pro te^poris ratione supplet, pan^s aut vini l^^o adhibeatur.
in that you sustain, that albeit he instituted his Sacrament in bread and
wine, yet nether the one nor the other of those kinds are necessary; so that
it maybe administered in other matters. Let the Reader now judge whether of us
are more injurious to the Sacrament, and more prejudicial to the people, and
consequently who are to be condemned. Without all doubt you will be held
faulty in the judgment of any Reader, yea which is more, even in your own
judgment. For albeit you conte^ne the authority of the Church, Hospinian. l.
1. histo. sacram. and lib. de concord. dis^. c. 41. Luther in declarat. Euchar
and ^l^bi.
yet by Gods special providence, Luther deferrs so much unto it in this point,
that by the relation of your own Caluinsts, he confesses, that it is not
necessary to give both the kinds; that the Church had power to ordain one
only; that the people are to be satisfied therewith; Further, he approues the
Rule made by the Council of Latran to that effect, which being done so, he
would find it very strange, says he, if one Bishope of his own authority
should opposeit.

CHAP. VII.
MINISTERS.
YOur Majesty should also see, that our religion is disciphered unto you quite
otherwise then it is indeed: for if the things which are imposed upon us, to
wit that we are enemies of saints, and of the Blessed Virgin Marie; and that
we hold that good works are not necessary unto salvation; and that we made
God author of sin, were true, we were abominable creatures, unworthy of the
society of men; but they are forged calumnies to bring us into hatred, and are
refuted by our writings, sermons, and our very manner of life.

ANSWER.
If you be men of your word, Ennemies of Saints.
it is high time for you to begin to trusse up your baggage, and to remove your
selves out of the society of men, since you have sentenced your selves to that
punishment, in case you be guilty of a crime, of which you will never be able
to clear your selves.

Is it not to be enemy to the Saints to ascribe contumelious names unto them,
which the Devil, Pagans, and the old Heresiarkes condemned by the primitive
Church, gave them? names, I say, which the Fathers do disalowe, and reject by
the authority of Scripture? And yet, witness Kemnit^us Exam. Conc. part. 3. p
228 Vsitat vocantur mortus. Ho^. 58. de S. Babyl.
Kernnitius one of your prime Authors, you do ordinarily term them dead,
no otherwise then the Devil according to S. Chrysostom: Julian the Apostata
in S. Cyrille lib. co^t. Iulias
: Vigilantius in S. Hierome lib. cont. Vigilantium.
, who together with the rest of the Fathers reprehend that manner of speech.
They are not dead, says S. Ambrose Sermon. 10. d. ss. Pet and Paul Non enim mor
tui sunt quor. curamus nata lem hodie, sed renati viuu^t, etc.
: we do not term them dead, says S. Damascene 4 de Fide c. 16 Eos qui in
spresurrectionis si deque erga eun diem extremun clauscrunt, mor tuos haud qua
qua^ appellamus
: He is not the God of the dead, but of the living, says S. Hierome l^b.
cont. Vigit. Non est Deu mortuorum se^ viuorum. Item sancti non appel la^tur
mortui, se^ dormientes.
following the Gospel. The Saints are not said to be dead, but to sleep,
says he again.

Is it not to be enemy to the Saints to deprive them of all care, and all
charity toward men? making them who are in the state of perfection above,
less perfect, then those that are here below subject to worldly defectes? and
yet this you do. They do not, says Calvin Calu. in 1. Cor. 13. Charitatem
praesent^b us offie^^s min^ me exercent, no^ sunt pro nobis soliciti,
charitatis perpotuitas nihil pert^net ad tempus intermedium. Et in cap 1 Zachar
officia charitatis scimus restring^ ad c^rsum praesentis vitae
, exercise charity, they have no care of us: we know that the offices of
Charity are restrained to the course of this prefent life.

Is it not to be enemy to the Saints to maintain that they nether pray for the
living in general nor in particular? Yet this you affirm, the dead, says
Polanus Polanus in disputationibus ^riuatis d^sp. 28. Sancti defuncti non
intercedunt apud Deum pro ^obis viuentibus ^^ec in genere, ^^ec in particu^a^^.
Perkinsius in Cathol. reform Coutrou. 15. de^uncti non ro^ant Deum spe^^aliter
pro hoc ^ut illo.
Professor at Basile, do nether in general nor in particular make
intercession for the living.

Is it not to be enemy to the Saints, to term them Monsters, Masks,
hangmen, beasts? To affirm of Moses chosen by God for the head of his old
law, that his wisdom is hypocrisy; that his mouth was full of gale, yea of
fury? to dare to say that S. James, one of the Apostles doateth. And yet this
your do. Calvin Call lib. de ve^arefor. Ecclesia.
does honor S. Catharine and S. Christofer with the name of Monster; S. George
16. and 3. instit. (...). 20. ^. 24.25. and 27
and S. Hippolitus, with that of Masque, S. Dominike lib. de vera resorm.
Eccles.
with Hangman: S. Medard Ibid.
and others, with beast: And Luthere Luth in Ps. 45. and in c. 22. Genesis
durst affirm, that Moses his wisdom was hypocrisy, and that S. James, did
doat.

Is it not to be enemy to the Saints, to equalize them and the most imperfect
Christians in point of perfection, saying in express terms, that the
greatest Saint does not surpass the least of the faithful? And yet this you
do. I will not esteem the least Christian of all, says Luthere Luth. cap 1^.
Genes. Non debe^ Christianum minimum omnium inf^riorem astimare D. Petro and ^m
^ibus Sanctis qui sunt in caelo. Enemies of our Blessed Laedye.
, any white inferior to S. Peter, and all the rest of the Saints in Heaven.

Is it not to be enemy to our Blessed Lady, who in the instant of her
conception was confirmed in grace, to accuse her of incredulity, to make her
an infidele, to affirm that she is repugnant to Gods words and works, that
she does, maligna^tly restrain Gods power? And yet this you do. She had
within her self, says Luther Luth. postillae in Euang. de annun. Sensum and
insultum incredulitatis in se habuit.
, both the feeling and assault of incredulity. She was an infidele, says a
certain Culma^nus lo. cit. fuit in fidelis Sa^er. in Eua^g-Verbo and operibus
Dei ^b Angelo reuelatis s^ opponit verbis Angels no^ credit.
Germane, both in the word and works of God revealed unto her by the Angel.
She opposes her self, says Calu. in cap. 1. Luc. Videtur no^ minus malign
restringere potentiam Dei quam Zacharias.
another, against the words of she Angel; she believes not. She seems, says
Calvin, no less malignantly to limite Gods power, then Zacharias.

Is it not to be an enemy of our B. Lady, to make her worthy of eternal
punishments: to say that she desired to be Christ his companion, in those
functions which God had committed to him alone: That she had lost all the
confidence which she reposed in God: finally that her offense was not light,
yea that it was as grievous as Eues. And yet this you do. Marie, says a
cerraine Spargenbergius post illa in Dom. post Epiphan. ^sgna fuit suppli^ijs
sempiternis.
Germane, was worthy of eternal punishments. Marie, says Dominica 2. post
Epiphan. Maria non eum tantum hono^em quaerit quae debetur parents^^us, sed
etiam ambi^ honorem Messiae and cupit esse quasi sociae administrands eius
efficij quod Chris^o tantum man^atu^ eraet.
Brentius, did not only seek that honor which is due unto parents, but also
ambitiously aimed at the honor of the Messiah, and demanded to be, as it were,
a fellow in the administration of that office, which was committed to Christ
alone. She lost, says Post^^^ in Do^^in. post Epiph. Perdi^it omnem sid^ c^am
erga Deum.
Coruinus, all confidence in God. The sins, of Eve and Marie, are nether of
them little. Marie did grievously sin, Profess the Cent. 1. l. 1. c. 10.
Viraque delicta non sunt ^exigua. Mariae grauiter peccat.
Centuriatours.

Is it not to be an enemy of the B. Virgin to make her importune, uncivil,
and arrogant toward her son, and ambitious in such a measure that Christ was
ashamed of it? And yet this is that you do. There is no doubt, says Calvin
In c. 12. matthew. in harmon. Gall.
, but our savior meant to reprehend the importunity of Marie: and indeed she
erred, so to interrupt our Saviors speech. Marie, says Homil. 78. in Luc.
Veh^me^ter inh^^este and inciuiliter Christum interpellaeun, importuna sua
e^ocaetione leges publicae henestatis violauit, euocauit Iesum arrog intia
quadam and elatione animi Ambitione sua tam grauiter peccauit vt palam per
Christum pudefiat: and addit, ambitio blasphemia est.
Brentius, did vehemently, dishonestly, and uncivilly, interrupt Christ, by her
importune interpellation she ^^^ated the laws of public honesty. She
disturbed Jesus with her arroga^cie and pride she did so grievously offend by
her ambition, that Christ did publicly shame her with it. insequall whereof
headds, that ambition is blasphemy.

Is it not to be an enemy of the B. Virgin, to affirm that in the passion of
Jesus Christ, she was offended at him, and co^ported her selfein such asort,
that it appeared planely that her thoughts were vain, her heart impious? And
yet this you do. They were offended at Jesus Christ, says Brent. hom. 17. in
Luc. offendebatur in Christo aedeoque apparebat tu^c ipsoru^ cogitationes vanas
and cor impium e^sse.
Brentius, speaking of the Disciples, and the Virgin, and thence it appeared
that their thoughts were vain, and their hearts impious.

I will pass over in silence what Bucerus lib. de omnipotentia. Beza lib.
cont. Jacob. Andrae. Molina. In Harmon.
you teach touching her virginity, I say not that you call in doubt, whether
after the birth of Jesus Christ, she remained without knowledge of man. That
which I have already said shall suffice, being a dear case, that none can use
such language, without declaring himself an open enemy, not only of the B.
Virgin, but his own, and of all mankind, who by means of her, were
replenished with so many benefits.

Having now shown you to be enemies to the Mother, Ennemies of Jesus Christ.
let us see whether you be not the like to the son too. It might suffice that
I have shown above in the 3. chap. sect. 5. that you teach that he was in
doubt of his salvation; that he suffered the pains of the damned; that by his
corporal death our redemption was not accomplished, that his passion and
torments had not been a condign prise of our redemption, unless he had also
endured the pains of the damned.

But this is but little, you say yet many more and greater things, which in a
few words I will show. Do not your Da^^us Apolg. ad lacob. Andrae. Christus
quatenus and homo non est adorandus nec inuocandus^ Peza in Col ^q. Mo^^bel.
Negamus humanitatem Christi adorandam esse.
Authors conte^d, that Christ, as man, is not to be adored, not to be inuoked?
Does not Calvin In 2. Luc. v. 40. Anima e^us subiectae fuit ignorantiae.
affirm, that his soul was subject to ignorance, and that a voice of Despair
In Matthew. 27. v. 46. Elapsa est ^s desperationis vox.
issued from him? In a word, you disciphere Christ in such a sort, that that
may most justly be imputed to you, which S. August. S. Aug. in Enchir. c. 4.
Sienim ^ili^enter quae ad Christu^ pertinent c^gitantur, nomine tenur inuenitur
Christus apu^ quosdam H^reticos.
ascribes to all heretics. If we diligently consider what belongs unto Christ,
we shall find him in words only in all heretics.

To attribute as many vices to Christ as there are truly virtues in him is not
this to hate Christ? If you love Christ, it is in words only; If you know
Christ you know him by name only. But if they that teach and defend such
blasphemies, be not enemies of Christ, then he cannot be said to be an enemy of
the innocent, who by malice makes him noce^t. Or if such an one be justly to be
esteemed the enemies of the innocent, you shall never avoid the just censure of
enemies of Christ, yea even by your own judgments.

And as concerning good works, Enemies of good Works.
with what face can you deni, that you do not hold them necessary unto
salvation? what means those words of Luthere Luth. lib. de Libert. Christ.
Nullo opere nulla loge Christian opus est ad salutem. Item, libertas
Christiana fuit ne cuiqu^^ opus sit lege and operibus ad ^^stitiam aut salutem.
, I pray, which he does so often iterate, and inculcate. A Christian stands in
need of no works, no law, to salvation. Whereupon the more rigide Lutherans,
as Schusselburgius Tom 7. Catal. haeret.
does witness, do condemn this proposition, Good works are necessary to
salvation. Wherefore did Pareus Par^^us l 4 de Iustifi^. c 1. Flauians ad
vitandum scandalum and err^ris periculum contend bant istam propositionem,
opera sunt necessaria ad salute^. non esse in Ecclesia vsurpandam. qua in part
fa^^le nos eis subscripsimus.
a Caluinist, as you are, after he had related that the Flaccians, which are
more absolute Luthera^s did profess that this proposition, works are
necessary to salvation, was not to be admitted in the Church, adds these
words, in which point we do willingly subscribe unto them, but to make public
profession of that, which you so audaciously deny? Why does he also continually
add, that the Gospel Ibid. Euangel stricte est doctrina gratie, sic solum
conditionem fides requirit.
requires no other condition but faith? Why does he also say in another place,
Et lib. 3. de iustif. c. 12. Non esse absolute necessaria ad salutem
intelligitur.
I understand these works not to be necessary to salvation absolutely? If you
reply that he is but one author: I answer that this man makes profession of
the Doctrine of your Church, as those words, we subscribe to them, do planly
show. Again, Kemnitius, whose learning your me^ do so much esteem, that they
give him immortal praise, and honor him with no other title, the^ that with
which Homere Homer. Odysix O^os (...).
adorned Tiresian, that they would have him to be the only wise man of all his
fellows, does sufficiently show that this is the doctrine of your Churches,
when he says, Kemnit. I. par. exam. de fide iustificant In nostris Ecclesijs
communibus suffiagijs, explofa sunt b^y opositionas, bona opera ad
iustificationem it a esse necessaria ^t impossibilesit quenquam sine
operibuisaluar^.
In our Churches, these propositio^s are rejected by common snffrages; good
works are necessary to justification: the In decl. are c. 4
book of the concord of Luthera^s, has the very same in these words. The
proposition of good works necessary to salvation, is to be hissed at
a^dreiected out of our Churches (...) ^false. Further; the Confess. Holuet. c.
16. Non sontimus bona opera ad salutom, it a esse necessaria, vt absque illis
nemo vnquam sit seruatus.
confession of Faith of the Heluetians, whom you accnowledge to be your
brethren, and which ^o^fession the Church of Geneua approved, does manifestly
confirm the same in these words. We do not judge good works so necessatie to
salvation, that none at all can be saved without them. What, I pray you, have
you to reply to these so clear testimonies? How will you be ever able to
warrant your selves from the blame and hatred to which these testimoies do
worthily expose you? Will you say that he means only, that works are not
necessary, as the causes of salvation, though otherwise their presence are
necessarily required continually to acco^paignie faith, as the shadow the body,
though the shadow does nothing at all co^tribute to the conservation of the
body? This shift shall not yet serve your turn, since they affirm the
contradictorie to that, which you do simply and absolutely deny without all
reserve, whereas Illyricus Apud Schusselbourg. 10.7. Sola necesstas praese^tia
operum ad salutem excluso omni merito, nihilominus hac incommoda secum affert.
does also in express words affirm, That the only necessity of the presence
of works had vssered in many discommodities. Amongst which he numbers despair
of salvation, which of it self and of its own nature does condemn that
necessary presence. Pareus Paraeus l. 4. de Iustsfic. c. 1. Latronem qui toto
vitae cursu nihil boni fecerat cum in agone ad Christum confugeret morte
praeuentum sine operibus saluatum existimamus.
also does dispute, that the good thief was saved without works, and contends
that they are not absolutely necessary.

In conclusion does not the Lib. 3. c. 12. supra cit.
Confession of the Heluetians overthrow the necessity of the presence of good
works, where it planly teaches that salvation may be obtained without them?
Yea Luther, Illyricus, Amsdorfius, and others did not only teach that good
works were not necessary to salvation, but they added further, that they were
pernicious unto it, and that too, according to its own nature and substance,
as may be seen in Hospiniane and diverse other Authors.

Having convinced you to be enemies of the Saints, Enemies of God.
of the B. Virgin, Jesus Chapter and good works, we will now see whether you be
not also enemies of God. And certes you are enemies of the whole Trinity,
making God almighty author of sin, and every effect of the three persons,
is common, which being without God proceeds from his power. You deny that you
teach this blasphemy, I affirm it: we are at varia^ce in this point. But
shortly we shall aggree, at least by the judgment of all men that without
passion and perturbation do consider the case. For mine own part I will
endeavor to speak nothing, which shall not be openly accnowledged to be the
same which you affirm.

Is not this to make God guilty and the cause of sin: if you auerre that he
wills sin, as sin? That sin was ordained by Christ; that evil is not
only foreseen but eue^ predestined by God? That God would certainly ordain
the fall of man, and gradatim dispose the causes of his damnation^ Finally that
man is blinded by the will and command of God. And yet these things you say:
Sin says Sanchius Zanchius in Miscell. lib. de Excaecat. q. 5. Peccatum
consideratum etiam vt peccatu^, quatenus ad illustra^da^ Des gloriam facit,
eatenus peccatu^ and malum culpae praeordinatum est a Deo.
, considered even as it is sin, so farforth, as it makes to the illustrating
of Gods glory, in this sense sin, and the evil of the fault (malum culpae)
is ordained by God. By Gods ordonnance and beck, says Calvin Calu. in c. 3.
Gen Dico Dei ordinatione and nutu lapsum esse Adam, hominem labi voluit.
, Adam fell; He would have man to fall. It is the opinion of our Doctors,
says Pareus Paraeus l 3. de amiss gratiae c. 2. Nostroru^ Doctorum sente^tia
est; quod Deus tentationem and lapsum bomini infallibiliter decreuerit.
that God did infallibly decree the temptation and fall of man God, Lib. 1. de
Praed. Deus non tantum ad damnatione^, sed etiam ad causas damnationis
praedestinauit quoscu^que libucrit.
says Beza, did not only predestinate who soever he pleased to damnation, but
even to the causes of damnation. Man was blinded, says Calvin Calu. 1.
instir. c. 18.. 1 Volente and iubonte Deo excaecatur homo.
, by the will and commandment of God. Do not they, who speak in this sort,
make God the cause of sin, yea even of the malice of sin, which sin as it
is sin, does formally import and contain?

Moreover to affirm that God was Author of Pharaos obduration, to co^stitute
the divine will the prime and supreme cause thereof; that God does inflict
sin, and that he made man and Angels violaters of the divine law, is not
this to make God Author of sin in plane terms? And yet this you auerre
too. Certain it is, says Sanchius Zanchius sup. q. 1. Certum est Deum
primariu^ fuisse huius obdurationis authorem.
that God was the prime Author of this obduration. We resolve, says Calu. lib
de Prad. In Doum transferimus obdurationis causas.
Calvin, the cause of obduration into God. And in another place Lib. de
Prouid. Dei voluntas summa est vel remota causa obdurationis Et 3. Instit. c.
23. 1. Sequitur absconditum Dei consilium obssurationis esse causam.
, the will of God is the chief or remote, that is, the primarie, cause of
obduration. Gods Decree, says Beza de Praedest. ad art is. Corruptionis causis
excludere Des decretum non potest.
Beza, cannot be excluded from the causes of corruption. God, says Martyr. in
Romans 1. Deus infligit peccatum originale.
Mart. does inflict original sin. God, says Zuin. Zuingl. lib. de Prouid.
c. 5.
makes man ad Angels tra^sgressiours.

He that affirms that God does incite, move, necessitate, and does so compelle
men to sin, that they cannot anoyd it; and that the efficacy of the error
proceeds from God, does he not make God, guilty, and cause of sin? D^us
Angelum transgressorem facit and hominem.
He that attributes the species, attributes without doubt the kind (genus) too:
and therefore whosoever ascribes this quality to God: that he does compel men
to sin, does also doubtlesly make God cause of sin, since compulsion is but
a certain species under that general cause: and yet this you do. God, says
Mart. in Romans 1 Deus in clinat and impellit voluntates impiorum in grauta
peccata.
Martyr. does incline and enforce the wills of the wicked upon grievous sins.
God, says Zuingl. Zuing lib. do Drouid. c. 6. Mouet Deus latronem ad
occidendum, Deo impulsat occidit, at inquies. coactus est ad peccandum,
permitto, inquam, coactum esse. Et in margin. Deus mouet sontes ad pec^andu^.
does move the thief to kill: God incites, he kills; but you will say, goes on
the same, that he was compelled to offend, and I admit your inference, he was
compelled,

The reprobate, says Calvin Calu. 3. Instit c. 23.. 9. Gall
, would be thought excusable in offending, because they cannot avoid the
necessity of sinning, especially since that depends upon the ordonnance and
will of God; but I contrariwise deny, that that can be a sufficient excuse for
them, because this disposition of God is just. A Creature, says Parcus
Paraeus li. 2. de amiss. great. c. 13^ Nei essario quidem and iustisssmo iudicio
Dei peccat creatura Item lapsum hominis ex accide^. te ob Dei decretum necess
^^ium, and ineuitabilen fuisse nostri redissime asserun^
, does necessarily offend, and that by Gods most just judgment. Our men, says
the same, do rightly affirm, that man's fall was by accident (by reason of
Gods decree) necessary, and inevitable. God, adds the same Et cap. 4. Opera
malorum Deus quae sunt mala poenae and iusta sua iudicia facit efficacissime.
, does the works of the wicked most efficaciously. Which are the evils of
pain (mala poenae) and his just judgments. The efficacy of the error, says
Calvin Calu. 1. Instit. cap 18. 2. A Deo ipso manat efficacia erroris vt
mendacijs credant.
, that credit is given to lies proceeds from God.

They that will have God be Author of all those things, which as we teach
happen by Gods permission only, do they not deliver in express terms, that
God is author of the malice of sin which we hold he permitts only? and yet
this you do: Now I have pla^ly enough shown, says Calvin Calu. 1. Instit.
c. 18. 3.
, that God is called the Author of all those things, which those Controwlers,
will have to happen by his idle permission.

They that do teach in express terms, that God, by his pure will, of his
own free motion, without all consideration of merit, does predestinate to
damnation, and damnes man, do they not speak yet more detestably, then when
they make God the Author of sin? And yet this you do. God of his own
accord. says Luther Luth. lib. de seru. arbitrio. Deus mera sua voluntate
homines deserit, indurat, damnat.
, abbandons, hardens, and damnes men. In damning them, says Et ibid. Non
respicit merita en damnandis. Et ib. Immeritos da^nat, itam and seuerit atem
spargit in immeritos.
he in another place, he respects not merits; be damnes those that have not
merited it. He powers out his wroth, and severity upon such as have not
merited the same. And yet in another passage, he says Hic est sidei summus
gradus credere illum esse iustum, qui sua voluntate nos necessario damnabiles
facit.
, that the sovereign degree of faith consistes in believing that he is just,
who by his sole will make us necessarily damnable. God, says he Ibid. Deus
absconditus operatur vitam morte^ and omnia in emnibus: multa vult quae verbo
suo non ostendit sese velle: sic non vultmortem peccatoris verbo scilicet, vult
autem illam voluntate imperscrutabili.
, wills many things, which yet by his word, he shows not to will, so he
wills not the death of sinners, to wit in word, but he wills it by his
inscrutable will. By his only will, says Calvin Calu. 3. Instit c. 23.. 2.
Nudo etus in arbitrio and citra propriu^ meritum in aeternam mortem prae
destinantur.
, and without consideration of their own merits, they are predestined to
eternal death. Calvin, says Paraeus Paraeus li 2. de Great. and lib. arb.
cap. 16. ait. Caluinus Apostolum sequutus praedestinatione^ peccati praeuisione
priorem facit.
following the Apostle, makes Predestination preceede the foresight of sin.

How can you now purge your selves of blasphemy, whereof you stand indicted, in
making God Author and cause of sin? especially being convicted thereof by so
many express testimonies of your own principale Authors? To what purpose
shoald you deny with your mouth so detestable a doctrine, since it lies still
at your heart, and since your writings, which you should have waighed in the
waightes of the Sa^ctuarie, ought rather to win credit the^ your words? For
if not to avouch ones crime, were a sufficient means to be purged of it, there
would none be found criminal, though they stood convicted of the fact.

What will you say to this? that our senses deceive us? and that we see what is
not? we appeal to your own eyes, which I dare be bold to say will aggree with
ours, if you will please to take the pains to open the^ and look upon your
book, to see therein the passages which I have most faithfully coted.

You will say peradventure that their meaning is only that God is cause of
sin, not that he is Author thereof. But this answer is no defense for you,
since your Doctors do say again and again that he is Author of sin,
either in express terms, or in words equivalent. Add, that though there is
indeed a difference betwixt these words, Author and cause, in that the one
does signify more then the other, Author signifying a first cause, which does
move of it self; yet light you of nothing which can free you from crime, since
it it is blasphemy not only to make God Author of sin, but even to hold
him to be the cause thereof.

You say that when yours do make God the Author and cause of sin, they
speak of the act, not of the malice of sin? But you cannot have recourse to
this answer, because you use this reduplication, sin as sin, tearming him
cause of the evil of saulte (mali culpae) and making him the fountain whence
flows the efficacy of error. What have you then to reply? That though you
deliver in your writings that God is Author of sin, yet do not you believe
it? you will not gain credit in this nether: and again, which is yet worse,
it is a part of the Devil and his disciples, whose aim is the destruction of
souls, to speak one thing and believe another in matter of salvation. You
condemn in one place what you profess in another: or rather, you blush, upon
some occasions, to make that good, which you are not ashamed to believe at all
times. Endeavor your utmost, you shall never be able to persuade, even the most
ignorant that those truths, which you miscall calumnies in your writings, are
calumnies indeed: for every one will easily discover, that if there be any
calumny, and injury, it is that which you impose upon the Saints, the B.
Virgin, Jesus Christ, good works, God him self. Which calumnies and injuries
do indeed make your religion odious; for which yet you can justly blame none
but yourselues: seeing it is evident: that you are so far from refuting those
blasphemies by your writings, sermons, and lives; that contrariewise your
writings, preachings, and lives do teach them.

In this extreamitie, and being reduced into these straights, whither are you
to betake your selves; certes, if you stand to your word, you are to depart out
of humane society, and to retire your selves into same corner of the world not
yet inhabited.

Yet if you will please to let me have credit with you, you shall do yet
beter. You shall accnowledge your fault, forsake your errors; and then in
steed of seperating your selves from the society of men, the Church shall
receive you again into the society of her children which you abandoned, and
in which only salvation is to be found.

CHAP. VIII.
MINIST.
But principally we could make known to your Majesty, that we are hated, and
hardly dealt withal, because we maintain the dignity of your crown against
usurping strangers, who do defile, and bring it into slavery. For your
Majesty may call to mind, that in the late assembly of the states at Paris,
the question was handled whether the Pope Could depose our kings, and whether
it is in the Popes prower to dispose of your crown: and that by the faction of
the Churchmen, who drew a long with them a part of the Nobility, you lost
your cause. Whereupon the Pope dispatched unto them letters triumphant and full
of praise. A thing which we, and diverse of your Catholic Roman subjects would
never endure, knowing that we owe our lives and fortunes, to the defense of the
dignity of your crown: especially to the defense of a right which God
bestows upon your Matie and which is grounded upon his word. Hopeing that one
day, God will open your eyes to discover, that under this specious name of
Roman Church, the Pope does establish unto him self a temporal Moniarchie
upon earth, and has withdrawn from your obedience the fifth part of your
subjects, to wit, the Church men, who hold not themselves to belyable to the
laws of your Court, yea for their temporallities, they have another whom they
accnowledge sovereign out of your kingdom. To which add, that which the Pope
pretends, and that which he has already practiced, yea even in our time, to
wit, that he has authority to deprive your Ma. of life and crown, what
remaynes, dread souueraigne, but that your kingdom is held in homage to the
Pope and that you live and reign at his discretion only.

ANSWER.
It is an old trike of craft, when one is guilty of a fault, to put it upon
another. Yet I stand astonishd to think how you dare make use of if it,
against the whole Clergy of this kingdom. whom you strive to make the king
suspect: accusing them of faction, whereof they are wholly innocent, and you
generally known to be stickers in.

The nature of your Ministry deptines you of credit in point of accusing
priests, for S. Augustine Hareticorum accusationes co^tra Catholicum prebyterum
admittere nec possum^^. nec debemm.
does teach us, that your accusations nether ought to be, nether indeed can be
admitted; and that it is the trike of heretics Aug. Epist. 137. Hoeretici non
hahendo quod in causa sua defensionis defendant, non nisi hominu^ crimina
colligere affectant, and ea ipsa plurafalsissime iactant, vt quia ipsam divine
scripturae veritatem qua vbique diffusa Christi Ecclesia commendatur, crimiuari
and obscurate non possunt, homines per ques pradicatur, adducant in odium, de
quib^^ and fingere quitquid in mentem Generit possunt.
when they have nothing to say to defend them selves, in point of their
division from the Catholic Church, to make a list of men's faults, and
following their own fancy falsely to enlarge them selves thereupon, to bring
them into hatred who teach the truth, which they are notable to find faulty,
or to obscure.

Having already sufficiently manifested in what manner you sustained the
dignity of this crown, and how little occasion you had to draw pride or
vanity from it; I will only observe in this place, that you do too too far
swerve from truth, and modesty, in saying that you are ill used in this
kingdom: and by assuring yourselues that if you were not hated, and hardly
treated for maintayning the dignity thereof, you should for ever after be
exe^pt from all hatted, and hard usage.

To what purpose did you tax the two first Orders of State, accusing the one
of faction, the other of weakness prejudicial to the kings Majesty, but to let
the world see, that when you bear a spleen against any one, wtih a wonderful
boldness you faigne faults to diffame him, though withont all fundation: for
none can beignorant, but that, if there were any faction, it got entry by
their means, who out of time and season would needs move a question, whereof
the Church, Nobility, and the greater part of the three states strive to
stop the course; moved thereto by diverse reasons, which in a few wonds I will
deduce.

First, because the question being merely spiritual, whether God had given
power to the Church to depose kings, in cases of heresy and in fidelity, when
they do not only make profession of them; but do also show the^ selves
persequutours of the name of Christ and the true faith: as also whether this
power did aggree with the word of God, or no; final whether it were lawful to
urge all the people to take an oath, whereby they should affirm that it was not
according to Gods word? which being handled in the assembly: a body composed
of lay-persons, could not intermeddle in it without sacrilege, without
intrenching upon the liberties of others; mounting into Moses his chair;
laying hand upon the incensoir, and consequently, without exposing themselves
to the desasters, which are wont to follow such impious and sacrilegious
enterprises. Nay even the Clergy it self, of a particular Church, as of the
Church of France could not decide this point, since it belongs to the
universal Church only, to define Articles of Faith.

Secondly, because all the kings and states in Christendom, having interest in
this cause, one only kingdom could not judge of it, without the appouall and
authority of all the rest.

Thirdly, because the holy Sea being interressed in this matter, your adherents
who have sworn its destruction, and who esteem the ruin thereof their
establishment, could not be held impattiall judges, though some of them
endeavored to deal in it.

Fourthly, because out of the definition which you aimed at, there followed a
most evident schism by establishing an article of faith particular to the
Churches of France, not Catholic or common to the universal Church, whence
there followed a division in faith.

Lastly, because the decision of this question, was not only of no effect to
the health and security of kings (which was yet the sole end of the question)
but was even prejudicial unto them, as may be seen by that which that great
Cardinal and honor of his age, wrote upon that subject, who does most amply
handle this matter, with eloquence equal to the profunditie of learning, which
all the world admires in him. These reasons being considered without passion,
will leave no doubt in any man but that the Clergymen were worthy of praise
not of blame, for refusing to decide a question, which was proposed unto them
to a bad end; nor did the decision thereof belong unto them. And therefore it
carries no color, but is quite contrary to truth, to accuse them of faction,
adding, that they, and a part of the nobility, made the king loose his cause.
For how do you not blush for shame to affirm this, since it is notorious to
the word, that in all the articles of the Clergy, and nobility, there was no
proposition made, much less any determination, of any thing that tends in any
the least measure to the diminution of the sovereign power of our kings, and
the dignity of their crown: and that the article presented by the advice of
some of the third order was only rejected, without ever deliberating upon the
contents thereof? it is a gross impertinence to say that we caused the king to
loose a cause, where no judgment was past and to make his Majesty a party in
a cause where he only interposed himself, by his authority to conserve
things in the same state, in which they stood. If any were cast in their
cause, it is you, who under pretext of maintayning the authority of kings,
would have brought inn a schism amongst Catholics.

As for the letters which the Pope wrote upon this matter, if it be a fault in
a father to write to his children to receive their fathers letters, his holiness
is blameworthy to have done that honor to the two orders whereof we speak,
and they culpable in receiving them: Marry seeing common sense does teach us
that there is nothing in all this which is not most convenient, you wrong us in
vpbrading us with it, and in striving to bring our holy Father into hatred, as
though forsooth, by virtue of that letter, he would have made some advantage
over this state, which is altogether ridiculous.

Your strife in this, is, to make the Popes power be suspected by all the kings
of the earth: But regal dignity, and the dignity of the Church have noe
repugnancie, the duties which we render to the holy Sea do no ways hinder us
to make appear by effects what you profess in words: to wit, that a subject
owes his life and all his fortunes to the defense of the dignity of his king's
crown. In this, you shall continually have us not for companions only, but
even for Guides. And doubtless if you second us, as I beseech God grant, and
give credit unto us, France shall conserve her peace which hitherto has been
too much troubled by yours.

But with what face can you affirm that the Pope has the thirds of the the
territories of France; that he has seduced the fifth part of the knigs subjects
from their obedience to him? and that out of the kingdom we have another
sovereign in point of temporalities?

It is false that the Pope has the third part of France, seeing he has only
the County of Amgnion, which his Predecessors bought of the Counts of that
Province. It is false that he withdrew the Clergy from their obedience to
their king: since they preach obedience unto and will preach it all the days of
their life, in word, and work. It is false that we do not esteem our selves
the kings subjects: since in subjection to him we are ready to spend our
lives for his service. It is false that we did not submitt our selves to
temporal jurisdiction, as though, to pretend exemptions in certain cases, by
the concession and grant of our Princes, whose authority is in question, were
to franchise our selves from their jurisdiction; and to enjoy a benefit
(granted by a king) in virtue of his Grant, were not rather an accnowledgment
of his authority then a withdrawing from it. It is false that we accnowledge
any other sovereign in our temporalls, then our king.

It is false that the Pope pretends to have authority to put kings to death.
False that he practiced this pretended power: false that he holds this kingdom
to be a fief which holds on, and owes homage to his chair false to conclud,
that the king lives but at his discretion.

Kings would be immortal, if their conservation depended upon Popes, who wish
their good, as parents the good of their children. Why did he who to the great
happiness of all Christen dome, sits now in the chair of Peter, The censure of
January 1613.
cause Becanus to be censured, who had put out seditious propositions, and with
all importing danger to kings, but to provide for their safety? Why did he
approve that the Clergy of France in the assembly of the states, and that
Sorbone at other times, did renew the publication of the article of the
Council of Constance, which pronunceth a curse upon those that do attempt
upon kings, unless their lives were as dear to him as his own?

You pass over these truths in oblivion, and not without reason, seeing they
discover to all men, that it is false to affirm, that the Popes, and Clergy
of France, do not affect the kings prosperity; they do, and will always do
in such a measure, that the Pope will not omit to endeavor any thing which
may tend to their good; nor will the Clergymen of France ever spare their
own lives, to assure the life of their saueraigne. If accusations were enough
to make a man culpable, none would be found without fault: innocence would
not be exempt. You are bold in laying aspersions, but that which is your
disgrace, is, that you fall short in your proofs. You make us criminal in
point of our duty toward our France, while to you she stands bound for
benefits: as though forsooth, her defense were only found in your hands: and
your weapons were her warrant against the usurpations of strangers. You do
wisely to term them strangers, least your own enterprises might be
comprised, which are so frequent and palpable that the weakest wit will with
facility deserne, that it is not your affection to your king which makes you
so zealous of their greatness but your hatred to the Pope, and the universal
Church.

And that it may not seem that I impose upon you, I will make clearly appear,
that you grant a far greater power to the people, then that which you deny the
Pope, which is exceedingly disaduantagious to kings: for there is no man that
does not esteement a thing far more perilous, to be exposed to the discretion
of the rude multitude, which does easily, though falsely, esteem it self
oppressed, and which is a many headed Hyder which is ordinarily governed by its
own passions, then to be subject to the correction, of a tender Father, whose
heart is full of affection, for his childrens advantage.

The common people, Lib. de iure regni. Popule ius est de sceptro regni
disponends pro libito suo.
says Bucanan, (whom Epist. 78.
Beza accnowledgeth to be excellent, and a man of great merit) have right to
dispose of the scepters of kingdoms at their will and pleasure. Bad Princes,
says an In Apolog. Godman.
English man who was Epist. 306.
Caluins intimate friend, and whom he called brother, according to the Law of
God, ought to be deposed; and in case the Magistrates neglect to do their
duty, the people has also as free liberty to do it as though there were no
Magistrate at all; and in those circunstances of time, God enlarges them with
leave to use the sword, Goodman in Apolog. Reges ius regnandi a populo habent
qui occasion data illud re^ocare potest.
The same Author in the reign of Marie Queen of England, composed a book,
entitled of obedience, printed at Geneua, approved by Beza and Calvin, wherein
these words are found. Kings have right to reign from the people; who upon
accasion can also revoke it.

Nor are you content with saying that kings may be deposed, you step on
further, teaching that they may be punished, condemned, and slain. That a
reward is to be given to the executioners of so horrible and execrable crimes.

The People, says Vvicklefs followers, as Osiander in Epist. centur. art. 17.
Vulgus provoluntate sua punire potest principes peccantes.
Osian relates, may, as they shall please, punish their Princes which offend.
The Goodman in Apolog. Protestant.
book whereof I made mention above, printed at Geneua, in the Reign of Queen
Marie of England, says, that if Magistrates transgress the law of God, and
oblige others to do the like, they fall from the dignity, and obedience which
otherwise is due unto them, and ought no more to be reputed Magistrates: but
are to be accused, examined, and condemned. The people, says Bucan. de iure
regni populus principem in ius capitis vocare. potest.
Bucanan, have power to judge of the life of kings. It were to be wished, Lib.
de iure regni. Optandum est vt praemia a plebe decernantur iis qui tyrannos
occiderint, vt fierisolet iis qui lupos caedunt.
says he again, that rewards were appointed for such as kill tyrants, as we
are wont to do to those that kill woolues.

But what form do you observe in these depositions? None at all. What
respite do you allow kings that are to be deposed by the people to recant?
None at all. In your opinion they depose themselves, when they behave
themselves otherwise then they ought: so that the people are only to oppose
themselves and rise up against them.

The kings of the earth, says in 6. Dan. v. 22. and 25. Abdicant se potestate
terreni principes, cum insurgu^e contra Deum immo indigni sunt qui in numero
hominu^ censeantur ideoque in capita potius little compuere oportet quam illis
parere.
Call, do deprive themselves of power when they make head against the king of
heaven. Yea they are unworthy to be numbered amongst men, and therefore we are
rather to spitt in their faces then to obey them. If Princes, says a Rnoxus
que^ Galuinus epist. 305. virum insignem, eximium virum, and ex animo colendum
fratrem. Beza ep. 74. Euangelij apud Scotos restauratore^, quem test Vvitakero
co^ trou 2. quaest. 5. cap. 13. Scoti omnes testantur fuisse spiritu prophetico
and Apostolico praeditum, in admonitione ad Angliam and Scotiam, si Principes
aduersus Deum ac veritatem eius tyrannice se gerant, subditi eorum a iuramento
fidelitatis absoluuntur.
scottish man, whom Calvin terms an excellent man, Beza, the restorer of the
Gospel in scotland: whom all the scots, as Vvitakere relates, esteemed to have
the spirit of prophecy: If Princes, says this famous personage in your
judgment, govern tyrannically against God and his truth, his subjects are
absolved from their oath of fidelity.

But what cause is sufficient to depose a king according to your doctrine?
Only religion? no, not that only but many other more; their wicked life;
their vices. No man, says Apud Osiand. in epiton^ centur. 9. Nullus est
Dominus ciuilis, nullus est Praelatus, nullus est Episcopus dum est in peccato
mortali.
Vviclef, is a temporal Lord, none a Prelate, none Bishope, when he is in
mortal sin. In explan. art. 42. Principes quan^^ perside and extra regulam
egerint, possunt eum Deo depo ^i.
It is lawful to depose Princes, says Suinglius, when they do disloyally
transgress the rule of Jesus Christ, which he thinks they do as he himself
confesses, if they Cum seelerates prouehit and innouios praegrauat, vt cum
inutiles ventres, otiosos sacrificos defendit (Princeps.)
advance the wicked, oppress the innocent, and defend the idle sacryficers, to
wit Catholics, as is to be noted.

I could prove out of a multitude of authors, what is your sense in this
behalf; which pains I would willingly undertake if that which you teach upon
this subject were as aduantagious as prejudicial unto you: I will only inuit
the Reader to see a book in titled, the Protestants Apology, one of the most
profitable, that has been printed these many years, where he will find far
more passages upon this subject, amongst the rest some which do verify, that
your Authors have written, that it is lawful by divine and humane law to kill
impious kings; that it is a thing conformable to the word of God, that a
private man by special instinct may lawfully kill a Tyrant; a most detestable
doctrine in every point, which will never enter into the thoughts of the
Catholic Church.

This is not yet all. Having now seen what you, deliver touching the
deposition of kings: we must also see by your actions how you behave your
selves toward them.

Since your etrours were brought into the world by Luthere and Calvin, you
have let no occasion slipe where you could make use of your pretended power, in
which you have not done it. You put an army a foot against Charles the V.
(whom by way of derision you instiled Charles of Gant) to trouble him in his
Dominions, Surius ann, 1547.
and to deprive him of dominion. You have borne arms against three kings of
France Francis the II. Charles the IX. Henry the III. in the reign of Charles
the IX. you coined money in the name of another, to whom you gave the name of
king. Du Chesne in the history of England under Elizabeth and Marie.
How did you use Marie Queen of Scotland? did you not make her captive? Did
you not, in prison, cause her to renounce her royal dignity? Did you not
thrice take up arms against Marie Queen of England? Did you not set up a
pretended Queen against her? Did not oue of yours attempt upon her royal
person? Jane borne up by the Duke of Northumberland.


In Flanders you dispoyled Philippe king of Spain of a part of his Provinces.
Christiernus, Surius.
king of Denmark, was by yours dispossessed of his crown, driven out of his
kingdom, afterward clapped in prison, where, following the opinion of the
times, the days of his life were abridged by poison. Sigismond, who at this
day reigns in Polonie sees himself deprived of the crown which appartaynes
unto him by right of inheritance, and which his father did peacably possess,
his uncle who was of your profession, being put up into his place by your men.
You usurped, upon the Emperor Rodolphus the last deseased, Transsiluania,
which he possessed by just title as king of Hongarie. And all this following
the example of your predecessor Calvin, who cannot endure the Bishope of
Geneua, I will not say in quality of Bishope only, but even in the nature of
temporal Prince?

Whosoever shall read the histories, wherein what I speak is contained, shall
see that in one age you disturbed two Emperors; acctually spoiled one king:
excluded another out of his kingdom, deposed one Queen, made war against
another to bereeue her of her crown, bore arms against four kings; deposed
other temporal Princes: put a king to death: brought a virtuous and wise
Queen into captivity, who had power to enlarge others with liberty; whom in
conclusion, violating divine and humane laws, you put to death, after a most
inhumane and incompassionate manner.

CHAP. IX.
MINISTERS.
TO bring more light and evidence unto this matter, we must give your Majesty
to understand, that you nourish in your kingdom a faction of men, who call
themselves companions of Jesus, as though it were too ^itle to be his
disciples, who have made an oath of blind obedience, and that without reserve,
to the head of their order, who is, and always was subject to the king of
spain: who were condemned by your Courts of Parliament, as enemies of your
state, of the lives of kings, and corrupters of youth: who teach the people,
that the Pope has power to depose kings, to cause them to be slain, and to
transport their crowns to others. That they are not to detect conspiracies
against the king, which they hear in confession: and that being attached they
may use equivocation before the Judge. Whence effects have sprung pernicious
to France, and to all Christendom. Vvherpon their books put out by the
public approbation of the General of their Order together with a good
quantity of Jesuit Docteurs, were by the Decree of the Court publikly burnt
by the common executioner. And if your Majesty will daigne to inform himself,
he shall find in the Jesuit College of Flesche founded by the bounty of the
king your Father of most glorious memory, he shall find I say in the Fathers
low hall a great Picture, wherein are represented the Martyrs of their Order,
amongst whom some are found who were put to death, for having enterprised the
death of their kings; and that this punishment is there called martyrdom: and
this is placed in the view of a multitude of youths to induce them by their
examples, to attain to the glory of Martyrdom by the same means. And yet
even those men, without having made any retractation, or public declaration
whereby to condemn such books and such doctrine, have at this day the ears of
our kings, they search the secrets of their consciences, and have freest
access to their royal personns.

ANSWER.
GOd's goodness is so great that ordinarily he does convert, the evil which is
intended against his friends, to their benefit. Your aim is to hurt the
Jesuits, and you do them great service: since all men will confess that it
is a great glory unto them, to be blamed with the same mouth, which does
accuse the Catholic Church; reiects good works; calumniates the saints;
iniures Jesus Christ; yea makes even God himself blameworthy. It is a thing
truly whichmakes greatly to their advantage, we see it by experience: for so
much as, besides the considerations which ought to make all men esteem them,
diverse do love them particularly, because you hate them.

Let us see the crimes which you lay to their charge. You say, they call
themselves the companions of Jesus Christ: what proof do you bring to make
this good? you will say that to call ones self of the company of Jesus, is,
to make themselves the companions of Jesus: but your consequence is
impertinent: for to be said to be of the company of a Prince, no other thing
is required then to be one of his followers: marry to be said to be his
companion much more is requisite. False therefore it is that the Jesuits term
themselves the Companions of Jesus Christ, though they be said to be of his
company. Wherein they do nothing worthy of reprehension, since the words of
the Apostle, 1. Cor. 1. v. 9. 1. Joan. 1. v. 3.
you are called into the society of his son; and those of saint John, let
our society be with the Father and his son Jesus Christ, are not only to be
understood of those to whom they are spoken, but of all Christians in
general, who follow the faith and doctrine of Jesus Christ.

But how is it sufferable, that the Reverend Ministers should blame the
Jesuits, as though they called themselves the Companions of Jesus, while they
assume to themselves, that title which they blame for arrogant. Certainly you
have forgotten your Catechism, 6. Sunday.
where speaking of Jesus Christ you say in plane terms, we are Companions of
his priesthood. And it appears planly that you begin to neglect Calvin by
reason of the multitude of blasphemies, whereof his works are convinced: for if
you had read him, you had observed without doubt, that it being said in the
second of S. Peter, Cap. 1. v. 4.
that we are partakers of the divine nature; he made us fellows of Christ in
the eternity of life. You would also have noted him where he says, that Calu.
in Coloss. 1. v. 24.
Paul was Christ's companion; that Christ In Mar. 13. v. 43.
promised the thief that he would make him his fellow-partner of eternal
life: In Hebra. 2. v. 13.
that we are all fellows to the son of God, that the 3. Instit. c. 18.. 1.
Elect are taken into the fallow shipe of Christ, yea of God too. ibid. c. 17. 6
Or if you had been conversant in Luth postillain Domin. 5. post Pascha.
Luthere, certainly you would have fallen upon these words: Through Jesus
Christ we are made equal and brothers to him, to wit, to God.

The Jesuits say you, make an oath of blind obedience, and that without all
exception. If you were not your selves blind, you would see that a vow of its
own nature contaynes an exception of all that may be prejudicial to kings:
for seeing all vows have good for their object, a man cannot oblige himself
by vow to do any thing contrary to the law of God, the Decrees of the
Church, obedience due to the king, and love to our neighbors. If you had
diligently read the Fathers, you would have learnt that the obedience, which
you call blind, is not subject to blame, since they teach that a true religious
ought to have it. So says Basil in co^stit. Mon. c. 23. Quamadmodu^ igitur
Pastori suo oues obtemperant and viam qua^cunque vult, ingrediuntur: sic qui ex
Deo pietatis cultores sunt, moderatoribus sins obsequi debent, nihil omnino
iussa eoru^ curiosius perscrutantes quando libera sunt a peccaco, etc. Item, vt
Faber singulis aertis instrumentis pro arbitrio vtitur suo, neque vnquam vllum
enuentum est instrume^tum quod ad que^cumque vsum elle voluisset non se facile
tracta^du^ praebuerit, etc.
S. Basile teaching that it is not the part of a true religious to examine his
Superious command, so long as he does not oblige him to sin; and he
compares him to a sheep, which goes which way the Pastor pleases; and to an
instrument which never resistes his will that uses it. So Bernard. Tract. de
pracepto and dispensat c. 9. Perfecta obedientia legem nescit, terminis non
arctatur -- largiori voluntate fertur in altitudinem charitatis, etc.
S. Bernard, saying, perfect obedience knows no laws no limines, but is
carried with a full will into the depth of charity; to all that is commanded.
So S. Hieron. epist. 4. ad Rustic. c. 4. credas tibi salutare quicquid
praepositus praeceperit, nec. de maiorum sententiae iudices.
saint Hierome, when he says, be confident that all that thy Superior
commands thee is wholesome for thee; and take not upon thee to judge the
commands. of thy betters. Finally, so Greg. l. 2. c. 4. in 1. Regum. Vera
obedientia nec Praepositorum intentionem discutit. nec praecepta discernit,
quia qui omne vitae suae iudicium maiori subdidit, in hoc solo gaudet, si quod
sibi praecipitur operatur. Nescit enim iudicare. quisquis perfecle didiceris
obedire.
sainc: Gregory, in these terms, That true obedience does nether examine the
intention of Superiors, nor discern their commands, because he that has
submitted all the judgment of his whole life to one greater then himself,
has no fairer way then to execute what he is commanded; and he that has
learnt perfect obedience, knows not how to judge. Therefore the Jesuits are
not to be blamed for making and observing a vow, which the Fathers of the
primitive Church do not only approve, but even ordain as a thing necessary
for religious people.

You say further that they promis this blind obedience to a General who is
always subject to the king of Spain. If you had informed your selves well of
the truth of the business, you had learnt, that it is false that their Generals
are, ought to be, or were always such: for even Father Vitelesque who at this
present is deservedly possessed of that charge; is a Roman borne, and the last
before him who lately deceased, was a Liegois.

Next, you vpbraid them with the Decrees which were made against them: but it
is sufficient that they were restored and established by the Edict of Henry the
Great, approved by all the Courts of Parliament in France. Which does
sufficiently justify the zeal of this order toward kings, the affection
thereof toward the state, and the profit which youths reap of the care they
take to instruct them.

Concerning their doctrine in point of power, which they attribute to Popes
over kings; you had spoken otherwise and more to the purpose, if instead of
gathering it out of the writings of some particular men, you had received it
from the mouth of their General who in the year 1610. made a public
declaration, whereby he does not only improve, and disallow, but absolutely
prohibit those of his Order, under most grievous pains, to maintain, upon
what pretext of tyranny soever, that it is lawful to attempt upon the persons
of kings and Princes.

As touching the secret of confession, I have not yet understood that they
hold any other opinion, then that which the universal Church holds. But it
is no wonder, since you quarrel with the Sacrament, that you employ all your
craft, to make this become odious; thereby to hinder them (whom you hold your
enemies, because you are the enemies of Gods Church) from having access to
kings persons, and from the knowledge of secrets of their consciences, whereat
you aim, as the last words of your paragrafe do testify.

As for the Equivocations which you say they use, and teach others to use
before their Judges, I refer you to the Answers which they so often have
returned you upon this subject: it shall suffice me only to show, that blaming
equivocation in in them, you practice it your selves; nay even most manifest
lies in matter of faith.

Vvicklef, In the 2. book, on the life of ^videf.
by whom, your french Martyrologe says, it pleased God to awake the world
which was buried in the dream of humane traditions, being demanded an account
of his faith, did not he and his use tergiuersations, if we may credit your
said Martyrologe, who speaks of them in these words? Striving only to find
out tergiuersations, and frivolous excuses, thereby to escape through ambiguitie
of words. Did not your Augustana Confessio use equivocation when it said? Cap
de Missa.
Our Churches were falsely accused of abolishing Mass; for we do yet retain
Mass, and celebrate it with greatest reverence. Did not Melancton use
equivocation, Apud Hospiman, part. 2. hister. an. 25 41.
when he did confess that he and his, had made the Articles, at Asbroug
ambiguous and easy to be turned? To what end does he say, that the Articles
made at Asbroug were to be changed, and to be suited to occasions, if he
condemn equivocation? They framed ambiguous and guilefull forms of
Transsubstantiation, says Calvin, Epist. 12.
speaking of him and Bucere. He endeavored, says Chauaterus, to setle a
certain concord in an ambiguous kind of speech, An. 1538.
meaning Bucere. We have met with a confessing adversary. For he himself
teaches upon Erasmus: that it is lawful in the affairs of the Gospel to use
colors and clockes. Bucere therefore and his fellows, when they grant to
Luthere that the body of Christ is truly and substantially in the Eucharist;
and also that the unworthy do receive it, do they not without compulsion for
their own pleasure, yea and even in matter of faith, use tergiuersatio^s and
equivocations? Does not the same say that the Zuinglians differe from Luther
(though indeed it is false) but in words only? Hospinian, part. 1. hist.
Sacram.
Does not Luther upon this occasion term him a sower of words? as says
Hospiniane? (...).
Do not the same Hospiniane, and Simblerus swethish authors, relate, that
Martyr did use for a time obscure and ambiguous words, in the matter of the
last supper? In a word: your Authou^s confess, that your invisible Church for
the space of many ages, did profess our religion, though with heart and mouth
they believed yours: which they could not do, not only not without
equivocation, but even not without denying God. And yet where is any of ours,
who does not accnowledge that he is rather a thousand times to die, then to use
equiuacatio^ in matter of Faith: or to deny him not only in heart, but even in
word, whom we are bound to confess with both?

Touching their books, if cortaine particular men composed any which were
burnt: what need you to stir in their ashes? Do not the same Decrees which
adjudged them to the fire, judge many of yours worthy of the same flames, since
they handle the same argument?

The picture which you mention, cannot any way advantage you, since you and
they aggree not in the fact: for they sustain, that he whom you esteem
convicted of a conspiracy against his king, is wholly innocent of the fact, and
hold that he dyed for the sole defense of the Catholic religion. Whence in
comes to pass, that if there be any error in this, it is error of fact (de
facto) not of right (non de iure) of Fact, as believing he dyed for his virtue,
not for his vice: not of right, as though they sustained that it were lawful
to murder kings; and that to suffer death for that cause, were martyrdom.

Now to conclud this Chapter, it only remaynes, that we beseech God, to shewre
down upon you the waters of the fountains of his Grace, because, being the
nature of calumny to obscure and blacken its own authors, not him, whom they
would, but cannot stayne with it, you stand in so much need of washing, that
all the waters of this world are not able to blanch you.

CHAP. X.
MINISTERS.
THese are they (dread Sovereign) who to advance their private designs, do
stir up tumults and scandalls against us, to cloak their own proceedings,
and to the end that the troubles which they make arise, may be imputed to their
Zeal of religion: for they cannot endure a king, though otherwise Roman
Catholic, unless he turn Persequutour of his subjects; and cause a
combustion in his kingdom.

ANSWER.
IT is a great sign of ignorance or malice, when he, to whom a benefit is
done, does publish that he has received an injury.

You complain of the Jesuits, and yet you receive nothing but good offices of
them: for it is manifest that that wherein you apprehend your selves injured by
them, is only, that they oppose your belief, which indeed is to your great
advantage. Saint Augustine does teach us, August. in Psalm. 30. Goncil. 1.
that by how much more we seek the saltation of heretics, by so much the more
we ought to place before their eyes the vanity of their errors. The ^esuites
have no other design, then the salvation of souls, and Gods glory. All the
means which they use, are referred to this end, not to tayse tumultes, to
cause scandalls. To labor to reduce you into the bosom of the Church, is this
to stir up troubles? To confirm the king in his belief, is it to move him
to persequute you? To inuit you to quench the fire, which one day will consume
your souls, call you this to set his kingdom on fire? The hurt man hates the
surgeon, while he is yet lancing his leg: but his hurt being healed his
accnowledgments follow the beloved surgeon. So one day, I hope, you will laud
the Jesuits, since now you only complain of them, because they affect your
wellfaire, and strive to procure your salvation. They desire peace in this
kingdom, and in your consciences. In which they differ far from yours, who
take a glory in troubles and tumults, conceauing the fairest fishing to be in
troubled waters.

You will say peraduentures that I miss the mark of truth: but to free my
self of that imputation, Luther. loc. cemm. class. 5. ^u quereris quod per
Eua^gelium nostru^ mundus tumultuatur. Respondeo, Deo gratias, baec voluifieri,
and o me misevum sinon ta^^^ fierent
I will engage Luthere your first father in the quarrel, assuring my self that
in the judgment of all the world, nor he nor you shall ever come off with your
honor: Thou complainst, says Luthere, that by means of our Gospel all the
world is in tumult, I answer, thanks be to God, it was my wish that so it
should be: and woe be to me, if so it were not.

CHAPT. XI.
MINISTERS.
AT the least (Sovereign) they cannot serve up in our dish, that any of our
religion has killed his king; nor that any Minister of the word of God, did
either in private or public incite any to do it. But contrariwise, after so
many oppressions and persequutions, we seek no other revenge, but to pray to
God for the prosperity of such as hate us, and esteem our selves happy
enough in seeing your Majesty a peaceable and happy possessour of his
kingdom.

ANSWER.
I Am constrained against my will to omit that which concerns your religion,
to examine that which touches your persons. My aim in this, is to please you,
by answering you point by point, which of my self I had never undertaken, for
fear of displeasing you.

I will pass over in silence to your confusion what Christiernus king of
Denmark, and Marie Queen of Scots suffered by yours: nor will I speak of the
conspiracies made against king Francis the II. at Amboyle, and against king
Charles the IX. at Meaux, and others which are more ancient, I will only
insiste upon that which past in the person of the greatest king that ever was
seduced by your error.

Is it not to will to kill a king to strugle with him, and hurl him down upon
the ground, as Gourrie did in Scotland treat the king of great Britanie, whom
he reduced to such an extreamitie, that his sole courage of mind and fortitude,
together with Gods assistance, conserved him alive? Will you dare to say that
the condemnation of my Lord Gobans brother was unjust, who was convicted of
making an attemptvpon this sacred person? These two examples do clearly
confirm, that such as have taken the tincture of your errors, do attempt
upon kings. Yet if you be not satisfied with this proof, cast your eyes, I
beseech you, upon the Epistle monitorie of this great king, of whom we speak,
you shall sind there, how speaking of the puritaines of his kingdom, who are
Caluinists like you, he says, I have not only ever since my birth been vexed
continually with Puritanes, but I was even almost stifled by them in my mothers
womb, before I had yet seen the world. And in the next leaf; I would rather
trust my self in the hands of the robbers of the wild mountains, or to
borderers, then to that sort of men. Of whom he says again in his kingly
Present, that during his mmoritie, they would have brought on foot a
dimocrasie in his kingdom; that they calumniated him in their sermons, not for
any harm they found in him, but even because he was king.

What will you say to these authorities? you dare not call them in doubt. Nor
indeed does Moulins, The R. Father Coeffeteau.
writing upon this subject against one of the most learned and famous religious
men of his age, deny them. It is manifest therefore that yours do attempt upon
the lives of kings. It would yet remain to be shown whether it were done upon
the instigation of those that do exercise your ministry, if the testimonies
which I have already produced, were not sufficient, if any shame be left in
you, to cause, as well your blush, as silence upon this subject.

CHAP. XII.
MINISTERS.
NOw, that which moved us to make these our humble complaints to your Majesty
was the last action of Monsieur Arnould Jesuit, who openly braged in his
sermon, in your Majesty's presence, that he would undertake to show that all
the places coted in our Confession of Faith, are falsely cited: Your Majesty
had thereupon a laudable curiosity, to hear him deduce his proofs upon this
subject: which he did in his ensuing sermon, in words which tended to make us
odious, and execrable to your Majesty, condemning himself to eternal flames,
and to undergo all sorts of punishments, if he did not clearly show that all
that is coted in the margent of our confession touchnig our controversies, are
false allegations: seconding that with many odious words, and proposing the
example of the Princes of Germany, who do only allow of one religion in
their contries: yea not content her withal, he has put down his proofs in
writing, and delivered them unto a gentleman of our religion, to bring them
unto us.

ANSWER.
SInce Every man understands his own business best, I have nothing to say upon
this paragrafe which touches F. Arnould, he having in his reply answered it
himself, only this I will say, he that knows his merits, learning, Zeal,
and moderation of mind, will easily judge him to be a man of greater
performance, then undertaking, and more prone to render your souls grateful
to God, then your persons hateful to men.

CHAP. XIII.
MINISTERS.
THis, Sovereign Lord, did oblige us to make answer: for this confession
having been made to give an account of our faith to our Sovereigns, and to
that effect being presented to king Henry the II. your predecessor: we thought
fit to address the Defense of the same confession to his successor, in whose
presence it was calumniated. And I wish to God we were licenced, to propose our
defense verbally in the presence of your Majesty, and were authorized publikly
and in presence of the king which God has bestowed upon us, to mantayne, the
truth of the Gospel, against those that do diffame it: which is a thing which
your Majesty ought also to desire. For seeing a dissension amongst your
subjects in point of religion, what is more convenient then that he who is the
common father of us all, should know in what the difference consistes, and see
the ground of the process? and to this effect he should look to the head of
the fountain, to discover what Christian religion was in its source. For he
that is established on earth, to see that God be served, ought exactly to know
the rule of Gods service: he who in his charge represents God's royalty, ought
in his actions to imitate his justice: which how can it be done without knowing
the sovereign rule of Justice, which is the word of God? Vvher upon it is that
God commands kings continually to have before their eyes the book of the law,
therein to read all the days of their life. But if they permit themselves to
be hood winked, and be content to follow without seeing the way before them,
the Popes and Prelates have fair occasion to accommodate religion to their
private lucre, and crect their own greatness, upon the ruins of the Gospel.
For now religion is made a trafike, and those our great Masters have invented
rules of piety, which does entrench not only upon the living but even upon
the dead. To no other end have the Popes, for some ages past, probibited the
kings your Majesty's Predecessors to read the holy Scripture, but that their
Empire is grounded upon the ignorance of Gods word. Never had it been permitted
to have grown so great, with the diminution of the greatness of our Kings, if
they had not wrought upon the advantage of an obscure age, wherein few people
discovered their design. He could not have made himself sovereign Judge in
points of faith, if the people had had the rule of faith before their eyes,
which God long ago pronounced with his own mouth.

ANSWER.
IT is a great art in him that is feable and fearful to feign himself bold
and valourous, you put a good face upon it, and bear it boldly, to make the
world believe that you have a great desire to appear before the king; to make
good in his presence, and in public, the truth of your new Gospel. Your words
which sound no other thing but a chalance, whereby you provoke all the Clergy
of France to a public disputation, makes me call to mind the Trojan whereof
mention is made in Homere, Iliad. 7
who boldly provoked to combat, marry when it came once to blows, he stood
in need of a cloud to cover his flight, and shame.

We could with facility, if we pleased, refuse to give you battle, without
the disadvantage of our dishonor, or affording you occasion of complaint: For
Luther does sustain, that we are not to dispute with such as renew old
heresies which were long ago condemned. But we will not proceed so rigorously
with you; the Church of France, by Gods providence, being provided of store of
Prelates, whereof I am the least, and of an infinite number of Doctors, who
upon all occasions will make appear, the verity of her doctrine, the vanity
of your errors. The only shadow of that great Cardinal will always be able
to defeat you, for the same reason, for which the Picture of Alexander made
him quake, under whose powerful hand he had somtymes sunk to the ground.

Is it not a mere flattery to inuit a king to discern differences in
religion? Will you have princes to assume to themselves the authority of
Judges in such causes? Though you would, yet would not your brethren consent
thereto. Princes themselves have no such pretension; The Holy fathers give
testimony, and the Scriptures teach, that justly they cannot do it.

That your brethren will not have it so, they themselves shall speak: Princes,
says Bezainconfess. c. 5. art. 15. Principes Synodo intersint non vt regnent
sed vt seruia^t, non vt leges condant, sed vt ex Deiverbo per os ministrorum
explicatas and sibi and aliis obseruandas proponant.
Beza, are present in synods, not to rule, but to serve: not to inact laws,
but to propose those to be kept by themselves, and the people, which according
unto the word of God, are explicated by the mouth of the Minister. The Prince,
says Controu. 5. lib. 2. c. 18. De sensu fidei mec cognoscit Princeps, nec
cognoscere officio Principali potest.
Iunius, nether does, nor can by virtue of his charge, judge of the meaning of
faith. We say, says Controu. 1. q. 5. c. 4. Dicimus lites Ecclesiasticas
decernendas esseex lege diuina per Ministrum. Item cap. 6. Respondeo Martinum
Ecclesiae vindicare iudicium de genere doctrinae non co^cedere Imperatort, etc.
Vhitakere, that Ecclesiastical differences are to be decided by the Minister
in virtue of the divine law. In another place, I answer, that Martine does
ascribe the judgment of points of doctrine to the Church; he does not grant it
to the Emperor: and who will deny that this judgment appertaynes to ^ishopes.
Finally it belongs not to kings and Princes, to confirm even true doctrine,
but they are to be subject to, and obseruant of it, says Luthere.

That Princes do not pretend to make themselves Judges in matters of Faith,
the Apud Soz. l. 6. c. 7. Mihiquisum de sort plebis, fas non est talia
perserutari, Sacerdotibus ista curae sunt.
Emperor Valentinian does confirm in these words; It is not lawful for me,
who am of the rank of the people, to sound and search into those things: they
are committed to the Preistes care. It belongs me not, says the same as Epist.
32. no^ est mecum iudicare inter Episcopos.
S. Ambrose relates, to judge of the differences which rise amongst Bishops.
The Emperor Basilius does also intimate this when speaking to the layetie, In
8. Syn. nullo modo vobis licet de Ecclesiasticis causis sermonem mouere, haec
inuestig are and quaerere Paetriarcharum, Pontificum and Sacerdotu^ est, qui
regiminis officium sortiti sunt, and Ecclesiastic as adepti sunt claues, non
nostrum qui pasci debemus, etc.
he says, It is no way lawful for you to meddle with Ecclesiastical causes;
to sound and examine them belongs to Patriarchs, Bishopes, priests, who have
the government and keys of the Church; It appertaynes not to us who are to be
fedd, to be sanctified to be bound, unbound. Of the same sense was Constantine
in the Council of Nice Gratiane in the Coun: of Aquilea: Theodosius the
younger in the Ephesine Council; and diverse other Emperors in many other
places. In contemplation whereof Lib. 5. epist. 25. Scimus piisamos Dominus
Sarerdo^^^tous negottis non se immiscere
S. Gregory says, we know that our most pious Lords do not meddle in the
affairs of priests.

And that the Princes, if they had any such pretention were not well grounded,
S. Epist. adsolit. ^i^a^ agentes. Quandoae conatio aeuo anditum est quod
indicium Ecclesiae authoritate^ sua^ ab Imperatore accepit? Plurima antea
Synodi fucre multa iudicia Eec^esiae habitae sunt, sed neque Patres
isliusmodires principi persuadere conati sunt, nec Princeps se in
Ecclesiasticis causis curiosum praebuit.
Athanasius does witness. Was it ever heard, says he, from the creation of
the world that the judgment of the Church had authority from the Emperor?
Many Counsels have been celebrated; the Church has often past her judgment;
but nether would the Fathers persuade the Prince to any such thing, nor did the
Prince show himself curious in causes of the Clergy, and a little after, Quis
videns eum in decernendo principe^ se facere Episcoporu^ and praesidere
iudiciis Ecclesiasticis, ^^on merito di ^at eum illam ipsam desolaetione^ esse
quae a Daniele praedicta est?
who is he that seeing him (he speaks of Constantius the Arian Emperor) take
upon him to be Prince of Bishops, to decree and preside in Ecclesiastical
judgments, that will not say with just reason, that he is the desolation of
abomination foretold by the Prophet Daniel? S. Ambrose does the like, when
writing to Valentinian the younger, who being corrupted by the Arians, would
judge in matters of faith, he uses these words: Ambros. l. 2. epist. 13. Si
vel scripturaru^ se rie^ diuinaru^, vel vetera te^porae retractemus, quis
abnuat in causae inquam fidei, Episcopos solere de Imperatoribus Christianis
no^ Imperatores de Episcopis iudicare? Eris, Deofauente, etiam insenectutis
maturitateprouectior, and tunc de hoe censebis qualis ille Episcopi ^^ sit qui
I aicis ills Sacerdotale substernit.... si confere^dum de fide, Sacerdotum
debet esse istae collatio sicut fact^ est sab^ onsta^tino Augusta mem^riae I
(...) cipe. Et Tract. de Basil. non tradend Quid honorificentius quam vt
Imperator Ecclesiae filius dicatur.
If we either reflect upon the order of Scripture, or times bypast, who will
deny but that in points of faith, in points of Faith, I say, the Bishopes were
accustomed to judge of Emperors, not they of Bishops? With the help of God,
goes he on, time will ripen thee, and then you wilt judge what kind of Bishope
he is who will subject Priestly right to laymen: if a conference be to be had
of faith, it belongs to the Priests, as it happened under Constantine Prince of
sacred memory. What has an Emperor more honorable then to be styled the
son of the Church?

That that which the Fathers say herin is verified by the Scripture, the
punishment which befell those, who would needs lay hand upon the Thurible, does
confirm. Further, it would not 2. Agg. 2. v. 12.
command that things belonging to the law, should be demanded from the mouth of
the Priest. without making any mention at all of kings, if both were equally
lawful. It would not 2. Paralypom.
say, that Amarias should preside in things belonging unto God, marry in those
that apperi ayne to the office of a king Zabadias, if their Courts were not
distinguished. To conclude Ephesians. 4. v. 11.
S. Paul making a long list of those who have power in the Church, had not
begun with the Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Doctors, not mentioning
kings, if their authority had extended so far.

Again put case the king had power to meddle in such causes, would you be
content he should sit upon yours, with obligation to stand to his judgment?
Yes, even as the Donatists who appealed to Constantine, stood to his: you will
stand to it, if it favor and like you, appeal from it, if it dislike, or go
against you. God (says Whitaker. controu ^. q. 5. c. 4. Iudicium sibi Deus
reseruanit, nulli hominum permisit.
one of your prime Authors following therein the donatists) reserved the
judgment of religion to himself alone; and did not grant it to any man. why
then will you have the king to judge?

But lets see whether you have a heart to enter into the lists, as you make a
flourish. None will believe in my opinion, that he that will not admit of
ordinary weapons, has a desire to fight, though otherwise he proclaim a
loode chalance: and who knows not that in rejecting the authority of the
Church, Fathers, Counsels, and Traditions, you refuse the ordinary weapons,
which are used in combats of Faith.

But oh, you will admit of the scripture, and we also most willingly admit of
it, yet not as it is in your hands, that is, Scripture not authentical,
maimed, corrupted, interpreted according to your own brain, and most
ordinarily against the true sense: but the scripture preached and interpreted
by the Church the pillar and rock of truth, whereby we are to be delivered from
all error. Who could away with him that in a civil cause, in a difficulty
of importance, would only stand to the text of written laws, rejecting the
explication of Doctors, the credit of the history, practice and common
custom, in fine the authority of the Judges, who are appointed to do justice
to all men? But were he not yet more insupportable, who only admitting of
written laws, should reject those that are directly against him, and
interpret the rest following his own fanticie? In these terms are you,
whereby it well appears, that though you make show to desire a conference, yet
indeed you fly it; contenting your selves to have occasion to bruit abroad
amongst your friends, that you offered a disputation, concealing from them in
the interim, that you refused the just and reasonable conditions thereof;
apprehending that you have done sufficiently, in putting out some small
pampletes which decide nothing at all, nor are good for any thing but to give a
false alarm, and content such as please themselves to hear calumnies cast out
against the Church.

This moves you to cry out that Catholic religion is made a traffike, and that
Prelates entrench upon the living and the dead.

Is it to entrench upon the dead, to do that which we see has been practiced
in the primitive Church, in the time of Tert. ^l. de cer. mil. c. 3. Oblationes
pro defunctis, pro natalitiis, annua die faci mus. Item l de Monoga. pro anima
eius offerat annuis diebus.
Tertul. Cyprian ep. 66. refert, vt si quis frater clericum tutorem nominas set
non offeretur pro eo, nec saecrificium pro dormitatione eius celebraretur.
S. Cyprian and others, and the contrary to which is, condemned, for heresy
in the person of Aerius, by the relation of Aug haec. 53. Epiphan. har. 75.
S. Augustine, and S. Epiphanius?

As your belief resembles that of the ancient Heresiarkes condemned by the
Church, so your manner of proceeding is not unlike to theirs: for the Manichees
did vpbraide S. Augustine, Vigilantius, and S. Hierome, that for their own
profit and interest, they defended the doctrine of the Church, which is the
very same which now you object against us.

The Prelates, nether entrench upon the living nor the dead, but do greatly
assiste the one and the other, whereas you abuse them both. They assiste the
living by instructions and Sacraments: the living and the dead by their
prayers and their sacryfices: whereas you do altogether neglect the dead; and
the care which you have of the living has no other effect then the death of
their souls.

You say that the Pope for some ages past, has hindered kings to read the
Scriptures. Where do you find that prohibition? The Popes would always
exceedingly rejoice, that kings who are learned, and are addicted to reading,
should exactly read them: being confident that by the assistance of learned
men who are able to explicate the sense unto the^, they will clearly discover,
that the government of the Church is not built upon the ignorance of the word of
God, as you calumniate; but that your religion is grounded upon the corruptions
and bad interpretations of that sacred word. They will also see that the Pope
makes not himself the supreme judge of faith, but that he was constituted
such by God and the Church which is the pillar and rock of truth, seeing God
did constitute Peter a Petra or rock upon which it is built.

And indeed S. Hierome, though most conversant in all holy Scripture, did yet
beseech Pope Damasus, that he would decree whether we ought to say one, or thee
hypostases, professing that he would hold as an article of faith what he
defined. Had not S. Bernard also the Scripture before his eyes when he wrote to
Pope Innocent the II. that all the dangers and scandalls which rise in the
kingdom of God ought to be referred to his Apostleshippe, especially things
concerning faith? Was the Scripture unknown to Iustinia^ the Emperor, when
he says in his Epistle to Pope John the II. we suffer nothing to pass which
belongs to the state of the Church, unknown to your Holiness, who is the head
of all the holy Churches. Why did the Ecumenicall Counsels held in the
primitive Church demand the confirmation of their Decrees of the Pope, if they
knew not by holy write that they were, obliged thereunto? Was not the Scripture
both in the east and west Church, when, as S. H^erome relates, the Synodicall
consultations of both those parts of the world, were sent to Pope Damasus to be
confirmed? Kings meet with nothing in Scripture but your condemnation. And if
they daigne to cast an eye upon history, they shall find, that the Popes whose
greatness is represented as prejudicial to this our France, has not been a
little aduantagious unto it. But if any have raised themselves to the detriment
of France always most Catholic; and with the diminution of the most
Christians kings dignity, you are the men, who being enemies to the Catholic
Church, and Christian religion, like true children of darkness, had your birth
and groth by means of their obscurity.

CHAP. XIV.
MINISTERS.
THe neglect of these things, has for the space of many yrares, drawn great
inconueniencies upon France, and has made it a Theater, whereupon bloody
Tragedies have been acted, while God punishes the contempt of his word, and
the oppression of his children. The ripenes of your wit, dread Sovereign,
even in the spring of your years, and the tymelynes in princelike and
Christian virtues which discover themselves in your Majesty makes us hope for
a more happy age under your reign. God who besto wed your Majesty on France
in his benediction, will by his providence conserve you, and will settle and
confirm your scepter in your hands, making use of it to the establishment of
his sonns kingdom who is king of kings, so that God reigning by you, may
reign also in you, to the end that you may reign with him for ever. But if
contrary suggestions hinder our humble supplications from being received of
your Majesty with wished success, yet will we never cease while God grants
life to instruct your people in obedience and loyally to Wards your Majesty,
and we will pray. to God for the conservation of your person, and the
prosperity of your Kingdom, as it becomes such as are, etc.

ANSWER.
IT is not at this present only that the professors of a false belief,
impute the calamities which happen in their times to the contempt of their
errors: for even Tertull. Arnobius, S. Cyprian, S. August and diverse others
do witness that the Pagans ascribed all the disasters of their times, to the
honor in which Christian religion was held, and to the contempt of theirs. In
this you imitate these old Paga^s, and indeed since the end does crown the
work, it was fitting, that your writing which is full of the imitations of
ancient heretics condemned by the Church, should be crowned with the
imitation of Pagans, condemned by all christian societies.

If the calamities of France did proceed from the contempt of your religion,
it had not so much flourished in the time o^ the Albigeois, whom you accnowledge
to be your brothers, seeing it did persequute them in open war. And without
doubt it had been oppressed with miseries under the reign of Pepin and
Charlemagne, who religiously honored the Popes and the Roman Church, whereas it
was never more flourishing then in their reign. Again Italy and spain where
your errors are not current, whence those that profess them are banished, and
where the holy sea is as much honored, as in any place of the world, should be
most miserable contries. But your assertions have no ground of reason.

It is true indeed, as the Fathers do observe, that temporal felicity does
follow religion, marry not yours, but that only which was left us by the
Apostles, and which to this day is conserved in the Roman Church. This moved
S. Ambrose to observe, that as long as Constantinople did nourish the poison of
the Arians in her breast her walls were continually environed with the armies
of her enemies, and that having once embraced the Catholic faith, she was
delivered from them with triumph.

The tragidies which are represented upon the French stage, proceeds not from
the contempt of your religion, but from the contempt which the professors of
it, show to the law of God; the authority of his Church; and their duty to
their kings. Heresy has always occasioned greatest calamities in the states
wherein it has gotten footing; and the kings that have abbandoned the Roman
faith, have ordinarily been unfortunate.

Christiernus king of Denmark the first king that was imbued with your
errors, was deposed from his kingdom, put in an iron cage, and finally,
according to the opinion of the times, poisoned, as I have already mentioned.
The Electour of Saxony, nephew to the first Abbettour of Luther, was taken
prisoner by the Emperor, condemned to death and in the end by commutation of
punishment, lost his Electourshipe, and the moictie of his estate: in sequall
where of his son dyed in prison. The Lantgraue of Hesse who sustained the same
cause, remained for a long time prisoner. Of 28. heretical Emperors of
Constantinople, thirteen were slain. Of the rest, some had their eyes pulled
out, some were deposed, all dyed most miserably. Hist. Wand.
Of seven Vvandall kings subject to the same errors, three were miserably
murdered. Of thirteen which the Visigots had, Annal. Hist.
twelve did violently die. Of seven of the Ostrogots, two only escaped the
enemies sword. Hist. Ital.
Of seven which were in Lonbardie, one only escaped an vntymly death.

So manifest it is that heresy is the source of all mischeife, and that he
that forsakes the Roman Church is ordinarily oppressed with miseries and
misfortunes! Wherefore having ^ust occasion to fear, that you might be utterly
ruined thereby, if you continue in your errors, I thought good, hoping to
reclame you, and to reduce you to the bosom of the Church, having already
refuted your writing, to propose unto you some reasons, which obliging all the
world to hate your religion, might administer you just occasion to forsake it.
I could easily produce a great number, yet I will content my self with five
only, which do convince that your belief is worthy of horror; because it
does introduce schism into the Church: reuiues the old heresies which were
condemned in the primitive Church: banisheth all virtue: authoriseth all vice;
and will have no law, whether of the Church or of Princes, to have power to
oblige in conscience.

THE RELIGION PREtended to be reformed is worthy of hatred, because it makes a
schism in the Church. CHAP. XV.
SInce we are divided and separated in communion, whereas before we were united
in one body, it is evident that you, or we, have made a schism. It rests to be
examined who is guilty of this crime, whereof, I assure my self, that by the
judgment of the whole world, and of your own consciences, you remain
convinced by undeniable proofs, since they are the same, by which the Fathers
of old did convince those whom you your selves accnowledge to be Schismatiques.

It is evident, says saint Cypr. l. de unit. constat a Christo and eius
Euangelio seperari, non enim nos ab illis, sed illi (...) nobis exie^unt.
Cyprian, speaking of the Nouatians, that they are separated from Jesus Christ
and his Gospel, because we went not out from them, but they from us
Caecilianus, says Lib. cont. Farmen. non enim Cacilianus exiuit a Maiorino,
sed Maiorinus a Caeciliano. vna erat Ecclesia antequa^ diuideretur ab
ordinationibus Maiorini: videndum est quis in radice cum toto orb manserit,
quis Cathedra^ sederit alteram quae ante non fuerat.
S. Optatus against the Donatists, did not separate himself from Maiorinus
your greatgrand father, but Maiorinus from Caecilianus, nor did Caecilianus
Sperate himself from the Chair of S. Peter, or of S. Cyprian, but Mayor: in
the chair in which thou sit, a chair, which before Maiorinus, had no
origin. And a little after, The Church was one, till it was divided by those
who ordained Maiorinus. We must now see who remained with the whole universe in
its belief, and in its root. who is seared upon another chair then that
which was before. These two passages do show that the Nouatians and Donatists,
were accounted Schismatiques: both because they with drew themselves from the
Catholics, not the Catholics from them, as also because they erected a new
chair, and finally because they stayed not together with the universe, in the
root whence they sprung.

Now all these things do convince you, considering that you went out from
Catholics, and not Catholics from you: that you set up a Chair at
Vvitemberg, and at Geneua, which was not before your time; and that you have
separated yourselues from the root which produced you, in lieu of remaining
together with the whole world in the Roman Church which brought you forth.

That you went out from Catholics, is justified by your own confessions: and
it is evident, in that you cannot name one of the first followers of Luthere,
who had not been of ours.

That you your selves are the Architectes and Founders of your chair, it is
clear; Confess. Helueticac. 16. Ecclesiae nostrae se a Romana separarunt.
Luther. in c. 11. Genesis Nos sumus sancti Apostatae, defecimus enim ab
Antichristo and Sathanae Ecclesia. Calu. 4. Instit. c. 2.. 6. Abeorum Ecclesia
recessimus. Et cap. 6.. 1. Za^chius tract. de Eccles. c. 8.
since none before the coming of Luthere did know, at Vvitemberg nor at Geneua
before Farell and Calvin, the Chair where your doctrine is preached: and that
you will not affirm, that they which preceeded those personages in those
places, taught therein the same doctrine which you teach.

That you remained not in the root from whence you sprunge, it is manifest:
since you are no more in the Roman Church where you took your origin:
therefore it is vndoutable, that the arguments of the said Fathers, do convince
you of schism.

Nor does it serve your turn to say, that our abuses were the cause you
withdrew your selves: for without examining the cause of your separation, it
suffices to know that you are separated, there being no cause at all which can
exempt a Church from schism, which comes entire out of another. This is
manifest, in that the Church having drawn her being from no other but Jesus
Christ cast into a sleep upon the Cross, like as Eve was drawn from no other
place, then from the side of Adam laid a sleep in Paradise, in that it
preceded every false Christian society, even as the Architype precedes that
which is copied from it: in that it was established 1600. years ago, with
promise of a perpetuity so assured, that it cannot depart from its primitive
establishement, that is to say, from the body first instituted by lesus Christ,
while he was in the world: there is none that does not accnowledge that a
Church, like yours, which a small time since departed wholly out of another
Christian society, is at least Schismatic.

And it will be as little for your advantage to affirm, that you were forced
out from us, the Church by her excommunication compelling you thereunto:
because, as I have said, it is enough to know that you are gone out without
searching the cause thereof: and again that it is a clear thing, that the
Church of Rome, did never bannish you from her communion, till after you had
divided your selves from her belief: which is justified, in that the Pope did
not excommunicate Luther till after he had preached against the Faith of the
Roman Church. Thus you remain attainted and co^uicted of schism, nor are you
able to purge your selves of it, as I shall still make more and more appear.

S. Aug. lib. 2. cont. litt. Petil. c. 16. Obiicio schismatiscrimen quod tu
negabis, ego autem statim probabo, neque enim comm^nicas omnibus gentibus and
illis Ecclesiis Apostolico labcrefundatis.
S. Augustine says to Petilian a Donatist, I object unto thee the crime of
schism, thoult, deney it, and I will presently convince thee of it, for thou
art not in communion with all the people, and Churches founded by the Apostles
labor. If S. Aug. convinced Petilian of schism, because he was not in
communion with the Church dispersed through all the world and founded by the
Apostles: can you your selves doubt but that you are convinced of the same
crime, since you have no communion with the whole universe no nor with the
Apostolical Church? your own consciences, I dare assure my self, will at
once both accuse and convince you. Now if the arguments I have used to convince
you of schism, have not fully satisfied: I will yet further lay before your
eyes, how the same Fathers, and many others, having condemned some of their
times as schismatikes, only because they did divide themselves from the Roman
Church, do in that their fact condemn you also of the sam crime, as having
forsaken the said Church.

He, says S. Cypr. lib. de unit. Eccles. Qui Cathedra^ Petri super quod
fundat^ est Ecclesia, deserit, in Ecclesia^se esse confidit?
Cyprian, who forsakes the Chair of S. Peter, upon which the Church is built,
does he conceive himself to be in the Church? Where this great S. does not
only say that such as divide themselves from the Chair of S. Peter, are out
of the Church, but withal renders the primitive reason thereof, because they
separate themselves from the fundation of the Church, The same Cyp. epist. 55.
ad Petri Cathedra^ atque ad Ecclesiam principalem, vnde vnitas Sacerdotalis
exorta est.
he to acheth in another place, where he says, that S. Peter's Chair, is that,
from whence priestly unity took its origin. Thou art not ignorant, says S.
Optat. l. 2. contra Parm. Igitur negare non potes scire te in vrbe Romana Petro
primo Ecclesia^ Episcopalem essecollatam. (...) his qua cathedra vnitas ab
omnibus ser uaretur.... vt am schismaticus and peccatoresset qui
co^trasingularem Carbedram alteram callen cares.
Optatus to Parmenian Donatist, that the Episcopal Chair was first co^ferred
upon S. Peter in the City of Rome, in which one chair all should be so
united, that who soever is disunited, and setts up an other chair against
that, is a Schismatike and a sinner. Whence, Lib. 2. Vnde est ergo quod claues
regni vobis vsurpare contenditis? quico^tra Cathedra^ Petri, vestris
praesu^tionibus and audaciis sacri legio contenditis?
says he in the same, do you then pretend to have the keys of the kingdom of
Heaven, you that wage war against Peter's l. 2. in qua vna Cathedra vnitas ab
omnibus seruaretur.
Chain, in which alone the unity of the Church is conserved? S. Lib. 3. cap.
3 Ad hanc Ecclesiam propter potentiorem principalitate^ necesse est omnem
conuenire Ecclesiam, hoc esteos qui sunt vndique fideles.
Ireneus grounds upon the same fundation when he says, that it is necessary
that all the Church, that is, all the faithful through the whole world, agree
with the Church of Rome, in regard of her more powerful principality. It is
also for this reason that Deobitu Satyri, vtrumna^ cum Catholicis, hoc est cum
Romana Ecclesia conueniret.
S. Ambrose relating that Satyrus dema^ds of some one, whether he did not
accord with the Catholics, adds, that is to say with the Roman Church,
taking the Catholic Church, and Roman Churh for one and the same thing. In
fine this would Ep. 57. Ego nullu^ primum nisi Christnm sequens, beatitudinis
tuae, id est Cathedrae Petri communione co^socior, super illam Petram
aedificatam Ecclesiam scio. Quicunque extra bano domum agnum commederit:
profanus est: non noui Vitalem, Meletium respuo, ignoro Paulinum: Quicunque
tecum non colligit spargit.
S. Hierome writing to Pope Damasus to say. Following no other then
Jesus Christ for the first head, I join unite my self in Communion with your
Holiness that is to say, to the Chair of S. Peter, knowing that the Church is
buillt upon this Rock. Whosoever eats the lamb out of this house, is
profane. Iaccnowledge not Vitalis, I reject Meletius, who is Paulinus I am
ignorant, whesoeuer gathers not with thee, disperseth.

After these so many and so conuincing authorities, rests there any more te be
said, to force you to accnowledge your selves to be overcome? Is it not
sufficient to have shown that you have erected a chair against the Chair of
S. Peter? That you are not in communion with his successor? That you are not
in the unity of the Church of Rome? That it is not in this house that you eat
the Lamb? That in the Person of Luther you accnowledge Vitalis and in Calvin
you embrace Meletius? In fine that you follow Pauline, in following the false
Doctors separated from the Church of Rome? May not I say to you with the same
S. Hierome Apol. 1. aduersus Ruffin. fidem suam quam Gocat? eamue qua Romana
pollet Ecclesia? si Romanam responderit, ergo Catholsci sumus.
, if you profess the Roman Faith, ergo you are Catholics: and consequently
if you profess it not, you are not in the communion of the Catholic Church.
What do you answer to all this?

You will study some evasion I know, and happily say, the fathers arguments
were good; because the Church of Rome being then the true Church, a man could
not separate himself from it without schism, and without straying from the
Paths of salvation, but now the times are changed, the circunstances we are
in, are others; corruption has so crept into the Roman Church that she is no
more to be termed a Church; and hence it was that you both could, and ought to
depart out of it.

But this evasion will not serve your turn: for the Fathers did not dispute of
the truth of the Churches doctrine, and thence inferred that the Donatists were
scismatikes, because they were separated from the Church who had the true
doctrine (though indeed it was true) but they disputed about the Chair of S.
Peter, of Pastoral authority brought down from him by an uninterrupted
succession concluding the Donatists Schismatikes because they were divided from
this Chair, and from S. Peter's successors sitting in the same. No otherwise
then one would convince subjects to be rebels, who should separate themselves
from the Royal throne and from the successor of the first Instituters of this
Throne: and as in the old law the Samaritans, may be concluded to have been
heretics because they withdrew themselves from the Chair of Moses, or Aaron.

That the Principle whence the Fathers drew their arguments, was pastoral
authority, and the Chair of S. Peter, and not the truth of the doctrine, it
does manifestly appear in that S. Cyprians De Gnitat. Eccles. and Ep. 55^
citat.
reason, is, because the Chair of Peter is the fundation, upon which the
Church is built, and from whence preistly unity takes its origin. And that of
Optatus lib. 2. Cisat.
, because in this only Chair of S. Peter, the unity of the Church is
conserved. And S. Ireneus lib. 3.5.3. cis.
, son that Peter's Chair, enioyes the chiefest power. S. Hierome Epist. 57. cit.
, because the, Chair of S. Peter is that upon which the Church is built. And to
conclude because S. Augustine Contrae Epist. fundam. c. 4. Tenet me ab ipsa sede
Petri Gsque ad praesentem Episcopata^ successio Sacerdotum.
says, that the succession of Priests which descended from the Chair of S.
Peter, held him in the Catholic Church, and that this In Psalm. contra partem
Donati, ipsa est Petra quam non Gin^u^t superbia inferorum portae.
succession is the Rock, against which the Gates of Hell shall not prevail.

Nor will your reply be any more to your purpose (to wit that albeit the
Fathers did indeed argue as we say, yet had their argument force and efficacy
from the truth of the doctrine, which then was adjoined to this authority to
this Chair) seeing that the Donatistes and Nouatians, against whom they
disputed, did directly deney the truth of the doctrine, to be in the Roman
Church. The Ambr. lib cont. Nouatian.
Nouatians improuing her doctrine touching remission of sins, and the August.
l. de hare. haeres. 69.
Donatists condemning her opinion of baptising heretics and admitting the
wicked livers into the Church. Which makes a clear demonstration that the
Fathers, did not make the truth of the doctrine the Principle of their
arguments, because that was as doubtful both to the Donatists and Nouatians,
as the conclusion it self which they were to deduce from it, for they deneyed
both the one and the other. Wherefore S. Donatus does sufficiently make appear
that he argued from their own confessions, and that which they could not deney
to wit, that the chair of Rome, was S. Peter's chair. Opt. lib. 2. contra
Parmen. titat.
Thou can not deney unto me, says he, but that thou know, that S. Peter
was the first, upon whom in Rome, the Episcopal chair was conferred, in which
only Chair unity was to be observed by all. Furthermore, you cannot affirm
that they formed their argument from the truth of the doctrine, because you do
not allow it to have been pure at that time, which is manifest, in that Beza in
Romans 8. Witat. l. 7. contra Durae. scit. 26.
you do condemn the doctrine of Pope Siricius, touching celibate or imgle
life, as the doctrine of the devil; and that yet the Donatists were reputed
Schismatikes even for seperating themselves from communion with him. Opt. l. 2.


For the rest; though to prove a man schismatique, it were indeed necessary,
to make good, that he were separated from the Church, as true Church, yet
should I not fail of my purpose, being a most facile thing, to convince, even
by the testimonies of your own men, that you accnowledge the Roman Church,
then, to have been the true Church when you came out of it. You accnowledge it,
both by the very confession of Caelu. 4. instit. c. 2.. 11. and 12. and Epist.
104. Du Plessis in the treatise of the Church c. 12. Osiander in Epito. p. 2.
your own Authors, and because Du Plessis au trascte de l'Eglise, chap. 81.
Osiander loco citato.
you your selves derive your authority from it: whence it manifestly appears
thar you hold it to be true, since otherwise you should derive your power, not
from the Church of God, but from a society of the Devil.

After all this, there rests so little for you to say, that if your tongue would
but faithfully interpret your conscience, we should, without doubt, hear you
condemn your selves, the thing being so clear and perspicuous, that, unless
you were more then blind, or that seeing light you would not see it, it were
impossible but your souls, casting the error which they row profess, should
win their cause. For if the Nouatians and Donatists, vere by the Fathers
sufficiently convinced of schism, for that they were separated from the Chair
of S. Peter, and his successors therein: you are also convinced by the same
argument since you are separated from us, who have always keept the possession
of the same Chair without interruption of succession.

Your are certainly co^uinced, I speak to all your church, and to you
Ministers in particular who are not only Schismatikes, as are your flock, but
withal Schismatic Pastors, for of your own authority you have
established your selves Pastors not having received power from those whose
successors you should be. Whence it follows that you are Opt. l. 2. de
^ictore primo Episcopo Donatistaru^; erat Filius sine Patre, tyro sine
Principe, discipulus sine Magistro, sequens sino antecedente.
Children without Fathers; soldiers without Captains; successors without
Predecessors.

Whereupon you shall give meleaue, to say unto you with the Fathers. Tertul de
praescript. c. 32. Edant ergo Origines Ecclesiarum suaru^, euoluant ordinem
Episcoporum suorum, etc. Opt. l. 2. cont. Parm. Vestrae Catbedrae Gos originem
reddite, etc.
Show us the origin: of your chair nor return us barely for answer that you
are extraordinarily sent, but bring a place of scripture, to verify your
assertion.

You are obliged to produce such a place, seeing the extraordinary Mission of
your Ministers, is an arlicle of your Faith, which consequently ought to be
verifyed by the express word of God, And show me, Ibeseech you a formal text
of Scripture, which says that Luther, Calvin, and the rest of your Ministers,
were sent extraordinarily. Show it not me, but those that follow you, who
without this, have no assurance that they are in the way of salvation: since
salvation there is none out of the Church, nor can the Church subsiste without
Pastors. If my humble petition be not powerful enough to purchase my demand,
grant it at least, for that Luther, and your own confession do oblige you
unto it; Luth. in Galat. Populus maxim opus habet ^ertitude vocationi^ nostrae.
Luther teaching the people, that it does greatly concern them, to have
assurance of their vocation. And your Art. 31. Confess. Gall.
Confession deliuernig in express terms, that every Pastor is Art. 31.
Credimus semper sequendam esse hanc normam vt omnes Pastores, etc. Suae
vocationis testimonium habeant.
to have a testimony of his calling to the office. You are to begin there (o
Minist.) for what ever doctrine you deliver (though it were cuen true) would be
of no profit to the people, unless they be within the bosom of the Church,
where yet they cannot be, you not being true Pastors. What, says l. 1. de
Baptis. c. 18. Quid prodest homini vel sana fides, vbi lethalt vulnere
schismatis perempta est sanitas charitatis.
S. Augustine, does a sound or entire Faith profit a mare, where Charity is
extinguished by the mortal wound of Schism?

Now having clearly shown that you are Schismatikes, I will produce certain
passages, which will make evident to all the world, that your doctrine, even in
that name, is worthy not only of hatred, but even of horror. It is manifest,
says Epist. 76. Apparet aduersarios Domini Antichristos omnes esse, quos
constet a charitate atque ab vnitate Ecclesiae Catholicae recessisse.
S. Cyprian, that such are Antichrists who have fortaken the Charity, and
vnittie of the Catholic Church. S. Optatus Opt. l. 1. cont. Parmen.
Does prove the horror of schism, out of the greeuousnes of the punishments
thereof, and sustaynes, that of all evils it is the greatest. Aug. lib. 2. de
Bap. c. ^.
S. Augustine assures us that schism is a more heinous crime then idolatry:
because idolatri is only punished by the sword, whereas the Number. 6.
earth gapes to swallow up the Authors of schism, and fire descends from
heaven to consume their followers. Who can doubt, Aug. l^co citquis dubitauerit
hoc esse scelerarius commissum quid and grauius vindicatum?
says he, but that the fault is more detestable, where the punishment is more
grievous. In another place lib. 1. cont. Parmen c. 4.
he says, that it is a sacrilege which does surpass all other wickedness. And
S. Chrysostom Chrysostom hom. 11. in Epist. ad Ephesians. c. 4. Nihil Deu^ aeque
irritat atque diuisaem esse Ecclesiam.
is of opinion, that nothing does so much draw God almighties wroth upon us, as
the division from his Church.

But that I may search no further into the Fathers, whose works are full of
like passages, I will only, to discover unto you the horror of schism, put
before your eyes your own Catechism, and Calvin. The 16. Sunday. All those
Who separate themselves from the community of the faithful for to make sects
a part, ought not to hope for salvation.
Your Cate chisme, which has in plain terms, that they are deprived of all
hope of salvation who divide themselves from the body of Jesus Christ, and by
faction cut in piece, his unity, while they do live in this divorce. Calu.
Ep. ad Sodolet. Sed omnium teterrimumest illud crime^, quod Sponsam Christi
discerpere conat, sumus. Id si verum esset, merito and tibi and orbi vniuerso
haberemur pro deploratis.
Calvin, who says, that of all the crimes, that ever were objected against
him, the most horrible was, that he had rent and torn by schism the Spouse of
Jesus Christ, for which reason, if it were true, he and all his might be held
for lost, and without hope of recovery.

Now I leave to the Reader to judge, whether by the testimony of your own
mouth, you be not in a desperate case, and cut of all hope of salvation, as
being separated from the Church, wherein it is only to be found.

That the religion which they call reformed, does renewall the old heresies.
CHAP. XVI.
I Could present the Reader with a great number of points wherein you call a
foot again old heresies, but to avoid prolixitie, I will only produce four.

1. Point.
The principale article of your faith consists in believing, that man is saved
by only faith, and that we are not justified by our works. We believe, says
your Art. 20.
Conf. that we are made partakers of this justice by only faith. We teach,
says Art. 116. Docemus hominem iustificari per fidem in Christum and non per
vlla opera bona.
that of Suise, by those of Geneua, that man is justified by faith in
Jesus Christ, and not by any good works.

That this is the principale point of your belief, is easy to be known,
since on it alone depends your salvation: and also because the Praefatio ad
Syntagma Confess. At vero hic articulus (de iustificatione) est basis forma and
anima religionis Eua^gelicae summa, etc.
Preface of your confessions, and many of Whitak controu. 2. q. 6. c. 3.
your writers, say that it is the basis, form, and soul of Christian
religion, and the abridgement of the doctrine of the gospel.

Now it is well nigh, 1600. years since this opinion was condemned in Simon
the Magician as heretical, as S. Ireneus does justify who was scholar to S.
Polycarpe one of S. John the Evangelists disciples, as also Theodorete, who
relates it so to have been. He taught, says S. Ireneus lib. c. 20. Docuit
homines non saluari secundum operas iustas.
, that men are not saved according to their just works; lib. 1. Fab
Haereticorum. c 1. Non per bonas actiones, sed per gratiam eos esse saluiem
consequutos.
he teaches, says Theodorete, in his book of heretical fables, that men are
not saved by their good works.

Nor can you avoid the force of my argument by saying, that Simon the Magician
was condemned for other errors. For as it follows not that a man was not
condemned to death for a murder because he was also found guilty of theft;
Even so, for that Simon the Magician called himself a Prophet, and sustained
that men were saved by his grace, it does not follow, that he was not also
reputed an heretic, in sustayning that works were not profitable to
salvation. In which matter, S. Ireneus and Theodorete remove all manner of
doubt when they bring in his opinion, that me^ were not saved by their good
works, as heretical.

Howbeit, I undertake not, to prove an entire conformity betwixt your belief
and theirs, not being ignorant, that as thieves disguise stolen things to put
them out of the knowledge of their owners; so you disguise the old heresies,
that men may mistake them. Marry I most willingly undertake to show, as
indeed I do, that that old Heresiarke, held as you do, That we are not saved
by good works. And consequently that huing been condemned in this point, the
soul of your faith was branded with a sentence of condemnation, in the first
age of the Church, whose authority you dare not reject.

2. Point.
You believe that the faith of parents is so efficacious, that their children
dying without Baptism, are saved. 24. Inslit. c. 15.
Calvin does teach this doctrine, and withal it is so vulgarly known even to
the simplest of your fellowers, that it needs no proof.

Now, albeit you make profession to deteste the Pelagian errors, yet your
belief in this point, is one of their heresies, as it is clear out of S.
Augustine, who puts it down as such, in his catalogue of heresies. lib. de
Haer. 88. Promittunt eis aeternam and beatam quandam vitam.
They promise, says he, to children not baptized, a blessed and eternal
life: lib 1. de anima eius origin 1.9. Noli credere, nols decere infantes
an^equam baptizantur morte ^raeuentos peruen^re posse ad originalium
indulgentiam peccatorum.
which he does charge with so heavy a condemnation, that in the books, he
wrote against them he adds. Believe not, affirm not, teach not, that children
prevented by death before they were baptized, can ever obtain remission of
their original sin, if you desire to be Catholic. Ergo

This article of your faith, is condemned in the person of Pelagius.

But if you allege for you, that your, and the Pelagian heresy are far
different; they holding that every child that dyed without baptism, did in joy
Gods Glory; whereas you limite it to the predestinate only. And again they
assigned to children dying without baptism, a different place, from that,
which those that were regenerated possess: which you do not. I answer that
the first difference which you give betwixt you and the Pelagians, consists
only in a greater or lesser number of those children, whom you believe to be
saved without baptism; and not in the substance of the error impugned by S.
Aug. who while he teaches that no child at all without Baptism can be saved,
he condemns you both, in that wherein you agree, to wit that some are saved
without baptism. As for the second difference, which consists, in this, that
the Pelagians assigned another place to children dying without baptism then to
the baptized, it is disaduantagious to your selves, and yet does no whitte
impair the force of my argument: to the validity of which is it sufficient,
that you and the Pelagians aggree in this, that without baptism one may enjoy
life everlasting. Which S. August. does clearly condemn, and by way of
disgrace object unto them, that they promise a blessed and eternal life, to
children not baptized.

And that this difference does disparage your cause. By deduction you will
plainly discover. The Pelagians held, that children were saved without
Baptism. This passage was opposed against them. Joan. 3.
Unless a man be borne again of water and the spirit he cannot enter, etc. they
being co^uinced by the clearnes of this place, granted indeed, that the
kingdom of heaven was only prepared for the regenerated; marry besides heaven
they assigned a third place, as a Residence for children dying without
Baptism. So that they gave way to the clearenes of this passage, which you
do; for you deney absolutely that it does exclude children that die without the
sacrament, from the kingdom of heaven, though it reach expressly, that they
shall have no patt therein. Wherein you clearly diseouer, that your heresy is
more impudent, then that of the Ancient heretics, since, you audaciously
deney, as a thing which is prejudicial unto you, that, which they durst never
call in question, though it were absolutely against them.

It is manifest therefore, nor have you what to say against it, that this
article of your faith, whereby you maintain that children dead without baptism
are saved, was condemned by the ancient Church, in the person of Pelagius.

Yet fearing that the differences which are betwixt his errout and yours
(abbeit they be not able to save you from the Churchs curse) might hinder you
to confess that you are condemned in his person: to leave you to your own
condemnation, I will show you the condemnation of your very error in S.
August. Lib. de anima and eius origin. c. 9. Isle autem (Vincentius) cum
confiteatur paruules origiginali obstrictos esse peccato, eis tamen regnum
coelorum non baptizatis ausus est pollicert, quod nec illi ausi sunt, etc.
in the person of one named Vincentius, who without assigning a third place
with Pelagius, ahsolutly allowed with you, the kingdom of Heaven to Children
not baptized. He durst, says S. Aug. promise the kingdom of heaven to
children not baptized, which the Pelagians durst never do.

3. Point.
Your Doctors do teach that our Savior Christ, did in his birth violate his
mothers integrity, as all other children are wont to do Whitak. controu. 2. q
5. c. 7. Docuit ^ouinianus Mariam amisisse Virginitatem in partu. Respondeo tum
impudetissimus haereticus fuit. sed ait nos similiter docere and nominat.
Bucerum Molinaum. Respondeo. Hoc ait quia non adenittimus fictam ^llam partus
ratiorem, etc.
Witakere purging himself of diverse errors, which the great Cardinal
Bellarmine justly imputes to his sectaries, does ingenuously auow this opinion,
and strives to defend it, which yet puts no obligation upon me at this present
to refute it, contenting my self only to show that it is the ancient heresy
of Iouinian, which was condemned in, the 4. age, according to S. Aug. Haeres.
Virginita^^m Mariae destruebat diee^. eam parie^do fuisse corrupia^.
relation in these terms. Iouinian, says he did destroy the virginity of
Marie, saying that in her Childbrith she was corrupted.

Nor is it to the present purpose to show that your belief does differe from
that of Iouinian, for that he, forsooth, does abolish the mental virginity of
the B. Virgin (which you de not) it being manifest, that Iouinian denid
corporal virginity to our B. Lady Both because S. Augustine impugning this
Heresiarke, defends her corporal virginity; and also for that the reason
which he brings to show that the B. Virgin had not conserved her Virginity,
was grounded upon her childbirth, and withal, that he sustained, that the body
of Jesus Christ, would have been conceived to have been an only Phantome, if
it had not been berd and borne after the manner of other children, which
belonges not to the Virginity of the mind, but that of body only.

Therefore my assertion stands firm, that your belief in this point was
condemned in the primitive Church, in the person of Iouinian.

4. Poini.
You hold and teach, that the just only are in the true Church, which is an
error condemned in the Donatists more then 1300. years ago. That you are of
this opinion, 4. Instit. c. 1. 7. In Ecclesiam quae reuera est coram Deo nulli
recipiuntur nisi qui adoptionit gratia filij Dei sunt.
Calvin does make manifest, in these terms. None is received into the
Church, which is truly the Church before the face of God, but he only who is
the son of God by the grace of adoption. And Art 27.
your confession does bear the same, saying, we affirm then, that the true
Church, following the word of God, is the company of the faithful, who
unanimously follow the same word, and the pure religion depending thereupon, and
who profit in the same all the days of their life.

That this opinion was condemned for heresy in the Donatists, S. Aug. makes
evident, by the passages which he alleges, impugned by him, and other
Catholics in the conferences had with them In collat. 3. die c 8. Zizania
inter triticum non Ecclesia sed in trundo permixta dixerunt. E^t c. 10. Non
been intelligi aiu^t Ecclesiaem inquua simul and triticu^ and zizania iussa
sunt crescere.
They say, that the dernel is mixed amongst the wheat, not in the Church, but
in the world: they say, that one can not well conceive a Church, in which
wheat and cocle grow both together.

You will say here, as in the formar points, that there is a fair difference,
between the error condemned in the Donatists, and your belief, because they
deneyed that the wicked were in the visible Church, which yet you grant,
deneying only that they are in the true Church.

To which I answer, that though it were a visible Church from which the
Donatists, did exclud the wicked, yet puts that no impediment why there may not
be a co^formitie betwixt them and you in the point I speak of, to wit, in
that both exclude the wicked from the true Church. True it is, there is this
difference between them and you, that they accnowledge the visible Church to
be the true Church, which you asscribe only to the invisible Church; whence it
is manifest, that the difference betwixt you and the Donatists, is, whether the
true Church be visible or invisible, not whether the wicked are in it or no,
whence you both equally exclude them. Thence it is manifest, that having
shown, that that opinion was condemned of heresy in the person of the
Donatists, I have shown by consequence, that it ought also to be condemned in
you.

That it was from the true Church from which the Donatists, excluded the
wicked, S. Aug. makes it clear lib. 2. cont. Caudent. c. 2. in vera germanaque
Catholica Ecclesia.
, saying in express words, that they deneyed that the wicked were, in the true
and lawful Catholic Church, and again lib. de unit. Eccles. c. 2. in corpore
Christi cuius Christus est Saluator.
, that they were in the body of Iesus-Chrst, whereof Jesus Christ is the
Savior. Which are Whitak. controu. 2. q. 1. c. 7. In Eccles. Cath. quae est
corpus Cristi. Item, possunt esse in visibili Ecclesia reprobi sed non in
Ecclesia Catholica.
the very words, in which you express the true Church. And therefore it is a
thing not to be called in doubt, that this article of your faith, was
condemned in the primitive Church in the person of the Donatists.

You will say, perhaps, that wellingly you will join hands, if we can
convince you, that these 4. points of your faith, were condemned by any
general Council in the primitive Church; but that the authority of one or
two Fathers is of small consideration, and consequently that you suffer no
prejudice, for being condemned by them.

To this I answer that it is not always necessary to interpose the
authority of a general council for the condemnation of an heresy, which is
evident by this, that when the Pelagians would not esteem themselves
condemned, because it was not performed in a general council, S. Augustine
laughes at such frivolous euasions, As though, says Aug. l. 4. cone. duas
Epist. Pelagii c. vltimo. Quasi nulla haeresis aliquando esset nisi Synod^
congregatione damnata sit, cu^ potius rarissime inueniantur propter quas
damnandas nesessitas talis extiterit, mulioque sint and incomparabiliter plures
quae vbi extiterunt illic improbari damnarique meruerunt atque inde per
caeteras terras deuitandae in nolescere potuerunt.
he, never heresy had been condemned but by a Synod seeing very few such
have been found, as that it was requisite for the condemnation of them to
assemble a Council, and that there were incomparably more in number, which
deserved to be reproved and condemned, in the same place where they were hatched
whence they might be diuulged through out all the world, to the end they might
be shunned.

Secondly I say, that I do not produce the authority of one or two Fathers
against our adversaries, as reputing their authority sufficient, to condemn
their opinion, but as esteeming it sufficient to declare what was the belief
of the Church in their time, whereby we justly judge such condemned of heresy,
as by their relation appear so to be. Being a thing most reasonable, and
agreeable even to judgments of least capacity, rather to give credit to those
ancients in the relation of things, which they affirm to have past in their
times, then to you who fall far short of them, especially seeing S. Augustine
teaches us, Lib. cont. Iul. c. 10. Quod inuenerunt in Eccles. tenuerunt, quod
didiscerunt docuerunt, quod a Patribus acceptrunt, hoc filijs tradiderunt.
that they held what they found in the Church; that they taught what they had
learnt, and left to their children, what they had received from their Fathers.

Finding this answer no armor of proof, you will fly for refuge to another;
saying that S. August. S. Epiphanius, Theodoret, and others who had made a
catalogue of heresies, did not propose unto themselves to put only into it
heresies properly speaking, whence it appears, that to show that an opinion is
related therein, is not a sufficient proof, that it was condemned as heretical.

To which I reply, 1. that this answer is without grownd, or proof. 2. that
the Fathers aim and end, in reducing into a certain order, and framing as it
were a list of all the heresies, do clearly show, that they register none
therein, but those thatare taken properly, since their design was to gather
together, all the opinions which might separate from communion with the Church,
to the end, that being known without difficulty, they might be avoided with
facility. 3. that besides these general profes, S. Aug. who is one of them now
in question, gives particular testimony, that he put down none but true
heresies in his Catalogue: For Lib. de Haeresi. Petis a me vt de Haeresibus
aliquid scribam dignum lectione cupientium dogmata deuitare contraria fides
Christianae.
he says in the beginning, that he does publish them, for their instruction who
desire to fly the opinions contratrarie to Christian faith. Whence is
apparent, that he only makes mention of true heresies, and properly taken for
such, as he does also afterward confirm, lib. de Haeres. Quid contra ista
sentiat Catholica Ecclesia superfluoquaeritur, cum propter hoc scire sufficiat
eam contra ista sentire, nec aliquid horum in fide^ quenquam debere recipere.
Possunt and hareses aliae quae hoc opere commemoratae non sunt vel esse vel
fieri, quaru^ aliquam quisquis t^nuerit Christianus Catholicus non erit.
saying that the Church condemns all the points which he putts down, that none
ought to receive any of them for articles of faith, for in so doing they shall
not be Catholics.

Wherefore notwithstanding all your euasions, it is clear, that in the four
points by me alleged, you have renewed the heresies condemned in the primitive
Church, and consequently, that in this consideration, your doctrine is worthy
of hatred and horror.

The religion pretended, to be reformed, does banish all virtue. CHAP. XVII.
THat your Religion does banish and abolish all virtue, though shame forces
you to deney it, yet will I force your own authors confess it, who, surely
will gain belief, no man being suspected in his own cause.

Let man know, says Luth. lib. de honis operibus, sciat hemo omnem eius vitam
and actionem nihil aliud nisi damnabilia esse peecata in Dei iudicie,
Luther, that all his life, and all his actions is nothing else but sin,
damnable in the judgment of God. Those, says Calu 3. Instit. 1.12.. 4 Qui
serio tanquam sub Dei conspectu de vera iustitiae regula quaerent, illi certo
co^periens omnia heminum opera, si suadignitate oe^seantur nihil nisi
inquinamenta esse and sordes; and quae iustitia vulgo habetur, eam apud Deu^
meram esse iniquitatem.
Calvin, who shall make a diligent search into the true rule of Justice, such
as itis in the judgment of God, will certainly find that all the works of men,
valued according to their weight and worth, is no other thing but ordure and
uncleanness, and that which is commonly termed justice, is in the sight of God
very iniquity. If God, says Beza Confess. Fidei. c. 4. art. 19. Si summo
iure inquireret Deus in ipsa quoque praestantissima hominum opera, nihil aliud
posset de ijs constitui qua^ meras esse donorum Dei pollutiones.
Beza, did rigorously sound the most excellent works of men, no other thing
could be resolved upon, then that they were pollutions of the guiftes of God.
If works be exactly examined, says Paraeus lib. 4. de iustitific. c. c. 15.
Eadem opera (bona) si districtum ad legis rigorem examinentur a Deo, mere erunt
peccata.
Pareus one of your best modern writers, according to the rigor of Gods law,
they will be found pure sins. You say also in your 2. Sunday.
Catechism, that there is always, some certain infirmity of the flesh,
mixed with our works, whereby they are defiled. Whence it follows planely that
all good works are bad, since the essence and being of Good proceeds from an
entire cause, as evil does arise out of the least iefect.

Now if all our works before God, who according to the 2. Corinthians. 6. Quae
enim participatio iustitia cum iniquitate, antquoe societas lucis ad tenebras?
Apostle to the Romans, knows and judges all things as they are in
themselves, are no other thing, then damnable sin, then ordures, uncleanness,
pure iniquity, pure sin, pure pollution of the guiftes of God; it is
manifest that there is, nor good work, nor virtue at all in the world, being a
thing altogether impossible that virtue and vice should subsist in the same
subject, and yet far less can virtue accompany an action, which is mere
iniquity, pure sin, and very filth. It appears therefore that you banish,
and directly abolish all virtue, and do indirectly, and in consequence, divert
and seduce men from every good action, since all that is reputed good in the
judgment of men, is pollution and damnable sin in the sight of God: So that
such as both love and fear God, are to abstain from it, as from a thing which
is disagreeable in his divine presence.

But perhapps, will you reply, your doctrine does not withdraw me^ from good
works, in that we teach that they are as many sins before God, since it
teaches with all, that those sins are not imputed to those that committ them.

But you shall not thus escape mo, because one that has a filial fear, does
not only weigh wether the faults commetted shall be imputed or no or whether
he shall sustain the punishment thereof, but does principally eye the offense
of his father, whom he nether ought, nor will displease; Whereupon he will
abstain from every action which may be displeasing unto him, and moreover that
he is obliged there unto.

And it will be as little to your purpose to allege, that you do not teach,
that works, are bad of their own nature, but only by the corruption of man,
whence you infer that a man is not obliged to fly them: because, besides
that Luth in Confut. Latomi, stat opus bonum natura sua esse immundum. Et
Assert. art 32. Opus bonum optime factum est peccatum veniale, non natura sua
sed misericordia Dei. whitak. li. 2. de peccat. orig. c. 3. Docemus mortaliter
semper peccari a tustis ex natura rei and actionum ipsirum, licet pro huiusmodi
non reputentur.
some of yours, do sustain that they are bad even of their own nature;
whither they be bad by nature or by accident, it is enough to bring an
obligation upon us to fly them seeing even the light of nature does teach us,
that what soever is evil is to be eschewed, without all exception; and that
God in no sort is to be offended, nether by an action bad in its own nature,
nor by accident. Which I will manifest by a familiar example, none being
ignorant, that though, an alms, be of its own natute good, and yet by
accident, evil, as being given to an ill end, it is not lawful to give it in
such terms,

The Religion pretended to be reformed lays open the Gate to all vices. CHAP.
XVIII.
Having learned of the Tertul. cont. Valent. cap. 1. Nihil magis curant quam
occultare quod praedicant.
Fathers, that it is the ordinary custom of those that are attaynted with
erour, to disguise their belief, and inuolue and hide it in obscurity:
nothing being more disgraceful unto you, then by your Doctrine to open the
gate to all vices, it may seem, a hard thing, to prove you guilty of this
crime, yet grounding my self upon an observation which Tertul. Furibus semper
aliquid excidere solet ad iudiciu^.
Tertullian made, that such as you are, may be discovered like as thieves, who
casually leave some thing behind them, which gives evidence to their
condemnation, I am not affrayd to undertake it, and I shall discharge my self
of my undertaking even by the iudgmant of all the world, if I make manifest,
that you teach, that Adulteres, Homicides, deneyers of Jesus Christ, and such
as commit other most greeuious crimes, remain notwithstanding in the state of
grace, and salvation: every one knowing by experience that it is a maine
allurme^t to the faithful to yield to their passions, and to abba^done and
give themselves over to vice, if living never so deboystly, they cannot be
deprived of Gods grace, or assurance of their salvation.

A Christian, says Luth. l. de ecptiu. Babylon. de baept. Christiauus sieve
baptizatus eciam nolens pptest perdere salutem suam, quantiscunque peccatis
nisi nolit credere. Nulla enim paeccata eum possu^t damnare nisi sola
incredulitas.
Luther, is so rich, that he cannot perish, yea though he would, what sin
soever he commit, if he will believe only. And in the same place, there is no
sin that can damn him, but only incredulity. The holy Ghost, says the
Apud zancli. l. 2. Miscellenu^ In Thesib^s. In sanctis Spiritus perpetuo manet,
quamuis pondere carnis aliquando vnicuntur.
university of Zurich, and which is to be noted a Caluinisticall university,
perpetually keeps his residence in Saints, abbeit, they be sometime carried a
way, and ouerswayed by the weight of the flesh. The Apud Zanchiu^ l 2. miscell.
in Thesibus. Labi electos atque etiam subinde sic cadere vt denuo erige^di sint
scimus, and id per refipiscentiam fieri non dubitamus: rerum ista ratio seu via
est admodum diuersa a prima illa vocatioce insitione, per quam electi Christo
incorporantur. Tale inter vtramque discrimen slatui posse nobis viaetur, quale
est inter mortuum corpus and illud quod morbo seu leuiore, seu grauiore ac
lethali affectum est illud sane vitali vt, vt ita dicam, opus habet: hoc vero
solum desiderat, vt quae adhuc in eo residet vita (nota) labefactata ill,
quidem and infirma inssauretur, recreetur and refocilletur.
university of Hildeberg does clearly teach, that the Elect, though laden
with heinous crimes yet loose they not the grace of the holy Ghost, for it
makes the same difference betwixt them and infideles, as betwixt a sick and
dead man, because even as, the dead man to live again must recover a new
life, so he that is deprived of Faith, must receive the life of the soul which
he has not. And as the sick man stands not in need of a new life, but a
strengthening of that which he always conserved in him; so he who is defiled
with sin having faith, has no need of new to receive the grace of the holy
Ghost, but only to be confirmed in that which he always conserved in his
soul.

But let us hear In antidoto Co. Trid. in Canon. 21. Semen aliquod fidei
manner in hominelicet suffocatum, etiam inter grauissimos lapsus non nego. Id
quantulumcunque est particulam fateor esse verae fidei, add etiam viuae.
Calvin upon this subject. There remain in man, yea even amidst his greatest
transgressions, certain seeds of faith, and afterward he says, that these
seeds are a parcel of the true and lively faith. Whereby it is evident, that
man in this estate, is in grace before God; seeing he says that his faith is
lively. And he teaches in another place, 3. Instit. c. 2.. 19. Vbi primum vel
minima fidei guttae mentibus nostris instillata. est, iam faciem Dei placidam
and serenam nobisque propitiam conte^plari incipimus.
That as soon as the least drop of Faith dothrun into our soul, we begin to
discover the face of God calm, sweet, and propitious unto us. Which Beza Beza
in Confess. c. 4. art. 20. Vera vel sola fidei scintillae hactenus est efficax
vt vere nos de nostra salute securos reddat.
confirms, saying, that one spark of lively faith, though sole, yet is it of
such efficacy, that it gives us a true assurance of our salvation. The same
Author being demanded in his Colloq whether David committing adultery, lost
the holy Ghost, In Colloq. Mo^bell. Thesi de Baptis Nequaquam amisit sed
retinuit. Iterum ego dico Dausdem in adulterio perpetrato retinuisse Spiritu^
sanctu^, quod similitudine declarabo. Ebrius no^ amittit intellectu^ seu ratio
no^, etsi ratio sese no^ exerceat: and ignis cinerib tectus minime extinctus
est, sed latet: ita gratia, Fides and Spir. S. in lapsibus Sa^ctoru^ ad te^pus
tegu^tur, vt non sentia^tur, quod in Dauidis adulterio factum est, in quo
gratin Dei ad tempus tecta, sed non amissa fuit.
makes answer, that he did not loose, but conserve it. Which he declares by
the similitude of a drunken man, who loses not his reason, though it be not
then perceived: and by the example of fire, which though covered in the ashes,
yet is it not extinguihed. Whereupon, he with whom he discoursed replying, that
if he might gain the whole world he would not teach that Fornicatours, and
adulterers conserve Faith and the Holy Ghost in their adultery; But I, replies
Beza ibid Ego vellem perire, si aliter docerem.
Beza, should be damned, if I taught any otherwise.

Nor is it to the purpose to allege that in Respons. ad act. Colloq. part. 2.
his answer to the acts of this Conf: he deneys in express terms that ever
he said that David in his adultery retained Faith and the holy Ghost: because
this does only prove, that being convicted of his own turpitude, he
contradicted himself, but not that he said not what I object, and that in
terms so express, that possibly I cannot put them down in clearer words.
And whilst he reprehends himself in this answer, be it that in words he
deneys that David conserved the holy Ghost in his sin, in deed and effect he
affirms it, for he does accnowledge in the Illum dixi quamuis adulterum and
homicidam, tamen quoniam electus erat aliquid Spiritus sancti in eo fuisse
seruatum.
same place, That in his addulterie and homicide there remained always somewhat
of the holy Ghost, because he was one of the Elect; seeing that according as I
have hertofore shown, following his own opinion, the least sparkle of Faith,
and of the holy Ghost, does justify a man.

Concerning that which they allege, that his acts were not faithfully put
down, the answer is easy. For in this In quaest. and responsionibus
Christianis. Nu^quam Spiritum penitus eripi dico. Non alite^ veram sidem and
eius effecta in electis interrum pi dico, vt in ii^ qui lethargo laborant, and
in ebrijs impediuntur animae facultates, non tamen anima ipsa tollitur, cum
inter lethargum, aut ebrietatem and morte^ ipsam plurimu^ intersit
book of Christian questions and answers, he brings the same examples which
are put down in his Acts, making a comparison betwixt such as fall into
enormious crimes and sick persons, who though sick, yet are they not dead.

When the flesh ouercomes the spirit, says Pareus Pareus lib. 1 de amiss.
gratis cap. 7. Quomo do caro vinci^ spiritum vt i^ Dauide lapso non ideo (...)
Spiritu (...) sanctis (...)
Professor of Hildeberg, as in the fall of David, the holy Ghost leaves to be
in the Saints. God, says Zanchius In de (...) ca lumn. Deu ele ctis cum peccan
non trascitur, eos nunqua^ odi^
, is offended at the Elect, but never hates them. And in the Ibid. Quia peccata
electis condonantur, nec mortem, i would refpectu personarum, quae sunt in Christo
peccata ab ipsis admiss mortalia dici non possunt: quare in renatis and vera
fide praea^lctis om nia sunt venalia.
same place, because the sins of the Elect are forgiven them, and are not
imputed unto them to death; whence it is, that in regard of those that are in
Jesus Christ, the sins committed by them cannot be said to be mortal. So
that, all things are venial to the regenerated who have truly faith. If men
be elected (says Locis Co^mun. Tit. de peccato, (...) personae in Christo
electae ^nt, and fideles, ^onsequitur and ^llorum peccatae nortalia non Esse,
sed ve^^alia.
Musculus) and faithful in Christ, it follows that their sins are not
mortal but venial only.

Now we are to note, that venial sins with you, is not only that, which as
we teach, is pardonable, but eue^ that which is already pardoned: not venial
but veniated if one might so say. Which Lib. 1. de amiss. ^rat. and statu
peccats c. 8. Esse veniale and ^mputari sunt ^ugnantia, quia ^ercatum esse
^eniale est pecatum venia do^ar. non puniri.
Pareus planely teaches, when he says; That to be venial, and to be imputed,
are contradictories; because for a sin to be venial, is to le remitted, and
not to be punished. Whence it follows manifestly, that all the sins of the
Elect and faithful being venial, none of them are imputed, none makes them
worthy of disgrace: And this is that which Wottonus in Apolog. Protest. ^raect
2 c. 3. ^emittitur pec^^ (...) potius (...) com^it. (...) adepto (...) semel
estisell sea plena ^^nium peccatrum praesentum and futuro^m (nota) re^issione.
one of your English writers expresses more clearly in the Protestants
Apology. Sin is remitted as soon as it is committed, or rather before it be
committed, man having once acquired justification, which is a plenarie
remission of all his sins present and to come.

Now I demand of you whether it be true that one of the faithful let him lead
what life and commit what sins he pleases, cannot perish: whether it be true,
that there remaynes always in him some seeds of the holy Ghost sufficient for
his justification: whether God, though wrothfull against him, do never hate
him: whether, in respect of him, no sin be mortal: whether the most
enormious crime, be not only pardonable in him, but pardoned him: To conclud,
whether euey one of the Elect, who dies, in what ever sin go straight
notwithstanding into Paradise: I demand I say, whether such Doctrine do not
make an open passage to all vice: and whether if there be one, that will
abstain from sin, for fear of offending his God, and incurring his
displeasure, thirty others will not commit it following their own sinful
inclination; seeing that, though God be offended indeed, yet sure they are that
they shall not be deprived of his grace, nor draw his hatred upon them? I
demand further, whether in this name, such doctrine, be not worthy, not only
of hatred, but even of horror.

The Religion pretended to be reformed does teach, that nether temporal nor
spiritual laws of Princes, do oblige in conscience. CHAP. XIX.
NEther Pope, nor Bishope, nor no other man, says lib. de captiui. Babyl.
Neque Papa, neque Episcopus, neque vllus hominu^ habet ius vnus syllabe
constitue^dae super hominem Christianu^, nisi fiat eiusdem consensu.
Luther, have power to oblige a Christian to one Jot, save only by his own
consent. I cry out, says he Ibid Clamo fidenter Christianis nihil vllo iure
posse imponi le gu^, sieve ab hominibus, sieve ab Angelis, nisi quantum volunt;
liberi onim sumus ab omnibus.
in the same place, with assurance to Christians, that nether men nor Angels
have power to impose any laws upon them, but so far forth, as they themselves
please: for free we are from all law. We determine, says 3. Institut. c. 19..
14. Omniu^ hominu^ potestate exemptas esse (conscie^tias co^stituimus.
Calvin, that the conscience is exempt from all the authority of men. In
sequall whereof he proves that political laws cannot oblige in conscience, Our
consciences, says In Antibell. l. de bapt. Ergo mandatis hominum nostrae
conscientiae non abstringuntur. Aliae enim nihil ad co^scientiam. Leges illae
(quae tum a Magistratu fiunt, tum ab Ecclesia) neque perdunt animos.
Daneus, are not tied by the commandments of men, no other law, (then the
divine law) has any thing to do, with consciences, and a little after, Laws
made, whether by Magistrates, or by the Church do nether loose, nor save
souls. Iesus-Ch. says Ad rationem 8. Camp. Christus voluit vt. hominum
decretis liberae conscie^tia pareamus.
Wittakerus, would have us to obey the decrees of men, with liberty of
conscience. Lib. 8. Duraeu^. Conscie^tiae nullis legibus adstringuntur nisi
diuinis.
Consciences are obliged, by no other but the divine Law.

Hence it is apparent that you teach in express terms, that the laws of
men, do in no sort oblige consciences; which is a doctrine detested by the
Catholic Church, and ought to be so, by all the world: since it lays open a
broad gate to disobedience, there being no more efficacious means to teach the
contempt of the authority, of the Church, Kings, and Magistrates, and to
violate their laws and ordonnances, then by openly persuading all men that
none of them oblige in conscience. Now there remaynes nothing, but that I
earnestly beseech you to enter into your own hearts, to dispose your selves to
enter into the way of salvation. What, will you remain in a religion, which
braging of much, can prove nothing? who knows not that it is now 1600. Years
since Iesus-Chr. established his Church, with promise of perpetuity: how can
that then which was but hatched within the term of 100. years, be his? who
sees not, that, the names CATHOLIC and CHRISTIAN, being the Church her proper
names, the religion to which they belong not, and to which the qualities which
they signify, cannot agree, cannot justly boast that it has the true Church?
Who sees not that a Religion which manifestly contradictes the Scripture, in
many principal points of its belief, is not that which was left us by
Jesus Christ, and his Apostles? Who sees not that they who under pretext of
Gods honor, iniure him; who in words pretend holy Scripture, and in in deeds
foist in place of it, that of men; and rely upon it as the fundation of their
faith; who sees not, I say, that those men carry not the torch which we are to
follow? Who will believe that he who denies the greatest part of the mysteries,
because they are burdensome unto him, who forsakes them to follow his own
ways and fancy, who will have no visible Head of the Church, that they may
live free from obedience unto him; who to exempt himself from labor, and
painstaking, will not have the blood of Jesus Christ, to render our actions
purgative, propitiatory, or merirorious: who, in a word, banisheth all pain,
to pass to heaven in a feather bed: who, I say, will believe, that such an one
is in the way of salvation, nay who does not see, that he runs the straight way
to his Erernall perdition?

Is any so silly as not to discover that they who promis the people full and
entire liberty to use the Scripture, and yet give them no other, but to look
upon the letters, and receive into their ears the sounds of words: and who put
the Bible into their hands, as the way of salvation, which yet they accnowledge
not to be authentical, yea depraved, and corrupt, are but mere mockers, and
impostures in things of importance toward salvation? Who will not planely see,
that a man has no assurance in a religion, wherein all the assurance of
salvation depends upon the warranty of men's opinions, and of each one, in his
own cause; in a religion the authors whereof die desperate. Shall one follow
those who profess punctually to follow Jesus Christ, yet do the contrary to
that which he did in that most sacred mystery which he instituted before his
death? Shall one judge that a true religion which banisheth all sacryfice,
without which never yet religion was?

Who will not judge that the true way not to follow the saints, is to follow
their enemies, and such as vomit out a thousand blasphemies against their
honor, and purity. Will any deem it the ready way to Christ, to load him
with blasphemies and contumelies issuing out of a sacrilegious mouth? And will
not even blind men see, that to make God author of sin and man's perdition,
is to perish in ones judgment, and to adiudge ones self to eternal flames?
And verily, following the Father's judgment, he is liable to a more greeuious
crime, who diuides the mystical body of Christ, then though he should tear in
pieces, his true body. Who then will not hold your religion abominable, which
stands convicted of so great, and detestable a schism? And who is he that will
not condemn it, when he observes it to be patched out of the horred heaps of
old heresies, and consequently condemned by it own judgment, since it is
condemned by the primitive Church, which it does accnowledge to be the true
Church? Can a lover of virtue and hater of vice follow that society, which
shuts up all passages to virtue? And will he not planely discern, that to lay
open the way to all vice, is no other thing then to lay open the broad way to
Hell. In fine, who sees not, that that society, which will submitt it-selfe to
no laws, spiritual or civil, cannot be subject to the laws of God?

They are worse then blind men that cannot discover this light. Let every one
open his eyes, and beware of being misledd by the common error of many, to
wit, that the desire they have to be saved, puts them in assurance, where ever
they be. They may please to know, that if our desire were sufficient to
justify us, then they that thought they did service and sacryfice unto God, in
putting to death the Apostles, wrought their own salvation, and not the
damnation of their souls. Let them know, that though one have an intention to
go to Rome; and yet hold on the way to Geneua, they shall never arrive at
Rome. Let them learn of the Fathers, that there is no salvation out of the
Church; none is assured against the wroth of God, who is not sheltered under
that covert. Let not the simple deceive themselves, by thinking that their
Ministers would not have the face to preach with such assurance, what they were
not assured of: because if it were enough for heretics for the approbation of
their doctrine, to publish it as good, and all contrary to it, as worth
nothing, one could not accuse the impiety of the greatest Heresiarkes that
ever lived, for with the pretended assurance of truth, they defended their
blasphemies.

I know indeed that the conversion of a soul is a difficult thing. I know
that as an impoysoned heart, as the report goes, cannot be consumed by fire: so
God, who is a consuming fire, does hardly inflame hearts infected with the
poison of error, by reason of the obstacles which he finds therein. Yet can he,
and will he do it, if every one putting of his passion, put on a fit
disposition, and embrace the means prescribed by the holy Fathers. If thou
desire, says Lib. de vtilit. credendi c. 8. Si iam tibi satis iactatus
Sideris, finemque huiusmodi laboribus vis imponere sequere viam Catholicae
disciplinae, quae ab ips^ Christo per Apostolos ad nos vsque manauit, and
optime ad posteros manatura est.
S. Augustine speaking to one that seeks his own salvation, to put a periode
to thy misery, put thy self into the way of Catholic discipline. which by
the Apostles descended upon us from Jesus Christ, and which shall be continued
in our posterity. That is to say, follow the Roman Church, which alone
descended by an uninterrupted succession from Jesus Christ. To this Church it
is that you ought to repair, whither S. August. by another more express place
inuites you. Idid. c. 17. Dubitamus nos eius Ecclesia condere
Do we fear, says he, to betake our selves into the (...)

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS and Sections contained in this book.
Chap. j. MInisters, page 1 Answer, page 2 Chap. ij. Ministers, page 4
Answer. page 6 Chapter iij. Sect. j. Ministers, page 32 Answer. page 32 Section
ij. page 37 Answer, page 38 Sect. iij. Ministers. page 54 Answer. page 54
Sect. iv. Ministers, page 76 Answer. page 78 Sect. v. Ministers, page 84
Answer. page 58 Sect. vj. Ministers, page 94 Answer. page 94 Chapter iv. Sect. j.
Ministers, page 108 Answer. page 109 Sect. ij. page 126 Chapter v. sect. j.
Ministers, page 129 Answer. page 130 Sect. ij. Of Indulgences, page 147 Chapter
vj. Sect. j. Ministers, page 155 Answer. page 156 Sect. ij. Of the Sacrifice.
page 169 Sect. iij. Of the Elevation of the Host, page 187 Sect. iv. Of masses
where the assista^ts do not communicate, page 189 Sect. v. Of Communion under
one kind. page 194 Chapter vij. Ministers, page 202 Answer. page 202 Chapter viij.
Ministers. page 221 Answer. page 222 Chapter ix. Ministers, page 241 Answer. page
243 Chapter x. Ministers, page 254 Answer. page 254 Chapter xj. Ministers, page 257
Answer. page 257 Chapter xij. Ministers. page 260 Answer. page 261 Chapter xiij.
Ministers, page 262 Answer. page 264 Chapter xiv. Ministers, page 276 Answer.
page 277 Chapter xv. The Religion Pretended to be reformed is worthy of hatred,
because it makes a schism in the Church, page 282 Chapter xvj. That the religion
which they call Reformed, does renewall the old heresies, page 299 Chap. xvij
The Religion pretended, to be reformed, does banish all virtue, page 314 Chap.
xviij. The Religion pretended to be reformed lays open the Gate to all vices.
page 318 Chap. xix. The Religion pretended to be reformed does teach, that
nether temporal nor spiritual laws of Princes, do oblige in conscience. page
326
FINIS.

