THE PRACTICE OF Chymicall, and Hermeticall Physic, for the preservation of
health. WRITTEN IN LATIN By Josephus Quersitanus, Doctor of Physic. And
Translated into English, by Thomas Timme, Minister.

LONDON. Printed by Thomas Creed, 1605.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR Charles Blunt, Earl of Devonshire, L. Mounti^y,
Lieutenant general of Ireland, M. of the Ordinance, Governor and Captain
General of the Town and Garrison of Portsmouth, and the I Will of Portsey, Knight
of the noble Order of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most honorable
privy Council.
I I may seem (Right Honorable) an admirable and new Paradox, that Halchymie
should have concurrence and antiquity with Theology, the one seeming mere
Humane, and the other Divine. And yet Moses, that ancient Theologue,
describing and expressing the most wonderful Architecture of this great world,
Genesis 1. 2.
tells us that the Spirit of God moved upon the water: which was an indigested
Chaos or mass created before by God, with confused Earth in mixture: yet, by
his Halchymicall Extraction, Separation, Sublimation, and Conjunction, so
ordered and conjoined again, as they are manifestly seen a part and sundered:
in Earth, Fire included, (which is a third Element) and Air, (a fourth) in
Water, howbeit inuisibly. Of which four Elements, two are fixed, as earth and
fire: and two volatile, as water and air.

That spiritual Motion of the first mouer, God, has inspired all the creatures
of this universal world, with that spirit of Life (which may truly be called
the spirit of the world) which naturally moves, Eccle. 3. 19.
and secretly acts in all creatures, giving them existence in three, to wit,
salt, sulphur, and Mercury, in one Huposiasis. Mercury congealing Sulphur,
and sulphur Mercury, neither of them being without their Salt, the chiefest
mean by whose help Nature brings forth al vege^^^ls, Minerals, and Animals.
So that of these 3. whatsoever is in Nature, has his original, and is
compacted of them, and so mingled with the 4. Elements, that they make one
body. Therefore this Divine Halchymie, through the operation of the spirit
(without the which the elemental and material Character, letter, and form,
profits not) was the beginning of Time, and of Terrestrial existence, Acts
17. 28.
by which all things live, move, and have their being; consisting of body,
soul, and spirit, whether they be vegetals, 1 Thessalonians. 5 23
minerals, or animals: reserving only this difference, Heb. 4. 12.
that the souls of men and angels are reasonable and immortal, Genesis 1. 16.
according to the Image of God himself, Wisd. 11. 17
and the sensuals (as beasts and such like) not so.

Moreover, as the omnipote^t God, has in the beginning, by his divine wisdom,
created the things of the heue^s and earth, in weight, mu^ber, and measure,
depe^ding upon most wonderful proportion and harmony, to serve the time which
he has appointed: so in the fullness and last period of time (which
approaches fast on) the 4. Elements (whereof al creatures consist) having in
every of the^ 2. other Elements, the one putrefying and combustible, the other
eternal and incombustible, as the heaven, shall by Gods Halchymie be
metamorphosed and changed. For the combustible having in them a corrupt
stinking feces, or drossie matter, which makes the^ subject to corruption,
shall in that great and general refining day, 2. Pet. 3. 10. 13.
be purged through fire: And then God will make new Heavens and a new Earth,
Apoc. 21. 5.
and bring all things to a christalline cleernes, and will also make the 4.
Elements perfect, simple, and fixed in themselves, that al things may be
reduced to a Quintessence of Eternity.

Thus (right Honorable) you see a Paradox, no Paradox, and a Hieroglyphick
plainly disciphered. For Halchymie tradeth not alone with transmutation of
metals (as ignorant vulgars think: which error has made them distaste that
noble Science) but she has also a chyrurgical hand in the anatomizing of
every mesenteriall vein of whole nature: Gods created handmaid, to conceive
and bring forth his Creatures. For it is proper to God alone to create
something of nothing: but it is natures task to form that which he has
created.

Wherefore if the fool which has in his heart said, Psalm. 14. 1.
There is no God, will put away the mist of ignorance and infidelity, and
behold the power and wisdom of God in his creatures, manifested more
particularly, and inwardly by the Art of Halchymie, imitating nature in
seperating from one substance, be it Vegetall, Mimeral, or Animal, these three,
Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, shall by that mystery, as in glass, discern the
holy and most glorious Trinity, in the Unity of one Hupostasis Divine. Romans
1. 20.
For the invisible things of God (says the Apostle) that is, his eternal power
and Godhead, Col. 2. 8.
are seen by the creation of the world, being considered in his works. This
Philosophy therefore (my good lord (is not of that kind which tends to vanity
and deceit, but rather to profit and to edification, inducing first the
knowledge of God, and secondly the way to find out true medicine in his
creatures.

Plato says, that Philosophy is the imitating of God, so farforth as man is
able: that we may know God more and more, until we behold him face to face,
in the kingdom of heaven. So that the scope of Philosophy, is to seek to
glorify God in his wonderful works: to teach a man how to live well, and to
be charitably affected in helping our neighbor. Gen 30. 37.
This Philosophy natural, Job. 9. and 26. and 28 and. 37. 38. 39.
both speculatiue and active, is not only to be found in the volume of nature,
but also in the sacred Scripture: as in Genesis, in the book of Job, in the
Psalms, in Syrach, and in other places.

In the knowledge of this Philosophy, God made Solomon to excel all the kings
and Philosophers that were in the world, whereby the Queen of Sheba was
allured to take a long Journey, to make an experiment of that wisdom, 2.
Cron. 9. 2
whereof she had heard so great fame, and found it by effect far greater. Mat
12 4.


Anaxagoras a noble gentleman, but more noble in wisdom and virtue: Crates,
Antisthenes, with many others, contemned the pleasures of the world and gave
themselves to the study of natural Philosophy. Philosophers have brought
more profit to the world then did Ceres, who invented the increase of corn and
grain: then did Bacchus, that found out the use of wines: then did Hercules,
which rid the world of monsters. For these things belong to the maintenance
of bodily life and pleasure: but Philosophy instructs and nourish* the soul
it self.

This philosophy, together with the most rare, excellent and healthful Physic
linked to true grounds; and vpholden by daily experience, the very marow of
true medicine, and the quintessence of marow it self, I most humbly present
unto your honors hands, as a Jewel of prise, to procure and preserve health:
which Ptolomeus the son of Antiochus valued at so high a rate, that he gave
to Erasistratus a noble Physician, on hundred talents for the curing of
Antiochus.

My labor herein, be it but as the apple, which Acontius gave to beautiful
Cydippe to make known his amorous affection: yet being tendered with no less
good will, in all humility I beseech your honor to accept: heartily wishing that
as you are a principal pillar of this Common wealth, so it may be a mean to
preserve you in health with long life, to your countries good (as heretofore)
and to Gods glory.

Thus craving pardon for my bold conceit, I ever resolve to be,

At your Lordships Honorable pleasure and command, right humbly T. Timme.

THE FORE-SPEECH TO the Reader.
ALbeit the profession of Theology, stands upon the infallible foundation of
Gods Word, yet among Divines, there have risen diverse opinions and Sects. Among
the (...) people) were Pharisees, Saduces, Esseis, and Gaulenists: beside the
false worship of Turks, Affricans, Tartars, Persians, Cataians, and Indians.
Among Christians, there are Papists and Protestants. The Papists, which call
themselves Catholics, have divided themselves into Dominicans, Franciscans,
Jesuits, Seminaries, Seculars, Scotists, Tomists, Occamists, etc. Among
Protestants, have sprung up, Anabaptists, Familists, and Brownists.

As in Divine, so in Humane Sciences speculatiue, grounded only upon probable
conjectures, there have risen also among the Professors thereof, diverse and
contrary opinions, and Sectaries. Among the Philosophers, were Stoics,
Peripaticks, Platonists, Cinnicks, and Epicures. Among Physicians, there are
Empericks, Dogmaticks, Methodici, or Abbreuiators, and Paracelsians.

The more part of these, plunged in humane error, and misled by carnal
respects, as singularity, envy, pride and ambition, has dissented from
others of sound and upright judgment. But some of these aiming at perfection,
and having the advantage of succession and other helps, have by Time
procreated a plain and naked truth. For this latter Age of the world,
abounding in all manner of Learning, and with men of mature and pregnant wits,
have greatly enlarged, illustrated, and refined all Arts and Sciences.

If Therefore Endymions diligence, which first found out the course of the
Moon: If Amphions Musical brain, which first conceived Harmony: If
Appolonius Memphites, whose industry first described the Anatomy of man's
body: If Chyron, which first discerned the virtue of Herbs, and taught
Aesculapius Physic: If Hermes Trismegistus, the first that reached and
attained the Ethereal and Quintessentiall Physic: If (I say) these, and many
others, in their rare inventions, have deserved singular commendation: then
Hypocrates, Galen, Discorides, Valerius Cordus, Paracelsus, learned
Quersitanus, and others more, which have added any thing to the enlarging and
perfecting of that noble Science of Physic, are to be embraced and honored,
albeit they agree not together in opinion for that they all by their labors
have sought the good of mankind. Eccle. 38.
Honor therefore the Physician (says Jesus Syrach) for the Lord has created
him, and given men knowledge, that he might be glorified in his wondrous
works.

But some Readers of their works, not carrying this moderation, like Midas,
prefer Pan before Appollo, condemning Chymicall Physic, Halchymie, and the
Spagericke Art, as too curious, dangerous, and desperate to be dealt withal.
Alleging also (which is too true) that many Halchymists are notable
Sophysticators and deceivers.

The meaning of some, by these and such like pretenses, is nothing else, but
like bad and unskillful Herborists, to sow Rocket, and to weed Endive. Yet
let such carpers know, that the abuse of Art does not abrogate the right use
thereof. For as if the tree be blasted that blossoms, the fault is in the
wind, and not in the root: so the fault is not to be ascribed to Art, which
is not in Art, but the Artificer which is unworthy the name. And in very deed,
it were to be wished, for common vtillities sake, that all such cozoners and
deceivers, might be banished out of City and Country, and from all society
of honest men, which without lawful allowance, take upon them such professing
and practice: or at the least, that they might be restrained, that through
their leaudnes, that art be not disgraced, which the ancients did not let to
call Holy. And for my part, I doubt not, but that one Aomus or other, will
recompense me with Balm, and say that I am out of my element, in that I being
a professed Divine, should take upon me to meddle with Physic, and to publish
that in the vulgar tongue, which was more fit to be in the Latin, as I found
it.

To this I answer, that a generality in humane learning, beseems a Divine:
and of all Sciences none more suitable to profession than Physic, as I could
easily prove by many reasons. And therefore the wisdom of Christ appointed the
miracles, wrought by himself and his Apostles, to consist chiefly in healing
corporal infirmities. S. Luke was both a professed Physician, and an
Evangelist. It cannot be but a commendable labor, and a charitable work in
whomsoever, to seek by good means to preserve life, Luke 14. verse 5.
be it but of thy neighbors Ox, or Ass: This my labor I am sure is well
intended, hosoeuer co^strued. But a wand thrust never so right into the water,
seems crooked or broken: even so a bad heart misconceiueth good actions. As
concerning the publishing of this in English, I have these Inducements. First,
the common good of all men. For even the ignorant shall learn hereby, to have
in high reputation (as is fitting) that which before they understood not, and
so will the more readily in time of need have recourse to the learned Physician.
Moreover, if the knowledge of holy writ be convenient for all sorts of men, as
the Physic proper for the soul, why should not natural Philosophy, and
Physic speculatiue, be common likewise to al for the health of the body? Number.
11. 29.
Therefore herein, I say as Moses said: Enuiest thou for me? I would all the
Lords people were Prophets. So I wish, that all which are capable, had the true
speculatiue knowledge of Physic. Then should Physic and Philosophy, not only
have a more great and general esteem, but also every mean Apothecarie, the
Physicians left hand, should well understand how to Elixerate, which is greatly
to be wished.

As for the time which I have spent herein, it is my gain: happily extracted
from idle time, whereas otherwise for my recreation, I might unhappily have
done nothing: and yet have not neglected my pastoral function.

If therefore (courteous Reader) by this my painful pleasure, thou may
procure to thy self, but one scruple of knowledge more than before thou
had, and in time of need, one dram of health, it is that which I seek,
wishing thee thy full contentment in all the gifts and graces of God, to thy
further profit, and to Gods glory: to whose protection, I now leave thee.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE PRACTICE of Chymicall Physic.
CHAP. I.
NOt only Hypocrates, but also all other famous Philosophers which have
succeeded him, have received their most principal grounds of Physic and
Philosophy, from the Aegiptians. For the Aegiptians had a most singular
knowledge of Astronomy and of the celestial courses, together with the
universal Science of the Mathematickes, and of such like Sciences. But the more
general knowledge of all Sciences, is by Strabo ascribed, before al others, to
that admirable Hermes Trimegistus: as does also Diodorus Siculus, who
affirms, that the Aegiptians were the first inuentors of Sciences, taking
their original and infallible grounds from the same Hermes, or Mercury: whose
divine monuments are to be seen at this day.

From this ancient Author Hermes, which lived in the first worlds, have sprung
up all our Hermetical Philosophers and Physicians, whose traditions, have been
received and embraced, not only of all sorts of learned men in all countries,
but also by the most noble and famous Princes and Kings, both Greeks,
Arabians, and Latins.

Yet it must be confessed that the most ancient learned Philosophers* neither
have nor could deliver such a general knowledge, wherein there was not something
wanting, and whereof themselves were not ignorant.

For (to use the words of learned Guido) we are infants carried upon the
shoulders of those great and lofty Giants, from whose eminence we do behold,
not only those things which they saw, but many other mysteries also, which
they saw not. For no man is so sottish as to imagine that those first founders
of Physic had attained to the exact and perfect knowledge of Medicine, or of
any other Science: which Hypocrates himself acknowledged in his Epistle to
Democritus.

The same Hypocrates, howsoever otherwise singularly learned, and of all
learned men for his monuments of Medicine, to be had in great reputation and
reverence; yet has bewrayed his ignorance in mineralls, and metalline
mysteries: as appears in his book of Simp. where he entreating of
Quicksilver, affirms that he never made tryail thereof, neither inwardly
taken, nor outwardly applied: bewraying his error in thinking that Hydrargyre,
and Quicksilver, were two several things: supposing that it was a medicine of
Silver dissolved into water, like unto potable gold.

Hereby (I say) he has bewrayed his ignorance in metalline substance, in that
he knew not Hydrargyre, and Quicksilver to be all one. Whereof never any man
doubted, except he were so addicted to his teacher, that he would say black is
white, because his master says so, which none of mean wit will do.

For as we think them worthy of blame, which with new found fantasies and
toys, do go about to burn and cover the errors of the reverend fathers and
ancients, as do many Empiricks and deceivers, under the name and profession of
Paracelsians: who also, do too stiffely and falsely ascribe to Paracelsus, as
to the only author, the knowledge of hidden things and causes, the finding out
of mysteries, and the true preparation of al remedies and medicines: so in like
manner they are to be reprehended which hold it sufficient, so as they talk
of Galen without all reason, and affirm that he was ignorant of nothing, and
that he came to the full knowledge of Medicine.

It is therefore well said of a learned and well experienced lawyer, that it is
a token of great rashness, for wise men, either at the first to subscribe error,
or to subvert that which might please, moderated with a temperate resolution.
And yet learned men against all truth, do oftentimes bark against ancient
writers, thinking it great honor and praise unto them, if they be able in any
sort to contend with their greatness.

Those Philosophers which have written of Chymistrie, have to maintain their
Science, Nature, Art, and Experience: by ancient practice derived from the
Hebrews, Chaldeis, Aegiptians, Persians, Greeks, Latins, and Arabians. This
Science therefore is not grounded (as some suppose) upon a vain an imaginary
speculation, but is found most certain and infallible to the procuring of
health, and length of days to many, by the goodness of Almighty God.

Neither does this Science only afford, common extractions of oils and
waters, by ordinary Distillations, (as many Emperis do imagine) but also most
precious Elipirs and Quintessences, much labored, circulated, and wrought, by
digestious concoctions, and fermentations, by the means whereof all impure and
corrupt matter is defeked and separated, the evil quality corrected and
amended, and that which is bitter, is made sweet. Without the which operations,
our bread, beer, and wine, the ordinary and most principal means of our
nourishment, become hurtful and pernicious unto us. For if we should eat raw
wheat, or hoyled only in water: what and how many diseases would grow in us?
For this cause we separate the pure from the impure, that they may be
profitable for us, as the meal from the bran, the which meal or flower, we
mix with water, we leaven and bake, whereof arises a great magistery, namely
bread fit for nourishment: and by his artifice, apt to pass and turn into our
flesh: in the working whereof, if there be but a little error, it will not be so
pleasing to the taste, nor so fitting to nourishment, as is to be seen in
bread, either ill seasoned, or not well baked: the which we reject through these
defaults.

The like practice and work is to be used in wines, if we desire to have them
fit for our use. For the pure must be separated from the impure, by boylings,
digestions, and firmentations, separating from the kernells and skins, the
liquor of the grapes, that it may be brought into pure wine.

This done, and being put into vessels, it works new seperations,
fermentations, disgestions, and purgations, seperating the dregs and lees,
from the pure substance of the wine; the which so separated, it becomes fine
and clear, and is fit to be drank for nourishment: Whereas otherwise taken
with the lees and not fined, it breeds dissenterie, fluxes, the stone, pain
in the head, and procures such like diseases.

Chemists therefore immitating nature in these kind of workings, and have
learned them in her school: finding by effect in natures work, that if common
and ordinary meats and drinks unprepared, unseasoned, and rude, cannot be
taken into our bodies without peril, then Physicians, and Apothecaries, ought
to prepare, separate and purge those simples which they shall use for medicine,
by art seperating the cross impurity, that they may not be more hurtful to
the weak and sick, then profitable.

If Hypocrates or Galen himself, were now again alive, they would exceedingly
rejoice to see art so enlarged and augmented by so great and noble addition,
and would patronize and uphold with their own hands, that which was hidden
from the old fathers in former ages: and rejecting many of these things, which
before pleased them, yielding to reason and experience, would gladly embrace
the new. For it is evident by their writings, how uncertain and doubtful they
be in many things, by reason of the weakness of the foundation whereon they
have builded. Whose buldings notwithstanding, utterly to overthrow, no wise and
modest Phhlosopher will go about, but will rather endeavor to uphold them, that
posterity may well and assuredly know that we were not barren, but endued with
the same wit that they had, and that our minds were seasoned with that more
noble salt. The which shall appear, it not rejecting the writings of our
elders, we shall enrich and adorn them with new inventions.

For arts come by tradition, and are delivered as it were from hand to hand,
and every one adorneth his art with new inventions, according as he excels
others in dexterity of wit. And albeit, it may be said, that it is an easy
matter to add to that which is invented, yet both the Inuentors, and also the
augmentors, are to be thankfully embraced.

CHAP. II.
THere are three principal things mixed in every Natural body: to wit,
Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury. These are the beginnings of all Natural things.
But he, from whom all things have their beginning is GOD, upon whom all
things do depend, he himself subsisting by himself, and taking the
Original of his Essence from no other, and is therefore the first and efficient
cause of all things.

From his first beginning, proceeds Nature, as the second beginning, made by
GOD himself through the power of his word. This Nature, next under God, ought
to be religiously esteemed, thought of, enquired, and searched for. The
knowledge hereof is very necessary, and will be no less profitable: the search
and raunsacking thereof will be sweet and pleasing. The profit which comes
hereby, appears in this, that the knowledge of all things which consist
thereof, and whereof they borrow their name and are called Natural things,
proceeds herehence whether they be subject to our senses, or above our
senses. Hereupon great Philosophers, both Christians and Ethnicks have been
moved to make the signification of the name of Nature, to sit and serve
almost all things. Insomuch that Aristotle himself, in that division which he
makes of Nature, dividing the same into the first and second Nature, and
speaking of the first, he calls it Naturam naturantem. Naturing nature, by
which he means God. So in like manner Zeno, a Prince of Stoikes, openly
taught, that Nature was no other thing then God. Therefore the first Naturing
nature is God; but the second which properly is said to be Nature, is
subdivided into universal and particular. Lact. lib. de Ira Dei, cap. 10.
The Universal is that ordinary power of God, diffused throughout the whole
world, whereof it is said, Plin. lib. 2. cap. 7.
that Nature does suffer this or that, or does this or that, as Augustine
teaches in his book De ciuitate Dei: Sen. lib. 4, de benet. cap. 7.
and Lactantius: and among heathen writers, Pliny and Seneca.

This universal Nature, is also taken for the divine virtue, which God has
put and implanted in all creatures: by the benefit whereof, certain notes of
the Divinity, are to be discerned in them. Hereuppon some old Fathers were
wont to say, All things are full of Gods, as did Heraclitus among others.
Thomas lib 9 super. 2. lib. de coelo.
Some others take this universal nature, for a certain influence and virtue,
whereby the Stars do work in these inferior things: or else for an acting
virtue in an universal cause, Plato in Timaeo.
that is to say, in a body Celestial.

Furthermore, that is universal Nature, whereof Plato speaks when he says:
Nature is a certain force and strength infused throughout all things, the
moderator and nourisher of all things, and by it self the beginning of motion
and of rest in them. The which Nature Hermes Trimegistus, almost in the same
words says, to be a certain force risen from the first cause, diffused
throughout all bodies by it self, the beginning of motion and rest in them.

This force the Pythagoreans called God. And therefore Virgil, a great follower
of the Pythagorean disciplne, wrote thus, saying; The spirit nourishes
inwardly, etc. And the Platonicks called the same, the Soul of the world.

But yet the Platonicks have not defined and showed, in what manner, and by what
means this Soul of the world, does moderate and order all these interior
things, and does stir up in the generation of things: neither can they yet
determine.

But the more witty and learned sort of Philosophers, hold and affirm, that
this world, which comprehends in the circumference and compass thereof the
four Elements, and the first beginnings of nature, is a certain great body,
whose parts are so knitte together among themselves, (even as in one body of
a living Creature, all the members do agree) that there is no one part of the
parties, of that great body, which is not inlyned, quickened, and sustained, by
the benefit of that universal soul, which they have called the soul of the
world: affirming also, that if the bodies of living creatures do derive life
and being from the soul which is in them; the same is much more done and
effected in the far more noble and more excellent body of the whole world, by
the means of the more potent and far more excellent soul, with the which
this body of the universal world is endued, and by which it subsisteth. For it
all the parts of the world have life, (as manifestly appearing it has) then
must it needs follow, that wholely it lives, for that the parts draw and
derive their life from the whole, from the which they being separated, cannot
but perish and die. And hereupon they infer, that the Heaven compassing all
things, is that Soul, which nourishes and susteineth all things. Also,
further they affirm, that all the forms, virtues, and faculties of things, by
which all things are neurished, sustained, and have their being do come from
the worlds Soul.

And as the body and soul are gathered and joined together in one, through the
benefit of the Spirits bond, for that it is partaker of both Natures: so the
soul and body of the world are knit together by the means of the Aethereall
Spirits going between, joining each part of the whole into one subsistence.
And yet hereof we must not conclude as did Aphrodisaeus and Philoponas, which
were Platonists, that the world is a most huge living creature, endued with
sense and understanding, wise and happy: the which is a most absurd and false
opinion. But the Platonists by the soul of the world, gave us rather to
understand a certain spirit, which cherishes, quickens, conserueth, and
susteineth all things, Genesis 1.
as it were a certain spirit of that Elohym, or great God, which moved upon
the waters: which Plato might remember, as one not ignorant of Moses, and
thereupon frame his soul of the world. Whereupon also it must needs come to
pass, that all these inferior things, otherwise transitory and infirm,
should soon come to destruction, without they were conserved and continued in
their being by that divine power, perpetually maintaining and suspecting them:
the which being disseuered, a great confusion and perturbation of the whole
world arise thereof. Which ruin and destruction, God of his great goodness
would prevent, creating that universal Nature, which should defend all this
great work, and keep it safe and sound, by his virtue and moderation: and
that by the yearly and continual rotation and revolution of the right Heaven,
and by the Influences and virtues of the Stars, Planets, and Celestial
powers, all things might be well governed, and might constantly remain and
abide in full fastnes of their estate, until the predestined time of their
dissolution.

To this Aethereall spirit, or rather Divine power, every effectual and
Omnipotent, Plato in his Timaeo gives testimony, when he speaks thus: When
the sempiternall GOD had created this Universal, he put into it certain
seeds of reason, and brought in the beginning Life, that he might beget with
the world the procreating force. Wherein our explication which I brought before
concerning the Soul of the world is confirmed. Which also agrees with that
which the Prophet Moses has written, and which King David has in his Psalm,
in these words: By the word of the Lord were the Heavens made, and all the
virtue of them by the spirit of his mouth. By which virtue of the quickening
spirit, that great Trimegistus more conversant and exercised in Moses writings,
then all other Philosophers, uttered these divine words in his second book,
which is called Asclepias: All spirit (says he) in the world, is acted and
governed by the spirit. The spirit tells all things: the world nourishes
bodies, the spirit gives them soul. By the spirit all things in the world are
ministered, and are made to grow and increase. And after that he says again:
All things have need of this spirit. For it carries all things, and it
quickneth and nourishes all things, according to the dignity of each thing
in it self. Life and the spirit is brought forth out of the holy fountain. By
which divine words it appears plainly, that this eternal and quickening
spirit is infused and put into all things: so that it is not observed to deduce
and derive the actions, forces, and powers: also all natural things, from the
spirits, as from the causes.

CHAP. III.
Having spoken sufficiently of the first and second beginning, that is to say
of God and universal Nature: God the first cause using that general Nature as
his handmaid: it rests that somewhat be spoken of nature natured, that is to
say, of that which is particular. To make an apt and convenient definition
whereof, let us know that it is no other thing, than every natural body
consisting of form and matter. For of these two causes, and not only of the
causes, but also of the parts of the whole compound, all nature, that is to
say, every natural body consists. For the Peripateticks do think, that
whatsoever is the beginning of generation, ought to be called nature by a
certain peculiar right. And Aristotle says, that the same, from whence any
thing is made at the first, and whereof it has the first motion, mutation is
the very beginning. Metaph. 5.
I say the beginning, from whence the essence of all natural things arises.
The which nature Aristotle in another place defines to be the beginning
substantial and the cause of motion, and of the rest thereof, Cap. 1.
in the which it is at the first, and not by Accidents: the explication of
which definition he has comprehended in eight books. And Aristotle does
rightly call Nature, the cause and the beginning of internal motion. For those
things which are made by Nature, and are therefore called natural, have a
certain beginning of motion, whereby they are moved of their own accord, not
by force. Whereby plainly appears the difference between those things which
are natural, and which are endued with an effectual spirit; and with power to
work by it self: and those things which are made by Art, which have no force
nor power of doing, but are dead, and deuoided of all sense and motion.

By these things it appears, that things natural are called properly natural
existences or beings, and such as have nature. And they are said to have
nature, which possess in themselves the beginning of their motion, and of
their rest: the which beginning of motion of every thing, is either the form
or the matter, whereof we have spoken. Form, which is wholly spiritual, has
all her motion likewise spiritual. So the soul is of this same nature in a
living creature, the motions and senses plainly celestial, spiritual, and a
light beginning. Whereas the Matter is terrestrial, ponderous, and corporal,
the other beginning of natural motion. By whose weight and grossness, the
body tends downward, so as this kind of motion proceeds not from the
soul, or spiritual form, but from the corporal matter, which is
terrestrial and heavy by his own nature. Hereof it comes, that the name of
nature, is given as well to Matter as to Form: but more aptly and conveniently
to Form: because Form does manifestly give to a thing his being, actually:
whereas Matter alone cannot perform that.

For not every living creature, has sense and motion from that body which is
solid, terrestrial and ponderous: but only from the spiritual form: that is
to say, the soul moving the body, and informing it with the vital virtues. As
for example.

A horse is in act, and in truth a horse, when he neither moves, leapeth, nor
runs: but these motions which are spiritual, are the effects and operations
of the soul or form, whereas otherwise the body having nothing but the
lineaments, and visible form, whereby it seems a horse is mere
terrestrial, heavy and dead. Howbeit, neither the soul alone of the horse,
can be said to be a horse, except it be coupled with the body.

For both being joined and coupled together make a horse.

Know therefore that the Form is far more noble and excellent then the
Matter: and that Nature as touching her effects and operations, is of that
power that it generateth, and gives being to all things, it puts matter on
the forms, it beautifieth, and suffers nothing to be corrupted, but
preserves all things in their estate. Th^se her virtues, faculties and powers,
she very apparently shows, when as she works and causes all sorts of
beings out of the (...), and out of the seeds and beginning of all things,
Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury: and informs with great variety of impressions of
the vital spirits, colors and taste, and with the properties of such kind of
powers and faculties, that it gives to every thing so much as concerns the
office and dignity thereof, in all sufficiency. The which building and (...)
of things, so apt^^ and conveniently formed in order, in number, and measure,
we may w^ll call divine, not terrestrial and corporal (...) same be
natural, according to the power which God has given unto Nature.

And yet we must not think that God has so forsaken the frame of this world,
that he sits idle, as having given such admirable and potent ^ffects to
nature only, according to the opinion of An^xagoras, Protagoras, and many
other Athe^^^i all Philosophers, which acknowledge no other God but Name, as
also did the Epicures. (...) it they be to be accused and condemned for so
wicked an opinion, then do they deserve no small reprehension, which deny
nature her parts and offices in working.

For the offices pecu^^ar both of her first and second cause, are to be
attributed to either, according to (...). Neither are these places of Scripture
any thing repugnant. (...) is God which works all in all. And again: in him
we live, move, and have our being. For albeit this is true, yet God has
appointed Nature as a means to fulfill his will, the which Nature he having
(...) with the virtues of working, he by the same begins, furthereth, and
perfiteth all things. Therefore the second cause, is called Nature, because by
the same, as by a vital instrument, God, who is the first cause works all
things. For thus God feeds men with bread, the which he has endued with a
natural faculty of nourishing, that the nature of bread may be said to feed
and nourish, whereto he has predestined the same, by the form of natural
bread.

Thus therefore these things are to be reconciled, that we acknowledge God to
be the first cause of working in all other causes, because he has made the
causes, and has given power of working, and does himself work together with
them, and that we believe that he stirs up, provoke, directs and
moderateth Nature, by the power, force, and unity which he has given to her,
to do all things by her proper motions. So that we must seek the cause and
form of all natural actions in Nature, which God has made potent with
spiritual virtues, by which it acts and works in the matter: for that
nothing can proceed from the matter it self being dead, which is Vital, or
endued with the faculties of working.

CHAP. IIII
THis word (Beginning) extends very far. For as Arts and Sciences, so also
all other things have their proper and set beginnings. Plato entreating of
Beginnings, one while appoints three: namely, God, Pattern, and Matter:
another while he appoints two only, that is to say, that which is infinite,
and that which is terminable, and to be limited. By the word Infinite, he
means Matter: and by the word Terminable, he means Form, as bringing a
thing within a certain compass, and restraining a matter excurrent within
bonds and limits.

Aristotle varyed not much from the opinion and sentence of his Master, albeit
he declared the same in other words, calling that Form which Plato named
Terminable. And that which Plato called Infinite; Aristotle names, Matter:
appointing Privation, by it self, for a third beginning.

Let it not therefore seem absurd to any, that we appoint three beginnings of
all things, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, as if it were thereby intended to
overthrow, by our constitution, the beginnings of the ancient Philosophers,
whereas we join and agree with them. For if we grant to Aristotle, his
beginnings, what difference will there be between him and us. We admit (if
you please) the distinction, by which he divides his beginnings, namely, into
the first matter, into the simple matter, and into that which is remote,
enduring all alterations of forms, or wherein there is power to be made
subject to all forms, and in two contraryes, to wit, Form, and Privation: the
which ability of taking form, is in the subject.

We grant that these beginnings, of all other, are the more parciptible in
understanding than in sense. As therefore our beginnings, which we appoint out
of which al mixed things are compounded and be, cannot by the Aristotelian
Philosophers be overthrown: so in like Aristotelian beginnings cannot by ours,
be destroyed. For all this whole world is divided into two Globes, to wit, into
the inferior Heaven, which is Aetheriall, and Airie: and into the inferior
Globe, which comprehends Water and Earth. The superior, which is Aetheriall
has in it Fire, lightning, and brightness: and this firery Heaven, is a
formal and essential Element.

What things soever are comprehended in these four bodies, which are the
Elements and receptacles of all things, are either simple things, or bodies,
mixed and compounded of them.

They are simple which are without mixture, existing apart and several by
themselves: of the which all things are made, and into the which all things are
resolved. They are compound or corporeat, which both are made of simples, and
into simples.

And simples may be distinguished into those things which are simple forms,
and into those which are simple matters: or into those things which are simply
formals, and into those which are simply materials. So bodies are divided into
material bodies, and into bodies formal.

Those things which are simply formal are astrall and spiritual: the Elements
are formal: Seeds are formal: and the three beginnings are formal: that is
to say, so spiritual, that they come not within the compass of our (...).

But the formal Elements (whereof we speak^) are they in w^ose closet the
astral seeds o^ things, and the formal beginnings, are defused and laid up, as
in their proper rec^^^^cles: in the which simple and spiritual Elements of
seeds, and spiritual beginnings, the (...) and quickening Sciences,
properties, and roots of propagating (...) increase of al things, lie hid,
wherein also all habites, (...), and figures, qualities, quantities and
dimentions, savors, ^dours and coolours are included, which do budde (...)
and flourish out of their bosom in their due time, by opertune maturitie. And
these simple Elements or beginnings, do embrace the spiritual seeds, with so
great simphathy and friendship, and do render to the Elements and beginnings,
mutual reciprocation of love, that being brought by the parents into some
particular kind, or form, they never make an end, (by the recordation of
their union with the simple Elements) but that at the last again, the
predestination and (...) of the natural bodies being consummated, they return
back again to their graundfathers, and great graundfathers, and do rest
there: even as the floods passing and issuing out of their Element of the sea,
and running in their course hither and thither, leaving at the length every
where behind them their generation (or their womb e^o^erated) they return to
their beginning again: whereupon by mutual copulation they receive new force
and strength to increase their issue.

And this is the perpetual circulation, by which the heaven is married to the
Earth, and the inferior Elements do conioyne with the superior. For the
continual vapors arising from the center of the earth, being expulsed into
waters, and being carried from waters into air, by the attraction of the
Celestial Stars: and also by the force and appetite of the inferior
Elements to bring forth issue, and to conceive from heaven, the seeds passing
too and again, at the last the Elements return to their parents full and
impregnated with Celestial forms, and do there nourish their seeds, until
at the length they bring forth in due season, and do exclude their
generation. The which impregnation comes from no other, than from those
astrall seeds, and those three several beginnings, Mercury, Sulphur, and
Salt, furnished and fulfilled with all science, properties, virtues, and
tinctures; and do borrowe and fit to themselves, out of their spiritual
body, a material, and do animate and adorn it with their properties. For it
belongs unto Mercury to give life unto the parts: to Sulphur, to give
increase of body: and to Salt, to compact those two together, and to conioyne
them into one firm body.

GOD the Creator of all things, made the world after his own Image, which may
plainly appear in this, that albeit the whole world is one, yet it ioyeth in
the number of three, being framed in order, number, and measure, in whose
bosom these three simple bodies were included, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury.

Therefore let us compare the works of God a little with the similitude of the
Trinity. The world is divided into these three parts, Intellectual,
Celestial, and Elementall. The Elementall (to let the other two alone, as
less known unto us) consists of Minerals, Vegetables, and animals: beside
the which, there is nothing to be found in this world. Of Minerals, there are
three differences, Stones, Metals, and mean Minerals. In like manner among
Vegitables, there are three sorts: Herbs, Trees, and Plants.

Also of Animals there are three orders, creeping things, swimming things, and
flying things. If we should prosecute every particular at large, we shall
find this Teruarie every where and in all the parts thereof. But we will
consider of man only in this point.

Man consists of Spirit, Soul, and body: as holy Writ testifies. The Spirit
says, Hermes is represented by Mercury: the Soul is represented by Sulphur:
and the Body, by Salt. 1. These. 5. 23.
The Spirit consists of mind, reason, and fantasy. The Soul has three
factulties, natural, vital and Animal. Heb. 4. 12.
The Body is cut into three parts in Anatomy: to wit, into head, belly, and
members. These have three principal members, whereunto others are subject: the
brain, the heart, and the liver. The brain has three helps to purge by, the
mouth, the nostrils, and the ears. The purgers and receivers of uncleanness
from the heart, are, the Midry^e, the Lungs, and the great Arteries. The
purgers of the Liver, are the Milt, the bladder of the Gaul, and the Reins.
So there are three principal vessels which do serve the whole body, namely,
the Arteries, the Sinews, and the Veins. Further if we consider the head
again, it has three skins. The brain has three bellyes, two soft before,
and one hard behind. There are three principal instruments of voice, the
throat, the palate, and the kernels. To conclude this point, if all these
should be disseuered and separated into their beginnings, they might be
resolved into Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt, whereof they consist.

Therefore these three formal beginnings, which we have described by their
offices and propertions, albeit they are more spiritual than corporal, yet
being joined with simple Elements, they make a material body mixed and
compound, they increase and nourish it, and preserve it in his estate unto the
predestined end.

And seeing the properties, Impressions, and faculties are inset and included
in those beginnings, and have those vital qualities of tastes, odours, and
colors hidden in them, how material soever those seeds be: yet
notwithstanding they rather contend to come near to Form, than to Matter:
but the Elements do more cleave and inclyne to Matter than to Form. And
therefore the Philosophers call them properly simple beginnings formal,
because they are more principal, adorned and enriched with the first and
chief faculties of astral seeds. But the Elements, they call beginnings,
material simple. To the one, they attribute actual qualities, and to the
other passive. And so of them both, as it were secondarily and so near as may
be, all mixed bodies are compounded and do consist.

If therefore we shall thoroughly discuss and ransacke every particular
indiuidiall in his kind, and their generation, we shall find that which is
said to be true: namely, that some simple beginnings are formal and
spiritual: others material, corporal, and visible. And that the Inuisibles
are the Elements simple, formal, the astral seeds, and spiritual beginnings.
Also that the visibles are all one and the same, but yet covered with a
material body. The which two bodies, spiritual and material, invisible and
visible, are contained in every Individual, albeit, that which is spiritual,
cannot be discerned, but by reason of motion of life, and of functions, and yet
is within it.

These visible and material bodies are of three sorts. Seeds. Beginnings.
Elements.


Of these 3. some are Active, as Seeds, and Beginnings. Passive, as are the
Elements.


The Active bodies of visible Seeds, wherein there is any virtue, are The
seeds of living creatures, put forth by Venus. The seeds of herbs and trees,
in their several cases and trunkes. The seeds of Mines, overwhelmed with a great
heap of impediments.


All which lie hidden in themselves have Spirits.

The Active bodies of beginnings, have Two moist, Mercury. Sulphur.
One dry: Salt.


Mercury is a sharp liquor, passable, and penetrable, and a most pure and
Aethereall substantial body: a substance ayrie, most subtle, quickening, and
full of Spirit, the food of life, and the Essence, or term, the next
instrument.

Sulphur is that moist, sweet, oily, clammy, original, which gives substance
to it self: the nourishment of fire, or of natural heat, endued with the force
of mollifying, and of giving together.

Salt, is that dry body, saltish, merely earththy, representing the nature of
Salt, endued with wonderful virtues of dissoluing, congealing, clensing,
emptying, and with other infinite faculties, which it exercises in the
Indiuiduals, and separated in other bodies, from their indiuiduals.

These three beginnings, were by Hermes the most ancient Philosopher, called
Spirit, Soul, and Body. Mercury the Spirit, Sulphur the Soul, Salt ye Body,
as is already said.

The body is joined with the spirit, by the bond of Sulphur: the soul, for
that it has affinity with both the extremes, as a mean coupling them
together. For Mercury is liquid, thin, flexible. Sulphur is a soft oil
passable; salt is dry, thick, and stable. The which notwithstanding are so
proportionate together, or tempered equally the one with the other, that a
manifest sign, and great analogy or conuenience is found in this contrariety
of beginnings. For Sulphur, or that oily moisture, is (as I have said) a mean,
which with his humidity, softness, and fluidity or passablenes, joins the
two extremes, that is to say, fixed salt, and flying Mercury: that is to say,
the drynes of salt, and the moystnes of Mercury, with his viscus and clammy
humiditie: the thickness of salt, and the subtlety of Mercury (utterly
contrary) with his fluiditie: which holds the mean between stable, and
flying. Moreover Sulphur, by reason of his exceeding sweetness, does contemper
the sharpness or sowernes of Mercury, and the bitterness of salt: and by his
clammynes, does conioyne the subtle flying of Mercury, with the firmness and
fastness of salt.

CHAP. V. Concerning Salt.
OF all other, the Philosophical salt is of greatest virtue and force to
purge, and is as it were the general clenser of whole nature, delivering the
same from al impuritie; whether it be the belly, by siege; the stomach, by
vomit; the reins, by urine; or the body, by sweat; opening and clensing
obstructions, coming of what cause soever.

This kind of purging is very large: whose parts albeit they tend to one end,
yet they have as it were diverse and contrary effects, proceeding from one
subject, which cannot be seen. And as the effects are diverse, so are there
diverse kinds of Saltes, which according to their diversity, have diverse
tastes and sundery properties of euacuations, and clensings, and diverse other
faculties.

But among Salts, that which is more bitter and nearest to the taste of Aloes
or Gaul, shows his proper working in purging the belly by siege. Such Salts
Chemists call Salt- Niter, or Niterous salts. Saladine, an ancient and great
Physician* speaking of Salts, says thus: There are four famous kinds of Salt,
to wit, the salt of bread, that is to say Common-salt, salt-gem, salt-naptie,
and salt-Indi^. And afterward he says, that this last is of all other the most
b^tter, sharp, and most violent, and therefore of greatest force to purge. And
he says, that al Salt is as it were a spur to other medicines with the which
it is mingled: for that it makes them to work more speedily. Lastly, he
says, that all Salt, brings forth gross Phlegmatic humors.

Among Salts, some are earthie, some watery, and some aierie, or such as have
in them predominant, either the Element of that earth, of water, or of air:
insomuch some of them are fixed, and are of the nature of earth: other some are
between fixed and flying, and do retain a certain middle watery property.
But Sal Ammoniac is of nature spiritual, (as is also the common Ammoniac) and
of all other most flying and ayrie.

And al Salt, whether it be flying, or fixed, is no otherwise dissolved and
commixed in waters, than with the water of Water, and if one be a dry water,
the other is moist.

These three kinds of Saltes, which lie hydden in the secret parts of things,
whether they be metalline, vegitable, or animal, and which are principally
seated in that element, which produces his generations out of the earth, they
do participat of the nature of the three beginnings. For the common salt, and
that which is of the sea, passing through the philter of the earth, and boiled
and digested with the heates of the bowels of the same earth, does participate
of the nature of fixed and firm salt, the father and original of all others.
But Niter, being partly fixed, and in part volatile, does participate of the
sulphurus beginning of things: even as Sal Amoniac does participate of the
Mercuriall beginning spiritual and ayrie: whose extremes, to wit, fixed and
volatile, of the sulphurus salt, or the Niterus, partaker of the volatile
nature in part, and partly fixed, are coupled together by intercession. By this
straight and wonderful bond of the three beginnings, three diverse substances
of Salts, of sundry properties, do manifestly appear, like in essence, but
not in natures of qualities. For beyond all expectation, a good witty
Salt-maker, will extract out of a fat and fertile earth, (by washings) these
three kinds of Saltes: namely, the marine and fixed, which is dissolved in lie
made of ashes, the Niterus by it self, which is there coagulated or congealed:
and the Ammoniac volatile and ayrie, flying in part out of the Lie, and partly
contained in both the Saltes and therefore hydden from the senses. This may be
done by a skillful Salt-maker, albeit he were utterly ignorant of all the
myster^es which here are hidden.

Which three distinct differences of Saltes, as they are to be found in every
fat kind of earth, so out of both the saltes, namely the marine and fixed, and
the Niterus volatile, they may be thenceforth separated. For those Saltes,
being put into a retort together, or apart by themselves, with a receiver,
first by the force of fire stilleth forth a Volatile Salt, sower, sharp and
Mercurial: then, with a greater heat, comes forth a Salt Sulphurus and
Niterus, and sweet: the third Salt, which is Salt upon Salt fixed, will not
move with any force of fire, but remains constantly in the bottom of the
glass.

All tastes are brought forth out of these three sundry Saltes, common to that
triple beginning of things, so as we shall not need to have recourse to hot
and cold, moist and dry. For they are procreated out of those beginnings alone.
Fixed Salt, consider as it is simple, and without commixtion, makes simply a
salt taste. A Sulphurus Salt also simply understood, yields out of it a
sweet oylely taste. But Mercurial Salt, in like sort conceived by it self and
apart, represents a sower taste. All which tastes mixed together in equal
proportions, yield a pleasant and delightful taste, without any sense or taste
of any of the particulars.

These three beginnings cannot be found simple in a mixed body, in such wise,
but that they have some composition, and do in mixture communicate their
qualities together: as may be seen in sea salt, and salt-peeter, out of the
which may be separated not only a salt and sharp taste, but also a sweet
taste. And it is certain, that in things sulphurus and oylely, and also in
Mercurial liquors, there is to be found a conjunction of such tastes.

For this cause we affirm, that all fixed Salt of a mixed body, is very brinish
and exceeding bitter: the sulphurus, of a fat and sweet taste: and the
Mercurial, sower, sharp and fiery. So that upon these simple qualities, salt,
sweet, and sower, (which are to be found in all bodies mineral, vegitable and
animal) all others tastes do depend.

And as touching the elementary qualities passive, which are as organical and
isntrumental causes, they little appertain to this matter: whether it be the
terrestrial and dry passive quality, and passive coldness, or whether it be
the aerie moist vapor, the which tastes of this sort, or potent qualities,
proceeds from these three beginnings, do either further to this or that
nature, or else do impair and weaken them. To make this plain by manifest
reasons, and to lay it open before our eyes, we will begin to entreat of mixed
bodies, the which notwithstanding according to the Elements, are most simple.

CHAP. VI.
IT is already said, that tastes by a certain private right are ascribed to
Salts, or to their spirits: which evidently appears hereby, that the
differences of tastes, are not produced but from the differences of Saltes: or
contrariwise, the differences of Saltes, are produced from the differences of
tastes.

In the bosom of nature, there are found almost so many kind of Saltes, as
there are variety of tastes. Dug or mineral, and marine Salt, is endued
with a salt quality. Niter with a bitter quality: Alum, with a sharp:
Vitriol, with a sower: Ammoniac, with a sharp and sower quality. But sweet
Saltes do manifestly appear, not only in Manna, and in Sugar, but also in
marine salt, and in salt of Vitriol, out of which they are to be separated. And
(as we have said) in every of these salts, these three first beginnings, Salt,
Sulphur, and Merucry, are contained jointly together: one aerie, mercurial, or
spiritual, the which is sharp and sower; the other earthly, which is sower,
and bitter: and the third oylely and sweet, which is a mean between them
both. In Vitriol alone, is manifestly to be seen, egar, sharp, sower, and
astringent, for that of all other Salts, it is most corporal.

But those tastes or qualities, which are mixed with passive and Elementarie
qualities, have not the full force of every of these, but are made more weak
by mixtion: for the sharp (which is not extracted and separated but by the
force of the fire with the aerie part) is mixed with a mercurial liquor: the
sower is mixed with a flegmetique, or watery humor: and the eger, with a
terrestrial dryness: the which, the more they have of the Elementary
qualities, and the same passive, so much the more weak they are and impaired.
But if the active qualities be separated from the passive, as by art it is to
be done, then the tarte and sower do obtain their full force, and do
manifestly and fully burn the tongue with their fires: for the sharp has a
more fiery and burning quality: and the sower, a more watery property. For
the sharp partaking of the nature of fire, has overmuch virtue to attenuate,
dissipate, and to fret: the sower, as, aerie, watery, and of thin parts, has
virtue to cut, to open, to refrigerate, and also to put away putrifactions.
The eger and more tarte, which remains in the Colchotar (after the extraction
of the sharp oylely, and sower water, with the aerie parts of the elemental
qualities) do possess a nature and force to thicken and bind, by reason of
the earthy and gross property.

But if from that terrestrial part, the pure (which is Salt) be extracted, it
will have a salt taste, by the virtue whereof it will be made, both deiectiue,
and vomitiue. And in the sweet Sulphur of Vitriol, there is a manifest
sweetness, which is plainly stupefactiue.

Finally, in all Salts, almost, (disseuered by Chymicall separation) these
three are to be discerned, Sower, Sweet, and Bitter, which have force of
active qualities, and yet not destitute of the moist passive, terrestrial and
gross, but with them, in sundry wise so seasoned and tempered, that they bring
to the Salts, varety of tastes.

And let this serve for demonstration, by which it may plainly appear, that
those sundry differences of tastes, are manifestly contained in Salts, both
jointly and severally, especially in their spirits: And according to the
opinion of Hermes scholars, we deny that those inset and natural qualities,
virtues, and properties, are to be arrogated to hot, moist, and dry, but
rather to the essences of a nature which is salt, bitter, eger, sharp, sower,
tarte, sweet, and oylely.

For there are six hundred frigidities or coldes, six hundred heates,
humidities, and ^^gities or drinesses, then the which nothing does more heat,
cool, moysten, and dry. But they have never brought any savor or taste to
pure or simple water, or to other Juices or liquors, which have been destitute
of Salt.

Whatsoever is without Salt, or destitute of a brinish spirit, can never be
discerned by taste, but is utterly unsavory. Yet notwithstanding, it simple
water be powered upon ashes, with a little heat, that water will draw unto it
saltness, bitterness, or sharpness, more or less, according to the nature
of the salt, more or less salt, or bitter, which is contained in the ashes.

And if any man object, that Honey and Sugar by boiling, or by the force of
fire, may be made sharp or bitter: we answer that it comes so to pass, when
the aerie sulphurus, and watery parts, which bring and preserve the sweetness
do perish and are separated by decoction. But terrestrial Salt, whose faculties
are inward, have this property, that of their own nature they possess, this
or that sharp or bitter taste, how extreme soever it be. So if thou shall
draw out of onions and garlic a Volatile and aerie sharp Mercurial Salt,
which arises in the superficies and uppermost of their bodies: thou shall make
them more sweet and pleasing, and to put off their sharpness, by which they
bite the tongue: but yet they will retain and represent their hot quality,
with the which they abound, by reason of their fixed Saltes. As out of Saltes,
so out of odours also, we may draw certain faculties, without the help of
hot qualities. For seeing they are referred to the diverse properties of
Sulphur, sundry odours do arise therfrom, and not from the qualities. Which if
they be sweet and pleasing, the brain receives them with pleasure and
delight, whereas unpleasant savors or odours, are offensive both to the nose
and to the brain, and are rejected. Such is the marcotical and stefactiue
odor of Poppie, and Hemlock, and such like which do stink, and astonish the
brain, by reason (as Physicians affirm) of their cold quality: Wherein they
break the Law of their axioms, for that they hold that their odours are of
a hot quality, as most true it is. For that which is stupefactiue in the
Poppeis, and in Opium, is no other thing, but a certain oylely and sulphurus
part conceiving flame, (much like to that kind of oil, which is extracted
out of the seeds of Poppey) the which albeit it do readily burn, yet as it is
commonly thought, it shows most cold effects. The common Physicians, to
correct such coldness attributed to Opium, use helps, as is to be seen in
their opiat and antidotarie medicines, wherein Opium is an Ingredient. Of these
kind of co^positions Myrepsus describes above four score: where Euphorbium
(which is of a fiery and burning faculty) is no more forborne then either of
the Peppers, or such other like causticke and burning simples, of extreme
hot quality: when as the true and proper corrector of Opium (that I may so
speak) well known to Hermeticall Physicians, is Vinegar; which puts away
stupefactiue vapors and fumes, that they ascend not to the brain, so
suppressing them by the sharpness thereof, that it retains them: whereas
their hot correctors do more stir them up and multiple them. Hereof come
sinister and deadly passions and pains, by reason whereof men are constrained
to use the imperfect Laudanum of Empiricks, against the deadly danger of such
medicines.

CHAP. VII.
NOw somewhat shall be said concerning colors. The dogmatical Physicians,
that they might not diminish any whit of the qualities of colors, are wont to
refer to those qualities a certain variety of colors: and have observed and
noted certain frivolous and light observations: as when they say, that in a
white onion, or in white wine, a man may judge by the color a great coldness,
than in a read onion, or in red wine. Whereas white sublimate, and Arsnic,
albeit they are most white like unto Crystal: yet nevertheless under this
whiteness, they foster and hide a most burning and deadly fire. Yea Sugar it
self, which is so sweet, white, and pleasant, does hide in the innermost parts
thereof, a wonderful blackness and sharpness, from whence may be extracted
most sharp liquors and waters, which will dissolve and break the most hard
metalls. Therefore it is absurd, to sharp and form colors from hot and
cold, which do proceed from the spirits only, or else from the most thin
and aerie vapors, which lie hid in the Salt: especially in that Salt which by
nature is sulphurus, such as is Niter, or Saltpeter, as men call it. Niter
thoroughly depured and cleansed, will be as white as snow; from which whiteness,
may be drawn infinite sorts of colors, most excellent to behold. Which
colors come from the only spirits of Saltpeter, which are able to pearce the
most hard kind of glass, by the force of fire thrust forth in the likeness of
volatile meal, and cleaning in the ouerture of the glass Alembic. By which
colors, a man may behold the body of the Alembic to be tained and dyed, as
well within as without in the superficial part: Which colors are of no less
variety, then are the flowers of the earth in the time of the Spring. Hereby
it appears plainly, that this diversity of all colors is to be taken from
the spirits, no less nor otherwise, then are all other properties and virtues
of all other things to be referred unto them.

If therefore the foundation of these three things be laid upon three
beginnings, and upon their spirits, it will be very firm and stable, in such
wise, that in the ignorance of any cause, it shall not be needful to fly to
hidden properties.

If this doctrine, according to the truth thereof, be received, learned, and
studied, being vpholden also with the authorities of that great Hypocrates, it
shall easily drive from us the darkness of ignorance, and shall bring with it
the light of knowledge, which will remove all difficulties: For out of this
school are learned most certain and infallible Thearemes and Axioms, against
which, as against most assured grounds, there can be no opposition or
resistance: but will be allowed by the general consent of indifferent Judges.

Let us take an example from Vinegar: whereof many famous Physicians, cannot
tell what certainly to affirm. For, because it is sharp, and therefore
cools, they will have it to be cold. But contrariwise, when they behold the
faculty thereof, to be attenuating, cutting, and dissoluing, also their ^ernor
and boiling thereof, when it is put upon earth or claie, they are constrained
to forsake their opinion, uncertain what to judge thereof. Who, if they had
been acquainted with the Hermeticall doctrine, they should have known, that
the cause of such tartness or sowernesse in vinegar, comes by the separation
of the spirit, from the wine: as is plainly seen by experience. For the longer
that wine stands in the Sun, or in a hot place, the more by little and
little it waxes sharp; and whatsoever is aerie therein, and of the
quintessence of the wine, by the force of the heat vaporeth away. This eternal
and celestial essence being gone, which was the cause of the wines sweetness
(which sweetness has always joined with it nevertheless, a certain pricking
very acceptable to the palate, by reason of a singular temper of sharpness
Vitriolated by sweet and Sulphurus spirits, put by the instinct of nature into
wine) at the length it waxes sower: the cause of whose sharpness, is not to
be referred to the cold qualities, but to those hidden and sower spirits of
Salt, which by the bond of the sulphurus substance, were contained and kept in
their office and working in the wine: the which bond being dissolved, the
spirits range at will, and do make manifest their nature, which was before
hidden. Hereupon it comes, that vnegers are sharper in one sort, then in
another, according as they have in them more or less of the nature of Salt
Ammoniac, and ^o whit of the sulphurus substance. For simple water deuoide of
all Salt, can never by reason of the coldness therein wax sower. But as from
wine, so from meat, and from ale or beer, and from boiling new wine, may be
separated the proper water of life, and ethereal substance, the which being so
separated, they become eager, because they contain in themselves a sharp salt
of nature.

Such is that sharp salt, which Philosophers call their Mercury, or Salt
Ammoniac, Volatile and spiritual (because of al metalline salts, the common
Ammoniac is most Volatile, such as in the form of most white and salt meal,
may be carried up unto the clouds by sublimation, and yet has a dry and
spiritual nature, which the Philosophers call their dry water: because this
Salt is so far forth Volatile and flying, that it is lifted up together with
the aerie or watery vapor, of the which is made the mixture of the compound:
and so great is the sharpness of this salt, that one scruple or eighteen or
twenty grains of this salt perfitly refined and made most simple, dissolved in
a pot of commom water, does make all the same wonderfully sower.

And this is the Salt, (the sulphurus essence taken away) which shows it
self evidently to be seen by his sharpness in vinegar, with watery
substance. But the more strong the wine shall be, the more sharp the ferment of
the vinegar, and the more vehement the tartness thereof will show it self:
out of the which the pearcing, attenuating, and dissoluing spirits, are
extracted by a skilful workma^: the which forces and faculties cannot proceed
from any other thing, then from that spiritual and Volatile salt Ammoniac,
mixed with a watery humor.

And to make this more plain, and to prove it by effect, take the most strong
Vinegar, white or red: distill the same in Balneo Mariae, till it be dry, with
a gentle fire, out of a pint and a half, you shall extract three parts or
more, like most clear water, but most sharp and sower, the bottom of the
matter as the leese and pheses remaining in the bottom of the glass with the
most sharp and biting Salt, the which, because it is fixed, and cleaving to
the terrestrial part of the Vinegar, cannot be extracted but by the great
violence of the fire. By which mean a most sharp oil, like in nature to Aqua
Regia, most corroding and fretting, is extracted, not by reason of the heat of
fire, but by the force and power of a brinish substance which is expelled in
form of an oil with the Salt from the rest of the ^eces, by fire.

But leaving that sharp fire of the Leese, let us take in hand to explicate
the sowernes of the Vineagar distilled. By a soft and gentle distillation, is
first of all extracted, a certain watery elementary phleme, which is drawn out
of the whole body almost without taste, leaving in the bottom of the glass,
another liquour, far more sower and sharp, and therefore more strong to
dissolve, which otherwise before was nothing so sharp, because the Salt
Ammoniac was tempered and mixed with a watery Phleame. Whereof if thou desire
to know the quantity, take so much of the best Salt Tartar, which is of the
same nature, but fixed, by which if thou draw by little and little three
pintes of this Vinegar distilled, and disph^eamed, to the weight of one ounce,
thou shall find the volatile Salt Ammoniac to be conjoined with the sharp
fixed Salt: and that which shall be distilled from the same, will become
altogether without taste, or a little sweetish, the volatile Salt Ammoniac
being gone, through the passage in the fixed Salt. So that the said ounce of
Salt Tartar, is increased by one scruple or more of volatile Salt, increasing
the quantity of the other fixed. Thus that volatile Salt Ammoniac which
vanishes out of the Vinegar with the watery and aierie substance is retained by
passage, in the proper fixed Salt, and there abioeth, and by his absence,
dispoyling the distilled liquor, of all sowernesse: the which is therefore of
no virtue, or of less efficacy, then pure and simple water. Hereby it
appears, how little ferment is needful to a great quantity of paste, to
acuate and augment the same, as Philosophers speak: without the which, the
elementary water will have no sharpness. For if that Salt Ammoniac be wanting,
as touching the force and virtue thereof, water has neither tartness, nor
taste at all.

Therefore a Hermetical Philosopher and Physician, which is well acquainted with
the lively anatonie of things, will teach, that the sharp, sower, and
attenuating taste of vinegar, and the dissoluing faculty thereof, arises
herehence, because tart things, whether they be waters, or juices, are mixed
and infused with salt Ammoniac: and that therefore Vinegar, not only in regard
of the tarnesse thereof, but also that most thin spirituous sower essence of
Salt, do pierce into the most inward parts even of the hard bodies. And if it
show forth any cooling effects, it comes thereof, because the sulphurus,
and fiery quality of the wine, that is to say, the Aqua Vitae, is separated:
without the separation whereof it can never be made vinegar, and can at no
time yield any taste of Aqua Vitae. And that sharpness by which it burns,
is the chariot or carrier away, of the elementarie and cold water, by the
which it is carried and pierces into the most inward and secret parts, as we
have learned by often experience, that in that water, the same sharpness is
contained, and most nearly conjoined therewith.

Now, as we have showed that the sower and mercuriall liquor of things, does
borrow that tartness, from a certain Ammoniac salt, and volatile, which
arises from the fixed: even so the sulphurus and oily liquor, does receive
and takes his virtue from no other thing, than from that sweet Niterous
sulphurus salt, which borrows the same from fixed salt: so that, in the fixed
salt, and out of that salt, that mercuriall sowernesse, and sulphurus virtue
do spring, and do receive their fruits therefro, as from the root and first
original.

As also here it is to be noted, and to be wondered at, that a tryple substance
is severally to be extracted, out of one and the same Essence: from whence all
things created, do suck and draw their faculties, virtues and properties: and
that the same do so subsist in one and the same subject, that two others are
to be produced from one other. And the same three essences, when they are
separated, and coupled together again and united, are then enriched and
increased with wonderful virtues and faculties, and have gotten exceeding
perfection. The which, the more often that they be separated and united, the
more perfect and high degrees of power and force they obtain: in such wise,
that it is to be reputed the universal and most excellent Medicine of all
others.

CHAP. VIII. Concerning the excellent goodness of Salt in Medicine, according
to ancient prescription.
IT is manifest in the Writings of Galen, and other Greek Physicians, as also
in the Traditions of the Arabians and Latins, with one consent, that Salt is
good and profitable, not only to season and sauce meats, but also for
Medicine: Albeit in the diet of sick persons, they commanded them to abstain
from salt things: They defended the use of Salt, to be necessary for the curing
of diverse diseases, for that it has virtue, to cleanse, to open, to cut, and to
make shinne, to move sweates, to further urine, and to provoke vomit.

And in this manifold faculty and virtue, it is more profitable than the most
of other remedies. For the proof whereof we will bring certain examples of
some of the most ancient and famous Physicians.

First of all Aegineta, Lib. de remed. 7. cap. 3
concerning the faculty of Salt, says thus: All Salt, has great faculty to
dry and to bind: Wherefore it consumes all whatsoever is moist in men's
bodies: and compacteth the rest by binding. For this cause it preserves from
putrefaction. But burnt Salt has greater force to resolve and consume.

Oribasius is of the same opinion, Lib. colle^. 15.
Saltes, (says he) whether they be dug out of the earth, or whether they
come out of the sea, have like faculty: and is mixed with two qualities, that
is to say, of clensing, and binding. In this notwithstanding they differ, that
Saltes dug out of the earth, are of a resolving and consuming essence, by
reason that they are of more gross parts, and do more bind.

The same Oribafius, Lib. 2. de virtute simp. medi. ad Eutrapi.
says also, speaking of Aloes, dug and marine salt have all one force, and
are mixed of two qualities, the one of clensing, the other of binding. But it
is plain, that both kinds do dry. For the which cause it consumes all
humor in the body, and thickeneth the solyde parts by binding. Burnt salt has
greater force to cleanse: but it does not contract and thicken so much as the
other.

The flower of salt, has thinner parts, than burnt salt, and is of a sharp
quality and much digesting.

Aetius has also almost the same words; Tetr. 1. sermon. 2. cap. 43. and 4. 6.
saving that he adds this concerning the froth of salt: The flower of Salt
says he, is frothy, cleaning to the rocks that are next adjoining, and it
has by nature more thin parts, than Salt it self, therefore it can much
more attenuate and resolve: but the rest of the substance, cannot thicken as
Salt does.

Paulus Aegineta, in the same Book and chapter before quoted, writes that the
same ^roth of Salt, is the flower of Salt, and is of more thin parts, and
more consuming, then is Salt it self, but does less compact. By whch it does
evidently appear, that the science of Calcination, of attenuation, and of
essences, was not unknown to them of old time. For by the working and
styrring of the sea, they learned the Art of distillation, by which they
separated the more spirituous, from the more gross: even as we see the truth
hereof to appear in the experience of charming and working simple milk. For
by that means, three sundry substances, are divided one from the other,
namely Butter, Curdes, and Whaye.

Aetius, Ter. ^. sermon 1. cap, 24.
speaking of cruditie, and of those things which do help concoction, according
to the opinion of Galen, and other Physicians, sets before us Saltes: In the
description whereof, he puts in, one pound of salt of Cappadocea, the which
surmounteth the dose of all other the Ingredients of that composition: the
which pouldred, he prescribes to be taken in a rear egg, to the quantity of
half a spoonefull, fasting in the morning. The effect whereof he shows in
these words: No man can sufficiently commend the worthiness of this medicine,
for the helping virtue which it has in cold distemperatures, correcting raw
humors: for the which cause it helps the collicke, and does gently loosen the
belly.

He describes also other saltes which loosen the belly, which draw fleame
from the head, with other helps besides. And into one composition, he
appoints to be put of clear dried salt, 144. dragmes. In the which
composition, he added of the flowers of C^amamil, of Coniza, of mountain
Calamynt, of the root of the mountain Eringium, of Origan, of Sylphium, of
Pepper of each a third part. The which Ingredients put to the quantity of
the salt aforesaid, come nothing near to the quantity thereof.

He appoints another composition of Salt: where to thirty ounces of parched
salt, he appoints a far less dose of Hysope, of wild Time, and of
Cummine: the continual use whereof, he appoints in steed of common salt,
not only for to make the meat sauory, but also for medicine. For (says he)
who so uses the same continually, shall at no time be troubled with any
disease. It helps headache, it quickens the sight, it cleanses the breast
from fleame, it makes good concoction in the stomach, and purges the kidneys.

Hereby it appears, that the ancient Physicians did not only use Salt, but
also that they made choice of the best and most clear sort, the which also
they dried and parched with heat of the fire, to make it the more forcible to
help in all obstructions. For Salts are of that power, that they take away all
manner putrefaction and corruption of worms, and do put away the original of
other vices and diseases, and do amend them. The which being so, what other
thing can be found out, for the conservation of life and health, or for the
expulsion of all diseases, more profitable.

Actuarius, also describing certain purgative Salts, does give unto them great
efficacy in helping and easing sundry diseases, In lib. de metho. me^^. cap. 9.
and (...) preventing many sicknesses.

^yrepsius describes more then twenty sundry Salts. And among their
compositions, he calls one the Apostles Salt, the which preserves the sight
to a very great age, cleanses the lunges from tough fleame, preventing coughes,
and enlarging the breath. Another composition he attributes to Saint Luke the
Evangelist, which is almost of the like virtue, the which the Priests of
Aegipt, (as he says) used for fullness, that they might be the more fit to
apply themselves to their studies: being also of force, to remedy sundry
diseases.

Marcellus Empiricus, discribed two manner of purging Salts. Many other authors
might be alleged, Li. de medidica. cap. 30.
as Gregorius Theologus, Plinius Secundus, and others, which have given great
commendation to the virtue of Salts, whose words for breuities sake, I omit.

CHAP. IX. Concerning the extractions of Salts out of all things, and Chymicall
calcinations and incinerations, known to the ancient Physicians, and used in
Medicine.
THere are some which contemn and deride our Artifice concerning the
extractions of Salts. But no wise man will speak against the thing which he
knows not. For the ancient Physicians, have used calcinations like unto
ours: as may appear by the words of Oribasius, when he makes mention of the
Calcination of Tartar, and of the feces of vinegar, put into an earthen pot,
close pasted or lated. For he says that the matter which is to be calcined,
being fast luted in a pot, and set over the fire to be baked, so long, until
it wax white, Alchimically.

Plinius Secundus, used the ashes of beasts and fowls, as most singular and
familar remedies.

All the ancient writers, speak of a little bird like a Wrenne, which is
called Regulus Troglodites, and have taught that the same being brought into
ashes, is singular remedy for the Stone. Also they say, that glass calcined
and burnt into ashes, has the same effect. And many of our later Physicians,
do use the ashes of a spoonge, drunk in white wine, for the cure of the
Broncoceles, which is a disease arysing from the throats kernells, of some
called the Hermis of the throat. This they prescribe to be drunk for the
space of one whole Moon: which is a most certain experience.

Aelius propounds many and sundry remedies, Ter. 1.
which they of old time used, which being calcined and dissolved into ashes,
according to the common fashion of Chemists, Ser. 2.
he most highly esteemed* as secrets of exceeding price. His words are these.
It is said, that it hearts horn be burnt and washed, Cap. 156.
it cures the disentery Flux, and the spitting of blood: and is given with
great profit to them that have the Iaundise: being given in the quantity of
two spoonefulls. And in another place he says: Cap. 157.
Some burn the claws of Swine, and give the ashes to those that are tormented
with the collicke, in drink. Other some say, that Asses hooues burnt, drunk
daily and do cure the falling sickness. Again he says* All burnt bones have
power to drive away and to dry up: Cap. 161.
but more especially men's bones. Much more might be brought out of Aetius
concerning these things, to prove that they of old, did use calcinations and
ashes, in diverse and sundry maladies. Albeit all ashes in general, so far
forth as they contain in them their proper Salt, have power in them to dry up,
and to cleanse, yet nevertheless they retain in them some property of that
matter out of the which they are extracted.

And this agrees with that which Aegineta teaches, Lib. 7. de re medica.
saying: Ashes have not exactly one temperature, but do differ according to the
difference of the matter which is brent. And therefore the ashes of sharp
things, as of Oaks, or Holme, do bind very much, and do stop the eruption
of blood without any other thing. But the ashes of more sharp things, as of the
fig, and Tythimal, or spurge, are more sharp and cleansing.

Oribasius writes in like manner, Coll lib. 15.
saving that he proceeds further. For he plainly teaches the Chymicall
extraction of salt out of such ashes, speaking thus: Ashes (says he) have in
them, partly that which is Earthie, and partly that which is fumie, and these
parts are thin, and the ashes steeped or infused in water, and strayned, do
pass through together: that which remains being earthie and weak, and
without biting, is made hot, having put of his force in the watering or
infusion. And thus Oribasius calls the separation of the active from the
passive and earthie (which he calls infirm, or weak, but the Chemists, the
dead and damned earth) Separation.

All whatsoever our more skillful Chemists of this age could add unto the
Calcinations and I^cinerations of the more ancient, is this one thing, that out
of such kind of Ashes (whereof Oribasius makes mention) they draw out the
whole water, and dry it up: and that which remains in the bottom, being
impure salt, they dissolve again with common water, or with the proper water
thereof, (which is better) distilled from it, before the Incineration of the
matter, that they may make the same clean and pure, and as clear as
Crystal. For they dissolve many times, they fylter, and coagulate, not to
the uttermost point of dryness: but drawing out only of that water two
third parts and more, by the pipe of the Alembick, they afterward remove the
same from the fire, that ^he salt therein contained, and set in a cold place,
may grow into a christalline I^e, which is the most pure salt of the matter
without all doubt. This salt must be gathered together, and separated with a
wooden spoone. And if there remain any part of the water, let it be
vapoured again, and then put into a vessel to stand in the cold air,
where will be coniealed a christalline residence anew, which must be separated
again, over and over so many times, until more it can grow into a Iellie or
Ise. These kind of Is^e recidences, are the true beginning of Salts, vital and
qualified with admirable virtues. And this salt has in it still the other two
substantial beginnings, Sulphur, and Mercury. For from the same, the mercurial
and sulphurous beginning, the one sweet and unctuous, the other sharp and
Etheriall, may yet be drawn by a skillful workman the more fixed part,
namely that of Salt, remaining still in the bottom. Saltes have their
corporal Impurities, but the spiritual Balsam which lies hid in them, is
the Chymicall salt, known to a few. Some of these Salts are bitter as
worme^ood, some sweet as sugar, some sharp as vitriolls, sower as Quinces or
grapes, by whose balsame they are nourished, ^ostered, and conserved. These
salts have diverse spirits, some resolving, some coniealing: And as they have
diverse spyrits, so do they work sundry and admirable effects.

CHAP. X. Wherein is proved, that the natural and original moisture in
Saltes, is not consumed by calcination, but that the very forms do lie hid
in that constant and vital beginning.
THe Natural and original moisture, with the which Saltes are replenished (as
is aforesaid) is not consumed with the force of fire, and by Calcination. For
it shall be here showed, that all the more forcible tinctures and impressions,
and the property of things, together with their most potent qualities and
powers, as tastes, odours, colors, with the very forms themselves, and such
like, are concluded, and do lie hid, in that firm, constant, and vital
beginning.

For the truth whereof, I will deliver unto you certain demonstrations,
oftentimes proved and confirmed by my own experience. One, I learned of a
friend which lodged at my house, who was the first Inuentor thereof. Another, I
received from a most learned and famous Polonian, a skillful Physician, above
26. years since.

This man was so excellently, and phylosophically skillful in the preparing of
the ashes out of all the parts of any manner of plant, with all the Tinctures and
Impressions of all the parts of the plant, and would in such wise conserve all
their Spirits, and the Authors of all their faculties, that he had above
thirty such plants prepared out of their ashes of diverse sorts, contained in
their several glasses, sealed up with Hermes seal, with the title of each
particular plant, and the property thereof, written upon the same. So, as that
if a man desired to see a Rose or Mary-gold, or any other flower, as a red or
white Poppey, or such like: then would he take the glass wherein the ashes of
such a flower was enclosed, whether it were of a Rose, a Marie-golde, a Poppey,
a Gilly-flower, or such like, according as the writing of the glass did
demonstrate. And putting the flame of a Candell to the bottom of the glass,
by which it was made hot, you might see that most thin and impalpable ashes,
or salt, send forth from the bottom of the glass, the manifest form of a
Rose, vegetating and growing by little and little, and putting on so fully the
form of stalks, leaves and flowers, in such perfect and natural wise in
apparent show, that a man would have believed verily, the same to be naturally
corporeat, whereas in truth it was the spiritual Idea, endued with a
spiritual essence: which served for no other purpose, but to be matched with
his fitting earth, that so it might take unto it a more soly body. This
shadowed Figure, so soon as the vessel was taken from the fire, turned to his
ashes again, and vanishing away, became a Chaos and confused matter.

When I had seen this secret, and endeavoring with all my might to attain to
the same, I spent much time about it, but yet lost my labor. But as touching
the demonstration following: I affirm upon my faith and credit, to be most
certain, and have often proved and experimented it by my self and may easily
be done by any man.

The Lord de Luynes Formentieres, a man of great account, both for his learning
and office, being noble, and of all men singularly beloved, long since departed
this life: with whom in his life time, I conuersed with great familiarity.
This noble man (...) very great pains, to search and find out the most
excellent secrets of nature, but specially those which appertained, either for
the preservation, or for the restoring of health. And seeking long to find such
remedies, for that he had languished in a crazed body a great while without any
help, and was judged by Physicians to be past cure, he was at the last helped,
and wonderfully restored to health, by one only Lossenge of a certain Chemical
electuary of great virtue, which the Lady de la Hone, a most noble and wise
matrone gave unto him. This Lossenge, provoked him to easy vomit, by which he
cast up from his stomach all impurity, tough and discous, like the whites of
eggs, diversely colored, in great quantity: by which he was restored to health
again, to his great joy and comfort.

Hereupon he greatly desires to know this secret, the which he not only
obtained at the hands of that noble Lady, but some others also no less
virtuous, by his own endeavor afterward: the which he used both for his own
health, and also for the good of others as need required, in the way of
Christian charity. This man coming out of France, in the time of the civil
wars, and conuersing with me, applied his mind to extract Salt out of metals:
that thereby he might prepare a remedy against the stone, dissoluing it with
crystal. This Salt being mixed with the lie made with ashes of (...) metals,
by often pouring warm water upon the same, and drawing it through too and
again (as women are wont to make their common lie) showed a proof of his
essence, included in the lie after this manner.

The lie being strained through a Filter, and oftentimes very well cleansed, was
put into a vessel of earth, having a narrow bottom, and a wide mouth, which is
called a Terime. And when the said vessel had stood without the windows in
the cold air, by the space o^ one night, it grew into an Ise, through the cold
of the winter. The window being opened early in the morning, and the lie
cleansed, there appeared a mere and firm Ise, wherein there appeared a
thousand forms of mettalls, with all the parts thereto belonging: as leaves,
stalks, and roots, being very plain and apparent to the eye of the
beholders, in such sort as no man could but acknowledge them to be metals.

When the noble man beheld this, and gazed upon it, as on a miracle, he hastily
ran unto me, and spoke to me in the words of Archymides, crying, I have
found, come, and see. And when I came into his worke-house, I took the Ise,
and brake of (...) good piece, which I handeled so warily, that it might not
melt with the warmth of my hand, and carried it to men of great worth, which
dwelt with us in that City: who beholding the Ise, affirmed most constantly
that they were mettalls, and did no less marvel then I my self did,
wondering what it should intend, and from whence, and how so excellent a thing
could proceed out of Nature: we all calling to mind this sentence of holy
writ: Remember man, that thou art Ashes, and to Ashes again thou shall
return: considering that the forces of such things do lie hid and abide in
their ashes, from whence the Resurrection of our Bodies is most assuredly to
be expected.

This gallant experiment being afterward oftentimes by me wrought, and
rightly performed by Art, brought also to my mind that History whereof I spoke
before, concerning a Poleland Physician: the which when I saw, I strove, and
endeavored all that I could, with meditation and practice to bring it to pass.
And first I thought upon the reasons how so excellent a work might be
finished: and what it was, that gave form so perfectly to a Rose, or to any
other Plant, according to the very life, with all the Natural colors thereto
belonging, in a moment, occasioned through a light heat. I say, I had diverse
and sundry cogitations with my self how this thing might be. And amyddest
these thoughts, and as I was busied in other works, I perceived that the
form and figure of a thing is included in his salt, without any color: and
that there are no other colors in water, then waterie, that is to say white:
And further, that the mettalls in that I see should be deuoid of all color,
saving waterie and white, by reason that the Ethereall and Mercuriall spirits
Vaporous and sulphurous* do vanish away, by their assation and calcination in
the Sunshine, from the which spirits the colors do arise, as is to be
seen in Salt Niter: which al beit white in show, yet put into a close Lembic,
and set over the fire in sand to be fixed, it sends forth his flying
spirits, even through the hard body of the Alembic, of six hundredth several
colors, and cleaning to the uttermost part of the vessel like volatile meal.
Seeing therefore there lie hid so many sundry colors in Saltpeter, (which is
a fat salt of the earth) there is no doubt but that the like Saltes also are
contained in all other things, which contain in them their proper colors also
drawn out of the power of the earth, which show forth themselves in their due
season by the industry of Art.

Thus after long deliberation had with my self, I fully resolved to make
trial hereof. And first I took one whole simple being in this perfect vigor
and strength in the spring time, having fullness of Juice, and impressions of
vital tinctures, which natures are included in the spirits of Saltes. This
simple (I say) I determined to beat in a marble mortar, with his stalks,
leaves and flowers, together with the roots, and so to reduce it into a Chaos
or confused mass, and to put it into a vessel of glass, closed with Hermes
seals, and so to remain to be digested, macerated, and fermented a convenient
time, out of the which at the length I might (...) those three principles,
Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, and to separate them according (...) preserving
with all diligence the spirtes: and out of their mercuriall and sulphurous
liquor active, separating the Elementall water passive, whereby is extracted
out of the dry Feces artificially calcined, a Salt, brought to the purity of
Crystal, which is a most white ashes, and most full of life.

Then after this, I would put to this Salt by little and little his Mercuriall
liquor, which I would distill from it, that I might conioyne with the fixed
salt, the volatile ammoniac, which is included in that liquor, and from whom
the liquor borrows his whole force, which I perceived to be deteyned and
swallowed up by the fixed salt: for so nature imbraceth nature, and like
rejoices with the like, as salt with salt.

These things thus finished, that is, these saltes being united together
again, then would I add by little and little the sulphurous essence, which I
would bring into earth soliate, that is to say: the most simple essence, full
of all vital Tinctures and properties.

But wanting leisure to go forward in this course, I have not as yet attained
the undoubted experience of this so noble a secret: whereof I will make proof
and assaye, if God permit, when occasion shall be given. For seeing it is a
matter in nature, and has been already done, there is no doubt but that it
may be done again, by other diligent woorkemen. Neither do I think that
there can be a more ready way of working prepared, than that which I have
already spoken of, and which is known and familiar to true Philosophers, and
Chemists. For this course observed, every thing well wrought, has his most
effectual and active virtues, and vital qualities. But some other better
learned and more exercised in Chemical philosophy then my self, can more
readily see this thing, and look further into the workmanship, who having
better leisure, may make trial of this working, and find out in very deed the
truth and certainty of the artifice. Whereunto if any man by his industry do
attain, let him not keep the secret to himself alone, but let him bestow the
same upon men of good parts, for the which benefit they shall stant bound
forever.

For albeit, it is a matter more pleasant to behold then profitable, yet it
opens and awaketh the drowsy eyes of the more witty and learned sort of men,
to behold and take in hand for greatter and more profitable things for
mankind: who afterward will guide into the right way, the blind, and such as
do err through ignorance, and will step the mouths of evil tongued and
malicious men.

CHAP. XI. Concerning the visible bodies of the Elements.
IT now rests that somewhat ^ee said^, concerning the visible Bodies of the
Elements, which of all things, as well of Mineral, as of Vegetable, and Animal,
do always appear to be two: the one dry, the other moist. The dry is a
Sandy earth or ashes, (...) of all salt, by reason of the washing of Waters,
and is called by the Chemists, Terra damnata, or Damned earth. Because it has
no other force, but that which is drying.

The m^yste which is called unsavory Phleame, is pestered with all Sulphur and
Mercury, having no odor or taste, or other vital virtue, which can only
moysten, without any other force at all.

And as these are of no force, so do they only possess passive qualities,
and unprofitable. But Air, the third Element, cannot be separated by it self,
but does either vanish into air, or else remains mixed Sulphur and Mercury,
and does more chiefly cleave unto Mercury, which is so spiritual, that the
most expert woorkeman cannot separate the same from it self alone, but does
always pass away into air, with the air or vapor of that thing, whereof
the separation is made: to which aier Mercury is straitely combyned, that it
can never be separated from the same, without it be done by the great industry
of a skilful workman, who knows that Mercury or salt Armoniack volatile, is
so conjoined with aier, or with the aerie parts, that it does also breathe away
with the aerie part, and with the same is reduced into spiritual Water, which
is known to be the mercurial water, by the sharp, sower, and vehement, which
springs from the Mercury or salt armoniack, of nature spiritual. The which
the workman seeking to separate, conioyneth this spiritual liquor, with a
Christalline salt, naturally fixed, from the which, he separateth that aerie
liquor, by Distillation, which by that separation is utterly spoiled of all
force, and remains an unsavory aerie liquor, for because that Mercuriall
spirit possessing the nature of volatile Salt, remains fixed, with his proper
Salt, with the which he has the most chief analogy and proportion. And thus
the Philosophers testify, that nature is delighted with nature.

Thus we see how the Elementary aier is to be separated from that Mercuriall
spirit, namely by bringing the E^^ment of aier, into water deuoyde of taste,
and by cutting the Mercuriall spirit, into the salt, of his proper pre-eminence.

Furthermore, hereby it appears, that Mercury is a certain aerie thing, or
aier it self: and yet somewhat more then the elementarie aier, which wanting
the spirit of Mercury, is a simple aerie liquor of no virtue or power, but
simply to moysten and penetrate. And so the active qualities do belong to the
beginnings, Salt, sulphur, and Mercury, and the passive to the Elements. This
thing we have made plain before, by the example of Wine, and Water of life.
These things are therefore spoken, that all men may see by the Anatomy and
resolution of things, that the element of aier, cannot be separated by it self
alone, neither is it so to be seen of any, but of the true Philosophers, and
by such as are most conversant in this art.

Thus certain demonstration is made of the visible bodies of things
procreated, both out of the seeds and beginnings, and also out of the
elements; albeit in the resolution of the bodies, thou do not discern the
visible bodies of the seeds, put a part by themselves. But it is an easy
matter to discern the severed parts of those three beginnings, and also of
the Elements, in the which parts of the three beginnings, the virtues and
powers of actions (wherewith the seeds are endued) are included and mixed
together. Whereby it comes to pass, that their bodies are filled together
with the vital forces and faculties of the Astrall and spiritual seeds, as
the receptacle of th^se virtues.

But the Elementall bodies, have only passive qualities: the which elementall
bodies, a w^rkeman cannot only separate by themselves, but can also bring them
to nothing, in such sort that the passive and material Elements being
separated, there shall only remain those three Hypostaticall, Formal, and
Active beginnings, salt, sulphur, and mercury, which being drawn into one
body, do make a mixed body, which the Philosophers call a fifth or a fourth
Essence, which is free from all corruption, abounding with quickening spirits:
whereas contrariwise, the sole elements separated from those three beginnings,
do bring nothing but impurities, corruptions, and mortification.

In this Chymestry is to be extolled, that imitating nature, it rateth
Elements, and their beginnings, by which all the parts of a compund body, are
anatomized and made manifest. And yet those natural substances, are not said
to be begotten, by such separations, as if they were not before: neither yet as
bring before, are they corrupted by the art of separation, but they were in
compounde, and after separation, they ceased not to be, and to subsist. And as
the three beginnings are coupled together, by the benefit of an oylelie liquor
joining them in one: so the three Elements, Air, Water, and Earth, are
combyned together, by the coming in of Water as a mean. For water by her
analogy and conuenience partaketh both of the nature of aier, and of earth:
whereby it comes to pass, that one while it is easily turned into aier,
another while into earth: and so it combyneth both the extremes. In things
that have likeness, an alteration is easily made. For, by reason of likeness
and consent, aier made thick with cold, passes into water, and water made
thin, becomes aier: and water also made gross and thick, becomes earth:
even as earth also made thin, passes into water, and is changed.

Wherefore, for so much as aier and earth, two extremes, are fitly joined
together, by a third, which is water, a mean between them both: Aristotle did
more than was needful to appoint a quaternarie number of Elements, out of the
quaternary number of the four qualities, Hot, Cold, Dry, Moist. Howbeit, it
cannot be denied but that he had great probability hereof, as is to be seen in
his second book of the generation of living creatures, where he goes about by
many reasons to prove, that it is most necessary for the production of things,
to appoint a fourth element, namely Fire, hot and dry.

But for so much as Moses in the first Chapt. of his Genesis (wherein he shows
the creation of all things) makes no mention of Fire: it is more convenient
that we leave it rather to the opinion of the divine Prophet, then to the
reasons of an Ethnic Philosopher. And therefore we acknowledge no other Fire
then Heaven, and the fiery Region which is so called of burning.

Therefore it ought to be called the fourth formal Heaven, and essential
element, or rather the fourth essence, extracted out of the other elements:
because it is indue^ with far more noble virtues, then the most simple
elements. For the Hermeticall Philosophers deny that there is a quintessence
because there are not four elements, from whence there may be drawn a fifth
essence, but three only and no more, out of which a fourth may be extracted.
So great is the power of this fourth essence, that it moves, sharpeneth, and
mightily animateth the bodies of the three principles, and of the more gross
elements, to come into a perfect mixture of one thing which never after can be
di^^des. Whereupon the Indiuidualls, or simples which cannot be divided, do
borrow from Heaven, and from no other, all those forces, faculties, and
properties, which they have no show forth. Hereupon it comes that the
proper quality of that essence, is neither dry nor moiste, nor cold, nor
hot. For it is a far more simple thing, that is to say, a most simple and pure
essence, extracted out of the more simple and more subtle beginnings and
elements, which makes a most simple, most pure, most thin, and most swifte
body, endued with the greatest force of generating, nourishing, increasing, and
perfecting, which comes so near unto the nature of fire, that in very deed
the Heaven is no other thing, but a pure and ethereal fi^r, neither is the pure
fire, any thing else but Heaven: which the more it ouercometh the principles and
elements, the more it obtains, the more potent, perfect, pure, and simple
forces and virtues, (...) into all things, and furnishes every thing with his
forms and virtues.

It appears therefore by Moses, that there is no other fiery Element, but
Heaven, which has the place of the fourth element, or which is rather a fourth
essence extracted out of the more subtle matter and form of the three
elements, The Heaven of Philosophers.
which is no other thing, but a pure ethereal, and most simple fire, most
perfect, and most for different, from the three elements, as imperfite: which
fire, is the author of all forms powers, and actions, in all the inferior
things of nature, as the first cause, and carrying it self like the p^^ent,
toward his offspring: which fire, by his wind carries and conueyeth his seeds
into the belly of the earth, whereby the generation or fruit is nourished,
fostered, grows, and is at the last thrust forth, out of the lap or bosom
of the elements.

This Heaven, albeit in it self, it is no complexion, that is to say, neither
hot nor cold, nor moist, nor dry: yet by his knowledge and predestination, it
yields to all things, heat and cold, moystnesse, and dryness: for so much as
there are stars which have their most cold and moist spirits, as the
Saturnails, and Lunaries: others, most hot and dry, as the Solarie, and
Martialls: others hot and moist, as the Io^ialls, who by their virtues and
complexion (wherewith every Star and Planet is endued) do inform, fashion, a
impregnat all these inferior things, in such wise, that some indiuidualls are
of this condition and complexion, which they have borrowed and taken from their
informing or fashioning planet or star: other some of that which they have
obtained from other Planets and Stars. For God has given to Heaven most
simple and perfect seeds, such as are the Stars and Planets, which having in
them Vital faculties, and complexions, do power them forth into the lap of
the inferior Elements* and do animate and form them. Neither does the Heaven
^casse from his working, nor the Astrall seeds thereof, because their virtues
are never exhausted: neither do they suffer alteration or diminution of
faculties, whereby they may (...) from procreating or forming, albeit that
sometime they do make more or less fruitful then at other some. Hereupon
comes that perpetual Circulation, by the benefit whereof the seeds of the
Elements or their matter, are coupled with the seeds of the Stars, setting
and putting their contained into the maternall lap, that it may form and
bring forth a kindly sprout. For as Heaven is said to work upon the Earth,
so also the inferior Elements, do yield and bestow their actions and motions,
but not after one manner: for that Heaven in acting suffers nothing, so far
forth as it is equalled, being of a Hemogeniall and most perfect nature: and
therefore is incorruptible and Immutable unto the predestined end of things
created.

But these inferior things do suffer in their action, because they have their
formal beginnings, mixed with their materials, subject to change and
destruction: whereupon also it comes to pass, that those things which
proceed from them, do in continuance of time decay and perish.

These things known to a true Physician and Philosopher, he seeks to
restore decayed health, and to preserve the same by the extraction of
celestial Essences and Forms, and the elementarie separation of the
beginnings and materials, from those three formal and spiritual beginnings,
the which he^^seth alone, separated from the others, which are Heterogeniall,
or of another kind, that he may work wonderful effects without any impediment.

And this is the universal Balsamic medecin, wherein all the parts are
Homogeneal, or of one kind most pure, most simple, and most spiritual, And
being in such simplicity, and most thoroughly cleansed and purged from all
gross Feces, and incorrupt, it is called a Quintessence, but more truly and
properly a Quartessence, and the celestial stone of the Philosophers.

But let no man think here, that when I name the Philosophers stone, (that is
to say, that universal medicine) that I mean the transmutation of metalls, as
if such transmutation, were the chief medicine of man's body: but know rather,
that in Man, (which is a little world) there lie hid the mines of Imperfect
metals, from whence so many diseases do grow, which by a good faithful and
skilful Physician must be brought to Gold and Silver, that is to say, unto
perfect purification, by the virtue of so excellent a medicine, if we will have
good and prosperous health.

The Physician therefore, must diligently consider two things, that is to say,
that Nature may be disquieted, both by an inward and also by an outward enemy.
But this more especially he must foresee, that Nature be not formented with the
outward enemy, which then comes to pass, when a medecin is ministered and
given, which is crude, impure, and venomous, and therefore contrary to our
nature and spirits. Then on the other side, he must have care that the
^omesticall enemies which are within man's body, be driven out with convenient
and fit weapons. For if a remedy be applied which is unfit, then Nature is
assailed by two enemies, that is to say, by the external medicine, and by the
inward impuritie, which remaining long in the body, turns into poison, if
speedy remedy be not had.

CHAP. XII. Moses in his Genesis shows the three beginnings Philosophical
which are in every thing created.
WE hold by Moses doctrine, that GOD in the beginning made of nothing a Chaos,
or Deep, or Waters, if we please so to call it. From the which Chaos, Deep,
or waters, animated with the Spirit of God, God as the great workemaister and
Creator, separated first of all Light from Darkness, and this Aethereall
Heaven, which we behold, as a fifth Essence, or most pure Spirit, or most
simple spiritual body. Then he divided Waters, from Waters; that is to say,
the more subtle, Aerie, and Mercuriall liquor, from the more Thick, Clam^y,
and Oylely, or Sulphurous liquor. After that, he extracted and brought forth
the Sulphur, that to say, the more gross Waters, from the dry part, which
out of the separation stands like salt, and as yet stands by it self
apart. And yet for all this, those universal parts of the whole Chaos, are
not to be separated, but that still every one of them, do retain in themselves,
those three beginnings without the which they cannot be, nor yet fulfill their
generations. This was the work of God, that he might separate the Pure from
the Impure: that is to say, that he might reduce the more pure and Ethereal
Mercury, the more pure and inextinguible Sulphur, the more pure, and more fixed
salt, into shyning and inextinguible Stars and Lights, into a Christalline
and Dyamantine substance, or most simple Body, which is called Heaven, the
highest, and fourth formal Element, and that from the same, the Forms as it
were seeds, might be powered forth into the most gross elements, to the
generation of all things. The which are called the mo^^ gross elements,
because from them in the division of the Chaos, the most pure part is
abstracted and converted and brought to a heaven, and to the fruits thereof.

All which elements whether it be that most simple fourth, or whether they be
those, which are said to be more gross, for so much as they consist of those
three Hypostaticall beginning, they could never be so separated one from the
other at the first, nor can now be so separated by any Chemist, but that
always still that which remains is compounded of them three. The difference
is this, that some are most pure, simple, and most spiritual substances of the
secret parts, and other some, are more gross and less simple, also a third
sort, most gross and material in the highest degree.

Therefore it must be confessed, that the Heaven, albeit it be most simple,
does consist of those three beginnings, but of the most pure and most
spirituous, and altogether formal. Whereby it comes to pass, that the
virtues and powers of Heaven, being wholly spiritual, do easily without
impediment pearcing into the other Elements, power forth the inferior Elements
the spiritual forms: from whence all mortal bodies do obtain the increase
both of their virtues, and also of their faculties.

If we will behold the purity of the Heaven above other Elements, and the
perpetual constancy thereof, look then upon those bright and shining fyers,
continually glittering and light, to whom the heaven has given the most pure
and extinguible substance of Sulphur, whereof they consist. For such as the
heaven is in essence, such and the like fruits has it brought forth in
substance: out of whose vital impressions and influences, they procreat and
bring forth some likeness of themselves, in the more gross Elements: but yet
according as the matter is more gross or more thin, more durable or more
constant, or more transitory.

And the influences of such fyers, are mercuriall spirits: but the light and
shyning brightness, is Sulphur: their fixed Heavens, or Vitriall and
Chrystallyne circles, is a salt body: which circles, are ^^pure, shining and
fixed, that a Diamond which partaketh o^ the nature of fixed salt, is not of
more purity, continuance and perpetuity than they are.

As touching the Elements of Air, the beginnings thereof are more gross,
less pure, and less spiritual and simple, than the beginnings celestial,
and yet much more perfect, thin, and penetrating, then are the waterie and
terrestrial Mercuries and Sulphurs: and is such, that next to heaven it has
the pre-eminence of actiuitie and power, whose forces are to be seen in diverse
and sundry winds which are mercuriall fruits and the spirits of the ayerie
Element: whose sulphurs also are discerned to be pure and bright in burning
Comets, which are no perpetual fires or sulphurs, which cannot be put out for
degenerating from the nature of Celestial stars and Sulphurs, as from
purity and simplicity, into a more gross and impure form.

Now as concernining Earth which is ayerie, it is so subtle and thin, that
it is very hard to be seen, being diffused throughout the whole Region of the
Air: which does not sent it self to the eye, but in Mannas, in Dewes, and in
Frostes, as in aierie salts. The very same beginnings of air, may also be
seen in Meteors: which in it, and out of it* are ingendered, that is to say,
in lightnings, in corruscations, and in thunderings, and in such like. For in
that flerie flame which breaks forth is Sulphur: In the windy spirit, and
moystnesse is Mercury: and in the thunderbolt or stone of the lightning, is
salt fixed.

The fruits also of this nature are Manna celestial, and honey, which Bees do
gather from flowers, wherein there is no other thing but Salt, Sulphur, and
Mercury of the air: which by a skillful workman are not separated from those
without great admiration: yea, the rustic Coridon finds this by experience
to be true, when as he can separate the matter of the Bees work, into wax,
which is a matter sulphurus, into honey, which is a Mercurial essence, and into
dross, representing the terrestrial salfe. And thus that superior globe
severed into an ethereall and ayery heaven, has his three beginnings, yet
nevertheless very different in simplicitis and purity.

CHAP. XIII. Whence is showed, that in this inferior Globe of the World,
namely in the Elements of Water and Earth, these three beginnings are plainly
to be seen.
THose three Beginnings, do as yet more plainly show forth themselves in
this inferior Globe, by reason of their more gross matter, which is to our
eyes more sensible. For out of the Element of Water, the iuyces and metallic
substances do daily break forth in sight: the vapors of whose moisture or
juice more spirituous, do set forth Mercury* the more dry exhalations,
Sulphur: and their coagulated or congealed matter, Salt. Of the which saltes
Nature does offer unto us diverse kinds of Allume, of Vitriole, sundry
differences, Saltegemme, and salt Ammoniac, and many others. There are also
many kinds of Sulphurs, of Pitche, and of Bitumen, and of Mercuries, or
Iuyces. Moreover the Sea does witness, that it is not without such Mercuriall,
Aerie and Sulphurous spirits: whose meteors in Castor and Pollux, and in other
(...) kindled, by reason of their sundry sulphurs and exhalations, do confirm
the same: and that the sea is not without his saltes, the saltness thereof
does make manifest. The Earth, also does prove the same, which being like unto
a sponge, does continually draw and suck unto it the salt body thereof:
Whereby it comes to pass, that there are so many kinds of metalls and
Mineralls therein. From this Marine sale, as from the Father and first original,
all other sates are deryued. And these beginnings are so separated in all other
Elements by themselves aparte, that no one of them is depryued of the company
of another. For in the Marine salt, albeit the nature of salt, does exceed
and over match the nature of the other beginnings, yet it is not destitute of
a sulphurous and mercuriall essence, as by Chymicall experience may be made
plain. For he which is a mean Chemist knows how to extracte out of the
same by the force of fire, a sharp Mercuriall spirit, which being Ethereall,
and therefore most Potente, does dissolve into liquor, the most firm and
hard metal, as Gold, which otherwise cannot be overcome neither with the
most vehement fire, nor be consumed with any long continuance of time.

Furthermore, a workman knows how to extract out of the same salt congealed
stones, very sweet, and of a Sulphurus nature, which nevertheless have a
mighty and admirable force, to dissolve the most hard thing that is. And yet
for all this, that which remains is Salt. Thus you see plainly that these
three beginings, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, are contained in the Marine Salt.

The same also is to be see^^ Vitriol, Venus and Mars are Copper and Iron.
the which among other Salts is most corporent. For always for the most part
figures and Images of Venus and Mars, are to be seen therein and conjoined
together.

In this Vitriol. I say, do plainly appear, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury.
Whose Mercury altogether ethereall, being by art separated, and made most
pure, from the elementary passive (...), possesses a green sharp spirit, of
so great an acting and penetrating force, that in a very short time it will
dissolve metalyne bodies, and most hard substances, whether they be metals or
stones. The green Lion.
And this is that green Lion, which Rypley commends so much.

The Sulphur in Vitriol, is easily discerned by a certain red Ocre, sweet,
which is easily separated from the same: which is an asswager of things, and a
right actatiue, and a great mittigator all griefs, and pains*

But the Colcotar, or red feces with remains in she bottom, after the
separation of the ethereall Mercury, and of the sweet Sulphur, contained in
it, a most white Salt, the extraction whereof makes a very good and gentle
vomit, fit and profitable for many diseases.

As these three are found in Vitriol, so also they are to be found in Alum,
and in other Salts, as we have showed before concerning common Salt.

They are also to be seen in common Sulphur, wherein beside the Sulphurus
substance, and inflamable matter, there is contained a Mercuriall sharpish
liquor, so pearcing, that it is able to open and unlock the most strong and
hard gates of Sol and Lana. Sol and Lana, Gold, and Silver.


But the Salt drawn from the other parts, remains in the bottom, as every
mean workman knows. And such is this sowerish spirit of Slphur, that
although it be drawn out of Sulphur, fit to burn, yet it is so unfit to take
fire, that it is easily let from burning.

It happens otherwise to common Mercury, which is altogether ethereall and
spiritual: (from whence the third begineing of all things which is most
spiritual, has borrowed the name, albeit it is not like unto common Mercury,
or to quicksiluer in form)* For out of the same, both a liquor, and a sweet
Sulphur, and also a Salt may be extracted.

Hereby it is easily judged, that these three principles of Thymists are not
the common Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury: but some other thing of nature, more
pure and simble, which nevertheless has some conscience and agreement with
common Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury: from whence also our beginnings have taken
their name: and not without cause, for that the common are in all mixed things,
and in all things most simple and spiritual. For the other being mixed with
the more gross substances of bodies, are hindered from being so volatile and
spiritual. For that they consist of many unkindly parts, with the which these
common spirits are not so holden back.

Of those three beginnings aforesaid, all metalls are compounded, albeit after
diverse sorts. And this is the cause, that they differ so much one from an
other. For in iron, the Sulphur thereof which may be burnt, in that it passes
almost away in sparks and ^^nders by means of the fire, does exceed in
quality the other two beginnings, and does ouersway them: Hereof it comes,
that will be on fire throughout. For the which cause it is called by the old
Philosophers, by the name of the Planet Mars, a burning Planet.

So copper has great store of Sulphur, but less burning then that of iron,
and it has also much vitriol salt, yet but little quantity of Mercury. But
that vitriolated Salt, is that sharp ferment of nature, whereby the
generations of all natural things are propagated and increased: whereupon the
name of Venus is given to Copper: in whom there is a second quaternarie among
the Planets, where are heaped up, nourished, and coagulated spiritually all
celestial essences: wherefore this Planet by all the ancient Philosophers is
called Venus, the mother of generations, and begotten of the males froth.

Tin has in it much ethereall and aerie Mercury, but of combustble Sulphur,
a small quantity, and the least portion of Salt. And hereof it comes that
Philosophers call the fame Inpiter, because that Planet is altogether aerie and
ethereall: and therefore Poets appoint him king of the aier, and the region of
lightning.

Gold and silver, which of all other metalls are most noble and perfect, do also
consist of the three foresaid beginnings, but yet mixed in equality, and so
perfectly with great purity united, that it may seem that there is one chief
and first essence only in them, and not three, of which they consist. For
their Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, are so straightly, and by the least things so
joined together, that it may seem they are one substance, not three, or
consisting of three.

Notwithstanding most pure Mercury, seems to excel and ouersway in silver,
by which it is made more moist then Gold, which is the most temperate of all
other.

But in Gold, the sulphur which is fixed and incombustible, of a fiery nature,
brings to pass that it stands invincible against all force of fire, and
loses not the least wait thereof, because like will never oppress his like,
but contrariwise do cherish and preserve one the other: whereby it comes to
pass that it ioyeth in the fire, and always comes out of the same, more
pure and noble then it went in. Therefore the name of the Sun is given to
gold, because in very deed it is an ethereall fire and brightness. For the
Sun is a most fiery shining Planet, giving to all things, by his heat and
spirits, life. But silver for the force and property of Mercuriall humiditie
which it has with the Moon, a Planet full of radical moisture and pregnant,
is called by the name of the Moon.

Lead contains much Salt, and great plenty of indigested and crude Mercury,
but less flying Sulphur: hereupon it comes, that lead is the examiner of all
other metalls, which it disperceth into some, as is to be seen by trial,
excepting the two perfect metalls, gold and silver, which it cannot consume.

This virtue of consuming the bodies of imperfect metalls, it has from that
quality of Crude and flying Mercury, with the which it does abound: whereas
otherwise by the nature of his Sulphur, it is able to do the contrary: that
is to say, to coagulate those metallic spirits, and to reduce them into
bodies, even as quicksiluer being altogether flying by nature, etheriall, and
truly Homogeny and spiritual, does after a sort congeale and fire. So that
hereby it appears, that it has in it by nature, the spirit of heat and of
cold, and therefore of metallic life and death: which makes the sentence of
Hermes good, when he said, that which is above is all one with that which is
beneath. For such as is Saturn in the superior Elements, such also is lead in
the inferior: and so of the rest.

And out of that burning licquor, more ready to burn, then the very Aquauitie,
may be separated a Mercury, or a more ethereall spirit by a Matrat with a long
neck, by a gentle fire. The which so separated, the rest of the matter of
mean substance, which is Sulphurus, Oylely, and apt to burn, resideth in the
bottom of the glass, with the Niterous and Sulphurus spirit of Salt.

Out of the black feces, which remain in the bottom of the retort, being
reduced according to the Phylosophicall manner into a calx^, is extracted a
fixed Salt, which often times dissolved and Coagulated with his proper fleame,
will at the last become Chyrstalline.

To this, if there be afterward powered by little and little according to Art,
his ethereal spirit, that from hence it may contract and draw the double or
triple weight of the volatile, and truly Mercurial salt, in such wise that
being cast upon a red hot plate, it do dispearce into fume: thou shall at the
last, by the mean of sublimation, attain to the foliat earth of the
Philosophers, which will have a greater brightness and perspicuitie, then can
be seen in the most rich and orient pearl in the world. This earth the
Philosophers call their Mercury* the which alone has admirable properties and
faculties.

Again, if to this be added the oylely liquor of his proper Sulphur also
exalted and kept a part by it self, in a just and convenient quality, and if
the same be drawn forth with sundry cohobations and extillations, again and
again, repeated and iterated, and be reaffunded and distilled, until out of a
Ternarie, there arise a unity: then out of the gross, terrestrial: and
material lead, shall arise and spring up a certain celestial and true dissoluer
of nature, and a quintessence of admirable virtue and efficacy: the true,
lively, and clear shyning fountain wherein (as Poets affirm, hyding under a
veil their secrets) Vulcan washed Phoebus, and which cleanses away all
impuritie, to make a most pure and perfect body, replenished with vital
spirits, and full of vegetation: and does so rid himself from his adamantine
fetters with the which he was bound, and hindered from the victory aginst the
Serpent Pytho, and does in such wise shake off all impediments, that being free
from all duskie clouds of darkness, with the which he was covered and
overwhelmed, he sends forth now unto us his most bright shining light, with
the which we are thoroughly refreshed, receiving youthful strength, putting off
all imbecillitie, and like unto that Ason king of Creta, through the help of
Media, are thoroughly restored again to young age. So that the same thing which
before was altogether cold without blood, and deuoided of life seeming as dead,
being washed in this fountain, it arises and triumphs in glory, in might,
and furnished with all virtues, and accompanied with an exceeding army of
spirits, does communicate unto us freely his glory and brightness, and does
most mightily restore and c^^^oborate the strength of our radical balsome,
with his only loo^^ and touch, thoroughly weeding and rooting out all the
causes and seeds of sicknesses lurking in us, and so consuming them, that
without al trouble, it preserves our health, unto the appointed end of our life.

He which has ears to hear let him hear attentively, otherwise let him
never take his work in hand. For albeit I have showed the way to perfect
working more plainly (as I think) then any other hitherto have done, yet thou
may err except thou be wholely addicted and intent to thy work.

Thus the way is prepared for true Philosophers, to attain to that great and
most excellent mineral work, and to the preparing of that universal medicine
out of mineralls. And this is the demonstration, by which in all metalls and
concrete bodies, those three beginnings are to be searched out, and being by
art separated, are to be set before our eyes. The which to make it more plain,
I thought good to use the example of lead, which of all men is rejected as most
vile, whereas notwithstanding the Philosophers have the same in great esteem,
because they full well know, what great secrets it contains within. And
therefore they call it their Sun or leperous gold.

From this tree of Saturn springs Antimony, as the first branch of the
stock, which the Philosophers call their Magnesia, which above all other
metallic substances, contains those three beginnings full of open actiuitie
and efficacy. Paracelsus among all other Chemical Philosophers, has
wonderfully ransacked all the parts thereof, and examined the beginnings most
diligently, whose substance he has exalted and commended, above al other
metallic substances and especially the Mercury thereof: out of which, as out of
the chiefest subject, and more noble matter, he wrought his chiefest and best
works. In the praise whereof these are Paracelsus own words: Antimony is the
true balm of gold, Lib de Aurora.
which the Philosophers call the examiner. And the Poets fain^ that Vulcan
washed Phoebus in the same lauer, and purged him from al his spots and
imperfections, being derived from most pure and perfect Mercury and Sulphur,
under a kind of Vitriol, into a metallic form and brightness. He compares
the same also in another place to the matter of gold, concerning whose virtues
and effects he delivers wondere: as that it is the highest and most perfect
purger of gold, and his Mercury, of men. His red Sulphur also does plainly
appear, which has his property, that it will take fire and burn like common
Sulphur or Brimstone: the which is especially to be seen in the night, and in
a dark place, without any sum, which the common Sulphur is wont to send
forth. This Sulphur of Antimony is Solary, and such as is able to gild the
superficial part of silver.

As touching the Salt of Antimony, it is to be separated from the same, whose
property consists in procuring vomit. For his strength to procure vomit lies
hid in the salt flowers thereof: from the which flowers, if the salt betaken
away and separated by virtue of a certain salt, as may be done, then out of
the flowers thereof, is made a most excellent purgation without vomiting.

But the property of the Mercury thereof brings no small wonder, which in the
liquation or melting of gold with other metalls, rejects them al, and
chooses the gold to it self, with the which it is mingled and united into one
body, in such wise, that it swalloweth up gold, whereas all other metalls
(except silver) do floate aloft, and will not sink into the same. Consider
therefore, (says Arnold,) that thing only which cleaves to Mercury and to
the perfect bodies, and thou have the full knowledge. And when he has thus
discribed the devouring Lion, he adds these words: Because our stone is like
to the accidental quicksiluer, which carries gold before it, and overcomes
it: and is the very same which can kill and make alive. And know further, that
our coagulated quicksiluer, is the father of all the minerals of that our
magistery, and is both body and spirit, etc.

The same three chief beginnings, do offer themselves unto us in other semi
mineralls, as in Arsenick, orpinent, and such other like: which albeit in their
whole substance they be contrary to our nature and spirits, yet by nature they
have that spiritual promptnes, and flying swiftness, that by their subtlety,
they easily convey and mingle and mingle themselves with our spirits, whether
they be inwardly taken, or outwardly applied, and do work venomous and mortal
effects, and that by reason of the Arsenical Mercury poinson full, or arsenical
Sulphur, and arsenicall Salt.

Gems also and precious stones, have in them the virtues and qualities of those
three beginnings: by reason of whose fire and brightness, the pure Mercury in
them does shine, cleaving firmly to his fixed Salt, and also to the Sulphur of
the same nature, whereby the whole substance of a contrary kind being
separated, there arises and is made a most pure stone of contrinance like unto
gold.

Of this sort is the most firm and constant Diamond, to whom that good old
Saturn has given the leaden color of his more pure Mercury, together with
the fixed and constant spirits of his more pure Sulphur, and has so confirmed,
coniealed and compacted it in all stability, with his christalline salt, that
of all other stones it is the most solyd and hardest, by reason of the most
firm union of the three principal beginnings and their coherence: which by no
art of separation can be disioyned and sundered into the solution of his
spiritual beginnings. And this is the cause, that the ancient Physicians had no
use thereof in medicine, because it could not be dissolved into his first
matter.

And it is not to be thought, that those ancient Physicians refrained the use
thereof, for that they deemed it to be venomous by nature, (as some falsely
imagine) which being homogenial and of a (...) simple nature, it is wholely
celestial, and therefore most pure, and for that cause nothing venomous: but
the poison and danger comes here hence, that being only broken and beaten,
and in no sort apt to preperation, taken so into the stomach, and remaining
there by reason of his soliditie and hardness inconcocted, by coutinuance of
time, and by little and little, it does fret and tear the laps of the stomach,
and so the intralls being ^^oriated, death by a lingering consumption ensues.

It belongs to gold, with his Sulphur, to give a red tineture, to
Carbuncles, and Rubines, neither does the difference of their colors come of
any other cause, then this, that their Mercuries and Chrystallyne salts, are
not defeked and cleansed alike: the which clensing, the more perfect or
imperfect it is, the color appears accordingly, either better, or worse.

And albeit Silver be outwardly white, yet within, it has the color of Azure
and blewe, by which she gives her tincture to Saphyrs.

Copper, having outwardly a show of rednes, has a green color within, (as
the Viridgreese that is made thereof does testify,) by which it gives
greenness unto the Emerand.

Iron, red within, as his Saffron and yeallow color does plainly show (and
yet, nothing like the color which gold has within it) gives color to the
Iacint.

Tin, albeit it is earthie, yet being partaker of the celestial nature, it
gives unto Agates, diverse, and sundry colors.

From gold, and from other metals, as also from precious stones, their colors
may be taken away, by Cementation and Reuerberation, by their proper menstrues,
which things are well known to Chemists and fire workmen. The which colors
and sulphurs so extracted, are very fit for the affects of the brain. The
color of gold, serves for the affects of the heart. The color of tin, for
the lunges. The color of Mercury, The color of lead, for the spleen. The
color of Iron, for the redness. The color of Copper, for the privy parts.

The heavenly menstrueese, to dispoyle mettalls of their colors and sulphures
natural is this: namely the deaw which falls in the month of May, and his
sugar Manna: out of the which two, mixed together, digested, and distilled
according to Art, there will come forth a general dissoluer, most fit to
dispoyle stones and metals of their colors. Yea, of only Sugar, or of honey
by it self, may be made a dissoluer of metals.

Now if these three beginnings, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, are to be found in
the Heaven, in the Air, and in the Waters, as is al ready showed, who will make
any doubt, but that by a far greater reason they are to be found in the
earth, and to be made no less apparent, seeing the earth of al other elements,
is the most fruitful and plentiful.

The Mercurial spirits sh^we themselves in the le^ues and fruits; The
Sulphurus, in the flowers, seeds, and kirnels: The salts, in the wood, bark
and roots: and yet so, that each one of those three parts of the tree or
plant, severally by themselves, albeit to one is given the mercurial spirit, to
another that of Sulphur, and to the third that of Salt, yet every one apart,
may as yet be resolved into those three beginnings: without the which they
cannot consist, how simple so ever they be. For whatsoever it be, that has
being, within the whole compass and course of nature, do consist, and are
profited by these three beginnings.

And whereas some are said to be mercurial, some Sulphurus, and some Salt, it
is therefore, because the Mercurials do contain more Mercury, the Sulphurus
more Sulphur, and the Saltish more Salt in them than the others. For some whole
trees are to be seen more sulphurus and roseny than other some, as the Pine
and Firre-trees, which are always green in the coldest mountains, because
they abound with their Sulphurus beginning, being the principal vital
instrument of their growing. For there are some other plants, as the Laurel,
and the Trees of Oranges, Citrons and Lemons, which continue long green, and
yet are subject to cold: because their Sulphur is not so easily dispersed, as
is the Sulphur of the fur trees, which are roseny, and are therefore thrice
of a more fixed and constant life, furnished against the injuries of times.
Furthermore, al Spice-trees, and al fragrant and odoriferous hearts are
Sulphurus. And as there are sundry sorts of trees of this kind, so are there
an infinite sort of Sulphurs, of the which to entreat here is no place.

There are other Plants which show forth Salt: which is to be found and felt by
their taste: as Celadine, Nettell, Aron, otherwise called Weak Robin, Radish,
Mustard Seed, Porret, or Leekes, Garlic, Ramsoms, Perficaria, or Arsesmart:
which also by the vertus and plenty of their salt, do defend themselves from
the wrongs of times.

Ros Solis (so called) abounds with Mercury amongst other Mercurial plants.
The which beginning notwithstanding, for so much as it is flying and spiritual,
except it be retained by another more corporeat, that is to say, by a waterie
or aierie liquor, it vanishes quite out of sight. But being dismembered and
thoroughly searched by the Art of Chymistrie, in his interior Anatomy, with the
separation of the beginnings, it may also be made subject to sense. For Mercury
is extracted out of every thing, first of all in his dissection or separation,
into a watery vapor: and Sulphur into an oyely: thirdly, out of the remaining
feces, brought into ashes, a Salt is extracted, by his proper water, which
being most white, and like to crystal, has the taste of sharp, sower, and
biting salt, or such like relish in the mouth: whereby it is found to be true
salt, which may be dissolved in water, according to the manner of true salts:
differing so much from the other ashes, as life from death: for as much as the
feces that remain thereof, are called dead earth, whereas this is replenished
with vital actions.

To conclude, in every kind of plant, and in all the parts thereof, thrice
three beginnings are inset and cleaving, endued with sundry properties and
faculties, according to the variety of Plants. The which also a skillful
Physician uses diversely, that he may fit each one to other, according to
equality of matching, and according to his intended purpose.

Hereby it appears how necessary the knowledge of the internal Anatomy of
things, which show easily by the impression of things, their properties and
virtues, which we may approve and confirm by experience. Let us take for
example, the oil or Sulphur of the Boxe-tree, always green and vitriolated,
by whose unpleasant odor, the stupefactiue Sulphur which is in it,
represents it self unto us. That oil, I say, of the Box, albeit it will
easily burn, yet is a great asswager and mittigator of all pains, as coming
nere to the nature and property of narcoticall or stupefactiue sulphur
vitriolated, being as auailable against the falling sickness as Vitriol.

If we consider the properties of the beginnings of Camp^yre, it will manifestly
appear, (although it do burn in water) by his unpleasant odor, that it has
a cooling property in it, and narcocal or stupefactiue: whose oil also, is a
good mittigator of pains and grief: when as notwithstanding it shows forth
contrary effects, as at the very first brunt, it seems to have a certain
fiery quality. By reason of the property which it has to assuage pains and
aches, the Arabians judged the same to cold in the third degree. The
experience thereof is easily to be seen in the ache of the teeth. For if a
hollow or rotten toothe, be but touched with the oil thereof, it puts away
the pain. The same oil is a most present remedy in pains and grief of the
reins, caused by the stone. For thereby the stone is dissolved and avoided, if
it be ministered with competent liquor.

Other are the properties of other Oils: For the oils or Sulphurs of Annis,
and of Fennel, are fit to dispearce and drive away windiness.

The Oils of Cloves, of Nutmegges, of Cinnamon, and of other spices and their
Sulphurs, as also the Oils of Mynts, of Ambrosia, of Sage, and Betony, and of
such like, are convenient to corroberat, and to warm the brain and stomach.

So the ole of Pepper, does attenuat, make thin, dissolve and cut tartarus
matters in the body, and humors that are niter Sulphurus and Choleric. And
howsoever many do deem the same to be hot, yet it is far more convenient
to be given in choleric fevers, and to put away other griefs, as tertians,
and such like, than any other altering or cooling sirrupe.

In like sort hot and burning oils, may be extracted out the seeds of
Poppey, Goordes, Melous, Cucumbers, and such like cold things, whose operations
notwithstanding do not bring heat, but rather rest and comfortable refreshing.

And the mercurial spirits of vegetables, are oftentimes conjoined with
sulphurus spirits: so that out of Teribinthine, which is almost wholly
sulphurus, as also out of Pitch and Rosen a mercuriall spirit, or sharp
liquor, may be by art extracted, having the force of Vinegar, being well
distilled, and likewise power of dissoluing the most solid and hard bodies.

Moreover, in pitch barrels, that mercurial sower liquor is to be found, being
separated from the Pitch, which has the same faculty of dissoluing. Also the
same sower Mercurial liquor by a gentle fire at the first, may be attracted
out of the shauings or chippes of the wood, and bark of green trees,
especially out of such as are vitriolated, as is the Juniper, the Box, the
Oak, Guaiacan Tree, and such like: which liquor is of force to dissolve
Pearls.

Out of the which Mercural sharp liquors, may also be made sundry several
remedies, apt, both to ferment, digest, and attenuate humors, and also to
move sweat, and to provoke urine, to break and drive forth the stone, and
very good to cure other affects, especially such as are Mercurial.

Now leaving to speak of Mercuries and Sulphurs, somewhat shall be said of
Salts: It has been already declared, that generally they serve for the
general purgation and euacuation of bodies: whether they move segges, Vrines,
or provoke vomit or sweates: or whether they do cleanse, cut, open, or any
other way help obstructions.

Yet notwithstanding, as between Sulphurs and Sulphurs, and between Mercuries
and Mercuries, there is great difference: so is there great variety of Salts,
and much difference of their virtues and operations. As for example, the salt
of the coddes of Beans, amongst others is exceeding causticke and burning: yet
being given in dry quantity in broth, it is very diaphoretical, or
dissoluing, in such wise, that nothing can work more effectual without hurt or
offense of the bowels.

The Salt of the Ash-tree, does most mightily open obstructions, most chiefly
sitting the diseases of the spleen.

The Saltes of Artemisia, (otherwise called the mother of Herbs, and
Mugwoort) and of Sauin, are most fit to procure the menstrues of women.

The Salt of Gammock, otherwise called Rest-harrow, Petty whynne, or ground
Furze: the salt of Saxifage, Gromel, otherwise called Pearl plant, of Radish,
are very proper remedies to break the stone, and to cleanse the kydneys and
bladder, from sand.

Also the Salts Double leaf, otherwise called Goosenest, of clot Burre, and of
Cardus Benedictus, which are diaphoricall, or dissoluing.

The Salts of Mynt, and Woorme-wood, are good to purge the lappets and tu^^cles
of the stomach, and to strengthen and comfort the same. So the Salt of
Guaiacine, is by a special property solutiue: as the mercury thereof by his
tartness does testify: and the oil or Sulphur thereof has a purging force.

Out of the which three beginnings, if the first two spiritual and more
simple, that is to say Mercury and Sulphur, be extracted and according to art:
and the fixed, which is salt, be also extracted and separated, and be after
that brought into one body, (which the Arabians call Elixir) it will be
jointly together a medicine provoking sweat, altering, concocting and purging.
Which tryple motion and operation comes from one and the same essence of
three united in one, giving most assured help, in steed of quicke-siluer,
against the veneril sickness, or French disease.

The salt of Tartar, is of the same kind that they be, which sharply do vite
the tongue, being also oily and sulphurus: yea, it is more sharp than any
other: nevertheless if it be mingled with the spirit or sharp oil of vitriole,
it can so moderate and correct his sharpness and biting spirit, that of them
both there may be made Ielly, and thereof a sweet and most pleasing delicate
sirup, which avails much against the gnawing and heat of the stomach, and to
ease al pains of the collicke.

All such Mercuries, Sulphur, and Saltes of Vegetables, do grow and arise from
the mercurial and sulphurus spirits of the earth, and from metallic
substances, but they are far better, sweeter, and of more noble condition
than their parents, from whence they take their original.

There will be no end of writing, if particularly should be prosecuted, the
difference of all beginnings, and their properties and faculties, which the sea
and the earth does procreate. That which is already declared may suffice to
stir up the mo^e noble wits to search out the Mysteries of nature, and to
follow the study of such excellent Philosophy.

Thus it is made manifest, that these three biginnings are in Heaven, in the
Elements, as in Air, Water, and in Earth, and in bodies elementated, as well of
Minerals, as of Vegetables. And now it rests that it be showed, how the same
be in Animals.

CHAP. XIIII. Wherein is showed, that those three first beginnings, are to be
found in all living Creatures.
FIrst, we will begin with Fowls, whose first beginning is at the Egg. For
in Eggs there are more plain testimonies of the nature of Birds, than in any
other thing. The white declares the ethereal Mercury, wherein is the seed and
the etherial spirit, the author of generation, having in the prolifying power,
whereof chiefly the Bird is begotten. For this cause it is marvelous, that so
many and so great dissoluing and attenuating virtues and faculties, do lie hid
in the white of an Egg, as in the ethereal Mercury.

The yeolke of the Egg, (the nourishment of the Bird) is the true Sulphur. But
the thin skin and the shell, do not only conteyne a certain portion of
Salt, but also their whole substance is salt: and the same the most fixed and
constant of al other salts of nature, so as the same being brought unto
blackness, and freed from his combustible sulphur, but calcination, it will
endure and abide all force of fire, which is a property belonging to the most
fixed salts, and a token of their assured and most constant fixion. This salt
daily prepared, is very fit to dissolve and break the Stone, and to avoid it.

As these three principles are in the Egg, so they pass into the bird. For
Mercury is in the blood and flesh: Sulphur in the fat and salt, is in the
ligaments, sinews, bones, and more in solid parts.

And the same beginnings, are more subtle and aierie in birds, than in fishes,
and terrestrials. As for example, the Sulphur or oily substance of birds, is
always of more thin parts, th^^ that of fishes or of beasts.

The same may be said of Fishes, which albeit they be procreated and nourished
in the cold water, yet do they not want their hot and burning fatness, apt
to burn. And that they have in them Mercury and Salt, no man well advised,
will deny.

All terrestrial living creatures do consist in like sort of these three
beginnings: but in a more noble degree of perfection, than in vegetable things,
they do appear in them. For the vegetable things which the beasts do feed
upon, being more crude, are con^^cted in them, and are turned into their
substance, whereby they are made more perfect, and of greater efficacy.

In Vegetables, there were only those Vegetatiues: which in beasts beside the
vegetation which they retain, they become also sensatiue: and therefore of
more noble and better nature.

The Sulphur appears in them, by their grease, tallow, and by their unctuous,
oily, marrow, and fatness, apt to burn. Their Salts are represented by their
bones and more solid and hard parts: even as their Mercuries do appear in
their blood, and in their other humors, and vaporous substances. All which
those singular parts, are not therefore called Mercury, Sulphurs, and Salts,
because they consist of animal Mercury, of animal Sulphur, and of Animal Salt,
without the conjunction of the beginnings. But in Mercurals, Mercury: in
Sulphurus, Sulphur: in the Saltish, salt does rule and domineere. Out of the
which three beginnings of beasts, oils, diverse liquours, and salts, apt for
man's use, both to nourish, and also to heal and cure, may by Chymicall art be
extracted.

CHAP. XV. Concerning Man, and the lively Anathomie of all his parts and
humors, with the virtues and properties of his three beginnings.
NOw it remains that we seek out and search in man, those things, in whom
they shall be found to be so much the more subtle and perfect, by how much he
excels all other creatures in subtlety and excellency. For in him as in a
little world are contained these three beginnings, as diverse and manifold, as
in the great world, but more spirituous, and far better. For Phol^sophers call
man, the compendiment or abridgement of the greater world. And Gregory
Nazianzene in the beginning of his book, concerning the making of man: says
that God therefore made man after all other things, that he might express in
man, as in a small table, all that he had made before at large.

For as the universal frame of this world is divided into these three parts,
namely intellectual, and elementarie, the mean between which is the
celestial, which does couple the other two, not only most diverse, but also
clean contrary, that is to say, that supreme intellectual wholly formal and
spiritual, and the elementary, material and corporeat: so in man the like
triple world is to be considered, as it is distributed into three parts,
notwithstanding most straightly knit together and united: that is to say, the
Head, the Breast, and the Belly beneath. The which lower belly comprehe^deth
those parts which are appointed for generations and nourishment, which is
correspondent to the lower elementarie world. The middle part, which is the
breast, where the heart is seated, the fountain of all motions of life, and of
heat, resembles that celestial middle world, which is the beginning of life,
of heat, and of all motions: in the which the Sun has the pre-eminence, as
the heart in the breast. But the highest and supreme part which is the head, or
the brain, contains the original of understanding, of knowledge, and is the
seat of reason, like unto the suprem intellectual world, which is the
Angelical world. For by this part man is made partaker of the celestial nature
of understanding, of the feeling and vegetating soul, and of all the celestial
functions, formal and incorruptible: when as otherwise his elementary world, is
altogether cross, material, and terrestrial.

And as man, as touching his substancial form, possesses all the faculties of
the soul, and their degrees, that is to say, the natural which is vegelatiue:
the animal, which is sensatiue and vital: and the Rational, which God inspired
into man, when he had made him: every of the which three contained under them,
three other inferiors, whereof to speak in this place is needless: so as
concerning the material body of man, there are in him three radical and
balsanick essences, out of the which, both the containing parts of the body, as
the fleshy and more solid, and also the contained parts, that is to say, the
spiritual and fluible parts, are made, compacted, nourished, and do draw their
life.

Salt in them, is the radical beginning of all the solyd parts: as being also
in the animal seed, it compacteth and congealeth the solid parts, so as it is
accounted the foundation of the whole frame.

But the radical beginning of sweet Sulphur in the animal, which is the
natural, moist, original, oylelike, shows it self, in the fat, grease, and
marrow, and such other parts, as well hidden as manifest.

The radical Mercury, wholly spiritual and ethereal, which is that inset and
natural spirit of every part and member, the next instrument of the soul, does
no less declare it self, in maintayning and concerning the animal life, as
being the very same, which from the soul is the life powered into the body,
which the Sulphurus part nourishes and sustaineth.

These three radical essences shut up in the seed of the animal, which we have
set forth in the framing of man, both according to form and matter, do
procreate in his members three kinds of spirits and faculties. The first
faculty is that which is called natural or vegetal, which being chiefly seated
in the liver, takes conservation and nourishment from Salt, that first radical
beginning and base of the others. The vital faculty seated in the heart is
cherished and sustained by a Sulphurus liquor, the which liquor is the natural
moisture and fountain of heat and of life. The animal faculty, wholly
Mercurial, ethereal and spiritual, and the principal instrument of the
functions of the soul, is placed in the brain: which is defended and
conserved by Mercury the third radical beginning, which is wholly ethereal and
spiritual.

Hereby it is plain, that these radical spirits, or substancial and formal
beginnings of things, do so mutually embrace one the other, and which is more,
the one will beget the other.

But the terrestrial and solid Salt which is discerned to be in the bones, and
in other hard parts, does compact and knit together with his gluing force, the
more soft parts with the hard: even as a windy spirit, or windy air shut up in
every body, does make a living body more light and nimble, then a dead
carcass. The which qualities and faculties are wholly elementary, as proceeding
rather from matter then form.

And thus briefly is showed the three beginnings of man and their faculties
and powers.

The body thus compacted and made of these three beginnings, has need of his
daily food and nourishment, whereby it may be preserved. Which nourishment
cannot be supplied from any other, then from those things, which are of the
same nature, whereof it consists. For we are nourished with those things
whereof it consist. Nevertheless for so much as the body is weak and tender
by his first original, it is not to be fed with the more hard food, but with
meat which will easily be concocted and turn to nourishment, containing these
three beginnings.

Such milk which is given to Infants to suck, without art or labor, does
plainly enough show his three beginnings. For the butter shows ye sulphurus
substance; ye whay shows mercurial: and the cheese his saltish beginning.
This milk being of one and the same essence, containing these three
substances, is easily concocted in the stomach of the Infant, and is first
turned into a white juice, and then into blood. The which blood, possesses
that which is more formal and radical in these beginnings, separating and
abiecting the rest into feces and excrement. Also the same blood being carried
into the heart, by the vein called Vena Cana, which is as it were the Pelican
of nature, or the vessel circulatory, is yet more subtly concocted, and
obtains the forces as it were of quintessence, or of a Sulphurus burning
Aquavita, which is the original, which is the original of natural and unnatural
heat. The same Aquanita being carried from hence by the arteries into the
Balneum Maris of the brain, is there exalted again, in a wonderful manner by
circulations: and is there changed into a spirit truly ethereal and heavenly,
from whence the animal spirit proceeds, the chief instrument of the soul,
for that it comes more near to that same spiritual nature, then do the
other two beginnings. For as from wine, those three beginnings are extracted by
a skilful workman (the which also may be done out of milk, with less labor)
so in blood (which we rightly compare to wine) are those three beginnings,
which by nature her self, executing the office of a true Alchymist, has
prudently and severally distributed and dispearced into all the parts of the
body, in such measure as is fitting to every member: giving to the bones,
sinews and ligaments, more plenty of the salt substance, then of the others:
to the fat, grease, and marrow, the substance Sulphurus: and to the flesh and
humors which come out of blood, and to the nourishing and natural spirits,
whether fixed, flowing, or wandering, a greater plenty of the Mercurial spirit.

That first age of infancy ouerpassed, and greater strength being increased to
concoct and digest meat, then the stomach offers it self to more solyd and
firm sustenance, as to bread, wine, and such like, coming as well out of the
store of vegetables, as of animals, fed and sustained by the same vegetables,
which are passed into an animal nature, that is to say sensatiue, even as a
mineral substance is brought into a vegetative.

It is before showed, that the vegetables and animals appointed for man's
substance, do change and come into his substance and nature with their
beginnings whereof they consisted: so as they being devoured and concocted, and
turned into that white juice called Chylus, and spread and distributed into the
liver, heart, and brain, by diverse degrees of concoctions and circulations,
that at the length they are changed into spirits, natural, vital, animal,
mercurial, sulphurus, and saltish ethereal, and spirituous: by reason whereof
man is preserved, and continues in his state, unto his predestined time:
hereof also may be gathered and understood, the original and generation of the
three humors, which come both from the mixture of these beginnings, and also
of the Elements. Which are no less different and varying one from the other,
whether it be in perfection, or in imperfection, then are those three
beginnings different in the degrees of perfection. The first of the profitable
humors, whereof we are purposed to speak, is that Chylus or white Juice,
which is effected and perfected in the stomach, and in the veins next
adjoining, especially in the mesaraic veins by the first concoction: the same
Chylus consisting of those three beginnings, but as yet very impure, whereof
the first beginnings of nourishment are: and the same is the first digestion
and separation of the pure from the impure, of those three formal beginnings,
and of the three material elements.

The second of the profitable humors, is blood, arysing out of the Chylus,
(which is a good juice) being of the first degree of the concocting heat of the
liver, and of the veins: whereof comes a second concoction, and separation
of the pure from the impure, notwithstanding of the formal and matertal
essence, which is far more subtle and noble then the first concoction and
separation.

The third of the humors, is that which after sundry reterations of the
circulations, made by the much vital heat of the heart; does very far
exceed in perfection of concoction: the other two, which may be called the
elimentary or nourishing humor of life, and radical Sulphur: the which is
disperced by the arteries throughout the whole body, and is turned into the
whole body, and is turned into the whole substance thereof, out of the most
perfect concoction of all the other; which is the third, and is called the
assimilation or resemblance, of the nourishment or nourished.

It is certain that this humor, is most especially partaker of the purity of
the three beginnings, and does resemble the rectified animal Aquauita, which is
separated from al passive element of the animal wine, that is to say, of the
blood. For the blood, (which we have already said to be the second profitable
humor, and by us compared to pure and refined wine) is freed from the greater
part of his terrestrial tartar, whose three beginnings also do exceed the
Chylus in purity. Out of which three beginnings by a third concoction and
digestion, the Sulphurus animal Aquauita, the aerie and most subtle spirit,
together with the Salt, depured and made thin, with diverse circulations also,
and natural concoctions, are extracted. The which being so extracted, that
which rests in the blood (as also in wine) is water without savor or taste,
and a Sulphurus tartarlike, and impure feces, which proceed from out of the
material elements. In blood, such are these; cold, moist, and mercurial fleame:
yealow, hot, dry, and Sulphurus choler: and melancholy or black choler, not
cold, but hot, dry and saltish, which are the ecremental parts of those more
pure substances. And yet the same lie not altogether unprofitable, for that
they retayning something out of the active qualities, both of the three
beginnings, and also of the elements, do serve for somewhat, so far forth as
they are material. For choler in that it is introsulphurus, most hot and
bitter, especially that which is of the gaul ouerflowing in the capacity or
place of the bowels, provoke the faculty expulsive to cast out. But the
fleame which is sower and mercurial, is profitable to stir up fermentation
and appetite: Whereunto also melancholy is not unfit, which is as it were the
dregs of the humor of blood, having a certain analogy and similitude with
vinegar made out of wine. For it serves for the first concoction of meats,
through the virtue of a certain internal and vitriolated fire lying hid in
such a sharp humor, which being stirred up and set on edge with the heat of
the stomach, does readily and quickly confect and destroy the meats, and does
with so great force consume and devour sometime, when it does superabound, that
many times it brings a doglike appetite.

And those excrements which are altogether superfluous, and a burden to nature,
will confirm the truth hereof: The which excrements are such as are separated,
partly from these three beginnings, and partly from the elements, namely the
mercuriall vapors, the Sulphurus breathings, and the saltish exhalations,
which pass through the skin by sweates, even as Mercury and Sulphur do
vanish away by an infensible transpiration. If such separation of excrements be
made by little and little, without any violence, they do prolong a happy age
even to extreme decrepity. But if on a sudden, and with a more violent force,
of some more vehement motion, or sickness, as of inflammation or of a burning
fever, they be thrust out, then they shorten age, and do hasten old age, or
else do cast headlong into untimely death by soundings and faintings.
Moreover, if such kind of excrements be retained in the body, and are stayed
by some impediment from their outgoing, by reason of some external cause, as
the coldness of the weather, which does harden and thicken the skin, or by
reason of cooling diet, bri^ging obstructions, or other infirmities of the body
which are impediments, they become the seeds and roots of sundry and infinite
effects.

The same is to be said of the most vile and filthy excrements, and of the
gross dregs of the elementary matter, together unprofitable, terrestrial and
filthy.

For out of watery, crude, and thin excrements: out of excrements aerie, and
windy: finally out of the more gross and earthie, or most stinking excrements,
how corrupt soever they be, yet there are bewrayed in either of them certain
prints of their defects, which the more pure substance of the three beginnings
procreated, from the which the impure at the length are separated.

If any man will make trial of the due Anatomy of these things as (amongst
others) of urine, which in sickenesses is diligently viewed and observed, he
shall find therein a great quantity of Mercurial liquor, sharp, subtle and
pearcing, which will dissolve the most solid and hard bodies: as also he shall
find great plenty of a sulphurus essence conceiving flames: that I may say
nothing of the body of Salt, which is evidently enough to be seen in that
great plenty of Salt, which is extracted from the same. The which Salt has so
great sharpness, biting, and coroding force and vehemency, that it is more
forcible and strong than all other salts of nature.

These things are most true, and evident to be seen in the Writings of
Chrystophorus Parisiensis, a most famous Philosopher, who has taken great
pains in setting forth the several parts of Vrines.

They which shall search diligently in the building and frame of man's body, for
another thing than the elements and their qualities, that is to say, hot and
cold, moist, and dry: namely, for a mercurial liquor, sulphur, and salt,
endued with all kind of vertures, faculties, and properties, the three
beginnings, out of the which, the colors, tastes, and odours, and such other
things of infinite variety do spring, shall easily understand, that every one
of the beginnings by his temperature or the excurreth out of their consort, do
procreat sicknesses of diverse sorts in the body: as if sulphur do too much
exceed, then it brings on inflammations and fevers of diverse sorts, beside
other stupefactiue and drousie affects, which the stupefactiue sulphur stirs
up, out of the stupefactiue and drunken spirits which it contains within the
same, and being excessive, spreads it self throughout the whole body.

The which is easily to be seen in such as drink too much wine, and in eating
of bread that has much darnel in it: as also in the taking of Camphyre, the
juices of Poppey, of Henbane, and of such like opiates, which bring sleep, by
their soporiferus Sulphurs, and not by their cold quality. Also they shall find
by their sower and sharp vapors of Mercury, that falling sicknesses,
Apoplexies, Palsi^s, and al kinds of Catarres come from thence. The which
effects, if they be accompanied with any poison, or malign and contagious
spirits, they cannot but must needs bring on, pestilential; venomous, and
contagious diseases.

If they look diligently into Salts, they shall find, that from them do arise
inward gnawings, Impostums, ulcers, disenterie fluxes, the Pemoxoides, and such
like, so often as they run out of their seats, and are separated from the
other beginnings, or do exceed the measure of nature, from whence also do
come great annoyances to the body, as by their resolution, the burnings of
urine, stranguries, and such like. For according to the variety of Salts,
diverse kinds of ulcers, impostumes, and other diseases, as diverse kinds of
Collickes, do arise by their sharp and sower spirit.

Also by the coagulation and congealing of these Salts, are ingendered
swellings, stones, and knots of the sinews, and an infinite sort of
abstructions, whereof many sicknesses do arise. The which coagulated Salts or
tartar, for so much as they never want their Mercury and Sulphur, rude
indigested, and impure, if they be out of measure, and do reach to the
uppermost degree of their malignitie, they will commixe according to their
sundry natures and properties, diverse effects, the which notwithstanding will
seek to come to the full sickness of the qualities and forces of every of the
beginnings, which are also wrapped and infolded the one within the other.

And herein we depart not from the opinion of Hypocrates, which he has showed
in his book concerning the ancient medicine. For he rejecting their opinion,
which tie the beginnings and causes of sicknesses to the elementarie qualities,
lays other foundations, namely, Sweet, Sower, Bitter, and Salt, the which we
reduce to those three beginnings of all things, arrogating to every of them
their singular faculties and properties. For what power or virtue soever is in
the nature of Medicines and of sicknesses, and does move and put it self in
action, the same is to be revoked to those three beginnings.

Yet notwithstanding I deny not, but that some kinds of sicknesses may arise
from the elementary qualities, abounding in our body, which do rather come of
the excrements and feculent humors, either retained or superabounding, and do
certainly rather arise out of such Elements, than out of the beginnings. For
out of the abundance of ayerie and spirituous winds simply, out of thin
waters, and terrestrial feces or dregs, we do see diverse kinds of effects
daily to come: yet notwithstanding such sicknesses have no long continuance,
being such as may be easily cured even by Elementary remedies, being either
hot or cold, moist or dry. As for example, ayerie winds shut up in the
bowels, and bringing forth the pains of the Collicke, are with lysters
dispersed and driven away. Surperfluous humidities and thin water is
consumned with drying medicines.

Inflammations coming of a terrestrial and simply gross matter introsulphurus,
are extinguished by a simple cooling help.

And to conclude, we will say with Fernelius, that some sicknesses are merely
secret and hidden, which the same Fernelius (as does also Paracelsus) affirm
to be supernatural: which sickness come from the influences of Stars; wherein
also is observed somewhat which is divine, or at least more singular and
peculiar, than in common sicknesses. Such are the astral and aerie effects
which happen to some men more then to other, by a certain singular influences
of the Stars, or constitution of the heaven, or by the concourse of the evil
Planets: who are therefore diversely affected, by the sundry roots, natures and
properties of their Ascendentes, producing by their aspects and radiations,
convenient fruits in fit times.

The secret and hidden causes of these kind of diseases, being such as we
cannot easily reach unto, like medicines of the same nature, which are endued
with a hidden virtue, are to be used. And as there be Celestial, spiritual, and
etherial effects: so also they require spiritual and etherial remedies: which
may elsewhere be taken, then from those three beginnings brought into a
spiritual nature. But we have stood too long upon this point.

CHAP. XVI. Wherein is showed, that the whole force of purging in Medicines, in
the Antimonial, Mercurial, and Arsenical Spirits according to every of their
several natures.
AMong Minerals, three kinds of spirits do offer themselves to be viewed and
considedered, from their first original: namely, spirits, Mercurial, Arsenical,
and Antimonial, which by their own nature are truly simple, formal, fiery,
and of wonderful quality and efficacy, and of ready working. Which are to be
distinguished as differing among them, and also as rising from the three
beginnings different. For the Mercurials as the most subtle, vaporus, aierie,
and waterie, take their original from Mercury: the Arsenicals, as those which
are more prosperous, or breathing, more fiery, hot, and meanly volatile, do
take their original of sulphur: the Antimonials, of al others the most gross
corporeat, and terrestrial, do take their original from Salt. The Mercurials
do borrow their Celestia^ spirits, from the Sun, from the Moon, and from
Mercury, and are by them impregnated and animated. The Arsenicals do receive
the spirits of Mars and Venus: even as the Antimonials do contain the
spiritual properties and virtues of Jupiter and Saturn. By the which virtues
of the Celestial, every of the beginnings, being impregnated by the things most
fitting for them and by the^ increased, do obtain greater forces in every of
their kinds, and a more corrected and temperate nature.

For the Mercurials, as endued with more gentle and wholesome spirits, do get
a more gentle nature, medicinable and nourishing. The Antimonials, from the
intermedials, that is to say, from things partly good, and partly malignant,
receive a worse nature, that is to say an intermedial. But the Arsenicals, as
stirred up with the worst and most pernicious spirits, bring a mortal and
destroying nature, which oftentimes brings great detriment. These last, being
so fyerie, vehement, and violent, do serve to form and to boil metallic and
hard substances, and are as fire to give life unto them being half dead, but
are in no case fitting to the more gentle and soft bodies, such as are
vegetables and Animals.

Also the spirits themselves, do put on bodies agreeing to their natures.
Arsenicals, and Sulphurus, do put on the body of auripigment, and Arsenic:
Antimonials, the body of Antimony and of Magnesia, or Loade-stone: because
among other metallicks, these are most corpulent and of grossest substance, of
the root of Saturn and Vitriole, and which for the same cause are the beings
and beginnings of other metals. By the impediment of which bodies, the force
and violent actiuitie of the foresaid spirits, is checked and restrained.
Neither do they show such violent strength, when they are brought to a
simplicity and spirituous thinness. But among corporal spirits, the
Mercurials do exceed the Antimonials in benignity and sweetness: and the
Arsenicals which are the last, do overcome the other two in violence and
malice. For these are wholly fiery for the most part, as is already said, and
are therefore most pernicious.

But the Mercurials, being of al other most simple and thin, are therefore
more ready to work. Also Mercury it self consists wholely of homogenial or
kindly parts, and the same spiritual: and therefore it exceeds others in
readiness of working. And hereupon it is made more fit than others, for an
universal purger and clenser, for that out of his whole substance without any
separation of the parts, excellent and the best purgations, of all sorts,
without any preparation at all, may be extracted.

Provided always that you correct a certain hurtful cruditie, which it has
in it, and that you alay his too much celeritie and promptness in working.
This you may do his concoction and fixation.

Also the spirits, which by a certain mean are fixed and volatile have place,
and do show forth themselves in Auripigment, and in Arsenic: out of whose
whole substance, without any exquisite separation, are extracted certain
solutiue spirits, so exceeding sulphurus, fiery, violent, and deadly, that
deservedly they are reckoned among the most mortal poisons: whose assalts and
vilolence* the animal nature, as more delicate and weak, cannot endure, but
that by and by it decays: whose vehemency, and pernicious quality, can by
no art be corrected or made fit for and use.

But the Antimoniall spirits, as more corpulent, and gross than others, do
fix their seat in Antimonie, because it is the root and original of all
other metals, which are more corpulent than other things.

And yet for all that they do not remain alone, but that being associated and
linked to the company of others, as to the society of Mercurials, and
Arsenicals of the seven Metals, they bring forth out of themselves, those
several kinds. Namely, Lead, and Tin, when as the antimonial spirits do
exceed in virtue and plenty: Iron, and Copper, when the arsenicals do
superabound and overcome: Gold, Silver, and Mercury, when the Mercurials have
the victory over others: the which Mercurials, are more spiritual and simple
than any others, and most essential: the which being brought to perfect
concoction and fixation, do procreate Siliuer and Gold, and do make them
pure and clean from all antimonial and arsenical Sulphur. For Gold and silver
are nothing else but fixed Mercury brought to perfect concoction. And these
Metals of gold and silver, when they are wholly fixed and corporeat, having put
off that simplicity and thinnes of spirits, are destitut^ of al power of
acting or working, neither can they work and perform any thing at all, except
they be brought again to their first spiritualitie, that is to say, into their
first matter.

As for the other four metals, they having as yet not attained that degree of
perfection, that is to say, of purity, digestion, concoction, and fixation,
albeit they seem to the sent most hard and solid, yet have they not gotten as
yet perfect fixation, being full of much impure Sulphur, and such other like
kind of heterogenial and unkindly substances, that is to say, of arsenicall
and antimonials spirits: and do possess a very small portion of the Mercurial
spirits, and the same as yet full of impuritie.

Whereby it comes to pass, that some of them cannot endure the trial of
fire, but by the force thereof do turn to ashes and glass, and can never
more be reduced by any Art into a metallicke nature: other some, as more
volatile and flying than others, do vanish away into fume or smoke.

The which is well known to al, not only Philosophers, which have seen the
nature of metals in the searching out and exercise of these works, but also
to every Goldsmith and Myntman, which know how to dispearse and send away such
metals into smoke, with their Cupels: which Philosophers can bring to pass
by diverse other means and instruments.

And out of these kinds of Metals, full of flying spirits, are extracted
purges of admirable operations: and the same according to the nature of the
spirits abounding or predominating in every of them. Of the flowers or spirits
of Tin, and Lead, extracted by sublimation, are made purgations, which work
wonderfully by dei^ctions, by vomit, by sweates, and by Vrines: which may be
reckoned among the mean sort, and such as are less hurtful, albeit they be
derived from the metallicke nature. Out of Iron and brass, may be extracted
very good purgative medicines, well known to them of old time.

Now to pass from metals to semi-minerals and so metallic juices, infinite
purgations also are extracted out of them, according to the force of their
spirits. As out of Vitriol, Niter, Salgem, Sal Ammoniac, and out of many other
such like things, may be extracted both mean and violent Solutiues.

And to make it plain, that all the power and effect of working which is in
Mercury, Arsenic and Antimonie, these three metallic spirits, and also what
virtue partly those four imperfect metals, and al kinds of Salts, Juices, and
metallicke substances have, do altogether come especially from these kind of
spirits: it is hereby manifest, that fixed Mercury, which by no manner of
means will move or fly from our heart, and which is sociable and communicable
with our spirits, has no force to purge either by deiecting through the belly,
or by provoking to vomit: but is rather fit to procure sweat and urine.

But when it shall be volatile and flying, by reason of his wonderful
spirituality and subtlety, it is made a great mundificatiue of the body,
pearcing into all the parts and members thereof.

So in like manner the glass of Antimonie, in that it has fuming and flying
spirits, not fixed, which does both show forth themselves at the time of the
fusion or melting, as also by a certain white exhalation thereof, when being
moulten it is put upon the Marble Stone, has also a vehement force of working.

Whose fusion or melting, if it be so long and oftentimes reiterated, until no
more whiteness will come from the same, then it is made utterly void of al
working force.

It will also loose all power of working or purging, if this glass be made most
thin in Alchool, and set in the heat of the Sun, by the heat whereof, the
more thin spirits do vanish away, and are consumed. And so then in steed of
a losing medicience, it is made a most excellent Anodine, or procurer of sleep
or rest.

Therefore to show by invincible Arguments, that al purging faculty consists
in those flying spirits, and is wholely to be attributed unto them, it is most
certain, that glass may be made of Antimonie and of Lead, and other
preparation, as well out of them, as out of metallic matters, whether it be
by subliming flowers out of them, or whether it be by extracting of Saffron
out of them, by the means of calcination, the which being beaten into fine
powder, and in the quantity of ten or twelve Grains infused in water, or in
wine by the space of certain hours, and after that the water easily powered
from the residence or powder which is in the bottom, and the same liquor so
given, there will follow thereof a wonderful purgation, albeit nothing of the
quantity of the powder be in weight diminished, because the spirits only
(which give no weight to the body) are left to the infusion, whereof comes
that great force of working.

The which powder may often be put into water or wine to leave therein his
purging strength and spirit: and it may so be done a hundred times, until the
spirits be clean euacuated: and yet for all this, the powder being dried,
there remains still the full weight without diminishing. But that powder
loses his force quite and clean of working, if the spirits be wholely
exhausted.

I my self have seen a Ring made of the glass of Lead, which being infused,
was to some a perpetual solutiue Medicine, so often as they would purge the
body.

So to others, the Regulus of Antimonie, made into a pill of the ordinary and
common bigness, swallowed down into the stomach, afterward passing through
the belly by siege, taken and being washed and well cleansed, swallowed into the
stomach again: and so the same washed and swallowed in like sort a hundred
times, so often as the body has need to be purged, it will perform the
parts of a solutiue Medicine, and yet lose nothing of his weight.

Hereby it does evidently appear, that the force of working lies hidden in
certain spirits, which have the same property, even as in other things there
is a force and power of altering or of nourishing, and of passing into our
substance. Hereof a more assured proof and trial may be made, by the
industry of a learned and skillful workman, who quickly and in a moment can
take away from them al force of purging, by using a certain fire of nature,
either taking away or fixing, the exceeding sharp and penetrating spirits of
Mercury and Antimonie, and to make remedies of them, which can restore found
and perfect health, by gentle and easy sweates, with insensible transpiration,
to the co^suming of the superfluous humors of our body, as also to the
clensing away of all impurities rather then by any violent and manifest
euacuation, to the troubling of the body.

And as the vegetative being of a middle nature, between the animal and the
mineral, by this nature of partaking with both, is turned into sensitive,
(even as we see of bread and wine, blood to be made: of blood, sperme or seed,
and of seed a man to be borne:) so the mineral (by that general consent of
all things among themselves) passes into vegetative, the vegetables sucking
unto them by the roots of the minerals, essential and metallic spirits with
the which the whole earth is filled, as is to be seen by so many iron mines,
and by such plenty of sundry stones, with the which it abounds and which it
brings forth, which are nothing else but of a metallic substance.

And albeit simple vegetants, with metallic substances, do draw those
mercurialls, antimonials, and arsenicals of a purging nature, (whereof they are
called purging medicines, because they abound with a certain ga^like
bitterness, by reason of the entering of the spirits of Sal^iter terrestrial
and metallic by roots into the anatonie of vegetables:) yet are they not
altogether so violent, and of so dangerous a spirit, as they were in their
first mine and original, as being thin of nature wholly crude, and indigested.
For they put of the poison in the vegetable, by their manifold concoction and
digestion, and are made more pure, in so much that they have no other
inconvenience in them, but the force and effect of purging, except
paraduenture, they be given out of measure, and in a greater quantity then is
fitting. But some are more purgative then others, namely those in whom there is
greater plenty of the Mercurial spirits, the which notwithstanding are nothing
offensive to our nature. Nevertheless if any vegetable have in it an
arsenicall spirit, albeit not altogether so pernicious, as is that which is in
Arsenic it self, for that it is made more gentle by concoction, yet it is not
without the violence and annoya^ce of the arsenical poison: such are the
herbs, Bane wort, Aconitum, and Enphorbium.

If any vegetable be endued with an Antimonial spirit or wheresoever the
antimonial is joined with another spirit, it brings violent vomits and
sieges: such are the kinds of Helebores and Spurges, and such like: neither is
the vegetable without commotion and perturbation, in regard of the violent
spirit which it has in it self.

And hereof it comes that such simples of vehement euacuation, do more
abound in mountains, in rocks, and in stony places, where the native seat of
metallic spirits is, then in the fat and fertile soil. For the correction
whereof, and to make them more gentle, and to put off that wild nature of
theirs, they are to be transplanted into home gardens. For thereby they borrow
another nature and more gentle nourishment, with the which they are tempered,
whereby they wax sweet and familiar, whereas otherwise in the mountains,
they are without, and destitute of that gentle nourishment, and sufficient
heat of the Sun, and of the temperature of the heavens, to concoct and to
temper their erudities. For those things which are austere and wild, are wont
to be made gentle by digestions and concoctions: and things venomous become
whole, so that art imitating nature, digesting and concocting most excellent
remedies, are made of deadly poisons and simples. But this cannot be done,
without the knowledge of the internal anatomy of things, and without the
assured science of their beginnings.

CHAP. XVII. Concerning potable gold.
GOld being prepared by the spirit of the Philosophers lead, is easily
dissolved into liquor, and deserves then to be called Potable gold* this must
needs be more convenient for medicine in the stomach of man, then leaf gold.
For how can leaf gold benefit the stomach, or in any sort be profitable for
the sick, when the secret kernel is so fast enclosed in the shell, which is
so indigestible, that it will not be dissolved in the body of the Ostrich. The
body of any thing profits little or nothing without the spirit.

It cannot be denied, but that all actions come from the spirit, for a body
deuoyd of spirits, is empty, rotten, and dead. If the spirits be they which are
agents, the body is desired in vain.

And contrariwise, when the body is an impediment to the spirit, that it cannot
utter his force and strength (as appears by the working of nature it self,
which without the destroying and obiecting of the body, cannot change the
spirit, that is to say, the nourishment of meat into flesh) then of
necessity, the spirit must be delivered from all his impediments, that it may
show it self powerful, and not be hindered from his working.

This appears plain by daily experience. For what good does that thing in
the body, which is neither profitable for the nourishment, nor yet for the
health thereof?

Nay, what annoyance does it not bring to our faculties, which lies in the
stomach undigested, much better then we shall provide for our body, if in time
of sickness we take that to nourish and sustain us, which is well concocted
and digested by art, and purged from all gross superfluity. For so nature is
no manner of way hindered from distributing the same to all the parts, neither
has it any burden in concocting the same, albeit as yet it is requisite for
nature to have a more subtle work, that it may turn to the profit of the
body. For how much more available to help the sick which are weak of nature
is the spirituous substance of a medicine, if it be given, tried and separated
from gross impurity, then to be administered with such impuritie, which
oftentimes cloyeth and ouerlayeth the strength of the body. He is more blind
then any ^^oule which sees not this. For the spirit whether it be of meat or
of medicine, is given in such small quantity, that it brings no detriment,
but speedy profit in a moment.

But yet these spirits cannot be given, nor prepared without bodies, for the
which cause we prescribe broathes and Iellies, to be the chariots of the
spirits: and we cleanse the bodies, that they being made pure, the spirit may
more firmly clean unto them.

And that they are not dispoyled of their first natural humor, it hereby
appears, because that natural humor is the body of his spirit. But when by
our art, the spirits are extracted, we must have diligent care, that none of
the^ fly away into the aier and so be lost. For this cause we must look that
our vessels be sure, and nothing break out, by violence of the fire: the which
spirits, if we can retain, much less can their bodies escape.

Spirits then are in bodies, and bodies pass into spirits, in such wise that
they are corporeat spirits, and spiritual bodies, so as we can give both body
and spirit together.

Furthermore, that the most dry calpes, do still retain their humor and
moisture in them, in so much that they may be turned into liquor, daily
experience shows. For glass brought into ashes, and gold brought into a
caix, may be restored to the forms of glass and gold again, through the
force of fire.

But here it may be objected (as it is by some) that gold has no force in it
to prolong life, or to corroborate the same, because it is prolonged by only
heat remaining in moisture and is also conserved by the reparation of natural
moisture. But these faculties or essences (say some) are not in gold, but
rather in those things which have lived, as in plants and living things, from
whom that force to prolong and preserve life, is to be taken, rather then from
gold. And hereupon it is inferred, that there is no life in metalls and
minerals, but that they are plainly dead.

I presume no man will deny, that gold is the fruit of his element, or some
thing elementated: if a thing elementated, then does it consist of elements:
therefore also of form. For elements do not want their beginnings, which are
formal beginnings, giving being, or that which it is, to a thing. For so much
as therefore gold is a body eleme^tated, it consists of matter and form, by
the mixture whereof there arises a certain temperature, or some thing of
likeness, which is the life of things. Therefore gold and other metalls have
life.

Furthermore, whatsoever the eye can see and behold, that has matter and
Form. For form is the external, arising from the internal, which offers it
self to the sense of the eye: if it have form and matter, then has it also
life. Death is said so be the destruction of things, which seems to bring the
subject to nothing. But for so much as metalls are the objects of the senses,
it shall be thought amiss that they are brought to destruction. They live
therefore because they subsist. And the things which subsist cannot be said to
be brought to nothing therefore not dead.

By these reasons it does plainly appear, that there is life in metalls,
because they subsist, and because they consist of Matter and Form, whose
mixture and conjunction is nothing, but by the bond of a certain kind of life,
which is drawn from the elements and beginnings, in the which consists the
life of things. Furthermore, that cannot be said to be without life, which is
endued with power of acting. For actions (as we have said) proceed from
spirits. In the spirits is life, or else they themselves are life. And
wonderful actions do proceed and come from gold, when it is spiritual and
separated from the weight of his body: finally, who is he that dare deny life
to be in metalls which are endued with so many tastes, with so many odours,
with so many colors, and with other virtues. Therefore gold is vital. For so
Marcilius Ficinus a most witty Philosopher, and a famous Physician, writes of
gold, saying:

We know that all living things, as well plants as animals, do live and are
generated by a certain spirit like unto this, and is always moved, as if it
were living, and does most speedily generate among the elements, because it is
most spiritual. But thou will say unto me, if the elements and living things
do generate and beget, why do not stones and mettalls beget, which are mean
things, between the elements and living things? I answer, because the spirit
which is in them is restrained and hindered by a more gross matter, the which
if at any time it be rightly separated, and being separated, if it be conserved
as the seminary of one thing, it is able to beget unto it self the like: if so
be, there be put to it a certain matter of the same kind: the which spirit
diligent Physicians, or naturalists seperating from gold, at the fire, by a
certain sublimation, they will put the same to any kind of metal, and make it
quick.

Thus it is plain by the authority of this learned author, that there is a
vital spirit in gold, and a virtue to procreate the like to it self: as also
it is confirmed by the testimony of Virgil in the sixth of his Aeneidos: where
the Poet says, that gold does mount and arise by his virtue into a tree, whose
golden boughs do spread far and wide.

If the mineral coral tree by his life natural, do grow and increase, why is
it not as like that gold and other metals do grow by the same life? Seeing
metals do draw their beginnings from minerals minerals, from waters, and
waters from the sea. Now if fishes shells, pearls, and coral, receive life
from their element, which is the sea, why may it not give vital spirits unto
gold? There are sundry sorts of life: yea, things which have neither motion nor
sense, have life. Our daily food, does teach us this, from the virtue whereof,
we draw sustenance and preserve life, albeit the flesh of beasts and fowls
whereof we feed, be first deprived of life and motion. So that there is
nothing utterly deuoid of life (as we said before) but that which is utterly
brought to nothing. For out of the very rottenness of wood, which does show
and threaten the final destruction thereof, worms of diverse sorts, are bred
and ingendered. What need many words, when as Philosophy teaches us, that
out of the corruption of one thing, comes the generation of another. And why
then may not the generation of a vital metal be brought forth out of the
corruption of a metallic body, and which is brought into his first matter:
when as life in the body, is the last that dies, if it may dye? It is plain
then, that there is life in metals.

But now let us see, whether this life which is in metals may be made fit to
preserve our life, in such sort that it may not be extinguished by diseases.
The which I will briefly handle and declare. Those things which continue longest
in their being, have a more constant and permanent life, then have those things
which dye in a moment. This is in plants, the other in metals: for plants and
herbs, do wyther and vanish away in a moment: but metalls will continue a
thousand years and more. Now how can herbs promise long life, and help of
continuance, which they themselves do want? Contrariwise, for so much as
metalls do so long preserve themselves by their long life, why should they not
perform the same, being taken into men's bodies?

The Philosophers say, that gold, of all other metalls is most temperat, by the
temperatures whereof, the balsam which is in us waxing sick, that is to say
degenerating from his temperature by the force of sicknesses, is restored and
helped, in such wise, that the virtue of his medicine does recall him to his
temper, and does so increase him with strength, that he easily overcomes
sickness. Gold is consecrated to the Sun for his color and brightness, and
to Jupiter for his temperature, and therefore it can wonderfully temper the
natural heat with moisture, preserve the humors from corruption, and bring
the Solary and Iouial virtue to the spirits and members.

The best way to make potable gold, is without mixture of any other thing. The
next unto potable gold, is that which is beaten into thin leaves, which for
want of the other, may be used in medicine cordial, to comfort the heart. The
tincture of gold being extracted, does cleanse and restore the blood. So that
hereby the homogenial and kindly parts are gathered together, and the
Heterogenial or unkindly are separated. For there is nothing under heaven to be
found more homogenial, or simular, of more thin substance, of more temperate
nature, and less subject to corruption, or putrefaction, then the very pure
substance of metalls, or quicksilver. What therefore can be more fit for our
Balsam then that spiritual medicine, purged from all impuritie, and brought to
exquisite subtlety. Does not a spiritual nature rejoice and embrace a
spiritual nature? Why is not gold impaired in the fire, but does rather joy
therein, and is made more pure? Is it not because it is fire? For fire is not
thrust out with fire, but they embrace one the other as being of one kind. So
in like manner, for so much as our Balsam of life is most pure, and resembles
the nature of fire, why should it not receive his like, and be strengthened
thereby? For Geber says, that gold is a medicine, which makes the heart
merry, and preserut^h the body in youth: the which medicine is no other thing,
but a natural heat, multiplied in ye fixed substance of Mercury: the virtue of
which heat is to gather together (as it is said before) y^ kindly, and to
disceuer and put away all things that are unkindly, conseruing the spirits and
humors in a man sooner then in the nature of metalls, because a man by his
proper natural heat does separate the unkindly superfluities, which metalls by
their unnatural heat cannot separate.

But let the reader understand, that our meaning is not to prescribe this Aurum
potabile, for continual food, but for medicine only in time of need. For it
will suffice, if it be taken once or twice in the year, to prolong our days
to Nestorian years, without the irksomeness of sickness.

The Philosophers have not only called this medicine Aurum potabile, but also
the water of life, the Tincture, the precious stone, the medicine which works
wonderfully upon three sorts of things, namely upon the animal, vegetable, and
mineral: for the which cause it is called the Animal, Vegetable, and Mineral
Stone: and the Arabian Astrologians call it the great Elixir.

Wonderful is the virtue of this medicine: for herewith the body of man being
sick, is restored to health, imperfect metals are turned into gold or silver,
and vegetables, albeit they are dry and withered, being moystened with this
liquor, do wax fresh and green again. This Medicine being a quintessence is
almost incorruptible and immortal, temperate, purified by the elements
themselves, and separated from the dregs and gross matter of the four
elements, which are the most chief cause of corruption, as the Philosophers
affirm: which therefore makes a temperate and sound body, because it is, as
it were the spirit of life, by whose force and help, nature does digest all
that is indigested, or expulse the superfluous and offending humors: it
suppresseth their qualities, it quickens the spirit, it makes the soft hard,
and the hard soft: the thick, thin, and the thin thick: the lean fat, and
the fat lean: it makes the cold, hot, and the hot cold: it moysteneth the
dry, and dries the moist: to conclude, it confirms and strengthens the
natural heat and moisture. And as all Phylosopers do write with one consent,
it is an universal medicinable body, whereunto all the particularities of
medicines, are reduced and infused.

For this cause, it is as it were a fineth nature, or essence* a most thin
soul, most purgative, much resisting for a very long time, putrefaction or
corruption, freed from al mortal concretion, a celestial and simple substance
of the Elements, brought to to this spiritual nature, by Chemical sublimation.

And yet for all this, we affirm not that this medicine is altogether
incorruptible, for as much as it is made and consists of natural things.
Nevertheless, it is brought to that subtlety, thinness and simplicity
spiritual, that it seems to contain nothing in it that is Heterogenial, or
unkindly, whereby it may be corrupted: whereby also it comes to pass, that
being given to the sick, it preserves them a long time in health.

And for this cause the Philosophers have had this in so great esteem, and
have wholly addicted themselves to seek and search out the same, not to make
themselves rich, by turning imperfect metals into gold and silver, when as many
of them willingly embraced poverty, but rather to heal the diseases and
sicknesses of men, and to defend and preserve their lives in long health
without grief, unto the time which God has appointed,

But leaving this great mystery, which very few attain unto, I will in
charity and good will deliver here unto thee, an easy prescription how to make
certain waters, of great virtue, which I found written in the Latin tongue,
in an ancient copy: serving to keep the body in health, and to deliver it
from many infirmities, which I thought good here to insert, as very pertinent
so this Treatise, which concerns (as you have heard) the virtue of Minerals.

Take of Aqua vitae, distilled with red Wine, lib. 4. Of burnt Salt, lib. 2. Of
dead Sulphur, lib. 2. Of white Tartar. z. 2. Of the coals of Flax which
grows in Abella, a Town of Campania in Italy; z. 3. Of Salt Peter, z. 4.
Beat al these into fine powder, and sear them: and being mingled together,
power on them the aforesaid Aqua vitae, and so put the whole mass to
distillation.

The Virtues of the Distillation.
THe first Distilation, has virtue of a Balsam to conserve both flesh and
Fish, from putrefaction. It cleanses the face from all freckles and spots,
clearing the skin, and making if fairer. It cleanses the body from Itch and
Scabbes, and dries up the tears, and watrinesse of the eyes.

The second distillation expels impostumations, and superfluities of the
body, fasteneth the teeth which are loose, and takes away the windiness of
the Liver.

The third takes away a stinking breath, and purges tough phlegm out of the
Stomach, and whatsoever is not well digested.

The fourth expels blood which is congealed in the body.

The fifth heals and takes away from man the faling sickness.

The sixth distillation helps al pains about the throat.

The seventh cures the pain of the Gout.

The eight is an excellent Balsam, which see thou keep well.

The ninth distillation comfort and preserves the Liver, if a little gold
be dissolved therein.

After every of the former distillations, the feces must be beaten, and searced
as in the beginning.

Another Water, by which a Physician may work wonders.
TAke the fylings of Silver, of Brass, of Iron, of Lead, of Steel, of Gold,
the sum or froth of Gold, and of Silver, and of Storax: so much of all these
as the ability of the man can well affoorde: put these the first day in the
urine of seven years of age: the second day, in white Wine, made hot: the
third day, into the Juice of Fennel: the fourth day, into the white of an Egg:
the fifth day, into woman's milk which gives a boy suck: the sixth day, into
red wine: the seventh day, in seven whites of Eggs. Then put all this into a
cupel, and distill it with a soft and gentle fire. That which is distilled keep
in a Silver or golden vessel. There cannot be spoken enough in the praise of
this water. It cures all sorts of Leprosy, and wonderfully cleanses the
body. It makes youth to continue long. Use it to thy comfort, and to the good
of thy neighbor.

CHAP. XVIII. Showing by what remedies sicknesses are to be cured.
IT is alleged out of the authority of Hypocrates and Galen, that contraries
are cured by contraries. But he which affirms that contraries are cured by
contraries, he shall never easily find out a remedy for sickness: neither
was this Hypocrates meaning, as shall be showed anon. It is out of question
that sicknesses do arise from the disagrement of the beginnings: and so often
as those beginnings do decline from their temper, (which is then called a
distemperature) and the one being separated from the consort of the other,
taking up his standing by himself, procures sickness. For when it is not in
mixture with the other, (which being joined together, do maintain concord)
they then make war upon the body, without any stop or let. I speak not
here of simple and bare qualities, but of the very essences wherein are those
powers and faculties whereof Hypocrates speaks, which preserve the health of
their Balsam, or to restore it when it is lost.

Seeing therefore the seeds and properties both of health and of sicknesses,
lie hid in the essences, it follows that they are to be cherished with
essences, and not with qualities. The which essences for so much as they are
mere acting spirits, they are to be repelled with spirits, not with bodies,
which are not like them, or which are contrary to them.

But it is objected, that al things consist of Elements, therefore our bodies
also. If then the Element of air do suffer and be out of course in us, shall
the same be helped with the Element of earth? Why then have Physicians so few
remedies against the pestilence? Is it because there are none at al? (I
confess when God will punish he takes away the virtue from remedies and
medicines.) That is not the cause, I mean the want of remedies, but because
ignorant Physicians, know not the causes of the pestilence, and therefore d^e
not rightly provide to prevent the same. For seeing they oppose against the
pestilence coming of the corruption of the Air, a medicine taken from earth,
water or air, or from the earth having a watery original, what maruayle is it,
if there follow no effect thereof, when as they do not drive away those things
which are to be mixed together, but those things which do easily agree and
are gathered together. For how can the heaven and the earth be mingled
together, to help the distemperature of the Heaven, between the which there
is so great distance, as there is between diuisible and indivisible, as Plato
spoke. Therefore celestial things are to be mingled with celestial things,
waterie with waterie and earthie with earthie, and not contrariwise, otherwise
there can be no agreement.

Consider well, that Heaven, Aier, Water, and Earth, are in us, but yet a
certain thing also far more excellent, namely, a certain supernatual body,
which conserueth all other things in their temperature, whose strength
retains all other things in their office: whereas imbecilitie and defect
suffers them to be out of course. What then is to be done in this conflict
but to cherish and uphold in his vigor and strength, that supernatural body,
that is to say, the Balsam of nature, that al other things subject thereunto,
and to whom it gives life, may by the mean thereof be continued in their
estate, firm and sound? But with what things shall the imbecilitie and defect
thereof be restored, but with things of the same likeness?

Does Oil increase by putting water therein? Does not one enemy put another
to flight, even as one friend helps another?

Al sicknesses come hereof in our body, in what soever they be seated, because
the Balsam of nature and life, do there decay and decrease. What else then is
to be done, but to help our weak friend? Lib. de s^^^^bus.


Hypocrates says, that hunger is a sickness. For whatsoever does put a man to
pain, deserves the name of sickness: whatsoever then asswageth hunger, is a
remedy for this sickness, such is al manner of food, wherewith that sickness
is cured.

Therefore according to the opinion of Hypocrates, food is a remedy. But
wherefore are meats and drinks sa^de to be medicinal remedies, but because
they have natural properties, agreeing with the Balsam of nature, not
contrary, whereby the weakened forces and strength are corroborated and the
defect thereof restored. After the same manner drink alayeth thirst. Why and
how comes this to pass but only hereof, because as nourishment is all one
with that which is nourished, so thirst is al one with the humor wanting, or
with drink?

Hereby we see how wrong their judgment is, which apply contraries to
contraries, to strengthen nature, that it may free it self from sickness.
Which nature if she should seek help for an enemy, she must needs fall
into a greater perrill, than if she were to try the combat only with
sickness. And yet for all this we reject not the saying of Hypocrates, that
contraryes, must have contrary remedies: that is to say, by the taking away of
the diseasefull impurities, and by the repairing of the strength and natural
Balsam, not by calefaction, or refrigeation, by humestation, or exsiccation:
not by abstersion, incision, attenuation, and by such other like, too common
and familiar so Galen.

But we are of Hypocrates mind, Hip. lib. de Antiq maedicina.
that hunger is cured by meat, thirst with drink, repletion with euacuation,
emptines with refection, labor with rest, and rest with labor. The which of
some are not understood, as they are expounded of Galen, who applies those
contrarieties to those bare qualities whereof Hypocrates speaks, seeing a
medicine is nothing else, then an apposition of those things which are desired,
and an ablation of those things which do too much abound, according to the
sound opinion of Galen here.

But Hypocrates aymeth at a further matter, in that he would have the disease
qualified and driven away, by giving strength to nature against the enemy:
which nature being the only Physician and curer of diseases, is to be helped
with such things as are like to the diseases, that so sicknesses and the
passions o^ sicknesses may be mittigated: even as hunger and thyrst, are
recreated and assuaged by those remedies, which they greedily desire. But
hostile things, that are enemy and contrary, are not desired, but such things
as are a friend and familiar. For who will give to his hungery son when he
asks bread, a Scorpion* Therefore like and fitting liquors, and nourishments
are to be given, which may procure to nature desired rest. For remedies which
come out of the same fountain, and out of the same family, which are agreeing
and fitting in likeness are to be ministered. For the thyrsting spirits of
fevers* are to be recreated with syrups, with sugars, with pertisan alone, or
with wine, because they are not of the same family and affinity with them,
therefore neither familiar friends nor kinsmen: but with those tart liquors,
which are begotten of the same lineage, which are spiritual not corporal, as are
those former, of the which, it certain drops be offered to him which is a
thirst, they will by and by slake his thirst, and presently bring such thirsty
spirits to their rest. After the same manner, watchings, pains, burning hears,
and such like are cured. For when the spirits are thirsty, that is to say, when
they desire any thing like to themselves which is wanting, they will never be
appeased nor at rest, until they have obtained that which they desire, and
have supplied their want. Wherefore they are rightly called, by Hypocrates,
contraries: and by Hermeticall Physicians, remedies of like sort. For they are
Similies, which are drawn from the ^ame anatomy of nature, containing like
properties, tinctures, and roots. And on the other side, they are contraries,
because they supply the defects, and do satisfy the desires with friendly
fullness, appeasing the spirits, and their fitting impurities, seeking to
consume them, or to take them away. Therefore these phrases of speech in
natures anatomy, albeit they seem different, and repugnant one to the other,
yet in good consent and agreement they are received and admitted. That is to
say, that contraries have contrary remedies, and like to their like.

But to return to our beginning, that is to say to the elements, or to those
three hypostatical and formal principles of bodies, namely Salt* Sulphur, and
Mercury, which is a liquor: for so much as upon them all grievous diseases for
the most part do depend, inso much that a common pestilence flying in the
outward air cannot invade a man, but it must make a breach and assail one of
these. Therefore thou shall not do more foolishly, if to help him which is
grieved with a mercurial sickness, thou use a remedy taken out of Sulphur,
then if thou should mingle oil with water, which two will never be mixed or
united. And in like sort, thou shall labor in vain, if thou go about to
help Sulphurus sicknesses with a Mercurial medicine: or to put away salt
sicknesses with the help of others. For these will never agree together: and
being so unlike one to the other, they will never be joined in one, to heal and
cure the body, except they be knit in a friendly peace and union, by that
supernatural and ethereal body, that is to say, by the Balsam which is common
to al things. He therefore which is sick of Mercury, must be helped with
mercurial remedies: as the Epilepsie, and the Apolexi, are to be helped with
vitriolated remedies taken from water. And he which will help sulphurus
sickness, must use sulphurus remedies, and sicknesses proceeding of Salt, with
medecines taken from Salt. So thou shall be taught by reason and experience,
that things of like sort will agree and be cured with their like. We might yet
make these things more plain, and lay the same more open by many reasons and
examples: but why should we ease you of that labor which we have undergone our
selves by dili^e^t reading, searching and experimenting the things of nature,
with great expenses, before we attained our desire. Accept my good will in this,
which, I freely offer for some ease of thy pains, and for thy profit. And if
it fit not thy humor and taste (for all men have not one relish) leave it for
those which shall better allow it.

FINIS.
THE SECOND part of this Treatise, wherein is contained in some measure, the
practice of the Hermeticall Physic.
CHAP. I.
SAlt (whereof has been spoken before at large) is a thing of such quality,
All things naturally love Salt.
and so excellent in it self, that all creatures by a certain natural
instinct, do desire the same as a Balsam, by which they are preserved,
conserved, and do grow and increase. They love it, and like it so well (I say)
that they long after it, and do draw it unto them by their breath, and do
lick it with their tongue out of walls, and old rubbish. Birds, as Doves and
such like, do search after it with their beakes, and will (if they can) attain
it, though out of ^eculent places, which are made ^at by men's excrements and
virtues. What huge multitudes of fishes are bread and nourished in the Salt
Sea? The which being so apparent. I wonder that men are of so perverse
judgment, that they know not, or at least will not acknowledge, Salt the
Balsam of nature
the admirable effects, of this radical balsam of nature. And who will not
admire the vertual properties and qualities of Salt, yea even of that which is
extracted out of living creatures: which qualities are to be seen in making
liquide, in clensing, in binding (...) preserving from (...) corruption, and
(...) Salt has life in it and is animal.
to prove that Salt is a thing animal? And so much the rather, because there
have been some chief Philosophers, who have affirmed the Mag^es or Loadstone
to be animate* or endued with life; only because it has power to draw ^ron to
it. How many faculties far greater then these, yea and the same magnetical
also, do we find in Salt, if we look diligently and thoroughly into them? What
is greater, and more admirable then the Salt of man's ^ri^e? which after
convenient preparation, is made fit to dissolve gold and silver? which by this
their simpathy and concordance, ^o sufficiently declare, and manifestly give
attraction, and magnetical virtue, occasioned or caused by their conjunction
and copulation. Who sees not those admirable things, which are to be
discerned, and which fall out in the preparation thereof, and in the exaltation,
whether you respect so great variety of colors, or the coagulations, and
dissolutions, when the spirit returns into the body, and the body passes
again into spirit? Christophorus Parisiensis, that great Philosopher, did not
in vain take the subject herehence, and begin the foundation of his work.
Thus I hope I have sufficiently declared, that our Salt may be said to be
animate.

Salt is also vegetal.
that it is not deprived of the growing faculty, it may hereby be
demonstrated, because it is the first moving thing in nature, which makes to
grow, and to multiply, and therefore serves for the generation of all things:
so as with the Poets and ancient Philosophers it may be said, that Venus the
mother, and first beginner of al generation, Salt the original matter of
pearls and coral.
is begotten of the Salt spume or froath of the male, the which also Athenaeus
confirms. For this cause Venus was called by the Greeks Aligene, as
aff^anced to the Salt sea. And also the generation of most precious pearls in
the shells of fishes, and of coral springing out of the bowels of hard stones
and rocks in the sea, spreading forth branches like a (...) do yet more and
more confirm this sentence. The^^ are the ^^fects, Salt the fire of nature.
which that fire of nature, Salt, brings forth, yea even in the midst of
most cold water.

But let us see also what it works in the earth. The effects which it has in
the earth are these: namely, it heateth and makes the earth fat: The effects
of Salt in the earth.
it anima^^th, fortifieth, and gives power unto it: It increases and gives a
vegetating and growing virtue with seed into every thing in the same. For what
other thing is it which (...) the earth (...), and brings to pass, that one
grain multiplyeth into a hundred but a certain ^^ercoration, and spreading of
(...) which comes from cattle? What other thing opens the earth and makes
it to sproute ^n the beginning of the spring time after that the Sun is
exalted into the sign of Ari^^ (which sign is the full of Saturn, and the
house of Mars, signs altogether f^ery) but the eleuations and subl^^ations of
the spirits of the said Salt, and of the balsam of nature? This is (...) and
quickens, which makes to grow, and which (...) and ioyeth the meadows and
the fields, and which produces that most ample and universal vigor and virtue.

Who sees not this in the very a^er also, The effects of Salt in the aier.
by the sublimations of the spirits of the (...) nature of Salt, which spirits
being sublenated into aier in the said spring time, do fall again in form of
a deawe, upon corn and all things that spring out of the earth? And who sees
not that these deawes arysing from the earth, and falling again from the aier,
is a cause of vegetation and growing. But that the dew is the spirit of the
foresaid Salt, and endued with Salt, they which think themselves great
Philosophers, against their wills and not without shame, do confess, when they
see that the true Philosophers do extract out of the deawe a Salt, which
dissolueth coral and pearls, no less then does the Salt* which is extracted
out of common Salt, out of Salt-Peeter, out of Niter, or out of other Salts
which are prepared for the same end.

Furthermore, the same Salt, may rightly also be said to be vegetall, because
it is manifestly found in all vegetables, and because those things in the which
it does most abound, have the longer life and continuance, and do more
manifestly show forth the vegetable effects, either in their own proper
nature, ^or at such times as they are to serve for use.

Salts mineral.
for that such sundry and diverse kinds of Salts are found in the bowels of the
earth: such are Salt, Gem, Alum, Vitriol, Salt niter, and such others more, all
which are of metallic nature, Salts of diverse kinds.
or else do participate much with the same. But a Philosopher knows how to
(...) this thing further, and to find out the innermost (...) by the help of
diverse strong waters, which he knows how to prepare: which are nothing else,
but the spirits of the foresaid Salts which have power to dissolve and to
bring metallic bodies into waters, Stirring waters.
as is known to every one. I say, that by this dissolution, we may be^^ld the
(...) simpathy of these Salts, with the metallic nature. For because they are
like, they will be well mingled together, conjoined and united, dissoluing his
like, and associating himself to his like. For strong waters do never work
upon wood, or upon any other matter, which is not of metallic nature: Nature
accord^^h with nature.
As it was most truly said of a certain great Philosopher* Nature loves her
like, and delights in her own nature* And by another wittily thus spoken:
Easy is the passage of things one into the other, which are one in likeness.
Sulphur, and other things, which are of an oil like nature, are sooner and
better dissolved with oils, as with the oils of Terebinth and of Flax, or
Linsede* which is most sw^^te, then with that great force, and most violent
sharpness of strong waters, which are nothing else but the spirits of Salts,
and by consequent do disagree with Sulphur, which is a beginning contrary to
the said spirits. Here i^ offered large occasion of (...) i^ time and place
would serve, but I omit it.

Let us return to our Salt: Salt is fusible
the which if I shall show that it may be moulten and dissolved, no less then
gold and silver, with the force of fire, and being cold again, may be
congealed into a mass, as metalls be, then no doubt it will evidently appear,
that Salt is of a me^allick nature. And this I say is to be do^e, not only in
Salt which is sound in mines and in caves of the earth, but also in the very
Salt of the Sea. But for so much as the same is better known to them that have
but mean skill in metalls, then that I shall need at this time to spend much
labor about it, I cease to speak any word more thereof.

Hereby it does appear very evidently, that this opio^e of Aristotle is false,
where he says, that cold dissolueth the things which are congealed with heat:
and that those things which are coagulated by cold, are dissolved by heat. The
which notwithstanding we grant to be true on the one part, for that we know
well, that Salt which is coagulated or congealed by the heat of the Sun* is
dissolved in cold water. But it must be confessed also to be true, that Salt,
by the vehemency of the heat of fire, is to be dissolved, moulten and made
fluxible, and to be cast into a moulten lump, as easily as metalls be.

Moreover Salts may be extracted out of all calcined metals which are to be
dissolved, Salts may be extracted out of metalls
filtred, and coagulated, after the same manner as are other salts, whether
they be common and not moulten, or whether they be moulten by the force of
heat. For it is known to a Chemist of small practice, that out of one pound of
calcined lead, ten or twelve ounces of Salt may be extracted. All which
things do sufficiently demonstrate and prove, that the nature of Salt is
metallic: and that therefore metal is nothing else but a certain ^u^il Salt.

By that which has been spoken, it may easily appear, how Salt is animal,
vegetal, and mineral, and that it agrees with that which all the Philosophers
have decreed with one consent concerning the matter and subject of the
universal Medicine.

And hereunto tend all other signs, whereby they describe their foresaid
matter, albeit most abscurely. All which things to agree with the nature of
Salt^ as that (...) is of small estimation: that it is to be found in every
thing, (...) our selves: the which is most plain, for so much as there is
nothing compounded in universal world, out of the which, and at all times, Salt
cannot be extracted.

CHAP. II. The three principles of all things are contained in Salt, extracted
out of the earth.
But to show now more particularly those things whereof we have spoken
generally, namely, that Salt do participate with the animal, vegetal, and
mineral nature, we will use a common example, the which notwithstanding, being
exactly and diligently waighed and considered by a true Philosopher, is a
notable mystery. The which, albeit it be taken from out of the earth, yet it
may lift up our eyes to heaven.

I mean to speak of Niter, which men commonly call Salt-Peeter. I let pass
the detestable and pernicious use thereof, invented for the destruction of men:
And yet I must confess that it deserves great admiration, in that it shows
forth so great, and incredible effects, when as we being in these lower parts,
it represents thundrings and lightenings, as if they were in the air aloft.
But it we should consider what it is, and of what quality, in his own nature
and composition, what diverse faculties, and qualities, and effects there are in
a thing so vile and so common, it would no doubt make us to wonder out of
measure.

Niter is made and compounded of earth his mother, which brings forth the
same: or it is taken out of old rubbish gr^unds, or out of places where stables
for beasts have been, or out of such kind of grounds which have been
replenished with salt liquor, or with the urine of beasts, rather then out of
a lean hungry land, washed with rain, or by some such like occasion, deprived
of that radical humor. It is most plentifully extracted from the ground where
doue-houses are seated, and out of Pigeons dung: and this is the best Niter of
all others: the which is worthy the noting. Whereby it appears, that Niter
does participate with the excrements and vrines of living creatures.

For vrines are nothing else, but a superfluous separation of the Salt of
vegetables, by which, living creatures are nourished and do live. Whereby it
evidently appear, how the foresaid Salt does in kind participate with the
nature animal, and vegetable. For as touching that which pertains to the
mineral, it is not much pertinent to our purpose to speak thereof, saving that
we think good to add thus much, that it is extracted out of the earth, which
is the reason why it is called Salt-Peeter, when as more properly it should be
called the salt of the earth. But let us go forward.

Nature ministereth matter to Art, whereof Salt-Peeter is compounded: Art
cannot make by it self, no more then nature can make Salt-Peeter-pure, and
separated from all terrestrilie and heterogeneal or unkindly substance. For
that it may produce the same effects which the other produces, it must be
prepared by the industry of workmen. For these make choice of convenient
earth, and out of fit places, to them well known, and being filtered, or
strained with hot common water, again and again, through the same earth, as
lies are usually made with ashes, it comes to pass that a saltness or
brinish taste is mingled therewith, which is proper to all salts.

Of the which like, or water so distreined, if two thirds or theraboutes be
vapored away by seething at the fire, and then let cool, the salt will be
thickened into an Ice, whereof the maker of Salt-Peeter finisheth his work,
purifying the same by sundry dissolutions, and coagulations, that it may loose
his fatness quite and clean.

This common work, being triuial, and no better then mechanical, if it be
rightly considered and weighed, is (as I have said already) full of admiration.
For by the very same preparation, the three beginnings are extracted out of
earth, which may be separated one from the other, and yet nevertheless the
whole three, do consist in one and the same essence, and are only
distinguished in properties and virtues. A Figure of the Trinity.
And herein we may plainly see as in a glass (after a certain manner) that in
comprehensible misery of the three persons in one and the same Hypostasis or
substance, which make the divine Trinity. For thus it has pleased the
omnipotent Creator, to manifest and show himself a v^^trine, or Trinne, not
only herein, that he is found so to be in the nature of earth, but universally
in all the works of the creation. For this our comparison of the Salt of the
earth is general, and is every where found, and in all things.

Also in this comparison of Salt, Phree distinct natures in Salt.
we may behold three distinct natures, which nevertheless are and do
subsist in one and the same essence. For the first nature is Salt common,
fixed, and constant: and the other nature is Volatile, Salt, the which alone,
the Sal-peeter-man seeks after.

This volatile or flying Salt, contains in it two kinds of Volatile Salt: the
other full of Sulphur, easily catching flame, which men call Niter: the other
Mercurial, watery, sower, partaking of the nature of Salt Ammoniac.

Wherefore in that most common essence of earth, these three several Salts are
found, under one and the same nature of the which three, all vegetables and
animalls whatsoever do participate. And we determine to place our three
hypostatical and substantial beginnings, upon these three Salts, as upon the
fundamental grounds, in that our work, concerning the hidden nature of things,
and the mysteries of Art, the which we had thought to have published before
this time: whereof we thought it convenient to say some thing by the way,
because the groundworke and beginnings of Medicines depend upon them.

Wherefore to the end so large and immensurable doctrine, may the better and
more diligently be considered of all men, especially of the wiser sort, then
heretofore it has been, I will set plainly before their eyes, those three
distinct natures of Salt, comprehended (as already is said) in one Hupostasis,
or substance.

For the maker of Saltpeter, or Niter, to make his salt the more effectual,
volatile, and more apt to take fire, takes away the fatness (as they term
it) from the same, and seperateth the Salt thereof, which is al one with the
sea salt* or common salt, which is dissolved into common water: Contrariwise,
Salt-peted (as men call it) is congealed into such pieces, as we see it to be:
and so there is made a visible separation of both the Salts. For the water
(wherein the common Salt being defused and dissolved as we said) being
euaporated or boiled away, there remains a portion of Salt in the bottom,
which is somewhat like to our common marine Salt, and of the nature thereof,
for it has the same brynish qualities, Two salts appear in the (...) of
saltpeter.
it is fixed, it melts not in the fire, neither is it set on fire, and
therefore is wholly different from that which is congealed in the same water,
which is called Saltpeter. The which thing truly deserves to be diligently
considered, not of ordinary Salt-peter-men, which are ignorant of the nature of
things, but of Philosophers, if they desire to be reputed, and to be such. To
whom it shall manifestly appear, that Salt which by nature and quality
(according to the common opinion of Philosophers) is hot and dry, a sulphurus
Salt, fiery, and apt to be set on fire, such as is Salt peter, will be
coagulated or congealed in water, wherein al other saltes are dissolved, no
less than that salt which proceeded from the very same essence of Saltpeter,
may be dissolved in water, as we have said.

Therefore not without great cause, the admirable nature of Saltpeter
deserves to be considered, which comprehends in it two volatile parts: the
one of Sulphur, the other of Mercury. The Sulphurus part is the soul thereof,
Two flying parts of saltpeter.
the Mercurial is his spirit.

The Sulphurus part comes to that first moving of nature, which is nothing
else, but an ethereal fire, which is neither hot nor dry, not consuming like
the Elementarie fire, but is a certain Celestial fire, and Ayerie humor, hot
and moist, Sulphur of Nature.
and such as we may almost behold in Aqua Vitae; a fire, I say, contempered,
full of life, which in Vegetables, we call the vegetating soul: in Animals, the
hot and moist radical: the natural and unnatural heat, the true Nectar of
life, which falling into any subject, whether it be Animal or Vegetable, death
by and by ensues. The which comes so to pass upon no other cause, but
upon the defect of this vital heat, which is the repayrer and conseruer of
life.

The same vital heat, is also to be found, albeit more obscurely in Minerals:
The Mercurial part of saltpeter.
which may more easily be comprehended by the sympathy and concordance, which
the said saltpeter has with Metals: as is to be seen in the dissolutions,
whereof we have spoken somewhat before.

Beside that sulphurus part, there is also found in saltpeter, a certain
Mercurial of ayerie nature, and which notwithstanding cannot take fire, but is
rather contrary thereunto. This spirit is not hot in quality, but rather
cold, as appears by the tart and sharp taste thereof: the which sharpness
and coldness is wonderful, and is far different from the Elementary
coldness: for that it can dissolve bodies, and coagulate spirits, no less
then it does congeale saltpeter: The cause of ferment, is sowernesse.
the which sowernesse is the general cause of Fermentation, and coagulation of
al natural things.

This same sower and tart spirit, is also found in sulphurs, of the same
quality, not burning, nor setting on fire, and which congealeth sulpur, and
makes it firm, which otherwise would be running like Oil. Vitriol, among all the kinds of salt, Vitriolis of the nature of Copper.
does most of al abound with this spirit, because it is of the nature of Venus,
or Copper: which sower spirit inconstant Mercury (which notwithstanding
always tends to his perfection, that is to say, to his coagulation and
fixation) full well can make choice of, and attract it to him, that he may be
fixed and coagulated, The spirit of Vitriol fixes Mercury.
when it is mixed and sublimed with the same vitriol. Even as Bees suck honey
from flowers, as Ripley says.

Furthermore, this sharp, sower, and cold spirit, is the cause why Salt-Peeter
having his sulphur set on fire, gives a crack: that so salt-peeter may be of
the number of them, whereof Aristotle writes, as that they are moved with a
contrary motion: Which words of his are diligently to be considered. But what
do I mean to open the gate of passage into the orchard of the Hesperides, in
speaking so plainly of salt-peeter, giving thereby a free access unto the
doltish and ignorant? Be not therefore deceived, in taking my words according
to the letter. Salt-Peeter of the Philosophers or fusile salt (whereof at the
first came the name of Halchymie) is not Salt-Peeter, or that common Niter: yet
nevertheless, the composition and wonderful nature thereof, is as it were a
certain example, and Lesbian rule our work. Howbeit I have spoken more
plainly and manifestly unto you of this matter, then any other which has gone
before me has done.

Let therefore Momus from henceforth hold his peace, and let slanderous
tongues be hereafter silenced. Also let the ignorant open their ears and
eyes, and give good heed to that which follows, wherein shall be plainly
showed many admirable things, and secrets of exceeding great profit. Wherewith
be you well satisfied, and take my good will in good part, till hereafter I
shall deliver that which shall better content you.

CHAP. III. Wherein by Examples, the forces and properties of Salt are
manifested.
Ye have seen out of that first remaining Chaos (that is to say, out of that
base earth, or out of a matter confused and deformed) an extraction, and
separation of a fairer, bright clear, and transparent form: that is to say,
of that Salt, which is opt to receive many other forms, and which is endued
with diverse and wonderful properties.

Ye have also seen, how out of one, and the same essence, three distinct and
several things, yea, three beginnings of Nature are extracted: of the which all
bodies are compounded, and with skillful Chemist can extract and separate out
of every natur^ll body, that is to say, out of Mineral, Vegetal, and Animal:
to wit, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury: principles verily most pure, most simple,
and truly Elementarie of Nature, all comprehended under one essence of Salt,
Sulphur, and Mercury, which Philosophers are wont to compare with the body,
Body, soul, and spirit.
Spirit and Soul: for the body is attributed to salt: the spirit to Mercury:
and the soul to sulphur: every one to their apt and convenient attribute.

And the spirit is as it were the mediator, and conseruer of the soul with the
body, because through the benefit thereof, it is joined and coupled with the
soul. And the soul, quickens the spirit, and the body.

Ye have also seen in the aforesaid salt, a Hermaphroditicall Nature: Male
and female: fixed and volatile: Agent and Pacient: and which is more, hot and
cold: fire and Ice, by mutual friendship and simpathie joined in one, and
united into one substance: wherein is to be seen the wonderful nature thereof.

The properties thereof are no less wonderful: nay, rather much more
wonderful. For Saltpeter is the especial key and chief Porter, which opens
most hard bodies, and the most solid things, as well stones as Metal: and
brings gold and silver into liquor, which the proper water extracted out of
the whole maffe, without separation of the male or fixed. And as it makes al
bodies metallic, spiritual and volatile: so on the contrary part, it has
virtue to fix and to incorporate spirits, how flying soever they be.

Who now will not wonder, or rather be amazed, which knows that Saltpeter is
so apt and ready to take fire, by which it passes into air and smoke, and
yet in the mean time sees that it remains liquid and fusible in a red hot
crucible, placed in the center of burning coals? notwithstanding the which
most burning heat, it conceiueth no flame, except the flame or fire happen to
touch it. And which is more, being of nature so volatile, it is at the length
fixed, neither is it overcome by the fire, neither does it yield be it never
so violent and burning, no more then does the Salamander (if it be true which
is reported of that beast) which before notwithstanding it could not abide, nor
by any manner of means endure. Thus therefore ye see, that by fire only his
nature is transformed.

Furthermore the same Salt^peter, which was of late rightly prepared and
cleansed, so white and Christalline, (at the least outwardly so appearing) being
now put into a fixatorie fire, you shall see that it contains within it al
manner of colors, as green, red, yellow, and white, with many others more. The
which if any man will hardly believe, because he will be rather incredulous than
docile, I wish him to make trial thereof, and then he shall learn so notable a
mystery of Nature, within the space of ten hours, with very little cost.

And least ye should take me for some Lycophrone, or Gramarian writer of
Tragedies, I will teach you how to work truly and plainly.

Take of Saltpeter the finest and clearest, one pound or two; put it into a
glass Alembic with a cover, A practice.
and set it in sand: no otherwise than if you should distill Aqua Fortis. Put
fire under, and moderate the same by degrees according to Art: she which fire
thou shall increase the third or fourth hour after, in such wise, til the sand
appear very hot. This fire in the highest degree thou shall continue by the
space of five or six hours: and then thou shall find and plainly see, that
the spirits of Saltpeter, have penetrated the very glass of the Alembic, and
that it has dissoloued the same as well within as without.

Furthermore the spirits of the Saltpeter, which are come through the body of
glass, cleaving to the outside thereof like unto flower, ye make take off
with a soft feather, and easily gather together in great quantity. This
flower is nothing else, but the spirit of Saltpeter, wherein ye shall see al
sorts of colors very lively expressed.

That which remains in the bottom of the Culcurbit, so white as snow, and
wholly fixed, is a special remedy to extinguish al Feauers. It is given from
half a drachme to a drachme, dissolved in some convenient liquor. A good
purgation of bad humors.


And to speak in a word, this remedy has not his like, to cut, to cleanse, and
to purge, and euacuate the corruptions of humors, and to conserve the body from
al pollution of corruption. For seeing it is of the nature of Balsamic Salt, it
must needs be endued with such virtues and properties. And in very deed to
deal plainly and truly, I cannot if I would, sufficiently extol with praises,
the true Saltpeter, and Fusile salt of the Philosophers. This Salt, Homer calls
divine. And Plato writes, that this Salt, is a friend and familiar to divine
things. And many Philosophers have said, that it is the soul of the universal,
the quickening spirit, and that which generateth al things.

It may peradventure seem that we have been too tedious in the inquisition and
speculation, as well of the general, as of the particular, concerning the nature
of Salt: but it is so profitable and necessary, that it is the Basis, and
foundation of al medicinable faculties (as more at large shall be showed in his
place) that Physicians may have wherewith to busy themselves, and to
understand.

But as touching a Chemical Philosopher, let him know that he ought to bestow
his labor most chiefly in fusil Salts, and to remember that Philosophers have
not without good cause ever and anon cried; Bake it, Bake it, and bake it
again: which is al one, as if they had said, Calcine, calcine, or bring it to
ashes.

And in very deed if we will confess the truth of the matter, al Chemical
workings, as Distillations, Calcinations, Reuerberations, Dissolutions,
Filtrations, Coagulations, Decoctions, Fixations, and such other appertaining
to this Science, tend to no other end, then so to bring their bodies into dust
or ashes, that they may communicate the spirits of Saltes and sulphur which
have made them (placed nevertheless under one and the same essence) after a
certain imperceptible manner, with their metallic water, and true Mercury:
and that to this end, that by the infernal virtue and force of Salt, the
Mercury may be consumed, boiled, and altered from his vile nature, into a
more noble: when as of common Mercury, it is made by the benefit of the
spirit of Salt, the Mercury of the Philosophers: which Salt it has attracted
out of the ashes, or calx vine Metallic.

Even like as it comes to pass in the lye-wash which is made of ashes and
water, the which being oftentimes messhed and drawn away, the ashes leave al
their life and strength, communicating all their Salt to the foresaid water:
the which water, albeit, it always remains fluxile and liquid, yet it
abides not simple and pure water, cold, or of small virtue: but being now
made lie, it is become hot, and of a drying quality, clensing, and of
quality wholely active, which is altogether the virtue and faculty of an
altering medicine.

But it is to be considered, of what matter this quick and metallic ashes
are to be made. Also of what manner of water the lie is to be prepared, that
thou may exalt the Salt or Sulphur of the Philosophers, that is to say, the
Balsamic medicine, which is full of active qualities like unto thunder, being
reduced into a true living calx.

And whereas at the first, it was a certain dead body void of life, it shall
then be made a living body endued with spirit, and medicinal virtue.

CHAP. IIII. Gold animated, is the chief subject of the metallic Medicine of
the Philosophers.
OF so great power and force is the Phylosophical Sulphur of Nature, that it
multiplyeth and increases gold in strength and virtue, being already endued
with great perfection, not so much for the equal concurrencie of Sulphur and
Quicksilver, as in regard of the perfect combination, adequation, equabilitie
of Elements, and of the principles which make gold. Gold tryumpheth in earth,
in aier and in fire.
And the said principles or beginnings (to wit, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury,)
do so order themselves, that the one does not exceed the other: but being as
it were equally balanced and proportionated, they make gold to be
incorruptible: in such wise, that neither the earth (being buried therein) can
canker, fret and corrupt it, nor the Air alter it, nor yet the fire master
it, nor diminish the least part of it.

And the reason hereof is, for that (as the Philosopher says) No equal has
any command or maisterie over his equal. The incorruptibilitie of gold, makes
it the best Medicine to help a corruptible body.
For because also, in every body equalled and duly preportioned, no action or
passion can be found; Also this is only that equality, which Pithagoras
called the Mother, the Nurce, and the defender of the concord of al things.
This is the cause that in gold and in every perfect body, wherein this
equality is, there is a certain incontrollable and incorruptible composition.
The which when the ancient Philosophers observed, they sought for that great
and incomparable Medicine in gold.

And because they understood, that gold was of so small compacted and firm
composition, that it could not work, and send his effects into our body, so
long as it remained in that solidity, they sought and endeavored to dissolve and
break his hard bonds, and by the benefit of vegetable Sulphur, and by the
artificious working of the Balsam of life, to bring it to a perfect adequation,
that the vegetable spirits of gold, (which now lay hidden as it were idle,
might make it of common gold, (which before it was) gold phylosophical and
medicinable, which having gotten a more perfect vegetation and seminal virtue,
may be dissolved into any liquor, and may communicate unto the same that
flowing and balsamic perfection, or the Balsam of life, and of our nature.

And because we are now speaking of the animation of gold, The wonderful
effects of potable gold.
be it known for a surety, that the ancient Fathers and Philosophers sweat and
labored much to find out the mystery hereof, that they might compound a
certain Balsamic Medicine, to vegetate and corroborate, and by the noble
adequation, and she integrity of nature thereof, to conserve the radical
Balsam, and that Nectar of our life, in good and laudable temperament. But
indeed it is not to be wondered at, that gold being delivered from his
mannacles and fetters, and being made so spiritual and animate, and increased
in virtue and strength, does corroborate nature, and renew the Balsam of our
nature, and does conserve unto the last period of life, being taken in a very
small dose, as in the quantity of one or two grains.

And so much less it is to be maruailed at, that for so much as by that great
adequation of temperature, it does conveniently agree and communicate with our
radical Balsam, it does check the rule of phleame, the burning of choler, and
the adustion of melancholy, and by his incorruptible virtue, does preserve our
nature, but also to overcome all the diseases which belong to our body. And so
much the rather, in regard that the same Balsam of nature, that natural spirit,
is the principal cause in us, of all actions, operations, and of motions, not
depending upon temperature or mixture, but concerning the same, as Galen
himself is compelled to confess, speaking of that our natural heat. Ye must
understand (says he) that Hypocrates calls that, inset heat, which we call
the native spirit in every living thing. Neither has any other thing formed
any living creature from the beginning, or increased it, or nourished it unto
the appointed time of death, but only this inset or natural heat, which is
the cause of all natural works.

Therefore they can be excused by no manner of means, which contumeliously, and
without any reason, do despise, disco^mend, and caluminat these kind of
remedies, which do principally tend to the restoring and corroborating of our
radical Balsam, which alone (helped with the said medicine) is able to separate
those things which are unkindly and grievous to nature, and merely
heterogenial, by expulsions convenient, and ordinary euacuations: and to
retain the homogenial and kindly parts, with the which it does most especially
agree to their further conservation. Whereas, if for the corroborating of man's
strength, there could be any use made of leaf gold (the which is nothing else
but a certain dead matter, in no sort fit to participate with our nature, and
much less able to be digested by our natural heat) which is most commonly in
use in all restoring medicines, as in Confectione alkermes, electuario de
gemmis, aurea Alexandrina, Diamargariton Aricenna, and in such other like: why
I pray you is the use of gold animate disallowed, prescribed in that manner and
form already showed? But in good sooth, they do in vain and too unadvisedly
disco^mend, and contemptuously speak against metallic remedies, as if they
were no better then poisons: when as the world knows, that men which are
irrecouerably diseased, when no other common medicines will help, are then sent
to Bathes, to the Spawe, and to such other waters which are medicinable, in
regard they spring from Niter, Alum, Vitriol, Sulphur, Pitch, Antimonie, Lead,
and such like: all which do participate of a substance and spirit metallic,
which we have found by experience, to purify and to euacuate our bodies by all
manner of euacuation, not without great profit, as we will declare more at
large, when we come to speak more particularly of the same in our book
concerning the hidden nature of things, and of the mysteries of Art: In the
which work we will show plainly and openly, the vertual qualities of those
metallic spirits. And it shall be there proved by reason, and also by
experience, that those metallic spirits, have the same effects that the
foresaid medicinable waters of Bath, Bathes and waters artificial.
and the S^awe, and other such like have, which are natural and naturally hot:
and therewithal we will show plainly, that such waters artificial, by industry
may be made at any time, and in any place, and with no less commodity and
profit.

There are a sort of men, which in some measure are to be excused, which being
old, and think that they know all things, are ashamed to begin now to learn
again: but they which oppose themselves obstinately, and through envy and
malice, do carpe and cauil, are more out of course, against whom we have
nothing to say in our defense but this, that they bewray their gross ignorance
and malice.

But the order and manner of preparing the Medicine, whereof we treat here, was
in old time called mineral, in regard that the Phylosophical Sulphur or Salt,
which serves for animation or vegetation, is extracted out of the first
vegetative spring of mineral nature.

Many Philosophers have taken Saturn or Lead for the mineral subject. Other
some have taken the Saturnal Magnesia or Loadstone, which is the first
metallic root, and of the stock and kind of vitriol. Isaac Holland, Ripley,
and many other Philosophers, have written their works concerning this matter,
the which, for so much as they are extant, every one that list may read them. For
we have no other purpose in this place, but to teach and demonstrate in plain
manner, what that Balsam radical is, and that universal medicine, so much spoken
of by ancient philosophers, for the conservation of health, and for the curing
of diseases in man's body.

Others (among whom also is Raymund Lully) sought their fire of nature in a
vegetable, to animate gold. For this was that which al men especially labored
for, to put life into gold.

And this is the reason why they all say* that there is only one way, and one
matter, or Balsamic Sulphur and of nature, which yields active and internal
fire, to the same work.

And among all vegetables, the chiefest is wine. For of all other it partaketh
very much of the vitriolated nature: which may be gathered, not so much by that
green collor of the unripe clusters of grapes and their sharp fast: as by the
saphiric and reddy color of those that are ripe, which appears both within
and also without, and by the sharp taste: all which things do plainly declare
both the external and internal qualities of Vitriol.

It is also well known that there are certain such waters in Auuergne in
France, which have the taste of wine with a certain pricking faculty or
relish.

Vinegar also, whereto wines is easily brought, when his sulphurus life is
gone, (that is to say, when his spirit is separated) does represent the tart
quality of Vitriol, as does also other impressions of wine sufficiently known
to true Philosophers. The Chemical ministries
The which also may be gathered by the concordance and agreement which wine
has with the metallic nature, seeing that as well out of wine as out of
Vitriol, the Menstrue of Chemical Art may be prepared, which is able to
dissolve metals into liquor.

These are (I say) the reasons why Raymund Lully, and other famous
Philosophers, placed their workings in wine, for the extracting of their
Balsamic Sulphur, that thereby they might make true potable gold, and the
infallible Balsamic medicine.

But now we will go forward to open in few words Lullies method, which he so
greatly hid in his book of Quintessence, and in other places, which if it be
rightly understood, it will easily direct and instruct every true Philosopher,
to extract out of all things (and therefore to compound) that Balsamic
medicine. Balsam is in every thing.
For the scope is every where all one, there is but one end, and there is but
one only way, to the composition of that Balsam, or Phylosophical Sulphur,
which existeth in all things, mineral, vegetable, and animal: howbeit in some
more, in other some less.

CHAP. V. By what Art the Sulphur and Mercury of the Philosophers may be
prepared out of a vegetable, to make true potable gold.
THerefore to the end all things may be duly performed, The spirit of wine.
which are required to such working, choice must be made of the best red wine
that can be gotten, being made of that vine whose wood is all so red, and of
this wine must be taken one hogs-head at the least, out of the which thou
shall extract an Aqua vitae, according to the woonted manner, the which thou
shall rectify to the highest perfection. This spirit of wine thou shall set up
in a most cold place, in a vessel very close stopped, least that it breath out,
by reason of the exceeding subtilty thereof. The remainder of the wine thou
shall distill again, and there will come out of the same a middle Aqua Vitae,
if the wine be of the best sort. The which so distilled, keep apart, or by it
self. This thou shall do again with the rest of the wine, seperating as
before the Aqua Vitae from his fleame, every one severally restrained by it
self. At the last thou shall gather the forces which remain in the bottom,
out of the which thou shall draw the last humidutie, by a Balneum vaporosum,
or by moist Balneum, or by ashes, until it wax thick and pyththie. These
pitchy remainders being put into diverse alembicks (if they be much) put so much
thereto of the reserved fleame, as may stand above it four or five fingers
thick: Put altogether upon a hot Balm, or upon hot ashes: so within few
days, the fleame which before was white, receiving tincture again, will become
very red, having attracted unto it a combustible Sulphur, out of the impure
feces or lees of the wine.

Separate this tincted fleame by inclination, and keep it by it self if you
will, for such uses as hereafter shall be showed.

After that again power a new quantity of fleame upon the same feces, in
several allembickes, if there be great plenty of them, as is showed before: that
which is tincted with red, separate again as before, and power it to that which
is already tincted and separated.

Thou shall continue this so often, until the fleame will draw no more
rudeness with it, and that the feces are now become somewhat white, or
Christalline. The which that thou may the more easily know, power upon it
an other fleame, and with thy finger or a clean stick stir them together,
that thereby thou may see whether any more tincture remains. For all must
be clean extracted, that the least fleame being powered upon it, will tinct or
color no more. By which proof thou shall certainly know, that the residence
is very well depured, which in another place we will call the Crystal of
tartar: The Crystal of Tartar.
because out of all common lees, and by a more easy method, the like
christalls are extracted.

This is a most pleasant and sweet remedy, and if any in the world be
acceptable it is this. It does very readily cleanse the stomach, the liver and
the spleen from their impurities, provoking urine, and moving one or two
sieges extraordinarily. The good effects of the spirit of wine.
But let us return to our work.

The ^eces aforesaid being now rightly and conveniently prepared and depured
as is said, must be put into diverse small cucurbits with long necks, and into
every one of them, put of the rectified spirit of wine, so much, as that it may
stand over it three fingers thick: presently set upon every one of them a
small cappe or cover, with his receiver, strongly and well luted, Hermetically
closed round about, that nothing breathe through: then set them upon the hot
ashes that they may boil, and distill: pouring in again the same which shall
distill forth, and so let them boil again. After that suffer all to cool.

Then as warily as thou can by inclination, separate the spirit, that nothing
thick or troubled pass forth therewith. And then again, power into every
cucurbittel another spirit of wine, and do as thou did before. This thou
shall do so often, and continue it, until the feces which by their own
proper nature are calcined, begin to wax black and to smoke, if they be
put upon a red hot plate. For this is a sign, that the first Phylosophycall
calcination is finished, and that the spirit, by the same work, is now become
animate by reason of the tarte Balsam, and Ferment of nature, contained in the
foresaid feces, reduced into Crystal, as is said.

These animated spirits joined together, and very well reserved, that they
breathe not, nor issue forth, thou shall put the foresaid feces into vessels
which are called Matrats, like unto round globes, having strait necks, by
which the matter is powered in.

These vessels being Hermetically closed, and stopped, that nothing may vapor
forth, let them be covered in sand, in the Furnace of Athanor, which will
yield flame, round about the compass of the foresaid vessel. Then put fire
thereunto by the continuance of five or six days, until the earth do become
as white as snow, and is well calcined and fixed. The which, that thou may
make the more volatile or flying, and may also make the Sulphur and Mercury
of the Philosophers, thou may if thou will divide this thy callixe into two
or three cucurbittils of convenient greatness, first waighing the weight of
every of the calxes, and pouring upon every of them a forth part of the spirit
of wine, animated as aforesaid.

Put a small head upon each of the cucurbittels, with their several receivers
well fitted as before. Place them in B. M. which is moist, B. M. signifies
Balneum ^arie
by the space of one day. After that, the same vessels being set in ashes, put
thereto a mean fire that the liquor may distill forth, which whereas before it
was most ardent and most sharp, now it shall come forth altogether without
taste, having no other relish upon the tongue and palate, then has common
wel-water: the reason hereof is, for that the foresaid spirit, has left and
forsaken his Balsamic Salt, which before being mixed with the spirit stilled
forth with the Salt of the foresaid Calx: For nature loves nature, and
follows her in her nature, as Philosophers teach.

Then again thou shall power on another spirit of wine animate, as before, in
the same proportion, and the former order of distillation observed, until in
taste thou find the foresaid animate spirit, to come forth and to distill, as
strong in taste and relish, as it was then when thou powredst it on.

For this shall be a sign, that the foresaid fixed Salt, has retained out of
the volatile, so much as shall be sufficient and convenient to retain.

And now if thou weigh and counterpoyse thy matters, thou shall find that they
are increased a third part in weight: as if there were one ounce in every
vessel of Calxe, thou shall find that every of them does weigh three ounces
or more.

The which is diligently to be observed for sublimation, and for the last
working which as yet rests to be done that the volatill may transcende, and
overcome the fixed.

In the which business that thou may proceed the more safely, thou must
take some of the foresaid Phylosophycal Calxe vine, and cast it upon a red
hot plate of iron, and if thou see all the said Calxe to vapor away and to
vanish in smoke, like Salarmoniack, thou have an absolute and perfect work.
If otherwise, thou must begin the foresaid work again, and continue it,
until the foresaid sign do appear.

This done, thou shall put these matters into small long Lymbeckes in form of a
Sublimatorie, with heads upon them, and receivers to receive the spiritual
sulphurus humiditie: and then thou shall distill it in ashes with a gentle fire,
by ye space of a whole day: afterward thou shall increase the fire by a further
degree, more and more, so long, until about the end of eighteen hours or
twenty, the fire be made sublimatorie, and that thou see the vessels to be no
more obsucred or darkness with spirits: or with white fumes. And then shall ye
see the sublimated matter cleaning to the sides of the glasses, fair and
bright, and transparent like unto pearls, or such like. Upon this matter
beaten into powder, in a Purphorie mortar of small bigness, thou shall powder
the sulphurus spirit distilled, moystening it by little and little, and boiling
or straining the whole by the space of four days in a strong Athanor.

And thus thou shall have a pearelike matter, A Balsam Radica^.
a Balsam radical, extracted from a Vegetable, the Mercury of the
Philosophers, the Sulpur Balsamic, and to conclude, that fire of Nature so
much commended, and so hidden by all the Philosophers, which with one consent
say, Ignis and azoc tibi sufficient: Let Fire, and the Matter suffice thee.

This only Balsam is the universal medicine, to defend and conserve health, if
it be given with some convenient liquor to the quantity of one or two grains.
Great and admirable is the virtue thereof, to restore our radical Balsam: the
which we affirm to be the Medicine of diseases, even by the common consent of
al Physicians.

But our Lullie and other Philosophers, are not content with this, but
proceeding further, do dissolve the forsaid Phylosophical Sulphur in a
convenient portion of the spirit of wine, rectified to perfection, as before,
and suffer them to be united, and very well coupled together by way of
Circulation in a Pelican Hermetically stopped or closed: and within few days,
the water is made azure like or Celestial: which being distilled, is of force
to dissolve gold, and does reduce it into the true Calxe of the Philosophers,
into a precious liquor, which itterated circulations and distillations, can
also pass by the neck of the Allembic or by Retort.

In the which working, if thou proceed as thou should, thou shall be able to
separate from gold (already phylosophically dissolved and animated) thy
phylosophical dissoluing, which will continually serve for new dissolutions.
For very little is lost in every dissolution. Potable gold.
And so thou have the true potable gold: the universal Medicine, which never
can be valued being inestimable, nor yet sufficiently commended.

After the same manner thou shall make the dissolutions of Pearls, and of
precious stones, most general remedies, and deserving to be placed among the
chief, if they be dissolved after the order and manner aforesaid, with a
natural dissoluing. Remedies I say, which can much better confirm and
strengthen our nature, than if according to the common manner, they be only
powdered and searced, as is wont to be done in those our common preparations
and cordial powders.

But some paraduenture will say, that these kind of preparations are too hard,
or such as they understand not, or at least care not to understand.

But this is a vain objection to prevent for excuse of their ignorance, the
difficulty of these preparations, and the protract al time, when as the thing
is neither difficile, nor long, to them which know how to take it in hand.
These things are not to be esteemed, nor labor is to be spared, to attain
so excellent and precious medicine, which in so little and small a dose, as in
the quantity of one or two grains, can work so great and wonderful effects:
which brings great commendation and honor to the Physician, and to the sick
perfect health and unspeakable sollace and joy.

But to conclude, I will say with Cicero, in his Tusculans: There is no measure
of seeking after the truth: and to be weary of seeking, is disgrace, when that
which is sought for is most excellent.

CHAP. VI. The way to prepare and make the Balsamic Medicine, out of all
things.
BY the foresaid preparation of sulphur, Balsamic vegetable, which we have
before taught, faithfully, plainly, and manifestly, it is easy to understand,
after what manner the same Sulphur may be extracted out of every mixed body.
In the which body (that I may summarily gather al things together) there is
first found a liquor, 1. Phlegm.
without al odor, 2. Mercury.
or rellishing taste, which is called Phlegm, or passive water. 3. Sulphur.
Then comes a liquor which has taste, color, odor, and other impressions
of vertual qualities, which is called the Hercurial liquor. And after that
comes forth an oily liquor, which floteth aloft, and conceiving flame,
which is called Sulphur.

After the extraction of these three several moystures, there remains nothing
but ashes, or dry part: out o^ the which ashes, 4. Salt.
being well calcined, Salt is extracted, with his proper Phlegm, messhing
oftentimes, and pouring water warmed, upon the foresaid ashes, put into
Hypocrates bag, and repeating this so often times, til you perceive a Salt
water to come, which has a brinish taste: after the same manner, as women are
wont to make their lye-wash.

This being done, let the moist be distilled, and the salt will remain in the
bottom. The which salt notwithstanding, in this first preparation is not made
clean enough, nor sufficiently purified. Wherefore the same distilled water is
to be powered up again, that the Salt may again be dissolved in the same: the
which so dissolved, filter it, or strain it through a bag oftentimes, as
before, til it be most clear: then coagulate it at a gentle heat. And after
this manner thou may extract a Salt, clear and pure, out of al vegetable
ashes. Upon this Salt being put into an Allembic, power al his mercurial
sharp water: let them be digested by the space of one or two days, in the
gentle heat of the Balm: and then let them be distilled by ashes, and so the
water will distill forth without taste or relish. Because whatsoever it
contained of the volatile Salt, will reside in the bottom with his per fixed
salt. Go forward therefore in thy working as before I taught thee concerning
the wine.

Or if thou will not work so exactly, meshe up again all the mercurial liquor,
and make it pass through the foresaid Salt, which will take into it, all that
vitriol impression which that water shall have, and the water or liquor, shall
have neither relish nor taste, but shall be altogether like to common water.
But if thou add so much that the volatile part do exceed the fixed, that is
to say, that there be more of the volatile, than of the fixed, (the which thou
shall easily know by weight, because it will be increased threefold, or by trial
upon a red hot copper or Iron plate, when this matter being cast upon the
same, vapoureth and passes away in smoke) then thou must sublime it, and it
will become the Sal A^moniack of the Philosophers: (so it pleases them to call
this matter) which will be clear and transparant like pearls.

Upon this powdered matter, thou shall power by little and little the oily
liquor purified, and thou shall boil this matter, that of volatile it may be
fixed again. Nevertheless, that which shall be fixed, shall be of nature more
fusible than wax, and consequences will more easily communicate with spirits
and with our natural Balsam, when it is separated from his passive water, and
passive earth which are unprofitable.

Both which matters the Philosophers call the passive Element, Elements passive.
because they contain no property in them, neither do they show forth any
action. And thus a body or nature is made wholely homogenical and simple:
albeit there are to be seen, three distinct natures, the which
notwithstanding are of one or the same essence and nature.

And so a body shall be compounded exactly pure out of those three hypostatical
beginnings, namely salt, Mercury, and Sulphur. The which Sulphur in some part
is answerable to truly simple, and Elementarie fire: Mercury, to Air and to
Water: in like manner most simply and truly Elementarie: and Salt, to pure
Earth, simple and Elementarie. The which Earth is not cold and dead, but hot
earth, Active El^ments.
living earth, and full of active, and vegetable qualities.

Behold then how a perfect and universal Medicine is prepared out of all the
things of Nature. The which if thou will use for purgation, choose for thy
subject some purging simple, if thou will, especially corroborate and
strengthen, make choice of such things as do yield most comfort. If thou will
either specially or generally lenifie, and mittigate pain, then choose such
things as are most lenifying and asswagers of pain.

And yet know thou this, that in one and the same Remedy only, prepared in
this manner, as for example, in the nature of Balsamic Salt, thou have a
clenser and a purger, and an universal emptier, a corrector of all impurities
and corruptions.

Thou have also in the particular nature of Sulphur, a general and spiritual
anodine or asswager. A Medicine particular and general.
In the Mercurial nature, there is an universal comfortatiue and the same
nourishing: Al which natures joined together as before, by the Art and industry
of a true Physician and Philosopher, are able to perform and effect al these
functions, without any grief and perturbation: and in the mean time it does
corroborate by his Balsamical virtue, or radical Balsam, supplying unto it al
means, not only for defense, but also for expulsion and suppression of al
diseases.

And this is the true Medicine, this is the reason of his universality, this
is his purity and perfection.

Neither is there any thing more easy then the preparation thereof, if it be
rightly understood. Moreover, so exceeding great is the vtillitie and
excellency thereof, that no labor, no pains, no industry, ought to be
omitted, or to be reputed hard, whatsoever difficulty or doubts may arise, or
be objected.

But if there be any man, which will not take upon him this labor, albeit most
profitable, and ordained for health and the prolonging of man's life, and for
the same he may exactly prepare these Balsamic medicines: yet at the least
he will by the means thereof, as it were by a certain Director, seek out in
general, the euacuating, mundifying, and clensing faculties, which are in most
use, and which chiefly consist in Salts: and in like manner the asswagers,
mittigators, aid healers, in Sulphur and Oil: and finally the nourishers,
restorers, and comforters in the liquor or Mercury.

And by the same way and reason it shall be taught, that the true correctors of
all remedies, are purifying and coctions only: and that these alone are the
true honey and Sugar, to sweeten al things.

For those things also which are most tart, sharp, and sour, yea and bitter,
are by this means made sweet, and al manner of evil quality corrected, and
contempered, even as fruits before their perfect concoction, and maturitie,
are tart, sharp and sour, every one according to their kind and quality.

So we see, that wines, in whose maturation or rypening the heat of the Sun
failed, are made more crude and sharp: which is the reason why some years,
wines are made more ripe, acceptable, and better agreeing with nature, albeit
they came as well before, (...).
as then, from one vine. Albeit much herein is to be attributed to the region
also, and to the place, whereinto the beams of the Sun may make a more
strong impression.

And this may be the cause, that some are sweet, and full of wine, some mean,
others very crude, and scarce wine.

So the Tigurine wines, and others in mountain places, which are cold, are
for the most part crude; and must have a for her rypening in their caskes,
before they can be drunk with pleasure and profit* Also the same wines
wanting a kindly rypening and concoction, remaining still crude, are so full
of leese, and tartarous matter, that the inhabitants which dwell in those
places, Crude wines breed the stone.
where these wines do grow, are more subject to the disease of the Stone,
than others.

Now, if this defect be to be seen in wine, so greatly nutritive, and
agreeing with our nature: what shall we say of Hellebor, and of many other
poisonfull M^^^nes which spring out of most cold Mountains, and wild,
without Tillage, much less are they concocted by the Moon?

Therefore no marvel that our Hellebor answers not those effects, Hellebor^
poisonfull.
which Hypocrates attributes unto it. For that which he commends in Greece,
comes out of a convenient Region, where no doubt there are Plants and Vines
of greater efficacy. Wherefore I have used for a first preparation of
Hellebor^, to transplant them into gardens, situate in a more temperate (...)
and place.

The which how much they differ from those which grow upon wild and cold
mountains, Transplanting of herbs helps their nature.
as do also garden Succorie and endive, from the wild, the difference and use,
do sufficiently declare.

But those preparations, which proceed and are done by Art, and the
concoctions which Art imitating nature finisheth, are much better, and more
contracted and sweetened, as by the preparation following, far more exact than
that those common, in which there appears nothing but that which is crude and
impure, shall manifestly appear, and the thing it self plainly prove.

CHAP. VII. The virtue, and pre-eminence of the Medicine Balsamic.
SOme Philosophers seek the matter of Medicine in our selves: othersome in the
honey of the animal and Celestial nature: othersome in a certain animal nature,
not in act or effect, but in power: which represents the similitude of the
world, and which contains in his belly Gold and silver, white and red:
Sulphur, and Mercury: which Nature the most ancient disposes under God, has
mixed together by due proportion. Out of the which matters* by sundry fair and
long preparations, they prepared their universal Medicine: which by reason of
perfect ^^temperance, adequation, and purity, can contemperate, conserve, and
also increase the radical humor, and that quickening Nectar of ours: because
in purity of his spiritual nature, he does communicate with our spirits.

Furthermore, let us see how much the said Medicine performs in the driving
away diseases, and what infinite multitude of remedies it has. And first,
for so much as it may be applied and fitted to al intentions requisitie (as may
be gathered by that which has been said before) and for so much as it may be
given in so small a dose, which will bring no violent action, nor loathsomeness
to our body, nor any kind of perturbation, and yet neuertherlesse works
exceeding well, according to the disposition of our nature, I see no reason why
this universal and most noble Medicine, should not be preferred before these
rapsodies of Medicines.

Who so uses rightly this Medicine, and in fit time, shall be refreshed and
corroborate, and so armed with strength, that from thenceforth he shall more
easily and readily shake off his sickness: whereof nature otherwise being
destitute, would easily be overcome. Let us use a familiar example that those
things which we have hitherto spoken, may more plainly appear to all men.

We see in our elemental fire, that if thou cast into the same* any thing that
will easily take flame, as straw, or any such thing which will readily burn and
increase the force of burning, which before was almost extinguished, for
because it was destitute as it were of nourishment, and wholly as it were
overwhelmed of ashes: So also our radical Balsam the fire brand, and burning
lamp of the fire of our nature, wanting convenient and proper nourishment
whereby it faints, or else so overwhelmed by the feces and ashes of
obstructions, that it is in danger of suffocation and smoothering, or else
kindred by some other cause, whereby it cannot exercise living flame for the
conservation of our life: then indeed it stands in need of a calefactor, and
restorer of heat, that in better manner and more readily it may show forth the
proper qualities and functions. The like reason and consideration also is to be
had concerning our natural Balsam, the which being diminished, or being hindered
or hurt by any occurrent outwardly, being again increased by that Balsamic
medicine, it arises est soon, and most perfectly performs his woonted
functions. For seeing that medicinal Balsam is of a certain ethereal nature
or a heavenly fire, because it quickens and burns not, nor consumes:
therefore out of hand, as if it were a permanent and certain spiritual water
of life, it does comm^nicate, and is as it were united with our spirit, and
does repair and increase it, by reason of the simpathy, and common likeness
therewith. Neither is it to be thought, that this comes so to pass, for any
other cause, but only of this (as was said even now) namely of that friendly
conuenience, and agreeing friendship, which that Balsamic medicine, has with
our radical Balsam. The which is the only reason why I call the one, Balsam of
life, and the other the medicinal Balsam, even for the relative conuenience of
them both. And yet beside this similitude and familiarity of nature, it has
other particular virtues. For it is endu^d with great actiuitie, it is
spiritual and exceeding pearcing: for this cause it does attenuate and make
thin, it does digest, dissolve, and euacuate these seculent s^uffings and
ashes, threatening peril of suffocation and choking to the Balsam of life.
Moreover, if there be any impurity or corruption, by which it is much offended,
by what other means can it be more safely and better rooted out, then by a
thing so pure and incorruptible? And if any burning fever do invade the body
and the instrumental parts of life about the heart, with what more convenient
sharp Syrup, or Syrup of Limons, can thou extinguish it, then by the
Balsamic sharpness of this our medicine? Let gun-poulder speak for us: and
by a sufficient testimony of this thing, which this liquor does not only
extinguish, but also will not suffer it to take flame, but makes it idle.
Witnesses also are the most burning and volatile spirits, which all the Ise of
the Northern mountains cannot congeale, and yet are congealed with that
liquor in Baln^^ Mariae: and yet with all, the same liquor has this property,
that it will attemperate and dissolve the most hard Ise. Is there any pain and
grief that would be assuaged? This medicine shall be thy mittigating anodine,
and most healthsome Nepenthes. Is there any pestilent poison, or malignant
quality to be e^tyrped? There is not a more safe Treacle or Mithridate then
this, which is the sum of all Alexipharmacons, and the most chief
preservative from all infection. Is the heart to be corroborated, and the
spirits to be vegetated? No confection Alkermes, no confection of Hyacinth, is
to be preferred before this balsam. To conclude, what more speedy altering
medicine can there be found, which is able to correct a distemperature, then
that most temperat remedy? To these unspeakable virtues, add yet this one,
that this medicine, never brings with it a glutting loathsomeness, or
perturbation of the body: but quickly, safely, and pleasantly performs his
workings. And the same with so small ado, that whereas in other medicine,
ounces, are required, in this a few grains dissolved in wine or in broth, or
in other convenient liq^^^, are sufficient to be opposed against the sickness,
which produce great and wonderful effects.

These are those great properties of this universal medicine so much spoken of
by the ancient Philosophers. These are the admirable virtues of our said
medicinable Balsam, the coadintor, and privy director of our natural Balsam,
which is the only mean to conserve our life: which natural Balsam, is the
only immediate putter away of sicknesses, and of all corporal infirmities. For
if sicknesses (as Galen says) be an effect against nature, hurting actions,
then must it also needs be contrary to our radical Balsam and Nectar of our
life, which is nothing else but the same nature or else an instrument so
resisting it, and conjoined with it, that without the help hereof, it can
intend to do or perform nothing.

Therefore now whether the functions be diminished, or depraved, or altogether
abolished, it cannot otherwise be, but that our said radical Balsam, is in some
part hurt, seeing it is certain that all those laudable functions proceed
there from. This is that which Hypocrates calls man's nature. This is that
disposer, which makes the attractions, expulsions, mixtions, seperations, and
concoctions of meats and drinks. To this chiefly, the same Hypocrates
attributes all the foresaid functions of our body. Not that the same Balsam of
our radical, can take upon it self and on his substance, alterations, and that
it can suffer, seeing it is of an ethereal and celestial nature, and therefore
after a certain manner incorruptible: but because his action is delayed, or
hindered by lets, which lie hidden in the internal members and bowels, and
which do occupy and trouble the same.

This is the occasion, this is the beginning, and principal foundation of
diseases. Objection.
Therefore to take upon me the dispute, and to defend it, thus I determine.

If such a disease coming upon a man, be to be taken clean away, first of all
nature is to be restored to her landable, whole, and woonted state: to the
which end, all our cogitations ought to tend. Answer^.
First of all therefore, we must provide to take away all lets.

To this the disciples of Hermes Trismegistus answer: All this may be
sufficiently performed and done, only by restoring the radical Balsam, for
that upon the same all action, and demonstration of health, do depend: the
which Balsam being helped as is conueuenient, it will come to pass, that the
sick man, within the (...) of one hour, shall have and feel more solace, and
so much the more, when the same Balsam of life, being helped with that
Balsamic medicine, does more boldly expulse the enemy: and that in a very
short time, I say to the greater joy and comfort of the sick, then can the
huge multitude of common potions, powered into the loathing of the patient,
bring to pass, and that very hardly in a long time.

And least any man might think, that these are our own inventions, Galen.
Lib. 13. Method.
rashly and inconsideratly broached by us, let us hear what Galen says. The
principal intention (says he) of the Physician, ought to be to reduce the
sick to his natural estate, and that neglecting all other things, his only
care must be to conserve that, from whence the faculty of acting comes. And
this consists in that natural heat, the which so long as it is of force and
not hindered, it preserves the body in safety, in such wise, that whatsoever
happens to the body unnaturally, and must be taken away, it is an undoubted
axiom, that it stands in need of a strong natural heat. And albeit in
external sicknesses, and in certain others, it may seem that natural heat is
little available, as in the removing of flesh which grows too rank in a
wound, or for the reuniting of the lips of a wound, yet for all that, the
conjunction and generation of flesh, and the healing thereof, cannot be done
without natural heat. This forespeaketh Galen, and very truly. Yea, all his
followers will willingly confess, that it is only nature, and that quickening
radical Balsam, which shows forth all those wholesome functions: the which
nature both here and before by the authority of Galen, we have rightly called
the true healer of all sicknesses: but so far forth nature is helped, stirred
up, and corroborated by all manner help and art of that Balsamic medicine,
that it can expel, overcome, and cast out all whatsoever is grievous or
contrary unto it. Thus far forth they and we agree together.

Nevertheless, this also is to be granted, that the same nature is the
beginning, and as it were the first moving to all curing: because without the
strength and vigor of nature, all medicine is unprofitable and vain. For
nature is always one and like to her self, neither is she at any time idle in
us, but is perpetually occupied, always stirring moving, and vegetating, until
by too much let, she being hindered, she do work more slowly and weakly. The
which impediments and contrarieties, she her self of her own accord, and by
her own proper strength goes about to put away and overcome: But when she
has to do with a most strong enemy, or with many, she sooner and far more
easily can overcome them, if she be strengthened with the helps of art, and
having convenient means, she shall with greater strength and security prevail.

To bring which thing to pass, our Balsamic medicine by that exquisite
preparation, has gotten a most pure, quickening, spiritual, strengthening, and
kindly nature, which without all exception, is far more convenient and
effectual, then other medicines of common Physicians, prepared by no art, by
no industry, or dexterity.

The which, for so much as they are yet crude, impure, and gross, and are
clogged with a terrestrial thickness, they do rather cloy and ouerlay nature,
before she can extract their malign quality, concoct their cruditie, and
divide their earthly grosnesse and impurity: the which being her task and
burden, she faints before she can receive any help or comfort.

And that we may not digress from our similitude, let us apply that which is
said, to fire, whereof we have spoken before. As we see fire when it is
overwhelmed with many ashes, and hindered from taking aier, (by which it is
nourished) is easily smoothered and put out: and that the same again is
stirred up, if a man with his hand do take away the ashes, and do blow the
sparks which remain, giving free access of the aier: here the cause of the
fires refreshing and beginning again, is attributed to him which removed the
Ashes, when as indeed he was but the instrument of restoring the fire.

But the principal efficient consists in the fire it self, the which he had
spread abroad and winded or bellowsed in vain, if it had been quite and clean
out. Therefore that renewing is to be attributed to the fire alone which
remained, as to the first, next, and inset cause, only the outward ventilation
or winding coming between as the instrument.

Moreover, as we see, that when the fire is so weak, that very few sparks
are to be found, that then in vain a great heap of dead coals are cast upon
the same to make a speedy fire, which will sooner put altogether out, then make
a quick fire.

But if thou put upon them quick burning coals, they will by and by increase
the fire, without fear of extinction: even so in like manner, the principal
virtue or function, is always to be ascribed to our vital or radical Balsam,
rather then to the Physician or Medicine, albeit the same may be some help,
in putting away the ashie feces, and in dissoluing the troubled lees which are
an impediment, that so it may more freely have transpiration and air, that by
them it be not oppressed and choked.

Such is this Balsamic Medicine, which being purified, exalted, and brought
unto the highest essence and perfection, it does stir up, refresh, and
restore our vital fire, living, but yet languishing, to his former vigor and
strength. The which, for so much as it does sooner, more safely, and more
pleasantly perform without all comparison then that other ordinary and common
Physic, thou shall not miscompare that of theirs to dead coals, or to green
wood, but this of ours as prepared* and brought to a Balsam, to a burning
coal, which is the sum of our whole disputation.

Let these things suffice to be spoken concerning the property, quality, and
excellency of our Balsamic medicine, which Philosophers prepare out of one
thing only, not out of many, whether it be mineral, vegetal, or animal. Of
this medicine alone is the saying of the wise man to be understood, Syrach. 38.
4
when he says; The Lord has created medicine out of the earth, and he that is
wise will not abhor it. For by this word (Medicine) he understands remedy,
not the Art of Physic. For it was ordinary and common in those first ages, to
use this medicine, taken out of one only matter. But the latter age
succeeding, after long search, found out that radical Balsam, and saw by
experience, that it was in some thing more, and in other some less. Whatsoever
it is, it is known that they of old time did use most simple remedies:
neither did they care for so great confusion of compositions and mixtures which
fill a whole warehouse and shop, as our Physicians and Apothecaries do at
this day.

And if we will consider of those things which Theophrastus Dioscorides, and
others of the ancients have left unto us in writing, concerning medicine, and
the virtues of simple remedies, we shall perceive and find, that they used the
most simple method and order of curing, and that they had not so much respect
to the active or passive qualities, of hot and cold, of dry and moist, out of
the which came the original of so many mixtions and confusions. But it is
plain and evident, that they attributed to their simples, this and that
property, either because they had so learned from others, peradventure by
tradition, or else by experience, observing the impressions, forms, and
figures of their simples.

But they of more late time have been so rash of judgment, that they will take
upon them to judge of the faculties of simples by their taste and relish, and
thereby discern and determine, their first, second, and third qualities, to
the which afterward all the virtue of the said simples was attributed. But
because they found not this an universal rule always and in all things, and
that it did deceive, therefore some fled to the secret and hidden properties,
arysing from the form, and the whole substance.

These and such like starting holes and subtilties, have brought upon us great
incertainty and doubtfulnesse, which way to discern and find out those things,
which serve for our best good.

Tell me I pray you (if you can) how many bitter things there are in taste,
which nevertheless according to the edict of that rule, are not hot at all?
Of this sort among others many more is Opium and Cichory. Again, how many sour
things are there, which by their rule should be most cold, which
notwithstanding are most hot, as the spirits of Vinegar, of Niter, and of
Sulphur? How many sweet things are there in outward taste, which in their
internal substance are nothing at all contempered. How many things are
outwardly and at the first beginning of taste altogether unsavory and without
relish, which inwardly and in faculty, A Dissoluing water.
are most sharp and biting, Honey, Cassia, and Sugar, are in their internal
substance so hot and violent, that out of them also may be prepared such
dissoluers, as are wont to be made out of Aqua Fortis, or Aqua Regalis: which
can dissolve gold and silver as speedily as the other.

Lead yields out no taste to the tongue: Copper is red without and greens
within.
and yet his internal substance, is a certain sugared delightful
sweetness. So outwardly Copper has no relish and is of a ruddie color: but
that green where into it is changed, is most sharp.

We might show of such examples, almost an infinite number, whereunto we must
not rashly give credit, nor stand upon taste, nor lean to much upon the
exterior qualities and temperament of things. For if they be more inwardly and
exactly examined, then by that superficiary and slight manner of tasting and
experimenting, and that their inward bowels, be diligently anatomized, they
shall be found far otherwise, and oftentimes different, not only in taste,
but also in odor, in color, and in their whole substance.

But if so be a separation be made of the three hypostaticall or substantial
essential beginnings, as of Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, then there will appear
a true and lawful difference of tastes. Because one and the same substance may
contain in it several tastes. How then can thou give a safe judgment of
his properties and virtues? As for example, consider well of Guaiacum: whose
diverse virtues and properties therein contained, thou can not easily discern
by simple taste.

Neither can thou allege any certain cause why it should be Diaphoretical,
that is to say, apt to provoke sweates: which by the separation of the
aforesaid beginnings, thou can attain unto. For thou shall find in his
mercurial tartness, and in his oily sulphurus, and thinner substance, that
faculty to enforce sweat, which is also in Juniper, in Box, in Oak, in
Ash, and almost in all woods and barks, as also in many other things: but
hereafter we will show the cause, why those sharp and sulphurus substances,
do provoke sweates. But you may also extract out of the same bitterish
Guaiacum, a Salt apt for purgation, and euacuation of humors. The like is to
be said of Cinamom, and almost of all other things. For Cinamom has faculty
both to bind and to loose. The opening force consists in his sulphurus oilie,
and thin substance, which being separated from his feces, thou shall find a
substance of the nature of Alum, wonderfully binding.

Also whereas Opium is bitter, Narcotical is Stupefactiue.
that comes by reason of his Salt, from the which being separated by his oil
or narcotical Sulphur, it becomes purging no less than out of any other
bitter thing, as if out of Gentian Centorie, and such like, the same Salt
should be separated and rightly prepared.

To these bitter Salts is given the name of Salt-gemme as a difference of other
Saltes, whereof there is great diversity of kinds, as more at large shall be
showed in another place. But now in few words I say, that some Saltes are
bitter, some sweet, some tart, sour, sharp, austere, pricking, and brinish:
whose particular faculty, is rightly attributes to the proper substance of the
same Salt, rather than to any other quality, whatsoever the same be.

THE THIRD PART OF THIS Work: wherein is contained a small Treatise,
concerning the Seals and Impressions of things, by Hermeticall Philosophers,
with much care, and singular diligence, gathered and brought to light.
ALl men follow not one way to attain to a general knowledge of all things.
The way of the Empericks is uncertain, for that it is traced in the darkness
of ignorance. These have respect to the external impressions, and to some inset
qualitites, especially to those which may be seen, tasted, and smelt.
Furthermore, they have great regard to the first qualities, hot, cold, moist
and dry: which they have made the beginnings and first foundations of these
faculties or virtues.

But the Hermeticall Philosophers and Chemists, leaving those bare qualities of
the bodies, sought the foundations of their actions, tastes, odours, and
colors, else where. At the last by witty inquisition they knew that there
were three distinct substances in every natural elemented body: that is to say,
Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury. And these internal beginnings of things, they
called hypostatical vertual, and ordinatiue beginnings. For in these three
hyposta^tical beginnings, th^se foresaid vertual and sensible qualities, are to
be found, not by imagination, analogy, or conjecture, but in very deed and in
effect. That is to say, tastes in Salt, most chiefly: odours, in Sulphur:
colors out of both, but most chiefly out of Mercury: because Mercury has
the volatile Salt of al things, Taste, odor, and colors.
joined unto it.

For there are two kinds of salts, Salt of 2. sorts.
the one fixed, other volatile, as shall be showed anon.

Therefore salt is firm, Salt defined.
fixed, and substantifying beginning of al things: and therefore it is compared
with the pure Element of Earth. Salt and earth.
Because falt is not cold and dry by his own nature (as it is holden of some
that the Earth is) the which qualities are the death of things: but it is
rather hot, and endued with an active quality, for that it is appointed to
serve for the generation of all things.

Sulphur is compared to fire, Sulphur and Fire.
for as fire, so sulphur does quickly take flame and burn: even as also do al
other things, which partake of the nature thereof, such as are Rosinie, fat,
and oily.

Mercury by Analogy answers the Air, Mercury, Air, and Water,
and Water. For not only that dry mineral water, (which is also called
Hydrargire and Quicksilver) is called Mercury: but also every water or active
liquor endued with any virtue, is also for the excellency thereof called
Mercury. The which Mercury, (as we have said) may be likened to either
Element, that is to say, to Air, and to Water: to Air, because when it is put
to the fire, it is found almost nothing but Air, or a vapor, which vanishes
away. Mercury a moist active.
This if you please you may call a moist active.

And it may be compared to water also, because it is running: and so long as
it continues in his own nature, it is not contained in his own listes, but
in the limmits of another: which according to Arictotle, is the definition of
moist.

These three beginnings, (I say) are found in all bodies as internal and
necessary substances for the composition of a mixed body.

For seeing the foresaid Mercurial, volatile, and spiritual humiditie, cannot
easily be conjoined with the earthie, corporeat, and fixed part, by reason of
that great difference and contrariety of either of them: it is necessarily
required, that there should be a mean, and indifferent partaking of either:
that is, as well of the spiritual as of the fixed, to conioyne both in one.

And this indifferent mean is Sulphur or oil, Sulphur the mean to join salt
and Mercury.
which holds a mean between that which is fixed, and that which is flying.
For oils, are never so quickly, so easily, and so well distilled, as are
waters: because the substance of Sulphur, or of an oily body is tenax and
retentiue, and therefore most apt to combinde the other two, to effect a good,
perfect and equal mixture.

To make the matter more plain by example. For as a man can never make good
closing mortar, of water and sand only, without the mixture of lime, which
binds the other two together like oil and glue: so Sulphur or the oily
substance, is the mediator of Salt and Mercury, and coupleth them both
together: neither does it only couple them to death, but it does also repress
and contemperate the acrimonie of Salt, and the sharpness of Mercury, which
is found to be very much therein. Much like to the conjunction which the
Spirit and quickening moist radical makes between the soul, and incorporeat
substance, and the body, which very much differs from the same.

Thus then it appears, Three natures in one.
after what manner these three natures may consist in one, together, and so to
be made a mixed and perfect body. For as salt by it self a lone cannot bring
this thing to pass: even so neither these two fluxible and moving humors,
cannot without Salt by their nature compose a firm, fixed, and solyd body.

Moreover Sulphur most needs be had as a Glue without the which the Mercurial
liquor will be swallowed up by the dryness of the terrestrial Salt, and through
the violence of the heat of the fire, which by the Sulphur is contained. But
the Mercurial humor, is as it were the chariot of the other two, serving to
penetrate, and to make the mixture easy and speedy.

If there be any man, which through obstinacy, or blockishnesse of wit, does
not well conceive and understand this: let him behold and consider of the
blood which is in man's body, how in the same, the whaye is as a chariot or
mediator, and combiner of the other two beginnings together, as may appear by
the preparation and separation thereof.

Very fitly we may use this example in this place. And hereafter, by
infallable and evident demonstration, we will show after what manner, the other
two beginnings, beside the whaye (which supplyeth the place of Mercuries) are
in blood. Salt causes Vicers in the body.
When Salt is predominate and bears the swaye, it produces so many kinds of
diverse Vicers and many other diseases: beside that portion of salt which
passes through the reins and bladder, by Vrines. In like manner we have
already showed how Sulphur, or the oilie part, is in the same blood. This
sulphur being exalted, it causes sulphurus exhalation, as inflamatio^s, from
whence come so many kinds of Feauers. So, Mercurial sublimations raise Rheumes
and Catarres, with other diseases Mercurial.

Chymistes determine, that there are sundry kinds of salt, which as they are
found apart in nature, s^ also in all mixed bodies.

That is to say, common salt (which the Sea by his secret (...) pypes does
convey through the earth:) Saltes of diverse sorts.
Salt gemme also, Alum (whereof there are diverse kinds) Vitriol,
Salt-Armoniac, and Salt-Niter, which men commonly call Salt peter.

Among these salts, two are flying, and are mixed with liquors after an
insensible manner: that is to say, Niter, and Salt-Armoniac of nature. Niter
does participate of sulphur, and of the oily liquor of things: Ammoniac
partaketh of Mercury, or of the Mercurial humor of things.

And these foresaid salts, (which are found both in earthie, and metallic
substances) are derived through the benefit of roots, into herbs, plants,
and trees: which because they are always in the earth, they retain the nature
most chiefly of fixed salt.

And after the same manner, the nature of fixed salt, is to be sought for in
roots. In flowers also and in leaves, there is great store of the other two
flying Salts, which being such, they easily vanish away and come to nothing;
when the flowers and leaves do wyther and wax dry. But those plants and
herbs which take their nourishment from fixed salt, are always kept
flowrishing and green: and therefore they do the more strongly resist the
fainting heat of Summer, and the morifying cold of Winter.

Moreover, their Roots standing deep in the ground, they do the more easily
withstand all external injuries. And when the Spring comes, and the Sun
sends forth his heat entering into the sign of Aries, piercing the earth
with his quickening beams, he stirs the same, and causes her to open her
bosom, out of the which at the last she powers forth abundantly those two
liquid beginnings, whereof we have spoken before.

The liquor, or Mercurial vapor, which is lifted up through the Roots with
Salt Ammoniac of a volatile nature (by a certain wonderful manner of nature^
distilling) and ascending into the trunk, under the bark, (at which time
trees may easily be disbarked) raises up, quickens, and adorneth with
green leaves, trees and plants, now hanging down their heads, and half dead.
And the other kind of volatile salt. Nitre-sulphurus, mixed with the more
volatile sulphur, and oil of nature, does cloth and deck the whole earth
every wherewith sundry sorts of most beautiful flowers.

And yet we must not think hereupon, that one vaporous liquor, which
proceeds out of the earth, is not partaker of the other, seeing the Mercurial
liquor is not without his sulphurus, nor the sulphurus without his Mercurial.
And this is the cause why in the vegetable nature, we do see that some do
put out their leaves and flowers sooner than other some.

Nature therefore has most wisely distributed those beginnings into all
things. And experience does teach, that somethings do partake of this or that,
more than some other things. For thou can not easily draw an oil out of
leaves: but a mercurial liquor plentifully out of al: and out of very few,
some sulphurus, or oily liquor. The reason is, because Mercury does carry the
rule in leaves, and is their chief nourishment, beginning and foundation as we
have already said. Mercury is properly extracted from leaves.
But the sulphurus liquor is the cause of the increase and plenty of flowers,
but yet the same sulphur is not alone and pure, but mixed with some portion of
Mercurial liquor, but with the least quantity of salt.

For this cause thou may extract out of flowers, both Sulphur or oil, and
also Mercury, but that oil more volatile: and of Salt, the least quantity. But
out of seeds is extracted much of the more fixed Sulphur, Sulphur out of
Seeds.
but of Mercury and Salt almost nothing. The cause is, for that Sulphur has
given beginning and the principal constitution, (not that volatile Nitrous and
airey Sulphur, but that which is indeed oylelike and fat, and which holds a
mean between fixed and flying: both which lie hid in seeds, even in those
seeds which are in great Mercurial herbs and fleshlike fruits, as in
Apples, Salt out of wood and roots.
Pears, Goordes, and such like. But Salt is in all these, as the most fixed
and necessary beginning, for the constitution and compacting of all bodies.
But this Salt does most chiefly re^ide in the wood, and in the root, not as
in his center or proper seat fixed, (for his principal rooting is in the
earth) but because it is first and most plentifully communicated to the wood
and root. From hence afterward much is derived to the branches and leaves, and
but little to the flowers and fruits.

Whereupon out of many leaves a sufficient quantity of salt may be extracted:
but out of flowers and seeds a very small quantity in regard of the others.

Thus you see after what manner these three beginnings do order and determine
all vegetables as hypostatical beginnings, and do bring them forth, conserve,
make them to sprout and flourish, and do give unto them diverse forces and
virtues. It is also evident, that the said three beginnings, are in all
things, but in some more, and in other some less.

Therefore, A mixture of the 3. beginnings.
none of those three beginnings is found simple, and alone, which does not
paticipate also with another. For Salt, through the benefit of the other two
Saltes, Niter and Ammoniac, contains in it self an oylely and a Mercuriall
substance: Sulphur contains a Salt, and a Mercurial substance: and Mercury
a Sulphurus and Salt substance.

But every one of these retains the name of that, whereof (...) it does most
partake.

But yet, if we consider of the matter exactly, we shall find that all the other
do spring from salt, Salt, the root of the other beginnings.
as from the firm and constant beginning. The nature whereof will enforce us to
lift up our eyes to heaven, seeing that from these inferior and natural
things, that admirable and venerable Trinity in Unity, is so clearly and
evidently to be seen.

And forasmuch as those three substancefying beginnings are, and commonly be
found in all the things of nature, we must not think that they are so in them,
as without effect, or utterly spoiled of al virtue: but we must rather be
sure of the contrary, namely, that from these chiefly, all the qualities,
properties, and vertuals do spring. For whatsoever has taste, the same if it
be bitter comes from Salt Gemme. And such have virtue to cleanse, Bitter
things do purge.
to euacuate, or purge. So others which have in them bitterness, are found to
be such, as have the same from this kind of Salt, and by the benefit thereof,
are reckoned among the number of clensing and purging medicines. Such are all
bitter herbs, and their Juices. In like manner all gauls. For without these
three, there can be no due excretion or sep^rating in bodies, of superfluities
and excrements. For nature by the conduit of her instrument, called Cholido^^n,
casting out into the bowels some quantity of gaul, stirs up the expulser,
and provoke it to send forth the excrements, and also cleanses, purges, and
emptieth it self, by it self. The which being undone, the Expulser lies as
it were buried, and overwhelmed, neither is there any good from thence to be
looked for.

And that bitter Juices, (as also the very gaul it self) are of the nature of
Salt, it may easily be gathered hereby, because the guale is oftentimes
congealed as a fixed Salt into stones, in his own bladder.

Also out of bitter herbs, Salt extracted out of bitter things.
as out of Woorme-wood, out of the lesser Centaurie, (which some call the gaul
of the earth) much Salt is extracted, as they that be workmen know.

Moreover out of the ^^ules of living creatures, there is a Salt to be
extracted very bitter, which purges wonderfully. So also there is Salt in
urine, which purges the blood by the veins, Salt in vrin^
which send it into the reins, and from thence by the water pipes into the
bladder, and so through the conduit thereto appointed.

In bitter Opium, which all men affirm to be so notably stuperfectiue and
cold, there is a bitter and Nitrous Salt, which if thou can separate from his
stinking Sulphur (by the means whereof it is so stuperfectiue) thou shall make
it a notable purger.

So in like manner the skillful know how to exiract out of Centaury, Purgers.
Gentian, Rue, Fumitory, and all such like, very good purgers.

Salt which is alluminous, gives a sower taste: Vitriol a stiptic or a
stringent taste: Ammoniac a sharp taste. And a diverse mixture of the same
Salts, procures sundry tastes and relishes: and that most chiefly by the
benefit of the two volatile Salts, which of all other will be best mingled, by
reason of their subtilty and spiritous substance. Ammoniac, which is sharp, is
more plentiful in vitriol, and in things vitriolated, then in any other Salt
substance or metallic. For that sharp Salt, or that sharpness of nature, is
the fermentation thereof, and the cause of coagulations, and of the
dissolutions of all things: as we have already touched before, and will in
another place more manifestly declare. Therefore it is certain, that those
things which are stiptick or stopping, and have outwardly a green color or
vitriolated with an inward sharpness and certain rednes, (as is to be seen
in Pomegranats, Barberies, and Limons) it is certain that they have it from
vitriol, and from the sharp Salt Ammoniac: for the vitriol of nature is
outwardly green, and red within, if thou search it by skilful Anatomy.

So also thou may extract out of the bark of the said fruits, as of
Granates, a substance coming most near to the virtue of vitriol. Dissoluing
liquors.
And the liquor which is extracted out of their red grains, or out of the
juice of Limons, or fruit of Barberies, has force to dissolve pearls, and
coral, even as the spirit of vitriol has. And this comes by the virtue of
Salt Ammoniac sharp of nature, and by the nature of mixture: but so mixed, as
by the industry of the artificer it may be separated, in such wife, that the
same Salt Ammoniac being extracted, the same liquor will be made sweet and
potable, and the Salt remain by it self: the which being again mixed with
spring water, or with any other liquor deuoid of taste, it will make the same
sharp.

That same sharpness or Salt Ammoniac spiritual, is not only found in
Vitriol, but also in common Salt, in Niter, yea in Sulphur also it self, as
also in all things. For that sharpness is that very same, which coagulateth
Sulphur, which is plentifully found therein. For without it, Sulphur will not
clean united, but would be running, as are other oyle-like liquors.

The same Salt Ammoniac of nature, is manifested unto us, by that extraction of
sharp oil, which is drawn out of Sulphur: whose nature is far different
from that of the said Sulphur. For it is so far from taking fleame, that
contrariwise, it is a hinderance to gun-poulder, not-suffering it to be
inflamed with the touch of fire, Dissoluing liquor.
as is said already. The same liquor does dissolve pearls and coral, no less
then does the juice of Limons, of Barberies, or any other of that nature, the
which power it has by the dissoluing virtue of Salt Ammoniac of nature which
is in it. The like, and by the same reason, does Vinegar perform. For Wine (as
is said before) partaketh of the nature of Vitriol, more then any other
vegetable, and contains much of the foresaid sharp Salt of nature.

He which does exactly consider these things, shall readily, and out of true
grounded reasons, dissolve the question, concerning the true and natural
quality of Vinegar, which question has troubled many of the most learned
Piysitians. For the dissoluing virtue which appears to be in Vinegar, even in
this, that when clay or earth is put into it, it will as it were boil, argues
that the nature thereof is altogether hot.

Others on the contrary part, denying Vinegar to be cold, appoint it as a
chief remedy to extinguish and repress external Inflammations. Also by the
taste, which they affirm to be the effect of coldness, they conclude that
Vinegar is cold. But they can very easily end this controversy, which have
the perfect knowledge of the nature of Salt Ammoniac, which Vinegar contains
mat. For this Salt is the true cause of dissoluing virtue.

But because the ^ame Salt is of force to coagulate spirits, and to dissolve
bodies, therefore it is effectual, and a singular remedy against both inward
and outward inflammations. For it does coagulate the Niter Sulphurus
exhalations, which stirs up those inflammations. For such heates and
feauerous passions, do proceed out of the spirits only, either Niterous, or
Sulphurus, arysing out of the Salt^Niter Sulphurus or tartarus of our body, and
lifted up into euaporations, which cause such unkindly heates. The which
comes not so to pass when the same spirits be as yet bound together, and lie
as it they were buried in their proper bodies, or tartarous feces.

But if thou will yet know more manifestly the corrosiue force, Dissoluing
spirits.
and inflaming heat of the said spirits, consider the strong waters, (which
are nothing else but the spirits of Niter, and Vitriol) which thou shall see
will dissolve silver, or any hard metal. But if thou put but one only ounce
of silver, to one hundred pound weight of Vitriol and Niter, as they are in
their own nature and body, yet they will never be able to dissolve it.

It is therefore manifest, that such violent forces and operations, are only
in the spirits, separated, euaporated, and dissolved from their body: the which
forces thou shall by no safer means take away and suppress, then if the same
spirits be again incorporated, and coagulated. And this is performed by that
Salt Ammoniac sharp of nature, which is in Vinegar, as also in other things
which have sharpness.

But peradventure there are some, which now thinking that we have killed our
selves with our own sword, Objection.
will infer upon the same example by us alleged, that such essences prepared
by Chemists, are all for the most part spiritual, and therefore by consequence,
are more violent remedies then is fitting for nature to bear, Answer.
and therefore cannot be given with safety. I would have those which make this
objection, to be in this wise answered. That the reason is not all one, and
therefore the concl^sion not good. For it we take the spirit of Vitriol, or of
Salt-Peeter, which indeed are spirits partaking of the terrestrial fire, yet
nevertheless they may be so sweetened, and mingled with broathes or other
convenient liquor, that they will be very familiar to nature, grateful, sauory,
and gentle, and not without great virtue and efficacy. The juice of Limons
given by it self alone into great plenty, can hurt the stomach. For the which
cause our manner is, to mingle it with some liquor, or with sugar, and to bring
it into a syrup or Iulep, no less profitable then pleasing to the stomach.

But the virtue of the spirit of vitriol is better known at this day, The
spirit of vitriol and his virtue.
and commended of the most approved Physicians of diverse countries, then that
the ignorant can detract any thing from the dignity and praise there^f. It is
reported very credibly, that in France it is much used and commended for the
effects it has to extinguish burning feauers. And not without just cause: for
it is a most singular remedy, not only against feauers, but also against many
other contumacious sicknesses, as hereafter in due place, shall be showed: but
it is fit, that no other presume to administer it, then such as are expert
Physicians, not Emperikes, and such as try conclusions by killing men.

Furthermore, the sharp spirit, drawn out of Niter alone, or Sulphur (among
the metallic Salts) is of the same nature and property. For these do avail
no less then the other, to extinguish feauers of what kind soever, by their
coagulati^e virtue, whereby they do tame, A remedy against feauers.
subdue, and coagulate, those Sulphurs and burning spirits of our body.

Moreover, there are other some, which judge us worthy of much reprehension,
because we said before, that one and the selfsame sharp Salt Armoniar,
Objection.
has both virtue to dissolve, and also to congeale: which being effects
contrary, cannot proceed from one and the same cause, according to the common
opinion of Philosophers.

To this we answer, that as we have spoken it, so we will maintain it. And
therefore we say again, that this Salt Ammoniac sharp of nature, whereof we
speak, can both dissolve bodies, and also (which is more to be maruailed at)
congeale spirits: yea and which is yet more wonderful, even in the midst of
fire it can congeale.

And concerning dissolution, it shall not be necessary that we prove this,
because it is well known to persons of very mean skill. And now to say
somewhat for the ignorants sake: The spirit of Vitriol or of Sulphur, or of
sower Niter, well prepared, and separated from all terrestreitie, does dissolve
coral and pearls.

By which dissolution, an excellent remedy is made to stop the fluxes hepatic,
Lienterie, and Dyssenterie, where the liver has need of speedy corroboration.
But they must necessarily be prepared according to Art. A remedy to stop
fluxes.


But now time and reason persuades us, that we say somewhat concerning the
contrary faculty of this sharpness, which is contrary to the other
coagulating effect. To do this, little wit, and less labor will serve. For
they which are but meanly seen in the Spargerick Art, and have been Chemists
a very short time, or if they be but common Apothecaries, they know this, and
have seen it in the preparation of quicksiluer: whose liquor and running
nature, no exterior coldness, no Elementall frost, how great soever the same
be, The fixing of quicksilver.
congeale or fix. But if it be sublimed with Vitriol only meanly calcined,
it will come to pass, that Mercury or quicksilver which desires his
coagulation as his perfection, by a certain magnetical virtue, draws into it
self that Sulphur, or that Salt Ammoniac sharp of nature, by the benefit
whereof, of running it is made solid and firm, so as thou may easily handle
it.

Being brought into this form, it is commonly called Sublimate. But to make it
yet more perfect, those which are careful and skillful workmen, reiterate their
sublimations, adding to this new Vitriol, that by his Salt Ammoniac of nature,
it may be impregnated. And thus at the last it becomes solid, and clear as
any Crystal Venis-glasse.

Spargeric Philosophers, can so dispoyle again this Mercury so prepared, of
his coagulation, or of his sharp Salt Ammoniac of nature, that he shall return
to his former state, and of fixed shall become moveable and running. But he is
now perfectly clen^ed, and is now no more common Mercury or Hydrargyre,
Mercury of the Philosophers.
but the Philosophers Mercury.

And now, if the foresaid water be exhaled or vapored, that there may remain
nothing but a sharp liquor, like unto the spirit of Vitriol, thou shall have a
liquor more excellent then any Vitriolated spirit, and truly spiritual. And so
in steed of a great poison which was mixed with Mercury (which was then
nothing but a certain terrestrial corrosiue fire) thou shall now have the true
spirit of Vitriol: whose greater and better part vaporeth away, is consumed and
lost, if it be extracted according to the common manner, with that great and
violent fire by Retort.

This spirit prepared after the said manner, exceeding good, The right spirit
of Vitriol: good against the falling evil.
and a special commander of the Epilepste, if it be administered by a skilful
Physician, not by an Emperick, with proper and convenient liquor. And this is
one trial of the virtue of coagulating Mercury.

The same coagulating force of his does manifestly appear in those
preparations which are called precipitations, which are made with the sharp
spirits of Vitriol and of Sulphur, by the means whereof it may be brought into
a poulder, which cannot be easily done by fire.

But that it may appear that this coagulating power of Ammoniac of nature, is
not only upon Mercury, (over whom it can exercise this power) but nothing
at all upon the spirits Niter. A remedy for Gangrena, and eating vl^ers.
Sulphurus of our bodies, with the which quicksilver has no simpathy, or
conuenience) we will show it by a certain other manifest demonstration, and the
same most true: as shall appear to them which will try it. And in the same
experiment I will also teach a very excellent remedy against Gangrena, and all
sorts of cankerous Ulcers: if any be loath to take it inwardly into the body,
because of the urine ingredient.

Take the urine of a boy, between the age of ten and sixteen, which drinks
wine in good quantity: let it be depured according to Art: Add hereunto of
Roman, or Hungarian Vitriol (for by these the operation will be the better) I
say of the Vitriol, twice so much. Put it to digestion in Balneo Mar, which is
moist, by the space of fix or eight days, in one, or in several glass
Allembicks. For there is required much matter. This digestion being ended,
Water for the Ophthalmie.
thou shall increase the fire of Balne til the water (...). Presently set on a
head with a receiver, and distill the water.

And the same which first comes forth, is an excellent Ophthalmick water for
the eyes. The second something more sharp then the former, Water to ease the
gout.
is excellent good to assuage the pains of the Gout.

Thus go forward, brging the heat of the Balne, or else by hot ashes, until
the matter in the bottom of the Alembic remain like unto honey. The which
afterward thou shall put into an iron vessel, and putting fire under it, stir
it continually with an iron spattle, that it clean not too: and this thou
shall continue so long, until all the liquor is vapored away, and that there
remains only the Salt of Vitriol, and of the urine dry in the bottom, and
in a certain mass. This being pouldred, put it into a cornute, well luted,
having a wide receiver, well closed, that the spirits issue not forth. Then put
to a vehement fire, such as is needful for the making of strong water, or the
spirit of Vitrioll.

But the fire must be moderated by degrees, until it come to the highest
degree, as Art requires. And then at the last you shall see the receiver
filled every where with white spirits, which in that great heat will be
congealed as it were into Is^-^ickels, having all bout the body of the
receiver: much like unto the hayse or white threedes, which in time of frost
are congealed out of foggy mistes, and do hang upon the trees. These are the
spirits of the Salt, which through the vehement heat of the fire, are thus
formed.

This Ise may be kept, A remedy against observations, and to break the Stone.
after the manner of Salt Niter. Whereof if thou give one scruple or half a
scruple, in broth, wine, or other convenient liquor, it will show it self an
excellent remedy against all obstructions of the Liver and of the spleen, it
provoke vrines, and is also a special remedy against the Stone.

The same Ise being brought into water (for it will easily be dissolved) is a
principal remedy for Inflammations and Gangrenas, Gangrena ^ured.
which very suddenly it extinguisheth. Out of this so fair and noble
experient, every true Philosopher and Physician, will take occasion of seeking
and searching further then the common sort are wont: Causes of the Ston^.
and so he may more certainly find out the causes of stones congealed, which
are engendered of the same salts or tartarous matter in diverse parts of our body.

He will also have more quick insight into many other diseases which come by
the coagulation of the foresaid sharp and Vitciolated spirits, or else of the
euaporations of other most sharp spirits, from whence Inflammations, and gouty
pains with swellings do spring, by the inward virtue of the thickened spirits
aforesaid. These things being thus known, a remedy will easily be found to
mittigate, and to dissolve such calculous and stony matter, if we mark and
consider diligently, where that sharp virtue lies hidden, and wherein also
the coagulatiue property of the said spirits are.

Also the same contemplation, will give occasion to pry into the diverse and
sundry meteors, which show themselves in man, the little world, out of those
continual vapors and exhalations which are lifted up from the lower belly
(which we fitly compare with the earth) into the air, that is to say, into the
uppermost region of the body, the brain. So it shall appear, that from the
Mercurial vapors, thickened into clouds through the coldness of the brain,
and by the same not able to be dispressed, do fall sometimes moderate showers,
and simple in show, and sometime out of thick clouds abundance of waters.
Whereof come either gentle Rheumes, o^ violent catarres, which are called
suffocatiue, because the matter rusheth after a certain violent manner, upon
the vital parts. Furthermore, out of the same contemplations thou shall find
the true original of winds, of hail, of snow, whereof comes the tingling
in the ears, the Palsy, the Apoplexe, and such like deseases, stirred up from
the Mercurial thickened vapors. The which diseases come not (as some does
think) because of coldness only: but the cause also thereof is the
sharpness of Salt vitriolated, which being mixed with those Mercurial
vapors, does suddenly coagulate and congeale them: and this is the cause of
Apoplexes and such like. For to take an example from our own body, to manifest
this thing, the urine which we make, is so replenished with these mercurial
humors, mixed with sharp salt, that it has force and power to coagulate.
Wherefore this which we have said must simply be granted unto us that
Salt-Armoniac of natural sharp, Sal-Armoniac a coagulator and a dissotuer.
has force to dissolve bodies, and to coagulate spirits, as we have plainly
declared in the foresaid experiments.

But paraduenture some young scoffing Scholar, which never knew what
Phylosophie meant, with great confidence and no shame (as of late one which
showed him self an Ass and Calfe, and yet of a ripe wit did) dare rise up
against us and sa^ that in our body, no vitriolated nature can be found, nor
an^ thing like unto it. But this fellow and such like, we w^ teach
sufficiently and moderately (if they will not refuse to learne^ in our book
concerning the hidden nature of things, and the perfection of art, where we
will declare this thing, and many other profitable questions, necessary for a
true Physician. But yet not to let the matter utterly pass, without some thing
spoken concerning this point, I will utter my self in few words.

First of al I wish, that exact consideration be had, which is that fire of
nature, and which is the author of the concoction of meat in our stomach,
which dissolueth and changes the same, and that in so short a time, as
neither seething water, nor elementarie fire can do, no not in long time. Let
them also I pray you consider what is the cause of that dog-like appetite which
some men have, by which they are wont so readily to consume all the meat in
their stomach, that nature has scarce lawful space to nourish her self: and
from whence this insatiable hunger comes. According to the common opinion, it
befalls some man to have this appetite, by reason of a certain sharp and
melancholic humor, which being thrust down into his sides, does sometimes
boil up like most strong vinegar, or rather in deed like oil of vitriol, or
like some such dissoluing and devouring thing. The cause of dogge-like appetite.
For truly, if that sharpness were diligently considered, and thoroughly looked
into by Phylosophical anatomy, it would easily be judged by good and
indifferent men, that it should not more unfitly to be said vitriolated, than
melancholicke: nay more aptly and better: because melancholy, neither can, nor
has been wont to work such effects, except by the sowrenesse aforesaid. For
by this manner of speaking, the dissoluing virtue, and al other properties, are
in far better sort expressed, which shall easily appear in him which will
thoroughly s^ann^ and weigh al things.

And what does let us now, to call such faculties and humors vitriolated, when
as al their properties and forces, do come so near to the nature of vitriol?
Shall it be free and permitted to common Physicians, Choler, rustie, yeallow,
and green.
to call choler, Aeruginus, Vitelline, and Proracious, for the likeness and
affinity of those things from whence the name is borrowed: and why then shall
it not be lawful for us to do the like, and to say that humors are
vitriolated, because they partake of the nature of vitriole?

But let us return is our Meteors which are in our body: having already
spoken of them which are raised up by the vapors of mercurial liquors, which
have a similitude with the watery, and also with those which proceed out of the
mere vapors of the earth of the great world. Now it remains that we say
something also of the others.

Therefore even as as the vapors and exhalations sulphurus, Nitrous, or
Antimonial, carried up out of the eath into the Air and clouds, The
Philosophical cause of Meteors etc.
do cause fiery Meteors, Corr^scations, Lightnings, Thundrings, Comets, and
such like: even so also in our bodies, from the fumes and smoakie euaporations
proceeding from burnt and scorched blood, and from so manifold and diverse
tartarous, sulphurus, and niterous fumes, with the which our bowels do abound,
the like Meteors are produced. For such fuming matter, lying burning in the
sides, near to the Liver and the Spleen^, hindered by windiness, being
thereof caused, or else stirred up by an immoderate and (...) heat, being at
the the last lifted up and carried into the brain, The cause of madness,
Frenzy, and such like.
and therein set an fire, stir up Meteors, long madnesses, burning phrenzies,
settled melanchollies, dotings, pains of the head, falling sicknesses, and many
such like. Some of these continue long, by reason of the clammie hardiness or
abundance of the matter, as madness: other some are sooner gone, as
Phrenzies: some do more fearsely exercise a man, some more gently, according
as the said fuming matters be more or less sharp, abundant, cleaving, Salt,
sulphurus, or of quality more or less inflameable, or by any manner of other
means hurtful. For there is great diversity of these fumie matters: no less
than we see differences of fires and smoakes in combustible woods, whereof
some are more clammie, some more salt, some sulphurus, and such like
diversities.

The same diversity also is to be seen in the separation of the spirits of
Leese, of Ale, of Cider, of Wine, of Hydromel, and of such like drinks, the
diuersititie whereof does manifestly appear, by the odours which do
abundantly ascend into the nose.

Also in Saltes, Sulphurs and oils, which are distilled, the diversity of
vapoures, (which are nothing but the spirits produced out of many tartarous
matters) do manifestly declare the same. For of these, some are sharp, some
sour, some biting, some stinking, some odoriferous, some so pearcing, that the
very odor does strike the brain, and do cause extraordinary neesing, or else
by some other means do hurt the brain, dazeling, dulling, or troubling the
spirits, or else by fumes which are sulphurus and stupefactiue.

The same differences are to be made in Antimonials, Arsenicals, and Mineral
humors, or vapors, and that out of their effect, either seplic putrefying, or
caustic burning, the which effects are in the said fumes, by the means of
salt. Such pearcing fumes are too well known, and felt of our eyes oftentimes,
to which they bring by their sharpness, pains, inflammations, and flowing of
tears. Hereupon out of this diversity of fumes, there arise diverse passions,
in continuance, in malady, and in vemencie, more or less inuading and
troubling, according to the nature, mineral, and condition of the quality or
quantity of the exhalations, and of their substances, which are lifted up with
them, as it were in a certain chariot.

Moreover, we see in the bowels of the earth of the little world, man, no less
then in the great worlds belly: in the bellies I say of both, almost the same
effects are to be seen of Meteors, as well waterie as fiery. For example, the
Tympanie, the swelling of the Coddes, windiness of the stomach, and belly: al
which do represent the winds, raynes, and Earthquakes of the earth: and the
waters within the body, and between the skin and the flesh, do represent the
Sea, the Rivers and Springs of the earth.

Also there are in man diverse fiery Meteors, by reason of the exhalations, of
the Niterous and Sulphurus spirits, which being set on fire, stir up such
diversities of Feauers and inflammations.

There are bred also in man, diverse metallic substances, as lands, and stones,
which are commonly ingendered in diverse parts of his body, as in his bowels,
stomach, gaul, spleen, liver, yea, in the lunges and brain: but more often
in the reins and bladder, which are the most fertile mines of all the rest.

There are also procreated in man's body, certain concreate and congealed
Juices; as many kinds of Sulphurs, but of Saltes more differences,
vitriolated, alluminous, niterous, and Gemmeus. Salt-gemme, or common salt, is
plentiful in Salt spittle: sower Salt-Armoniac, in sower phlegm or spittle,
and also in a certain kind of sower melancholy: salt vitriolated and of the
color of rustie metal, in choler that is of the same complexion: Salt
aluminous, pricking and stiptick^, in glassy fleame, of the same quality: Salt
niterous and bitter, in bitter choler. Moreover, Vrines which are wholly
niterous, Salts of diverse kinds in mands body.
do represent a matter most like to Niter. There are also in this little
world, as also in the greater world, found many differences of Salts: as a
sugered salt, in sweet phlegm: as also an Arsenical and corroding Salt, in
malignant and pestilent humors. From the resolutions of the which Saltes, but
most especially of the stiplick or corroding salts, come certain kinds of
Chollickes, which afterward degenerate into contractions of the bowels: From
the corrosiue Salts spring diverse kinds of disenterie fluxes: from the brinish
salts, come the burnings of Vlrines: from the tart Salts, comes the appetite
of the Stomach: from the Arsenicall Salts, comes Carbuncles cankerous Ulcers,
running pockes, and such like. And of the congelations of these salts, comes
Goutes, Stones, Scirrhus hardness, and diverse kinds of obstructions,
according to the diversity of tartars, and of Salts which are engendered and
procreate to nature, in our body. From these things, are the causes of diseases
in man's body, to be truly and exactly learned and discerned: without the which
we shall in vain seek for remedies.

But to make al which, has been hitherto spoken more plain, we will add
certain manifest demonstrations, and plain to sense, but yet in as brief
manner as I can, seeing we have reserved a more ample and special Treatise of
these things to our work, concerning the hidden nature of things.

It is known and confessed of al, by the Edict of Hyppocrates, the chiefest
Author of Physicians, that our body consists of things containing of things
contained, and of things enforcing. The things containing, are the solid and
more firm parts, as the bones, gristles, ligaments, flesh, which do
contain, and as it were restrain, the more soft and delicate parts.

The contents are in a twofold difference: some are violent breathing out, and
enforcing: (as Physicians speak) othersome moystening, and flowing out. The
first sort, are the spirits of our radical Balsam, which they call natural
spirits, whether they be firmly fixed in any one part, or whether they have
scope and recourse throughout the whole body; generated of the most pure
substance spiritual of the Sulphurus liquor, and of the (...) of the
nourishments of our life. Furthermore, they divide the spirits, into natural,
vital, and animal.

All these, are either natural and pure, or else impure and seculent. The one
are of a most pure nature, ethereal and conseruers of life: the other gross
and impure in comparison of them, subject to alterations, for that they
participate much of the seculent impuritie of Mercury, and of the liquors of
Salt, and also of the aliments of Sulphur: of the which beginnings we do
consist, as we said before. The moystening parts are mercucurial liquors, or
that which they commonly call humors, as well the natural, profiting and
nourishing, which retain somewhat of the spirit of life, as the unprofitable
and excremental.

The out-flowing and breathing forth, are the breathes, under which name also
we comprehend the vapors, of the which we made mention before: which vapors
are a distillation, and that moist euaporation, taken from the more watery part
of humoral or mercurial things: or else a dry exhalation; of Sulphurus and
tartarous things, and of Salts of our body.

And such exhalations also are no other thing, but fumes and spiritual smoakes,
but yet excremental, and therefore superfluous. For beside those first
seperations, which nature makes out of the more gross part of nourishments,
by the excretion and separation of the ordinary impure feces: there are yet
also in the Chylus, or good Juice, and in the very blood, which of all other
humors are most noble, certain superfluous impurities, which for the same
cause Nature seperateth.

Therefore the more m^yst superfluities are separated by euaporations, and
those only which are separated in the third concoction, which could not be
made semblable or like to the nourishing parts. For the which cause nature
expels them by insensible passages, eue^ through the pores of the skin, that
our natural heat may the more freely be winded by the air, and the burning of
the heart comforted.

The breathing superfluities also, do paticipate as much of the dry as of the
moist: that is to say, of those which are exhaled and euaporated out of the
sulphurus salt matters, and mercurial liquors. Whereof the more thin and
breathie part, pass by insensible transpirations: the more waterie, by
sweates: but the more foul, and that which is feculent, cleaves to the
outside of the skin.

But now, if such vapouring exhalations be retained still in our body, (the
which sometime comes to pass through the coldness of the air co^passing us
about, The stopping of the pores procures sickness.
by the shrinking of the skin, by occasion of place, or of age, by intemperate
life, by a natural disposition, by the thickness of the skin, or by such
like occasions) then it cannot be, but that such bodies shall be subject to many
other diseases, than those whereof we have spoken before.

It is also to be remembered in this place, that in all these euaporations, and
ordinary exhalations, somewhat of our substancetying nectar of life, or of our
radical Balsam, does also breathe away. The which breathing, if it be gently
and sparingly, and without all manner violence and force, but by a certain
voluntary continuance, and natural, then our age is prolonged, in the mean
time declining to extreme old age by little and little, until al our water of
life, or radical oil (which continues the lamp of our life) be consumed.

But if the said exhalation or breathing be violently and suddenly enforced,
as it comes to pass in burning feauours, and in many other sicknesses,
faintings, passions, and most vehement motions of the spirits of our body, then
our life shall be prevented before age. Haereupon comes the untimely, and in
some sort, the violant death of many: and yet the cause of such violence
coming from an internal occasion.

And because it is very pertinent and necessary, that we rightly understand
those things which we have now spoken, concerning the natures of the contents
in us, that is to say, of the enforcings, moystenings, and out-flowings: and so
much the rather, because by them we come to the knowledge of our ^pirits, and
of our radicial moisture, or nectar of life, and also to the causes of the
conservation, prolongation, destruction, and abreuiation of our life, I will
therefore now declare them all by an example, whereby every one which will give
ear, may come to the perfect knowledge of those things.

And yet we do not much esteem presumptions, probable reasons, or
authorities, but we will ground our demonstration upon the very senses
themselves, that those things which we speak, may be both seen and felt.
And if so be any be so far deuoyd of shame, that he will yet obstinately
contradict us, we will say to him, as sometime A^errho said: One experience, is
more of value, than many reasons. Experience cannot be without sense: and he
which denies sense, is worthy to have no use of sense.

And forasmuch as Aristotle said, that the foundation of all demonstration is
in sense, Who is he that dare gainesay it.

Therefore we will take Wine again for an example, for so much as we used the
same before. In which wine how apparently and manifestly do such separations;
and excrements appear to be made? And this it does by his own proper nature,
that the more easily the nature of either of them, and of both, may manifestly
be known by this Analogy and resemblance which it has with our blood. For
by the clensing of wine, we know the vital Anatomy of our blood: and by the
same it will appear which are our natural spirits ethereal, as also which is
our native heat, and radical moisture, which two do uphold our body, and
defend our life, and of whose help either of them have need: forasmuch as
that radical moisture is the food and nourisher of heat, and this same heat
subsisteth by the benefit of that moisture.

Thus these two replenished with spirit, and as it were knit together, are
spread and diffused through the whole body. By this same example, the difference
between nourishing vital humiditie, and that which is unprofitable and
excremental, will plainly appear. Furthermore, it will appear which be moist,
and which be dry, in that kind of moystures which are outflowing: and which of
them are hurtful to our nature, and which profitable. By which anatomy of
blood, the reader willing to learn, shall profit more (as I think) because we
refer those four humors, (whereof they make blood one) to the very same, and
do by a certain analogy and resemblance, compare it therewith. But to come
to the (...).

Therefore when the wine is prepared, the clusters of grapes are crushed in the
wine press first, and the skins and kernels with the stalks are thrown
away. Then the unprofitable clensings and excrements, being partly by man's
industry, and partly by the nature of the wine it self being rejected, the
wine is powered into caskes and vessels. In these, digestion being made, by his
own force, it seperateth and purges forth together those seculent and more
gross superfluities. This done, the wine is all most perfect, and fit for
drink and nourishment.

That first artificial preperation of wine, (which is made by the expression
and separation of the Vintners) does after a certain manner represent unto us,
the preparation of wheat, in the which separation, the chafe and the branne
being taken away, the rest is ground into meal, that it may be more fit for
nourishment. Even so in like manner in our mouths, first preparation of the
flesh is made from the bones, or such like: And the expression or grinding is
made with the mouth and teeth, then after due chewing, the meat is sent down
into the stomach. This is the first resembled preparation of our nourishment,
with that first preparation of wine, and wheat, and that which is put into our
stomach, answers that wine, which at the first is put into vessels, and the
meal which is ground. Therefore after this, there is another working in the
stomach by nature. For whatsoever the stomach receives, it concocteth, and
digesteth: yea all kind of meats mixed together, like wine in his cask^, or
any other kind of drink, made of honey, fruits, barley, or of water wherein
diverse things are sodden.

The stomach therefore is that vessel of nature, wherein not only the matter
put into it is concocted and digested: but also it is the same which seperateth
the tartarous feces, and whatsoever is excremental therein, by such passages
and vents, as nature has provided to that end. At the length after much
purifying, the blood is cleansed, being the red fountain, and the original of
the spirits of our life: even like as wine which thoroughly fined is preferred
before all others, which serve for the nourishing and restoring of our life.
But let us now proceed. (...).

Out of this artificial wine, with the h^^pe of gentle fire, by circulatorie
vessels (as they term them) is extracted a fire of nature, which attends the
radical moisture: namely, a water of life, wholly fiery and ethereal, a
quintessence, altogether spiritual, and almost of an incorruptible nature.

After the very same manner, through the benefit of nature, and by Circulation
which is made by the heat of the Heart, and of the Liver, there is generated
and extracted in us that quickening fire, accompanied and nourished with his
proper unctuous humor, and radical, which is the water of life, and true and
quickening Nectar, the quintessence, and almost the ethereal spirit, the
incorruptible vpholder and conseruer of our life.

This also here by the way comes to be noted in the operation of the foresaid
wine, which is also worthy the marking and admiration: namely, that two or
three fiery coals and no more, put under a large vessel or chaldrone, Spirit of
wine.
(which may contain six gallons, will heat the same wine, and will procure
the spirit of wine to distill: when as by that small heat, a much less
portion of water, cannot be made blood warm. But which is more to be
maruailed at and observed, when the same spirit of wine, does pass through the
Colunrina (as they term it) namely by very long cunduites and pipes of brass
reforsed, fit for this distillation, it does so heat them, as also a whole
pipeful of cold water-besid^ and far^ enough from fire, (in the which the said
pipes are moystened) that a man may scarce handle them. The which is to be
attributed to the great heat which the spirit of wine gives to the cold
water passing through the foresaid pipes. For when all the spirit of wine is
distilled forth; although thou put under the said vessel a much more vehement
fire, yet thou shall feel the heat of that water in the vessel contained, to
be extinguished and cooled. The which should put us in mind what is the next
cause and original of natural or connatural heat in us: for this heat is
stirs up in us by the continual circulation of the quickening spirit of our
blood.

When all this water of life is at last distilled forth by a certain internal,
external, and violent heat, or else utterly wasted by progress of time, then
does appear the extinction of that quickening heat, and cold death insueth.
But to return to the matter.

After the extraction of the true Aqua-Vitae, or spirit of wine, (which is the
whole purity of those three substantial beginnings) whole liquor represents
Mercury, whose flame, which it readily conceiueth, shows the Sulphurus
nature, and the exceeding strong taste, declares the spirit of Salt Ammoniac)
there remains great plenty of ^^eame, or of Mercurial water, which as yet
contains some quantity of spirit of wine.

But the last remainder is no better then unprofitable water, which soon
corrupts in like manner, after the extraction of the water of life, (which is
truly spiritual,) from out of our blood, there remains in our body, that
moist and moystening liquor, which is partly nourishing, and partly
excrementall, as is said before. Lastly, there remain over and above the
former, the Feces Tartarous residences, and Niterus Sulphurus matter, which
contain many stinking Impurities, as also great plenty of Salt.

The impurities, do sufficiently show the impurities in the eyes, and filthy
stinkes out of the nosthrils, where as diverse oils are distilled out of the
said feces by vehement fire. And out of the very feces there is extracted Salt,
if they be calcined, and the same is also fixed with his proper fleame, as we
have showed before in the working of the same vegetable. This Salt is made
Volatile, with Salt Ammoniac, flying contained in his own spirit, or water of
life, proceeding as we have already showed.

In like sort in blood, beside that spirit of life and Mercurial liquor, (which
two may in very deed be separated from blood it self, and showed to the eye,
after convenient digestions, in the heat of Balne Mary, which resembles the
heat of nature, that it may the better and more easily appear, how the same
heat, and the same nature in us, makes the same seperations and operations) I
say, beside those two, a certain soft consistence like liquor, will reside in
the bottom, wherein thou shall find many impurities, to be seen and smelt,
if the same matter be dried upon a fire of ashes, proportionable to the heat
of a fever, and no greater.

This Niter-Sulphurus stink is that, which manifestly causes in us fiery
meteors, as well in the upper, as in the inferior part of the body, and which
brings forth innumerable passions and pains beside, as is already showed
before.

So also by the force of the fire, Sulphurs and oils, thick and gluing like
pitch, may be separated out of the feces and tartar of blood, no less then out
of wine, so offensive with stink, as thou art not able to abide the odor
thereof: whereof, how many diseases may arise in our bodies, every man may
easily conjecture.

This done, there will remain ashes, out of which a Salt is extracted, the
which (by the virtue of the Salt Ammoniac of nature) may be made Volatile, and
the very same which Lullie calls the greater Lunarie, for the imitation of
the vegetable work. This work is very admirable, by which the true Numie, the
universal Medicine, and the true Balsam conseruing and restoring nature is
made. And this is the true and vital anatomy of blood, which by manifest
demonstration we have showed, that it has a great analogy, proportion and
resemblance with wine: when as a true Philosopher, as well out of the one as out
of the other (saving that the one requires greater artifice) knows how to
separate waters of life merely spiritual, which are said to be very forcible
and strong: and beside these, Mercuriall liquors, which are as well profitable
as hurtful, which are also moystening: and finally, which knows how to
extract vapors, and exhalations fuming, which are called out-flowings.

Now therefore, if so be in wine, which we easily use to nourish our bodies,
and the same pure and clear after the separation of the spirit thereof, we see
and behold so many unkindly things, and so impure; how many more gross
impurities I pray you shall we find in the Lees of wines cleaning to the
caskes, and in the gross residence of the same?

They which know and understand that great and exceeding blackness of wine
lees (which is manifestly to be seen in the calcination thereof) and the
sepreation of his spirit, and of his oil, red, black and stinking, which is
done by destillation, they (I say) can give clear testimony and credibly
inform, what a great stink there is in the Sulphur thereof: and how great the
acrimony and biting sharpness is in the same tartar or lees, by reason of the
Salt which is extracted out of the same, and the oil which is made by the
resolution of the same Salt of tartar. And trust me, in the feces of the same
wine, there are found, beside the things already spoken, those matters which
are more gross, impure and stinking, as they well know, who to calcine them
into ashes (which they call clanelated) are compelled to go out of the Cities
into the fields, and places further off, by reason of their exceeding
infection and stink, with the which they are wont to infect the places near
adjoining.

What marvel is it then, as is showed before, if in our blood, after the
separation of the true spirit, there are found so many unkindly, tartarous,
stinking and Sulphurus impurities? But what marvel I say, if more and greater
impurities and stinkes, are to be found in diverse of the Heterogeneal parts of
the Chylus, or best matter digested in the stomach for nourishment, from whence
blood draws his first beginning of his composition? That tartar or lees, is
of the blood which cleaves to the vessels of the bowels. Now the feces of the
Chylus are nothing else, but that huge heap of excrements of diverse sorts,
which are in that nourishment existing in diverse parts of the body. And when
those Niter-Sulphurus and tartarous impurities, cannot by nature be digested,
overcome and expelled, they stuff the bowels, they are made the seminary and
storehouse of most grievous sicknesses: so that if we will confess ye truth,
we must of necessity say with great Hipocrates, that sicknesses have both their
seeds, and also their roots in our bodies: the which most evidently appears
by the foresaid comparison of wine and blood. The which stands upon apparent
and sensible foundations, and not upon doubtful figments and Imaginations.

And as we see in the spring times, when nature puts forth her flowers, that
the lees of wine, are mixed with the wine it self, and do trouble it, and
oftentimes corrupt it: and that as in the exceeding heat of the Summer Sun,
the more hot Sulphurus part of the same wine, that is, the spirit, may and is
wont to vapor away, whereof follows the corruption of the same wine: even
so also, about the same seasons and times, the feces, and tartarous heap mixed
with our blood, does at the last pervert, and corrupt it: hereof comes the
occasion and multiplication of sicknesses. For the spirit of blood being
disprearced and separated, both by external and also by internal heat, it must
needs be corrupted, to the which corruption, arising of the said causes, the
cause of many sicknesses is rather to be referred, then to those bare simple
qualities, of hot and cold, dry and moist.

As therefore we have taught in the separation of the true spirit of wine
(which resembles the celestial and spiritual Nectar of our life) many
impurities thereof do manifestly appear: even so, and after the very same
sort, it fares with wheat with fruits, and with meats and drinks prepared
of them, and generally with all other vegetable things, proceeding after the
same manner as we have said, concerning wine. For they have no light proportion
with our blood; according to this saying: We are nourished with those things
whereof we consist: which thou may aptly turn and say; we consist of those
things, wherewith we are nourished. But the one partaketh of the other, or of
this or of that more then of the other: as for example, of the spirit, of the
Mercurial liquor, of Salt, of the feces, and of the stinking and unprofitable
excreme^ts: which is the reason, that out of this or that more commendable
kind of meat, the more worthy and commendable blood is generated.

Therefore to add one example more in steed of a surplussage of weight, let it
not be forgotten, that out of Hydromel, Cider, Ale, or such like kind of
drinks, and out of their feces, the same preparations and seperations, as well
of a commendable liquor, as of feces, may be made after the same manner, as we
have before showed to be done concerning wine: and that the beginnings and
heterogeneall and unnatural parts, may in the same sort be extracted out of
these, as out of that other.

To conclude, thou may with better success learn the beginnings of
sicknesses, by making a comparison between the preparation and separation of
those things which give nourishment unto man, and our blood, then if according
to the common manner thou have recourse to the humors, and bare qualities, and
so to seek out and discern the causes and originals of sicknesses, by a
certain witty contemplation, rather then by that which is more true and
infallible.

Thus we have thought good to set down these things by way of anticipation,
concerning the exact, and internal anatomy of humors, and concerning also the
artificial examining of them: both that thereby it might appear from whence
the natural impressions of things, and the infallible causes of diseases are to
be sought, as also that the true Philosophers and Physicians may understand
thereby the way to co^pound prepare, and administer artificially medicines and
remedies, which now we intend to show, even according to the order and method
of the Dogmatickes. So as we think it not good, utterly to reject the old,
nor wholly to follow the new, but to restore the old form of composition of
Medicines increased and amended with many of our inventions, experiments, and
compositions, for the public good, and for the health of the sick, as also
for the instruction of some ignorant Physicians.

An Elixir of our description. A wonderful remedy to cure inueterate and
almost desperate diseases, and to conserve health, and to prolong life, as
follows.
TAke of the root of Zedoary, of Angelica, of Gentian, of Valerian, Tormentil,
or Setfoyle, Goats beard, Galanga, the wood Aloes, and citrine or yeallow
Sanders, of each three Ounces. Of Baume, of red Mint, Maioran, Basil, Hysope,
Germander, Chamepithis, of each half a handful: of Laurel Berries and
Juniper, of the seeds Peony, of Seseli, or Comin, of Anis, of Mugwoort, of
Cardus-Benedictus, of each two ounces: the bark of Citrine, of Missel of the
oak, and of all the Mirabolans, of each one Ounce. Cloves, Cinamum, Mace,
Ginger, Cubebs, Cardamony, Pepper, long and round, Spikenard, of each one ounce
and a half. Aloes Hepat, Myrrh, Olebanum, Mastic, of each six Drachmes. The
flowers of Rosemary, of Sage, of Stechados, of Mary-golds, of Saint Ihons
woort, of centaury the lesser, of Betonie, of the Linden tree, of each so many
as ye can gripe with two fingers and the thumb at twice: of the flowers of
Chicory, commonly called Suckary, of red Roses, and of Buglosse, of each one
gripe in like sort only, of gruat honey, and of white Sugar, of each one pound.
Of Aqua-Vitae after the best manner rectified ten pound. Cut that which is to be
cut, and beat that which is to be beaten.

All these things being put into a large Matrat, and close stopped that no breath
come forth, set in horse-dung meanly hot, by the space of eight or ten days,
to putrify.

Being putrified, let them be hard and well pressed or strained, and put the
liquor distrained into an Allembic, and distill it by a Cornute, at aconuenient
fire.

The first water which comes forth from the distrained liquor will be most
clear: keep it by it self for it is precious.

Thy Receiver being of glass must be of good receipt, and must be passing well
closed with the Cornute by the neck, that the least vapor come not forth. And
when the Receyuer begins to be darkened, and to be filled with white
spirits, thou shall increase thy fire by degrees a little and a little,
according to art, until the said whited spirits appear no more. The water of
2. degree. Mercury.


Then take away the Receiver, that thou may put by it self that water which
comes forth the second time, and keep it well: it is called the mother of
Balsam, being very profitable to root out many sicknesses, and to conserve
health.

Then again put to thy Receyuer, An Oil.
and increase thy fire by degrees, Sulphur.
as thou did before, so long until at the first, there distill forth a
yealow oil: Fire.
after that a red oil, the matters in the Matrat remaining dry: and yet not
thoroughly dry, least the liquor which shall distill forth do smell of burning.

These things done, take that most clear water which came forth first of all
in good plenty: power it upon the feces remaining: and make them to digest
together by the space of 6. or 7. days, at the heat of Baln-marie, until the
water be colored and wax yellow: The Feces.
that is to say, until it has attracted the more fiery and oily portion of
the matter: Salt.
and the feces which shall remain, Earth.
when they have yielded their whole tincture to the foresaid water, reserve and
keep apart to such use as herafter shall be declared.

(But if you think good, you may reserve a portion of every of the said liquors
to such medicinable uses as is before showed, and use the rest in the progress
of the foresaid work, and in the subsequent.)

After you have drawn the foresaid liquors, and that also which took last
tincture from the feces, thou shall mix them together, that from thence thou
may extract a far more Elixir of life, than the former, and most precious:
proceeding in manner following.

When thou haste mixed the foresaid three liquors together, A most precious
Elixir.
thou shall distill them by a Corrnute, or by a glass Allembic, pretermitting
al digestion, using in other than the said mixture: use and follow the same way
and order, which thou did before, seperating the Elements, and beginnings
of liquors.

For thou shall draw out of the first most clear water, which thou shall
reserve by it self, namely, at such time as thou shall perceive the receiver
to be darkened with a cloudie fume: then changing the Receiver, and putting
too fire as thou did before, thou shall continue it so long, until thou see
the liquor to issue forth of yealow color, the which also thou shall keep
apart as thou did the former.

In the mean time while the foresaid distillations, or seperations of
Elements, that is to say, of the two beginnings, Mercury and Sulphur, are in
hand, thou shall calcine, at a Reuerberatorie fire, the Feces which thou
reseruedst before: out of the which, being brought to ashes, thou shall extract
salt, according to Art, with thy first most clear water; the water seasoned
with his Salt, shall be mingled with the other two liquors which were reserved,
that so at the least out of a Tryangle, thou may make a Circle O, as
Philosophers speak: that is to say, that out of those three several waters, by
circulation (in a Pelican) made according to Art, there may come forth one
essence: and so by that means that great Elixir of life, and admirable secret
shall be made.

And not only made, but also by so short a way, so easy, and so well known
to true Philosophers, that they know thereby, how, and in what order to make
Elixirs out of all things.

The virtues of this Elixir are unspeakable, both to the curing and also to the
preventing of giddinesses in the head, the Falling sickness, Apoplexies,
Palsies, madness, Melancholy, the Asthma, and diseases of the Lungs, faintings
and soundings, traunces, weakness of the stomach, and of other parts,
consumptions proceeding of an evil disposition of the bodies, passions
proceeding from the gaul, and such like heavy and lamentable griefs.

Certain drops only of this, being given in some convenient breath, and
fitting for the sickness. As for example, against the Epilepsie, with water of
Peonie; of Lillyes, Connally, or of flowers of the Linden tree. Against the
palsy, with the water Mary goldes: against the pestilence with the water of
Goats beard, or of water of Cardus Benedictus: against the Asthma or Tissick,
with the water of Scabiose, or of Fole-foote, or such like.

Moreover this Elixir, is of force to restore and conserve our radial Balsam,
if four or five drops thereof, be given in broth, wine, or other convenient
liquor.

But peradventure thou will say, that the preparation of this Elixir, requires
too much labor, and is too tedious. But it is much better and more necessary
to spend the time in things so admirable and of so great importance, than about
Medicines that are altogether unprofitable. And yet to serve every man's turn,
I will set down the preparation of an other Eilxir, more easy, and
peradventure more pleasing, to conserve health, and to prolong life.

Another Elixir of life most easy to be made.
TAke the Roots of Gentian slit in pieces, and dried with a gentle heat, also
the root of the lesser Centaurie, of each three ounces. Galanga, Cinimon,
Mace, Cloves, of each one ounce. Flowers of Sage, of S. John's woort, of each
two grypes with two fingers and a thumb. Of the best white wine 6. pound.
Infuse these in a glass Matrate, well stopped, by the space of eight days, at
a gentle fire of Balne-Marie. Then let them be well streined, and so distilled
by a glass Allembic in ashes, til nothing remain but dryness.

Then power the water distilled upon the feces, that from them thou may
draw away the whole tincture, in a milk warm Balne-Mary: Hippocrates bag,
is like the bag where through Hypocras runs.
Bring the Feces (after the drawing away of the tincture) into ashes, which
thou shall put into Hyppocrates bag, pouring the said colored water oftentimes
upon the ashes, that it may draw unto it the proper salt.

Give of this Elixir the fourth part of a spoonefull in some convenient liquor.
Use it a long time. It is a special remedy for all consumptions, for the
weakness of the stomache, which it purges from tough and slimy humors which
clean to the same: It stays the breeding of worms, and keeps the body in
health. Take of this twice in one week and continue with it.

A Treacle-water for the head, helping all pains of the same, proper for the
Apoplexy, Epilepsie, Palsey^, and such like.
TAke of the roots of Peony, of Misselto, of common Acorns or Cane, of each
three ounces. Of ripe Iuniparberryes, and of the seeds of Peony, of each, one
ounce: Of Cloves and Maces, of each 6. drachmes. Of Castoreum, half an ounce:
Of the flowers of Stechados, Mary-gold, Rosemary, Sage, Lillyes co^^ally, of
the Linden tree, of each, two grypes with two fingers and the thumb. Cut that
which is to be cut, and beat that which is to be beaten: and infuse them by
the space of 3. days, by the heat of a hot Balne, in white wine of the best,
2. pound: and with the waters of Peony, Sage, and of Mary-goldes, of each one
pound.

Then straning them hard. To this liquor add of Treacle of Alexandria, ounces
4. of Anacardine confectionem Me^u, one ounce and a half, of Diamosch, and
Aromatici Gabriel, of each half an ounce.

Steep or infuse these again, by the space of two or three days, at the fire
gentle of Blan* M. Then strain them again, and distill them upon ashes to
dryness: and thereof a Treacle-water will be made.

A very small spoonefull of this is sufficient to be given at once against the
diseases before expressed.

Another Treacle-water cordial, and comfortable for the heart, very good
against al pestiferous effects thereof used, with great profit.
TAke of the roots of Angelica, of Cloves, of Goats beard, of Tormentil or
Set-foyle, of Bifolium, or two-blades of Enula campans, of each two ounces. Of
yealow Sanders, and of the bark of the same, of each one ounce and a half. Of
white Diptani, of Scabiose, of Rus, of Goats beard, otherwise called
Meedwoort, of each one handful. Of the Flowers of the less Centaure, of S.
Iohns-woort, of Broom, of Violets, of Borage, of Buglosse, of Water-Lyllie, of
Red Roses, of each, a three finger gripe. Put these into 3. pound of Malmesie
infused by the space of 4. days, set upon the fire of Baln M. and the Juice of
Lemons, the water Melissa, Aeetouse, and of Roses mingled with the said Wine,
of each one pound. Then strain them.

In the liqnor distrained, put of Treacle ounces three, of the confection of
Hyacinth, one ounce. Of the confection Alchermes, 6. drachmes. Of Diamargarit
friged, Diatria Santali, of each 3. drachmes: of Diambre, and Diacoral, of each
two drachmes, of Saffron, and Myrrh, of each half a drachme.

Infuse them again, by the space of two or three days, at the same fire of
Baln. M. Then distill them to dryness by fire of ashes: and it will be a
Treacle water. But to make it the more effectual, the Salt must be extracted
out of the feces which remain, according to art, and then mingeled with the
foresaid water.

A water against Poisons, and against all pestilentiall effects.
TAke of the Roots of Angelica, of the Carline-thistle, of Set-foyle, and of
the Bark of the Olibian Tree, of each two ounces, of Cardus Benedictus, of
Meede-woort, called Goats beard, of all the Sanders, of each half an ounce:
the Treacles of Mythridate, and the confection of Hyacinth, of each 2, ounces:
the speces of Diamarg. Frigid, Camphor, of each 2. Drachmes. Let these be
grossly beaten or bruised, and put into a glass Allembic, pouring thereon 3.
pound of rectified Aqua vitae. Then let them be digested in a vessel well
closed, and so distilled by ashes, or a vaporous Baln. This water is wonderful
effectual against poysonful and pestilential effects. The quantity which must
be given, is half a spoonful.

An excellent water to be given against Fevers, burning and pestilentiall.
TAke of the roots of Angelica, Buglosse, of Scorzonerae Ac^^y, one ounce: of
the Treacle Alexandrine, 2 ounces: of the Juice of Lemons cleansed, of the
waters Fumetarie, Gotes beard, and Cardui Benedictus, and of the lesser
centaure, of each, ounces 4. Diamar^^. Frigid half an ounce. Let these lie
infused by the space of three or 4. days: then let them be distrained and
distilled Of the which let the sick drink 4. ounces: and then being well
covered in his bed, he shall sweat more than ordinary.

Principal Remedies to ease the torments and extreme pains of the Gout.
TAke of the leaves of Missel, which grows on the Apple Tree, cut or shred
very small, half a pound: the flowers of white Mulline, of Chamomil, of
Lyllies, of Wallwoort, or Danewoort, all the kinds of Poppey, with their cases
which contain the seed, new gathered, and before they be full ripe, of each
one gripe of the 2. fingers and the thumb, of green Frogs, or in steed of
them, the Ielly or sperme of Frogs, which is to be found in standing waters
in the Month of March, one pound: the seed of white Poppey bruised, 4. ounces:
of Crabbes of Crafishes shelles, and all beaten or crushed together, 20. in
number: of red Snailes, and Earth-wormes, both well washed in good white wine,
of each 4. ounces: of Badgers grease ^xe ounces; of Sperma Ceti, 4. ounces: of
the oil of violets or water Lilly, newly made, 6 pound: or if you will, in
steed of these oils, take so much of oil Olive.

Put these into a glass vessel, for that purpose convenient, and close stopped
set it in horse dung by the space of 7. or 8. days. But if need require more
haste, let them boil in a Copper vessel over the fire, by the space of two
hours, and then strain them strongly. The which also you shall do, if they
stand in Horse dung to be digested.

Thou then shall separate the oil from the watery part thereof according to
art: to the which oil, thou shall add of Saffron 2. ounces, of Camphyre,
hale an ounce.

Put all these into a glass vessel, and set them again in Horse dung, or in
Balneo, or in the Sun, by the space of 5. days, and thou shall have a most
excellent Balsam to assuage and qualify all pains of the Gout and in the
joints.

I wish that all Apothecaries would prepare this, to be reary at al times for
present use: for that they cannot appoint themselves of any thing better than
this, which my self have found true by experience.

A plaster to help and easy all pains of the Gout.
TAke the marrow or pulpe of Cassia four ounces, of new Treacle, the newer the
better, half an ounce. The meal of Barley and Oats, of each three ounces.
The crumbes of white bread^ four ounces: of Cowe-milke, two or three pound.

Let al these be sodden in the form of a Cataplasme; which thou shall apply
warm to the grieved parts. It thou shall add one ounce of vitriol calcined,
and beaten into the powder, thou shall make it much better.

Another Cataplasme.
TAke the distilled water of white Mulleyn, and of Fern, of each half a
pound: of calcined vitriol as before, one ounce and a half of Oate meal 4.
ounces: Of Saffron two (...) make a Cataplasme.

A water against the pain of the Coute.
THis water following prepared in due time, will much avail against the
greatest pains of the Gout, where there appears redness, and much heat^.

Take of the distilled water of the sperme of Frogs, of Hightaper and of
Fern, of each one pound and a half. In these infuse Tuttie, and Lytharge of
each two ounces: Vitriol calcined and Alum, of each one ounce. Let the grieved
parts, be moystened with linen clo^^es wet in the same, applied warm, renewing
the same diverse times.

Another excellent water against the Gout.
TAke of the Soap of Genua, that which is white and good, one ounce. Of liquid
Salt, made to run at a strong fire, one ounce and a half: of Vitriol, one
ounce: of Acatia, half an ounce. Let them all boil together in a pint of
Rose vinegar, or of common vinegar. With this liquor wash both the greiued
parts.

An excellent plaster, which being laid upon the knots and puffes of the
Gout, dissolueth them.
TAke of the oil of Apple Missel, of our description, one or two pound: warm
it in a vessel at the fire: being made warm, put into it of shaued or
scrapings of Soap 4. ounces, let them be well stirred together with a spattle,
until the oil and Soap be well incorporated together. After this put thereto
Venis Ceruse, and Lytharge, of each 2. ounces, ever mingling and stirring them
with a spattell* of Vitriol calcined til it be red, and pouldred one ounce* Of
(...) half an ounce. When any of the aforesaid things are put in, stir it
well til it come to a convenient thickness for a plaster: which thou shall
apply to the knots: it helps not only these* but also of callous, and hollow
ulcers and pockes.

An excellent water to the same effect.
TAke Vns^ickt-Lime, let it lie in Spring water five (...) six days, that
thou may draw out the Salt, Let the water be four or five fingers above the
Lyme. Of this water take 3. pound: in the which thou shall quench a red hot
plate of Steel, twelve times, and oftener.

After this, thou shall put therein of burnt copper brought into powder 3.
ounces: of Cinabar, half and ounce. Let them stand by the space of four or
five days, in which time the water will be of a green color, by means of
the inward vitriol of the burnt copper. This water is an excellent remedy to
qualify and alay suddenly all manner aches and pains.

A remedy to dissolve the Stone.
AFter some convenient gentle purgation, let the patient grieved with the
Stone, take one little spoonefull of this poulder following, which not only
opens the conduits provoking urine, but also diminishes and hinders the
growing of the Stone.

Take of the kernels which are in Medlars, Gromel, called Milium Solis, the
seeds of the great Burre, Saxifrage, Hollyhock, Auis seeds, Fennel-seedes, of
each three drammes: of Crystal stones and of Tartar, fix drammes: of the
stones which are called commonly Crabbes eyes, half an Ounce, of the Salt of
ground Furze, one drachme: of Cinnamon one Ounce and a half: of Violated Sugar,
two Ounces and a half: mingle these and make a poulder. This poulder being
taken, let the party drink upon it, a little wine Iuniperated, or of this
water following.

Take of the roots of Eryngium, of ground Furze, and of the five roots
apertiue, of each one Ounce: of the bark of Lemons, one Ounce and a half: of
the four greater cold seeds, of the seeds of Mallows, and Hollihock, of
each three Ounces, of the seeds of Saxifrage, of Gromel, of the greater
Radish, of the Burdock, and of ripe Iunipar Berries, of each, Drachmes six: of
Askakeng Berries, twenty in number, of Iui^bes six couple, of Dictam, of the
flowers of Broom, of Saint John's woort, of Betonie of the greatest Mallow of
each two gripes with the thomb and two fingers: of liquirice, two ounces and a
half: of the wood of Caffia, one Ounce: beat and poulder that which is to be
pouldered: and let them be steeped or infused in water of silver weed, called
wild Tansey, and of Parietory of the wall, of each one pound and a half: of
the best white wine two pound, and that by the space of four days, in Bal. M.
hot: and then let it be strongly strained.

Into the liquor, put of the Species of Diatragaganthum Frigidum, and of the
Trochiscks of Alkakenge, without Opium, of each one Ounce. Let them be digested
again at the fire of Baln. Mar, by the space of one or two days: and let them
be distilled by a glass Allembic, according to Art. This water also taken by
it self alone, c^^teth and thinneth gross matters, and cleanses the raynes
and sucking-vaines, and the bladder, from the stopping of sand and grauel, and
fr^eth them from gross humors.

Of this water by it self alone, the dose to be given at one time is two
Ounces, with some convenient syrrup.

An other excellent water against the Stone.
TAke the Juice of Radish, of L^^t^ns, of each one pound and a half, of the
waters of Betonie, of wild Tansey, of Saxifrage, of Veruaine, of each one
pound: of Hydromel, and of Malmesey, two pound. In these liquors mixed
together, infuse by the space of four or five days at a gentle fire of Baln.
Mar, Iunipar Berries ripe and new gathered, being bruised, three Ounces, of
Gromel, of the seed of the Burdock, of the greater Radish, of Saxifrage, of
Nettels, of Onions, of Anis, of Fenel, of each, one Ounce and a half, the
four cold seeds, the seeds of great mallows, of each six drach^^es: the
species of Lithontri, the Electuarie Duis and Iustini Nicolai, of each half
one Ounce: the Calxe of Egge-shels, Cinnamon, of each three Drachmes, of
Camphore two Drachmes. Let all again be well distrained and then distilled by
ashes.

Two ounces of this water taken, does wonderfully cleanse the Counduits, provoke
urine, and will break and expel the Stone. To this if you add his proper
Salt, or one scruple of the extract of Betonie, it will be a more effectual
remedy.

The conclusion of this Treatise.
ALchymie or Spagyrick, which some account among the four pillars of medicine,
and which opens and demonstrateth the compositions and dissolutions of all
bodies, together with their preparations alterations, and exaltations, the same
I say is she which is the inuenter and Schoolemistresse of distillation.

For Alchymie uses seven works, which are as it were certain degrees, by
which as it were by certain necessary instruments, she orders and finisheth
the transmutations of things. By transmutation I mean, when any thing so
forgoeth his outward form, and is so changed, that it is utterly unlike to his
former substance and woonted form, but has put on another form, and has
assumed an other essence, another color, another virtue, and another nature
and properly. As for example, when linen rags are turned into paper: metal
into glass: skins or leather into glue: an herb into ashes: ashes into Salt*
Salt into water, and Mercury so moveable, into a fixed body, as into Sinabar,
and poulder.

The seven degrees of working are these mentioned before in the Practice.
1 Calcination, Which is the bringing of any thing to ashes. 2 Digestion, Is a
dissoluing of that which is thick into thin, to be purified. 3 Fermentation,
Is a mixing of kindly matter for multiplication* or the kindly seasoning, or
leauining of a thing. 4 Distiliation, Is an extraction of a liquor from a body,
by heat. 5 Circulation, Is to rectify any thing to a higher perfection. 6
Sublimation, Is the lifting up of moist matter, to make it more pure and dry. 7
Fixation,Is to make that which is flying, to abide with his body.
Beside these, there are diverse other workings, as Dissolutio^, is to dissolve
y^ which is gross Putrefaction, is the mean to generation. Exaltation, is
euaporation of the impure humor. Rectification, is a reiterated Distillation
to perfection. Coagulatio^ is the congealing of moisture. Cohobatio^, is a
repetition of Distillation, by which the liquor distilled is powered upon the
feces, and distilled again.


Distillations are diverse, according to the diversities of reasons, manners, and
of subjects: whereupon arise sundry differences of distillation. The first
difference is taken from things, out of which a moisture or liquor may be
drawn. For after one manner Honey: after another, Sulphur: after another Wine:
after an other Wax: after another Turpentines and Gimmes, as Mastic,
Euphorbum, Styrar, and such like: after another, Salts; after another Herbs:
after another, Roots: after another many seeds are to be distilled.

The second difference is taken from the diversity of the liquor distilled.
For waters, are otherwise extracted then are oils. As for example, out of
Herbs, Roots, Flowers and seeds, which are not dry, but growing, waters are
extracted by simple distillation, without the admixture of any other liquor.
But out of Roots, Herbs, Flowers, and seeds which are dry and odoriferus,
the floating oils are not extracted, without the means of some water or other
liquor as a help.

The third difference depends upon the matter and fashion of the vessels*
Upon the matter: for one vessel is of earth, another of brass, another of
lead, another of glass.

Upon the fashion also: for there is one manner of distillation by an Allembic,
another by a Cornut, another by a Matrat, and another by a Pelican, and so of
others.

The fourth difference is by the site and placing of the vessel.

For if it be by a right Cucurbit, which has a head with a pipe or beak, or
whether it be inclining or crooked, we call such distillations, by ascent: or
when the neck of one Matrate or cucurbit, is put into the neck of another, that
is to say, when the vessels by concourse are so joined together, that one
takes in the mouth of the other, and the same by a diverse position: and by
these most commonly are distilled those things which do hardly ascend, and
have small store of juice.

Many things also are distilled by descent, that vessel which contains the
matter turned the wrong way, and put into the other, the which manner of
working is called by Descent, and is contrary to that which is by Ascent.

By Descent are distilled Ceates, and sundry kinds of fat wood, as Giraiacum,
Iunipar, and those of rosen sort.

The fifth difference is, by the degrees of fire, which are four: the first,
second, third, and fourth.

The first is soft and gentle, such is the fire of Balne. M. or of vapor: the
second, is of ashes: the third is of sand, or of the dust of iron that falls
from the Smithes hammer in his work at the Stythee. The fourth is of bare fire.

By the first and second degree of fire, we distill by Ascent: by the third and
fourth, we distill by concourse and Descent: Thus oils are distilled out of
Salts* as out of common Salt, out of Vitriol, and out of such like.

But before you begin to distill, be sure that you dissolve and putrify.

But because mention is made before of Digestion and Fermentation, I will show
you plainly, how by these two means you may extract out of Roses a most
Fragrant water of life, and so excellent, that one drop thereof, shall give a
sweet sent and odor to a great quantity of common water, and will also make
the the same most profitable and sweet.

Therefore take Roses gathered it (...), when there is neither rain nor (...)
upon them, but tarry till the Sun with his beams has (...) and taken away
that humiditie. Gather then of them a good quantity: and then bruise or beat
them in a stone (...), or else thou shall put them into a small bonlet of oak,
and shall with diligence press them in with thy hands, in such sort that the
vessel may be stuffed full almost to the top. Then stop and close it up,
that Digestion may more easily be made, and set in a wine seller by the space
of one month, or longer if need require, until thou shall perceive that the
foresaid matter have the odor of tart wine: whereby thou shall know that the
Fermentation is perfected: and so long it must at any hand be delayed until
the foresaid sign do appear.

These things thus finished, take to thee the fourth or fifth part of the Roses
Fermented, according to the greatness of thy vessel, which necessarily must be
such as the Chymicall Distillars do use wherewith they extract their oils,
and Aqna-Vitae, the which indeed are large, and of Brass, rather then of
Lead, furnished with their refrigeatories (as they term them) which being full
of water, the spirits made thick through cold are more easily and commodiously
drawn forth: Taking I say, that portion of Fermented Roses, distill them
according to the wonted manner. That done, separate the feces remaining, which
subsist in the bottom of the Allembic, and put so much of the Fermented Roses
aforesaid into the same vessel, and power upon them the water extracted
before, distilling altogether again, until there appear diverse; thy vessel
as well closed as may be as is said before.

Gather again the dried feces (the which it thou will, thou may reserve
with the former feces) and put the same quantity of the foresaid Roses into
the Allembic which thou did before, upon which again thou shall power all
the distilled water: And this thou shall do so often until thou have
distilled all the said fermented Roses.

These things orderly done, thou shall take all the distilled water, and shall
distill only the twelth part thereof, with a gentle fire in a vessel with a
long neck or Matrate, or in such a one as Aqua-Vitae is distilled, which is the
quantity of all the spiritualls almost. As for example, if thou have twelve
pound of water, thou shall only extract one pound, which will be very
odoriserus most sweet, and spiritual, as ready to take flame, as is that which
is extracted out of wine.

This water if thou will yet make of greater virtue, thou may rectified
again. But the rest of the water which shall remain in the bottom of the
Allembic, will be more fragrant, and better then that which is distilled after
the common manner: whereinto also thou may convey his Salt and insert it, by
bringing the foresaid feces to calcination, and meshing the same oftentimes
through Hypocrates sleene or bag with water, whereby it shall more easily draw
unto it and retain that Salt. After the same manner also thou may draw
waters of life out of violets and other flowers, and especially out of them
which are hot and odoriferus, as Rosemary, Sage, Betonie: and such other like,
which are better and more effectual against sicknesses, then if they be made
according to the common order. The least quantity hereof will work wonderful
effects.

If our Apothecaries would acquaint themselves with these Concoctions,
Fermentations, and Digestions, and understand them aright, in their workings
immitating nature after a certain manner, they should be able to effect diverse
commendable and profitable preparations. Yea it is not fitting the Apothecary
alone to know these things, but for the Physician also the commander and
director of the Apothecarie, if he respect his humor and the health of his
patient.

But these things at this day are little regarded, insomuch that many
Physicians either neglect them, or else disdainfully contemn them, for that
they know not what profit such preparations do bring with them. And verily I
do not know, what should be the cause of such obstinate disdain and wilful
contempt, but mere ignorance: seeing it is well known that nothing is
contemned, but of the ignorant.

And what will not these mad Ignorants contemn, which do also despise the
preparations of Medicines? which administer nothing to their sick patients,
but those things which are crude, and full of impurities. They rather choose
obstinatly to go forware in their error, both to their own reproach and
damage of the sick, then rightly to follow wholesome admonitions, least they
might be thought not to have been wise enough before, and to have learned more
knowledge of others.

Let them consider the necessity of our life, that they may learn that the
same has constrained us, to seek the preparations of our meats, which are
necessary for the sustaining of our bodies: in the preparing whereof,
notwithstanding, there is not so great necessity as there ought to be in the
preparing of medicines for our health.

Let them behold the corn which comes out of the earth, which is not by and
by given crude as it is, for food but the chafe and the branne being
separated, it is brought to flower: which as yet is not so given to eat, but
being first termented or leuened, ^ well kneaded or wrought, it is baked, that
it may be bread fit for nourishment. Consider well the fermentation, by which
bread is made light, and fit for nourishment: the lighter it is, the wholsomer
it is, and the more it is fermented the lighter it will be. The less it is
fermented, the heavier it is, and the more unwholesome. If this preparation go
not before, but that we only make a mixture of water and flower together, and
so presently thrust it into the Oven, in steed of bread, thou shall prepare a
glutinous matter very hurtful to nature. Do you not see how paste a glutinous
matter, and starch, also are made only with flower and water? What then
think thou will come to pass in thy stomach and bowels, especially in those
which are more weak, if such be offered and taken? Surely such as will
procreate matter to breed the stone, and will be the seminary of many diseases.

So necessary and profitable is this Fermentation, that it is very behouefull
for an Apothecarie to know it: for that it does attenuate every substance, it
looseneth it from his body, and terrestrial impurity, that it may afterward be
made fit to bring forth the true radical Balsam, and the quickening spirit.

By the benefit of this only Fermentation, are extracted waters of life out
of all vegetables whatsoever. After the same manner, by this Fermentation and
Leaven of nature, all (...) humors of or^ body are made thin and subtiled.
You know how in holy writ it is said, that a little sour Leaven does ferment
the whole mass.

By the way of Fermentation, which consists in a certain Acetoius liquor of
nature, our humors are made thin and disposed to excretion. And therefore
there are certain tart things which move sweates, albeit the same by the
opinion of Physicians are cold.

Do we not see that women and ordinary Cooks have attained this knowledge of
Fermentation: and thereby provide for sick persons, Iellyes made of flesh of
fowls, and such like, to restore and strengthen them in the time of their
weakness?

And what are these but extracts? For the terrestrial parts are separated from
the more laudable substance, which is more convenient for the sick. And why
do not Apothecaries the like in compounding their medicines?

The nature of the sick man being now weakened, cannot abide crude and fulsome
meat, but does rather loathe them, and is more and more weakened by them. How
much more will he be offended and hurt by medicines not rightly prepared nor
separated from their impure substance? Such impuritie must needs be a great
hurt and hindrance, that the natural force of the Medicine, cannot encounter
with his enemy the sickness, and overcome him.

What shall we say then of those Medicines, which have not only cruditie in
them, but also some evil quality, and the same not separated, or rightly
prepared: or being corrected, may we be bold to give it? They are wont, (with
grief I speak it) too much and too often, I saythey are wont, I mean such
decocted, pouldred, and mixed Medicines, by no manner of other art prepared, to
bring more grief and pain to the sick (that I may say no worse) than sollace
and help.

Therefore these kind of preparations, concoctions, I say Digestions, and
Fermentations, are not to be despised or neglected. For if these things be
done, they are done according to natures fashion, which uses the same
operations to the perfect ripening of fruits, and all things the which it
brings forth. But let us hasten to conclude this Treatize.

Aristotle in his fourth of Meteors, has appointed three Pipsias, or kinds of
concoction. The first he calls Pepamsis, which is the concoction of humor in
moist seed, made by natural heat: And this is the mean of concocting,
ripening, and of making of the seeds of Plants, and of other things to grow,
and to bring forth plenty of fruit: and it is a work only belonging to
nature, which uses that quickening heat for an Instrument, which heat
answers the element of Stars in proportion, as the said Aristotle says.
Albeit Art cannot immitate this heat, yet it may tread in the steps thereof.

The second kind of concoction, he calls Epsesis, or Elixation, which is a
concoction made by a moist heat of a thing indifinitely existing in a humor.

The third and last is Optesis, or Assation, which is the concoction of the
same interminate, made by a dry and strange heat.

These two last concoctions, are made especially by Art, concerning the
moderation of which heates, we will hereafter teach the diligent and
industrious Apethecaries, I say industrious, and such as follow the prescrips
of true Physicians and Art, not Petlars and Sellers of Trifels, which rather
desire to make retale of Candels, Lanternes, and all Mercerie-wares, and to
fill their shoppes with trash, than to follow the works of Art.

Therefore in steed of liberal persons, they are miserable hierlings: Sowters
they are, and not Artificers and lovers of Art, Merchants, and handy-crafts
men, setting their rest upon pomp, pleasure, and gain. I had rather see an
enemy in the City, then one of these base minded fellows. For Citizens know
how to beware of an open enemy: but how can a man beware of the falsehood and
treachery of these companions which they bring to pass either by ignorance,
or by malice or else by negligence: I say who shall take heed of these, but
he which banisheth them quite and clean out of the City.

I speak of deceivers, and such as falsely usurp the name and tittle of
Apothecaries, professing that, and yet follow the Trade of Merchandise, and not
of honest and good men, which are dilligent in their Art, to whom this our
labor pertains, and to whom these our studies and admonions are dedicated,
for the health of many, and for their praise and profit.

The ancient Physicians and men of the best sort, dealt more warily and
provided better for themselves, had this art in great honor, and therefore in
their own houses, they prepared medicines with their own hands.

And we also for our own parts would be loath that some of our secrets,
should be cast before these Hogs, and therefore we commonly provide, that
they be prepared in our Laboratorie at home by a kilfull workman, whom we
direct and appoint for that purpose.

Not that we might make thereby the greater gain to our selves, but for the
honor and praise of the Art, and to our friends good, the which all those
know, that know us, and have received the benefit from us. But for this time
these shall suffice.

For the Pattern of Furnaces and glasses apt and meet for Distillation, buy
Master George Bakers Book our Countryman.

And if thou be desirous to procure glasses of all sorts for this Art, thou
may have them at the Merchants hand, which sell such in their houses near
the Poultery in London.

THe wind Furnace, must have a hole beneath, one foot deep inward, and one
foot and a half upward: and at that height a grate shall be laid, wherein
the coals of fire must lie. Also at that height make another mouth, where at
thou shall put in the said coals of fire: and about the same raise up the
walls round about ten Inches in height and there also lay two bars of Iron
to set the Pan upon, either for Balneum Mariae, or for a dry fire.

To make thy nourishing Baln^.
TAke chopped Hay and water, and put it into an earthen Pan, then set over it a
Trencher with a hole in the midst, to answer the bottom of the glass,
which must come within two Inches of the water.

Concerning Hermes Seal, and the making of diverse closiers of glasses.
FIrst thou shall know, that of all fastnings or closing up of Glasses, that no
v^pours nor spirits go forth, the Seal of Hermes is most noble: which is
done in the manner following.

First, make a little Furnace, with the Instruments belonging. It must have a
grate in the bottom to make fire upon. In the middst of the Furnace shall be
a hole, to put in the end of a narrow necked Glass, so that the third part
of the glass be empty. And if the hole of the Furnace be greater then the
glasses neck, close up the hole with claye on every side, round about, so as
the mouth of the glass have some liberty. Let thy fire be as far from thy
glass as thou can: and when thy coal fire is ready, put the Glass nearer
and nearer, by little and little, till the mouth of thy glass wax red, as it
were ready to melt. Then take the red hot tongues, and therewith wring or nippe
the top close together: whereby it shall be so closed, as if it had no vent
(...), or came so closed out of the Glasse-makers shop. But take heed when
you have so done, that you pull it not too suddenly out of the fire, least the
s^dden cold crack the glass, and mar all. Therefore abate it by little and
little, and not at once.

And when thou will open the glass, take a thridde dipped in brimstone or wax,
and wind it 6. or. 7. times about the neck of the glass where thou would
have it to break, and set it on fire with a small wax candle, and when it is
burnt, power a drop or two of cold water upon it, and it will crack in the sa^^
place, that thou may take it off.

Concerning the manner of making Lutes, wherewith to close glasses.
THe ordinary Lutes wherewith to stop vessels of glass against faint vapors,
are these. Take quick lyme beaten to ^oulder as fine as may be, and searsed:
temper it with the white of eggs. Or else mix wheat flower with the white of
eggs, spread them upon linen cloth, and wrap it diverse times about the mouth
or joints of the glass.

Other Lutes, called Lutum Sapientiae, made for the defense of stronger
vapors, either to parget and lute the body of the glasses, or to stop their
mouths, or loose their joints: which are to be wrought clear, smooth, and
without knots or bladders: in manner following.

Take potters earth, with a forth part of shorn floxe added to the same: an
eigth part of white ashes, with a forth part of dry horse-dung. All these well
beaten together with an iron rod.

This is the right composition of Lutum Sapientiae. There be that do add to
this composition, the poulder of brick, and of the scales beaten from iron,
finely searsed.

And for the more convenient drying of vessels so luted and fenced, you shall
bore certain holes in a wodden form, into the which put the necks of thy
glasses, that their bottomes and bodies may be dried the better.

Another most excellent Lute for the like incloser is made of glass and
Vermilion, of each like quantity, pouldred and searsed, then incorporated with
vernish, and a little oil of Linseede, and making the whole like a soft
poultesse which is to be spread on a fine linen cloth, wrap it about the
mouth and joints of the glasses, and so suffer them to dry in the Sun. Which
albeit, it is a long work, yet it is most sure. For this will serve against
the strongest vapors that are.

Also to compound a Lute, wherewith to make your Furnace that it may not riue,
or chap, take chalk and potters clay, and a quantity of sand, wrought together
with woollen (...) and horsedung, incorporated as before.

Thus courteous Reader, I have showed thee such secrets in this Art, as neither
Quersitanus, Isacus, Hollandus, nor any other Philosopher, have before
published in print to my knowledge, but have come to my hands in paper and
parchment copies. If thou be industruous, and do tread the right Hermetical
path, thou shall by the means of these helps, so plainly set before thine eyes
without Hieroglyphics and Riddels, to do thy self and thy country good. Thus
wishing to thee, as to my self, good success in all thy godly endeavors, I
commend them and thee, to the Lord.

FINIS.

