OPPOSITIONS OF THE WORD OF GOD, TOGETHER WITH THE DOCTRINE OF THE ROMAN
CHVRCH. Moreover, what points are held by the same Church, which she hides
from those whom she means to draw to her faction. Written by PETER MOVLEINE,
Minister of the word of God in Paris, and translated by A. S.

LONDON Printed by WILLIAM STANSBY for Richard Moore, and are to be sold at his
shop in Saint Dunstanes Churchyard in Fleete-streete, 1610.

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, both the Argument of this short Treatise (the better part of
which consists in Oppositions, which the more plainly they be set down,
the more clearly they appear) and the purpose of the Author (who made it for
the unlearned) has made me to abstain from the flowers of Rhetorique in the
translation thereof, wholly applying my self to express the Authors meaning,
as knowing that there is nothing here but for the simple, who ought rather to
be instructed then delighted in matters of Religion. Pardon the Translater
hereof, that he names not himself, since that he had rather purchase profit
to others, then vainglory to himself. The name of the Author is a sufficient
patronage for the book, who is so acute, and subtle in controversies of
Religion, that he never disputes, but withal he refuteth. Many books have
been written of this Subject, but none as yet so fitted to the capacity of
the vulgar, neither comprehended in so few leaves. Here are no nice
distinctions to distract the ignorant, but only those Papisticall errors are
here showed, which are repugnant to the written verity. Let intention
accompany thee in reading, discretion in judging, gratulation in profiting:
and if thou be profited, then shall I count my self to have well
translated. Farewell.

Thine or not thine, A. S.

OPPOSITIONS OF THE WORD OF GOD, TOGEther with the Doctrine of the Roman
Church.
I cannot rank my self with the Roman Church, because she teaches things
disagreeing with the word of God, contained in the holy Scriptures.
I.
GOD forbids to add any thing to Deutro. 4. 2.
his word: The Roman Church in way of contradiction does add many things
thereunto: as invocation of Saints, adoration of Images, the Communion under
one Species or kind, a prohibition to eat flesh upon certain days; prayer
in a tongue not understood of the people, the satisfaction of Saints for the
sins of others, the single life of Priests, confirmation, Auriculer
confession, the deliverance of souls out of the fire of Purgatory by the
indulgences of the Pope, the Iubily at the end of every five and twenty years
for the remission of all sins, pardons for a hundred thousand years and more,
the Lymbus for Infants: the institution of Mass Priests, who vaunt that they
sacrifice Jesus Christ, pilgrimages to visit relics, the diverse charges
given to Saints, as to one to cure the tooth-ake, to another to be patron of
the Shoomakers, to another to govern Spain, or France. Particular Masses,
said in a corner of the Church, at the request of some particular man who
pays for them, Masses without Communion, and without assistants: Masses for
the corn, herds of cattle, etc. The holy beads which are distributed to
procure a hundred years pardon of sin. The Agnus Dei which the Pope
sanctifies, giving them virtue and power against the devil, and against
sin, the custom to baptize bells, ships, etc. And a thousand such follies,
of the which there is not so much as one word extant in the word of God.

II.
God forbids to diminish his word, or take any thing Deutro. 4. 2.
from it. On the contrary side, the Church of Rome has taken away the second
commandment of God, out of the Canons of the Mass, in the which is contained
an express prohibition to make any resemblance of any thing, which is in
heaven above, and in the earth beneath, in way of worship. With the like
impudency have they took from the Bible Genesis 3. 15.
these words: that the seed of the woman (namely Jesus Christ) should bruise
the head of the serpent: saying, that it should be read thus, that the woman
shall bruise the head of the serpent: giving that honor to the virgin Mary,
which is due to our Savior Jesus Christ.

III.
Saint Paul says, that the holy Scriptures are able to make 2. Timoth. 3. 15.
us wise unto salvation: On the contrary side, the Church of Rome teaches that
the word of God is insufficient to declare the truth: that it was not
instituted to be the rule of our See the 3. verity of Charron, and Bellarmine
de verbo non Scripto, and the Bishop of Eureux in his book of traditions. Romans
11. 21. and 22.
faith: that it is but a piece, or part of that rule. And that it is not the
principal, and sovereign Judge in doubts and controversies of Religion: but
that this prerogative of right belongs to the Church of Rome.

IIII.
The Apostle S. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, threatens the Church of
Rome, that she should be cut off, if she perseuered not, or if she grew high
minded. On the contrary part, the Church of Rome at this present day vaunteth,
that she cannot err: and that her head, to wit the Pope, cannot become an
heretic.

V.
God does exhort us to read the holy Scriptures, not that Revel. 1. 3. 2 Pet.
1. 19. Acts. 17. 11.
excepted which is most obscure in them, as the Revelation, and the Prophets.
On the contrary side, in the Church of Rome the people are not permitted to
read the holy Scriptures, least they become heretics; neither do they
suffer the word to be read in a tongue understood of the people.

VI.
The Apostle S. Paul would have us pray and speak in the 1. Corinthians. 14.
Church, in a tongue understood of the assistants; and says, that he had
rather pronounce in the Church five words with understanding, then ten
thousand in a tongue not understood. On the contrary part, in the Church of
Rome the divine service is said in an unknown tongue, and the people are
accustomed to pray to God without knowing what they say: from whence it comes
to pass, that oftentimes they say a Pater noster, before the Image of S.
Nicholas, or S. Roch, and say an Aue Maria, as if it were a prayer.

VII.
The same Apostle holds it a thing impossible for a man Romans 10. 14.
to call upon him, in whom he believes not, saying, how will they call upon him
in whom they have not believed? and all the prayers of the holy Scripture are
addressed to God: On the contrary side, in the Church of Rome they inuoke them,
in whom they believe not, and address their prayers to the creature.

VIII.
The holy Scripture teaches us, that God alone knows 1. Kings. 8. 39.
and searches the hearts of men. On the contrary side, the Church of Rome
tells us, that the Saints know our hearts, and thoughts.

IX.
The holy Scripture presents Jesus Christ, as him who 1. Timoth. 2. 5. Acts
4. 12.
has given himself a ransom for us: and moreover says that salvation
belongs to him alone. On the contrary side in the Roman Church it is taught,
that the Saints and Quorum precibus, meritisque In the Canon of the mass.
Monks have done and suffered more then they ought, and beyond their duty,
for the payment and absolution of the punishment due to their sins, and that
this ouer-plus serves for the payment and acquitting of other men's sins:
wherefore in the Mass and prayers of the Church of Rome, they pray not only
to God, through the intercession of Saints, but also ground their demands upon
their merits.

X.
Saint Paul says, that every one carries his own burden. Galat. 6. 5.
On the contrary side in the Church of Rome they teach, that by fasting,
afflicting our selves, and giving to the Church, we may bear the pain due to
the sins of our friends, as also that we may shorten their torment in
Purgatory.

XI.
The holy scripture terms Jesus Christ our only advocate and mediator, who
sitting at the right hand of God makes 1. John 2. 1. 1 Timoth. 2. 5. Romans 8.
33. Romans 5. 10.
intercession for us, and who loves us with a Soueraign love, even to thrust
himself into the jaws of death to save his enemies. On the contrary side, the
Roman Church sets him forth like a severe Judge, full of wrath and This is
to be seen in the virgin Mary's Psalter.
indignation against us, till the Virgin Mary standing before him, appease his
anger, and turn his indignation from us.

XII.
God in his law forbids all men to represent him by any Deuteronomy. 4 15. and 16.
resemblance or picture whatsoever. On the contrary side the Church of Rome
painteth forth the Trinity most grossly.

XIII.
God forbids in his law to bow before the likeness or similitude of things,
that are in heaven above or in the earth Exodus 20. 4 and 5.
beneath it. On the contrary side, in the Church of Rome they kneel before the
Images of Saints, do reverence to them, carry them in procession, cloth them,
put them on clean caps every holy day, light candles by them: and to show some
holiness to be in the Image, they will have of one and the self same Saint many
Images, one of the which shall be visited, and honored, another abandoned and
forsaken.

XIIII.
The Apostle S. Paul says, that whatsoever is done without faith, is sin. On
the contrary side in the Church of Romans 14. 23.
Rome they teach, that those, who are Infidels, and without faith, do
nevertheless good works, and merit by them, which they call merits of
congruity.

XV.
The holy Scripture speaking of man, not regenerate, and Genesis 6. 5. Ephesians. 2. 1.
as he is in his own nature, says, that all the thoughts of man are at all
times evil, and that he is dead in sin, and that we cannot so much as will
what is good. On the contrary side in the Church of Rome they teach, that man
not regenerate, has freewill, and has the power to choose what is good.

XVI.
Saint Paul calls the concupiscence which remains in Romans 7. 7. In the
Counsel of Trent. Sess. 5.
the faithful, sin. On the contrary part the Church of Rome teaches, that
it is not sin.

XVII.
The holy Scripture says, that there is no man without sin, and that we all
fail, and fall in many things: and Jesus 1. Kin. 8. 46. Iam. 2 Job 7. 20.
Psalm. 51. 6. and 7. Romans 7. In the summary of the law.
Christ commands his Apostles, and us all, to repeat this often, Forgive us
our trespasses: Job, David, S. Paul acknowledge themselves to be sinners. On
the contrary side in the Church of Rome they teach, that man can fulfill the
law, and by consequence, be without sin: nay, which is more, they teach that
man can do more, then God commands in his law to be done: although he
command us to serve him with all our hearts, with all our souls, and with all
our might.

XVIII
The Apostle Saint Paul says, that all our sins are forgiven Col. 2. 13. 1.
Ioh. 1. 7.
us freely, or as we commonly say, gratis, and that the blood of Jesus Christ
does cleanse us from all our sins. On the contrary side, in the Church of Rome
they teach that our sins are not forgiven us freely: but that we must pay
satisfaction for them, and endure pain for them, both in this life, and in
Purgatory: and that besides the blood of Jesus Christ, we must have another
clensing and purification of ours in the fire of Purgatory, from whence there
is no delivery before the last penny be paid.

XIX.
The spirit of God says, happy are those which die in the Revel. 14. 13.
Esaias. 57. 2.
Lord, and that they rest from their labors: in like manner those which walk
in Gods ways, when they die enter into peace: and repose themselves in their
beds: Item, that it is ordained that every man shall die once, and after that
shall judgment come, without making mention of any fire, Heb. 9. 27. Luke. 23.
43. Luke. 2. 29. 2. Tim. 4. 8.
through which we must pass before we come to judgment: and the Scripture
witnesses to us of the good thief, that the same day which he died, his
soul entered into Paradise: and of Simeon, that he is entered into peace: and of
Saint Paul that having finished his course, he received a Crown of glory. On
the contrary side, in the Church of Rome they teach, that the souls of the
faithful are carried into a fire, there to be tormented for a long time
together, as appears by the pardons for an hundred thousand, and two hundred
thousand years. For this reason also are Masses said, for such as have been
beneficial to the Church four or five hundred years ago.

XX.
The holy Scripture calls eternal life a gift, and an inheritance. Romans 6
23. Luke. 12. 32. Ephesians. 2. 8.
On the contrary side, in the Church of Rome they teach, that we purchase life
everlasting by our merits, notwithstanding that Jesus Christ has taught us,
that when we have done all that we can do, we are unprofitable servants. Luke.
17. 10.


XXI.
The remission of sins is set forth in the Gospel, as a gift promised to
those who believe in Jesus Christ. On the contrary Acts. 10. 43.
part, the Pope remitteth sins of all sorts, be they never so lewd, and
enormous, not as one who inuiteth, and summoneth sinners to apprehend the
grace, which is purchased for us by Jesus Christ: but he gives the remission
of sins in the form of Arrests, and Letters Patents, sealed with lead under
the Ring of the fisher, as if a King did speak, and not an Heraulde of the
grace of God.

XXII.
Remission of sins is published in the Gospel, and declared Acts. 10. 34. 35.
to all men of all nations whatsoever. On the contrary side in the Church of
Rome: the remission of sins is tied to one certain day, to one certain
place, to one certain year, and to one certain Convent, whether the people
are bound to go to seek pardons for their sins: in like manner the full
pardon of all sins is published at Rome, in the year of Iubile, which is
renewed very often: to wit, at the end of every By the inhabitants of Rome
five and twenty years: from whence it follows, that the remission of
sins is easily to be obtained, but hard to be obtained by them who dwell
far off, especially if they be sick, feeble, or are destitute of horses: as
also that God is more merciful in the year of Iubile, then in any other
years, and that the prayers made in the Churches of the Gray-Friers, where the
Iubile is kept, are better then those which are made at the Iacobins Conuents:
counting it a great unhappiness to die a little before the Iubile: whereas he
that dies incontinently after the Iubile goes directly into Paradise.

XXIII.
Jesus Christ says that happy are the poor, for theirs is Luke. 6. 20
the kingdom of God. On the contrary side in the Church of Rome it may be
said, Blessed are the rich: for they have where with all to pay for Masses
after their death, the which Masses are of power and virtue, to take away and
nullify the pain of Purgatory: they say more particular Masses for the poor,
the order of begging Friars never go to visit a dying man, except he be a man
of wealth: they say no Masses for nothing: in brief with the Church of Rome,
every thing is sold, burial, the ringing of Bells, Confessions, Prayers,
Remission of sins; besides this, boxes set in order to inuit the people to
contribute to the Church, although she have the third part of the revenues of
the kingdom: and the Pope bestows Which they call in the Roman Church
Annates.
Bishoprics upon this condition that he shall have the first years rent.

XXIIII.
The Apostle Saint Paul teaches us, that we are justified by Gal. 2: 16.
faith only, and not by the works of the Law. On the contrary side the Church
of Rome teaches, that a man is justified by his works: not only by that
justification toward men, (which S. James makes mention of) but also toward
God.

XXV.
Saint Peter says, that whosoever believes in Jesus Christ Acts 11. 10. 43.
Acts 13 39.
shall have remission of sins: and Saint Paul, that whosoever believes in
Jesus Christ, shall be justified. On the contrary side, in the Church of Rome
they teach, that every man that believes is not justified, neither has
always remission of his sins, since that as they say, to believe and to have
faith, is only to hold for truth all what God has said; all which the devils
and many of the wicked believe.

XXVI.
God would have us to approach before him with boldness Ephesians. 2. 12. Hebrews
3. 6. John 3. 16. 17. and 18.
and confidence, through the faith which we have in Jesus Christ: and that we
retain to the end the assurance, and glory of our hope: and Jesus Christ does
assure us, that whosoever believes in him shall not perish, but have life
everlasting. On the contrary side, the Church of Rome calls this confidence
and assurance, a presumption: teaching the people that they should doubt of
their salvation. From whence ensues, that he who is in his deathbed, and
believes in Jesus Christ, ought to doubt of the truth of the promise of God,
who says, that whosoever believes in Jesus Christ, shall have life
everlasting.

XXVII.
Saint Paul having said, that all our sins are forgiven us Colos. 2. 13.
freely: adds in another place, that where remission of Heb. 10. 18. and
Chap. 9. 25.
sin is, there is no more sacrifice for sin, and that Jesus Christ does not
offer himself often for us. On the contrary side, in the Church of Rome they
offer every day sacrifice propitiatory for the redemption of our souls, and
they pretend to sacrifice Jesus Christ himself, although the Scripture
teaches us, that Jesus Christ has a true humane body, as we have, the which
is placed at the right hand of God, and is contained in heaven, from whence he
shall descend at the day of judgment.

XXVIII.
Jesus Christ forbids his Apostles to reign one over Luke 22. 25. and 26.
2. Corinthians. 12. 11. Galath. 1. 1.
another: and S. Paul says, that he was in nothing inferior to the most
excellent Apostles: as also that he had not his charge from any man, but from
Jesus Christ. On the contrary side in the Church of Rome, they make S. Peter
the head and the Prince of the Apostles, having authority and command over
them, as if they were all subject unto him: in like manner the Pope wills all
other Bishops to take their charge of him.

XXIX.
S. Paul would have a Bishop to be the husband of one 1. Timoth. 3. 2. and 4.
wife, and that he keep his children in all obedience toward him. On the
contrary side, in the Church of Rome Ecclesiastical persons are forbidden to
marry: a doctrine which the In the 4. Chap. of the same Epistle.
same Apostle calls the doctrine of devils.

XXX.
The word of God would have us, when we are invited by 1. Corinthians. 10. 25. and
27.
Infidels, to eat whatsoever is put before us, without making a conscience so
to do. On the contrary side, those of the Roman Church being invited by us,
would make it a conscience to eat of all that we set before them we (I say)
whom they name Heretics, and rank with Infidels.

XXXI.
S. Paul would have all men to be subject to the higher powers, Romans 13. 1. and
4. 14.
and to Princes, who carry the sword to do justice. On the contrary side,
those in the Church of Rome, who have retired themselves into a Convent, are
not only free from the power and command of their Princes: but also of their
fathers and mothers.

XXXII.
Our Savior Jesus Christ distributing the cup in his last Mat. 26. 27. 1. Cor.
11. 28.
supper, said, Drink of this all, and S. Paul wills, that every one having
proved and searched himself, drink of this Cup. On the contrary side, in the
Church of Rome the Priest alone drinks, and the rest of the people feeds
upon one Species or Kind only.

XXXIII.
Our Savior Jesus Christ distributing the bread, said, take, 1. Cor. 11. 24.
eat. On the contrary side, in the Church of Rome the Priest in the Mass
eats alone, yet notwithstanding in way of mockage, he says, take, eat; and
prays for all those who have eaten and participated at the Altar, albeit
himself eats Vt quot quot ex hac altaris participatione Sump serimus. Mat.
26. 29.
and drinks alone.

XXXIIII.
Our Savior Jesus Christ calls that which he gave to his Apostles, the fruit
of the vine. On the contrary side, in the Church of Rome they teach, that it is
not the fruit of the vine, but blood.

XXXV.
S. Paul says, that he brake bread in the Lords Supper, 1. Cor. 10. 16. In
the 10. chap. and 11.
with these words, the bread which we break: and himself five times together
says, that we eat bread. On the contrary side, in the Church of Rome they
teach that it is not bread, but Jesus Christ, as great, and as tall as he was
upon the Cross: and moreover in breaking him with their teeth, they break him
not; but remains whole in every part and piece of the host, or Sacrament. 1.
Cor. 10. 20. They call the Supper the washing of the Poores feet.


XXXVI.
S. Paul calls the Sacrament, which Christ ministered to his Apostles, the
Supper of the Lord: but in the Church of Rome at this day there is a number of
Masses different in ceremonies, different in the end, and purpose for which
they S Geneviefue the Patroness of Paris.
are made: which are high or low, dry, or current: there have you a Mass for
S. Geneuiefue, S. Michael and others.

XXXVII.
Beside these doctrines and many more, contrary directly to the word of God,
and besides those which are not contained in the holy Scriptures, but invented
by men under the name of Traditions; there remains as yet a marvelous abuse
committed in the ceremonies of the Roman Church: of the which some are
superfluous, and ridiculous: other some contrary and repugnant to the honor of
God, and his word: all in general, excessive in number, and yet held more
necessary then doctrine it self. The superfluous and ridiculous ceremonies
amongst others, are those which the Priest observes in the Mass, in the which
he makes a thousand turnings, faigneth to sleep, mutters out his words
softly, makes his tail to be lifted up, causes a bell to be sounded, etc.
Item the salt, and spettle in baptism, the blow, and the band which the
Bishop gives in the confirmation. In like manner those which the Pope observes
in the Procession, causing God to be carried upon a Hackney, with a Lantern
before him to give him light, together with many such like absurdities. The
ceremonies contrary to the word of God, are no fewer in number; as when the
Priest turns his back to the people, lifts up the Host behind, muttereth
out the words of Consecration for fear to be understood, speaks in an
unknown tongue, etc. For Jesus Christ has done the quite contrary unto this:
as also the adoration of the Host is clean contrary to that which the Apostles
did, who sat at the Table not adoring it, acknowledging as it were, that it
was not God, which they received, and eated, and that they offered not any
sacrifice propitiatory: of this kind are so many feasts, which fight with the
law of God, the which says, Six days shall thou labor, etc. But the wont
is, that these ceremonies Exodus 20.
and humane intentions are placed above the word of God, and his Commandments:
for he that has blasphemed the name of God, shall not be so abominable unto
them, as he that eats flesh on good Friday, which nevertheless is the day on
the which Christ ordinarily did eat the Paschal Lamb, and holy days with
them are celebrated and reverenced with more solemnity then Sunday: and at Rome
it is a less matter to be a despiser of God, and be given to unnatural vices,
then to detract from the Popes holiness: For this latter point a man is burned
quick, and the people are instructed to talk of Procession, Chapelots, or
Beads, Images, Relics, Iubilies, ornaments of Altars, etc: but of the
mysteries of our redemption, of the saving grace in Jesus Christ, and the whole
doctrine of the holy Scriptures they are wholly ignorant, and are to them as
clasped books.

XXXVIII.
To conclude, I abhor the pride of the Pope, and do not see that he does any
thing that S. Peter did, of whom he styles himself successor: neither that S.
Peter did any thing which the Pope now does: For S. Peter preached the Gospel
with patience, zeal, and poverty. On the contrary side, the Lib. de ceremonijs
Sacris. cap. de receptione regis et cap. de fest. Papal.
Pope preaches not at all, but gives and takes away Kingdoms, causes
himself to be carried upon the shoulders of men, makes Kings hold his bridle,
Emperors kiss his Pantable: nay, he makes his household servants, and
Cardinals go before Kings, he never saluteth any man; nor does ever reverence
to any man: he pulls souls out of Purgatory, absolueth and dispenses with
Oaths, promises made unto God: he wears a triple diadem; and gives pardons
for Lib. 1. de cerem. Sac. can. Satis in distinct. 96 can. nos iusticia^ de
immunit. in 6. Extra de Maio rit. and obed. s. 33 can fundament. de electione
in 6 can. 5. Papa did. 40. causa 25, qu, 1. can. ideo,
millions of years, he names himself in his Canons, decretals, and
extrauagants, God, Spouse of the Church; he calls his ordinances Oracles,
that is to say answers of God: he braggeth that all power both in heaven and
earth, is given him, that all law, and right is in the closet of his own
breast: also that he cannot err in faith: that he can send souls to hell by
troops, without any person daring to control him: and having made laws for
the Church, will not be subject to them himself. Moreover, because there is no
salvation without the Catholic and universal Church, which is the assembly
of the Elect, and faithful, the communion of Saints, and the body of Jesus
Christ himself being the head: and because there is no other means to be the
body of Jesus Christ, but to cleave fast to Jesus Christ, and that the way to
be united with Jesus Christ, is faith: I do assure my self that believing in
Jesus Christ, I am of the Church, and shall have life everlasting: although the
Pope does excommunicate me; his thunderings and Canons are but charged with
wind, against those who build themselves upon Jesus Christ, and trust in his
word.

Certain points held in the Roman Church, which they would hide from those,
whom they mean to draw to their faction,
THE Roman Church holds and teaches, that a man cannot only fulfill the
Law, but also do more then the Law does prescribe, and do better things and
more perfect then GOD has commanded, which they call works of Supererogation.

Item, that a man may suffer more in this life then is necessary, and more then
is due to satisfy God for the pain due unto his sins; which they call
superabundant satisfactions.

Item, that these superabundant satisfactions of Saints, Bellar. lib. 1. de
indul. cap. 2.
Monks, and Martyrs, may be transferred to others, as well dead, as living, and
turned into satisfactions for their sins.

Item, that the Pope does heap up these works, and superabundant Extra. vag.
Papa Clemens 6. can. vnigenitus.
satisfactions in the treasure of the Church, and mingling them with the
superabundant merits of Jesus Christ, does distribute them by indulgences.

That the indulgences of the Pope extend themselves, even to them that are
dead, in such sort that the Pope does draw souls out of Purgatory, by applying
to them the merits and satisfactions of Saints.

And these pardons extend themselves to a hundredth thousand, or two hundredth
thousand years: at Rome in the Church of S. Bibiane, there are six hundred
thousand years pardon on the day of all Saints, for those that will make some
voluntary offer: there are found as yet greater Pardons then these in other
Churches; as is to be seen in the book of By Marcel. Frank a. 1599.
Romish indulgences, printed at Rome by the authority of Leo the tenth, etc.

Item, in the Roman Church they teach that we must adore images, this is to
be seen in the Council which they name the seventh, or the second of Nice:
and in Cardinal Bellarmine, and others: also they picture GOD against the
manifest prohibition made in the law of God in the second commandment, which
therefore they have cut off from their Hours and breuiaries against the
express prohibition made in the fourth of Deuteronomy Chapter 4. Verse. 15. and 16.
Quorum meritis precibusque concedas.


Item, to this day by the consentment, and approbation of the faculty of
Divinity in Paris, in the year 1602. they have reprinted the Psalter of the
Virgin Marie, where she is called the first cause of Salvation of the world,
the Inuentresse of grace, the Divine Majesty, she in whom we alone place our
hope, she which does appease the indignation of Jesus Christ, when he is
incensed against us, the Spouse of God, etc.

In the Mass the Priest demands the favor of God, through merits of
Saints: which is a language or manner of speech, which a Subject dare not use
to his Prince. In the Breuiaries oftentimes such prayers are read: for the
merit of such a Saint or a Saintesse, give us life everlasting: and the Priest
bowing himself before the Altar, demands that it would please God to be
favorable unto him, for the merits of those Saints, whose relics are under
the Altar.

In the Church of Rome they teach that a man ought to Purchase the Kingdom of
God by his own merits: nay which is more, they attribute to man merits ex
condigno, that is, of themselves worthy, which may be a price worthy so
excellent a purchase, as is life everlasting.

Item, they there teach, that under the earth there are four stages, of which
Hell is the lowest, next to that Purgatory, next the Lymbus of little
Children, which die without baptism, and who are deprived of everlasting
salvation; and above all those is Lymbus of the fathers, dead before the
coming of Jesus Christ in the flesh.

Item, they there teach, that Jesus Christ did not deliver us by his death from
all punishment, due to our sins committed after Baptism.

Item, they there teach; that the true body of Jesus Christ Council. Trident.
Can. 12. si quis dixerit, and Andradius in hunc locum. Bella. li. 1 de purg
cap. 7 and Io. 2. de consecra. can. Ego Berengarius.
is truly, and sensibly broken, and bruised in the Mass by the teeth of the
faithfufull, and yet they teach, that if the Wafer were broken into a thousand
pieces, that in every piece the body of Jesus Christ is whole, with all his
parts, and members, as great, and as tall as he was upon the tree of the
Cross: also they teach, that that which the Priest breaks is no longer
bread, although S. Paul says, The bread which we break, etc. They teach that
the body is in the Cup, so that the Priest drinks the body of Jesus
Christ; and although every one says that he eats God, and carries God,
and that in the Mass he receives his Creator; notwithstanding there has not
been any one hitherto that has dared to say, that he drinks God, or that God
is in the Cup.

From the beginning of Massels, or Masse-bookes, there are Hanc oblationem quam
tibi efferimus in bonorem beatae virginis and omnium sanctorum.
found Caueats, or rules of the Mass, in the which among many other Rules, it
is commanded, that if a man having received the host, do chance to cast it up
again, that then he must lick it up, and eat it once more as presupposing God
to be in the thing which is vomited, but if it hap that a man has not the
heart and stomach so to do, he is then commanded to burn this
vomited-stuffe, and to turn the ashes thereof into Relics: the same also is
commanded concerning rats, and worms, who have knawen, and eaten the sacred
host.

In the Mass the Priest says, that he offreth Jesus Christ Hac munera
accepta habera digneris, sicut accepta habere. dignatus es munera pueri tui
Abel. Jube haec perferri per manus sancti Angeli tui. Corpus tuum Domine quod
sumpsi adhaer eat visteribus meis.
to God in a Sacrifice truly propitiatory, and satisfactorie for the sins,
as well of the living, as of the dead; yea, he offers him unto God in honor of
the Saints, as the words are expressly set down in the mass, and prays to
God, that it would please him to receive the sacrifice which he makes, to wit,
Jesus Christ with as gracious and favorable an eye, as in times past he
received that of Abel, that is to say, a Sacrifice of beasts.

He prays that the Angel may carry his Sacrifice to the celestial Altar,
then he eats it, and having eaten it, he prays that the body which has
eaten, may remain cleaving to his entrails or bowels.

And these Messels or masse-bookes serve for all uses, even for corn and
herds of cattle; in these messels or masse-bookes are to be found masses of
women great with child, masses of Virgins, whereof S. Paul contenteth himself
to say, The Supper of the Lord. As concerning sins, the mass is not but for
venial sins, and for the mortal sins which a man has forgotten. Lib. Sacrar,
cerem cap. de benedictione ensis. Can. 5. Papa did.


Also in the Church of Rome it is held, that the Pope cannot become an
Heretic, and though he should send souls by troops and cart-loads into
Hell, yet no man ought to repine at him for so doing: he names himself God,
the spouse of the Church, his holiness, and his words Oracles, that is to say
answers of God, and his Decrees, canonical writings: he gives and takes
away Kingdoms, he dispenses with oaths and vows made to God, he says that
he cannot be made an Heretic. Can. fundamentale elect in. 6. (...). 19. in
Canon. (...) titulo. Sixtus Quartus lib. sa^^ar. cer. Tom. (...) cap. excus.
^^^tijs 1518.


His ordinances, as to forbid to eat flesh in Lent, are more straightly
observed then the commandments of God, as the prohibition to swear, and
whore: he boasts that all power is given him both in heaven and earth: he
takes away the second commandment from the Law of God: he hinders the
people from reading the holy scriptures, the which some of his faction, call
insufficient to declare the truth, it being but part of the rule: and that the
other part is the word not written, which must be learned of him, and those to
whom he has given charge, and vocation to it: so that no man can reprove him,
except he be authorized and approved Causa 25. qu^^; can. Ideo.
by the Pope, and to bring his Tyranny to a head, he says, that the Pope
gives Laws to the Church, to the which nevertheless he is not subject, as
being master of the Law.

FINIS.

