(...) complaint and lamentation of Mistress Arden of ^^rsham in Kent, who for
the love of one Mosbie, hired certain Ruffians (...) Villains most cruelly to
murder her Husband; with the fatal end of her and her Associats.
To the tune of, Fortune my Foe.


AY me, vile wretch, that ever I was borne,
Making my self unto the world a scorn:
And to my friends and kindred all a shame,
Blotting their blood by my unhappy name.
Unto a Gentleman of wealth and fame,
(One Master Arden, he was called by name)
I wedded was with joy and great content,
Living at Feuersham in famous Kent.
In love we lived, and great tranquillity,
Until I came in Mosb^es company,
Whose sugared tongue, good shapt, and lovely look,
So one won my heart, and Ardens leave forsook.
And living thus in foul adultery,
Bred in my husband cause of jealousy,
And left the world our actions should bewray,
We did consent to take his life away.
To London fair my Husband was to ride,
But ere he went I poison did provide,
Got of a Painter which I promised
That Mosbies sister Susan he should wed.
Into his Broth* then did put the same,
He liked it not when to the board it came,
Saying, There Is something in it is not so^dd,
At which enraged, I fiung it on the ground.
Yet ere he went, his man I did conjure,
Ere they came home, to make his Master sure,
And murder him, and for his faith and pain,
Susan, and store of gold that he should gain.
Yet I misdoubting Michaels constancy,
Knowing a Neighbor that was dwelling by,
Which, to my husband bore no great good will,
^ought to incense him his dear blood to spill.
His name was Green; O Master Green (quoth I)
My husband to you has done injury,
For which I sorry am with all my heart,
And how he wrongeth me I will impart.
He keeps abroad most wicked company,
With whores and queanes, and bad society;
When he comes home, he beats me sides and head,
That Id^^ wish that one of us were dead.
And now to London he is rid to roar,
I would that I might never see him more:
Green then incenst, did vow to be my friend,
And of his life he soon would make an end.
O Master Green, said I, the dangers great,
You must be circumspect to do this feat;
To act the deed your self there is no need,
But hire some villains, they will do the deed.
Ten pounds I Will give them to attempt this thing,
And twenty more when certain news they bring,
That he is dead, besides I Will be your friend,
In honest courtesy till life does end.
Green vowed to do it; then away he went,
And met two Villains, that did use in Kent
To rob and murder upon Shooters hill,
The one called Shakebag, the other named Black Will.
Two such like Villains Hell did never hatch,
For twenty Angels they made up the match,
And forty more when they had one the deed,
Which made them swear, they would do it with all speed
Then up to London presently they hye,
Where Master Arden in Paul's Church they spy,
And waiting for his coming forth that night,
By a strange chance of him they then lost sight.
For where these Villains stood and made their stop
A Prentice he was shutting up his shop,
The window falling, light on Blacke-Wills head,
And broke it soundly, that apace it bled.
Where straight he made a brabble and a coil,
And my sweet Arden he past by the while;
They missing him, another plot did lay,
And meeting Michael, thus to him they say:
Thou know that we must pack thy Master hence
Therefore consent and further our pretense,
At night when as your Master goes to bed,
Leave open the doors, he shall be murdered.
And so he did, yet Arden could not sleep,
Strange dreams and visions in his senses creep,
He dreamt the doors were open, and Villains came,
To murder him, an 'twas the very same.
The second part.
To the same tune.
HE rose and shut the door, his man he blames,
which conningly he strait this (...) frames;
I was so sleepy, that I did forget
To lock the doors, I pray you pardon it.
Next day these Ruffians met this man again,
Who the whole story to them did explain,
My master will in towns no longer stay,
Tomorrow you may meets him on the way.
Next day his business being finished,
He did take horse, and homeward then he rid,
And as he rid, it was his hap as then,
To overtake Lord Cheiney and his men.
With salutations they each other greet,
I am full glad your Honor for to meet,
Arden did say* then did the Lord reply,
Sir, I am glad of your good company.
And being that we homeward are to ride,
I have a s^^ie that must not be denide,
That at my house you will sup, and lodge also,
To Feuersham this night you must not go.
Then Arden answered with this courteous speech,
Your Honors pardon now I do beseech,
I made a vow, if God did give me life,
To sup and lodge with Alice my loving wife.
Well, said my Lord, your oath has got the day,
Tomorrow come and dine with me, I pray.
I Will wait upon your Honor then (said he)
And safe he wont amongst this company.
On Raymon-Downe, as they did pass this way,
Black-will, and Shakebag they in ambush lay,
But durst not touch him, cause of the great trains
That my Lord had: thus were they croft again.
With horrid oaths these Ruffians began to swear,
They stamp and cursed, and tore their locks of hair
Saying, some Angel surely him did keep.
Yet vowed to murder him ere they did sleep.
Now all this while my husband was away,
Mosby and I did revel night and day;
And Susan, which my waiting maiden was,
My Loves own sister, knew how all did pass.
But when I saw my Arden was not dead,
I welcomed him, but with a heavy head:
To bed he went, and slept secure from harms,
But I did wish my Mosby in my arms.
Yet ere he slept, he told me he must go
To dinner to my Lords, he would have it so;
And that same night Blacke-will did send me word,
What luck bad fortune did to them offord.
I sent him word, that he next day would dine
At the Lord Cheinies, and would rise betime,
And on the way their purpose might fulfill,
Well, I Will reward you, when that you him kill.
Next morn betimes, before the break of day,
To take him napping then they took their way;
But such a mist and fog there did arise,
They could not see although they had four eyes.
Thus Arden escaped these villains where
And yet they heard his horse go by that way,
I think (said Will) some Spirit is his friend,
Come life or death, I vaw to see his end.
Then to my house they strait did take their way,
Telling me how they missed of their pray;
Then presently, we did together gree,
At night at home that he should murdered be.
Mosby and I, and all, our plot thus lay,
That he at Tables should with Arden play,
Black-will, and Sakebag they themselves should hide
Until that Mosby he a watchword cride.
The word was this whereon we did agree,
Now (Master Arden) I have taken ye:
Woe to that word, and woe unto us all,
Which bred confusion and our sudden fall.
When he came home, most welcome him I made,
And Judas like I kissed whom I betraide,
Mosby and he together went to play,
For I on purpose did the tables lay.
And as they played, the word was straightway spoke,
Blacke-Will and Sakebag out the corner-broke,
And with a Towell backwards pulled him down,
which made me think they now my joys did crown
With swords and knives they stabbed him to the heart
Mosby and I did likewise act our part,
And then his body straight we did convey
Behind the Abbey in the field he lay.
And then by Justice we were straight condemned,
Each of us came unto a shameless end,
For God our secret dealings soon did spy,
And brought to light our shameful villainy.
Thus have you heard of Ardens tragedy,
It rests to show you how the rest did die:
His wife at Canterbury she was burnt,
And all her flesh and bones to ashes turned.
Mosby and his fair Sister, they were brought
To London for the trespass they had wrought,
In Smithfield on a gibbet they did die,
A just reward for all their villainy,
Michael and Bradshaw, which a Goldsmith was,
That knew of letters which from them did pass,
At Feuersham were hanged both in chains,
And well rewarded for their faithful pains.
The painter fled none knows how be did speed,
Sakebag in Southwarke he to death did bleed,
For as he thought to escape and run away,
He suddenly was murdered in a fray.
In Kent at Osbridge, Green did suffer death,
Hanged on a gibbet he did lose his breath:
Blacke-Will at Flushing on a stage did burn,
Thus each one came unto his end by turn.
And thus my story I conclude and end,
Praying the Lord that he his grace will send
Upon us all, and keep us all from ill.
Amen say all, if it be thy blessed will.
FINIS.
Printed at London for C. W.


