LAWS and Ordinances military, set down and established by the right
excellent ROBERT Earl of LEYCESTER, Baron of Denbigh, Justice of Oyer and
terminer of her Majesty's Forestes, Chaces and Parkes on thisside Trente,
Master of the Horse to the Queens most Excellent Majesty One of the Lords
of her most honorable privy Counsel, Knight of both noble Orders, of the
Garter and S. Michaell: her Highenes Lieutenant and Captain GENERAL of her
May. Army and Forces in the low Countries: And Governor GENERAL of all
the Prouincies and Cities united in the said low Countries, and there
associates.

To be observed by all such as shall serve in her May. Army under him in
the said Countries.

Imprinted at Leyden by Andries Verschout / the xxv. of January. 1586. de
stilo nouo.

Forasmuch as there is not any Estate, which in peace or war can be
accounted sure, or preserved from dishonor and ruin, unless it be supported
and borne up by Justice duly administered, and discipline orderly observed: And
for that no man can be so ignorant as not to know, that honor, fame and
prosperity, do duly follow that common Wealth or Nation, wherein good laws
are established, the Magistrate ministering Justice is duly regarded, and the
people fearing to offend, are drawn under the rules of Justice and obedience:
And seeing that martial discipline above al things (proper to men of war) is
by us at this time most to be followed, as well for the aduanceme^t of Gods
glory, as honorably to govern this Army in good order: And least that the
evil inclined (pleading simplicicie) should cover any wicked fact by
ignorance: Therefore these martial Ordinances and Laws followinge are
established and published, whereby all good minds endeuouringe to attain
honor, may stand armed, and receive encouragement to persevere in well doing,
and such as are inclined to lewdenesse, be warned from committing offenses
punishable. which being embraced with careful respect, and followed with
obedience, do promise good order and agreement amongst our selves, with
victory and good eue^ts against our enemies.

1 First, Blasphencers.
For So Much as the holy Name of our most mighty and invincible God, with all
reverence ought to be regarded, and that destruction is pronounced to such as
blaspheme or abuse the same: it is therefore ordained and commanded, that no
person whatsoever, either in common conference or communication, or for any
cause whatsoever, shall blaspheme, or take his Name in vain, upon pain of
loss of v.s. to the relief of the poor for the first offense: for the
second, five days inprisonment: for the third, loss of his place and wages.

2 And because the continual and unspeakable favors of our Almighty God,
Divine service.
by our unthankfulness may be taken from us, and that no good event of any
action can be expected, wherein God is not first and principally honored and
served: It is therefore especially ordained and commanded, that all persons
whatsoever, shall upon general warning given either by sound of Trompet or
Drum, repair to the place appointed, where the Divine sernice is to be used,
there to hear the same read and preached, unless for the present by sickness
or other service he be impeached, upon pain to lose his days wages for the
first, two danes wages for the second, and so to be increased by the discretion
of the Judge, and for every such default in the Soldier, as well the Captain
as his inferior officers, to be punished with like penalty.

3 And seeing it well beseems all Christians, Vnlat full games.
especially such as profess the military service, to pass away the time in
matters requisite for their profession: And because no time can be more vainly
spent, then that which is consumed in unlawful games, besides the breeding of
much contention and quarrelles: And for that there be many allowable and
commendable exercises for all fortes of men to use: Therefore it is straightly
commanded, that no private Souldiouror inferior Officer shall play at Dice and
Cards, nor any other unlawful games, upon pain of two days imprisonment for
the first time, and for after committing the like, to be further punished by
the Judges discretion.

4 And for that it often happens, Vagrant women.
that by permitting of many vagrant and idle women in an army, sundry
disorders and horrible abuses are committed: Therefore it is ordained that no
man shall carry into the field, or deteine with him in the place of his
garrison, any woman whatsoever, other then such as be known to be his lawful
wife, or such other women to tend the sick and to serve for launders, as
shall be thought meet up the Marshall, upon pain of whipping and banishment.

5 And insomuch as clemency amongst men of war in some respects is a
singular virtue: Women with Child. Aged persons. Midowes. Dirgins. Babes.
It is ordained that no man in any part of this service that he shall do, shall
lay violent hands upon any woman with child, or lying in childebed, old
persons, widows, young virgins, or babes, without especial order from the
Magistrate, upon pain of death.

6. Noe man of what degree so ever he be, Violent defyling of women.
shall enforce any wife, widow, maid or virgin, and by violence defile any
of them upon pain of death.

7 What person soever that shall be commonly given to drunkenness, Dronkenes
and riotuousurs.
or riotously behave himself, shall be banished the Army.

8 Whosoever shall conceal, or in any sort keep secret, Concealment of
treason. Conspiracy.
Treason, any dangerous conspiracy, or other practice which may be hurtful,
and may concern the peril of her Majesty's person and realm, or of her
General, or the estate of this Army, and shall not with all diligence reveal
the same either unto the General, or some other Officer of especial trust,
shall incur the pains of death with torments.

9 If any man whatsoever shall practice and conspire any thing to the hurt
or peril of her Maicsties person, Treason and Conspiracy.
and realm or of her General, or the estate of this Army, and be thereof
laufullie convinced, shall suffer death with torments.

10 No man shall have speech or conference, send message, Conference / or
writing with or to the Ennemie.
deliver or receive letters to or from the enemy, or any his confederates,
either secretly or openly, without manifesting the same presently unto the
General or Marshall, or having former authority so to do, upon pain of
death.

11 No man being in this service shall depart the Camp or place of Garrison for
any cause whatsoever, Departinge from the Camp or the Garrison without leave.
without the Generals especial Pasport, or other head Officer authorized, upon
pain of death.

12 No man shall break out, Breakinge order of the rank.
or leave the order of his rank, being once ordered in the field by the
Marshall or Sergeant Mayor, without some great occasion first made known unto
the said Officer, upon pain of loss either of life or limne, at the
discretion of the General or of the Marshall.

13 No man appointed to watch or ward, shall shun or depart the place, Watch
word neglected.
neither shall sleep, or neglect his duty therein, especially after the
watch is set and the word given, unless he be orderly relieved, or for some
great occasion enforced, with license of his Captain or Officer, upon pain of
death.

14 No man shall bewray the watchworde to the enemy or to any other,
Watchworde bewrated.
or give any other word then is delivered by the Officer, upon pain of death
with torment.

15 No man shall raise any mutiny, Mutynie / or unlauful affemblies
or procure unlawful assemblies upon private, secret, or hidden purpose,
whereby to disturb the peace and quiet of the Army, upon pain of death.

16 Noe man shall lift up his weapon against the Magistrate, Weapon against
Magistrates.
his Captain or Officer, upon pain of death.

17 No man shall quarrel, Quarrelinge or fraiemakinge in Camp / or Town of
garrison.
brauwle, or make any fray within the Camp or Town of garrison, upon old
malice, or new occasion whatsoever, but shall complain to the Officer, who is
to decide the cause and punish the party offending, upon pain of loss of
life or limme, at the discretion of the General or Marshall.

18 And whereas sundry nations are to serve with us in these wars, Forreiner
abused up English men.
so as through diversity of languages occasion of many controversies may arise
or happen to grow: It is therefore ordained, that if any person of English
nation shall find him self agrieued with any wrong proffered him by any
forreiner, that then without profering further revenge he shall signify the
same unto his Captain or other officer, whereby order man be taken so, as no
further quarrel grow thereof, but that quietness in all respects may be
preserved, upon pain of such punishment as the head officers shall think
meet, either by loss of life or limme.

19 No man appointed to the defense of any Breach, Trench, or Straight,
Leavinge breach / trench or straight upon fained excuse.
either Captain or Soldier, shall willingly leave it, or upon any false or
imagined cause or excuse shall absent himself from the place, without
sufficient warrant, upon pain of death.

20 No man shail enrolle his name under two Captains, Soldier enrolled under
two Captains.
nor muster in several companies at one time, or otherwise pass in an other
man's name, or lend armor, weapon, or other furniture upon the muster day,
whereby to abuse her Majesty, and weaken the present service, upon pain of a
months imprisonment, and banishment.

21 No man shall embezill or deminish any of his Armor, weapon and furniture,
Armor embezilled / dyminished / or pawned.
which is appointed him by his Captain, unless he can prove that he lost the
same in service. And that no man shall take in pawn any Soldiers weapon or
furniture, upon pain to the Soldier of loss of his place, and to the other
that shall take it in pawn, the loss of the double value.

22 No man shall play away, engage, Playing away of Armor.
or lend away his furniture, but shall always keep his Armor and weapon
clean and serviceable, upon pain of being discharged.

23 No man shall deceitfully take away his companions provision, Pilfering of
his fellows victuals
victuals, or furniture, upon pain of imprisonment.

24 No person trancyling, Forceable traction of victuals or goods.
lodging, or abiding in any the Towns or Contreis of her Majesty's friends or
Allies, shall in any wise exact or take by force from the people either victual
or other their goods whatsoever, without present payment, or other sufficient
order to the just satisfaction of the party, upon pain of death.

25 No man shall forestall any victuals brought for the Camp or place of
garrison, Victuals forestalled.
but suffer the same peaceably to come into the Market place, there to be
rated and priced by the Marshall or his officer, before he buy the same, upon
pain of death.

26 No man shall rob or spoil any Shop or Tent, Robbing or spoilinge of
vitler or Merchant.
or any victualler or Marcha^t coming for relief of the Camp or garrison,
but in all good sort shall entertain and defend them, upon pain of death.

27 No Soldier commanded at any time to take victuals for certain days,
Excrabing the dates for taking of victuals.
shall exceed the same days, or spend the same other wise then according to
the proportions and time allowed him; upon pain of imprisonment, or other such
punishment as the lawful officers shall appoint. None to be spoiled being of
the Generals protection.


28 No man shall distress or spoil any person standing on her Majesty's
party, or being under the Generals protection, upon pain of death.

29 No man shall disobey or transgress any Proclamation made by Drumnie or
Trumpet, set forth by the General, Proclamation transgressed.
upon such pain as he shall set forth.

30 No man shall resist the Provost or his other officer in apprehending of any
malefactor, but if need require, Resistinge the apprehension of Malefactor^.
shall aid and assist him therein, or otherwise if by such occasion any
escape be made, it is ordained that every person by whose defaulte the escape
was committed, shall suffer like punishment that the parties so escaped should
have endured.

31 No man shall molest or trouble any person being under his own regiment,
Disturbance of any there lodginges.
or the leading of any other, once placed by the Marshall, forrier, or
Herbinger in the Camp or Town, but quietly to permit and suffer every one to
enjoy his several room or lodging, unless it be by mutual consent and
agreement, neither shall any man lodge out of his Captains quarter without
license, upon pain of imprisonment.

32 No man shall overthrow or destroy any water Milles or water works
without special commandment of the General, Water Milles.
or other head Officer upon pain of death.

33 No man contrary to order shall set on fire or burn any house, Burning up
fire.
milne, or corn, nor at dislodging or remoouing shall set the Camp on fire,
without special commandment from the General or other head Officer present,
upon pain of death.

34 No man shall make any owterie or noise in any watch, Silence in match
ward or Ambush.
ward, Ambushe, or any other place where silence is requisite and necessary,
upon pain of loss of use or lymme, at the generals discretion.

35 No man without great occasion shall make any Alarm, Alarm.
but if any chance to arise, then shall every man presently repair in all
haste unto his appointed place, unless some true excusable cause do hinder
him, upon pain of death.

36 No man shall harbor or receive into his lodging any person being a
stranger, Harboring of Strangers not in pay.
or of our own nation not being enrolled in her Majesty's pay, but shall
presently acquaint the General or Marshall with his name, country, the time
of his coming, and business, upon pain of imprisonment, and loss of his place
and wages.

37 No man shall talk or have conversation with any Trumpetter or Druminer of
the enemies, Talkinge with the Enemies Trumpeters.
or other sent in message, but such as be appointed by the General, upon
pain of death. Attendance upon Cariagies.


38 No man shall attend upon the cariages, but such as are appointed to that
charge, neither linger, or loyter behind with them to ride or ease themselves,
unless it be such as by sickness, hurtes, or other infirmities known to the
officers, to be permitted so, upon pain of imprisonment, and loss of wages.

39 No man shall attempt to go a forraging, Foraginge.
without the officer appointed for that purpose deliver them a sufficient
guarde for their defense, upon pain of death.

40 Every Soldier shall present such prisoners as are taken, Soldiers
prisoner.
to their Captain immediately at their return to the Camp, and none shall
either kill them, or license them to depart, without commandment or leave
from the General, or other head Officer thereunto appointed, upon pain of
being disarmed, and banished the Camp.

41 Every Soldier at all times in service shall be obedient and faithful,
Obedience of the Soldier to his Captain or his deputy.
as well to their Captains as other inferior Officers, and not to refuse
direction of any, under whom they are appointed to serve, upon pain of
imprisonment, and loss of a months wages. And whenever any Captain of
any band shall upon urgent causes appointe in his absence any other whom
he shall think good to supply and execute his room of captainship, every man
owght to follow and oven the said deputy with noe less care and diligence,
then they would the Captain him self upon the same pain.

42 Every man shall support and defend his own Ensign both night and day,
Supporting the Ensign.
and shall resort unto the same upon the first warning, and not depart until
it be brought into safety, upon pain of death.

43 Every soldier shall diligently observe and learn the sound of Drums,
Sound of Drum^ Fifte^ or Trumpet to be learned.
Fiftes, and Trumpets, to the end he may know how to answer the same in his
service.

44 No man shall slaughter or kill any beast of what nature soever within the
Camp or Garrison, Slawghter of beasts.
Garbage.
but in such places as are appointed for that purpose, Waters undefiled.
nor shall suffer the garbage to remain unburied, neither shall any man
trouble or defile the waters adjoining, but in the lower part of the stream
some good distance from the Camp, upon pain of imprisonment.

45 No man shall ease himself or defile the Camp or Town of Garrison,
Easementes.
save in such places as is appointed for that purpose, upon pain of
imprisonment, and such further punishment, as shall be thought meet by the
chief Officers.

46 If any man do take a prisoner or booty, Prisoners and booties certified.
he shall immediately after he is returned unto the Camp or Town of
Garrison, make his Captain or Governor acquainted therewith, and the Captain
shall declare the same unto the Marshall, who every eight days shall make
certificate thereof unto the General, upon pain of imprisonment, and further
punishment as the General shall set down.

47 In Marching by the fields, Crie^ at the puttinge up of any hare.
no man at the putting up of any Hare, or any other beast shall make any shout
or cry, whereby to disquiet or stay the rest of the hands, but to use all
quietness and silence in their march, upon pain of imprisonment.

48 No man shall give up or deliver unto the enemies any place left to his
charge or keeping, upon pain of death. Place of charge / given to the Enemy.


49 If any man fly to the enemies, Flyinge / to the Enemy.
or be taken upon his departure toward them, he shall suffer death.

50 That no person whatsoever shall pass by any other way either in Town or
Camp, Passage by ordynarie way.
but at the ordinary gates and passages, upon pain of death.

51 That all heraults of Arms shall do there messagies, Heraults.
and make proclamation at such times and places and in such order without
addicion, dymynucion or alteracion, according unto there direction and
commission from the general, upon pain to be inflicted at the generals
discretion, according to the quality of there fault.

Captains,
52 No Captain, Entricinge of a Souldire from his Captain.
Officer, or other person, shall receive or entertain any other man's Soldier
or servant, without consent of his former Captain or Master, neither shall
entice an other man's Soldier from him, upon pain of loss of a Months
wages, and to restore the party to his former Captain or Master.

53 No Captain shall send forth any men to do any enterprise, Doing any
Entreprice without the generals knowledge.
without knowledge of the General, or chief officer appointed thereunto, upon
pain of loss of his place.

54 All private Captains, Watch and ward up private Captains.
being no head Officers, shall watch and ward with their Ensigns, unless it
be by special leave, upon pain of the loss of a months pay, and for the
second time, loss of his place.

55 No Captain shall sell or caunsome his prisoner without license of the
General, Prisoner caunsomed or sold.
and shall not suffer them to depart without making the high Marshall prime to
the same, upon pain of loss of his prisoner, and imprisonment.

56 Any Captain finding any Soldier of what band or company so ever, Soldier
transgressing to be taken up any Captain.
which has transgressed any of these Laws and Ordinances, may take him and
bring him unto the Marshall to be punished.

57 That no Captain shall receine or enroll any person into his pay under
him, Soldier sworn before he be received.
but that he cause the said Soldier to receive the oath, upon pain to the
Captain for not obseruinge the same, of loss of a months pane.

58 Noe inferior Captain shall for corruption, Captain not to license any
soldier to depart the Camp.
or any other cause license any of his soldiers to depart the Camp, or
Garrison without special license of the General, or other hedde Officer,
upon pain of loss of his months pay, and expulsion out of his office.

59 If any Captain hereafter receauinge his soldiers pay, Soldiers pay.
do not pay the same unto them within 8. days after, and being demanded,
Then upon complainte made, and the Captain thereof convicted, he shall lose
his months pay, and be deprived of his office, banished the Camp, and
disabled from thensforth to serve in this Army.

60 Captains and Officers shall frequent and reforte unto the Soldiers
lodgings to see in what state there Armor and Munitions be in, Disiringe the
soldiers furniture.
And to give great charge that there furniture be always in a rediues, there
corstlets with all pieces belonginge to the same, and there Caliuers to be made
clean and onled, to have match and powder dry, and Stringes for there Bows,
there bylls and halberts to be kept clean and sharp, upon pains and
punishment arbitrarie, according to the quality of there necligence.

61 All other offenses and Acts that may tend to disorder, Punishment of all
other Offencies.
not comprised within these Articles, shall be subject to such manner of
punishment, as the Lieutenant General shall inflict upon them, as if it had
been specially expressed and set down.

62 And to the intent that no man may pretend and allege any just cause of
ignorance of the before recited laws and Ordinanceis, Publishinge of the
Articles.
or any of them, the said lord General does ordain, That all chief
Officers, and Captains of this Army shall cause the same to be red and
published with in there Band every xx. days, to all those whitch be under
there charge respectiuelie according to there quarters, especially in all
those placeis where then shall lie in Garrison, as well horsemen, as footmen,
and to cause the same to he kept and observed inuiolablie as much as in them
lies in every branche and article of the same, according, to the tenor, form
and effect thereof.

The form of the Oath Which all Officers, Captains, Soldiers, and all other
seruinge in this Army shall take and perform.
I. A. B. do swear and promise to do all loyal, Oath.
true and faithful service unto the Queen of England her most excellent
Majesty, and unto the Provinces and Cities united in these Countries, and
there associats under the charge and obedience of the right excellent the
Earl of LEYCESTER, Governor general of the said Provinces and Cities, and
there associats, and of her Majesty's army and forces within the same. And all
laufull and due obedience unto the said Governor, and to any other superior,
that shall have charge under him for government in this Army. And farther I do
promise to endeavor my self to fulfill and keep all such laufull Ordinances as
his Excellency has or shall set forth and establishe for the better
ordering of this Army, as much as concern me, so long as I shall serve in
the same under him. So help me God, by Jesus Christ.


