THE IESVITES SHIFTS, AND EVASIONS; OR, His deportment in Controversies of
RELIGION.

OR, A Treatise, wherein the causes are examined why Mr. Arnoux the Jesuit,
refuses to answer to seauenteene questions propounded by the Ministers of the
Church of PARIS.

Wherein also the Treatise of five euasions which he has added to the
examination of our confession, is likewise examined and answered: BY PETER DV
MOVLIN.

LONDON, Printed by T. S. for Nathanael Newbery, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the sign of the Star in Cornehill, and in Popes-Head-Alley. 1624.

To the Christian READER.
COurteous Reader, I would not have thee to imagine, that our Author would have
vouchsafed to bestow his labor upon the confutation of such silly shifts and
sorry Euasions as our modern English Jesuits and Popish Priests suck out of
their fathers plants, and cast forth with more malice then wit, in paltry
pamphlets amongst us, to seduce simple people; for, alas, they are not worthy
any wise man's view; much less his pains for confutation. But these of Mr.
Arnoux are of an higher strain, and of more especial moment; which being
fully cleared and displayed by our worthy Author, and added as a Supplement to
his Buckler of Faith, a Book that is now reprinted, as most necessary and
profitable, in these disputing times, I could not withold this piece from
thee any longer, because I supposed it would be very useful unto thee also, as
a light Sword to offend our common Adversaries, the more readily in lighter
skirmishes either jointly with, or severally without the Buckler; which is fit
to defend us in our strongest Incounters with them; I doubt not (good Reader)
but thou shall in both of them find such satisfaction as shall give thee great
content, and make thee stand the more stedfestly and boldly in the breach
against the enemies assaults, amidst a multitude of staggerers and
backe-sliders, which that thou may be enabled to do, to the glory of God, and
the salvation of thy own soul, I shall always pray, and endeavor my self to
yield thee what help I am able; Vale.

THE IESVITES SHIFTS AND EVASIONS: OR, His deportment in Controversies of
RELIGION.
CHAP. I. The demands of the Pastors of the Church of Paris, made to Mr.
Arnoux the Jesuit.
THere is nothing more easier than to propound questions, but the difficulty
consists in answering well. An ignorant person will put more questions in an
hour, than a wise man can absolve in a year. A knot is easily knit, but it is
not so easily unknit again: from thence it proceeds that in Controversy for
Religion, he that feels himself to be too weak, or that his cause is
ill-grounded, always seeks to make difficulties, and to find some means to
blame his adversaries belief, but as much as he can, or may, exempteth
himself from yielding a reason of his own faith, and is wary to enter into
any proof of his Religion.

Master Gontri late deceased, gives this counsel in a book which he made
touching the manner how to confer with us: for, having by experience found how
dangerous it is to be too forward, and that the surest means is to bind us to
prove that which we say, and still to find some cauilation in our confession,
he gives this counsel to his Disciples, either to be wary how to make
answer to our demands, or to defend themselves against our accusations, and
never to enter into a proof of the Catholic Romish Religion.

This counsel likes Master Arnoux exceeding well: for having, in the presence
of his Majesty, snatched at the margents of the confession of our faith, and
exclaimed against some cotations of the places of the Scripture by us noted, he
presses us to defend them, and to justify our allegations. And has made a
book wherein he disciphereth our confession of the faith, from the one end to
the other.

Which book, and all his accusations, we hope we have in some sort satisfied,
whereby I am persuaded that he will not hereafter enter so easily into the
lists again. And not content to defend our selves, we have taken on us the
Challengers part, and have also pressed him to defend his Religion, to see if
he has so much capacity in him to answer, as he has readiness to put
questions.

And in counterchange of that, which he does, seeking to snatch at the places
of Scripture noted in the margent of our confession, we have produced the
allegations of the extrauagant vnam sanctam, made by Boniface the 8. and the
places of Scripture, alleged by the last Council of Lateran: as for example,
the Apostles having said, here are two swords: the Lord made answer and said,
It is enough. And in the beginning of Genesis, it is said, that in the
beginning God created heaven and earth. And Psalm. 72. it is said, all the Kings
of the earth shall worship him: And Jesus Christ said, all power is given me in
heaven, and in earth, Math. 28.18. which places and many the like, are used by
the said Pope, and that counsel, to prove that the Pope has sovereign power,
as well over temporal, as over spiritual things, and that Kings must worship
him, and that he has all power in heaven and in earth. Whereupon we ask
Master Arnoux whether he will approve such allegations: or, whether in the
margents of our confession he finds any places of Scripture noted with such
horrible licentiousness, and manifest profanation.

And in counterchange, for asking us a proof of our Religion by the Word of
God, we summon, and defy him, to prove his Religion by the Word of God, and to
that end have propounded these seauenteene questions following unto him.

1 In what place of the holy Scriptures God has commanded us to call upon
dead Saints.

2 Where God has commanded us to represent the Trinity in stone or in picture.

3 In what place of the holy Scripture, we are commanded to worship and serve
the Images of Saints, or to adore them, as it is ordained by the second
Council of Nice.

4 In what place of the Scripture it is commanded to sacrifice the body of
Jesus Christ in the Eucharist, and where Jesus Christ established sacrificators
of his body.

5 In what place of the Scripture God has commanded to withhold the Cup from
the people in the Sacrament.

6 In what place of the Scripture, the Bishop of Rome is established and made
S. Peter's Successor, in quality of head of the Church.

7 Where God commands us, in the Church to read the holy Scriptures to the
people, in a language which they understand not.

8 Where God has commanded us to pray unto God, without understanding what we
pray, praying in a language that he which prays understands not.

9 In what place of the Scripture, it is said, that the death and passion of
Jesus Christ has satisfied for the punishment and for the fault of sins
committed before baptism, but touching the punishment for sins committed
after baptism, it belongs unto us to satisfy the justice of God, either in
this life, or in purgatory.

10 Where God forbids Priests and Monks to marry.

11 In what place of the Scripture we are commanded to adore the relics of
Saints.

12 In what place of the Scripture there is any thing said of the place of
Limbus for little Children.

13 In what place of the Scripture it is said, that the Church of Rome is the
Sovereign Judge of doubts in faith, and that she cannot err.

14 In what place of the Scripture the Virgin Mary is called Queen of Heaven.

15 In what place of the Scripture God forbids the people to read the holy
Scriptures without special permission.

16 In what place of the Scripture, power is given to the Pope, to gather into
the treasury of the Church, the super-aboundant satisfactions of Saints, and of
Monks, and to convert them into payment for others, distributing them by
Indulgences.

17 Lastly, where and when has God given power to the Pope to depose Kings, to
draw souls out of Purgatory, and to give pardons for seven or eight hundred
thousand years.

Upon these seauenteene points, which make the Body of Popery, and wherein the
abuse and tyranny thereof consists, we ask Master Arnoux whether he will
produce any places of holy Scripture to prove them, and we will content our
selves with one place only for every several point. Our meaning is not to
restrain him to find these things in the Scripture word by word, it shall
suffice us, if he can find them there in substance, or that they can be
deduced by good consequence. For we seek no delays, nor are not tied to the
number of syllables, so the thing be proved in the word of God. Now we must see
what answer Mr. Arnoux makes to these questions, and how he proves his
Religion by the Word of God.

CHAP. II. Mr. Arnoux answer to these Questions.
THe Adversary makes answer in these words. 1. 100. page of Mr. Arnoux Book.
First (he says) it belongs not unto them to ask me the reason of my
belief, because I am in possession, and no man has given them commission to
pull the title of the inheritance which I hold, out of my hands.

I answer, that it is true, that we have no power to make him speak, nor to
bind him to give us an answer; but the commandment of God binds him
thereunto, in the first Epistle of S. Peter 3.15. Be ready always to give an
answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you, with
meekness and fear. Jesus Christ made answer touching his doctrine to those
that came unto him, although they were his enemles, and had no power over him:
We have answered Mr. Arnoux to all whatsoever he demanded of us, and objected
against us, although he has no power over us, neither did show us his
commission. He has bound himself to answer us, because he provoked us to
speak. For, that asking us a reason of our religion, he might make his account
that we would ask him a reason of his religion: not in manner of revenge, but
to let the truth be known, and to show that we are better grounded in
Religion then he is.

Whereas he says, that he is in possession of an inheritance, and that we have
no commission to take it from him; If by that inheritance he understands
earthly possessions, and riches, we envy him not, and wish that he had ten
times as much more, so he would become a defender of the truth: But if by that
inheritance, he understands the possession of the true doctrine, it is to
presuppose that which is in question. We go not about to take a thing from the
Church of Rome, which she has partly lost. There needs no commission to ask a
man what he believes, or the reason of his belief. Charity toward all men,
and a desire to lend our helping hand to him that is fallen, and the zeal that
we ought to bear to the defense of Gods cause, sufficiently binds us to
speak, and to propound the doctrine of salvation to those that require it. It
is to no purpose to say; it is already long time since I have bin in possession
of this doctrine: For Pagans, Jews, and Turks may say as much, whose
religions are ancienter then Papistry. We dispute not by numbers or years, but
by proofs. The Church is in a Country where there is a written Law, and not in
a Country where custom only rules. There is no prescription against the
heavenly truth, which always is most ancient, for that untruth or lying is but
a corruption of the truth. An ancient opinion once was new: and if time may
authorize a doctrine, tell me how many years at the least, me must have to
give authority thereunto? Then we must proceed to the ground, and to the
institution contained in the Word of God. And without speaking of the Word of
God, yet it will be found, that the most part of the errors of the Church of
Rome are very new. As the deposing of Kings by the Pope, the Communion under
one kind, The forbidding to read the holy Scriptures, etc.

2 Mr. Arnoux adds and says, Their request should be more tolerable, if
they made it before some Judge that had authority to end our difference.

If this excuse, made by the Jesuit, were allowable, before he sets upon us he
ought to find out a Judge that could set us at an agreement. But that
notwithstanding, we have not spared to answer him, because, that although at
this day there is no man to be found that is fit to be a Judge of
Controversies, with infallible certainty, and sovereign authority; yet every
particular man ought to have judgment with discretion, to discern which of us
best proves and justifies his sayings by the Word of God. Then that should
be no hinderance unto him to answer us.

3 The third excuse that he adds, is no better then the former: which is;
seeing (says he) that they have bound themselves to re-establish the Church
that is fallen, and that I offer my self unto them, to be drawn out of the
ruins, wherewith (as they think) I am enclosed. It belongs to them to lend me
their hand, to show me those notable places, and to produce the Scriptures.

I answer, that it is false that we have taken upon us to reform the Church,
and that we have bound our selves thereunto. It is sufficient for us to
reform our selves. They call our Churches reformed, and not reformers. And
they are called reformed, because they are Christian Churches purged from
Papistrie. It is true, that as every true Christian is moved with compassion
toward those that err; we could gladly wish that our adversaries eyes were
opened, and that we could take the veil of ignorance from before them. But yet
we take not on us the title of reformers. I am persuaded that our adversaries
which believe that they have the truth on their sides, would be glad if they
could do the like for us: and yet not ascribe the title of Reformators unto
themselves. And although we should call our selves reformers, is it not Mr.
Arnoux duty to show us, that there is nothing to be reformed in the Church of
Rome, by proving his belief by the Word of God; thereby to withdraw us from
this unprofitable labor, and to hinder us from applying any more plasters,
where there is no wound? Then that likewise should not hinder him from
answering unto us.

4 That which follows is no better; until (says he) that they have confuted
my Paper of confrontation, against the which they have written, it were a kind
of folly in me, to grant them such a disloyal and frivolous digression.

For answer hereunto, I say, that we have in such manner confuted his
confrontations, that they are become ridiculous. His accusations did not merit
the pains were took therein, but we had a respect to the dignity of the
persons, in whose presence he pronounced them. And when any man moves us to
render a reason of our belief, it is no digression, to cause him to yield a
reason of his own belief. For a man always to ask questions, and never to
make answer to any thing that another asks him, besides the unjust
usurpation, it is a confession of his own Ignorance. For he that asks,
desires to be instructed, and he that will not answer, silently confesses
that he is not able to give instruction: And if when we make these questions
unto him, we should use a digression, yet seeing that our people are not
separated from the Church of Rome, and because we cannot satisfy their
demands by the Word of God, it is Mr. Arnoux part to supply their want
therein, and to give them instruction; Seeing that if his cause be good, he
shall have less pains to produce a place out of the Scripture touching every
one of our 17. demands, then to seek for so many shifts; He takes more pains
to show the reasons why he answers not, then he should have had to answer us.

5 The fifth reason is excellent. When (says he) they shall plainly and freely
confess, that they can no more brag and boast of the Word of God, and that
their confession is wholly abolished, and that it is no more to be spoken of:
Then I will make no difficulty to instruct them in my belief, and it shall
not be to the end to make them account thereof, but to win them to God.

He will have me to leave my own Religion before he instructs me in his
belief, but in the mean time what Religion shall I hold while I attend his
instruction? This is excellent counsel, to wish me to leave my Religion
without taking another in a certain time after, and that I should renounce my
confession of the faith, before I know whether he that induces me to do it,
has a good religion: And if after I have left my Religion, without taking
another; I come to Mr. Arnoux to learn his faith of him, and that therein he
does not content me, shall I remain without Religion, or shall I take that
again which I left? That is as much as if a man should leave his own
Religion, not knowing wherefore: For I cannot know that my Religion is false,
unless I know that the contrary Religion is true. This Doctor has learned all
this from Father Gontri, that published diverse small Treaties, wherein are
found these slender shifts and childish conceits, to learn men to exempt
themselves from answering, always to ask questions, and to bind us to prove
our allegations in as many words and syllables out of the holy Scripture.

6 Lastly, after so many ouerthwartings, Truth gives Mr. Arnoux a blow, and
draws this confession from him. Such questions (says he) cannot be made by
those that know well, that we never promised, as they have done, neither yet
protested in any of our Articles, that we ought not to believe any thing, but
that which is formerly set down in the Scripture, and in express terms: to
the contrary we hold traditions, which they reprove and reject.

He should have said so at the first, without seeking so many ouerthwartings
and delays. Then he confesses that he cannot answer our questions by the
Scripture, and that those points whereof we desire a proof, are not proved by
the Word of God, contained in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, but by
tradition, and by the unwritten Word; That is to say, that these doctrines are
neither in the Law of God, nor in the Gospel; for in the holy Scriptures the
Law of God is whole, and the Gospel whole, and not half, unless the title be
false, And yet these 17. points, are the principal points of the Romish
Religion, and which are held to be necessary for salvation, and which are the
causes of our separation. Then be it known to all the Realm of France, that
Mr. Arnoux, being at this day seated in so eminent a place, (after he has
defied us with so solemn a defiance in the presence of his Majesty, and of
the greatest persons of this Realm,) has bled at the nose, and confesses his
own weakness, and acknowledges that his Religion is not grounded upon the
Word of God, contained in the holy Scriptures, but upon an unwritten Word, and
upon Traditions, which have no other rule, nor certainty, then the authority of
those that propound them: and who by that tradition have heaped up infinite
riches, and builded an Empire upon earth. While the holy Scriptures which is
able to make us wise to salvation; is hidden, and withdrawn from the peoples
sight. And that we on the contrary have from point to point satisfied and
answered to all his questions and objections. Blessed be the Name of God, that
makes truth to triumph, and draws our adversaries condemnation out of their
own mouths. Then with good reason he adds these words; saying, they did
well to conceive that I would never undertake an impertinent thing: and that
also which he says, that we would have him lose days and nights, and spoil
his breast, and his stomach with so much writing, and abandon his charge, and
then stay a long time for an answer, and striking after one manner, he should
lose his blows. It is not impertinent to defend his cause by the word of God,
that pains will neither hurt nor spoil his breast nor stomach; For, it is so
hard a matter, to produce a place out of the Scriptures for every one of these
17. points, and if not formal, at the least, such as have some appearance
thereof.

Touching the places of the Scripture alleged by Pope Boniface the 8. and by
the last Counsel of Lateran, in so prodigious and profane a sense; Mr. Arnoux
Arnoux p. 112.
dares not maintain such cotations of the Scripture, nor yet reject them,
least he should condemn the Popes and their Counsels, but finds a way
between both, saying, That those proofs are not produced in the literal
sense, but in an accommodated and appropriated sense, nothing contrary to the
literal sense. I will make our greatest enemies Judges herein, whether they
would endure that in our confession we should serve our selves with places of
Scripture not agreeing with the literal sense, but with an accommodated sense,
made for our pleasures, and drawn for our profit, for those places are
interpreted for the Popes advantage, in an impious sense, to persuade men, that
he ought to be adored by Kings, and that he has all power in heaven and in
earth. Are these the men that will bind us, to find all that in the Scripture
which we say, and in as many words and syllables, who in the mean time, take
liberty themselves to play with the Scripture with such licentious
profanation, and think to carry it away by saying that it is an accommodated
and not a literal sense, which accommodated sense nevertheless, they receive
for good and most certain, seeing they hold that the Pope and his Counsels
cannot err in faith?

After this Doctor has so barely acquitted himself, he speaks as being
touched with compassion toward us, and gives us counsel full of wisdom,
saying, Yield your selves to the Church, and she will tell you all: as if he
should say, Join your selves with the Church of Rome, and then we will at
leisure answer to your demands: for by the Church he understands the Romish
Church, which he will have us to believe to be the true Church, before we know
what she ought to believe, that she may be the true and pure Church. But why
should she rather be the true Church than the Greek or the Syrian Churches,
which are ancienter than the Roman, and purer, and which Jesus Christ and his
Apostles did plant, and where S. Peter's and the rest of the Apostles chaires
are?

Thereupon Master Arnoux will have us plainly to show which is the true
Church, if the Church of Rome be not the true Church; but he says that to
mock us: for he speaks as if he should say, Show us that, but while you show
it, we will shut our eyes: for the true Church is that which follows and
teaches the true Doctrine contained in the holy Scriptures, by that we must
know it, as St. Augustine says, Aug. lib. de vnitate Ecclesiae, cap. 16. Vtrum
ipsi Ecclesiam teneant non nisi diuinaru^ Scripturarum canonicis libris
ostendatur. Et eodem libro. Ergo in Canonicis Scripturis eam requiramus. Cap. 3.
let us seek for the Church in the canonical Scriptures: that is, that holy
Scripture which they hide from the people. Then these Doctors will have us to
show them the true Church, but will not have men to see that, which only
makes them to know the Church. As if a man would have one to show him the best
governed Commonwealth, without knowing the rules that make a good
Commonwealth. He also will have us to produce our Commission, and the charge
that we have from that Church. Whereunto we have answered in the 123. Section
of the first Book, where we have handled the vocation of Pastors. The effect
thereof is, that although every Pastor of our Churches be lawfully called, and
according to the form and manner therein required, by imposition of the hands
of other faithful Pastors, after enquiry made of his life and conversation,
and of his capacity and doctrine, yet it is not always necessary to have his
commission, and allowance from a pure Church, and without error. He that is
admitted into the charge of a Pastor, in an heretical Church, (as in an Arian
or Nestorian Church) and that has been received upon oath to teach the truth,
ought necessarily to accomplish that oath, and in the same charge to change his
heretical doctrine, and propound the true Doctrine of salvation: Not only
because the charge of a Pastor, in what Church soever it be, by the nature
thereof, and the first institution, is expressly given unto him, and instituted
to teach the truth, but also because that every oath made to God concerning any
good, just, and necessary thing, and whereinto a man has not intruded
himself, ought necessarily to be accomplished. And if it happens, that any
Pastors of an heretical and an idolatrous Church, as the Romish Church is,
changing their heretical doctrine, and taking on them to preach the truth, and
thereby draw a part of their flocks to follow the truth, and that thereupon
the other part, obstinate in error, expulseth and excommunicateth them, I say
that they ought to be constant, and not to abandon Gods cause, and that they
may not leave their charge, for accomplishing their oaths, but convert their
charge into the true use thereof: for they ought rather to have a respect to
Gods will and intent, for the which he has instituted the charge of Pastors,
than to the intent of those that imposed their hands upon them, when it is
contrary to Gods will and intent: for a man is not established in the charge of
a Pastor to do the will of man, but the will of God: The force of the bond to
observe and keep his oath, proceeds not from him before whom he takes his
oath, or that makes him to swear, but from God to whom he swears, and in
whose power the punishments of perjury are reserved. Such was the commission
and the proceedings of those whom God used to strive against Papistrie in the
Church of Rome, and openly to publish the holy Scripture, which the Pope had
suppressed, who having been chosen and elected Priests and Doctors in the
Church of Rome, to preach the Doctrine of the Gospel to the people, and to be
sacrificers of the body of Christ, did believe that they were bound to perform
the first, because it is the ordinance of God, and to leave the second, because
it is the invention of man. Master Arnoux adds a conceit, which he says is
very strong, and of much force, the substance whereof is, That no Testament is
made without there be an heir; That the Testament is the Gospel; That the
Church is the perpetual assigned heir of this Testament, the which by
consequence cannot err, as being perpetual inheritor of the infallible truth.
I answer, that the inheritance which Jesus Christ by his testament has left
to the true faithful, Ephesians. 1.14.18. Hebr. 9.15.
is the Kingdom of Heaven, and not the gift, not to err. And although the
infallible truth of God might be called the inheritance of the Church, yet it
does not follow that the Church cannot err, nor sin against the truth. So
the law, which is the entire rule of righteousness, is given to the Church,
which nevertheless does sin against that Law. How should the Universal
Church be without error, seeing it is composed of diverse and particular
discordant Churches? among the which, why should the Church of Rome rather have
the gift not to err, than the Greek, ancienter than the Roman, or than the
Syrrian, much ancienter than the Greek, and where Saint Peter's chair is, and
which Jesus Christ himself planted? as also, seeing that the rest of the
Apostles having left no successors in their Apostles charge, why should Saint
Peter only have one in his? Did Jesus Christ ever declare that Saint Peter
only, among the Apostles, should have a successor in his charge of Apostle? or
did Saint Peter ever declare that the Bishop of Rome should be his successor
in quality of the head of the universal Church? Where is there any one word of
this succession used in the Word of God? As also that the heresies Leo the
second complains of Honorius his Predecessor, for that by his heresy he had
defiled the seat of Rome. In the action 18. of the 6. Council.
of diverse Popes, (acknowledged by the Popes themselves,) and the schisms
which have rent that Seat, and which often times have bin the means, that of
diverse Antipopes contending for the same, the wickedest and the most unjust of
them intruding himself, has carried it away: have partly broken the line of
this imaginary succession: for to what purpose does it serve to show a list of
men's names in a picture, from Saint Peter to our time, if they show not that
the second of them taught as the first did, and the third as the second, and so
by degrees? Many heretical Churches in that manner produce their succession,
and are nothing the better for that; for a succession of a chair, without
succession of Doctrine, is rather an expulsion than a succession.

Page 120. J^nius lib. ^. cap 3.
But M^ster Arnoux says, that learned Irenius says, that it is altogether
necessary that every Church should resort and join unto that of Rome, wherein
the chief Principality reci^^^. But M^ster Arnoux, having not in all his
Book alledge^ an^ place that is not either cut short or falsified, would not
at the end of his book begin to allege them truly. For, first he adds this
word adherer, which is not in Irenius, and the word conuenire he translateth
resorting, whereas it signifies to land, or to come from diverse places into
one place. And to these two falsehoods, Master Arnoux adds a notable
corruption of the sense; for Irenius by this chief Principality,
understands the power of the City of Rome, because of the imperial Seat,
and not of the supremacy of the Bishop, or of his Church; for that, Christians
from all Churches, arrived at, or came to Rome, because of the Emperors Seat,
and of the Senate, where they had some affairs to be dispatched: As if I
should say, that from all the Churches of France, they come to Paris, because
the Kings sovereign Court is there. Then we must translate Irenius in this
mannner: To this Church Ad hanc Ecclesiam, propter potentiam pr ncip^l^atem,
nece^s^ est omnem co^uen^i Ecclesiam. (...).
all Churches must necessarily come, because of the sovereign power, which is
the imperial power. Upon the same reason, the council of Antiochia, in the
ninth Canon, groundeth the superiority of the Bishops of great Towns, because
(says that Council) that all those that have any business, come to the
Metropolitan City; ^or that cause it has been ordained that the Bishops
thereof should have pre-eminence of honor. Therefore the Church of Alexandria
went before Antiochia, although the Church of Antiochia was ancienter, and
founded (as it is said) by Saint Peter, because that among the Cities of the
Romish Empire, Alexandria, according to civil order, was the second City after
Rome, and was before Antiochia. The 17. Canon of the Council of Calcidonia,
speaks expressly thereof; where it is ordained, that the order of
Ecclesiastical Dioces should be accommodated according to civil and public
form.

For conclusion, our adversary immitating (as he says) the example of Saint
Augustine, refers us to the Fathers, that are not partial in this cause.

I marvel why he does not rather refer us to the Word of God* which is not
partial, no more than the ancient Doctors are, and which speaks with another
manner of authority; and much more, that he refers the people to the reading
of the Greek and Latin Fathers, whose works are infinite to be read, and the
understanding of them obscure, and, which he knows, the common people
understand not, and that out of their works, there are not many places
alleged, whereupon there is not some question made touching the sense and the
interpretation of them. And I am much more abasht that he refers the people
to the reading of the Fathers, to be resolved in Religion, seeing there is not
one of the Fathers, which the Doctors of the Romish Church do not censure, and
often times reprove them: For they make themselves Judges of the Fathers, in
stead of receiving the Fathers for Judges. In their books of Controversies you
shall see nothing but diverse opinions of the Fathers, whereof they choose those
whom they please and reject the rest, and many times reject them all, to
establish their own opinions.

Now to show, that the reason why they refer the common people to the reading
of the Fathers, is not because the Fathers favor them, but only to shun the
holy Scriptures, which they fear, and to lead the minds of the common people
through a way wherein they can neither see nor know any thing: I would gladly
know, whether our adversaries receive the Fathers for Judges in all our
Controversies; if they received them not for Judges but in certain points, why
not also in others? but if they receive them for Judges in all things, then
they must enter into the lists, and let some of them show us in the Fathers,
these seauenteene points, whereunto, having been so often times pressed and
urged, they are yet to answer.

1 For I say, and maintain it, that they cannot show that any ancient Church
ever celebrated the Eucharist without communicants, as they ordinarily do in
the Church of Rome, and many times also without any assistants.

2 They cannot show, that any ancient Church kept the people from the communion
of the cup.

3 Or that in any ancient Church, public Service, and the reading of the holy
Scriptures, was done in a language not understood by the people.

4 Or that any ancient Church, did forbid or hinder the people from reading of
the holy Scripture, which is by no means permitted without special privilege
in these countries where the Pope is absolutely obayed.

5 Or that in any ancient Church, they made Images of God, and representation
of the Trinity, in stone or in picture.

6 Neither can they show us, that in any ancient Church the people have been
taught to pray without understanding what they say, and to be Barbarians to
themselves.

7 Or that any ancient Church, has done any service to the Images of
creatures, as kissing, clothing, kneeling before them, or offering unto them.

8 Or that the ancient Church did believe that the Virgin Mary is crowned
Queen of Heaven, and Lady of the World, as she is painted in all the Papists
Churches.

9 Or that the ancient Church gave diverse charges and offices to Saints, to one
over one Country, to another over another Country, to another over an
occupation, etc.

10 Or that the ancient Church believed that the Pope can give, and take away
Kingdoms, and dispense with subjects touching their oath of fidelity,
cannonize Saints, and dispense with vows and oaths made to God.

11 Or that in the ancient Church, the Pope by his pardons, distributed the
supererogatory satisfactions of Saints, for remission of the punishments for
other men's sins.

12 Or that the Pope then, set up pardons in one Church and not in another,
making privileged Alters, to the which sometimes he granted two or three
hundred thousand years of pardon.

13 Or that the ancient Church did believe that there is a place called Limbus
for young children.

14 Or that it adored the host which the Priest holds in his hands, with
Latrian worship, and that to the same end the Priest lifts up the host in
the Mass.

15 Or that the ancient Church ever esteemed the books of Machabees to be
Canonical books.

16 Or that it believed that the Bishop of Rome cannot err in the faith.

17 Or that the ancient Church did believe that Jesus Christ by his death and
passion did satisfy for the faults and for the sins by men committed before
baptism, but that for sins committed after baptism it belongs to us to
satisfy for them, either in this life, or in the fire of Purgatory.

Upon every one of these points, I will content my self with two places
alleged by them out of the four first ages.

CHAP. III. The five manners or ways of Euasions, set down by Mr. Arnoux to
confute the Ministers.
THe careful and zealous reading of the holy Scriptures; and the ancient
doctors; the understanding of the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew tongues, and the
knowledge of histories and of Philosophy, are things required to be in a
Divine. But the only intelligence of the Scriptures ought to suffice if all of
us were wise, and of one accord; But the sickness of this age, and the
starting-holes which error has dug, are the causes that diverse other things
are required in a Divine. Father Gontri deceased, acknowledging that, and
feeling himself to be destitute of many necessary aides therein, as of the
knowledge of the Greek and Hebrew tongues, and yet desirous to win reputation,
invented certain means and ways whereby an ignorant person, void of all
learning, might maintain a disputation, and to that end published diverse small
Pamphlets, which serve to form and frame the manner and order which those that
dispute or confer with us, should hold, to whom he gives these two counsels:
The first is never to yield to make any answer, nor to bind themselves to
defend the Romish Religion, but always to put questions, and to force us to
the defense of our confession. And if they be pressed to prove their belief by
the Word of God, instead of answering us, that they should say, It belongs not
to you to examine me of my belief, for I am in possession, and you have no
commission to examine me; Seeing you are reformers, it belongs to you to
reform me, and to produce your proofs. And, who told you that this is the
holy Scripture?

The other counsel which he gives is, that when we come to make objections,
and to produce our proofs, not to allow of any thing whatsoever we shall say,
if we show it not in the Scripture in as many words and syllables as we
allege it; and that, if we frame an argument whereof both the propositions are
in the Scriptures, to deny that they are bound to allow the conclusion, because
Aristotle's rules do not bind the faith: And that, if in our discourse we
shall happen to use these words. That is to say, or, by consequence, they
should force us to find those words, That is to say, and, by consequence in
the Scripture: And that if we produce a place in the Scripture for the clearing
and interpretation of another place in the Scripture, they should say unto us,
show me a third place in the Scripture, which says, that this place ought to
be expounded by that place: And that, if we do not answer them to their
desires, then that they shall break off conference, and thereupon make and
raise clamors and slanderous libels, full of triumphant words, that they have
brought the Ministers to their Shifts of that is to say, and, by consequences,
and to say that a Caroach also is a consequence, because it follows the
horses.

There is no Cobbler in the Country, but that in a quarter of an hour he may
become a Divine, if it be sufficient always to put questions, and never to
answer. Certainly all this is but a small mass or lump of scould-like
wrangling, which only learneth a man to defend himself with his claws like a
Cat, and to prolong a disputation, never entering into the matter. But this
dresser of craftiness and deceit, never reaped any benefit by his proceedings;
for at the first encounter with the least of the Ministers, his nose fell a
bleeding, and all his craft vanished away, like a tempest driven back with the
wind of a Hatte, and so withdrawing himself like a light horseman unhorsed,
went into another town, there to be dealt withal in the like manner.

If we would give the like measure to those that use these iugling tricks, we
could at the first word that they speak, ask them, who they are, and who sent
them, and upon their answer, that they are Priests and Doctors of the Church,
say unto them, what know we whether there must be a Church or not, or that
there is a Church? and thereupon if they speak any thing, say unto them, show
that in as many words in the written or unwritten word. And if they chance to
come out with Therefore, or, for that cause, say unto them, show me that word
in the unwritten word, and who shall be Judge? etc. And so like them use that
simple wrangling which is fit only for madmen and malicious wranglers, that
fear the touch, and dare not show their faces in open field.

Mr. Arnoux follows this instruction, fit for a man that is meanly
furnished, and decking himself with other birds feathers, has drawn these
subtilties into a kind of Art, and reduced them into five heads, intitling his
discourse, Means, or, ways of evasion; Wherevnder pretense to discover our
shifts, as they say, he shows his own, and frames a discipline of small and
slender subtilties, fitter rather to stay and hinder disputation, then to
instruct. To each of these Euasions, we will say somewhat, that we may not let
any thing pass without replying.

CHAP. IIII. The first way of Evasion.
THe first of our wiles which he notes, is, that when we are put from a place
of Scripture, we produce our own interpretations, and save our credits by, That
is to say. Whereunto I reply, That if the interpretation which we give to a
place in the Scripture, be drawn out of the Scripture it self, it is not we
that are the interpreters, but God himself interprets: For example, when to
have the understanding of these words, This is my Body, we expound the word
This, by the bread which I break, and these words, my Body, by the remembrance
of my Body, we are not the interpreters, but the Apostle S. Paul, and Jesus
Christ himself, which give us this interpretation.

So when the Apostle to the Hebrews 13.16. says for with such sacrifices God
is well pleased; We deny that those sacrifices whereof he speaks are masses,
and say, that he speaks of doing good and of Christian liberality, and prove
it by the same verse, where he says, But to do good, and to communicate
forget not, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased. But, in Mr. Arnoux
judgment such expositions are not allowable, if I bring him not another place
of Scripture that says, that the same interpretation is true, and that this
place ought to be expounded by that place. So, it is requisite that some of the
books of the Scripture should be commentaries upon the other books, and that
in the Scripture there should be a Commentary upon the Psalms, and another
upon the Prophets, that should expound every verse severally, and that should
say, that such and such a verse ought thus to be interpreted: but seeing there
are no such Commentaries in the Scriptures, it appears that Mr. Arnoux has
no other intent but to inquire absurd and impossible things of us, and so never
to have the Scripture to be interpreted by the Scripture, and thereby to
impeach and hinder all instruction. For example, of our, That is to say, Mr.
Arnoux produces the 2. verse of the 16. Psalm, where word for word according
to the Hebrew. It is, My goodness extends not to thee: And we say that
thereby David acknowledges that the good which he does is no benefit unto God,
and that God has no need thereof, which overthrows merits. Mr. Arnoux
rejects this interpretation, (which notwithstanding is the interpretation of
his own Bible) which is translated, Bonorum meorum non eges, thou have no need
of my good deeds. This man with a blind zeal gives a blow to every thing,
and to contradict us, contradicts himself.

That which Mr. Arnoux adds, that every one of us boasts of a particular
Spirit, and of a Judgment sounder then that of the universal Church is a
slander, none of us attribute such a spirit unto our selves, such a particular
spirit is an universal folly.

CHAP. V. The second Evasion.
THe second Evasion, wherewith Mr. Arnoux says we serve our turns, is, that
we have our recourse to consequences, which (says he) we would not do if we
had a formal place of Scripture: And that to confirm our consequences, we
make Sillogismes, the forms whereof proceed from Aristotle's forge, which
cannot bind men's consciences, nor strengthen faith. All this is the Jesuit
Gonters fense, which always held his first trade. He knew not that a place of
Scripture from whence we draw a consequence, is nevertheless formal, when the
consequence is plain and necessary. If the Scripture says, For there is no
man which sins not, 2 Chronicles. 6.36. Is not that a formal place to prove
that the Apostles sinned, seeing they were men? When the Law of God says, Thou
shall not commit adultery, Is it not a formal place to show that the Pope
does evil to permit adultery, and yet it follows by consequence? And when
the Gospel commands every man to believe in Jesus Christ, is not that a
formal place to prove that Philip and Anthony ought to believe in Jesus
Christ, and yet that follows by consequence? So when S. Paul Romans 9.19.
says, For who has resisted his will? And when David Psalm. 115.3. says, But
our God is in the Heavens, he has done whatsoever he pleased; Are not these
formal places to prove that God guides all things by his providence?
Nevertheless, the Jesuits, will not allow of such proofs, and when I say,
that God guides all things by his providence, they say unto me, prove that by
the Scripture, and then if I allege these places out of S. Paul, and the
Psalms, they reject them, because they contain not the same words, and the
same syllables, but consequences drawn from them by reason. Acts 17.3. and
18.28.
By this means they condemn S. Paul and Apollos, who by the Scriptures
proved to the Jews, that Jesus is that Christ, although that in those places
of the Scripture which they alleged to the Jews, the same words are not
therein found, but are drawn from them by necessary consequence. So S. Peter,
Acts 10.43. says. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his
Name, whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission of sins. Which
nevertheless is not found in the same words, but is drawn from thence by
consequence. So the Fathers in the Counsel of Nice, by the Scriptures prove,
that the Son is consubstantiall with the father, and the first Counsel of
Ephesus, that the Virgin Mary is (...) Deipara, These words are not expressly
found there, but are drawn from them by consequence.

Gregory de Nazianze, in his fifth Oration of Divinity, says; There are things
which although they are not named in express words, yet men gather things
which make and prove them by necessity.

Cardinal John de Turre Cremata says, A thing is contained in the Scripture
by these two means, Summa de Eccles. lib. 4. c. 8.
either in express word, as in this sentence, Christ was a man or obscurely,
that is, that which follows by good and necessary consequence of things
formally placed on earth; as from this proposition, Christ was a man, therefore
it follows that he had a reasonable soul.

Peter de Alliaco, Cardinal of Cambray, says, I say, In 1. Sentent. Quest. 1.
art. 3.
that to speak properly, a Theological discourse is composed of propositions
contained in the Scripture, or of those that are drawn from it, etc.

Cardinal Bellarmine in his third Book of Justification, Cap. 8. says,
Nothing can be certain touching the certainty of faith; if it be not
immediately contained in the Word of God, or drawn from thence by evident and
true consequence. For it is not faith, if it be not grounded upon the authority
of the Word of God, and thereof neither Catholics nor Heretics make any
doubt. Then Mr. Arnoux, which doubts thereof, by the judgment of a Cardinal
and a Jesuit, is no Catholic.

Where as he says, that he would have no Sillogismes allowed of; there is a
means to content him, by speaking with him as with children, seeing he
rejects the natural rules of reason: which are not Aristotle's invention, as
he thinks, Zeno Eleates and diverse others before him wrote of that matter.
Diog. Laertius in Zenone Eleate. (...).
Plain Country people use those rules, not thinking thereon, being insensibly
thrust into them by the force of reason. Whosoever will have no consequences
produced, abolisheth all common sense, and all use of reason, which only
consists therein. The rules of Lodgique are no Articles of faith, but
instruments to manage all knowledge by order and certainty, and by consequence
also, matters of Divinity.

CHAP. VI. The third Evasion.
THe third Evasion which Master Arnoux says we use, is, that we serve our
turns with the circle; in this, that we prove those things to be Scripture by
our particular spirit, and prove that particular spirit by the Scripture. Which
is false and slanderous. We leave that particular spirit to mad men, none of us
makes our selves Judges of the Scriptures; That is the Popes and his Prelates
property, who being assembled boast that they pronounce Judgment touching
points of faith, and believe they cannot err. And our Adversaries say, that
every particular person of the Church of Rome does certainly discern the true
Church, which spirit or particular judgment, is mere blindness, seeing that
the poor people have no other proof to know that the Church of Rome is the
true Church, then only the witness that the same Church gives of itself.

Touching the circle, if any serve their turns therewith, it is our
adversaries, for they ground the authority of the Scripture upon the testimony
of the Church: and yet ground the authority of the Church upon testimonies of
the Scripture: as one that having placed the walls of a house upon the
foundation, afterward should place the foundation upon the walls. When we ask
them, how they know that we must believe the books of the new Testament; They
answer and say, because the Church says it, and ordaines it to be so: and
when we say, that how know you that we must believe the Church? because (say
they) that the books of the New Testament say so, and ordain it to be so, for
there it is written, Tell it unto the Church, etc. Certainly as often as they
allege the Scriptures to ground and authorize their Church, they overthrow
that which they will have men to believe; which is, that the authority of the
Scripture is grounded upon the authority of the Church. And thereby are tied to
roll the circle, as Diogenes is to his tub, and ouerturne their own wits by
this circulation. But when we ask one of them, and say, how know you that your
Church teaches the true Doctrine? or how know you that it is conformable to
the ancient Church? There they are at a stay, and the circle rowles no more,
and so they are dumb by necessity: For how shall they know the true Doctrine,
seeing the rule of the true Doctrine, which is the holy Scripture, is hidden
from them? And how should they know whether their Church is conformable to the
ancient Church, seeing it is not known, but by an infinite number of Greek
and Latin Books, which the people understand not? Then the people must know
that the Church of Rome teaches the true Doctrine, only because those that
teach it, say so, which is to believe at hazard, and to have a humane Religion,
grounded upon conjectures, without the Word of God, and to allow a man to be a
witness and a Judge in his own cause.

Therefore Master Arnoux gives marks to know the true Church, without
speaking of the holy Scriptures, Page 119.
which are all false. First, The consent of the people. But there are a greater
number of the people that disagree with the Church of Rome, than those that
agree therewith. And Jesus Christ says, that broad is the way that leads to
destruction, Math. 7.13.14.
and many there be which go in thereat: because strait is the gate, and
narrow is the way which leads unto life, and few there be that find it. Then
he adds the testimony of Martyrs: a false mark, for there shall never be any
Martyrs found, that died for calling upon Saints, or for Transubstantiation, or
for Purgatory; They suffered death for the doctrine of the Gospel, for the
which our poor Churches have suffered so many martyrdomes by means of the
Church of Rome, which suffers no more, but makes martyrs suffer. For a third
mark, he places the authority of the Fathers: But the Fathers are contrary to
the Doctrine of the Romish Church, the people cannot look into them: And
Master Arnoux speaks by hearsay: for in his Book he alleges but four or
five places out of the Fathers, which are not found to be false and corrupted.
For a fourth mark, he puts the eminence of the Doctrine. I think that by the
eminence, he understands the excellency, which consists in purity, and
conformity to the Word of God. Without proof to say, that the Church of Rome
has the purity of Doctrine, it is without proof to pre-suppose that which is
in question. To the contrary we have proved, against Master Arnoux, that
Popery is a heap of errors, and a corruption of Christianity. And how
should the people know that purity of Doctrine, seeing they hide the rule of
purity, which is the holy Scriptures from them?

For the last mark, he se^teth succession, never interrupted. It he
understands a succession of doctrine, we deny it; if he understands a
succession of chaires without Doctrine, that succession is nothing. Many other
Churches also which condemn the Church of Rome, have their succession, and
that ancienter than the Roman. And schisms have often broken the succession
of the Romish Bishopric. And how can the people know any thing touching this
succession, which cannot be learned but by reading of infinite Histories, and
Greek and Latin Authors, that have written for the space of one thousand six
hundred years?

CHAP. VII. The fourth Evasion.
THe adversary notes another Evasion, wherewith we serve our turns (as he
says;) which is, to produce diverse places of Scripture, one with another,
whereof the one serves to interpret the other. For example, he says, that we
expound these words, This is my body, by this place, I am the Vine: wherein he
slandereth us. We know well, that these words, I am the Vine, are not the
exposition of these words, This is my body: We note not those places. I am the
Vine, I am the door, This cup is the Covenant. The rock was Christ, to
interpret these words, This is my body, but to show that whosoever will always
take the words of the holy Scripture literally, and leave these interpretations
whereby the Scripture expresses it self, should often fall into great
absurdities, and to show that ordinarily the Scripture names the signs and
Sacraments, by the names of that which they represent.

CHAP. VIII. The fifth Evasion.
THe fifth Evasion which Master Arnoux imputes unto us, is a Chaos of confused
calumniations. He says that we attribute things to the Church of Rome, which
she believes not. That we charge the Popes with injuries. That we reject the
original Text of the Scripture, that is, the Hebrew and the Greek. That we
say, that a Verse is sliden from the Margent to the Text. That we reject the
common translation, received by all the Fathers. That we add unto and take
away from the holy Scriptures. That we forge metaphors, and improprieties of
phrases. That we esteem that to be spoken per Ironia, which is said upon oath,
that we tie a conditional particle, to a period, to draw it from the absolute
sense thereof, and make thirty manifest places of the Scripture intricate by
one obscure place.

This cart of confused calumniations, without any proofs, deserves no
answer. It is an easy thing to speak evil of a man without any proof. And
I believe that Master Arnoux has made a collection of faults, (wherein the
Doctors of the Romish Church are culpable,) to impose them upon us: for in
Master Arnoux Book we find that in every place he changes our belief, and
makes us say things which we abhor as much as he does.

He knows, or ought to know, that the Doctors and Writers of the Romish
Church, say and speak a thousand injuries of Popes, and detest their lives and
doctrine.

He knows that the Church of Rome rejects the original text of the Bible,
which is the Greek and the Hebrew, and prefers the vulgar translation before
it, which nevertheless is so much corrupted, that if you compare the vulgar
translation with the Hebrew, you will say that there is no Book in the world
so badly translated. Sixtus Seuensis, the Popes keeper of his Library,
acknowledges the same, in the seventh Book of the Library, Here Is. prima,
Editionis venetae, p. 921. and 92^. Vulgata edito quae Hieronymi esse dicitur
in multis a Graeca veritate distat.
where he says, that the vulgar Edition, which is said to be Saint Hieromes,
in many things differs from the truth of the Greek. That which Bellarmine
acknowledges, is so far Bell. lib. 2. de Verbo Dei. ca. 2. Heretici huic
temporis odio editionis vulgatae nimium tribuunt editioni Hebraicae etc.
from accusing us of rejecting the Hebrew or Greek Text, that to the contrary
he accuses us of holding too much with it, and of referring too much unto it.
Heretics (says he) in hatred of the vulgar Edition, attribute too much to
the Hebrew Edition. For Calvin and Kemnitius will have all examined and
corrected by the Hebrew Text. To the contrary he Eodem. cap. 2.. His ergo.
Scripturas Hebraicas non esse in universe. deprauatas opera vel malitia
Iudaeorum, nec tamen esse omnino integras.
maintains, that the Scripture in the Hebrew is corrupted in many places, and
contradicts the opinions of Hierome and Augustine, that will have the Latin
translation to be examined and corrected by the Hebrew and the Greek: Cap. 11.
Fontes scripturarum anteponendi riuulis versionem, quando constat fontes non
esse turbatos. Nunc autem fontes multis locis turbidos fluere iam ante
ostendinus.
For he will have the vulgar translation to be preferred before the Greek and
Hebrew; And that men should have their recourse to the little Rivers, because
the spring is troubled. But those of the Church of Rome, that have some remnant
of equity in them, and that plainly perceive that this opinion is an entrance
into Atheism, and makes nothing certain in the Word of God, join themselves
with us, and not only reprove the vulgar translation, as Sixtus Seuensis
aforesaid, but also they themselves have made translations of the Bible
according to the Hebrew, as Sanctes Pagninus, a Luquois Monk, and Arias
Montanus a Spaniard; between the which translations, and that which is used in
our Churches, there is great conformity.

Whereas Master Arnoux says, that the vulgar translation has been received
of all the Fathers, he shows, that he never looked into the Fathers; for in
Saint Augustine there are two thousand places of the holy Scriptures alleged
in other words than they are set down in the vulgar translation. And
Tertullian uses a different translation from all the rest; and in Hierome we
have diverse places of the old Testament, by him truly translated according to
the Hebrew; and Bellarmine in the tenth Chapter of his second Book de Verbo
Dei, says, that the vulgar translation began to be received in the Church of
Rome, in the time of Gregory the first, that is, six hundred years after
Jesus Christ. And Saint Augustine acknowledges, that in his time, the
diversity of Latin translations were infinite, in the second Book of
Christian Doctrine, Chapter 11.

In all these things, De Doctr. Christianae, l. 2. ca. 11.
as also in the rest of the smaller calumniations, which he sets down, he
shows, that he knows not what we say, nor what he himself says: and that
he has no knowledge of antiquity, nor of the nature of our Controversies, and
had done wisely, if he had showed his Book to men of some judgment, before
he published the same, in stead of taking all his defense out of Father Gontri,
without any other examination, which Jesuit, if he were living, would ask for
his feathers again, and so Mr. Arnoux should be stark naked.

The reproach which he gives us; to take from the Scriptures, without telling
wherein and how it is done, is unseemly in the mouths of those that from the
Law of God cut off a whole Commandment, that is, the second Commandment,
wherein the worshipping of Images is prohibited.

But we must of force say something touching the reproach which he gives us,
that we attribute things to the Romish Church, which she believes not.

To avoid this blame, in the defense of our confession of the faith, against
Master Arnoux, I have drawn our Adversaries belief from the Councels of the
Church of Rome, and specially from the Council of Trent: as also from the
Decrees and Canons of Popes, and from the Text of the Mass. And where there is
any discord between our Adversaries, I have not hidden it, to the end, that an
error which belongs but to one part of the Romish Church, should not be
imputed to the whole body thereof. And if I have alleged any particular
Doctors, they are some of the notablest, at the forefront of whose writings,
the approbation of the Doctors, and of the faculties of Theology, is apposed.

In controversies of Religion, to impute contrary things to the adverse party,
which he believes not, is expressly to make war against God, and to fear
that the truth should be known, that is, to make controversies where none are,
as if we had not true controversies enough, without forged false
controversies. It is a confession of a bad cause, and an acknowledging of the
truth of the contrary opinion, when before we speak against it, we seek to
disguise it. To be short, it is a confessing that if the opinion of the
Adversaries were truly propounded, it could not be contradicted. Or if any man
does it without malice, he shows that he wants common sense, to content
himself to learn the belief of his adversaries, by their enemies inuectiues,
or by popular report, rather than by their own confession. Whereby it
happens that all the disputation is a manner of skirmishing in the air,
which strikes no man, and a fantasy of an imaginary controversy, forged, to
storm or bestirre themselves against.

But this is the manner which at this day they use with us, for they that
preach, or write against us, make us as black as Pitch with slanders, and
forge another confession for us. When we read our Adversaries writings, we
might imagine that they write against another Religion than ours, if we saw not
our names at the beginning of their Books, and in the titles of the Chapters.
And what protestations soever we make that we believe nothing that they make
us to say, yet they are resolute, and will persuade us that we do believe it.
Master Arnoux Book written against our confession justifies the same, which
in stead of refuting our confession, changes it, in such manner, that fighting
against his own inventions, his quarrel is against himself.

Whereupon, I am forced in a brief Table to set down what kind of confession
of the faith our Adversaries attribute unto us: and how they paint out our
confession like a horrible Monster, which they show unto the people to get
money thereby.

Peter Cotton the Jesuit, made a Book entitled Catholic Institution: at
the beginning whereof, he has made a Preface to those of the pretended
reformed Church, wherein he comprehends all our belief in 28. Articles,
which are these that follow:

1 THat the Children of Christians may be saved only by the faith of their
Parents, without baptism, and therefore that baptism is not absolutely
necessary.

2 That the Bread in the Supper of our Lord is only the figure of the Body of
Jesus Christ.

3 That the Church may err.

4 That we must not allow of any traditions.

5 That Angels and Saints which are in glory, know not our necessities, and
cannot hear our prayers.

6 That Priests and religious persons may break their vows.

7 That single life is not to be preferred before marriage.

8 That the Books of Macabees, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Tobias, the rest of
Daniel, and Baruc, are Apocripha.

9 That the Soul of the Son of God did not descend into Hell, to fetch the
souls of the holy Fathers from thence, which there stayed for his coming, or
that before the Ascension of Jesus Christ, the souls of the Saints were
received into Heaven, and not into Limbus, nor into any other third place.

10 That we must confess our sins to God only.

11 That faith only justifies.

12 That when the fault of sin is remitted, the punishment also is remitted.

13 That God did not create men in one and the same condition, but that he
created some to be saved, and the rest to be damned perpetually.

14 That every particular man has an Angel that watches over him.

15 That it is not lawful to salute him, nor to call upon him.

16 That God does not suffer sin to be done, but that he will have it to be
done, that he thrusts us forward unto it, and constrains us thereunto.

17 That the Scripture is easy to be understood, and that the understanding
thereof is given unto all men.

18 That there needs no ordinary or extraordinary vocation to preach the Word
of God.

19 That we must believe nothing but that which is written.

20 That God has not given power to the Church to remit sins.

21 That all sins are mortal.

22 That a man cannot merit by grace.

23 That it is impossible to keep the Commandments of God, although he aid
us.

24 That God does not recompense good works.

25 That there is no distinction of blessedness among the Saints, and that
they are all equal therein.

26 That we must not use the imposition of hands which the Apostles used upon
those of Samaria and Ephesus.

27 That the precept to annoint sick persons with oil, whereof St. James
speaks, ought not to be practiced in the Church, although it was used by the
Apostles.

28 That prayer for the dead was not used in ancient times, nor yet in the
Machabees time.

Upon these eight and twenty Articles, he asks us proofs out of the holy
Scriptures, but he should ask proofs of all these Articles of those that
believe such things, and not of us to whom all these points are in a manner
slanderously imputed. Upon the which I will briefly say something to the
Reader, and run over all these Articles.

1 IT is false that we say that Children may be saved only by the faith of
their Parents: Touching the necessity of Baptism with water, the Church of
Rome believes it not. The Council of Trent is of opinion that a vow supplyeth
the want of Baptism with water, and our Adversaries say, that the Baptism of
blood, and the Baptism of the Spirit, that is, martyrdom, and regeneration,
without baptism with water, may save a man.

2 It is false that we believe that the Bread in the holy Supper is only the
figure of the body of Christ. The Scripture teaches us, that the Sacraments
also are seals to confirm, and that the bread which we break, is the
communion of the body of Christ.

3 It is false that we simply say that the Church can err: The Church that is
spoken of in the Creed, which is the Church of the Elect, cannot err in
deciding of the doubts in faith, because it never assembleth to decide any
thing. Touching the visible universal Church, it was assembled in the persons
of the Apostles, which did wholly govern it; then it could not err. Now it is
divided into particular contrary Churches; separated from communion. It is
impossible to assemble the same to decide any causes. Touching particular
Churches, as the Greek, Roman, and the Syrian, etc. There are some that may
err, and there are some particular Churches wherein it is impossible to be
saved, that is, those that are idolatrous, where the benefit of Jesus Christ is
corrupted.

4 It is false, that we reject all traditions, we reject those only, which add
something to the doctrine of faith, contained in the holy Scriptures.

5 It is false, that we believe that Angels and Saints, know not our
necessities, they do generally know, that the Church of God is persecuted, and
has great combats to resist. The Angels that God has appointed to be our
gardians, know our necessities, and what estate we are in.

6 It is false, that we simply say, that Priests ought not to keep their
vows, if they make a vow of possible things, and conformable to the Word of
God, they ought to keep them.

7 It is false that we say, that single life is not to be preferred before
marriage; single life that is continent, and has no evil desires, has great
commodities and advantages above marriage, and more liberty to serve God.

8. 9. The eighth and ninth Articles are true, we reject the Limbus patrum,
which is said to be empty these 1600. years, and the Apocriphall books.

10 It is false, that we say, that we must confess our sins only to God. We
must confess them to the Church, and to our Pastors, and to our neighbors
whom we have offended.

11 To take the word justify, in that sense which our Adversaries take it, for
regeneration and sanctification; It is false that we say, that faith only
justifies. For a Christian is regenerated by all Christian virtues. But if by
being justified they understand absolved, and esteemed to be righteous before
the judicial seat of God (which is the sense wherein the Scripture ordinarily
takes the word justify) in that sense, we say, that faith void of works,
cannot justify us: but that faith accompanied with works, only has the
virtue to justify us; for that among Christian virtues, faith only has that
property; To apprehend the benefit of our Lord Jesus Christ.

12 It is false that we simply say, without exception, that when the fault is
remitted, the punishment also is remitted. We speak that of satisfactory, and
vindicatiue punishments: but not of chastning punishments which serve to amend
and instrust the sinner in time to come. Those punishments are sufferable with
the remission of sins.

13 It is false that we say, that God has created men to be damned, Calvin
says not so, and if he had said so, we are not bound to believe it.

14 It is false that we say, that every one of us has not an Angel to be his
guardian. Our Churches have not defined any thing touching that point. Whether
God imployeth an Angel for the guarding of diverse persons, or many Angels for
the guarding of one man: It is a thing which we leave to the Counsel of God.

15 The fifteenth Article is true, we honor Saints, and set them before us for
an example, and aspire to their beatitude, but we call not upon them.

16 It is false and slanderous that we say, that God thrusts us forward and
constrains us to sin; that doctrine is horrible and devilish. Calvin to
whom they impute this doctrine, never said it, but taught the contrary, and
although he had said it, yet our confession of the faith in the seventh
Article, protests the contrary in these words, saying; Not that God is the
Author of evil, or that the fault can be imputed unto him, seeing that his
will is the sovereign and the infallible rule of all doctrine and equity.

17 It is false that we say, that the Scripture is easy to be understood, and
that the understanding thereof is given unto all men. In it there are obscure
prophesies, and difficult places. We say that in the Scriptures there are
sufficient, evident and clear places which are instructions unto us for
salvation; and that in things which are plain and manifest in the Scriptures,
and which have no need of interpretation, all that which is necessary for our
salvation, is contained.

18 It is false that we say, that to preach the Word of God there needs no
ordinary nor extraordinary calling. I have made a book expressly to prove the
contrary.

19 It is false that we say, that we must believe nothing but that which is
written. We say, that we must not receive any doctrine, (as necessary to
salvation) that is not contained in the holy Scriptures.

20 It is false that we say, that God has not given power to the Church to
remit sins; faithful Pastors have that power, but their pardon is
conditional, so the party be a repentant sinner, which is not certanely
known, but to God only. Therefore their judgment must of force be
conditional. As the holy Scripture says that Pastors save souls, because God
uses their ministry to save them, so it says, that Pastors pardon sins,
because God uses their means to pardon them.

21 It is false that our Churches have made any definition touching this point,
that all sins are mortal: It belongs not to criminals and sinners to
determine what punishment every sin they commit deserves. Only we reject
that distinction which is made between mortal and venial sins; that is,
pardonable: because those sins which are called mortal, are pardonable in
those that convert and amend their lives, and those sins that are called
venial, are mortal when men persevere therein till they die, and that
contempt and final obstinacy is added to the transgression.

22 The 22. Article is true, We do not presume that we can merit before God,
and if thereupon we should be asked, whether we cannot merit by the grace of
God? I answer that the same grace is it which hinders us from meriting. For,
for that cause our good works are not meritorious, because they proceed from
the grace of God. It is no merit to receive grace.

23 It is false that we say, that it is impossible to keep the commandments
of God, though God does help us. When it is the will of God to make a man
perfect, and without sin, no man can hinder it, nor limit any rules to the
efficacy of his Spirit.

24 It is most false that we say, that God does not reward good works.

25 It is false that we hold, for a most assured thing, that the Saints have
equal glory in heaven. That is no Article necessary to salvation, we condemn
no man for that opinion, but suffer every man to conceive thereof as he
thinks it most probable. But the Pope which gives a degree of glory unto
some men above the vulgar Saints, is bound to maintain that inequality.

26 It is false that we say, that we must not use the imposition of hands which
the Apostles used in Samaria, and in Ephesus: Whosoever has the virtue by
imposition of hands to confer the same miraculous graces, and the gift of
tongues, which the Apostles conferred, shall do well to use that ceremony.

27 It is false that we say, That the precept to annoint the sick with oil,
whereof S. James speaks, ought not to be practiced in the Church; We know,
that not only the Apostles, but also their disciples after them, did
profitably use the same, for healing of the sick: Whosoever can by that
unction do the like miraculous effects, shall do well to use the same
ceremony.

28 Lastly, it is false, that our Churches believe and teach that prayer for
the dead was not anciently in use. We say, that the first ages, whose examples
should serve us for a Law, used it not, and that God did not ordain it.
Touching the Machabees, it concerns us nothing to know, whether that as then
they prayed for the dead: For although the books of the Machabees are full of
fables, and that the same history is to be suspected, yet although it were
true, our Religion is not ruled by the Jews actions, but by the commandment
of God, as also that prayer for the dead, whereof we speak, is made with a
reference to the resurrection, and not to draw souls out of Purgatory.

The indifferent Reader will consider, with what people we have to do, seeing
that of the 28. Articles, wherein they comprehend our Religion, there are but
four which truly and without calumniation do represent our doctrine: and
what hope is there, to end our Controversies by the Word of God, seeing that
they bind us by the Word of God to prove those things which we believe not.
How should they faithfully propound our belief to their people, when they
disguise it unto us? Put the case that our Religion were as full of errors, as
it is holy, just, and true: why do they instead of seeking to draw us out of
errors, go about to drown us therein? why do they study to make us worse,
instead of amending or bettering us? or do they think, that we have
forgotten our Religion, and that we must be forced to come to them to learn
it? We are used in the like manner by the Bishop of Luzon, in his book that
he has made against our Epistle dedicated to the King. In the tenth page, he
reduces our Religion into twelve Articles, which he has forged out of some
places of our Authors, which he has clipped, and which do not say that which he
would have them to say, which we take for a justification of our cause, seeing
that no man dares encounter with us face to face, nor come directly to us, but
all of them take a wrong course, and go by-as way, and discharge not their
choler against our Religion, but against another, which they have forged at
their pleasures.

FINIS.

