HERACLITVS: OR MEDITATIONS UPON THE vanity and misery of humane life, first
written in French by that excellent Scholar and admirable divine Peter Du
Moulin Minister of the sacred word in the reformed Church of Paris:

And translated into English by R. S. Gentleman.

Printed at Oxford by Joseph Barnes. 1609.

TO HIS MVCH HONORED FATHER: S. F. S.
SIR,
The naturalrespect, that an obserua^t son owes to a worthy and careful
father, obliges me to meditate on some thing that may deserve your perusal,
and answer part of your expectation: having therefore tasted the fruits of
many men's inve^tions, I could not find any sort so wholesome for a man of your
years, nor so pleasing to mine own relish as this ensuing treatise of that
worthy Gentleman and admirable divine Peter Du Moulin, who by his tongue, and
pen does daily win many souls to God, which otherwise would by the subtle
delusion of Satan, and the persuasiue discourses of wicked Massepriests, and
sin-plotting Jesuits run headlong to their own destruction. I know your
expense in my breeding may justly require as great a work as this immediately
from my self, which I should be as willing to perform, as you to command,
were it not that I look back into this age as full of envious detractio^s, and
idle censures, as void of all true judgment, and virtue. Moreover this matter
being a divine morality, or rather a moral divinity would seem too grave for
my youth, and too high for my knowledge. Wherefore I am the rather desirous to
make use of this Translation, because it will serve not only as a buckler
against those critical shafts, which some musty quiver might send out against
me, but also as a comfort and restoratiue for your declining age. I have
presumed to dedicate it to your fatherly censure, as being yet unable to
apprehend any other thing that may either add perfection to it self, or
deservedly attract any favor from you: humbling craving that the errors of
this Translation may not any way impeach your good opinion but as you have
formerly* so now and ever after you will bind me to rest

Your most observant and respective son R. S.

THE AVTHORS EPISTLE Dedicatory to the Lady ANN of Rohan, Sister to the Duke of
Rohan.
MADAM,
This book which warreth against the vanity of humane life, is deservedly due
unto your Ladyship, who has truly vanquished it in your self. I encounter it
with words, but you overcome it by actions. And actions do so far surpass
words, as health excels a medicine, and as victory is more honorable then a
combat. Your name only in the beginning of my book shall serve for a ^^^ument:
for if this little work be a true portraiture of vices, your life is a perfect
pattern of opposite virtues. Also I do ingeniously confess to have received
from your perfections much aid toward the perfecting of this small invention.
For to draw out the Image of vices I am to represent the contrary of that
which I do both see and admire in you; to have the sacred word of God often in
your hand, but more often in your mouth: to be daily in prayer; to have Modesty
without Art: to have your hand open to the afflicted, and your ear deaf to
vice: In understanding above your sex, to have humility below your condition:
to have a firm and free zeal without any scruple, from which christian
prudency has taken away al affected austerity. These are virtues that each
apart is sufficient to attract admiration, notwithstanding they all concur in
you. They are virtues that the greatness of your house does render more
remarkable, and the corruption of our age more admirable. An age in which vices
are ma^ners, and wherein debosching humors, and profane vanity are passed into
nature, and turned into complexion. In the midst of these corruptions, you
shine as a burning candle in an obscure night. I am well assured that your
modesty permits not this discourse; but the public profit requires it. To
the end that each may know what estimation we have of virtue. To the end also
that those vices which spread themselves, and increase amongst us, may be
repelled by your good Example, and that your virtues serving as accusations may
be a means to incite us to good. It is our glory that that sacred seed which
we have scattered abroad, has fallen into so fertile a land where it has
brought forth so rare fruit, especially amongst us, who have so many examples
exstant, that do demonstrat the difference between true piety, and that
superstitious devotion, which endeavors to obtain the favor of God by a
seeming pensive action, which limiteth it self to a set number of reiterated
prayers, and has reduced religion to the fingers ends.

Having then had (Madam) so many reasons to dedicate this writing unto your
Ladyship. This one being sufficient, that I had never undertaken it but by your
command. For I am destitute of those ornaments that are required in this
distasteful age: I have not any great words, nor those swelling terms that
only fit frolike humors: I speak not of the Barriquades of greedy The
fooleries of Father Corton in his sermons before the K. of France
desire, nor of the Escalades of virtues. I call not Jesus Christ the Daulphin
of heaven, neither do I compose Orations upon the Fan and Nosegay, it
suffices me to write French, my intention being only to be understood; and in
deciphering of vices to plant in your spirit the contempt of the world* and the
love of God. In mean terms I intend to discourse of high matters, and with a
coal to delineat out the truth. The defect that is in it ought to be imputed
in part to my dulnes, in part to my condition, which is much busied and
disturbed.

It is hard for a man to meditat amongst the blows of Harquebusches, and to
mount his spirit very high, when a thousand opposed things do tend downward
and break his flight. But the self same ing enious disposition, which
solicited you to incite me to write, shall also cause you to support the
imperfectio^s of it. Because (not thinking in the beginning, it should have
passed forth of my house) it is not so well adorned as I could wish. But seeing
that it must now trauerse abroad by your commandment, my desire is that it may
be received as from the hand of him, which prays to God for the prosperity of
your most Noble family, which God has honored with his holy and divine
alliance, and who has noe other ambition the^ to obey you, and remain all his
life

Your Ladyships most humble and obedient servant, PETER du MOVLIN.

Meditations upon the vanity and misery of humane life.
THE importuning diversity of worldly affairs, does cut our time into a
hundred thousand pieces. And every affair does take from us one part of our
life, leaving us no time, but that which we gain by theft; substracting some
hours for to examine our selves in secret, and to entertain our mind with
religious thoughts. These solitary meditations have sufficient in them to
employ our wits. For the first subject, which does present it self to our
perusal, is a consideration of the vanity, and misery of humane life; not for
to moles^ us any way, while we are in it; but to prepare our selves to depart
well out of it. No man can aspire as he ought to the future life, which does not
contemn this present Neither can any man contemn this present, which does not
well know it. And the way to truly know it, is to remove it far from us, to
withdraw it from our heart, and to banish it from our affection. For worldly
goods being near at hand do both dazell the mind, and distract the judgment.

But let us first enquire, before we proceed, of some one that has passed
this way. King Solomon in the beginning of Ecclesiastes, entering into that
meditation, does write, that vanity is most vain, all is vanity. That great
and mighty King, which had riches without example, peace without trouble, glory
without envy, who was obeyed of his subjects, respected of his neighbors, and
reigned forty years, which was a sufficient time to content his mind, in
sumptuous buildings, in multitude of horses, in all variety of studies and
sciences; who had traversed his Spirit through all the secrets of nature, eve^
from the Cedar, unto the Hyssope; Nevertheless in the conclusion of all,
considering how these sweetes are confected with bitterness, how there is
little co^sta^cie in these things, how there is small content in all this
travail, he makes this the close of all his actions, That all is vanity, and
affliction Ecclesiast. Cha. 1. 14.
of Spirit. But before that Salomo^ had proved these things he learned that
lesson of David his father, which is written in the 39. Psalm, True (...)
every man is nothing but vanity; he wal^eth in a vain shadow, and disquieteth
himself in vain, he heapeth up riches, and knows not who shall gather them.
Let us therefore according to the rules of such excellent men, enter into that
meditation, and taking that rasor out of their hands, make an Anatomy of our
selves. There is no discourse more serious the^ that which treats of vanity.
Nor contemplation more high then to reason of our own infirmities: seeing by
that means man contemning himself, is elevated above himself. This vanity
linked with misery, is to be considered, first in the Nature of man; secondly
in his actions; and thirdly in his thoughts and desires.

The vanity of the Nature of man.
FIrst to speak of man in his original; The most noble The birth of Man.
of them, yea if he be the son of an Emperor, does rece^ue his form between
the two basest excreme^ts of Nature, and there he is nourished for time with
the most impure blood of all. He is there subject to be bruised by the least
fall of his mother, or sti^^d by the savor, which proceeds from an
extinguish^d Lamp; his birth is shame^^^, in so much that women bl^^^ to be
publicly seen (...) childbed. It is also reputed an honor to kill a man,
and therefore Duells add to one much reputation; because as it is (...) shame
for a man to be borne into this world; so it is an honor to send him out of
it. A manifest proof that the life of man is evil, since that it is so great a
dishonor to beget it, and a greater glory to destroy it; seeing that also he
does begin his life with sorrow, and being borne immovable, tumbleth into his
own filth; whereas other living creatures, are no sooner out of the womb, but
they fall on their feet, and are ready to go, nor out of the shel, but they run
for meat. He again is borne unto such necessity, that he is compelled to gain
his own living with the sweat of his brows, whereas other living creatures do
find all things ready prepared for the^, man only has need of habiliments: for
he which is the most noble in the world, is ashamed to show his nakedness,
and therefore hides himself under the spoils of other Creatures. He is
subject to more maladies, then all the Beasts together; to which the obscurest
fogges or evening dew do no hurt. They never bleed at the nose, although they
go always declining toward the earth; They are ignorant what the Catarre,
Calcul, and diverse sorts of Agues, mean: Man only is capable to discern these
differences, and to feel their effects. For if there be any beasts which are
more afflicted with diseases, they are such that live limited within the
precinct of some house, and so receive it by Co^tagion.

But some will object, that man has reason above the beasts, which is indeed
the reason of his torment, in winning him to practice dangerous, and pernicious
designs: to be subtle in contentions, to wind himself into other men's
affairs, and being once satisfied, to stir up an artificial appetite, and a
desire to drink without thirst. I am ignorant what the reason is, but we are
much more sensible of ill then good, and that griefs do more disturb us, then
pleasures can content us. Scarce can we think of an absolute health, but some
torment or other does presently possess us, as the Toothach, or pain in the
fingers end One drop of Gall will distaste a whole vessel of Sweetes: How much
then of happy fortunes is required, to digest one affliction?

The vanity of man in his Actions.
MAn being borne so Infancy.
poor, and base into this world, how many years steal from him before he
receive ability to conduct himself? How long, and laborious is his
instruction? What time is consumed, while he trembles under Masters, for to
gain unprofitable words and some little superficial knowledge? Also who does
not discern in this part of his age, an untoward perversitie, a contradicting
humor, and in one Infant spirit, all the vices of man, as buddes, and grains
of some future infelicity? The only mean to appease children, is to correct
some one before them. If any do but touch one of their toys, they overturne
all the rest for despite. The love and respect which they give to there poppets
are eminent seeds of Idolatry. Such are the infants, that are begotten of the
best of me^: a grain of corn well used in growing produces straw, a man
circumcised begets an Infant uncircumcised. Therefore you may know by the
perversity of your children, the image of your corruption.

After man's infancy follows Youth.
his youth, which is an unbridled humor; a violent heat, that provokes him
to undertake things unfit that leads him into al dangers, and that induces
him to reject all instructions. O how many men do wander in this way? How many
persons in this age are corrupted with too much pleasure, lulling themselves a
sleep in the lap of such, that seek to strangle them? O traitresse Dalilah,
which seek by thy enticing flatteries to deliver us to an enemy far worse
the^ the Philistines, which is the Devil himself! Such pleasures are like unto
gilded pills; which under their external beauty include bitterness. They are
also like unto fresh Rivers, that end their course in the sea, loosing their
sweet relish in an Ocean of saltnes. True zeal cannot flourish under so nice
and delicate a government; nor ca^ the perfect knowledge of God, (which is a
celestial gift) be subjected to the belly, it cannot remain amongst swine
that habitatio^ is only agreeable to the Devil; who b^ the permissio^ of Jesus
Christ having entered into a hear^ of swine, compelled them to run headlong
unto their own ruin, and who (as it i^ recorded in the holy writ nourishes
prodigal childr^^ with the husks of pleasure instead of their parents brea^^*

This heat being somwha^ Ripe age.
allayed by age, and man no^ come to his maturity, behold other vanities, which
a^tend on him, although no altogether so violently scho^ching; yet more
opinionated, and troublesome. For the comes irremoueable care domestique
troubles, the knowledge of husbandry, contentions in law, and the labor of
painful Mechanique Arts, all to the end, that he may gain somewhat for his
children, who sucking from him all that he has it may be, is only requited
with ingratitude, and reproach. These infelicities are the occasion, that man is
always wearied with the things present, desiring only things to come, and
continually endeavoring to catch at so^ewhat that is already escaped; whereas
if by chance they obtain it, it dissolveth to nothing, as it is in their
hands, or if they enjoy it, it yields no contentment, nor does any way appease
their fear, or satisfy their desire. This evil^ has many inconveniences.

There are many men, Covetousness.
which will hazard their life to win a little money, that is to loose their
being, for to gain the means to be which miss the end, to obtain the
accessories: As he which sells his sword to buy a sheath: or his horse to
have some provender: and to gain worldly pelf, not to serve his occasions,
but rather for himself to serve it; to have riches as one has a fever, which
does more often possess the grieved then the grieved it. To be like unto a
greedy dog, which lying upon hay, and not eating it himself, will snarle
when any other comes near unto it. O miserable people, that live poorly to
die rich! that are most covetous in their declining age, which is to provide for
a tedious journey, when it is even finished! But a man that fears God, for to
avoid so great an inconvenience, will consider in himself, what is the worth,
and estimation of such dross; and will conceit, that the Devil is the only
giver of these things, and and seducer of minds from true piety, and the
divine knowledge of the Almighty, who shows us what estimation we should
have of riches, in giving largely to the wicked, within whose breasts it does
fall, as a purse into a stinking privy. Jesus Christ does give us an example,
what repute is to be held of it, in committing his purse to Judas, when as he
gave his holy spirit to his faithful Apostles. And if he had thought wealth to
have bin the true felicity, no question he would have gathered it more
abundantly: but he had not so much where to lay his head on. He has willed us
to honor poverty by his example. And the great King of Luke 9.
the world will despise all things, that shall entice us to affect the
contrary. A little wealth will suffice us to live well, and less to die
happily: godliness with contentment is 1. Tim. 6.
a great gain; we are come naked into the world, and naked shall we go out:
peacable poverty is much better then troublesome riches. But man is so foolish,
that he had rather draw water out of a great disturbed river, with difficulty
and peril, then from a little clear brook with facility and ease; had rather
take a great mass of gold with torment, and danger; then a little with peace
and security; and in fine, he will be nothing the more satisfied. Moreover he
often thinks that to be lost, which was never gained by him: this kind of
avarice is always linked with envy. If peradventure a man lose his worldly
fortunes (according unto that which Salomo^ says that Prou. 23. 5
Riches takes her to her wings) it does sometimes distract humane sense, for to
ransake a covetous person, is to flea his skin from his body, to take from him
his riches, is to deprive him of his heart, since that such do wholy deuote
both heart and affection to their wealth. The faithful considering these
things, will say with the wise man, that This is also a vanity and affliction
of spirit.

Like to this former vanity, Ambition.
is that of those, which aspire to honor, and greatness, with an extreme
desire. Amongst that multitude of people, which press themselves in mounting
up, those that follow, endeavor to march upon them, which go before: and at
length three parts of them, being driven to stay behind, swell with envy, and
grief at the rest; when as those that have attained to the height of honor,
draw up after the^ their scaling ladders, fearing that otherwise, some by
aspiring might parallel their worth. But oftentimes when they have possessed
themselves with these dignities, they are like unto Apes which having once
climbed to the top of a tree, or house, do sit and make ill favored faces at
passengers, and retain the people to gaze at their moppes: For then ordinarily
their weakness does increase, and their vices grow emine^t; in so much that
they find more care, and fear in that state of greatness, then when they
were most mean. The highest boughs are most shaken by the wind, and the
points of steeples most beaten by storms, and lightening. A man has least
mind to sleep in beds of silk embrodered with gold. The greatest fear of
poisoning is at Tables furnished with variety of delicate dishes. Whereas on
the contrary, it has not been heard, that any has received hurt out of
woode^ cups. After an innocent travel, sleep seems pleasing in a bed of
straw. This is also a vanity, and affliction of Spirit.

Above all that vanity, The life of Courtiers
which corruption does continually attend, there does appear in Princes
Courts a certain noble captivity; where under the color of greatness, is the
highest servitude, and those gilded chains, that fetter men's minds. He which
will live here, must always be masked, and prepared in one hour, to co^vert
him self into twenty several shapes, to entertain many servants, but no
friends. There innocence is accounted mere simplicity, and to affirm any
thing, is to disprove the same. There are two sorts of people in Court, which
hate one the other, each knowing of it, notwithstanding there is always an
emulation between them, which should first attempt any point of honor, to do
the other service; and be the last that should end it. But such ridiculous
complements, are like unto Antike actions. Envy which does supplant, and
deceive his neighbor, or that does snarle in secret, is there perpetually, and
to appease it there is no way but by misery. Vices and degenerat actions are
esteemed amongst Courtiers, as precepts, and part of their composition. Not to
be corrupted by them, there requires more faith then a grain of Mustard seed.
As Crows build their nests in the highest boughs, so does the Devil amongst
the highest of men, where spreading his wings, he clocketh for his little
ones, which are his vices; because there they remain, more exposed to the
sight, and never appear but with authority. There also shall you see
Cavalieroes, which out of their gallant disposition will kill one the other
upon the interpretation of a word; a manifest confession, that their life is
not much worth, which will sell it so good cheap. Notwithstanding these kind
of men that are in such occasions so valiant, do fly away, when they shall
suffer any thing for Gods cause. Surely many such are required to make one
good Martyr for the holy Gospel. O how ill do they understand the precepts of
honor! This is also an unhappy life, and extreme vanity.

To this also there is linked the vanity of another sex. The vanity of women.
For the most part of women are vain, not only out of weakness, and example:
but also by express profession. All their study is how to establish vanity,
and about this they have great strife, and emulatio^. For amongst those worldly
lusters, you shall see women corrupted with delicacies, subiecting themselves
to fashions, and aspects of others, loosing the use of their feet, by pleasing
their fancy with too much neatnes, employing the fourth part of their life,
in attiring themselves: wearing hair bought out of Tyre-womens shoppes,
painting their faces, Idolatrizing their own bodies, yet nevertheless
crucifying the^ with a just punishment, ignorant of all things, yet studying to
speak well, viewing themselves in a looking glass a thousand times in a
day, and calling consultations upon: particular hair. Poor creatures, who in
altring the color of their hair, and adding somewhat to their height, by
extraordinary shoes, would disprooue the saying o^ Christ, and that he
understood little, when he sought to verify, that man could not mak^ Mat. 5.
36. 6. 27.
one hair white or black, no^ add one cub it to his stature. Make but a
collection of the time, that a curious woman does spend through al her life in
dressing her self, and you shall find, that it is more the^ a fourth part of
her age: This curiosity has some affinity with servitude. Who amongst them
will apply so much time in doing good works? And how comes it to pass, that
those habits, which were given unto man for to hide his sin, are now converted
into sin it self? What is the occasion, that that which God has ordained to
cover man's shame; serves now to set forth his glory? That that which was an
argument of humility, is now become the matter of pride? There is nothing so
contrary to the will, and glory of God, as that vain vanity. For a woman that
hinders the going of her own feet, by wearing such nice, and high
pantoffles, how ca^ she fly away into a strange country for Gods cause? A
flesh that is so delicate, how can it endure to take rest, being imprisoned for
the testimony of the divine Gospel? A woman which by reason of her painting
cannot tolerate the heat of the Sun, how can she then endure the fire for
the sacred word of God? Observe our preparatio^s to suffer afflictions, and
pervse our appre^tiship to Martyrdom; and in the end you will find that
Solomon has not seen such things in his time, and that The vanity of
vanity, which he speaks of, is inferior to the vanity of this age.

But now behold another O^ pettifogging strifes in law.
sort of vanity, which does much vex and trouble man. A roaring, crying, and
turbulent vanity, which is armed with stings, and covered with subtility:
which emploieth all the best part of man's life in petifogging strifes, and
amongst the controversies of importunate process. Do but enter into some
great Hall, or place of pleading, you will admire at the confused murmr,
the corrupted discipline, the wearisome courses, and contentious humors, and
will truly perceive that in carriage of all these things, there is no mention
of God, unless perchance insvvearing. And that there in the mean time, while
that two persons do consume their estates, to gain a process, comes a
third and beguileth the^ both of the prey, and oftentimes their charge in
follovving, surmounts the principal. O how many me^ do live by the loss of
others? How many would fast without riches, if all those that endeavor to
consume one the other, should but enter into familiarity and friendship? I do
think that God does perceive this confused and murmuring multitude, in the
same fashion, as we do see a little hillock full of Ants, running together pell
mell, without order, or reason.

This is also a great vanity and affliction of Spirit.
Some one it may be knowing these things to be true, will say nevertheless,
that there is in humane life some honest study, some laudable knowledge, and
many civil, and religious virtues, which cannot be comprised under vanity,
but deserve to be much esteemed. In this opinion does principally appear the
vanity of man's spirit: for if the best of humane actions be but vain, how
much more is vanity it self? Let us first begin to examine studies and
sciences.

In this our modern time Of the knowledge of the tongues
learning is only reputed to be the knowledge of languages: and those that are
learned, do busy themselves to find out how the Romish vvome^ did speak
two thousand years since, how the ancient Romans did apparel themselves, how
people did then affect Comedies, and to refine some Lattine or Greek words,
that are now grown out of use by antiquity. This kind of course is to use a
golden scepter for to take up dong, to employ the understanding, which ought to
flourish in one, to some base occupation, and to make a feast of nothing, but
sauce. For the knowledge of these things is only profitable to season, no way
good to nourish. Also there are some, that when they have attained old age,
do then search for words, when they should have the things. Many there are
also, that begin to read grammar, when they are come to use spectacles. They
learn rules to speak eloquently in Latin, when they are barbarous in their
own native language. So that their life is a continual incongruitie. Of
learning and Philosophy.


Philosophy and the sciences have many things not only more high, but also
harder: like unto pine aples in the highest part of a pine tree, which many
seeking to obtain, do fall in climbing for them, whereas others do break
their teeth that strive to open them. Such is this learning, that as it indueth
a man with much knowledge; so also it adds unto him more care and trouble of
mind. For Solomon says, that he which does augment his knowledge, does but
increase Eccl. 1. 18.
his sorrow. Ignorance is never without some commodity* and in conclusion,
when we have gotten all the precepts of this knowledge, it extends it self
not far, and is of small use: For man cannot by all his Philosophy attain to
the perfect knowledge of a small fly, or garden lettice, much less of his own
composition. We desire to trauerse our spirits through all things, but remain
strangers to our selves. We will know much, and perform little. To speak
more properly, our study is no labor, but rather an idle action, which does
torment us without any hope of advancement: Like unto the Squirrells, that
run continually within turning Cages, thinking to get away, when as after
al their pains taking, they still remain in the same place. We learn little
with great pain, and that little does scarcely amend our imperfections, but
rather oftentimes adds more to them. One drop of wisdom, guided by the fear
of God, is more vvorth then all humane learning. For what does it profit a
Lawier in taking pains to gain the process of another, if he himself be at
variance with God? What commodity reapeth a Physician, to judge of another man's
health, if he himself be not as yet resolved to feel the pulse of his own
conscience? What good is it to any, that have learned the ancient histories, if
they be ignorant of those things that pass in this time? Or to have learned by
Astronomy the motions, and influences of heaven, if they know not the means
how to come thither?

There be some, that undertake Of Travailers and Pilgrims.
long tedious voyages, gaining many hosts, but few friends, promising to
learn much in their journey, when as oftentimes they return more foolish then
thy went: and perchance having circuited the earth, do sorrowfully bequeath
their body to it, for a conclusion to their perfected resolutio^s, as flies
when they have passed many times round about the candle, at length enter into
the flame. After they have seen so much land, there only requires a handful
for to cover them. With this vanity are they justly afflicted, which make long
voiages toward some Saint, for to desire that they may get children, when it
may be at their return they find that some officious neighbor has
discharged them of that care. This is also a vanity and affliction of Spirit.

Perchance our civil virtues Of Civil virtues.
have some things that are of more consequence. But here out of this also does
bud another vanity, seeing that those virtues have no motion, but by vices. For
choler gives an edge to valor, Cowardice does make a man to be more
circu^spect, and wary. Ambition, Avarice, and Envy, are as stings to study, and
Industry. The fear of an ill report in many women is the cause of Chastity,
many are sober out of a covetous humor, others for necessity; friendships are
contracted, either for the desire of pleasures, or for the hope of profit, the
first being no otherwise then a paltry brokery, nor the last the^ a
merchandise. Religion it self does often serve for a cloak to such covetous
persons: for many follow Christ in the desert only to have bread, Ioh. 6. 26.
which is to subject their understanding to the belly, and the chief of
virtues to the meanest of vices, but I know not which is worse, either to fly
away from Christ, or to follow him for gain: to serve him for money, or to serve
the Devil for nothing. Whether it does seem most injurious and ignominious
toward God, either to leave his Son Jesus Christ, or in following him, wrong
fully to make him a vallet to our concupiscences. What can these virtues then
be that march under the Pay of the Devil? Surely this is also a great vanity
and manifest corruption.

Wherefore some (not perceiving any thing in the world which is exempted out
of this vanity, and that vices and impiety have infected all sorts of estates
and conditions in humane life) do think to wrest themselves out of it by
co^fining their bodies to some desert, and conde^ning their mind to a
perpetual care, where being secluded from all company they live in continual
silence, never speaking but with God and themselves. This solitary humor in
many does proceed from a brutish co^ceipt, in others from a weak spirit
incapable of humane society, in others from an ambition to be remarkable for
some extraordinary profession, and in others out of discontent and envy, that
they are wearied in swimming against the current of this worldly stream, and
in having received all things still contrary to their desire; Notwithstanding I
do not doubt but that there be some which do embrace this sort of solitary
life to banish themselves from the vices of this world, and to serve God with
more liberty. But such are much deceived who willing to forsake the world do
return farther into it by other means, and are assaulted by worse
temptations. For then passionate griefs, curious cogitatio^s, peevish Idleness,
Hypochondriacall humors, despair, presumption, and self admiration do
insensibly glide into men's spirits under the profession of an extraordinary
sa^ctity; all which do render the spirit disconte^ted of an insolent melancholy
and presumptuous devotion, which oftentimes degenerateth into madness and want
of sense. A solitary man in the extremity of his griefs and sadness has no
body to comfort him, and comparing himself with none other but himself, has
this conceit, that he is some excellent thing. But then lustful desires do
doubly burn within him. For man is of this nature that he thinks those
things most beautiful which are farthest remote from him. So Saint Hierome
being in the St. Hi^rome in his epistle to Eustochium.
midst of a desert, and in his greatest abstinency does confess that his mind
was then amongst the dances and Ballads of young maids, and that he did burn
with incontinency and desire. Besides the Devil following Jesus Christ in to
the desert does plainly show that he did judge that place most convenient
for temptation. Then if the Son of God was assailed by the Devil in the desert,
how scapeth an Hermit or secluded person that can never be exempted? Therefore
the surest way for a man is to separate himself from the world, not with his
feet, but with his affection, to expel it altogether from him, and his heart,
fearing otherwise that departing from this world, notwithstanding he carries
it with him. For as it is possible to be worldly and vicious living far from
the world: So is it possible to leave the world with out flying into a desert,
and to live alone in the midst of company: To be within a Court or Palace
spectator of vanity and troubles, without participating of them: and in the
midst of a babbling multitude, to talk only with him self, and to entertain
his thoughts with God: And in the mean time to employ his endeavors to the
edification of the Church, stretching out his hand to the Erroneous, for to
reguide the^ into the right way of Salvation, rather then to hide his Tale^t in
the earth, and to cut himself clean off from the body, and all civil
society, as an unprofitable member. So did the Apostles and those glorious
lamps which have enlightened the Church of God, and which shine to this day
amongst us they being dead. I know well that the opinion of Aristotle in the
beginning of his Politiques is true, that He which is of a solitary di^^^sition
is either of a most divine, or very base spirit: because that he does estrange
himself from all society, either for that he has virtues more then humane,
or that he is so contemptible and mean in respect of man, that he is unworthy
to approach near him: But let him know which does affect solitarines, because
he does surpass all men in understanding or virtue, that he ought to repel
that humor, and to condescend by humility and meekness to the imperfections
of others, laboring for the good of the Church or Commonweal, either by word
or work. For what are al those perfections any more then shadows and obscure
traces, of those perfections which are in Jesus Christ? Notwithstanding he
took upon him our shape and conversed amongst men, that there by he might save
them, and win souls to heaven. Therefore to conclude this point; Jf to fly
from the world be a vanity, how much more to follow it? If vices and torments
do harbor in the desert, how much more in presses and throngs of people?
Truly if vanity be in every place, let us say that All is torment and
affliction of Spirit.

But in the mean time that Old age.
Man is busied about all these vain conceits while he is pushing ^ime with
his shoulder, endeavoring nothing al days of his life but to rise, and to go
to bed: to apparel himself, and to make himself unready: to fill his belly,
and to evacuat his stomach: Which is no more then a Circle of the self same
importuning occupations: much like unto a Millers horse that always treads one
compass: While he is thus busied with such occasions, behold old age
stealingly arriveth, to which few do attain, and all desire. But if any do
peradventure gain that time, they desire to have it prolonged to the utmost.
This age (being as grapes which have lost their juice, and as the sink of man's
life) is without question the most unhappy for those men that are worldly: as
on the contrary it is the most blessed for such as are godly. For worldly men
in this age are doubly possessed with waywardness; their fear and distrust
does increase; their judgment waxes weak, and begins to diminish: Wherefore
we do wrongfully call a melancholy humor, wisdom; or a disability
sobriety, because oldnesse leaves not pleasure, but pleasure leaves it. And
therefore he does undeservedly complain that the time and manners of men are
changed into worse, while nothing is changed but himself. For in his youth all
things pleased him, if they were never so bad; in his old age all things
disliked him, if they were never so good; Like unto those which being in a
ship think that the baukes move, when it is only themselves. It is also a
vice incident to this age for to speak much, because they are no more able to
perform any thing; and that they think also themselves most fit to propose
precepts to youth, and to declare things of time long since. Like unto a
declining state (as that of the Roman Empire) where there are many talkers,
but few valiant: and not much different from the aged time of the world, where
are many curious disputers, but few of the true religion. In this age also does
increase the love of wealth, and earthly cares do summon new forces against
man; he waxes all gray, and every thing in him begins the^ to wither,
only his vices excepted. That ancient man of whom the Apostle makes often
mention, being ready to dote, waxes not old in worldly age, but then is he
in his full vigor. He then fore-feareth approaching death, and holds his
life like unto an Eele which slideth away. In the mean time he determines of
tedious designs, and heapeth up riches as if death stood a far off, and durst
not appear: The^ man has least fear to die when nothing of worth remains
in him, but the very leese and dregs of life. Then does he prepare himself
least to gain the future bliss, when age forwarnes him, and every gray hair
does ordinarily advertise him: yea many times death takes for a gage one part
or other of our body, as an arm, or eye, or leg to serve for an
advertisement that he will very shortly fetch the rest. For old me^ are
affianced to the earth by a long use and habit: notwithstanding they are
unwilling to go to it, when nothing remains in them but evil. This is also a
vanity and great grief of Spirit.

In conclusion of all this unprofitable and wearisome travail, Of death.
behold the approach of death, before they have learned to live, much less to
die. The most part of the^ being taken out of this world before they know to
what end they entered in. They vvoulde willingly prolong the date of their life,
but death admits no composition: for it has feet of wool, but arms of Iron:
it comes insensibly, but having taken once hold it never loses her prize.
To this pace or step man comes so slowly as possible he can: For if a ship
should sink amongst the waves two hundred leagues from land, notwithstanding
every passenger would strive to swim: not with an intent to save his life,
but to repel death for some minutes, and to render nature her last inevitable
tribute. Every man trembles at this passage, and labors to settle himself
here. The sole memory of death, mournful funerals, and the reading of
Inscriptions engraven on sepulchers, does make the very hair to stare and
stand on end, and strikes man with an horror and apprehensio^ of it. Some
represent death terrible to the aspect and deprived of flesh, others consider
it with compassion mixte with dread. Some particular man which not long since
was clad in silk and shined with Diamo^ds, is now assaulted with troops of
worms, and breathes forth intolerable sents, while that his heir does laugh
in secret, and enjoys the fruit of all his labor, which he himself never
enjoyed. And never thelesse in this his very dust and corruption does appear
an ambition, and pride does rest it self within his tomb. For then behold
stately Sepulchers, ingraued stones that report some famous actions, and proud
titles upon his tomb set out with false narrations, to the end that passengers
by may say, Here lies a goodly stone and a corrupted body, Surely this is a
vanity of vanities, and one extreme vanity.

But all these are as Roses Of Hell.
in respect of the Thorns which follow: for the vanity and travail of this
temporal life is a happiness in regard of the torments of eternal death
which does swallow the most part of men. It is a large way which leads to
perdition, and few do find the way of salvation. Death comes here to leuy
souls for hell, and does enroule great and small, learned and ignorant; rich
and poor; yea many which are esteemed holy, and live covered under the cloak
of hypocrisy, to the end that they might go to hell with the less noise, and
not be stayed by the way. This Hell is a place of flames, and yet there is
perpetual darkness, where souls do wax old and yet never die; and where
they live continually to die; where they burn without consuming; where they
mourn without compassion, are afflicted without repentance, where torment is
without end, and past imagination. There the unhappy rich man, which refused to
give poor Lazarus a crume of bread, does now beg of him a drop of water,
although whole rivers be not sufficient to extinguish his heat. What if the
Rods that God does punish his Infants withal, do sometimes make them almost
despair, and even curse the day of their nativity, as Job and Jeremy did?
What Job. 3. 1. and 3. Iere. 15. 10
are those afflictions that he does oppress his adversary withal? It is a
horrible thing (says the Apostle) to fall into Heb. 10.
the hands of the living God. For because he says in his anger, as it is
written in the 32 Chapter of Deuteronomie, I have lifted my hand toward heaven,
and said, I am the everliving God; If I whet my glittering sword, and mine hand
take hold on judgment, I will execute vengance on mine enemies, and will
reward them that hate me. Praised be God which has delivered us, and drawn us
from that burning furnace of hell by his son Jesus Christ, who (as St. Paul
says to the Galatians) was Gal. 3.
reviled for our sakes: and has called us out of perpetual darkness to his
marvelous light. 1. Pet. 2. 9. Is it possible for us to be ignorant what that
torment is, and not know how much he has suffered for to retain us in fear,
and to make us know the greatness of the grace of God, and the excellency of
our rede^ptio^ in Jesus Christ his son, who is also God eternally blessed?

This whole precedent discourse How God frustrateth our designs.
has led us through all ages, and through all the most ordinary conditions of
humane life, yet in this voyage we have known no thing but vanity and torment
of Spirit. And it has chiefly appeared, when we have cast our eyes upon the
divine providence of God; which does from the highest heavens view all the
actions of man, not as an idle spectator, but as a wise conductor and just
judge. And there from above he laughs at the designs of great men, and
frustrateth their enterprises, destroys their tongues and spirits of
Babylonian builders, ruineth their greatness, and breaks their Scepters into
shiuers; teaching man that he is nothing but dust, and his wisdom but mere
blindness; To the end that he may learn to contemn the world, and
transport his hopes from earth to heaven, and that having seen some beams of
this terrestrial splendour, which vanishes as lightning, he does say with St.
Peter. It is good that we be Luke 9. 33.
here, let us make our selves here Tabernacles. Happy is that man which having
well known the vanity of this world does retire himself toward God: that he
being in a sure haven a far off, and that being under his shadow as under a
sure covered place may contemplate the ruin of the wicked, the instability of
their designs, the folly of their hopes, and the effects of the judgment of
God. Thereupon the Prophet David in the 92 Psalm says also O Lord how
glorious are thy works, and thy thoughts are very deep.! An unwise man
knows it not, and a fool does not understand this. When the wicked grow as
the grass, and all the workers of wickedness do flourish, then they shall be
destroyed for ever. It behooves us here to note carefully that this Psalm is
entitled A song for the sabbath day. For by it he does advertise us that this
meditation requires a quiet and resting spirit which being restrained from
the press of humane actions does range it self into the house of God,
according to that which he says in the 73 Psalm, where he does confess
that the prosperity of wicked men has offended him, and that he could hardly
digest it, until that he had entered into the sanctuary of the Almighty, and
considered the end of such men. For to understand what the true happiness is,
and to unmask himself to the immaginary felicity of this world, it is not
necessary to go to Philosophical schools, or to build his resolutions upon the
opinion of the vulgar, but to enter into the holy house of God, and there
learn what the difference is between the riches, which he scatters upon
this great multitude, and that which he reserueth for his little ons, what the
uncertainty of this vvorldly prosperity is in respect of the certainty of Gods
promises. But with what insensible chains does Satan lead men into perdition?
How does he triumph over those which triu^ph in this world? How they that
think themselves most sure are upon the point of their ruin and perpetual
destruction?

Furthermore he does consider Of the vain glory of men
how vain the glory of man is, in that some one does boast of his particular
strength wherein it is impossible for him ever to equal a Bull: some other do
glory in their beauty, when as it is only a superficial color, which
covers the blood, bones, and brains, hiddeous things to see; It is also a
thing that age and many maladies have power to deforme. Some other does glory
of his honor, and greatness, when indeed he is possessed in this state with most
trouble and fear, and less liberty; besides he is mounted so high, that he
cannot fall but with breaking of his own neck. Some other does glory to be
more dru^k the^ his co^panio^s; but if his belly be greater in capacity then
other men's, notwithstanding it will never exceed a barrel. This is also The
misery of some conditions of men and nations.
a vanity with a like peruersity.

Those former things are general; for vanities and miseries are common to all
men, since that sin has subjected mankind to them: But notwithstanding there
are some more then other, which are made examples of extreme misery. As poor
beggars, which are constrained through necessity to lie upon the bare pauement;
as gallie slaves; and as those miserable wretches which are made mercenaries.
The hundredth part of humane kind does imperiously and impiouslie torment the
rest; and those that are feeble and mean serve as prays to the mighty.
Amongst the Turks and Pagans which possess three parts of the world, men are
bought and sold in the same fashion, as horses in a fair. For the buyer
marketh their sight, makes the^ show their teeth, and feels the sinews of
their Arms and legs. Great Princes keep Millions of chained slaves for to
labor in making of sugar, in vvorking of Mines, to serve in Galleys at sea,
and to perform such kind of servility, that death is more tolerable to them
then this kind of life. There are certain people which have for the space of
six months continual night, who live in Cavernes, and in the extremity of
the extremest degree of coldness have no heat to comfort them but only
cruelty: Others there are on the contrary, who live among Sa^des continually
scortched by the Sun, a Country barren in fruits, and fertile in Serpents,
and Lions. Our clymat in respect of such intemperature is as the garden of
Nature, where God has planted most wealth and riches; but where he has reaped
least fruit of graceful actions. And where these natural blessings are so ill
husbandred, that amongst all that abundance there is nothing to be seen but
misery and poverty.

The vanity of the thoughts, desires and judgments of men.
NOW that we have formerly and superficially represented as with a Coal the
vanity and misery of our nature, and the actions of man, let us now examine
his thoughts. David in the 94. Psalm says, The Lord knows the thoughts of
man that they are vanity. For if any Idle and unprofitable thoughts.
could but make a true collection of his thoughts which have only passed
through his brain in one day: the confused multitude and variety of them,
being all very foolish, would astonish him: The diverse fictions and strange
Idea's that painters conceit in respect of these are nothing. For some man
(when he has settled himself in his study, or some place where he thinks to
have his spirit busied about the most serious affairs) does then begin to
count the quarrees of his window, or, as the Emperor Domitian, to pursue little
Sueton.
flies both with eye and hand. Some one again perceiving himself destitute of
company, and being very pensive, does advise with himself what he would do if
he were a King: or if that he had a million of crowns how he would spend the^:
or thinking of his own domestique affairs, does thread a chain of tedious
hopes, and by degrees becomes very rich in his discourse, at the conclusion
of which he frustrateth all that imagination, and returning to the
consideration of his present poverty, he moderateth his passions. Yea also
during the time of Sermons and prayer (when God speaks unto us, or we to
him;) our minds are abstracted, and thinking of some other thing; Therefore if
our best actions are infected with idle cogitations, how much more our
unprofitable hours, and ill spent time?

These frivolous thoughts mixed with vain desire, and a like ignorance do
labor the mind, and gives it no repose: For man in his solitary thoughts does
ruminate the evils past; vexing himself with the things present and
fore-fearing things to come, yea those things that shall never happen: he
changes his doubtful fear into certain miseries: Many being miserable out
of a fear that they shall be miserable: and many diing out of a fear that they
shall die. Every day has sufficient affliction to torment us. For who can ever
be in ease, if all the past and future evils do render themselves present to
us; the first by our memory; and the last by our fear? This natural unrest is
the cause that man loves change; like unto one that is sick, who desires
continually to change his bed: yet notwithstanding finds himself more
diste^pered in the last then in the first, thinking no repose to be but in
wearines. For he always carries his grief with him, and finds little ease
in cha^ging of sides: yea (I dare say) if God had placed man betwixt good and
evil to take his choice of either, and, as it were, to cut what he thought
good out of whole cloth, his blindness is so great, that he would rather choose
the worst: or if he did make choice of the best, his perversity is such, that
he would quickly convert it into ill. Jf God send such no griefs, they will
send themselves some. Jf their own griefs do not trouble the^, the
happiness of others will torment them: and envy is more stinging then
affliction.

From it also does it proceed Desires.
that men desire always they know not what themselves: they are greedy to
desire, but weak to put in execution: as a bird that does covet to fly, but
uses only one of her wings. Also men are distracted with contrary cogitations:
One complains that his wife is dead: Another that she will not die. One
mourns for the loss of his children; another that he has some that be
very wicked. One disturbed with business praises domestique repose; and that
opinion of Saul who did rather affect to live obscurely in the basest poverty,
then to be exalted to the highest dignity: another being excluded from
public command does notwithstanding break his own neck to attain it.
Every thing does seem to us beautiful, but that which we have, and nothing
delights us but that which we cannot obtain. Nothing does so much rejoice
us as the hurt of another man: Jf some one decay in fortune we smile, but it
grieveth us to see him receive any honor.

Jn this vanity of thoughts and uncertainty of desires does appear a great
weakness of spirit. For our affections are swaied more by gestures, and
external appearance, then by the thing it self. Like unto some spectators at
a Tragedy, who notwithstanding that they know the Argument to be fabulous and
nothing concerning the^: do weep out of compassion; when as they will not
shed a tear for their own unfeigned griefs. Some there be also that hang
themselves out of despair, which the selfsame hour would have run away from
the thrust of a sword, because that this last kind of death comes accompanied
with horror and fear, whereas the former is so quickly dispatched, that the
sight of it does nothing amaze on. Opinions do more govern us then the things
themselves, many do sometimes eat meat which they know not, and yet they
find it pleasing to the taste: but after, when some one has told them what it
is; their conceit will make them so sick at heart, that they will vomit it
up again. Some others have more fear of a mouse, or of a he^, or of a Toad,
the^ of a sword: certainly such peevish weakness and fantastical actions do
govern our imaginations.

Truly I know not how, but me^ study to deceive themselves. Some one will
recite a tale for truth, which he knows to be most false; and that so
often, and with so great an assurance that himself in fine does believe it. A
husband that knovveth his wife to be deformed, notvvithsta^ding because she is
painted and disguised, will begin to persuade himself that she is fair: and
she her self will believe it, and think to be reputed so: How many be
there which believe in a religion because they vvil believe it? Which contest
against their own sense? Which say among themselves that Surely is absurd and
not agreeable with the Scripture; I will have it thus, and will believe so.
This is to have a constrained belief, not to have his will subjected to
religion, but religion to his will.

The infirmity of man's judgment does especially show it self in religion. For
what he thinks touching the service of God does manifestly appear by his
exterior actions. In matters of news we do sooner believe one that has
seen it, then the common report: But in matters of religion it is contrary;
for most do follow the vulgar opinion: which is as much as to maintain that
which is most absurd, and then to hide himself amongst the multitude. If some
one has a desire to put out money, he requires for such as are both faithful
and of ability, and will have good assurance for it: But in matters of
conscience without farther enquiry he refers himself and opinion to the
Curate of the same place wherein he lives. Observe many other things which
follow, that any may easily perceive to be most ridiculous: as to cloth with
silk and gold the images of men, while that a poor beggar goes naked, which
is the image of God: To put of the hat at the name of Jesus, and not to remove
at the name of Christ. To wear a Cross hanging down upon the belly, while
that the belly is a enemy to the crosses of Christ. In going to a bawdy house,
or returning from some wicked fact, to say certain Pater nosters. To kneel
down at the box which keeps the Host, when it returns empty from some
sick body, as when it went full. To adore the Host passing by in a little box,
and not to respect it in a ma^s body, which is come newly from receiving it. To
make their Creator with words, and then presently to devour him with their
teeth. To be insolent and deboshed on day before le^t, and the next day
following to be very grave and sorrowful. To employ their blessed beads for
to obtain remission of their sins. After the death of any great personag to
cloth with black the Image of our Lady, to the end that she may participate
of their griefs. To whip themselves in public for to content God, or to
release a soul out of Purgatory. In honor of the Saints to burn candles in
the midst of day. To conclude, man has forged many strange things in his
brain, and would have God to approve them. Nay he is come to that pass, that
he does assume to himself the distribution of offices in Paradise; making one
protector of a Country, another a healer of some particular disease as if
little Antes had power to dispose of affairs belonging to the Crown of France.
this is also a vanity of vanities and an extreme imbecility of Judgment.

Our selves which have the true word of God for a rule to frame our actions by,
are not exempted; and our folly and vanity does mix it self with the sole
verity of God. For in our civil actions if we have need of counsel, we
presently address our selves to some friends: But in matters of Gods divine
service we take counsel of our mind and concupiscences, which are our
domestical enemies. Jf money be due to us from one, we had rather alvvaies
have the money the^ his promise; in celestial matters it is contrary. For the
Holy Gospel is an obligation, by which God has promised us salvation, and
has sealed it with the blood of his Son; but we had rather keep the
obligation then receive the payment, which is due at the day of death, nay we
do endevor to prolong the date of it.

Some do record in the Zonaras.
Emperor Honorious a great simplicity, and childish weakness, that having a
Hen nominated by him Rome, which he did cherish, and so infinitely affect,
that when one came unto him, said that his Rome was lost, he answered very
sorrowfully, Alas! she was here but even now. But the other replying said, And
please your Highness I speak not of a Hen, but of your city of Rome, which
has been surprised and sacked by Alaric Goth. The Emperor hearing this was
somvvhat comforted, thinking that loss to be more tolerable. Such is our
simplicity we will not suffer one to touch our riches, but we will endure
any to entice us to vice, to seduce us into error, and to poison our souls. It
is a great folly to refuse a medicine because the Physician is not eloquent.
Why do we not then make account and estimation of the preaching of the
Gospel, if the preacher be not eloquent, seeing that the holy Gospel is the
medicine of our souls? Is it not then an extreme brutishnes for some vicious
person to misprize the Holy writ, because it is not adorned with flowers of
Rhetorique? what is the reason then that the word of God does not please us,
If it be not decked with flowers and composed with art, seeing that it is
that sacred work and doctrine of our reconciliatio^ with God? We do not
receive willingly the correction of our parents, if it be not very mild. This
is also a vanity, distaste, and childish Humor. False Judgments


Touching our judgment which we have of others, either in esteeming or
co^temning them, it is most vain and ridiculously ignorant. For if there be a
question about burdens, we account him most strong which can carry the
heaviest; on the contrary about quarrels we esteem him the most valiant
which ca^ bear nothing; attributing force and valor to weakness and
impatience. Jn matters of Ornament we do not judge of the goodness of a
svvorde by the beauty of a scabbard: nor of the mettle of a horse by the
fairness of the Bridle and Saddle: why do we then measure our estimation of
a man, either by his good or bad apparel? And if it be necessary that we
salute one for the stuff of his clothes which he wears, why do we not
salute the same stuff in the shops? Why do we judge discreetly in the
estimation of vain and triuiall things, when as in a matter of such
importance, as of the estimation of man we are most void of reason? So some do
respect a Marcha^t or Rent-gatherer, because he su^meth up exactly his
accou^ts, when he lives in such fashion that he cannot give an account to
God. Some labor to till their Gardens and other grounds, and by it win much
praise, when as themselves are barren and bring forth vain fear.
no fruit of good works.

We are as much vain and childish in our fears as in any other thing. For as
little Infants do play with fire, and burn themselves, but fear when they
see their father coming (masked with a frowning countenance) toward them: So
men desiring to dally with pleasures because of their luster, at the length
loose themselves amongst the^; yet notwithstanding they fear God their Father,
when he comes to the^ under the mask of afflictions or death. Also man does
inge^der in himself either foolish or pernicious fears. Some one being
jealous, that his wife does affect others, end voreth to espy and search out
that which he fears to find: and by this means angereth her, so that she
seeks to be reve^ged in such nature which he formerly suspected. Some other
fearing to live without honor, co^mits such things that subjects his body to
some cruel torment, and staineth the memory of him with perpetual infamy.
So^e other fears the want of riches, but he shall want it, and die without it.
Some again fears he shall die before marriage; but God will attend that time,
and by wedlock will make him twice; miserable.

When I consider what Childish wisdom.
humane wisdom is, I find it agreeable to the Industry of Moles, which dig
under ground with much dexterity but are blind when they come into the Sun.
So we have much skill in earthly affairs, to sell, to covenant, and to
supplant any one; But take one of these men which is most subtle in these
things, and bring him to the brightness and light of the holy Gospel, and
there he is altogether blind, and of a self conceit will continue so. For
during the time that he does foresee future eve^ts and alterations of estate,
he is ignorant of his own destruction: while that he discourses on the
affairs of kingdoms he is a slave to the Devil. And notwithstanding that
blind judgment of his dares contest against the ever living God; the folly and
foolishnes of the children of darkness against the divine wisdom of the Father
of light; And the discretion of man against the providence of the Almighty. For
the wicked do cover themselves with silence, craft and dissimulatio^: like unto
little children, which think that they are sufficiently hidden when their eyes
are closed: believing that no body sees them, when they see no body. But in
the mean time God perceiues them both naked and uncovered, yea better the^ they
know themselves. For God is not only al hand in holding and conducting the
whole universe, but also all eye in seeing and dicersning all things in it. The
thickest bodies are to him transparant, and darkness it self is to him light,
and therefore the Prophet David does justly reprehend that foolish wisdom in
the 94. Psalm, where he says Understand ye unwise among the people: and ye
fools, when will ye be wise? He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? Or
he that formed the eye, shall he not see? Now in this place he calls them
unwise, not which are fools and run up and down the streets: nor those
private and particular men which are without office: nor the heavy-spirited
Commons, but such as are crafty, and manage affairs with dexterity, thinking
by their sagacity to cover themselves from the wisdom of God; or to dazell
the Eyes of his sacred providence. Like unto the most dangerous Agues, which
are under the appearance of coldness: so the most ridiculous folly is that which
lies under the appearance of wisdom.

It behooves also the faithful to exercise his meditation and to be Spectator
of the actions and thoughts of me^, and of all the unprofitable labors of his
life. For it is in humane life, as in a Fair, where there comes two sorts
of people; one for to buy and sell; the other only to see. Man that fears God
is like to one of those which come to see, he is not here to be Idle, and
search for nothing but to conte^plate the works of God and humane actions: but
he may say (when he has seen all the delights that the curious vanity of men
can show forth) O how many things are there in this world which I have nothing
to do withal? What if during this contemplation some one do iossell or throng
upon him, or if one cut his purse, that is do afflict or deprive him of any
thing, all that such a one will do is, to go out of that company, and knowing
himself to be a stranger in this world will travel toward his Country,
where that celestial habitation is, pressing always (as the Apostle says)
toward the mark for the price Phil. 3 14.
of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. If the world contemn him, he
will contemn that contempt, as knowing himself better then the world, and to
be called to a better hope: he will esteem the promises allurements of the
world, vain, the occupations of men base and importunat. And according to
the example of Mary in the tenth of Luke, He will choose the good part, which
shall not be taken from him: Concluding all his Meditations after the same
manner as Solomon does in the end of Ecclesiastes: The end of all, is the
fear of God, and the keeping of his commandments: for in it is comprised the
sum of man's being.

Now therefore after all this Meditation let us rest our selves upon these two
Maxims and propositions, which are the true foundation that zeal is grounded
upon. The first is for to love God, it behooves to conte^ne the world. The
second is, that for to contemn the world it is necessary for the faithful to
know his own worth, nobleness, and excellency of his vocation.

The first Maxim is taken out of St. John in his first Epistle, Love not the
world, neither Chap. 2. ver. 15.
the things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the
Father is not in him. For all that is in the world (as the lust of the flesh,
the lust of the eyes, and the pride of the life) is not of the Father, but is
of the world. And the world passes away, and the lust thereof: but he that
fulfilleth the will of God abides for ever. Nothing does so far separate us
from the love of God as our affection to the world, seeing that the holy
Scripture for to admonish us does call the world the kingdom of Ioh. 16. 11.
the Devil. But as the Moon has no light unless from the Sun: So our
souls have not any light but by the regard of our God; and by a consequent
neither more nor less: but even as the Moon does loose her light when she is
hid within the shadow of the earth: So also do our souls loose their brightness;
for they are called in the holy Scripture the Infantes of light, when they
molest and wrap themselves within the shadow of earthly things, cares, and
worldly concupiscences: which we ought to tread under our feet according to
the example of the Church, which as it is written in the 12. of the Apocalypse
has under her feet the Moon, that is, the mutable instability of these
inferior things. To this purpose also Jesus Christ would that The penny
should be restored to Caesar, because that it had his Jmage on it. Let us
therefore then give our selves to God, seeing that we bear his own Image.
But the Jnconvenience is that we do often abolish the Image in rubbing it
against the Earth, and polluting our souls with worldly thoughts and desires.

That we may therefore misprise the earth, and all that the word does promise,
it requires that we come to the second point, which is, to know perfectly
what the vvorth and excellency of the faithful is. For when as men by an
unfriendly amity, and cruel welwilling do solicit some one to do ill, which
has the fear of God, and to offend his conscience in offending God, It
behooves the faithful to think in himself: what? I that am a child of God,
and am of a celestial noblenes, that am one of the first borne whose names are
registered in heaven, shall I esteem Heb. 12.
the promises of the world, which when they are most certain, they are too
base for me to meditate on? to delude the son of a Prince with an apple? To
entice with silver the Son of the King of Heaven, to offend his Father? And
after the ensample of Esau to sell my birthright for a mess of pottage? Such
persuasions shall not by any means possess me. God will not afflict me with
so great a blindness. We are unworthy to be followers of Christ, if we do not
esteem our selves to be better then the world. Was it not for the love of the
faithful that the world was framed? Will not God ruinate it again for to
reedify for the^ a fairer house in heaven, where shall be the fullness of
glory? For this heaven or climate is inferior to the vvorth and dignity of the
children of God. You that fear God and trust in his Son, know that it is you
that underprop the world, and that nourish the wicked in it. Therefore the
enemies of God are bound in obligation to you. For he does co^serue the world
out of a respect, which he has toward his chosen and elect, whereof some
are mixed amongst the evil, and others are yet unborn. It is written in the
6. of the Apocalypse, That God does attend until our fellow servants be
accomplished. And therefore this is one of the reasons why that Christ does
call the faithful the fault of the Mat. 5. 13
earth, which is as much as a little part amongst me^, which conserueth the
rest, and delayeth their destruction. For God conserueth the sinful because of
the good, to the end that they should serve as medicines to them, and that the
might and power of our adversaries might serve to compel us to the fear of
God and to trust in his promises. Such being the excellency of Gods elect above
the rest, it behooves us to respect the pleasures, riches, and greatness of
the world, as things that are most ridiculous, and as the painted kingdoms
which the Devil showed unto Christ. Like those which from the highest part
of the Alps do look into Campania, where the greatest Cities seem like
unto little Cottages: how much less and base will they seem then if they were
discerned from heaven? From thence therefore it behooves that the faithful
contemplat humane things, and that he transport instantly his heart to heaven,
since that there is his treasure. And considering from thence the Palaces of
Princes, he will esteem them as habitations of Ants; and the turbulent
murmuring of men as the buzzing of an angry swarm of Bees; and contemplating
from thence what things are most great and apparent in the earth, he will
say, The vanity of vanities that all is vanity.

That Holy glory will not hinder Christian humility. For we knowing the
worthiness in our selves, do find our dignity in Jesus Christ. If
repentance does humble us, faith does exalt us: If we are nothing before God
we are somewhat in God, and in his fatherly affections. And therefore in this
the faithful are contrary to vvorldly men. For they do lift their eyes to
heaven by too much pride, but press down their heart on the earth with
avarice and inco^tinency: whereas the godly on the contrary has his eyes upon
the earth by humility, as the Publican which durst not lift his eyes to heaven,
but has his heart in heaven by faith and hope. The contempt of this world
proceeds not out of a love to himself; but out of a true affection to God.

The wickedness which now reigns.
Moreover the contempt of the world borne of the love of God shall at length
grow to hatred of the world, when that besides the vanity and misery of it, he
shall contemplate the mischief and enmity against the Almighty, which there
reigns; when besides that vanity which some do lay open to the view of all,
he will represent to himself the iniquities which are closely kept, and the
treasons, adulteries, murders which are privately and lurkingly committed; when
he shall consider the vials of Gods wrath and displeasure powered generally upon
humane kind. For in the consideration of this world, it behooves us to leave
out no part of it, but to observe all manner of Nations and people, amongst
which there are many Pagans, which not only by a Consequent, but also by
express profession adore the Devil. The East Indies dedicate their Temples to
him, and honor him with all respect. The West Indies are afflicted and
tormented ordinarily with evil Spirits. In most part of the North lurking
deceipts, and assuming strange shapes are very common amongst the Inahbitants:
Sorcery is there an ordinary profession; and the Devil reigns without
contradiction. Jn that Country, which did once flourish, where the Apostles had
planted so happily the Holy Gospel, the churches are now changed into
Mosquees, and Temples of Idolatry; In the West the head of the visible Church
is become an earthly Monarck: and banks are erected in those places where in
time past was the house of God. Amongst those erroneous and envious people are
scattere^d the Jews, which blaspheme against Jesus Christ, and having
persecuted him in his life do injuriously wrong him after his death. The
Country from whence come decrees and orders for Religion, has in it public
brothell houses, and Sodomy is there an usual custom: Here it is also where
doubts in religion that concern a man's faith are decided in the midst of
corruption.

There only remains in the world a handful of people which serve Jesus
Christ in truth and verity, and they can scarce receive breath in this air
which is so contrary to them, being here as fishes without water, as the
remainder of great Massacres, as pieces of boards scattered after the breaking
of a great vessel: And yet nevertheless amongst these few (which are
subtracted out of the rest of the world,) Corruption does increase, as a
Cancre or ulcer. Quarrels, vanity, superfluity in apparel, Avarice, ambition,
sumptuousnes, which spends foolishly, does infect the one part of this small
troop. For God is il served in private families, their alms are cold; they
pray seldom; and read never: In brief a co^tagion of vices, by conversing
with our adversaries, does infect us, which is the first step to
superstition: For error creepes in to us by vice, and spiritual fornication by
corporal. Jf therefore where God is most purely known, he be there il served:
How much more amongst the rest of the world? If vices do harbor within the
Sanctuary, how much more in the body of the Church, and habitatio^ of the
wicked? Therefore Christ does rightly call Satan the Prince of the world, and
Peter does justly write in the 2. of the Acts Save your selves from that
perverse generation. For Satan lies in ambush for us all; this age is
infectious: vices are like unto glue; temptations strong: our enemies mighty:
our selves feeble and ignorant: and the way of Salvation narrow, and full of
thorns: and few there be (says Christ) that find it. And those which find
it, do not always keep it: but many, having known the truth, do leave it,
and return to their vomit. Let us know then a place so dangerous, that we may
pass by as strangers, which do not only pass but also run from it, flying
from the world, to come unto God. For we shall never have repose unless we
rest our selves upon him. The heaven moves always, and yet it is the place of
our rest: on the contrary the Earth rests always, and yet it is the place of
our motion. The Quadrantes and Horologies imitate the motion of Heaven: but the
faith of the believers does imitate the rest which is above all. Ulysses did
more esteem the smoke of his own house, then the flame of an others; How
much more the^ would he esteem the flame of his own chimney than the smoke
of another? We are here strangers, this is not our house, our habitation is in
heaven. Let us compare the smoke of this strange house, and the darkness of
the Earth with the beauty and splendour of our own dwelling, which is in the
kingdom of Heaven. Here is the reign of Satan; there the kingdom of God.
Here is a valley of tears; there the height of mirth. Here we sovv in
sorrovve; there we reap in Joy; Here we see the light of the Sun through
two little holes, which are called the eyes: there we receive light from
God on every side, as if we were all Eyes.

Therefore because God is all in all. To him be honor and glory in this world,
and in the world to come. Amen.

FINIS.

