CAESAR'S PENNY, OR A SERMON OF OBEDIENCE, PROVING by the practice of all ages,
that all persons ought to be subject to the King, as to the Superior.

PREACHED AT St MARY'S in Oxford at the Assizes the 24 of July 1610.

BY JOHN DVNSTER Master of Arts and Fellow of Magdal. College.

MATTHEW. 22. V. 21. Date Caesari, quae sunt Caesaris; and Deo, quae sunt Dei.

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes. 161^.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, MY VERY GOOD LORD, THE LORD BISHOP OF
LONDON.
RIght Reverend, at the first that I was entreated by Authority to this Sermon,
I intended it only to be, filium horae, the son of an hour, ^o die as soon
as my breath should ex^ire, but only so much of it as the holy ^host should
quicken in their hearts who ^eard me that day: but scarce being out ^f the
Pulpit, I found to be true by expe^ence, which Ench. c. 15.
Epictetus affirms to fall ^t in every business ((...)) That every thing,
especially a Sermon; ^th two handles; some, both Ho. and Wor. took it by the
right ear, and accepted of it beyond its worth; others b^ the left ear,
haling it to a farthe^ sense then (God knows) ever it was intended. The maine
scope was to cry dow^ the Supremacy of Rome, where by reason of those words, To
te King as to the Super^our, in the order of my Text, I was occasioned to say
somewhat of the Immun^tie of Kings from al coactiue power of their subjects.
All that I said was not much, eu^ no more, then has been said before me, Can.
tota^ de poen. did. 3.
Solum principem soli Deo h^bere de pe^cato reddere rationem, and again, Can.
aliorum 9. q. 3
Soli coe^ debere Innocentiae rationem. A doctrine think, never denied in
print by any, until Vindiciae contra Tyrannos.
Brutus, and De Iure regni apud Scotos.
Buchanan, and De Iusta abdicatione Hen. 3.
Bo^chier (...), using or abusing rathe^ their malicious zeal to treasonable
occasions, did embase the metal of the Crown, and put the Dan. 2.
golden head ^ the picture under its foot of clay, and subjected Kings to the
mercy of their people. That which I then spoke, was delivered ^n their words,
from whom I borrowed ^t, and sure I am in their time held to be good and sound
divinity, and I cannot yet understand the contrary, but true and necessary for
these times also; when, if ^ever we have occasion to preach over and over
again that Text of Scripture, Ps. 105.15.
Touch ^ot mine Anointed, and ^oe my Prophets no ^arme. When the sacred
Majesty of Kings ^s made so vulgar, that many less tremble to cut the throat
of their Sovereign, Sam. 24. v. 6.
then David to cut off the winge of Saules garment. And when, had not our
Gracious Sovereign both Regium and Sacerdotalem animum, as Leo has it of good
Theodosius, Epist. 17. ad Theod. semp. Aug.
Aarons rod, and the pot of Manna, would both be snatched out of the Arc by
profane hands, and peradventure the Arc it self be given up into the hands
of the Philistims. The phrase is popular and easy, applied to the auditory
which then was mixed, and I would have that to commend a Sermon which does
commend an honest woman, Ep. Ench. cap. 62.
Modestia non forma. Whatsoever it is either for matter or manner, I humbly
offer it unto your Lordships censure; and if your L. shall encourage me, I will
step farther abroad.

Propert.
Crescet and ingenium sub tua iussa meum. If otherwise, it shall be my excuse
that I have ventred thus far only to give satisfaction to the world, and to
bear true witness to mine own innocence: Sermon. 1. in anniversario assu^pt.
Eius ad Sum. pont. Romans culmen and onus.
and my prayer for your L. ever shall be the same of B. Leo for himself, Qui ibi
honoris est author, ipse fiat administrationis adjutor, det virtutem, qui
contulit dignitatem.

Your Lordships in all duty JOHN DVNSTER.

1. PETER. CHAP. 2. 13. Therefore submit your selves unto all manner ordinance
of man for the Lords sake, whether it be unto the King, as unto the Superior.

14. Or unto Governors, as unto them which are sent of him for the punishment
of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well.


WHEN these Catholic Christians, dispersed Jews, or converted Gentiles, to
whom St. Peter addresseth this his Catholic Epistle, were eagerly driven at by
the secular Arm of Pagan Infidels: and it should seem upon the wonted, and
colorable accusation of all Primitive Christians (Nos infamamur circa
Maiestate^ Imperij, Co^t. Scap.
says Tertullian) that they did deny obedience to the civil Magistrate, as if
they were the only Sons of Beliall, men without yoke: and it were their
language in the psalm: Let us break their bonds asunder, Ps. 2.
and cast their cords from us. and, as if Christ their Mr, and not Antichrist
were that (...), that lawless, and transce^de^t man (2 Thessalonians. 2.) and came
into the world, Non tollere peccata, sed iura mundi; not to take away the
sins, but the laws and societies of the world: a point so far mistaken of
them, that if ever nation, it was the people of God, take it Jewish or
Christian, whether you will, that doted upon Magistrates, for they would rather
have non Deum then non regem: no God, the^ no King at all, They have not cast
thee away, but they have cast me away, that I should not reign over the^, in
that they said, make us a king to judge us like all nations (1. Sam. 8.) when
these Catholic Christians (I say) were greivously, and upon a false ground (as
you have heard) which to a bending, and ingenuous nature, is more greiuous,
persecuted: our blessed Apostle S. Peter from his sea of Rome, the western
Babylon, Hier. oecu^. Beda.
as it is probable out of the last of this first Epistle, writes unto them;
not to claim any right of Sovereignty for himself he had learned from his
Masters own mouth: Luc. 22.25.
Reges Gentium dominantur, vos autem non sic: but to persuade them in all
humble obsequiousness to submit their necks under the yoke of Infidels, and to
offer their throats unto the sword of the civil Magistrate, in these words;
Therefore submit etc.

So that this parcel of holy Scripture may well be called the Magistrates
Scripture: and Caesaris denarius, Caesar's penny: for it has every where his
Image, and superscription. And in it I observe these 6 parts.

1 A duty enioin'd: (...): be ye subject.

2 The object of this duty: to whom we must be subject, delivered at large omni
humanae creaturae, to all manner ordinance of man; so called, because it is
proper to man, not instituted by man; for it has his beginning from God: By me
Kings reign, and Princes decree justice, by me Princes rule, and the nobles,
and all the Judges of the earth (Prou. 8. c. 15.16. ver.) Omni homini, to every
man, Ergo omni Tyranno, therefore to every Tyrant, says Caietan: we must obey
good Princes willingly, and endure evil Tyrants patiently* Omni: to every one.
Non distinguendo inter Ethnicos, and fideles, not distinguishing between
Christians, and Infidels (says Catarinus) and S. Aug. gives a reason of both:
Nam qui regnum dedit Caesari, De civ. Dei l. 5. c. 21.
dedit and Mario: qui Augusto, and Neroni: qui Constantino, Christiano, and
Apostatae Iuliano. He who gave the Empire to Julius Caesar, gave it also to
Marius: to Augustus, and to Nero, to Constantine the Christian, and to Julian
the Apostated Infidel.

3 The distribution of this object into his parts: (...). The King as the
superior, and to other Inferior Magistrates, as his subordinat Lieu-tenants;
to Pharaoh, and to Joseph; to Caesar, and to Pilate; to Moses and to his
Sanadrim.

4 The reason of our duty before enioyn'd: Propter Dominum: for the Lords sake,
Sic ordinantem, so ordaining it: All power is of God, and he that resists the
power resists the ordinance of God: (To. 13) or Propter Dom: for the Lords
sake: that is, not outwardly only with eye service, but inwardly also in the
heart where the Lord sees. Or thirdly, propter Dominum for the Lord, huius
exemplum ostendentem: giving us an example hereof in his own person: Luke 2.51.
(...): here is the very word (...); he was subject unto them; and he says
to Ioh. 19.11.
Pilate, Thou could have no power at al against me, except it were given thee
from above. Romani Caesaris potestatem Christus super se quoque fatetur fuisse
ordinata^: (S. Be.) Christ confesses that the power of the Roman Emperor was
over him to: and an other where: (S. Be.) Quid saecularitate^ co^te^nitis? Ad
Hen. Sen. Arch.
saecularior nemo Pilato, cui Dominus adst^ tit iudicandus. Why do ye contemn
the secular powers? No man was more secular the^ Pilate, before whose bar our
Lord stood to be judged. Or fourthly, and lastly: propter Dominum: for the
Lord, that is, In his quae ordina^tur ad Dominu^, In those things which are in
respect and ordination to the Lord, and then as before, he taught, Quibus
debe^t, to whom they ought: here he teaches In quantum debent, how far forth
they ought to obey. viz: In all things where the Lord is not prejudiced. For if
S. Aug. case be, August. de verb. dom. 2. Mat. ser. 6.
Aliud Imperator, aliud Deus: the Emperor comma^deth, and God countermandeth
the same: we have our answer, whether it be better to obey God, or man, judge
ye. If Caesar say, Solve tributum: Ibib.
pay thy tribute, Esto mihi in obsequium: yield me thy service and obedience.
We answer, it is right, we owe service; we owe tribute; we must obey: but if
he bid us to bow the knee to Baal, or to leave a hoof behind us in Egypt, or
not to name Jesus in our preaching and profession, there we are forbidden says
he: who forbids? A greater power Da veniam Imperator, tu Carcerem ille
gehenna^. O pardon Emperor, thou threatnest but prison, he threatens Hell,
thou to kill the body for a time, he to kill both body and soul for ever.

5 The persons who must perform this duty; Ye; Be ye subject, etc. Ye who
are called at the 9. v. A chosen generation: a royal Priesthood: an holy
nation: a people set at liberty, and yet this Christian liberty no way
exempting the^ from subjection. Libertas per Christum Co^cessa, Aquinas.
est libertas spiritus, caro adhuc remanet servituti obnoxia, and there be for
it (...), Lib. 5. de Romans pont. cap. 3.
Lords after the flesh: Ephesians. 6. and Bellarmine himself, Non obest regibus
Christi beneficiu^: The liberty of the Gospel and benefit of grace by Christ do
not prejudice kings in the right of their obedience, But be ye subject.

6 The end of al, both command, and subjection: praemium and poena; reward,
and punishment. Both the King and his Judges are sent of him, that is of God,
for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well.

It would be too long to handle each several part apart. And I should to much
abuse your Honorable patience. Marc. 12.
Wherefore in imitation of him who contracted 10 words into 2: Deum and
proximum, God, and our neighbor: and the many books of the Old and new
Testament into 2. Ioh. 1.17.
Mosen and Christum: Moses, and Christ: I reduce all unto these two heads:
Lineam, and Lineam, a line, and a line: praeceptum, and praeceptum, a precept,
and a precept.

1 The first praeceptum nostrum, a precept for us, our duty, the duty of the
Subject, obedience: Be ye subject, etc.

2 The second, praeceptum vestrum: A precept for you (R. H.) The duty of the
Magistrate care and conscience, For the punishment of evil doers, and for the
praise of them that do well. First of the first, Our duty, the duty of the
subject, Obedience. Be ye subject.

That Christians are to be subject in Gods ordinance unto the Civil
Magistrate, is evident to every one, that does but observe how in the whole
book of God, al both the language, and actions of all the servants of God, do
savor of very perfect obedience. Daniell never spoke unto the king of Babylon
but with terms of respect, My Lord, the dream be to them that hate thee, and
the interpretation thereof to thy enemies: and again to Darius, O king live
for ever: and the Jews were commanded to pray for the life of Nabuchadnezar,
and for the life of his son Baltazar: and the form of prayer is prescribed
them, ut aetas eorum aevo Coeli respondeat; that their days might be upon
Earth as the days of Heaven (Baruc.) And in the time of the gospel we shall
find this Doctrine of obedience to be consecrated in the person of our
Savior. Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire, but mine ears have thou
opened: The L. God has opened mine ears and I was not rebellious. He lived
obediently, As a sheep before his sheerer, so opened he not his mouth: he died
obediently to; Ne perderet obedientiam perdidit vitam: he lost his life that
he might not loose his obedience. And the Apostles (that we may know them to be
the disciples of this Master, did ever teach this duty of Obedience, Put them
in mind (says Paul to Titus, Tit. 3.
that they submit themselves to powers, (...), the very word of my Text: and an
otherwhere to the Romans Romans 13.
Let every soul be subject unto the Higher powers: (...), the same word
again. These powers and higher powers were cruel and merciless Tyrants,
which did use, or abuse rather their power no way more, then in the Torment of
Christians: and yet Plautus.
(Indigna digna habenda, rex quae facit, says the Poet: and Quomodo
sterilitatem, aut nimios imbres, and Caetera naturae mala sic Improbitatem
Dominantiu^, Tacitus.
Says the wise historian.) We hear of nothing but of subjection and
obedience. And if we search into the stories of after ages, we shall find that
the Christians of the Primitive Church for above a thousand years together,
did profess, and practice this doctrine of obedience. In Apolog.
Tertullian makes it clear in his time: we pray for the Emperor, says he,
that God would give unto him, vitam prolixam, Imperium securu^ domum tutam,
exercitus fortes, senatum fidelem, populum probum, orbem quictum, and
quaecu^que hominis, and Caesaris vota sunt: A long life, a happy reign, trusty
servants, valiant soldiers, faithful Counselors, orderly subjects, and the
world quiet under him, and whatsoever else people or Prince could wish for.

And why did Christians thus pray for the prosperity of these Wolves and
Tigers, think ye? sciu^t quis illis dederit Imperium: O, says he, Ibid.
they know who has give^ them their Empire, sentiunt Deu^ esse solum in cuius
solius potestate sunt, a quo su^t secundi, post que^ prim^, ante omnes and
super omnes: they are resolved, that it is God alone in whose alone power
Emperors are, from who^ they be the second, and after whom the first: and in
another place you that think we care nothing for your Emperor, Inspicite Dei
voces, Literas nostras: look upon the oracles of our God, the books of old
and new Testament: and scitote ex illis nobis esse praeceptum: know ye that
out of them we are commanded to love our enemies, and to pray for our
persecutours; Et qui magis inimici, et persequutores Christianoru^, quam de
quoru^ maiestate convenimur in crimen? and for conclusion he appealeth unto
their own experience: consider your annals, examine your records of justice,
see, and tell me: vnde Cassij, and Nigri, and Albini? Whence was Cassius, and
Niger, and Albinus, and their like? De Romany; they were Infidels of your
own; sure I am, de non Christianis, the^ were no Christians.

Aug. in Ps. 124.
To go a step lower to S. Aug. time, he wi^ tell us how the case stood even
then. Iulianu^ exstitit infidelis imperator: Julian, says he, wa^ turned
infidel Emperor, milites Christiani serui^runt Imperatori Infideli: yet,
Christian soldier did serve under this infidel Emperor, when he bad them
sacrifice, they indeed refused, when he lead them forth to fight, they obeyed.
Distinguebant Dominum aeternum a Domino temporal^ and tamen subditi erant
propter Dominum aetern^ etiam Domino temporali: They did distinguis^ the
eternal God, from mortal man, and yet the^ were subject to man for Gods sake.
Here is subjection propter Dominum: the words in m^ Text. To come yet somewhat
lower to S. Ber^ time: the doctrine of obedience was sound ^ven then. In his
170 Epist. to Lewis called the Gross king of France, as wicked, and prophan^
and Tyrannical, and infest a king to the Church as ever was in France: a whole
Catalogu^ of whose obliquities we have in his 220 Epistle yet how does he
write unto him? S^ totus orbis adversum me coniuraret, vt quipp^ am molirer
contra regiam maiestatem, ego tame^ Deum timerem, and ordinatum ab eoregem
teme^ offendere no^ auderem: nec enim ignoro vbi legerim: Qui potestati
resistit, Dei ordinationi resistit. If all the world should bandy against me,
and egg me forward to some undutiful attempt against the kings Majesty, I
should so fear God, that I should not dare to transgress against the king
his ordinance for I know where it is written, He that resists the power
resists the ordinance of God. Here is again obedience propter Dominum.

Let Theobald the Earl of Champagne and Raoul the Earl of Vermandois lift up
their heel against there Sovereign, yet we of the Clergy will ever Co^taine
our selves within our duty to Gods ordinance: Non imminuetur honor regis per
nos 16.
Hoc sentite de nobis^, hoc sentite de nostris, in the same Ep. o think thus
of Ber, and all that are like Ber.

I know what Bellarmin replieth: if Christians did suffer and obey Tyrants, and
Arrians, surely it was Lib. 5. de Romans pont cap. 7
Quia deerant vires temporales Christianis, because they wanted power enough to
depose them an exception (beloved) directly contrary to that which they
themselves testify of themselves. For to begin where even now I did, says
Add quod nec id licuit cum potesta^ impiorum superior esset Bouch.
Tertull. Si hosts agere vellemus: if we would deal with you by revenge:
deesset nobis vis numeroru^, In Apol.
and copiaerum? should we want either number or strength? Consider well:
Externi sumus, and vestra omnia implevimus: we are strangers unto you and men
as it were of another world; yet we have filled all places of yours: your
Cities, Islands, Castles, borroughs, meeting places, Tents, tribes, ba^ds,
Palaces, Senate, and Court, and all. Nay it is an exception in his judgment
very absurd. For, says he: Cui bello non idonei, non apti fuissimus, etiam
impares copijs, qui tam libe^ter trucidamur? What war are we not ready and fit
for, though unequal in power, though unequal in power, suppose that, who do so
willingly suffer death? Si non apud istam disciplinam magis occidi liceret,
quam occidere: but that by this profession it is more lawful to be killed then
to kill. And S. Cyprian to Demetrianus the officer of a persecutinge Emperor;
Nemo nostrum adversus iniustam viole^tiam, qua^vis nimius et copiosus sit
noster populus vlciscitur, none of us does revenge himself of your unjust
violence, though the number of our people be marveilous great: mark I beseech
you here is violence, yea unjust violence, and Copios. pop.
power enough to resist, nay Nimius and cop.
more the^ enough to resist, and yet Nemo nostrum vlciscitur, none of us ever
offered to revenge. But the story of S. Ambrose will put all out of question:
He being summoned by Valentinian the Arrian Emperor to depart from his
Churches, and to leave them to the Arrians, tells us himself of himself, that
not to say any thing of Christ and his holy Angels (who ever pitch their tents
about the Godly) Maximus in the west, and Theodosius the Orthodoxe Emperor in
the East, and all the people, and most of the soldiers were on his side: In so
much that the Emperor being solicited by some in his Court to go in person
against the Bishop, made answer: Lib. 5. ep 33. ad Marcellinam so rorem suam.
Si vobis iusserit Ambrosius vinctum me tradetis, No says he, for if Amb.
hold but up the finger, you will betray me bound hand and foot unto him. Yet
what spirit did this otherwise stout, and courageous prelate take unto
himself? Upon what terms for justification of Arms stood he with his
Sovereign? Ibid.
Tradere Basilicam no^ possum, sed pugnare no^ debeo: rogamus Imperator, non
pugnamus: Oration in Auxen^
dolere potero, potero flere; aduersus arma lachrymae meae arma su^t. Talia
enim munume^ta sunt Sacerdotis, aliter nec debeo nec possum resistere: I cannot
betray the Church, and yet I may not fight, we supplicate, o Emperor! we do
not carry Arms: a shewer of Crystal tears is all the buckler I oppose
between me and your forces; these are the munition of a Priest, otherwise I
neither can nor ought to resist. You here all the resistance that this good
Bishop did make, and yet by the way this is that Bishop to whom Bristow does
so often parallel Pius 5 that insole^t Anathematizing Pope of Rome. Tom. 2.
Mot. 19. p.
So that still you see Obedience to be the doctrine of the Primitive Church:
and we find it too (right Ho:) at the same time the contrary to be given for a
mark of Reprobates and Heretics. We read in S. Iudes Epistle of some
desperately wicked ones, Verse. 8.
Dominationem spernunt, they despise government, maiestatem blaspemant, they
blaspheame Majesty, and there is a woe against the^ too. Verse. 11.
Vae illis qui in co^tradictione Core. And Lib. 3.
Optatus observes it as a point remarkable against Parmenian the Donatist,
that Donatus the Father and Author of that heresy, was wont to say: Quid est
Imperatori cum Ecclesia? What has the Emperor to do with Church and
Churchmen? And that he did revile in one of his letters the officers of the
Empire, writing thus to Gregorius the President: Gregori macula senatus and
dedecus praefectorum, and caetera talia: o Gregory the stain of the Senate,
and disgrace of Presidents.

These all knew very well the nature of Majesty to be great, that the style
of the holy Ghost did put Kings and Emp. at the top of Jacobs ladder, and
almost within heaven itself. ( dixi Dij estis I have said ye are Gods. Dij
incarnati, Gods incarnate says Luther) and us baser worms at the foot: 1.
Tim. 2.
I beseech you Brethren that prayers and supplications be made for all men,
(...) for Kings and all that be (...) in sublimitate in sublimitie. And Romans
13.
let every soul be subject, (...) again, in sublimity: and in my Text; (...),
always in sublimity. And it cannot be but desperate, and unwarrantable
presumption, for any son of the earth to swell so big as to offer to bring
into order, if out of order these powers in sublimitie.

They are not cou^table to us, for their actions, their enditement belongs to
a higher bar, whatsoever they do commit, whether adultery or murder, or
idolatry, or whatsoever else the Devil can suggest, and wickedness armed with
authority exsecute, it is their language and privilege, David quia rexerat
aliu^ non timeba^ Hier.
tibi soli peccaui: against thee, against thee only have I sinned: Sup. Imper.
non est nisi solus Deus qui fecit Imp Opt. lib. 3.
at the bar of heaven only do they stand for sentence: no laws either of
their own constitution, or municipall, and fundamental of their subjects (for
coactiue power) can take hold of them. I would be loath to teach this
transcendent liberty of Kings had not I warrant for it from Antiquity: S.
Ambr. in his Apology for David: Liberi sunt reges a vinculis delictorum, neque
enim vllis ad poenam vocantur legibus tuti imperij potestate, Princes are free
from the bonds of their sins* from all obligation to humane punishment for sin:
they are not pleadable by any law, being safegarded by the power of Empire. And
Lib. 5. c. 17.
Gregory Bishop of Towers to king Chilpericke, a Bishop to a king: Si quis de
nobis o Rex iustitiae limits transcendere voluerit, a te corripi potest, si
vero tu excesseris quis te corripiet? Loquimur enim tibi, sed si volueris
audis, si autem nolueris quis te damnabit, nisi solus qui se pronunciauit esse
iustitiam? And In ep. ad Fred. Oen. praefixa cron.
Otho Frisigensis to Frederick Oenobarbe a Bishop likewise to an Emperor: Cum
nulla inueniatur persona mundialis quae mundi legibus non subiaceat, subiacendo
no^ coerceatur, soli reges vtpote constituti supra leges divino examini
reservati, saeculi legibus non cohibentur: whereas there is no person in the
world which is not subject unto laws, by a subjection Coactiue, only kings, as
being placed above the laws and reserved for Gods inquisition, are not bridable
by the laws of this world. Neither is this the holy water of the Court as some
call it, which smells sweet in the nostrels of Ambition, nor that Oleu^
peccatoris, that precious balm in the Psalm which pestilent flatterers power
upon the head of Majesty: but true divinity grounded upon evident scriptures.
Elihu demands (Job. 34.18.) Will thou say to the king No rather quoth Calv.)
Ser. 132. in haec verba. say, Et bien Seigneur ceuxcy dominent en con nom il
fault donc que nous leur soyons suiects.
thou art wicked? Or to the Princes ye are ungodly? It boots not, nay it fits
not. Seeing where the word of a king is, there is power, and who shall say
unto him what do thou? Eccl. 8.4.


And is it so (Right Hon:) Is it the Apostles precept, Be ye subject? and unto
the king as unto the Superior? How far wide then from this doctrine and
practice are they who will have kings to be subordinate to Ephori and
Paedagogi, to Vshers and Tutors? Calvin, Inst. l. 4. c. 20. and 31.
to the public Honorable assembly of the States of the Realm. (And yet I may
not charge him too far in this point, for he speaks doubtfully and very
cautelously -- Si qui nu^c sint populares magistratus, and qua forte potestate
fungu^tur in singulis regnis tres ordines, De Iure regni ap. Scotos. and reru^
Scot. l. 17. p. 560.
And no^ veto, And pro officio intercedere.) Buchanan to Populus, the beast
with many heads the common people: Rossaeus to Resp: Christiana, the christian
commonweal and the Masters of the Reformed Discipline to their Presbytery
and Senate Ecclesiastical (for so they style a few Artiza^s and base people in
an Eldership. Discip. Eccles. from Roch. Ano 1574.
) All these to some few or many, who shall have power to give check-mate to
their Sovereign, and to play with him * Rege^ spoliare at their pleasure. Le
roy de spouuille.
Nay some go farther and will bring the king to his own bar, for his own
life, a thing so unheard of even among Pagans, and Infidels, that the Orator
being to plead for Deiotarus a king before Caesar tells us, Regem capitis reum
esse, ita invsitatum, ut ante hoc tempus inauditum: that for a king to plead
for his life, was so unusual, as unheard of until Cesars time.

Again is it unto the king indeed as unto the superior? And was this the
Doctrine of the Primitive church? What means then the high Priest of Rome to
exalt his linne^ Ephod above the Golden crown, and Scepter of kings, making
himself the Cedar, and them but the Thistle in Libano^. What is the world
turned vpside-downe? And whereas Moses was once Aarons God, Ex. 4.16. v.
will Aaron now become a God to Moses? It is an observatio^ of one of their own.
Carerius l. 2. c. 1. Aquin. com. in 1. Pet. 1. Chapt. Stapleton. doct. prin.
lib. 5. c. 22.
In lege veteri regnu^ erat sub stantivum, and sacerdotium adiectivu^. In the
old Testament kingdom was the Subst. and Priesthood but the Adiect. But now
the Grammar is altered, and Priesthood is the Subst. and kingdom but the
Adiect. And now it is held for good divinity: Cu^ recta fide tenendum: Carerius
lib. 2. cap. 9
to be held as an Article of the right faith, Principatum Romans Pontificis esse
veru^ and vnicum principatum totius orbis nedum quoad spiritualia, but quoad
temporalia. That the kingdom of the Pope is the true and only immediate
principallity or kingdom of the whole world, and that not only in spiritual,
but temporal Causes also: and that all other powers in the world, A prima fummi
Pontificis regia potestate pendere, Careriu lib. 2. cap.
^o depend upon the first kingly authority of the Pope. And hence it follows
that every king for example the King of Great Brita^ny) ad iussu^ ^rincipatus
papalis, mobilem, revocabilem, Apud Carer. l. 2. cap. 9.
corrigi^ilem, and punibilem: at the Popes pleasure, and command, is moveable,
revocable, corrigible, and punishable.

And whereas the French affirm that there king holds his kingdom immediately
from God, this habetur res maxim ridicula Romae: Author libelli cui inscriptio
brevis Narratio quomodo Henricus 4. fr. and Nav. rex apud Clem. 8. humiliter
perlegatos egerit. Ibib. Ier. 1. c. 10. Lib. 1. c. 3.
is at Rome accounted a ridiculous, nay most ridiculous matter: and nugantur
huiusmodi politici: they that talk so are but trifling politicia^s. And they
have scripture to for all this: good God that Divines should allege thy word
to the prejudice of thy ordinance: for whereas the Lord says to his Prophet
Ier. behold this day have I set thee over the nations, and over the kingdoms,
to pluck up and to root out, and to destroy, and throw down. Carer. will tell
us: Hoc Propheta in persona Christi ad Roma. Pontifice^ loquitur: that the
Prophet in the person of Christ does speak this to the Bishop of Rome: 2.
Cron. 26.20.
and because Azariah the Priest did thrust Vzziah the king staind with Leprosy
out of the Temple: therefore the Pope may excommunicate kings defilde with the
Leprosy of the soul, which is heresy: Durante excommunicatione qui obnoxii
erant vinculo fidelitatis vel iuramenti tali vinculo liberabuntur Tol. Inst.
Sac. lib. 1. cap. 13.
Et postquam per Pontificem excommunicantur, ex tunc vasalli ab eorum
fidelitate denunciantur absoluti, says * Massoveus. and when the kin^ is so
excommunicated, then, and then instantl^ his subjects are freed from their
allegiance, an^ they may lawfully, nay ought to kill him. An^ when we reply
that David after the sentence o^ Excommunication pronounced by Samuel against
Saul, De Maiemilit. Eccl. par. 2. lib, 4 de Imper. 1. Sam. 15.26. v.
God has cast thee away from being king over Israel, more terrible the^ any
that eve^ came from Rome: did notwithstanding hono^ him, and was so far from
taking away his life* that when he had him shut up in a Cave, and was animated
by his soldiers so to do, would not lay violent hands upon his person, but
1. Sam. 26 10. v.
protests that as the Lord lives, except the Lord strike him, or his day
shall come to die, or that he perish in war, God be merciful unto me that I
lay not my hands upon the Lords anointed: and when he had but cut off a lap of
his garment as if he had pared away some branch of his Majesty, his heart
smoate him for it: and it is observed by Lyran. ib.
some, that David circa morte^ fuit punitus in Poena do cente culpam Lyr. 2.
Sam. 1.
simili, to wit, in vestibus, in his Clothes, for they would not warm him in
his old age, according to that (Wis. 11) per quae peccat quis per haec and
torquetur: In the same that a man sins, he shall be punished. They answer
to all this, that David was ^ot ex optimatibus populi: Iu. Brutus page 212.
David was no peer ^f the kingdom, his father was but Ishai the ^ethelemite,
or Secondly, it was co^scie^tiae scrupulus: ^e scruple and tenderness of his
conscience, and his makes a man, Saepe permissis abstinere, often ^mes to hold
off his hand from doing that which he might lawfully do: or Bouch. l. 3. cap.
18.
Thirdly, perfe^tionis hic exemplum non necessarij officij esse intel^gendum:
this was an example of perfection ^ot of necessity to be imitated. Or Fourthly
and ^^stly he did it in policy, seeing himself ordained ^o be his successor,
because he would not give ^uch an example for others to practice toward
^imselfe.

Thus they shift over all Scriptures, that they ^ay make way for their
Attentates, and vsur^ations over kings: you see (R.H.) how high ^hese men build
the Babble of their pride: We ^aue heard of the pride of Moab, he is
exceeding ^roud, as it was said of old by In Apol.
Tertullian. Nisi ho^ini Deus placuerit, Deus non erit: except God ^lease man,
he shall be no God at all: So a king ^halbe no king except it so please the the
man of ^^nne the Pope of Rome: he will crown whom ^e pleases, and discepter,
and dethrone whom ^e pleases.

If Henry the 3. King of France, be traduced at Rome by Sycophantes, that he
loved in heart the Protestants: that he was wont to style our Queen
Elizabeth, Bouchier. At Bloys) vos clerus meus.
bonam suam Sorore^, his good Sister: and that he used to call the Clergy of
France, Clerum suum, his Clergy (a Clerum enim Gallicanum vel regni dicere
debuerat. Boucheir.
style forsooth savoring too much of absolute Monarchy) not the Fhench Clergy,
or the Clergy. A conspiracy shall be plotted, and confirmed, or hollowed rather
at Rome, and be sent into France by the name of the Holy ligue, to depose him
of his Regalities: and Bouchier a Priest shall write a book, de iusta
abdicatione Henrici tertij; of the rightful deposition of Henry the third: and
a James Clement.
Iacobin shall have a knife put into his hand edgd with that Text of Scripture
(suscitauit Israelitis salvatorem, Judge. 3.
qui Aeglon interficeret, suscitavit and me Catholicis, qui H. interficiam.) to
kill the King, and after the murder is performed upon his sacred Majesty, the
Pope in the middle of his Cardinals shall make a panagericke in commendation
of the fact. Xistus Quintus 2. Dec. 1589.


Mortuus est rex Francorum per manus monachi, magnum and memorabile facinus.
The King of France is slain by the hand of a Monk, o rare and memorable Act.
And why? Occidit Monachus regem non fictum aut pictum in charta, sed regem
Francorum: for he has slain a king not painted in paper, or graven in stone,
but the French King, and therefore o memorable Act, done by the admirable
providence, will, Ibid.
and succor of Almighty God. And in applause hereof, K. of Fr. had his
Embass. whipped at Rome for penance. Apos. for the oath of allegiance
there shall be song that hymn in the Psalm. The right hand of the Lord has
done valia^tly, the right hand of the Lord has brought mighty things to
pass: And of late again, H. the fourth immedidiate successor both in name and
fate to H. the 3, shall be dispatched in the same bloody and boucherly manner:
would ever man have thought, that he who in submission to the holy Church did
receive discipline at Rome? he, who at the insta^ce of the Jesuits did
demolish the Pyramid the monument of The house where John Castle was borne,
being razed to the ground, and a pyramid builded in its place, speaks thus,
Hic alta quae sto pyramid, domus fui, Huc me redegit tande^, herilis filius,
malis magistris vsus, and schola impia Sotericum eheu nom^^ vsurpantibus
their disobedience; and did recall, and restore, and endow, and countenance
that order above all other orders of Friars: he who might well say with our
Savior: For which of my good works do ye stone me? Would ever man think
that he should find that aversion of heart, and indignation from that society
that whereas before he refused to swallow down the knife put into his mouth,
he must now admit it into his bowels, and have his very heart strings cut
therewith? By John Castle.


And is the king of great Brittany in better terms of amity with that
Church, By Ravail i art.
then these two unhappy and disastrous kings before recited? Or has he in this
king-killing age a super sedeas from danger? It was once the Divinity o^ Rome,
Tenentur Angli vi reginam suam deijcere the English are bound to depose their
Queen says Bannes: and In his admonition. page 33.
C. Allen: My Lords and Contryme^ for Gods sake fight against the Queen to
depose her* and now that our Queen is dead is our King in greater safty? Lib.
5. de Romans pont. cap. 7.
Is there not a position in Bell: tha^ reaches unto him? Non licet subditis
tolerare regem Hereticum: sed expellere eum debent, vt pasto^ Lupum: It is not
lawful for subjects to tolerate a king an Here: but they ought to expel him,
as a sheapheard the wolf. Has he not already fealt the effects hereof? Be
not there some sons of Beliall in our land, geniti proditionis, as the
Prophet calls them, who plot and practice til their heads ache again, to find
out the thread of our dread Sovereigns life: but that the good God of this
Land has enclosed it in a maze of his mercies past their finding out. Did they
not of late go to the Devils forge for a Torture? of which we may say:
Claudian.
Quid tale immanes vnquam gessisse feruntur? and again with the same Poet: O
mites Diomedis equi Busiridis arae Clementes!

If they be compared to this late prodigeous tragic Gunpowder stratagem. If
the grape gatherers come unto thee, would they not leave some grapes? If
thieves come by the night they will destroy til they have enough: and but till
they have enough (Ier. 49.^.) but these merciless men, these Ignatian
Pyrachmons, will down with all at one blow, Surely every battle of the
warrier is with noise and tu^bling of garments in blood, but this should have
been with burning and devouring of fire. Is. 9.5.
they will bury in one common * fire, root and branch, head and tail, patrem
and patriam, King, Queen, Prince, Clergy, Nobility, the R. Judges, the
flower of the Commonalty of our Land, and only, I think, that they might see
an image of Tophet, and hell in this world. And do you think they will here
cease? no no, Ep. ad praeposit. soc. Ies. In his Ep. to the King
Campian has told us long ago: ^rascatur homo, saeviat Demon, erunt in
Anglia qui curent salutem suam, erunt qui provehant alienam. And Bishop of late
in more express terms: when they shall see no hope of remedy, the state being
now settled, and a continual posterity like to en^ue of one nature and
condition, God knows what that forceable weapon of necessity may constrain
and ^riue men to at length: they will betake them^elues to their old Gods
again: Buthos and silen^ium, as De praesc.
Tertul. observes of some Heretics in ^is time: the depth of Satan to invent,
and si^ence closely to carry their Machinations, until ^hey meet with an
opportunity to act them. I ^emember a saying in Live. de aetolis lingua^ tatum
Graecorum habent sicut speciem hominu^, moribus ritibusque efferatioribus qua^
vlli Barbari immanes bell. luae, vivunt.
Livie, of a sort of people not far unlike to these men: Mare interiectum ab
istis praedonibus non tuetur nos, quid si in medio Peloponeso arcem sibi
fecerint, futurum nobis est? The sea is between them and us, and yet all the
water in the sea cannot quench their rage and wildfire, and what do you
think would become of us, if they had convents, and colleges in the heart of
our Land?

I fear me I insist to long in this argument: It is only to show your L. the
straights in which we are. Aut dandus aut trahendus sanguis est: that either we
must give them ours, or take from the^ their heart blood: and as Tully wrote
once to his friend Brutus, video te lenitate delectari. I must change the
number, I see your H. delighted with lenity, praeclare quidem, you do well:
sed alijs rebus, alijs temporibus locus esset solet, debetque Cleme^tiae: but
in other affairs, and at other times there is and ought to be place for
clemency. Nun^ quid agas Brute? templis Deorum immortalium imminet hominum
egentium spes: now what is to be done? The secular Priests preface to the
Jesuits catechism. Ibid.
A society of men who style themselves Fratres minimi, the lowest and meanest
society and who apply unto themselves that in the Prophet: qui sunt isti qui vt
nubes volant and qua^ colu^bae ad fenestras suas? Who be these that fl^ like
clouds, and as doves to their windows and why doves? One of them will tell us:
Quia fellis acerbitate caret haec pacifica societas Jesus: for that this
peaceable society of Jesus has no gale: and yet are proud Giants of the earth
and Incendiaries of this Christian world* these men I say are ready at all
occasions to set fire on our houses, and daggers at our hearts, therefore Cui
parcimus? aut quid agimus? What do ye? who^ spare ye? It is to you (R. H)
that the Spouse in the Canticles speaks, take ye these Foxes: or if you will
have it in an other idiome, (...), halter ye these Wolves. It is into your
ears that the Apostole powers the affectionate desire of his zealous heart, I
would to God they were even cut off that trouble you. Non est crudelis qui
crudeles iugulat, says S. Hierome, He is not cruel which kills them which
are cruel, but on the contrary, he is cruel who does not so, for crudetissima
humanitas quae cum pernicie multoru^, says the same Hierome: It is a most
cruel kind of gentleness to spare to the peril and hurt of many. And I say
unto you all that hear me this day: put every man his sword upon his thigh:
go to and fro not only from gate to gate, but from Dan even to Beth-sheba, from
one corner of this kingdom to another, and slay (the Minister with the sword
of his mouth, the Magistrate with the mouth of his sword, The one with his
(...), the other with his (...), these fathers and children of Babylon, and let
that eye want sight that pittieth them, and heart be destitut of comfort that
cries at their downefull: Alas for these men.

The second part follows, and that is praeceptum to: and it concerns your
duty, in which I will not be long, neither need I, seeing your LL. are so well
experienced already: and I know what S. Ber. says, Indoctus si praesumat
docere quod nescit, nihil indoctius agit: if Phormio will teach Anniball he
does nothing more unhappily. Yet seeing that it has pleased your good Lordsh.
to come with Moses into the sanctuary to co^sult with the Oracle of God before
you give sentence suffer I beseech you the word of exhortation, and permit me
to go so far with you as my Text does, and to tell you that you are the
governors sent of God and your Sovereign for the punishment of evil doers,
and for the praise of them that do well.

For the punishment: (...): for just vltio^ and revenge upon evil doers, it is
not enough to discountenance or punish them, if co^victed, but you must use
prosequution and persecution against them, you must enquire after the^, search
tribe, and family, and household, and man by man, to find out wicked Achan who
has stolen the wedge of God, and the Babylonish garment: Ios. 7. c^
and when you have found him you must hale him to the bar of justice, and
with the sword which God has put into your hands cut him of from among men:
Auferte malum ex vobis, says the Apostle, (1. Cor. 5.) put away from among you
the evil man, purge out the sour leaven, Auferatur malus ne malos generet,
says S. Ber: let the wicked be taken out of the way that he make no more
wicked: and ne invltum peccatum caeteris noceat exemplo: says S. Hierome:
Least his unpunished sin encourage others by his example.

There be two kinds of wicked men that I think good especially at this time
to commend unto your L: the 1 is the wicked and deceptfull man: (...), and
(...): it is the Prophet David's Combination, Ps. 3. Deliver me o Lord from the
deceitful and wicked man. the second is the wicked and cruel man: (...) and
(...): it is likewise the Prophet David's Combination, Psa. 71. v. 4. Deliver me
o God out of the hand of the evil and cruel man.

By the wicked and deceitful man I mean those Foxes, those little Foxes in
the Cant. Cant. 2.2^ Ber. ser. i^ Cantic.
Parvulae non malitia, sed subtilitate: says S. Bernard little indeed not in
malice, for their wrath is firee and their rage cruel, but in wiles, and
subtilties making but little noise in the vineyard yet tending to as great a
desolation thereof as the wild Bore himself. Quid faciemus his malignissimis
vulpibus, vt capi queant? says S. Bern: what shall we do to these mischievous
Foxes that we may take them? Quae nocere quam vincere malunt: had rather
conquer by secret revenge then by open enmity, Et ne apparere quidem volunt sed
serpere: and will not show their heads out of their holes, but creep in darkness
from place to place. Eo licentius quo la tetius. Ber.
Hence their going masked under so many names, as so many visards, that they
may the more surely and securely entrap us. Garnet, alias Walley, alias Darcy,
alias Roberts, alias Farmer, alias Philips. S. Amb. observes of Auxentius the
Arrian Heretic that sometimes he would be called Auxentius, Orat. in Aux.
sometimes Merculinus: Vnum portentum and duo nomina, it is one monster, says
he, under two names: mutavit vocabulum, sed perfidiam no^ mutavit, he has
changed his title, but his malice and treachery he never forgoes: exuit Lupum,
and induit Lupum, he put off the Wolf in one name, and put it on again in
another. A right Emblem of our Jesuits, who you see are already grown from
Foxes in S. Bern: to Wolves in S. Amb. and let them have but head a little, and
they will be Lions to* but of these I spoke but now, there is a 2 sort of wicked
ones, even in this kind. I told you but now that the Priests and Jesuits
were Foxes, and you know, Vulpes foveas habe^t: Mat 8.
Foxes have their holes, and these have their hiding places and harborers in
our Land. They have their Dan and Bethel, where they do kiss the Calves, and
erect their Idolatrous worship, they have their high places and Hill-altars,
and groves amongst us, where they pray o Baal hear us, and swear not by the
fear of Isaak, 1. Kings. 18.26.
but by the sin of Samaria: saying thy God o Dan lives, and the manner of
Bersheba lives. There be to to many Michahs in our Land, Judges. 1
who have a Priest and a Teraphim in Mount Ephraim in some private Chapple or
Chamber, or Closset or the like: 1. King. 1
to many who with Obadiah hide Prophets, but false Prophets, by fifties in a
Cave. these would be looked after and be drawn to the Bar to receive their
demerit for their treasonable charity: at the least such order would be taken
with them as that their Recusancy should not be to the advantage of their
estates. If you talk with them they will tell you of disgraces, imprisonment,
and losses, of their inexplicable grief of heart, for the aversion and
indignation of his Majesty, more grievous and heavy unto them then all
temporal losses and afflictions. And yet if you look upon their estates you
shall find many of them gain by this trade. In an an^wer to a po^ish libell
in^ituled, a pe^ition to the ^. Preach. and Gospellers. by Francis Bunny.
It is a story printed to the disgrace of our Laws, that a prisoner in York
Castle got so by this lost that he gaind where by to purchase land worth an
hundred pounds by the year: and it were greatly to be wished that recusantes
under this colorable pretense of their losses might not rack their rents, and
deal hardly with their Tenantes as they do, nor lessen their charge and live
far under that state there Ancestors have heretofore lived, and they might yet
if they pleased. Again there is a custom, I fear me (permit and pardon my
jealousy) for women to reconcile to the Church of Rome. The woman Iezable, is
the Prophet, and under the warrantable liberty of her husbands conformity, she
entertaines, instructs, reconciles all comers, and by these sugared Sirens many
of the kings loyal and honest subjects, are brought acquainted with Foreign
opinions. Dearly beloved, the Devil was ever wont to use the woman for his
last most forceable help to speed his Temptations with all. Quid non mihi
Foemina praestas? And I cannot but think that in this eager business of his,
he uses their help beyond our knowledge and suspicion: this also would be
looked unto.

The second sort of wicked ones is the wicked and cruel man: the greedy
depopulator; who to make room for a shepherd and his dog, does send a whole
world of people a begging: these are the wicked of who^ Job speaks, they
have undone many, they have forsaken the poor: and spoiled houses which they
never built. Job. 20.19 and concerning which wicked ones it is said to you
(R.H.) Let no man oppress and circumve^t his brother, for the Lord is avenger
of all these things. 1. These. 4. Ahab will have Naboths vineyard: give me thy
vineyard: he confesses it to be his vineyard: 1. King. ^ 2. Confitetu^ lienam
vt poscat in^bitam. Am^
and yet he must have it from him, or he will be sick after it. And why?
because it is near by mine house. These great men must dwell alone in the
world, they cannot endure the shouldring of neighbors. Verse. 2^
Lion-like they make a partition of al to themselves, for so says S. Aug. Amat
and avaritia vnitatem: De verb Dom. se^ 20.
Covetousness loves a kind of unity to join house to house, and land to
land, that he may dwell alone on the earth: and to what use must Achab have
Naboths vineyard? only to make Hortum Olerum, Verse. ^
that I may make a garden of herbs thereof, that I may make a sheep pastor
for my profit, or a park for my pleasure, or peradventure that I may only be
said to be Lord of all this large circuit: and yet be Achabs reasons never so
weak, or his end never so unlawful, let the Prophet Isay cry never so loud
in his ears: Is. 5. v. 8.
Woe unto them that join house to house, and lay field to field, till there be
no place: Mich. 2.2.
and the Prophet Michah, Woe unto them that covet fields and take them by
violence, and so oppress a man and his house, a man and his heretage. Let God
and his Ministers say what they will, Ahab must and will have Naboths
vineyarde: Historia Achab tempore vetus est, Ambr. de Nabuthe Jesraelita cap. 1.
vsu quotidiana, says S. Amb: the story of Achab and Naboth is old indeed, but
the example of Achab and Naboth is every days example. Ibid.
Quotidie Achab nascitur. Quotidie Nabuthe sternitur every day there is an
Achab borne into the world, and every day there is a Naboth sent out of the
world. A lamentable case that men should better endure the bleating of sheep
and Oxen in their ears, then the tears and groans and cries of there
harbourles and desolate brethren. And yet if they did but strip the^ of their
vineyards only, and turn them out of house and home, it were well, but
sometimes it comes to pass, Ibid. cap. 1.
vt possessio pauperi eripiatur, vita pulsatur: that the possession may come
the better over, there be devises to fetch the poor owner within the compass
of the law. And be cause it was Achabs method: ociidisti et possedistis the
poor man shall suffer at the gallows, 1. King. 21.19.
that he may suffer the Rich quietly to enjoy the inheritace of his fathers.
This is a thing (R.H.) which concerns you nearly. Let not such Ahabs find
favor in your Courts, let not, o let not Justice, Ar. in eth.
which is as the beauty of the morning and evening star be thus blemished.
Ordinatio divina non est peccatorum obstetrix, says S. Aug. Courts of Justice,
which are Gods ordinance, are not, ought not to be a midwife to help into the
world, or bolster out sin. And if there be any Ahabs that hear me to day my
counsel to them is that of Daniel to Nabuchadnezar, Dan. 4.24.
break off your sins by righteousness, your iniquities by mercies toward the
poor, and quem vltore^ timetis facite debitore^: whom you either do, Amb. de
Nab. c. 2.
and certainly do or should fear your judge for the cause of the poor and
widdowe, make him your debtor. He that gives unto the poor le^deth unto the
Lord: and as you have turned their joy into mourning, Ipse cibo in paupere
pascitur. Amb.
and their gladness into sackcloath, so go back again, and turn their
mourning into joy, and sackcloath into gladness, let their loins bless you,
and warm them with the fleece of your sheep. For the praise of them that do
well.
I fear me I have bin too long: All that I would say in the remainder is this.
Dishearten and oppress not innocence, let not flattering Zibah insinuate into
Mephibosheths wealth, and if at any time by error you have done wrong in this
kind, 2. Kings. 16
as sometimes no doubt you do, No^ voluntate nocendi, sed necessitate
nesciendi, as S. Aug. pleads for you, not of purpose to do wrong, but
because you cannot come to the knowledge of the right, recall and cancel your
former acts: put Zibah out of Mephibosheths possession, let not your laws be
like printers characters, that with the same leters ca^ print heresy and
principles of the true religion, let it not be double tonged to speak to the
Protestant in his language, the language of Jerusalem, and to the Papist as
kindly in his language, the languag of Ashdod: Let it not have mensuram and
mensuram a measure and a measure: po^dus and pondus, a weight a weight: one
weight for great men at the court another for poor of the Country: one for
your kinsman and friend, another for your enemy: one for the Laity, another
for the Clergy. Let it not be said of you as of some judges in S. Aug. time,
alienus animus alienum tribunal, tha^ if the judge favor you not, the law shall
not favor you: or if so, yet let it not 'o let it not be said of you, that you
are some of those judges in the Psalm (Ps. 93) Qui fingunt afflictionem pro
lege* who give wormwood and bitterness, instead of judgment, and turn
Mispat into Mispah, judgment into a snare, to ensnare the simple and ^nnocent.

And you the Gent. of the Country, do not end your countenance to strengthen
the arm of sin. And you Councillors, do not lend ^our tongues to varnish
over the rotten body of sin. And you I urers, do not lend your ^oules (which
you have impaned by oath) to set ^inne loose and out of fetters. Again, you
Gent. of the Country, do not lend your countenance ^o the discountenance or
oppression of the in^ocent. And you Counselors, do not lend ^our tongues to
make virtue ilfauored, or iu^tice guilty. And you Iurers do not lend your
^ouls either in favor of the Judge, or some great man on the Bench, to find a
wound for the stroke of justice, where there is none.

And I beseech you my L. for the honor of your Christian profession: for the
peace and security of our King, and Gospel under him, for the glory of your
God, which may be hence il^ustrated. Let not the equiuocating Jesuit slip
from under, or out dare your laws: let not Recusants bear false witness any
longer against their own souls, in complaining with Crocodils ^eares of
imprisonment, and losses. Let the statute as far forth as it was intended, and
you may make them speak truth. Let not women by privilege of their sex, have
impunity to do wha^ they list in the matter of Religion. Again, let not Ahab
range at loose without a hook in his nostrells. Let not nobility underprop
it self with titles to oppress. Let not the wealthy increase their gains by
swallowing up the poor and beggaring the laborers of the Land. Let not
Officers strippe and grind the people with tricks and devises of cosnage. Let
not Naboth loose his vineyard, or if his vineyard must needs go, let him not
loose his life for crying out of wrong and oppression.

Da propriam Thymbraee domum da moenia fessi^ Let equity be mingled with
justice, and both put in practice according to the law and Christian charity,
and a good conscience: let sin bear its burden, and have his wages
punishment. Let virtue have her reward impunitie, acceptance and praise, so
shall he who made you judges on earth, make you Angels in heaven, and shall
bring you out of these Courts on earth, to the assemblies of the first borne
which are in heaven, to God the Judge of all, and Christ the Judge of the world
to come.

FINIS.

