Imprimatur THO. WEEKS* R. P. Episcope Londinens. Cap* domest.

Octavo die Maij.

Astro

logus*

THE RESOLUER; OR Curiosities of NATURE

Written in French by Scipio Du Plesis Counselor and Historiographer to the
French King.

(Useful and pleasant for all.

GOD and Nature has done nothing in Vain.

Arist: lib: 5. Cap: 8.

Plato*

Aristotle



Jason.

W. Marshall.

London Printed by N. and I. Oaks.

Anno Domini* MDC XXXV.

Al^humil Sculpsi^*



THE PREFACE OF the Author upon his natural Curiosity, super-tituled, THE
RESOLVER.
ARistippus being asked wherefore he instructed his Son in good Disciplines
with so great care, made this crude or raw Answer, to the end said he, That one
stone should not be set in the Theater upon another stone: It seems by this
answer, he esteemed ignorant men below beasts, and things though animated, he
esteemed rather a stone, above them, which has neither sense nor life:
Nevertheless I would not so vili^te the dignity of Man, although he were
ignorant, because of the divine Character of the Soul: but I dare hold and
maintain, that of base things, he is of worse condition then the beasts,
although that they for the conservation of their kinds, have been endowed with
many rich natural faculties, the effects of which seem to approach even to
reason: But man having no need of such faculties, being he has been created
of Reason it self, if he would vouchsafe to use it; by the means of which he
may be a neighbor even to Divinity, which is far from brutality. Now the
use of Reason appears principally in the search and knowledge of causes, the
which makes us to equally distinguish of those which are ignorant, and of the
beasts together: For the ignorant and the beasts know well the being of things,
but not the causes of them; they see well that it is Day, that it is Night,
they hear well enough the murmr and grumbling of the Thunder, they mark the
progress, the perfection, the decline, and the alteration of things which are
in Nature, but the causes of all these things are only in the learned, which
know, and that with singular contentment of spirit the causes. Nevertheless as
those which are shut up within a dark dull prison, cannot extend their aspects
upon all sides, but only a traverse by the grates, and little openings of the
same: so our Soul, a prisoner within the gross carcass of this material
body, having no other way of knowledge (for the most part) of those things,
then by the means of the Senses, which are as the windows of his prison,
cannot commodiously speculate and consider, nor by consequent know; but as the
Hydropickes augment their thirst in drinking, so the desire that they have to
learn, increases in them even in their learning: And yet further in admiring
the diverse objects that present themselves ordinarily as marveils to his
ignorance, so that he may have a solace in his knowing, without being
satisfied, and yet may draw some resection, not perfection; the which has
therefore been so wisely ordained by the singular providence of the sovereign
author of Nature, to the end that being stayed in the search of the Causes in
these low things, and being not able, but to admire the effects in many
subjects, our Soul lifts it self up to the knowledge of the first cause,
which is God, wholly wise, wholly good, and Almighty: This is therefore that I
ought not to be blamed of curious spirits, if in this curious search of causes
in natural things, I have not dug so profoundly into all the secrets of
Nature as they would desire: for it is a thing above more then humane power;
and although I have not fed them with vain imaginations, or imagined vanities
as some, who with an ambitious arrogance have published resolutions of the most
abstruce things, which the Ancients, more able then they, have held either for
inexcrutable, or for uncertain: Also it is easy to judge, that they did but
trifle themselves herein, and that silence would have better becommed them then
their too much prattling, for in the end they could not discharge themselves
from those bars where their subtle spirits were so inwrapped, that they were
constrained to have often recourse to the first causes, or to the universal.
For if one asked them the reason, why the Adamant draws the Iron, or the Ieate
or Amber the straw, they answer, that it is by Sympathy, Analogy, and
resemblance of qualities that there are in these two bodies, but ask them what
are those qualities, they are stopped there, so as they are less resolved
after such their solution, then they were before; for if I should grant them,
that if the resemblances of some qualities are the cause of such attractions,
then wherefore is it, That wood does not draw or attract wood, stones stones,
and so of other things, which not only sympathize in qualities, but are also
of the same essence: Who is he that can yield a certain reason, why the little
Chickens fear the Kite, although they have never seen him, and that he is so
far from them, as almost in the clouds; and yet they fear not the Dog, the
Cat, the Horse, nor any other Animals which pass hard by them: The same one
may say of the fear which naturally the Hare has of the Dog, the Rat of the
Cat, and other the like; but these subtle spirits will answer, that it is a
certain Antipathy: In truth, on the contrary, it is uncertain, since we can
neither design it, nor particularize it; for what other thing can we say, but
to run to the general cause, and say, that nature has given them as by
instinct this knowledge of their enemy, for the safeguard and conservation of
their kind. Who can resolve me of the marvelloas invention of our Fathers,
touching the needle in the Mariners Compass, which turns always toward the
Pole Articke, or North-starre, so necessary to Navigation, the point of the
same being only touched by the Adamant: There are say they, Mountains of Iron
under this Pole, or near it; the which for the sympathy that is betwixt the
Iron and the Adamant, wherewith this Needle is touched, and is the cause that
this point is always turned toward that coast there: neither will I deny,
that these Mountains are so, because I have never been upon them; but yet I
am not bound to believe it so, although I shall defer this to the authority
of those which have written hereof: Therefore I will not very willingly
persuade my self, that the attractive faculty of these Mountains of Iron are
so powerful, that they can extend so long a distance, as they ordinarily prove
it in the vastity of the Seas.

Who is he amongst the Physicians, that can give me a clear and true Reason
of the coming and going of the Ague, be it quartan, quotidian, or tertian, and
why at his coming it first shakes him with a cold fit, and after seizes him
with a hot, and how successively the sick have their hours certain and
infallible: nor otherwise can they resolve me, wherefore children of the
seventh month live, and those of the eight, not; if it be not as they say in
Egypt, because of the serenity of the Air which is in that Region: Briefly,
there is an infinite number of other effects, of whom the neighbor cause is
hidden from us, to the end, that we shall acknowledge our weakness, and that
we should not grow proud upon our sufficiency, so short in many things, but
that we should praise God, and that otherwise marking the infinite desire to
learn, which is innated in our Souls, the Engine of Divinity, and which
cannot be satisfied in this life, drawing from us a certain proof of its
Immortality, and that it is in another place where she ought to be made
allknowing and all accomplished, by the enjoying of the sovereign good in the
contemplation of her Creator, the most clear Mirror, representing and
teaching all things which shall be to her eternally in view.

For the questions contained in this Treatise, I persuade my self, that they
shall here find solution pleasant, and not vulgar; being for the most part
drawn from the Problemes of Aristotle, of Alexander Aphrodisea, and from the
works of the most excellent Physicians, Naturalists, and other grave Authors
which I have gleaned, and been choice in them; having also contributed much of
my own as well in the invention, disposition, and facilitating the reasons of
others; so that those, which though they have but little judgment, may resolve
an infinite of other questions, by the understanding of these here: Also it is
my principal aim and mark, to profit by my labors all sorts of studious
persons, and that the glory may be to God, by whose grace and bounty we hold
all sorts of goodness, which appear by so much the more great, as we
communicate his gifts to others: for unhappy are those, who hide or bury their
treasures, be it riches of spirit, or other communicable blessings.

THE TABLE OF ALL the chiefest heads that are contained in this Book.
Air. page 11 Animals. p. 25 Ascending and descending. p. 2^0 A Gouty
question. p. 226 Age. p. 393
B
Bitterness and love p. 16 Blindness. p. 22 Basili ke. p. 33 Bastards. p. 34
Beasts. p. 36 Baldness. p. 64 Bells. p. 94 Bow-strings. p. 103 Breathing. p.
232 Birds. p. 310 Blood. p. 340
C
Crooked Persons. p. 40 Callus. p. 41 Camelion. p. 44 Calxes. p. 46 Cocks. p.
100 Cold. p. 208 Cause of the Hicup. p. 237
D
Dogs. p. 83 Dropsy. p. 248 Drinking and Eating. p. 273 Dumb folks. p. 289
Drowning. p. 298 Death. p. 403
E
Eggs. p. 58 Echo, and of the Element. p. 156 Excrements. p. 183 Extremities.
p. 184 Eating and drinking. p. 273 Ears. p. 314 Earth. p. 362
F
Flesh. p. 4^ Flame of a candle p. 44 Fingers. p. 12^ Face. p. 186 Females. p.
189 Fire. p. 194 Fevers. p. 19^ Form. p. 20^ Fruit. p. 21^ Frost. p. 214
Fatness. p. 226 Fasting. p. 252 Fear or fright. p. 327 Fishes. p. 333
G
Gravel or stone in the bladder or raines. p. 42 Gelded folks. p. 45
Grainesse. p. 71 Gaping or choking. p. 177 Generation. p. 218 Gold. p. 313
Gunpowder. p. 336
H
Heat. p. 63 Heaven. p. 83 Heart, p. 93 Horn^s. p. 107 Habitation. p. 227
I
Infancy and Increase. p. 1 Infants. p. 157. Images. p. 249 Joy excessive. p.
25
L
Lamenesse. p. 39. Lightning. p. 207 Letuce p. 258 Laurel or Bays. p. 264
Looking-glasses or Mirours p. 284 Life and to live. p. 389 Lice. p. 402
M
Manginesse. p. 113 Milk. p. 256 Moon. p. 266 Morning. p. 276 Moors or
Ethiopians. p. 287 Music. p. 291 Mice. p. 403
O
Of Oil. p. 244
P
Pissing and breaking Wind backward. p. 172
Q
Quicksilver. p. 28
R
Running. p. 11 Right hand or side. p. 138 Resounding and Retaining. p. 337
Rats. p. 403
S
Sharpness. p. 10 Stamerers. p. 35 Speaking. p. 38 Sneezing. p. 59 Sleep. p.
129. Sweetness. p. 136 Shame. p. 242 Swearers p. ^55 Sickness. p. 269 Snow.
p. 294 Smelling p. 304 Sobriety. p. 342 Spittle of man. p. 343 Salt. p. 344
Sun of the Firmament. p. 347 Sorcery. p. 350 Sweating. p. 352 Spots. p. ^59
Sight or seeing. p. 367
T
Tooth-ake. p. 9 Tickling. p. 62 Teeth. p. 115 Tasting. p. 223 Tongue. p. ^60
Tears. p. 162
V
Urine. p. 387
W
VVayes. p. 70 Water. p. 141 Women. p. 191 Washing of hands. p. 263 Wind.
p. 364 Worms. p. 402
Courteous Reader, I entreat you to add these 4 words to the latter end of the
last line of page 205, common to all forms.

The Resolver, OR, CURIOSITIES OF NATVRE.
Of Infancy and Increase.
QUESTION. WHerefore is it that during our Infancy, and the first year after
our Birth, our bodies increase much more, and more hastily then in our Youth?
Answer. Because that Nature being far from her perfection, hastes as much
as she may, and troopeth up all the forces of natural heat, which is then
fervent and boiling, to turn great quantity of food into the increase of the
body.

Que. Wherefore is it that Females are sooner perfect in their growth then
Males?
Ans. Because as in things Artificial, those which are done in most haste, are
the worst accomplished; so Nature imployeth less time to the increase of
Females, as being less perfect then Males, which have much more of natural
heat, and are more vigorous, strong, and robust, then they are: It is also the
cause wherefore Daughters are deemed by right of Law capable of Marriage at 12
years of age, and Males only at 14, which age is called Pubertie, or Youth;
as also that Nature is so free to men, that she makes them gain twenty
years above women, for the two they went before them by increase in their
childe-hood: for women decline and decrease, and cease to conceive about the 50
years of their age, and men are capable of generation at 70 years: and we
read of some that have begotten children after fourscore years, as Cato the
Censor, and the King Massinissa, although he had attained to the age of
Foure-score and six years.

Q. Wherefore is it that the vital Faculty exercises not so well its
functions in the increase of the body to the end of the life, as it does to
move the appetite to eat and drink, to concoct, digest, and dispense the
victuals by all the members of the body, to thrust out the excrements, and
briefly, to nourish and sustain the body?
Ans. Because that all natural bodies are determined to a certain quantity,
otherwise they would increase unmeasurably, being then arrived to that regular
quantity: for then Nature increases no more the bodily mass, the which having
remained sometimes in his perfection, begins in the contrary, to decline and
decrease: So as it is not necessary to the life, that the body should still
increase without end, but it is above all necessary, that the other functions
of the vital faculty should be exercised, because that without them we know
not how to live.

Qu. But wherefore is it, that the body having his perfect growth, has
nevertheless yet need of nourishment?
Ans. Because that our bodies have this imperfection, that they are in
continual flux and loss of substance, the which we repair, and renew by
meat and drink, which I have other* where showed more amply.

Qu. How is it then possible we should dye, since that by eating and drinking
we repair the loss of our substance?
An. Because that which is added by the meat and drink, is of strange matter,
and is not so excellent as that which is innate and wholly natural* as the
light in the Lamp, by the means of Oil, abateth with time, and in the end we
corrupt by the ordinary alteration we receive by food, so that it is of
necessity we dye.

Q. But how is it the Apostle teaches us, Romans 5. Cap. That by a man sin
entered into the world, and by sin, death: it is not then by the fault and
imperfection of the body, but rather of the foale?
A. If the first man had not sinned, truly he should never have dyed, but had
remained in the state of innocence within the Garden of Felicity, until that
after a l^^g tract of years, it had pleased God to lift him living into the
Heavens: but the humane body framed of corruptible matter, had not left to have
the default and imperfection aforesaid, the which nevertheless he had
repaired by a more singular and sovereign Diet, then that whereof we feed at
this present, which food was of the Tree of Life.

Q. Wherefore is it, that little children increase more in the Head, then in any
other part of the body?
A. Because according to Aristotle, eating much, and often, natural heat,
which is very boiling in that age, lifts great quantity of the aliment to the
superior parts, especially to the Head, which nourishes it much more, and
sooner; so that it has been observed five days after their birth, the little
children have not been able to move and turn the neck, so have the parts
above been filled with humors.

Adolescentior Youth.
Q. FRom whence comes it, that youths about 14 or 15 years become hoarse,
having their voices rough and unequal, and a little time after change their
voices into a more gross and grave tone?
A. It is because in that age the Organs and Conduits of the body dilate and
stretch themselves, and all the members ingrosse and fortify, to be the more
proper to travel, and especially to generation: and amongst other Organs, that
of the voice dilateth it self also: but because that it is not done at (...)
sudden, nor according to some equally, by the Artery of the throat, the
voice sharp and small, stretches into a more gross and grave tone, becomes
unequal, until it be entirely changed by a perfect dilatation of the vocal
Artery.

Q. Wherefore is it that about the same Puberty or Youth, that is, in young
youths at 14 years, and maids at 12, the hair begins to appear in their
chinnes and secret parts?
A. Because then, as the great and ample conduits of the body stretch and
dilate themselves, so do the pores and subtle conduits of the flesh, so the
hair has liberal issue likewise in the parts natural, where the heat
begins to descend with the spirits, which aideth to carnal copulation:
nevertheless women have no beards, because of their excessive humidity and
coldness, as I shall say more amply hereafter upon this word* Women.

Toothache.
Q. FRom whence proceeds the aching of the Teeth?
A. From cold and austere iuyces and liquours which fret in the Teeth, as we
may prove in cutting a green and unripe Apple, by the juice upon the knife.

Q. Wherefore is it that Parsley and Salt takes away the akeing of the teeth?
A. Parsley has a weak juice, yet nevertheless it is gluing and binding, the
which being administered, and stick in the teeth, takes away the akeing: Salt
also by his acrimonious and stinging quality, produces the same effect; and in
as much as he is hot and corrosive, he takes away the akeing from the teeth,
which proceeds of coldness: upon the subject see more after, where I speak
of Teeth.

Sharpness.
Q. WHerefore is it that Victuals sharp and biting, provoke appetite to ^ate?
A. It is in as much as they are opening, for they open the stomach, and by a
kind of tickling or pricking, they awake the natural heat, in cleansing or
dissipating that which held his action still, or in quiet.

Air.
Q. HOw can it be, that the Air is more moist then the Water: for in the
common opinion of Philosophers, seeing that the Water wets much more, and the
Air in the contrary dries?
A. In as much as Water is a body much more gross then Air, so it is less
humid then Air, and wetteth therefore the more: even as a piece of Iron red
hot in the fire, burns more then the fire it self, because of the solidity
of the matter, and for that which is said, that the Air dries, it is because
it is hot: but it dries not much without the aid of the Sun and Wind, which
holds of hot and dry.

Q. From whence comes it, that where motion chafeth the Air, we refresh our
selves, nevertheless when we are hot, in beating the air with our hats,
hand-cerchiffs, or Fannes?
A. It is that in so moving and beating the Air, we chase behind us, that
which was formerly chafed, and that which succeeds and follows suddenly
after the other, is more fresh; for there is nothing void in nature.

Q. Wherefore is it that it is more hot and smothering, the Sky being covered
and charged with Clouds, then when it is clear and fair, seeing that the
Stars may more commodiously heat the ^arth, the air being fair?
A. It is because that all the heat exhaled aloft when the Air is fair*
nothing does thrust it down below: and in the contrary* the clouds repulsing
it, downwards it falls of necessity, that the inferior region of the Air is
more heated, and as it were stifled or choked by this repulsing of the heat.

Q. Wherefore is it that the Air is more moist in Towns, then in the fields?
A. Because that the buildings hinder, that it cannot be struck, or beaten by
the rays of the Sun and of the winds.

Q. Wherefore is it that the middle region of the Air is more cold in Summer,
then in VVinter?
A. It is because of the Antiperistasis, and counter-resistance, or
counter-battery of heat and cold: for the heat occupying the face of the
earth in Summer, the cold is shut up partly within the entrayles of the earth,
by reason whereof the water which issues out, is fresh, and part flies into
the middle region of the Air, because whereby Hayle is engendered, which is of
the water taken and congealed by the cold.

Q. Wherefore is it that the air is not perceiveable by any of our exterior
senses, but by the touch only?
A. Because that it has no other quality of it self to those which are
objects to the other 4 Senses, which are Color, Sound, Odor, and Savor: but
in as much as it is naturally moist and dry, and sometimes also hot or cold, as
it is diversely affected, we feel it strongly by the touch.

Q. But wherefore is it that nature has not given it neither color, nor
sound, nor savor, nor odor?
A. Because that being the medium, or means, by the which we perceive the said
qualities, it should be impossible for us to mark or discern in the world,
the admirable variety of colors, sounds, savours, and odours, if the Air were
participant; for as we behold traversly a glass red, or yellow, all things
seem red or yellow: in like sort if the Air had certain color, sound,
savor, or odor, all things would seem to us of the same color, sound,
savor, or odor, that the Air had, in as much that by the means of it we
perceive these said qualities in all other things.

Bitterness.
Q. FRom whence comes it, that bitter things have for the most part some
medicinal virtue, or purgative faculty?
A. It is in as much that they are of a difficult digestion and concoction, so
that they serving not for food and nourishment to the body, they yet serve at
least for purgation and medicine.

Love.
Q. HOw comes it to pass, that many times we love those that we never saw?
A. This happens not often that we love so, but those the which by reputation
we believe to have some perfection, be it of Virtue, of Science, or Beauty,
that we are so taken, and our souls do imagine this self perfection more
great then it is: so that it is no marvel she is so taken, and that she loves
and honors much more, then after she has seen the subject* for rare persons
are like to Tapestries, which seem fairer a far off, then near hand.

Q. Wherefore is it, as says the Comicke, that the falling out of lovers is
the renewing of love?
A. Because that Love is like to a flame, that increases by the blast, and by
the wind: likewise Love augmenteth by some disfavour that one Lover receives
from another, so as they are sometimes unassociated and retired, but after they
desire a reunion of their love with more fervor and passion then before.

Q. Wherefore is it that the love of men augmenteth, when there are many
corrivals in the enquest of one self subject?
A. It is because that the jealousy that the one has against the other, the
which as a puff of wind, re-inflames the fire: so does the amorous passion*
this is therefore that the ancient Poets feigned very properly, that Venus knew
never how to put into credit her son Cupid, or Love, that the Greeks call
Eros, until she had brought forth an Anteros, or Counterlove.

Q. From whence comes that we are ashamed to discover our amorous appetites
when they surmount us, and discover frankely and without any shame our appetite
of eating, drinking, sleeping, and such like?
A. It is because the amorous appetite is not necessary to the life, as the
others are, and the open practice thereof is shamefully censured amongst the
most politic Nations, and being shameful to be acted, but in the night, and
in hidden corners, it is not comely to speak lasciviously; but amongst Nations
which held it no shame, nor made it no more difficult to publicly play with
women in love-tricks, then to eat and drink. And Diogenes the Cynick, had no
more shame in this action, then to say he was planting a man, as if he would
say, that it should be as lawful to plant publicly Men, as Trees.

Q. From whence comes it, that lovers are ordinarily pale and wan, and that
sometimes the extremities of their bodies are quickly hot and cold, and all for
love?
A. They are wanne when they are in defiance, fear, or despair of their
loves: because that such passions cause the blood to retire to the interior
parts, by reason whereof also the extremities of the body become cold; for
blood gives the Vermillion blush, and heat together: but when they are in
hope, or assurance to enjoy their loves, then they are red, and have the
extremities of their bodies hot, the blood running and spreading over all the
parts, even to the extremities, and with the blood the natural heat.

Q. Which of the two is more constant in love, man, or woman?
A. Virgil and other Poets, have accused Women of extreme lightness and
inconstancy: nevertheless it seems to me, that reason and experience should
combat for them herein: Reason, in as much as they are more cold then Men, and
the nature of cold, is to hold and shut constantly: heat in the contrary, (the
which abounds more in men then in women) unties, disunites, and dissolves:
Experience confirms the reason, in that we ordinarily see more women deceived
by men, then men deceived by women.

Q. Wherefore is it, that women love more ardently and constantly those which
have had their maidenhead?
A. It is because a woman receives her perfection by coupling with the Male, as
the matter by union with the form, and so women love most those which have
given beginning to this perfection, or that those which have depucillated them,
hold the most fair and most rich gage of their love, which is their Virginity.

Q. Wherefore is it that Mothers love their Infants more tenderly then their
Fathers?
A. It is because they cost the Mothers more dear, who have contributed to
their generation with their Fathers: And besides, they have borne and nourished
them within their flanks, and after brought them forth with peril of their
lives: Also that the Mother is very certain, that they are her children, but
the Father does but think it only that they are his, not being wholly
certain that they be begotten by his works: this is the reason that the Poet
Menander sings in his Verse,

The Infant is beloved by his Mother
More tenderly then by his Father:
Because she well does know it is her own,
And he but thinks it fruit himself has sown.
And the same reason makes Homer to feign, that Telemachus, the Son of
Ulysses, being asked who was his Father, answered in this sort, My Mother has
me told Ulysses was the man,
I do believe it so, for who tell better can.


Q. Wherefore is it that fathers and mothers love much more dearly their
children, then they are beloved of them?
A. For three principal reasons, the one is, that the Fathers and Mothers love
further their Children, to wit, from their birth, by which cause their love is
more fortified, and the children love not but since they had the judgment to
acknowledge them for Parents: the other is, that the fathers and mothers love
their children as themselves; seeing a continuance, and a progeny of their
being to posterity, and the children love them not, but as being sprung from
their truncks, without regarding of them, as propagators of their being, the
third, that nature, that always has regard to the conservation, and promotion
of the Species, which she maintains in the continual succession of her
individualls, thrusts always out the love of predecessors, to the successors,
and regards not much behind her the posterity of the ancestors, and that is it
which causes this common saying that love descends more then ascends.

Animals.
Q. FRom whence comes it, that we cannot find any private and domestic
Animal, but that there is of the same kind wild and savage: and nevertheless
there is of the savage, that can never be made tame.
A. That is (says the Philosopher) that the evil is more easy to bring
forth, and produce, then the good; in as much that the good are more perfect;
and that which is most perfect, is of hardest production: now that which is
Domestic and tame, being better then that which is wild, is not so frequent,
the same one may say of plants, as well as of Animals.

Q. From whence comes it that household beasts, are more fruitful then the
wild, when they engender?
A. It is because they travel less, and are better nourished.

Q. From whence comes it, that certain beasts, as Elephants, and Camells, will
not drink in the water, unless it be stirred and troubled?
A. Because that seeing their Images in the clear water, they are afraid, and
get out, not daring to drink.

Q. How is it that some Animals, can sleep with their eyes open; as do Lions
and Hares?
A. It is because they have not their eyelids sufficiently large, to cover
wholly their eyes.

Q. From whence comes it, that women have not a certain season for child
birth, as well as all other kinds of Animals have for the most part, the most
perfect producing ducing their fannes, and their Colts, at certain seasons of
the year?
A. That the conjunction of man with woman is at will, irregular and
indifferent at all times, and the most part of all other Animals, ^oupleth not
but at certain seasons, and not all the year through.

Q How comes it that certain Animalls naturally, fear others, even at the
first sight, as little Chickins, the Kite, the Hare, the Dog; the Lamb, the
Wolf; the Rat, the Cat; and so others, and yet fear not other strong Animals,
and more formidable then they are?
A. I have said herebefore in the Preface of this book, that it is not easy
to yield a particular reason, and a near cause, but only in general, that
the same proceeds from an Antipathy, or a natural hate, which is between
certain kinds of Beasts to the most weak, whereof nature has given this
instinct and knowledge of their enemies from their birth, for their safeguard,
and for the conservation of their kinds.

Quick Silver.
Q. FRom whence comes it, that Quick Silver separateth, and div death it self
into diverse parcels upon a body solid, dry, plain and smooth?
A. It is because of his subtilty that he holds always inmooving, according
as the figure of the place permits him, because of which mooving subtilty, and
Activity, it is called quick.

Q. Wherefore is it, that being separated in pieces, he gathers together, and
again comes into a body, if he be powered into a hollow place?
A. Because that being liquid, the parts separated, researcheth, and easily
finds their union in a proper place, to contain and border them, for it is
the nature of liquors, to Unite and Remasse, because of their resemblance, and
the easiness that they have to stretch forth, and run the one within the
other.

Q Wherefore is it that it runs still round?
A. It is the nature of all the Elements, to occupy the place Spherick,
Circular, or round, by reason where of they are parties, as by some natural
right that they hold from the total, aroundeth so: now quick silver being no
other thing, then water mixed with very little of Terrestrial exhalations, and
that the most subtle takes the same figure* even so as we see by experience,
that drops of water, or other liquor shed upon the earth, gather themselves
together round as little bullets; being that moist things fly the dry, as*
their contrary, clap into a roundnesse, to touch the less.

Q. But why? it seems not to me that all the Elements occupy a round place in
their parties, for the fire is always in a Pyramid, not in a round; the earth
has no certain figure in his parties, and for the Air being invisible, we
can know nothing of it?
A. Intruth the material fire is always in a Pyrmais, because that we can
never see it but in motion, and tending to his natural place above the Air,
and likewise the small drops of water, are Ropes in the Air, hanging their
motion, and casts them into rounds, being come to their Center, but if the
fire were in his natural place, with the fire Elementary, it should be
without doubt in a Spherick figure, as the other bodies which inv^ron it: for
the earth, she has her Center round, as well as the other Elements, making but
one self globe with the water; but if she is removed in her parts and pieces,
she retains such figure as the giver, or as she falls in the division;
because of their soliditie and dryness, which permits them not to extend
forth, as those of other Elements, which are fluid and moist.

Q. Wherefore is it, that Quicksilver wets not a dry body running over it,
seeing that it is very waterish?
A. Because that being in part composed of Terrestrial exhalations: so in all
metalls the dryness of them hinders the moisture; so as Quicksilver flies
marveilously, and will not be long stayed; but runs along, or leapes to
avoid the touch.

Blindness.
Q. WHerefore is it, that the blind has better hearing then the clear seeing?
A. Because that the Sense of the sight does not distract them other-where, and
being they can see nothing, they hearken always more attentively, being that
Nature recompenseth in one Sense the loss of another.

Q. Wherefore is it, that they have also better memories?
A. For the same reason above said, for perceiving little of object, in
comparison of clear seeing, they retain what they hear, better, and longer
time.

Basiliske.
Q. HOw comes it to pass, that the Basiliske kills men with his only look on
them?
A. There is more appearance that he kills men by certain stinkes, and venomous
vapors that he exhales and breaths out, with which he infecteth those that
approach near him: for if he saw from a far, he could not hurt them.

Bastards.
Q. WHerefore is it that Bastard children are ordinarily more ingenious, and
more courageous then the legitimate?
A. The cause is, that being conceived by stealth, the business is done with
an affection more particular, and ardently searching those parts which cause
the child to be much more accomplished, then those which are begot with an
ordinary and common affection, and sometimes languishingly; and this is the
cause wherefore the ancient Bastards, that the Poets called Hero's, or demi
gods, have bin esteemed Sons of a god, and of a mortal woman, o^ of a
Goddess, and of a mortal man* because of their admirable, and above humane
virtue, as Hercules, Achilles, Aeneas, Romulus, and others.

Stammerers.
Q. WHerefore is it, that those which stutter, having great difficulty to
express with an articular voice, cannot speak softly and low as others do?
A. Because that to surmount this difficulty and natural default and accident,
(for this may come by sickness, or other harm) that hinders them from
pronouncing distinctly and neatly, they force themselves with more contention
then others, and so striving, they cannot speak low, as those which have their
tongues easy and smooth.

Beasts.
Q. Wherefore is it, that Beasts go as soon as they are brought forth, and
men do not?
A. Because that the Beasts have their natural heat from their birth, equally
diffused through all the parts of their bodies, and man not, but only and
principally in the head; and so the other members are not sufficieutly strong
of sustain him in going, until that with time natural heat stretches it
self also to the inferior parts, thus says Alex. Aphrodiseus: but in effect
to say better, and that the cause truly is, that men have their legs more
fleshy, but the beasts being almost all ^erves and bones; by which reason the
Philosopher concludes, that men are many times born more lame, then any of the
other Animals, as we shall say hereafter.

Q. But wherefore is it that nature has so or dayned, that the man should in
this be inferior to the other Animals?
A. It is in my opinion, that if the beasts had been also infirm as men in
their birth, the greatest part of them had been lost, neither having
judgment, nor conduct, nor the commodities of men, and being subject to be
taken, and surprised by one another, as also by man; but in man's behalf it was
very expedient that he should be borne so weak, to the end that he should
acknowledge his baseness and his infirmity, and that he should be less proud.

Q. Have not the beasts some judgment, or at least, some use of reason?
A. No; but only a certain natural instinct which has bin given them for
the conservation of their lives, and propagation of their kinds.

Speaking.
Q. WHerefore is it, that no other kind of Animal has the faculty of
speaking, besides man only; or if there be any that imitate his language,* or
rather his voice, they understand nothing?
A. It is because that words are the messengers of the reason or will: and
beasts being deprived of reason, have no need, neither of discourse, nor of
words, their inarticular voice being to them sufficient to express their
appetites, and animal passions, as joy, and grief, and anger; for those which
would have that the beasts have also their language, and that many have
understood them, as Tiresias, Thales, Melampus, and Apollonius, Tyanien, are
fables, or rather follies.

Lame.
Q. WHerefore is it that the lame are more gluttonous and luxurious, then those
which have their legs equal and whole?
A. Because the food that they ought to employ to the increase of the thighs
or the legs, enters not through all the members, one being more short then
the other, or both imperfect; which is the cause that the rest of the Aliment
mounteth aloft, and turns into seed, the superfluity whereof provokes luxury.

Crooked persons.
Q. Wherefore is it that those which are crooked and curbed backed, have
ordinarily difficulty in breathing, and have stinking breaths?
A. Because that their Lungs are by the same means rebaited and recurbed so,
that the Air being there stopped and shut up, they breath with pain, and the
same Air being not free, corrupts and putrifies there within them, and then
breathing it out, stinkes.

Callus.
Q. HOw comes it that in a broken leg ill set, there comes to be a rupture,
or hard knot, which the Latins call Callus, which is more hard, and more strong
then the bone it self was before the Rupture?
A. It is because that Nature is provident in all things, and has more care of
the parts offended, then of those which are whole, so as she distributes more
abundantly nourishment unto them* as a good father does likewise to his sick
children, and by this means the said parts are more fortified then they were
before; the same also happens unto Trees.

Gravel or Stone in the Bladder, or Reins.
Q. From whence comes it that little children having the Ston or Gravel, which
the Latins call Calculus, engender within the bladder, and aged men most often
in their Reins?
A. It is because the little children have the conduits of the Reins very
strait, so that the urine running through like a channel of water, trayneth
with it by force a gravelly sand (which is the matter of the Stone) below
within the Bladder; but old men having the conduits more ample and large, there
is place enough to give way to the urine, without trayning any matter which
flows in it: nevertheless when it is heapt together in great quantity, it
sometimes stops the conduits, and is not suffered to descend so well in old
men, as in little children within the Bladder: now this sand being made of
certain adust humors, and too much boiled, is reduced into powder, and at
last coagulated into a stone in the Reins.

Flesh.
Q. WHerefore is it that the flesh of young Animals corrupts sooner then that
of the old?
A. Because that of the young is much more humid, and of the superfluous
humidity proceeds the corruption.

Camelion.
Q. From whence comes it that the Camelion changes his color so often, and
takes that of the next body, to which he is nearest neighbor?
A. The cause is, that he has his skin so shining, the which as a kind of
mirror, represents the colors of the neighbor body diversely: nevertheless
according to the reflection of the light for to prove the same, it must be
done in a bright day, and in the Sunneshine, as I have seen it by experience;
they 7s;ay the 7s;ame of a Fish called Voulpe.

Of Candle.
Q. FRom whence comes it that the Flame of a Candle retires, or with-drawes it
self from that side if there be near to it ^ron, or some other cold thing?
A. To resolve this in a word, it proceeds from Antipathy and contrariety of
qualities in the fire with other cold things.

Q. From whence comes it, that the flame of a Candle only in Winter, and in
moist times, seems bluish?
A. The same proceeds from a mingling of the light with the vapors and fumes
which proceed from the Candle, the which color is furthered also by his
lighted match, proceeding from the mixture of his blackness with the light.

Gelded folks.
Q. WHerefore is it that men Gelded, which the Greeks call Eunuchs, have ^o
beards?
A. Because they are too moist, for as a field mediocrally moist is fruitful,
and in the contrary barren, if it be too moist; likewise men of middle
temperature have beards, and men too moist, as the gelded folks, children and
women, who otherwise are cold, have no beards on their chinnes.

Q. How comes it that Eunuchs are so extremely moist?
A. In that their seed which they cannot thrust out, or consume by natural
heat, so well as perfect men, spreads through all their bodies, and are moist
excessively, by which they have their cheeks blown up, and their Paps great
even as women.

Q. But since the excessive humidity is the cause that they have no beard, from
whence comes it that they have hair as well as entire men, and besides become
not too much bald?
A. Because that this excessive himidity which is in them, falls by his weight
below upon the other parts of the body, hinders not the hair from being
thrust out, besides, the neighborhood to the brain, which is temperate, and
besides, the abundance of the Spirits which are in the head, moderateth it
very much; nevertheless because that it remains always to nourish the hair
more then in full men, that become seldom or rarely bald.

Q. Wherefore is it that their legs are feeble and crooked.
A. Because they are very moist, and by consequence fleshy and weak, and
besides they make a great weight upon the body, which is the much more heavy,
and more charged with humors, then that of perfect men, even as green wood is
less proper to serve the bearing up, and portage of a great burden; because
it stoopes under the burden; by the same cause also great drinkers, and
bathers are less strong.

Q, Wherefore is it that the Eunuchs become more gray hayrd then those which
have all their pieces?
A. Because they cannot discharge the moist humors by the Venerian act, or
that they cannot consume it as well as others, because they have the less
heat; and this white humidity blancheth also sooner their hairs, whereas
others become white in their Age, which abounds then in that humor, if it be
not by accident, as we shall declare in its place.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the Evnuches cannot swallow the splean of any Animal?
A. Because that the spleen is extremely spungeous, and swells always more
and more being chewed; so that the gelded having the throat pipe narrow,
because of their grease of their moisture cannot swallow a morcell great or
spongeous.

Q. Wherefore is it that they have the voice whining and sharp?
A. Because, as I intend to say, the grease and the humidity, stopping the
conduit or pipe of the voice, and narrowing it, it must of necessity make the
voice sharp and small, as the Oaten pipes, the more smaller they are, yield
the most smallest sound together, with having the respiration more weak then
full man, and mooving by that cause less air, their voices are more close and
sharp, and so it is with sick folks.

Q. But wherefore is it then, that Oxen low more grossly then Bulls; and Capons
have their voice more bascthen Cocks?
A. It is because that Bulls do bellw, and Cocks do not sing but with great
strength, and contention of voice; the cause wherefore their voice is more
sharp and high, as also more strong, the which we may prove in our selves, for
when we would cry the most strongliest, we lift up our voices, as we do in
the most base song grave and low.

Q. From whence comes it that gelded men are not afflicted with the gout, and
Capons are extremely subject to it?
A. It is because that pullen is extremely lascivious, and a^oundant in sperm*;
so that Capons being too much moist, by their retention of the same seed become
gouty, being that Capons also excessivly eat, seeing that heat is little in
them; but gelded men, according to the proportion of their bodies are not so
moist, so as the Capons ^re, not so subject to the gout, in the contrary those
which have all their pieces, and that play too much with women, and too often
become gouty by the to much emission of their seed* and so the perfect man is
gouty too by the Evacuation of the genitall humor, and the Capon by the
retention of the same seed; in the contrary the gelded man is not subject to
the Gout, because of the retention of the same humor; and the Cock, because
of the evacuation of the same; and this in all is, because that Pullen is of a
nature much more moist then man.

Q. Wherefore is it that gelded Animals, as the Wether, Sheep, or gelded
sheep, and the Capon, are better, and more tender then those that have all
their pieces?
A. Because that the gelded lose not their better humors with females, and are
more delicate, and more fat.

Q. Wherefore is it that the gelded Animals are sooner tamed, and easily
brought more gentle, then those which have their genitall parts?
A. Because they are deprived of their heat, and of the abundance of spirit
that is engendered in the spongious vessels, the which heat and spirits amove
and lift up the courage, and embolden those which have all their parts.

Q. Wherefore is it that gelded Animals become more fat then others?
A. Because they lose not their better humors, and do not runafter the
Females: For the like reason the Horns increase more in Animals that are
horned.

Q. From whence comes it that the Horns of gelded Dear fall not, as of the
others* nor the feathers of Capons, as those of Cocks?
A. Inasmuch as the Dear amongst all other horned Animals, having only their
horns solid and massive, it is needful they have a great quantity of
humidity to entertain their branches, as also to fill, moisten, and nourish
the feathers of the Pullen: Now the gelded Dear and Capons being more moist
then those which are perfect Animals, because of the retention of their seed,
have by the same means wherewith, better to moisten and entertain the one
their Horns, the other their Feathers, and by the same cause gelded men
seldom become bald, as I have said before.

Q. From whence comes it that we are sometimes benumbed, and asleep in our
members, but principally in our feet and our hands, by gouts, crampes, or
otherwise?
A. This proceeds of the cold which infinuateth into the body by the absence of
the blood, which is retired: and forasmuch as the feet and the hands are parts
of the body, most far from the heart, where the source and siege, and as it
were the spring of the natural heat is, and that those exterior parts are
least fleshy, they are the most apt to be seized on by the cold, to be
benumbed, and asleep.

Q. How is it possible that the fish called a Torpedo, benumbeth so the arms
of the Fisher, without touching him, so as he is not able to help himself,
but seems as it were insensible?
A. It is because this Fish exhales a certain humor and vapor, the which
has this natural virtue to benumbe: but Pliny in a few words says, that it
is by his odor, and a certain wind or vapor of his body, which so affects
the members of man.

Q. From whence comes it that we desiring to rest our selves, and fall asleep,
and resting upon one of our arms, it will be benumbed, and become as
unsensible?
A. It is because that in pressing upon it, the blood retires, and runs to
the other parts of the body, and with the blood the natural heat, its
inseparable companion, and with them both the animal spirits, causers of the
feeling, so that the member left of the blood of the natural heat, and of the
animal spirits, and seized with *the cold, remains as insensible and
immovable.

Grafting.
Q. FRom whence comes it that trees grafted or inoculated be are better fruit
then the wild ones, and yet more, those which are again inoculated, bear yet
better, those which have bin twice I mean?
A. It is that Nature perceiving some want, betakes her suddenly to repair,
by a more ample and better nourishment, so that the Tree being cut or slit, to
graffe in, she sends so much food as is necessary, and of the best to that
part slit and cut, the which she fortifies, in as much more as she was
sluggish before, and produces more fair and better fruit: the same likewise
happens to ruptures, which being well joined, and set the, Callus becomes more
hard then the bone it self.

Q. Wherefore is it not good to graffe and inoculate in all times, but only in
the Spring?
A. Because that in the Winter the overmuch cold makes the Trees to dye, by
insinuating into the opening or incision of the graffe: and in Summer the
excessive heat withers the tree, and kills it: Likewise in Autumn it
profits not neither, in respect of the colds nearly coming, which are
enemies to Natures productions; but in the Spring time, because there is no
very great frosts after the grafting is made, but a temperate heat, the friend
of nature ayding to their increase and perfection.

Eggs.
Q. WHerefore is it that Eggs are such a good nourishment to the humane body?
A. Because that they are hot, and give aid by their own decoction, without
much borrowing of natural heat: nevertheless those which are roasted in the
imbars, and eaten without so me liquor, as Verjuice, Vinegar, or other the
like, are not good for aguish people, because they are affected with a strange
heat by the fever, they do add yet more heat to the fever.

Sneezing.
Q. WHerefore is it that men sneeze more strongly, and more often, then any
other Animals?
A. It is because they eat ordinarily more then need, and of many sorts of
meat too, which is the cause that they cannot so well digest as other Animals;
so great quantity of vapors mounting to the brain, which moves and provokes
them to discharge it, which they do by the means of sneezing, which
proceeds, as says the Philosopher, by the force of the Spirits; then when
the humiditie forces them to exhale and distill, or by the strength or
expulsion of some raw, and undigested humor: or as the Philosopher likewise
says, man having the conduits of his nostrils more ample and open, in respect
to the proportion of his body, he lodges more wind and spirits there, which
provoke him to sneeze: I will add hereunto, that man having according to his
temporal mass, more brain then any other Animal; so has he more humiditie,
so as he growing cold, great quantity of humors fill the conduits, the which
thrusting out by the effect of the spirits, it makes that he sneezeth
strongly, in and by this conflict, and with great noise.

Q. Wherefore is it, that old folks sneeze with more pain then young?
A. Because they have the conduits of their nose more shut, and more straight,
and as it were taken and closed together.

Q. But why have they the conduits of their nose more shut, then the young?
A. Because they are cold, and cold restraines and shuts.

Q. From whence comes it, that sneezing, we shake, shrug, and tremble?
A. It is because the veins void themselves of a certain humor, or heated
spirit, and fill them again with fresh air, for they cannot remain empty; it
is that which maks us to shake, the same happens to us in emptying the
bladder.

Tickling.
Q. WHerefore is it that we tickle not our selves?
A. Because that our touch is to us natural, and familiar, and things familiar
and ordinary, mooves nor affects us much.

Q. Wherefore is it, that we are very ticklish in the soles of our feet, and
under our arme-pits?
A. Because that the skin in those parts is stretched and very delicate; as
also they are parts that we are seldom touched by, which as I have formerly
said, give more cause of motion and effection.

Q. Wherefore is it, that we are very ticklish about the place of the Spleen?
A. Because that the Spleen being a part spongeous and delicate, it is also
more easily affected so that men the which feeling the body shot through that
part of the body, have dyed laughing.

Heat.
Q. WHerefore is it that hot things are sooner cold in the Sun, then in the
shadow?
A. Because in the shadow the cold locks up the heat, and hinders it from
dilating, or exhaling, which is the cause that it is more strong and vigorous:
And in the Sun by the contrary, the heat is extended, or exhaled by the Air,
which is his neighbor, which being heated by the reflection* and stroke of his
rays, so that it is much more weak and feeble: for the same cause the fire is
less hot in Summer where the Sun shines upon it, then it is in Winter, or
in the shadow,

Q. From whence comes it that a piece of Iron red hot in the fire, is much more
hot, and burns much more then the fire it self* seeing that the Philosophers
hold that, that which is such by the means of another, that which is the cause,
ought to be much more it self?
A. That the fire being a body simple, and nothing solid, cannot work so
powerfully, as the Iron, or some other body that is solid, thick and gross
unto which the fire has imparted his quality.

Baldness.
Q. WHerefore is it that we become more bald in the fore part of the head, then
behind it?
A. Because that the fore part of the head is more soft, and more thin, and
divided by many seames* as we may see in the sculs of the dead: and the hinder
part is in the contrary very hard and close, by reason whereof the humidity,
which is the nourishment of the hair, is exhaled more ea^^ly from the parts
before, whereby it loses the hair sooner then of that behind.

Q. Wherefore is it, that those which have curled locks, become soonest bald,
and later gray then others?
A. They become sooner bald, because that they are of complexion hot and dry,
so that the hair the which is also dry, falls of for want of moisture, which
is its nourishment, and they are also later gray then others, because their
heat consumes the moist humor, which is the cause of whiteness of the hayres,
being it self of the same color.

Q. But wherefore is it that Eunuchs become seldom bald?
A. Because they are very moist and charged with excrements, and their hairs,
as I have formerly said, are maintained and nourished with humidity. The same
thing* one may say of young men and women, and for the very same reason, horns
fall not from gelded Dear, nor the feathers from Capons, as I have said here
before.

Q. But wherefore is it, that old men become bald?
A. For the reason contrary to the precedent, that is by declining with age,
natural humidity consumes in them, although they abound in corrupt excrements.

Q. Wherefore is it that bald men are esteemed more luxurious then other?
A. In the contrary we ought to say, that they are more bald, for being too
much luxurious, then luxurious for being bald; for by force of drying their
bodies, and especially the brain, which contributeth most to the act Venerian,
they become bald, not retaining sufficient humidity to nourish the hairs.

Q. Wherefore is it that bald persons are esteemed of others wicked and
dangerous?
A. Because they are of a nature hot and dry, and so are prompt, hardy, and
choleric, if good education and nourture does not moderate and correct them,
but also those persons that are of the same complexion, are ordinarily
judicious, vigilant, prudent, and subtle.

Calxes.
Q. Wherefore is it that one contrary ordinarily flies another, nevertheless
Calx, Sponge, Cloth, bran, and many other dry things receive water very
easily, and imbibe and moisten?
A. We must observe, that all bodies which have pores and subtle conduits,
some nevertheless more close shut then others: so then dry bodies which have
pores shut, admits not at all, or very little of humidity; and those which
have the pores more open as the said things, admit not more of themselves, that
is to say, in as much as dry bodies; but accidently, because of the opennesse
and laxity of their pones, by which the humidity has ingression.

Q. How is it that quick Lyme breaks and fall in pieces, being drenched with
water?
A. In as much as the water insinuates, and penetrateth strongly without, and
within the parts of the Lyme, opening the ties of it, whereof follows the
division and separation.

Q. How is it that the Lyme quenched with water, heateth and smoakes, seeing
that it ought rather to grow cold by the moist coldness of the water?
A. It is because the Lyme being a body well burnt in the Furnac^, holds much
of the fire, and contains great quantity of fiery spirits, the which bandeth
and gathers together against their contrary, which is the water, and works
vigorously against it, chafing and turning part of the same into fumes and
vapors, as those which breath out of a vessel full of water put upon the fire.

Ways.
Q. FRom whence comes it that we find the ways more long which are to us
unknown, then those which we have often traveled?
A. It is because that we determine and easily limit in our selves the way we
know, and cannot limit that which we have never gone, it seems to us longer
then it is.

Q. From whence comes it that a plain and smooth way, although it be very
easy, as by fields and valleys of great stretch, it is much more trouble some
then those which are unequal and rough?
A. It is because the plain and smooth way is always alike, and that which is
unequal and rough, has in it diversity and change, which is agreeable to our
nature, and solaceth much more the incommodity that we receive of others, as
also that which is limited, has diverse pieces, and by retakes; but in that
which we see in a long stretch, it seems to us infinite, and to be without
limit for the sight.

Graynesse.
Q. WHerefore is it that men beginneto wax gray near to the temples, then
behind the head, by reason whereof Homer calls them Poliocrotapous, that is
to say, to the gray temples?
A. Because that this part of the head is more watery, humid, and soft, then
the hinder part of the same, and by so much more subject to the corruption of
the humors, which makes white the hairs.

Q. How comes it that in age our hairs become white?
A. Because as the Philosopher teaches us, old persons abound in phlegm, the
which being white, tincteth the hairs in the same color by which the hairs
are nourished.

Q. Wherefore is it that a man only of all other Animals, is properly said
gray, when Horses also become grisseled?
A. It is because that of other Animals, where the hair falls all the year by
little and little upon the Winter* and then comes again after, as in Horses,
in Beeves, and in Dogs; or if they fall not, as wool does not fall much from
the sheep, it is because that such Animals live so few years, that they
cannot change their hairs and color: but man is not of that nature, so that
his hair falls not yearly; nor of so short life as the other Animals, from
whom the hair falls not; it must be that in his age he still grisseleth, and
becomes wholly gray, and in the end fully white by the abundance of moisture,
so far that at last natural heat being extinct in him by the default of
radical humidity, which is associated with natural heat.

Q. But how, when other Animals having the same default and debilitation of
radical humidity, and of natural heat in their age, wherefore show they not
the like effect?
A. This comes particularly to man, in as much as according to the proportion
of the corporal mass, he has more quantity of brain then any other of the
Animals: Now the natural heat debilitateth and diminishes in him in his age,
and he cannot conserve so great quantity of humidity, so that this humidity
superabounding, leaves him; the natural heat corrupts, and the hairs then
receiving an evil nourishment, whiteneth, and represents (as I have said
before) by this whiteness the color of this corrupt humor, which is a kind
of phlegm always white.

Q. From whence comes it that there are men white before age, and in the flower
of their best time become gray?
A. The cause is labor, travel, torments, affliction, and sicknesses, which
do often debilitate and often extinct before the time the power of natural
heat, according to the saying of Pindarus in this Verse, It sometimes happens
in our way.
To meet a young man turned gray.
And Homer to this purpose, Care, sorrow, grief, and dire distress,
Gives the young head the old man*s dress.


Very fear it self, horror, and the apprehension of an inevitable death,
has so far seized upon some men, as we read of a kinsman of Francis
Gonzagus, Prince of Mantona, who accused of treason became gray in the prison,
betwixt the evening, and the morning.

Q. Wherefore is it, that Horses become gray, or griseld about the head, more
then any other kind of Animal?
A. Because that they have the bone which covers the brain much less hard;
considering the proportion of their bodies, then any other Animal, which is the
cause, as says the Philosopher, that by coming old, the natural humiditie is
exhaled, and the corrupt humors affect more easily their hair.

Q. From whence proceeds the the diverse colors of the hair?

A. From the diverse temperaments of the humors, whereof they are composed and
nourished; for example, those which have their humors much boiled, have black
hair, as the Ethiopians, Egyptians, Moors, Affricans and others; those which
have them indifferently boiled, are red or deep yellow, according as the matter
is more, or less boiled, or according to the mixture of Phlegm with choler*
but these which abound in Phlegm and Crude humors, have flaxen hair.

Q. From whence comes it that some have naturally their hair curled?
A. Galen yields many reasons, saying, that frizling of the hair is caused by
the temperature, hot and dry of the person: as we see that little, long, and
straight bodies, when we dry them at the fire, they bend and reply; or it may
proceed, says he, from the weakness of the matter of the hair, which cannot
remain straight streached all a long, but turns up again, and frizells
below; or we may with Aristotle attribute the same, with a double mooving from
the matter of the hairs, which are but of sooty exhalations, the which being
something hot and dry, and by the same, holding of Terrestriate and fiery
quality, the earthly falls down below, and the fire affects the height, it
falls then of necessity, that by this double and contrary motion the hair
frizels, and curles, all which reasons are sufficiently receiveable.

Q. Wherefore is it, that those which have their hair rough, gross, and
harsh, are ordinarily more strong; robust, and courageous, then those which
have it soft, smooth, and subtle?
A. Intruth the same may be noted in many sorts of Animals, as in Sheep, in
Hares, and in such other cowardly, and flying Animals, which have all their
wool, or hair downish, and lies smooth: but in the contrary Lions, Boares,
and Bares have it rough and staring, the which is found by experience also true
amongst men, and not without reason; for hair which is harsh, rough, and
gross, testifies that there is great abundance of natural heat, mixed with
the humiditie, the which opening the pores, gives passage to the humors,
which are the matter of the hair; to this purpose says very well a Latin
Poet, A thick beard, and curled locks,
Shows a soldier fit for knocks.


Q. Wherefore is it, that those which have curled locks, are ordinarily camesd,
or the nose turning up?
A. Because they have the blood very hot, and boiling, and heat hinders
superfluous matter, to strech and extend, for the nose is of Cartilages, and a
Cartilage is a kind of bony substance, and the bone is of a superfluous
matter* for this cause also little children, having boiling blood, have their
noses also turning up.

Q. Wherefore is it, that such complexionated persons are more watchful then
others?
A. In as much that they are dry, and the humidity dried up, hinders the
sleep; upon the contrary reason, those which abound in moist humors, as little
children, women and drunkards, and those which often wash and bath themselves,
are very much given to slay ping.

Q. Wherefore is it, that those which have red hair, are deemed commonly
naughty boys?
A. Because they are of a fiery nature, hasty and choleric, but those which
are well bred, know how to moderate and rule their passions.

Q. Wherefore is it that those which have the hair of their head of one
color, and their beard of another, are ordinarily dangerous?
A. Because that it marks in them an inequality of their humors and
complections, which makes them naturally variable, deceivers, and disguised, if
they correct not their evil nature, by good discipline: from whence arises
this common saying: A black head and a red beard,
Take him with a good turn, and chop of^ his head.


Dogs.
Q. WHerefore is it, that the Dog excels in smell, more then all other Animals?
A. The cause is, that according to the proportion of his body, he has the
Nerve of that sense more great then any other Animal* And man in the contrary
has it very little, so that he smells not very much.

Q. Wherefore is it, that a dog of all other Animals, remains lynde or fastened
within to the female after coupling, without being able easily to unloose, and
undo?
A. Alexander Aphrodeisea says, the cause is, that the bitch in her native
ways is very strai^^^, and the verge of the dog, being swollen within, by the
Ebullition of the spirits, he is hardly able to withdraw it after the coupling.

HEAVEN.
Q. HOw is it that we have some small perceivance of the number of Heavens?
A. By 2 principal means, the one is by the eclipses, defaults, or obscurity
of the stars, are eclipsed, and hidden from us a (certain time:) by others, it
is a firm argument, that they find betwixt our sight, and those which they
eclipse, and make defalling of light to us, that they are in some more low
stage of the Heavens; for if they were not below, they would not robbethe other
light from our sight: The other proof is drawn from the diversity and
different mooving of the Heavens; for all natural bodies have one only proper
and particular motion: yet nevertheless they note diverse movings in the
Heavens, and more great number in the inferior Orbs, then in the superior,
for it is infallible, that the inferior receive this diversity of moovings,
besides their own natural from the superior Orbs, and therefore it is of
necessity, that there should be as many Heavens, as there be diverse motions.

Q. How is it that they have a little learned that the Heavens are round?
A. I have brought out to that purpose many reasons in my Physic, of which I
will repeat here the principal in few words: First that the Heavens enclosing
and containing all the other bodies of the universe, ought to have the figure,
thereto most capable, is round Sphearick or circular: secondly, that the
Heavens being the bodies most mooveable of the world, as we may perceive by
the continual motion, we ought therefore to attribute this figure to them, as
most proper to the motion: thirdly that if the Heavens were of any other figure
but round, they would be jumbling and dashing, or piercing, and penetrating
with their angles, corners, and extremities, in turning and rolling the one
within the other, or ^else there must rest some vacuity or voydnesse betwixt
the angles, corners, or extremities of their bodies, which were absurdities in
and against nature: fourthly that if they were of any other figure but round,
in one self day the Sun, the Moon, and the other Stars which are carried
by the rapidity or incogitable swiftness of the primum mobile, or first mover,
should make in four and twenty hours the Center of the Universe, to appear
at certain hours more great, then at other times, from measure taken when
they approach near the earth, which being not, it must be concluded, that the
Heavens are of figure round.

Q But how? see we not many times in one self same day, that the Sun and
Moon appears more great one time then another, especially at morning and
evening?
A. That seems so, but it is not so for all that, but the exhalations, and
vapors which are betwixt us and these great globes, deceive our sight, and
represent them more great then of custom, as it comes to those which regard
any thing in the bottom of the water, or with Spectacles?

Q. Wherefore is it that the Heavens remain always in an equal intervall and
distance from the earth?
A. Because they have not in themselves neither lightness, nor weight
whatsoever, in respect whereof they bouge nor stir not at all from their
natural place: but if they were of a fiery nature as some would have them,
they should descend to the fiery circular, which is under the Moon, as tending
to their natural place; or else they must, since the creation of the world
have always still mounted, and that it incessantly, as it is the nature of
fire to aspire always in height.

Q. From whence comes it that the Heavens being of the same matter that the
Stars are, according to the agreement of all the grave Philosophers, we see
them not for all that, and yet we see the Stars?
A. It is because that the Stars are more solid and massy then the Heavens,
which makes that they appear more easily to our sight, and the Heavens not,
because of their rarity and thinness, neither more nor less, then as we see
well enough, thick and gross vapors and smoakes, and see not the ^ost
subtle; and likewise as we see the water, but not the Air.

Q. From whence comes it that this great and vast space or extent which is
betwixt us and the heavens, to see the heavens themselves, which seem of a
bluish and azure color?
A. Neither the air nor the fire which are betwixt us and the heavens, nor the
heavens themselves, in as much as they are all simple bodies, are neither
colored, nor susceptible of any color: nevertheless because of the great
distance there is betwixt us and the Heavens, all those bodies there, which are
very rare, simple, and thin, seem to condense and thicken, and this
condensation makes, that all this immense extent seems colored with Azure.

Q. From whence comes it that certain Stars twinkle to our eyes, and others
not?
A. Those which are in the Firmament, and above the 7 Planets, as most far
from us, twinkle to our respect, as does a Torch far off; in like man-ner the
little Stars, more then the most great; because that little objects rob more
easily our eyes then the great; but the Planets twinkle not, or very little,
because they are more low then other Stars, every one in his Orb; and likewise
that they are more great: nevertheless Mars twinkleth also, although that he
is below other Planets that twinkle not, but that is because he is more
reddishbrowne, and by consequent less visible.

Q. But wherefore is it that the Stars more high, and further from us,
twinkle more then the others?
A. This proceeds from the rays of the fixed Stars which are in the Firmament,
and above the Planets, their light descending in the Air, as it were broken in
our sight, by the motion of the Air; which is the cause they seem twinkling,
nor more nor less then the pibbles which are under the water, seems to
tremble by the mooving of of the water, the which cannot be attributed
properly to the Planets, by the reason aforesaid, because of their rays
coming more near, and that they are greater bodies to resist more strongly
the mooving of the Air.

Q. Wherefore is it that we see not the stars in the day time?
A Because that the middle means, or the betwixt both, which is the Air,
receives the impression of the light more strong and shining, which is that of
the Sun, in such manner, that that of the other Stars remains as offusked,
as being confused with that of the Sun, so as we cannot distinguish it.

Q. Wherefore is it that the other Stars appear not sometimes in form of
increasing, as the Moon does?
A. Because that the Moon shines not by her proper light, as does all the
other stars, but only by that of the Sun, so that according as she is
diversely infused, she represents her self to us in diverse figures, but when
she is of all deprived by the interposition of the earth, she is eclipsed and
darkened.

Q. From whence comes it that the stars seem to go before us, then when we
go of the same side, that they run, and likewise on the contrary (a
mer^^ailous thing) they seem to follow us then, when we go the contrary
course of their way?
A. It seems to us that they go before, when we go the very same way
before, and that whirle in, because of their celerity and incomparable
swiftness; but when they seem to follow us, going on the contrary side of
their course, it is because of their immense greatness of their bodies, in
respect of the place where we are; although we go of the one side* and they of
the other, they are always seeming before us, which cannot* nevertheless be
well marked, but that they remain always either near to us, before us, or
following us.

Bells.
Q. WHerefore is it that Bells of silver are more resounding then those of any
other metal whatsoever they be, aad those of Iron, less then any others?
A. That silver holds most of air, and Iron most earth: and as ayry things are
most resounding, so are earthly things less then all others.

Q. Wherefore is it that Bells covered with clothes, be it of woollen cloth,
Silk, or whatsoever other thing like, yields little or no sound?
A. Because that these bodies are soft, and repercusse not the air, which is
the cause of sound.

Q. Wherefore is it also, that a Bell filled with earth, or some such like
matter, seems to yield no sound?
A. Because that the Air, which as I come to say, is cause of the sound, and
is choked or suffocated by this other body where with he is filled.

Heart.
Q. WHerefore is it that the heart is set or placed in the middle of the
Animal?
A. Because that it being the treasury of the natural heat, and magazine of
the ^itall Spirits, it is most commodiously placed in the middle of the body,
from thence to expand, and to distribute over all the parts of the body, as the
Sun in the middle of the 7 Planets.

Q. Wherefore is it that being so in the middle, nevertheless chafeth nor
heateth not so much the back and the parts behind us, as those before?
A. Because that the bones that are in the back, hinders, that the heat cannot
work so lively together, the coldness of the back bones and the temperament
also of the heat, which proceeds from the heart, is not so forcible to
penetrate those parts there.

Q. Wherefore is it that he is seated in such a hidden place?
A. Nature has done the like with all the noble parts, as with the Brain,
with the Liver, with the Lungs, to the end that they should not be easily
offended, hurt, or wronged, seeing that these parts cannot be grieviously
offended, without loss and death of the Animal.

Q. Wherefore is it that the heart of some Animals being torn with force out
of the body, will pant and moove still?
A. This panting and mooving, comes from the fervor of the blood, and of the
spirits, from the heart, as sparks and flames from the natural heat which are
not suddenly extincted after the death of the Animals, no otherwise then a
snuff or a meske of a lighted Lamp, loses not suddenly all his fire, nor
all his light, although separated from the Oil.

Q Wherefore is it, that in Animals the most courageous, as in Lions, and in
Tigers, they have their hearts very little: and in those which are the most
fearful, as the Dear, the Ass, and the Hare, they should have the most
great, considering, the proportion of their Bodies, and nevertheless to
signify a valiant man, they commonly say, he^ is a man of a great heart?
A. The Animals that have little hearts, are commonly the most hardy, because
that the force of the heat amassed together in a little place, are more
vigorous, and do greater deeds, then being dispersed neither more nor less
then an ordinary fire heats not so easily a great hall, as a little chamber;
and whereas they commonly say, a hardy man has a great heart, the same ought
to be understood of quality, not of quantity, that is to say of courage it
self, of valor it self, of hardiness it self, not of the mass or piece of
the heart.

Q. Wherefore is it that hurting of the heart is mortal?
A. Because, as says the Philosopher, that it being the principal and
beginning of the life, if it be wounded, there is nothing that can sustain or
snccour the other parts that depends on it: nevertheless it has been found
of Animals, that although wounded in the heart, they have not dyed of the hurt;
judging by that, that after they have made dissection and cure, they have found
the Iron head of an arrow, or the bullet of a Hargubusse sticking in their
hearts.

Q. From whence comes it that some renowned personages have their hearts hairy,
and have bin approved wonderful valiant and courageous, as Leonidas the
Lacedemonian, and Aristomenes the Argien?
A. Because that it testified an extraordinary calour, or heat, nevertheless
natural in them, the which excited smoaky exhalations in their hearts, and
such fumes are the matter of the hair, and natural heat is accompanied with
vigor and courage.

Cocks.
Q. BY what virtue is it that the crowing of the Cock so affrights the Lion?
A. There is no Animal whatsoever, is so fierce and courageous as the Cock,
which combats most valiantly even to the death, his crow is also very
penetrating, so as the Lion knowing by instinct his invincible courage, and
fierce hardiness in so little an Animal, hearing him sing, is astonished, and
retyres himself, so writes Pliny.

Q. What is it that induces him to crow every third hour, and so justly at
midnight?
A. One may ordinarily prove that he croweth not every third hour, although it
has pleased Pliny to say so, that took up much by hearsay, but for his
crowing at midnight they give diverse Reasons: as some hold that the Cock is
an Animal wholly solarie, because whereof the Ancients consecrated him to
Aesculapius, Son to the Sun, so that resenting about midnight, that the
Planet predominating upon his nature, is remounting upon our Horizon, he
awaketh, he rejoices, and sings for joy: Others attribute the same to his
Venerian desire, for he is an Animal which is very lascivious, and why?
having his Hens about him: and otherwise he is accustomed to sing rather
after, then before his treading, and therefore this reason seems to me
nothing probable; Democritus, as Cicero reports, held that the Cock
satisfied with sleep, after he had perfected his digestion, as he has in
him much natural heat to well concoct and digest his food, he awaketh all
joyful, and proclaims his joy with his own Trumpet: but that great Julius
Scaliger durst resolve nothing of this question; but I dare say, that there is
some appearance in the first opinion, but more in the last of Democritus.

Strings.
Q. WHerefore is it that the string of a long bow, or a crosse-bowe, breaks
sooner, when one discharges them without an arrow, then when they shoot with
an arrow?
A. It is because the Arrow abates and moderateth the violence of the motion,
but when one disbandeth the violence of the motion which finds not an
encounter, nor stays, makes a strength against the cord it self, and is the
cause it breaks, and sometimes the Bow it self.

Q. Wherefore is it that the strings of a long Instrument breaks sooner* and
will not stretch so high as those of a short Instrument?
A. Because that those of the long, stretch longer then the others, and have a
more long space from the middle, are more further from their center, that is to
say, from the place where they are tied, and that which is further from their
center, is most weak, whereof we see diverse examples from these words, light,
weight.

Q. Wherefore is it that two strung Lutes, or other like instruments, being
reached up and tuned in one and the self same tune, if one sounds or play
eth upon the one near to the other, that which is not touched, shall sound,
and moove also upon her Harmonious cords, and the dissonant not moove astraw,
being laid upon the string, of the untouched Lute, or such like strung
instrument?
A. This is caused by the Sympathy, and consonance of the instrument, the
strings of the one being touched, the Air which is affected with the harmony,
makes to resound, affect and stir the same strings of the other, and by the
same cause, if one strike a string of a Lute, which is accorded in the unison,
or in the octave, it will shake also the other, which one may prove by putting
a little straw upon that which is not touched, and which is agreeing to the
unison, or to the octave, of that which is struck: and better yet to Philosop
hize upon this subject, we will adjoyne that we may observe a double mooving
in the strings of an instrument, the one is it which beats the Air, then
before is string is struck, the other then behind, when it retyres after that
it is struck, the shake makes him to resound, but encountering other strings
streatched into another tune, and out of the unison or the Octave they shall
not find the like disposition of mooving, because of the dissonance, and
disproportion of tunes, so as they will not resound at all.

Q. From whence comes it that the harmony and Systeme of the voice, or of
instruments well accorded, is so agreeable to the hearing, and the discordaut
on the contrary so offensive?
A. From this, that the established order in every thing, is very agreeable, as
the unestablished and disorder, on the contrary, is displeasing; now the order
and rules of harmony, consists on the correspondency, and Systeme of certain
tunes, the which failing, it follow with the irregular, and disordered, and by
consequent such object is displeasing to the senee which it peirceth.

Horns.
Q. WHerefore is it that those Animals which have horns, have no teeth in
their gums above?
A. Because the matter and Aliment of the teeth is turned into horns in such
Animals.

Q. Wherefore is it, that only horned Animals chew the cud?
A. Nature foreseeing that these Animals have no teeth above in their superior
gums, and that they could not well grind, chew, nor digest their pasture, has
given them a vant stomach, that the naturallists call Reticulum, into the which
they send their pasture ill chewed, to parboyle it, as we say by our meat, and
to soften it, and, then drawing it up to their mouths, and there is rechewed
more easily, and that is called properly chewing of the cud.

Q. Wherefore is it, that in the Regions Septerntrionall, or Northern, the
Sheep have no horns?
A. The cause is, the extreme cold which shuts up the pores and conduits of
the flesh, and of the bones, and by the same means hinders the horns from
budding and getting forth.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the Goats which have no horns, have more milk then
others?
A. It is because that the matter which should be employed to nourish the
horns, turns it self into good nourishment, and into humor.

Q. Wherefore is it that amongst all horned beasts, the females have no horns,
excepting Cowes and Goats?
A. Because that the femalsare more cold then the males, and their coldness
shuts and closes up the pores of the flesh, and of the bones, as it is said,
and so hinders the horns from going forth, or else it is, that the females
being of a nature more weak, flying and fearful, nature, which makes nothing
in vain, has denied them horns, which would serve them to no purpose but to
hinderanc^, and be an unprofitable burden in their flight: nevertheless,
having done all things for the use and commodity of man, she has given the
particular Kine and Goats horns, to the end that man might more easily take
them, stay them, and ty them, and make them serve him as domesticke beasts.

Q. Wherefore is it that gelt horned beasts have their horns longer then those
which have their genitories?
A. Because that the humor genitall which they use not, is employed to the
nouriture and increase of the body, and particularly to the horns, because of
their neighborhood to the brain, which contributeth most to carnal
copulation.

Q. Wherefore is it that horns fall only from Dear, of all other horned
beasts, although that they are not gelt?
A. Because that Dear only have their horns solid and massive, and other
Animals have them hollow, by reason whereof Dear not having sufficient
humidity to entertain the heavy burden, it falls out by necessity that they
must fall off: it happens not so to those others that are gelt, because that
they have more moisture to nourish their horns.

Q. Wherefore is it that they plant imaginary horns upon married men's heads,
if their wives play the wag-tayles?
A. Because even as horned Animals being gelt, are strong, great, yet heavy,
slow, and little worth, in respect of the others; they give the same title to
them that are unable for the act of generation, or that they be so sottish and
stupid, that they know not how to govern their wives.

Running.
Q. WHerefore is it that there is more pain in running, then in going, and
walking softly?
A. The celerity or swiftness of motion is one cause, but the most proper and
nearest is that in running, one is almost always in the Air, without easing
and sustaining himself, whereas in going softly, we have always alterably one
foot fixed and stayed upon the Earth, which sustaineth as by a counter poize
all the body, of which she is the true Center, and place of rest, not the Air;
as also that the celerity and swiftness of the motion hinders our respiration.

Q. Wherefore is it that running too soon after eating, hurts our repast or
feeding, since that motion excites natural heat?
A. Because that running is a motion too violent, which making the meat to
rise and leap within the stomach, troubling, and hindering the digestion and
and concoction thereof.

Manginesse French or English.
Q. FRom whence comes it, that we have such pleasure in rubbing and scratching
the part which is infected?
A. Because there is a certain humor thick and gross, the which in rubbing
and scratching issues or dissipateth, and in issuing or dissipating, it
pricketh sweetly the flesh, or rather the skin, for willingly this humor
sticks ordinarily to the skin.

Q. Wherefore is it that the manginesse ceasing, we have no more pleasure to
scratch that place, but rather dolor?
A. Because that after the cause of the manginesse is taken away, the place not
being infected, or affected as before, it is offensive to the life, if one
rubbeth or scratcheth, in like sort as when it was charged with the foresaid
humor.

Q. From whence comes it that after a wound is closed, or a little after
healing, it itcheth?
A. It is because the party which has been hurt, being strengthened, and
near well, casts and thrusts out that which remains of any evil humor
within, the which staying in the skin, makes it itch.

Q. From whence comes it that the scratchings and the itchings receive such
pleasure and contentment in Baths, Stoves, and warm waters?
A. Because this itching and manginesse comes from a humidity gross and cold,
and being mixed with a moderate heat, such as is in baths and stoves, gives
the party contentment.

Q. Wherefore is it that old folks are more scratching and itchie then the
young?
A. Because that this waterish and cold humor is very abundant in some old
folks: the like happens also to children, and youth, because of the abundance
of the humidity which is in them, and often also, because of the boiling of
their blood.

Teeth.
Q. WHerefore is it that the Teeth being of bones, have feeling, seeing that
the other bones have none?
A. It is because of little veins that are fastened to them, and from the
roots also which enter within the flesh.

Q. Wherefore is it that the teeth, although they are more hardy and solid then
the flesh, feel nevertheless cold much more then the flesh?
A. Because, as says the Philosopher, teeth are fastened and in-rooted with
little and subtle conduits, the which containing very little heat, cannot
make resistance to the cold, as does the flesh, which is tempered, and
participateth much more with the heat then does the teeth.

Q. Wherefore is it that the first teeth fall from the little children?
A. Because of the overmuch humidity that is in them, which makes that they
first loosen, and then fall, for that which is set upon too much moisture, is
not firm.

Q. Wherefore is it then that from old persons they also fall, seeing that
they are very dry?
A. No, too much is neither friend of nature, nor of perfection; so old folks
losing their teeth with too much dryness, and children with too much humidity,
is neither more nor less, then as a wall built of dry earth and sand, instead
of good mortar, cannot long endure, no more then if it were founded upon a
place too moist.

Q. Wherefore is it that the teeth still increase, and become large above in
aged persons, and on the contrary, thin, clear, and small below toward the
roots, although that they have been other ways well stopped?
A. They become large above, in as much as they increase well near all their
life time, but that they clear it, is by their grinding, besides they grow
bar^ in their drying by their age, which is the cause they are more clear, and
small below then above.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the teeth increase so well near all the length of
the life, being that they are bones, and the other bones increase not but with
the members of the body?
A. Nature has it so wisely ordained, well foreseeing that other ways within
a little time, the teeth would consume themselves by their grinding of their
food.

Q. Wherefore is it that the teeth fall from old folks?
A. By the lack of humiditie, as does the leafes from the trees, as also Rumes,
Catars, makes them hollow, rot; and at last fall from young folks likewise.

Q. Wherefore is it, that they judge shortness of life in those that have
their teeth thin, clear, and not firmly set?
A. Because it is a certain sign of the thickness of the bone of the head,
the matter of defailance in the teeth, being turned into the thickness of that
bone; the which is the cause that the brain cannot so easily discharge
himself, he makes within the head great corruption, and putrefaction of the
humidity, whereof follows mortal maladies: this is the resolution of the
Philosopher, but I will say further, those which have their teeeth so thin,
are of weak complexion, and of a feeble nature; for if they were of a nature
robust and vigorous, she had planted in the gums teeth, firmly and thick set,
for the fertile and well bearing earth, makes the grain grow thick, without
leaving vetle void places * nevertheless the learned Scaliger notes upon this
purpose; that if the chawers were too hard set, the matter feeding the teeth,
could not pierce them, which should be an argument rather of long then of short
life.

Descending and Ascending.
Q. WHerefore is it, that we Descend more easily, and more nimbly, then we
Ascend?
A. Because that we being naturally heavy, our bodies with their proper
weight, and natural motion, bears us below when we descend: on the contrary
then, when we ascend, they load and keep us back in this motion, being
against nature; by the same reason, a stone thrust from high to low, runs
much more swiftly then she can mount from below to high, although thrown with
a strong hand: moreover, I say, that all bodies heavy and weighty, tend
naturally to their center below.

Q. Wherefore is it that we wallow much more going upwards, then downwards?
A. Because that we have more pain in mounting, then in descending, by the
reason deduced in the precedent question, which is because that the interior
air heateth sooner, then when we go at our ease; for we often then blow,
and respire for quick breath.

Q. Wherefore is it, that water being heavy, may nevertheless be made to mount
as high as its spring?
A. The vulgar holds this commonly as a great marvel, and likewise Cardan
has put it amongst his subtilties, without yielding any reason, but only he
says, that nature has so ordained it with much providence, if she had not
given it this faculty, and property to the water, the course of Brooks and
Rivers, should be arrested and stayed at all the encounters of bodies, a little
height, from whence it should have followed, inundations which would have
covevered the earth on all sides; but if we consider that the first Sources of
all waters comes from the Sea, and that all ebb and return into the Sea; as
teaches the divine Oracle, we shall ^inde that this reason is more false ^hen
common, since that expe^ience her self shows us ordi^inarily the contrary,
for we may ^urne easily the water, by ditches and banks of earth, which we may
oppose* to their courses; ^he true cause is then, that the ^odies of the most
soft, and most ^uple, being pressed or repulsed by the most hard* yield not
place plumne down, or perpendicularly, but lift up and in^ance themselves, for
example, press your foot amongst dirt, or Ouse, and it will swell and rise ^n
height, instead of falling of the sides: if one would say to me, it is because
of his humidity, I shall answer, that one doing the same to a heap of sand, it
hapens not, or shall it not so do? so then the water has his way, falling
from an high and eminent place, the flux of that which is behind, *sha^ incess
antly thrust still on tha^ which is before, pressing upon and thrusting one
another, which is the cause that finding resistance, or hindrance in his
course* and that which is thrust, cannon penetrate or pierce the body i^
encounters, gives place, so as it i^ forced by that which followe^ it, to lift
it self up and mount, and the other likewise that follows him, if it finds
not some easy means to extend and spread i^ self; for in as much as it is
liquid, the extention and defusion is natural to it, and the descent also
because of his heaviness, and its mounting, is contrary, and caused by
vyolence, for it extends in breadth, and descends sooner, and more easily, then
it mounts by the hindrances that it encounters by its course; but suppose that
the water be so well enclosed within a pipe of lead, that it cannot extend
side ways, yet it cannot for all that be so limited in his course, but that it
will mount to the height of the place from his course* and this depends upon
the force, impulsion and weight of the body, which thrusts him behind, and of
it that resists before, for if the repulsion and weight of the body pressed by
the behind, is more weak then the resistance of the body, which is in the
before, the water will not mount so high, as if the impulsio^ and weight of the
body, pressing by the behind, surmounteth: and it must be as is said, forced
by him that resists in him before: this may be seen in the pipes of
fountains, that one may cause the water to mount as high as one will, by the
Artifice of weight, but here let us stay fixed; I have dwelt the longer upon
the resolution of this question, to destroy the popular error proposed in the
same, and by the same means, to establish the truth o^ the cause.

Q. From whence comes it, that throwing in a perpendicular line, a chippe, or
other piece of wood equally big within the water* the upper end which first
enters within the water shall be ^ooner remounted upon the water, then that
above shall sink to the bottom?
A. It is certain, that wood being a thin body, contains very much air,
the natural place whereof is above the water, by reason whereof being thrust
by violence under the water, he rises above by his own nature in less time,
then the violence which thrusts him down, because it was but accidentary.

Q. Wherefore is it that a ball blown full of wind, being thrust down by
force under water, sud^ainly mounts up again upon the top of it?
A. Because that the Air or wind wherewith it is full, comes to his natural
place, which is above the water.

Q. Wherefore is it that a piece of wood being cast from high to low within the
water, with a piece of lead, stone, or any other hard or solid body of the same
weight, they shall both descend, and fall in the same time upon the water, yet
nevertheless the lead or stone shall sink into the water, and the wood shall
swim upon the top of the water?
A. The wood sinks not within the water, because it is ayerie, and the place of
the Air is above the water, the other sinks, because they are earthly and
watery; but in the air the wood descends as swiftly as the terrestrial and
watery bodies, because that the air, as all other Elements, excepting the
fire, weighs in his natural place.

Finger.
Q. FRom whence comes it that the fourth finger of the left hand, next to the
little finger, has been so esteemed amongst the Egyptians, Greeks, and
Romans, that they have only adorned it with a gold Ring?
A. Because in making Anatomies and dissections of the body, they have found
that there is a little nerve in the same, which stretches and reaches even to
the heart; and for the conjunction and ligature it has with that noble part,
they more honored it then the others; and more, they call it the medicinable
finger.

Sleep.
Q. Wherefore is it that Physicians forbid us to lie in our beds upon our
backs, and our bellies aloft?
A. The cause is, that lying in that sort, the Reins heat, and the Phlegm
which is there; hardens, whereby is engendered the stone in the reins, it
chafes also the blood that is in the vein called Cave, and the spirits that
are within the great Artery; and it likewise shuts and stops the conduits of
the excrements, whereof ensues and proceeds, as says Avicen, Apoplexies,
Phrensies, and Incubus.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the morning sleep is more pleasant then that of the
night?
A. Because that the Sun remounting in our Hemispheare and coming near us,
mooveth sweetly in our bodies, such vapors as provoke us to sleep.

Q. But wherefore is it that sleep after dinner is hurtful?
A. If one have watched the night before, I do not condemn him to sleep in
the day; but having sufficiently rested the night, and to take a nappe betwixt
the two meals, it corrupts the digestion, loses and slakes the members too
much, dulleth and makes the head heavy, and brings one to be careless and
unprofitable. I will say nevertheless that although the Physicians permit old
folks to sleep sometimes in the day, because they cannot well rest in the
night, therefore they may take a nap when they desire it; but it is not good to
use it too soon after meat, or if then, but a short one with the Proverb:
Somnum Meridianum aut brevis, aut Nihil.

Q. Wherefore is it that little children are very sleepy, and old folks on the
contrary very watchful?
A. Because that little children are very moist, and nevertheless abounding in
natural heat, the which evaporates great quantitity of the humidity, and
sends it to the brain, so as the conduits by which the animal spirits flow
from the brain, to the other parts of the body, being stoppen, they sleep
easily: Old folks on the contrary are dry, and have besides little natural heat
in them, and is the cause that the matter and efficient cause of sleep fails in
them, and that they cannot long sleep: whereas I say that aged folks are dry,
I mean they have little of radical moisture, although they abound in ill
humors, the which nevertheless are not the cause and matter of sleep.

Q. Wherefore is it that those which have their veins very small, are more
sleepy then those which have them great?
A. Because, as Aristotle says very well, that the fumes and vapors which
have their mou^ture to the brain, and have their stopping by the conduits of
the sense, cannot easily flow, nor be dissipated by the natural heat, so easily
as if the ways were large and ample, so then it is requisite they have more
time to take away the cause of sleep, as also the effect lasts n t long.

Q. From whence comes it that Harmony, and a sweet consort of a well agreeing
music, be it of voice or of instruments; yea a sweet murmur of waters and
Rivers, the chirping of birds, and the humming of flies, and other such objects
of the hearing, provoke sleep?
A. The same proceeds from that, as the soul is greatly affected, and as it
were seized and charmed by the hearing, gathers all his forces for to send up
great quantity of spirits, so as the other senses being altogether deprived
remain as filled, and the Agitation of the same spirits mooving the vapors,
and fumes to the Organes and conduits of the hearing, provoke a sweet and
pleasant sleep.

Q. How can it be that sorrow breaks the sleep, and yet nevertheless sleep
allaies sorrow an^ grief?
A. It is that sorrow and grief troubles and hinders so much the concoction,
that imagination it self breaks the sleep, and nevertheless rest increases
the motion of the troubled spirits, and releaseth the anguish and sorrow.

Q. How can it be, that labor provokes sleep, seeing it expandeth and
throws abroad natural heat through all the body, and nevertheless natural
heat amasseth from the interior, is the efficient cause of sleep, making to
vapor the fumes from the stomach to the brain, the which turning them into
water, stops the conduits of the sense, which remains by this means filled
and bound?
A. Sleep comes not from the labor, but by accident, and mediately, not as
the nearest cause, because labor ingenders weariness, and weariness
constraines us to rest, so that during the rest, natural heat retires within,
and works so with that she finds within the stomach, and inwards, that it
exhales the fumes and vapors to the brain, the which provokes sleep, and
stops the conduits of the Senses.

Q. Wherefore is it that the first sleep is more strong, more profound, and
holds the sense more bound, and more drowned in sleep?
A. Because that then it sends more great quantity of vapors to the brain,
then after that one has slept sometime, and that the digestion is made, or
very near accomplished; for natural heat not being so busied, begins to
disperse and consume the vapors which sto^ the conduits of the Senses.

Q. Wherefore is it, that when we are seized with sleep, our eyelids fall
down, and cover the eyes?
A. Because that the natural heat being then occupied to concoct the victuals
which are within the stomach, where they are shut up, the parts a loft during
that time, are seized with cold, the which stiffens and makes them without
motion; for it is that heat which works and moves this corporal mass in
all his parts, and cold on the contrary stiffens all our members.

Sweetness.
Q. FRom whence comes it that we well feel and perceive ^owernesse and
bitt^rnesse of the pittle, that is sometime in our mouths, and not the sweet?
A. It is because that the sweet is the natural temperament which one
perceives not him self, as he does of the other qualities which proceed from
some alteration, and comes beside nature.

Q. Wherefore is it that sweet meats engender vermin in our bodies, sooner then
those which have in them acrimony or sharpness?
A. Because that sweet meats are very easily corrupted, for sharp tasting
things resist corruption, by reason whereof we salt and powder our meat to keep
it, the salt drying and consuming the superfluous humidity, but the swetnes in
victuals testifies a temperature of heat, with humidity very much disposed to
receive a new form by corruption.

Right hand or side.
Q. WHerefore is it, that the instruments of the senses, those of the right
side, as the eye, the ear, and the right nostril; are not more excellent, then
those of the left, seeing that in all other things we prize more the right,
then the left, and especially in the parts of the body, where the right is more
strong and robust then the left?
A. In as as much as to feel is to suffer or to be affected, and being so, that
the one and the other instruments of the senses, as well the left as the right,
is equally susceptible for the affections of the object and the other parts of
the body consist more in action then in passion, so that the right being
ordinarily, and from its birth more exercised, it is therefore more strong and
robust, whereof the contrary, if the left were as much exercised, it would
surmount the right in force, and in nimblenes, as you see in those that they
call left handed, but nevertheless the right part is esteemed more excelent,
then the left, because it is consecrated to divinity, and is taken for a symbol
of good luck, and honor together, as we sometimes read in the Poets, that the
thunder held in the left hand, is esteemed a presage of good luck, that is,
because that that which comes to us on the left side, comes from the right of
God, which regards us from high, for he that opposes me face to face, has his
right hand answering to my left, and my left answering to his right.

Q. Wherefore is it, that according to the common saying, that male children
are ingendered o^ the right side of the matrix, and females on the left?
A. It is a popular error that they have believed otherwise then at the
present; for by the Anatomies and dissections of the bodies of Women, they have
seen the contrary, and that the males and females are engendered indifferently
in all the Cells of the matrix.

Q. Wherefore is it that we bear more easily a burden upon the left side
then upon the right, since the right side is more strong?
A. It is because that upon the right we hinder the part more strong, and lest
it remain in his infirmity and weakness, and bearing it upon the left side,
the right remains free, and we are something eased; or else it is, that as the
right part is more easy to move then the left, also it endures less in
travel.

Water.
Q. WHerefore is it that pitwater is more fresh in the winter then in Summer?
A. It is in as much as naturally all contraries fly most strongly their
contrary; the face of the earth being then in Summer, heated by the double
reflection of the Suns rays, which beat right down, and in a right line
from high to low, the cold which cannot resist it, is shut up within the
intrailes of the earth, from whence it comes, that the waters in the pits are
fresh: on the contrary, the Sun darting his rays in winter obliquely and
aside; the face of the Earth is not much heated, so that the col^ there
predominates, as the more strong, and the heat is enclosed within the earth:
and for this cause, the water which is in the pits, participates of this heat,
and is by this resistance of mutual contrarieties, which the Greeks call
Antiperis^asin.

Q. Wherefore is it that the waters in pits being drawn, and left within the
tub, nevertheless without touching the same, it is more fresh then that which
they draw at the present?
It is because the Air in the bottom of the pit or well, and so it comes to
cool the water which is left to rest within the vessel: and therefore those
which love to drink their wine fresh in Summer, make their bottels to be
hanged within the Wells or pits, that they may be ^he better tempered within
the water.

Q. But wherefore is it that the air does not cool as well as pitwater,
though it be formerly drawn, and left to rest within the bottom of the pit,
or in the tub?
A. It will cool also without doubt, but not so much; because it is more ea^ie
to affect a little quantity, then a much more great.

Q. Wherefore is it that water being heated to that degree, that it is more hot
then the fire it self to the touch, cannot for all that burn and consume
wood, or such like bodies, as does the fire?
A. It is because that the flame of the fire which burns and consumes, is very
subtle, active, and penetrating, and the water is gross, at least in regard
of the fire, together, that the humidit ^ of the water hinders* it from
consuming and burning.

Q. Wherefore is it that casting a stone, or another heavy body within the
water, it will make many roundles of circles, waving even to the banks?
A. It is as says Alexander Aphr^diseus, in as much as water yee^ding to a
body more strong, retyres it self, and in his retyring, one wave thrusts
another of all sides in a round, because that the water is naturaly round, as
we have showed, in that the drops of rain falls in roundells upon the earth;
for the same reason ought to be in the whole, as he is in his parts: so
teaches upon this subject the Philosopher.

Q. Wherefore is it that water descends more nimbly then ascends?
A. It is because it is heavy, and tends naturally to below.

Q. Wherefore is it then that the water being heavy, accabels not, and
overpresseth with his wheightinesse those which plunge or dive into it, and
those which swim between two waters, and likewise, wherefore a paile full of
water, weighes not, or swallows not within the water it self, it from him
that sustaines it aloft, by the chain or cord, although that it weighes very
much, being out of the water?
A. It is because that water in his proper and natural place is so well
united, that the parts sustayn the one to the other, which hinders, that his
weight keeps it not down, or pressingly those which are under it: for the
opinion of those which hold that water weighes not in his natural place, is
false.

Q. Wherefore is it that rai^^ water nourishes the plants better then that of
ponds and rivers?
A. Because that in falling from aloft, she wraps up in he^ much air, as the
little botte^ or bubles which are here begotten in falling down, mak^ proof,
and the air being of i^*selfe hot and moist, aydeth much to the production and
increase of the plants together that those waters so ingendere^ in the air,
are more pure and more clear, whereas the o*thers still retain some qualities
of the ground, upon and by which they run.

Q. Wherefore is it that rivers bear in winter greater burdens, and that
boats sail or swimm^ more slowly then at other seasons even in equal depth of
water?
A. It is because that the cold ^ickens, condenseth and shut^th close the
water, and especi^lly the frost, by reason where^f being brought to be more
so^d, it will bear a greater bur^en, but it runs the more ^owly.

Q. Wherefore is it that sea^ater better bears and sustains the ^essels then
fresh waters, though in ^n equal profundity and depth?
A. It is in as much as the Seawater is gross and more ter^estriall, caused by
the burning ^xhalations which mingleth with it, and thereby it becomes so
salt.

Q. Wherefore is it that those which often wash themselves in seawater, are
sooner dry then those which are washed with freshwater?
A. Because that Seawater is more thick and dry, his proper saltness ayding
to dry, and fresh water wetteth much more, which is the cause that they are
longer a drying, although that Plutark seems to hold a contrary opinion,
without yielding any other reason then the authority of Homer, to as little
purpose, and as far from this matter.

Q. Wherefore is it that fresh water, is more proper and better to wash and
cleanse our clothes woollen or linen, then that of the Sea?
A. Because that fresh water is more subtle, by reason where of it easily
insinuates into the little holes of the cloth, and so thrusts out the ordure
and dirt.

Q. Wherefore is it that those which sail upon the sea, even in calm and
fair times, are more heart sick, then those that sail upon fresh Rivers?
A. It is in as much as the odor of the sea is more violent, moving and
provoking them, as a strong medicine to cast and void upwards and downwards,
together with the fear and apprehension of danger, which often there is much,
but this does not happen upon fresh rivers, because they have neither that
vapor there, nor any such apprehension of peril, as upon the Sea.

Q. Wherefore it it that the sea water will not nourish herbs and plants?
A. Because that is so gross, that it can neither pierce nor penetrate even to
the roots, besides it is so heavy, that it cannot mount to the branches: now
that it is much more gross, and by consequence more heavy then fresh water, it
appears by that we have formerly said, that it bears a greater burden,
and sustaineth the vessels better, even in equal depth: join also that it is
a dust, bitter, and saltish, because of the burning exhalations which are mixed
with it* the which takes away the virtue of the nourishing herbs and trees,
as the faculty of moystning, by reason whereof we cannot drink it; for to the
contrary, as we have formerly showed, Sea water makes dry.

Q. Wherefore is it that the sea in winter, is less salt, then in any other
time of the year?
A. Bccause that it is then less heated by the Sun, for being that the
saltness of the Sea proceeds from burning exhalations, and are drawn from the
profundity of the same by the heat of the Sun: this heat being much more
weak in winter, then in any other season of the year, it must of nece^ssit y
be, that the sea should be less saltish together, that in the winter so many,
and such abundance of flods come and discharge themselves within the sea, with
much more great quantity of fresh water then accustomed, may also something
moderate and attemperate the saltness of the Sea: all these things together,
may do that which they cannot do particularly.

Q. Wherefore is it that all the natural waters, that of the sea is only
susceptible of the flame, that's to say, may be only burned?
A. Because that it is more gross, as its saltness shows, and otherwise it
is as oily, for of salt one may draw and distill an oily liquor, and oil will
conceive flame.

Q. Wherefore is it then, that sea water being more fat and gross, is
nevertheless more clear and more transparent then fresh water?
A. It is because the Sea water is fat and oily, as I have said before, it is
nevertheless more transparent then fresh water, which is ordinarily sulied and
thickened with the clay and dirt of the earth, but Sea water is not so sullied
and muddie in going from any fountain, but his issuing is from Rocks, and
floting upon sand, it is clear and transpaparent as Crystal it self.

Q. Wherefore is it that hot water, is sooner cold in the Sun, then in the
shadow?
A. It is because that the neighbor Air being heated by the reflective rays
of the Sun, the heat extends it self, and dissipateth sooner then when his
forces are shut up within it self, flying the cold of the shadowed air: by
the like reason the fire is less hot, then when the rays of the sun
touches it.

Q. Wherefore is it that water which has been boiled, and after cold, sooner
congealeth or freezeth, then that which has never been heated?
A. It is inasmuch that cold works with more force against that which has
been heated, as being more contrary to him, or else that the fire has
evapoured by his heat the more subtle parts of the water, so that as they
which remain, being more gross, are taken, and frozen more easily by the
cold, for gross things are more easily frozen, then the most subtle and soft*
as the mudde sooner then the water, nevertheless Seawater, because of his
heat and saltness, freezeth not so soon as fresh water, although it is more
gross.

Q. Wherefore is it, that Aqua vitae, if it be excellent, conceives flame, and
burns without hurting the body that is in it, be it a linen cloth, or such
other thing?
A. It is, that being extreme hot, it conceives easily his like, and yet
entertaines freely what he has of matter.

Q. Wherefore is it that it is more light then any other liquour, and likewise
that it will swim upon oil?
A. It is because that it holds both of air and of fire, which are the two
light and subtle elements: for all that is earthly and gross in the wine,
whereof it was made and drawn by the Alembicke, was separated from it.

Q. Wherefore is it that it being mixed with any other liquour, it hinders it
from freezing, even during the extremity of thewinter?
A. Because that it is exteamly hot of it self, and therefore it is called
burning water, the cause whereby it resists so the cold, be it never so sharp
and vehement.

Q. Wherefore is it that it is not profitable to a lean and dry person?
A. Because it dries and burns the humors which be not superfluous, but
rather defailing in lean and dry persons; it were better therefore they did
conserve them, then consume them.

Echo.
Q. WHerefore is it that the Echo reports more clearly to our hearing the last
syllables then the first?
A. It is because that the first are broken by the last, or that we are too
near, or that we speak the last in measure, ^onger then the Echo gives us
the first, and so we cannot so well understand them.

Elements.
Q. HOw can it be, that the Elements which have their qualities so contrary,
may be ho^den with so straight and perfect a bond together, without destroying
the one the other by their neighborhood?
A. It is that their qualities are so justly and perfectly balanced and
proportioned, that they themselves are the band which most strictly ties them,
the one being not able to undertake nothing too much upon the others* for even
as a consort of four good voices discordant in tone, nevertheless agreeing in
their Systeme, is much more harmonious, then if they all agreed in the unison:
likewise the accord of the four Elements consists in their discord, by the
just proportion of their forces.

Infants.
Q. WHerefore is it that Infants which are borne in the 7 month after their
conception, many times live, and those which are borne in the 8, seldom do?
A. Some attribute this to the order of the seven planets, and hold, that the
first month answers to Saturn, the second to Jupiter, and so according to the
order of the Planets in descending toward us; and although that the seventh
month be past, we must begin again with Saturn, which is a cold Planet,
and Symboliseth with weakness: therefore children borne in the eight month,
cannot well live, although that Aristotle, and after him Pliny testifies, that
sometimes they lived as well as the others, and especially in Egypt, because of
the continual serenity of the Air, which is in that Region, but the foresaid
reason seems to me more subtle, then veritable: Fracastorius the Italian,
thought better how to deal, then others, upon this question: he says, that
the children of the seventh and ninth month may live, but not on the eight, in
as much that as there are kinds of corn which comes in three months, others
in seven, out of these times they are worth nothing, so there is* of the sorts
of humane seed* the one of seven, and the other of nine, and out of these times
the children cannot live: the which resolution is yet more impertinent then the
precedent, for even as the corn of seven months is worth nothing, at three,
so to follow his manner of saying, those that beget children of nine months,
know *not how to beget for seven, that may live: on the contrary, or to
traverse it, those which are begotten for seven months cannot beget for nine:
and nevertheless experience every day shows us the contrary; for my own
part I see well enough, that neither the one nor the other says any thing of
value: nevertheless I will adjoyne, although it is possible enough that I
shall say nothing to the liking of another: but so much I love to attribute to
the perfection of the Septenarie number, the which by a certain occult and
secret virtue accomplisheth all things: This number is very perfect, because it
is composed of the two first perfect numbers, par and impar; to wit, of the
third and fourth: for the second being not composed but of an unite repeated,
the which is no number, nor is perfect; for his occult virtue, I esteem that
it works upon all the things sublunary, because that the Moon changes her
form from seven to seven days, that is, every seventh day; and she is more
apparent and manifest in man, then in any other thing whatsoever: For first
being borne seven months after his conception, he may live: in the seventh
month after his birth, his teeth begin to come out: at seven years, he
begins to have the use of reason: at twice seven years, he enters into the
age of Puberty and to be capable of generation; at three times seven years,
he enters likewise into the flower of his Age at four times seven years* he
begins to enter into the Age of Virility and full perfection of his natural
vigor and manhood: from seven to seven, if we take heed, a man receives
ordinarily some alteration and change in his spirit, or body, or in his
temporal goods, or in his fortune, be it in adversity, be it in prosperity,
such a change is principally remarkable in his complexion, and after all,
which is full of admiration; the climatericall year, which is the three score,
and third year of the age of man, now count seven times nine, or nine times
seven, the which is ordinarily reduced to some extremity and peril of his
life, which the Emperor Augustus well noting, rejoices marvellously, to have
past that very year, not without apprehension, though without danger of his
life; then as by the number of seven and and of nine multiplied, the one by the
other, we are in danger of death, so the very same numbers are also happy for
the prolongation of our lives, now to cut short this question, the Lawyers
approving this doctrine from the Physicians, have judged that children borne
the seventh month with perfection, ought to be allowed as legitimate, if by
adventure the father had been absent.

Q. Wherefore is it that children, as as soon as they are out of their mothers
wombs begin to cry?
A. The cause is, they feel a great change in passing out of a place so close
and hot, to enter into an air free and cold, together with clarity which
dazeleth their weak eyes, which causes them to cry, and if we shall yet
further enter into the profound mysteries of our being, be it that they
presage the miseries of their future life, which is but a passage and a way,
(not a life) to go to a true and immortal living.

Q. Wherefore is it that little children have their noses turned up?
A. It is as says Aristotle, that they have their blood boiling; and the heat
hinders the superfluous matter to extend it self: now the nose is a
Cartilage, and a Cartilage is a kind of bone, and a bone is a superfluous and
insensible matter.

Q. Wherefore is it that little children have more heat and fire, and natural
humidity then perfect men?
A. Because they are newly composed and formed of a matter hot, and very moist,
to wit, of seed and of blood.

Q. Wherefore is it that the little tenderling children have their hair very
clear and thin?
A. Because that they have not yet the pores of the skin open, for to give
passage to the humidity: and likewise they have yet little or no smoaky
exhalations, which are matter of the hair.

Q. Wherefore is it, that little Infants have their voices small and sharp?
A. It is because they have the Artery and pipe of the voice more ^^raite then
perfect men, together that having much humidity, the conduit of the voice is
stopped, and the voice by the same means is more sharp: For as the pipes of
winde*instruments express the sound more sharp, if they be strait and small:
so is it of the Arteries, Organs, and conduits of the voice.

Q. From whence comes it* that rocking provokes sleep in little children?
A. Because, as I have said before, they being very moist, this agitation and
moving them up and down, moves also the humors, which mount to the brain,
and provoke sleep, which comes not so to aged persons, because they have not
so much humidity.

Q. Wherefore is it that little children falling to the earth by stumbling
against some stone, or other hard or solid body, takes no such bruises and
hurts as great and old folks, that are strong and robust?
A. If they fall only all along, the reason is easy; for being little and
low, they cannot hurt themselves so much, as if they fell from an high; but
besides, it may be said, that they are more soft, tender, and flexible, so that
stumbling against any hard and solid body, their flesh resists not as it does
with big folks, but yields and gives place, the knock and stumble is not so
rude, even as it is in a sponge, that will not break against the stone, as
another stone will; or as the reeds which yield and wave up and down, are not
so easily overthrown by a violent and forcible storm, as the Trees which
refist it.

Q. Wherefore is it that the little Infants have their vital functions so
strong and vigorous, and their animal functions so weak? I call vital
functions their eating, concocting, digesting, nourishing, increasing and
growing, and the animal functions, as their mooving and holding fast?
A. Because that the natural functions exercise themselves by the means of
the natural heat, which is in them abundant, and boiling, and the Animal
functions exercise not themselves, but by the means of the Animal spirits,
which proceed from the braiee; the which being yet very feeble, and the grisly
bones, which incomposeth, and covers them, being yet tender and frail; it is
no marvel that the Animal spirits have their effects less vigorous, until
the brain be fortified with age.

Q. From whence comes it that little children, which have more of judgment and
use of reason then their age will bear, or ordinarily pernut or promise, which
we commonly call, too forward children live not long, or being too fat and too
great, become sots an d lubbers?
A. Truly Cato the Censor said very well, that we could not look for any
other then a hasty death of children, that are hastily prudent; that is to say,
when it comes too much before the due time of mature age; and the reason is
taken from this, that it is a certain argument, that such children have their
brain dry out of measure, and beyond the temperature of their age; for the too
much humidity, which is ordinary in all little children, hinders as a cloud,
that their interior senses should not stretch so far, so clearly, and so
openly, their functions, as in persons of perfect age; and the unmeasureable
dryness which is in some one extraordinarily, is the cause that within a
little time the body dries always more and more with the age, so that the
Organs of the Senses, yea, all the body dissolves, and death then follows; or at
least, the Senses are so ill affected, that the soul cannot worthily exercise
his function, neither more nor less, then the best artificers can make no
masterpiece of work with evil tools, though instruments of their Art.

Q. Wherefore is it that little children are ordinarily slavering, and
sniveling, and have their heads all of a dandering scurfe?
A. Because their natural heat exhales from their stomach great quantity of
vapors to the brain, the which discharges himself by all his means, as
head, mouth, and nose.

Q. How comes it that children piss their beds in sleeping, without feeling
it, which comes not much to those which are arrived to the youthful age?
A. It is because that children are very hot and moist, as is above said; and
therefore they are very laske, and discharge their bladders more easily, as
also being in a profound sleep, the bladder discharges it self without any
feeling of it.

Q. But wherefore is it that they have no seed?
A. Because that they being far from their perfection, all their good
nourishments turn into the increase of the corporal mass.

Pissing, and sneezing, and farting.
Q. FRom whence comes it, that sometimes we shake and tremble after we have
pissed?
A. Because, as says Alex. A. phrodiseus, that there is a sharp and biting
humor, which pricking the bladder, moves all the body by a strong convulsion,
to the end it should more forcibly thrust out this ill humor, which falls most
commonly to children, because of their much and often eating, and because they
abound in excrements* or better, according to Aristotle, it proceeds of this,
that although the bladder being full of urine which is hot, it then feels not
the cold: but on the contrary, it being discharged, (for nothing can remain
void) the air then filling it, which being cold or fresh, makes us to shake
and tremble: the same happens to us sneezing, when the veins void themselves
of some humors, or hot spirits, and that the fresh air enters into their
place.

Q. Wherefore is it, that ordinarily we let fly wind in pissing?
A. It is, because that as long as the bladder is full, the great gut or Colon,
is stretched, and that in voiding the bladder, one holds his breath, so as the
bladder being after released and avoided of his measure, the intestins which
were banded and filled with air and wind, are released always by the same
means, and so voided.

Q. Wherefore is it that horses and many other kind of Animals, and even men
themselves piss for company*
A. It is by the Sympathy of the Animal spirits, or rather that the one thinks
of the other.

Q. Wherefore is it that in rubbing our eyes we cease to sneeze.
A. Because by that mean the humidity exhales, and sneezing proceeds not but
of too great abundance of humidity, the which nature seeks to thrust out,
which is easily perceived that suddenly after our eyes water, or that we cease
to sneeze in rubbing our eyes, because that this rubbing excites heat in the
eyes, near whom we make this sneezing, and that being a stranger heat,
nevertheless more strong, extincts the other heat, which causes the sneezing,
for sneezing is never made without some heat* which striveth to thrust out the
cold humors: the same thing commonly happens in rubbing the nose.

Q. From whence comes it that we lifting up our noses in the Sun, it sometimes
provokes us to sneez?
A. It is because the Sun draws some air or spirit of humidity which is
within the head, the effluction removing, or expulsion of the same, is no other
thing but sneezing.

Q. Wherefore is it that we sneez sooner in the sun, then near the fire?
A. Because that the Sun by his sweet and moderate heat, attracteth the
humor without consuming it* and the fire by his sharp heat dryes and consumes
it.

Q. Wherefore is it that in softly pricking the nostrill with a bent, straw,
fether, or other such like thing, we provoke others to sneeze?
A. Because that this gentle pricking mooves and excites a certain heat, the
which thrusting out the humidity, the sneezing is begotten of the conflict,
which they make in this expulsion.

Q. Wherefore is it that in sleeping we sneeze not, and nevertheless we let
go wind by the conduits both high and low?
A. Because that sneezeing is made by the means of heat excited within the
head, the which retyring during the time of sleep within the stomach, and
within the entrals of the body, these parts then swell themselves, and come
sometime to their release, it must be that the winds exhale* but
nevertheless the head least provided of heat, the sneezing cease.

Gaping.
Q. FRom whence comes it that we gape when we see others gape?
A. It is because of the common disposition of the spirits, or interior Air,
the which have amongst us al a great Sympathy, consent, and affinity, which
makes them moove and affect the same thing, by the only thought; and by the
same reason, hearing others sing, we sing sometimes apart by ourselves, without
taking regard, or being attentive to the others.

Choking.
Q. WHerefore is it that the eating and drinking weasen pipe, being separated
from that wherewith we breath, nevertheless* if we swallow too great a bitte
or morsel, we are choked, and so stuffed, that we can neither breathe, nor
take breath?
A. Because that those conduits, although different, are nevertheless so near
neighbors that too great a morsel will stop and ram up the hole and conduit
of the respiration pype, which is the cause that he must either disgorge it,
or be choked and strangled.

Q. From whence comes it that sometimes it seems to us by some fantome that we
are strangled and choked in our sleep?
A. This is a disease which the Greeks call Ephialte, and the Latins Incubus,
which is no other thing, says Fernelius, then oppression of the body, the
which suppresseth the breath, and aresteth the voice, and he holds that it is
a thick gross phlegmatic or me lancholy humor, the which is fastened to the
intestines, and coming to swell and puff up it self by the crudities of the
stomach, presses and opresseth the diaphragme, and the lunges, and a gross
vapor exhales from thence to the wind pipe, and to the brain, the voice is
in it suppressed, and the senses troubled, and if the same continues long, it
will turn into an Apoplexy or falling sickness.

Q. But wherefore seems it to us that we have a heavy, foul and oppressing
burden upon our stomachs, as if it would strangle and choke us?
A. It is because the muscles of the breast are seized with crudities and
gross vapors, which exhale from the stomach, when we ea^e excessively.

Q. Wherefore is it that those which sleep so profoundly, as do those which
have mnch traveled, that they sleep little, or cannot bethink them of their
dreams?
A. It is in a word that they are wholly stupefied in their senses.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the dreams which we make toward our waking in the
morning, are not so irregular, as those of the first sleep?
A. Because the brain is not so charged with the digestion of the supper, as
the evening dreams are.

Q. Wherefore is it, that we sleeping, by and by after our repast, we dream
not suddenly after sleep has seized us?
A. Because that the great quantity of fumes and vapors, which arise from the
stomach to the brain, hinders the images of the things that represent
themselves to the interior senses.

Q. Wherefore is it that things which we dream, seem often much more great,
then they naturally are?
A. It is because that the senses so drowned, cannot so subtly judge of the
objects, but then they have recourse to things more gross, and more sencible,
in the same kind; so a man shall seem a Giant or a Colossus; a thing
medocrally hot, shall seem to burn* a sweet Phlegm shall seem Sugar; a
little noise to our ears, shall represent the thunder of Cannons.

Q. Wherefore is it that dreams which we dream in Autumn, are more turbulent
and confused, then those of other seasons of the year?
A. Because of the new fruits, the which being full of humidity, boiling
within the stomach, send great quantity of sumes to the head, the which
mingling with the spirits, give them strange and confused illusions.

Q. Wherefore is it, that sick folks have more confused and irregular dreams
then sound and healthy persons?
A. In as much as their evil and corrupt humors excite the corrupt vapors
and fumes to the brain, the which mingling with the animal spirits, (the
porters and representators of dreams) troubles and corrupts even them, so that
they lead to the fantasy irregular kinds, and apparitions so deformed, as
sometimes most fearful.

Excrements.
Q. Wherefore is it that old folks being charged, and even laded with humors
and excrements, are nevertheless so dry and wrinkled?
A. In as much as those which are entertained with healthfulnesse and
temperament of the natural heat and radical moisture, or at least with good
humors, and not with corrupt excrements, as are those old folks, are neither
dry nor wrinkled.

Q. Wherefore is it that the excrements of the belly of man, are more stinking
then those of other Animals?
A. It is because of the diversity of victuals wherewith he is nourished: and
moreover he eats many times unmeasurably by custom, and without appetite,
and does not use exercise.

Q. Wherefore is it, that exercise is so wholesome and necessary for the
conservation of the health?
A. Because it exciteth the spirits and the natural heat to better make the
digestion; and moreover it makes the evil humors to evacuate and consume.

Q. Wherefore is it, that those which use great exercise, eat much more, and
digest their victuals better, then those which are sluggish, and given too much
to their ease?
A. It comes, that Exercise moves the natural heat, concocteth and digesteth
better, then if the victuals were asoped and crude, like a drowned toast, so as
the digestion and former repast not put over, but laying load upon load,
against the Faulconers rule.

Extremities.
Q. WHerefore is it, that the extreme parts of the body, as the feet, the
hands, the nose, the ears, are more chilly and cold then the others?
A. It is, because they are more nervy, less fleshy, and by consequent more
sencible; and besides, that they have the less of blood, so they have less
heat to resist the cold: moreover, that they are farther from the heart, which
is the fire and heater of the body.

Q. Wherefore is it, that they esteem it a sign of good health, (if there be
no other sinister accident) to be cold in the extremities of the members
farthest from the heart, after repast?
A. Because it shows that the natural heat is shot within the body.

Q. Wherefore is it to those extreme sick, they often apply extreme remedies?
A. Because it must be, that the remedy be proportioned and answerable to the
sickness, being for a certain, that a sharp and violent malady cannot be
healed by benign and gentle remedies, in as much that they cannot vanquish
neither more nor less, then as a Fort well amunitioned and defended by
courageous men, cannot be won without great and strong forces.

Of the Face.
Q. WHerefore is it, that Nature has made Man with a Face upright, and looking
toward heaven?
A. To the end that he should ordinarily contemplate celestial things, the
original of his Soul, and the eternal seat that he ought to aim at, after
the passage from this life, which the Pagan Poets themselves have known:

Vpreared looks God only granted man,
The other Animals he curbed down;
But he to judge the earth and heaven to scan
Ha h only power; besides, to smile orfrown,
To laugh and weep, and all this in the face
The high Creator placed to man's high grace.
Q. Wherefore is it that we sweat more in the face, then in any other part of
the body, being that the face is uncovered?
A. Because that it is more humid, as its hairinesse shows, which is nourished
by humidity, and that the brain which is very moist, being within the head,
discharges it self on all sides by diverse conduits, as also that the humidity
is descending, and mounteth not as in the parts below.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the face is not cold, although it is uncovered, and
that other parts of the body, although they are well covered, are cold and
chilly?
A. Because that the face being ordinarily bare, the cold stopps the pores:
which is more, the head being full of spirits which are hot, and heateth,
therefore it is less cold; but I believe, that custom of keeping the face
uncovered, does more then all: for we see in the like, that those which go
commonly bare legged, feel no cold* and an ancient Hermit that went all
naked, was used to say, that he was all face, to show, that custom and the
habitude of going naked, was the cause that he feared no more cold unto the
other parts of the body, then to the face.

Q. Wherefore is it, that little swellings and pimples come out more in the
face, then in any other part of the body?
A. In as much as there is more humidity in the Head, then other where; and
that these little pimples and pushes are no other thing, then an evacuation of
a crude and undigested humor.

Females.
Q. WHerefore is it, that amongst all the kinds of Animals, the females are
ordinarily the most subtle, and escape more cunningly and craftily from men's
ambusbes, then the males?
A. It is that being for the most part more weak then the males, nature, to
repair that defect, has given them more wily craft, for the conservation of
their lives.

Q. But wherefore then amongst the Serpents, the fishes, the be ares, the
Tigers, the Panthers, and such other kinds of Animals, the females are
commonly more great and furious, then the males?
A. It is that nature so pleases her self with diversity, for the ornament of
the world, as also that it was expedient for the good of humane kind, that the
males of some of the* foresaid kinds, should be something gentler, for if
they were full as furious as the females, they should be well near all
invincible.

Women.
Q. WHerefore is it that women have no beards, and ar^, not so hairy or downy
as men?
A. Because that they are of a nature cold and moist, and the cold which
restrains, is the cause that the pores of the flesh being shut up, the hair
cannot pierce nor get out, but only in some parts of their bodies, where there
is a particular heat* also their too great moystnesse likewise hinders that
their hair cannot spring out, as it is in the gelded, and in children; and no
otherwise then a ground too moist becomes infertile.

Q. Wherefore is it that women become sooner gray haird, then men?
A. Because, as I intend to say, they are naturally cold, and ordinarily more
idle, and less given to labor, and violent exercises, by which reason they
gather together great quantities of evil humors, the which whiten their hair.

Q. Wherefore is it that they bear more easily cold then men, for ordinarily
they are thinner clothed in winter then men?
A. Because that they being cold, they feel cold the less; for every like is
least affected to his like; in example, he which has his hands cold, feels
not so well the coldness of a another by, as if they were hot.

Q. But how? blood being always accompanied with heat, and women having much
more blood then men, as their natural purgations make proof, does it not
follow then that they should have more blo od then men?
A. No, for on the contrary leaving to speak further of that blood, with my
modesty in the rest, they have less good blood then men, for not the crude
blood, but the good is accompanied with heat.

Q. Wherefore is it that Women are sooner capable of conceiving then
begetting, because the laws permit them marriage at twelve, and men at
fourteen, and not before these ages.
A. It is certain that women increase in all things sooner then men, because
that nature striveth to conduce sooner to perfection things of least lust,
recompencing in that course, what she took away in the other: so then men
being still capable of generation, at threescore and ten, and women ceasing at
fifty; it is no great marvel though nature advanced women in the beginning,
since she sooner fails them, then men in the end.

Fire.
Q. FRom whence comes it, that fire does yield less heat in Summer then in
winter, seeing that in Summer, it seems that its heat were joined to that
which comes from the double reflection, o^ stroke of the Suns ^ayes, it
should be more hot then i^ Winter?
A. Because that in Summe^ the air is heated by the double reflection of the
Suns rays, and the heat of the fire finding the air affected with the same
quality, extends and spreads, and so is much more weakened i^ winter: on the
contrary, the air ^eing cold, the fire gathers in^o himself all his heat,
to make ^esistance to this great cold, with which it is besieged of all parts:
So that all his forces being thus united, his heat is much more sharp.

Q. Wherefore is it that the fire is less hot when the Sun shines upon it?
A. It is the same reason that I have formerly brought upon the precedent
question.

Q. Wherefore is it that the fire gos out, if there be not matter which ^e can
take to its nourishment?
A. It is, that his heat is so active and subtle, that it cannot be retained,
nor entertained without matter, but quickly dissipateth.

Q. How is it then that fire being covered with ashes, conserves it self so
long a time?
A. It is because his virtue (so subtle and active) is retained as ^ prisoner,
being hindered to work by the means of the ashes wherewith it is covered.

Q. Wherefore is it, that we see not the element all fire which is above the
air, as we do here below the material fire, seeing that according to the
Philosophers, it is ten times more vast then the air, and yet we see the
Starre^ of the heavens which are above it?
A. It is, because the Elementary fire is a body very much more simple then the
air, and without any color; if we then cannot see the air which we suck
and breathe, and with which we are environed, although it is more gross then
the fire elementary, how can we see then the fire elementary it self; but we
see well e^ough our fire material, because it is colored, and a yel^ow
reddish glow, and white ^ame, because of its mixture ^ith terrestrial
exhalations, which proceed from the matter ^y which it is nourished and
en^ertained.

Fevers.
Q. WHerefore is it, that those which are furious by the ex^eame fits of a
burning Fever, are ^o very strong and robust during their fury, and a little
after be^ome extremely weak and lan^uishing, when the fit is past?
A. It is, that the extreme ^eate and dryness which is in their bod^es,
bandeth their ^erves for a little while, which by and by after loosing the body
becomes again weak, stretched out, and languishing.

Q. From whence comes it, that in winter, which is the most coldest season of
the year, burning fevers reign most; and on the contrary the shaking fits are
most rigorous to the aguish?
A. In Summer the cold afflicts more the feverous, and the heat in Winter,
because of the Antiperistasin; for in Summer the the heat shuts up the cold
within the body; and on the contrary in Winter, when the cold is more strong,
in the without the heat, gains the within, so that the one exciteth the
shaking fits; and the other the burning, being besieged by his contrary within
the body, as within a Dungeon; from whence he resists him, and does all his
power to maintain and defend himself there.

Q. Upon what reason is it* that the Physicians judge that that the Fever will
be more long and dangerous, when the Feverous are hungry, then when they are
thirsty and desire drink?
A. The cause is (says they) that the Fever proceeding fom a sweet Phlegm in
those which have great drouth or thirst, and of a Phlegm sharp and salt in
those which are hungry: and because that the acrimony of this Phlegm exciteth
the appetites to eat: but this Phlegm being very holding, gluing, and
viscous, it is in as much more harder to purge.

Q. Wherefore is it that they give great draughts, and but now and then to the
dry feverish not often and little sips?
A. So prescribe the Physicians, although Aristotle seems to hold a contrary
opinion: but experience and reason together makes us believe the Physicians;
for as burning coals in the smiths forges being sprinkled by little and little
with water, flames and burns the more, likewise the burning and Ardour of the
Fever is augmented, if the sick drink by little and little. Aristotle
nevertheless has said very well, that if the sick drink suddenly, the draught
does not sprinkle his entrayles,* but it runs into the Bladder, like a
gross rain that wets the earth, much less then a small, because that it
stays not, but runs and wets upon the surface most: but the Physicians
intend, that giving a great draught to the patient to drink, he should drink
softly, and by little and little, without hasting or gulping lit down, all at
a breath or pull.

Q. From whence comes it that those which are afflicted with the Fever, are
ordinarily thirsty, and have not appetite to eat; and on the contrary being
well, they are hungry, and not so thirsty?
A. It is because that the heat, or ardour of the Fever makes them so dry
during their sickness, and the great quantity of evil humors wherewith they
are filled, takes away their appetite of eating: on the contrary being well
healed, and these evil humors purged and consumed, they are extreme hungry;
for the body being refreshed by the expulsion of the strong heat of the Fever,
they are very thirsty.

Q. From whence comes it, that our bodies being composed of four diverse
humors, and all being subject to corruption during our life, there is (for all
that) but three which can cause the Fever?
A. It is that the blood, which is one of the four humors, being a great
friend of Nature, and furnishing nourishment to the body, if it comes to
recule, and to be too abundant, ingenders not only the Fever, but a repletion
which the Physicians call Plethora, corrupting and putrefying it self with a
Fever, and it remains no more blood, but yellow choler; whereas the
super-abundance of the other three humors, the Phlegm, the Melancholy, and
the choler, without corruption of putrefaction of any of them, may beget the
Fever.

Q. Wherefore is it that the Fever quartane dures longer then the other Fevers,
although she gives more of release.
A. It is because it proceeds of a gross and terrestrial matter,
nevertheless viscous, holding; and, if one may so say, opinionating, the which
is the cause that it lasts more long time, although it be with more intervall
and relax; for it does in long time that which the others more sharp, do in
few days.

Q. Wherefore is it, that it is more hurtful to old folks then to young?
A. Because that old folks being very dry, the Fever dries them more, and
often conducts them to the grave or tomb; and young folks being more humid,
find them not so ill, the Fever having more wherewith to betake him to, and a
great quantity of humidity to resist his fervency.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the Physicians hold that we must entertain a Fever
quartane sweetly, and with gentle remedies: cum quartana (say they) benign
agendum?
A. This is not, as the vulgar commonly say, that the Fever quartane and the
Gout the Physicians cannot see, looking all about; for they know right well,
violent remedies do take away the Fever quartane, yea, better then the
Mountebanks and Empyricks* but they proceed more discreetly then they, for they
love better, you should travel your self with this Fever, then to hazard your
lives in giving you Antimony or Sow-bread, for these are the violent remedies,
that bear away good and evil humors together, and other cor^asives, so that
in curing you of one evil, they leave you many others, and sometimes kill the
malady indeed, as I have seen and observed: but the But or aim of the prudent
Physician, is to take away the sickness, and restore the patient unto his
entire health, and perfect estate, not to chase one malady by another, as boys
do with Elder-gunnes, by shutting out one paper-pellet, and leaving in another.

Form.
Q. WHerefore is it that the Physicians establish not a primer form for the
first matter, and principal of things natural, as they do for a first matter
A. In as much that form is not only the principal, which gives being to
things, but also that it makes difference and distinction, and to diversify the
one from the other; to which diversification nature is pleased above all, for
if she had but one form commonto al matters, all the things of the world
should not only be of one liknesse, but also uniform, (that is to say) one
self same thing.

Q. A branch of a tree half dry, and dead, and the other half green, and
living, is this one self same thing?
A. No? they are truly two forms of bodies, but not mathematical; that is to
say, they are two bodies different in nature and in form, but their dimentions
are conjunct, although different in quantity.

Lightning.
Q. HOw is it possible that lightning can produce so marvelous effects, for it
kills Animals, breaking their bones without any wound appearing, it breaks the
sword within the scabard without hurting the sheath; melts the money within
the purse, without hurting the purse?
A. The lightning which produces these effects, is extramly subtle, and wholly
fiery, which is the cause that it breaks, bruseth, or melts, that which
resists it, and does nothing of force to that which yields without any
resistance.

Q. But what produces it yet more contrary effects, for it makes the rain to
issue out of the vessel, without any known passage whatsoever, according to
Lucretius: and on the contrary according to Seneca, it makes a thick skumme, or
conglutinate substance within the space of three days, although the vessel be
cracked and broken?
A. Ha! intruth these are marvells indeed, but all founded upon natural
reasons; for, as recites Lucretius, the lightning can by this subtle heat
wholly exhale the wine as a vapor, and, as says Seneca, it does it when the
lightning suddenly decocts it, by his extreme and unexpressable heat, upon the
surface of the wine, producing a froth, containing the wine as a skin of a
Goat.

Cold.
Q. Wherefore is it that those whit hare seized with a great cold, coming near
a good fire, f^ele a great grief, and are like to swoun, as we prove
ordinarily, rubbing then our cold hands, close to, and before it?
A. It is because contraries working vehe^ently, and violently against
contraries, they must of necessity be subject to the passion during that
conflict, especially the humane body, the which being more temperate, then
those of other Animals, feels much more of the combat of those two contrary
extremes, with grief, but to apply and moderate remedy, let them warm
themselves a far off.

Q. Wherefore is it, that cold things offend more the teeth and the nerves then
the flesh?
A. Because that those parts are more terrestrial, and by conscquent more cold
then the flesh, which holds more of air and of fire; so that adjoining cold to
another cold, the subject is much more effected and offended.

Q. From whence comes it, that the extreme parts of the body are black, and
as it were transpierced with the cold, during the extremity of the winter,
although that in our interiours we are warm?
A. It is because the extreme cold closes and shuts within the natural
heat, and the cold seizes only upon the extremities of the outward members,
as when a powerful enemy assaults the courtaines, and outward walls of a
strong place or Fort, and constraines the besieged to keep within the walls and
Cittadell.

Q. From whence comes it, that those which are seized with a great cold, have
their flesh looking as dead folks, and their visages tarnish't with a leaden
color?
A. Because the cold surmounteth the heat, and congealeth the blood, and for
this cause old folks for want of natural heat become so tarnish, and look
with a leaden color.

Q. Wherefore is it, that those which are chill with cold, are so unperfec^ in
talking or speaking?
A. Because that the cold shutting and thickning the humidity, binds up their
tongues, and takes away the easiness of its moving, as also that their shaking
caused by the cold, causes itso.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the cold benumbeth, and makes animals slothful?
A. Because that it chaseth the natural heat from the interior parts; and is
the cause that the body being exterially seized with it, the members are
restrained, all stiff, and as taken and bound, so as they are not able to
exercise their functions, and remain all unable and benumbed.

Fruits.
Q. Wherefore is it, that of fruits some are within their parts unprofitable,
and are nothing worth to eat, and others, as Nuts and Chestnuts?
A. It is, because that nature is so pleased with her diversity, and
nevertheless she so diversifieth with such a providence, that she intends
principally to the generation and conservation of their kinds: and it is
therefore, that she hides and shuts up within the seed of the fruits, and
puts on the outside that which is least profitable to the production of the
like.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the fruits, and such as are most tender, little, and
furthest from their maturity and perfection, are in so much the more bitter?
A. Because that with time they are decocted always to more advantage,
ripening and becoming more sweet and savorous by the exhalation of the
superfluous humidity, and by the heating of the Sun.

Q. Wherefore is it, that vulgarly they hold, that after raw fruit they must
be tempered with drinking wine?
A. Because that raw fruit boiling within the stomach, as must within the
vessel, as being hot and moist, and further being heated within the stomach
with natural heat, but wine being infused, cocts the crudity and humidity
rebounding, besides, wine by his stronger heat extincts the boiling of the raw
fruit, and abateth his weight* but water, although contrary to the quality of
Wine, is also very good, and more wholesome after raw fruit; although the
common speech of drinkers say, that it cooles, and abateth this extraordinary
boiling* for so says Aristotle in his Problems, and the wisest Physicians
approveit.

Frost.
Q. WHerefore is it that the Frost and Ice being engendered of one self same
matter, that is, Rain, it freezeth not for all that, as it raines in all
seasons?
A. Because that the Snow and Rain comes from great clouds, amassed from
vapors, which are drawn into the middle region of the Air, and there hanging
many days: and the Hayle comes not but from vapors drawn from the bodies,
hanging one night, the same vapors being not able to lift themselves high, are
congealed and taken together by the cold in cold seasons, but in seasons
temperate and warm, they come to dissolve in small drops of water, which we
call the dew.

Q. Wherefore is it, that water and oil congeales easily, so does not Wine nor
Vinegar, or saltish waters?
A. It is because that Wine or saltish waters having in them some heat, resist
easily the cold, and cannot be brought to congeale, but very seldom, or by an
extreme cold: Vinegar also, because it is very subtle and retains some thing
of the qualities of wine resisting also the cold: but water being very cold,
and participating with the gross vapors of the earth, is easily taken and
congealed with the cold; and oil being temperate, resists more the cold then
the water, but not so much as wine and liquors more hot.

Q. But wherefore is it that in frosty weather, a little fall or an overturne,
maks us run into the danger of breaking an arm or a leg, sooner then in
other seasons?
A. The cause is that the humidity being bound in by the cold, the body and
limbs are more stiff, more bended, and by the same means more frail,
brittle, and more easy to break, even as candles frozen, be they of wax of
tallow, or of rosin, as also on the contrary, the humidity being spread, and
diffused through all the body, the members are more loose and flexible.

Q. Wherefore is it, that Aqua vitae being mixed with any other liquour, keeps
it from freezing?
A. Because it is very hot, and therefore it is called burning water, and is
very good in your ink in the wintertime.

Q. How comes it, that the cakes of ice swim upon the top of the water in
Rivers?
A. Because they are made of the most light water, that is to say, of that
which is uppermost, for the bottom of Rivers congeale not, because that all
the heat retires thither, flying the cold which seizes upon the surface of
the water and of the earth.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the bodies most gross, are sooner congcaled and
frozen, then the subtle and smooth, as by example, the mud sooner then the
water?
A. Because that the more subtle being more active, resists ^more then the
passive, nevertheless if the more gross bodies be more hot, and they resist
yet more easily then the subtle cold, so the wine resists the frost more then
the water, and the water of the Sea, more then the water of the River.

Generation.
Q. FRom whence comes it that all the Animals of the world have appetite to
engender and beget their like?
A. Nature has given them all this appetite, to the end they should conserve
their species, and kind.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the naturalists hold, that of all the motions and
changings, only generation and corruption, are done in an instant, and without
any consideration of times?
A. In as much that if generation and corruption should be done with any space
of time, a thing should receive his being, in part and part.

Q. From whence comes it, that certain Animals bring a great sort of little
ones, and others only one?
A. Nature as I have said often, above all things pleases her self with
diversity* but yet we must note herein the providence, for commonly the Animals
that live but a little while, produce also often, and that much more often then
the others; the multitude of their little ones; where the frequent production
repaireth, the small lasting of their lives; as in dogs, in swine, and also
in all birds and fishes: on the contrary, those which live more long time,
produce seldom but one, because that during their long lasting, they may
diverse times beget many others, as Men, Elephants, and Dear do.

Q. Wherefore is it, that during the blowing of the northern winds they beget
more of males, and when the wind blows in the south, they beget more femals?
A. Many learned and wise men say, they have so observed it; and the reason of
this is, that the North wind by his coldness makes to close and unite the
natural heat within the interiours, and so the males which are naturally more
hot then the females, are begot oftener in that time, then on the contrary,
because that the south wind languisheth, and lets slack natural heat, the
generation is less vigorous, so that it must be then the Sex feminine, which
is more cold, and more weak, and begotten oftener then the masculine.

Q. From whence comes it, that learned and prudent men, often beget children
unhealthfull, weak, and sots; and the sots and ignorant on the contrary beget
children unhealthfull, well advised, wary, and strong?
A. It is because the sots and ignorants attend brutishly the carnal
copulation, and have not their spirits diverted other where, so as they
accomplish the act fully, and from thence it comes, that they beget children
well complexioned and accomplished: On the contrary, men learned and wise, have
often such extravagancy of spirits, that they least attend the carnal and
brutish pleasure in this act of generation, that they do little, and the
children which are then begot, are less accomplished.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the Physicians hold, that the corruption of one thing
(whatsoever it be) is followed with the generation of another?
A. Because that there is no corruption, but by the privation of the form
precedent, and succession of another wholly new, the matter always remaining,
the which cannot be naturally annihilated, nor cannot change, but in the form^

Taste or tasting.
Q. HOw comes it, that all bodies are not sappish, that is to say, savorous,
and perceptable by the taste?
A. For that the watery humidity is not decocted in all by the heat; for savor
and taste consists in the mixture of the dry in earth, with the moist in
water, both concocted with heat.

Q. From whence comes it, that fruits are of better taste in moderate and
temperate Regions, then in cold?
A. Because that in cold Regions the moisture is not sufficiently decocted by
the heat, and that the cold hinders them from full ripening.

Q. Wherefore is it, that by the rigor of an extreme cold, victuals become
walowish and without taste?
A. Because that the taste (I take the taste for the savor, according to the
vulgar fashion,) consisting in a temperate heat; so an extreme cold makes,
and takes away the taste from the victuals.

Q. Wherefore is it on the contrary, that victuals too much decocted, become
untastefull?
A. Because that by too much heat, the moisture has been too much decocted,
and dried, and the taste or savor consists in the mixture of the dry and the
moist, moderately decocted by heat, as I have formerly said.

Q. How comes it, that sweet meats are more pleasing, and agreeable to the
taste, (since that sweetness is but an index of temperature,) how then are
they sharp* and sour; nevertheless we are not so fully pleased with the
sweet, as with those which have some little pricking of sharpness?
A. It is because that the sweet victuals are ordinarily more succulent and
nourishing, by reason whereof they glut and fill more then the tart, or meanly
sharp, the sharpness of which, pricketh, exciteth, and provokes more the
appetite, then it does glut it.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the sick become ordinarily without taste?
A. Because that their palats of the mouth, and the tongue, (which are the
principal instruments of the taste) are seized with some evil humor that
depraves them.

Q. From whence comes it that there are some waters wallowish, and merely
without any taste?
A. It proceeds by the ground by which they run; for if it be fat clay or
marle, they are fleshy and without taste.

A gouty question.
Q. WHerefore is it, that they commonly say, the gouty have great store of
crowns?
A. It is because they being people given much to their ease, idleness, and to
be still sitting, they bethink themselves of nothing else, but to tell over
their money, and so they contract themselves to the gout by their idleness,
and such business.

Fatness.
Q. WHerefore is it, that fat folks live ordinarily less time then the lean?
A. Because that fat folks have less blood, which is the humor in the most
benign, and the most friend to nature, for conservation of natural heat, for
the food which turns in them into fatness, turns it self into blood in
the lean.

Q. Wherefore is it, that fat folks are more cool in the venerian combat
then the lean?
A. Because that the superfluity of the food which turns it self into seed in
the lean persons, is employed into nourishment of the fat, ^having a gross
mass of body to sustain, join to this, that lean folks have more blood.

Habitation.
Q. Wherefore is it, that those which inhabit in hot Countries, are more
prudent then those which inhabit in cold.
A. Because that those are more sober, more dry, and less laden with
excrements, and the others which are more devouring, and given to the throat
or swallow, because their natural heat is shut up within their entrails, and
by that cause the brain is ordinarily more troubled with vapors and fumes
which rise from the stomach; together, those which inhabit cold Regions, are
more choleric, impatient, and boiling; but those of hot Countries, are more
melancholy, patient, and stayed.

Q. Wherefore is it, that those which inhabit in hot Regions, live longer for
the most part, then those which inhabit in cold?
A. Because that those in the cold Regions, are ordinarily more afflicted with
the cold, the which extincts and corrupts their natural heat. On the
contrary, those in the hot Regions, by the affinity of the air; (provided also
that it be not extreme hot at all times) are better preserved, and more long.

Q. Wherefore is it, that those which inhabit in cold Countries, are commonly
more robust and courageous, then those which are in hot?
A. Because that the natural heat of them there is held shut in the
interiours, makes them full of courage, and in the others it is dispersed and
expanded through all the members of the body, by reason whereof it is more
languishing and loose within them: But on the contrary, we see many times, and
that truly, that the nations more hot, have in most times mastered the more
cold, and it is by reason, the hot nations are more wairy and prudent, as I
have said before, and also better politicians, and better, and more regular in
martial discipline.

Q. Wherefore is it that those which inhabit in high places, are more
healthful, and grow old more late, then those which keep themselves, and in
habit in low grounds?
A. Because those diseases which are the most dangerous* come from
putrefaction, and age it self, is a kind of putrefaction: now the air in low
places is in quiet, in tranquillity, and less subject to the blasts of of
wind, and for the same reason more subject to putrefaction, then those which
are in up raised places, where the Air is ordinarily agitated with the winds,
and so they live there more longer, and in better health.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the change of habitation is dangerous to those that
are in good health, and often profitable to the sick?
A. It is a good course, that those which are in good health, should not make
change, neither of their habitation, nor of time; unless they mean to alter
their health, as the^ air is altered; and on the contrary, the sick, if they
cannot endure it, receive ordinarily comfort, by the changing of the
habitation, and of the time; for if the one is not profitable to their
complexion, or estate of their health, the other may be.

Breathing.
Q. WHether of the two precedeth in Animals, either the inspiration, or the
expiration: I call inspiration the reception of fresh air, which stretches
the Lungs, and the expiration the expulsion of the heated air, which is made
in restrayning and abating the Lunges, which are like to a pair of bellows,
serving to refresh the heart?
A. This is a question very hard to resolve; nevertheless the decision of the
Philosoper, seems to me, to carry a likelihood of a truth, saying, that since
by the expiration of the Animals, they finish their lives and dye; it must be
that they begin to live by a contrary principle, that is inspiration.

Q. Wherefore is it that infants ^espire and breath more often and short, then
aged per^ones.
A. Because that infants, as I ^ave showed you herein before, ^re much more
hot, by reason whereof they have need to ^ee more, and more often refre^hed,
together that they al^o eat much more, having regard to their corpulency, and
quantity of body, then the aged: so that the conduits of the respiration being
ordinarily stopped in them, by the vapors and fume^ of their diet, they breath
more often and short.

Q. How comes it that one cannot breath but with great difficulty, and
especially when one is stuffed in a place where there is but little air?
A. It is because that the respiration is no other thing, but the reception of
a fresh air, and the expulsion of that which is formerly heated by the within;
it comes then, that being in a place where there is little air, as also that
it is soon hot by the frequent attraction, which is in the within, and not
having more means of attracting, and drawing in the fresh air, it follows,
that one may be soon stifled.

Q. From whence comes it that some people are so short breathed?
A. It proceeds of some rhume, that it discharges it self upon the Lungs, or
it is some other indisposition of the Lunges; of which we can make but
judgment according to the effects.

Q. From whence comes it that ^ommonly being fasting, our breath ^s sharp and
strong?
A. It is because, that from the stomach issue, and evapourate fumes of an
evil savor, if they are not tempered with fresh victuals, and this comes
pri^cipally to much sitting persons, to the sick, and those which have eaten
too much, because both the one and the other have crudities in their stomachs,
or that they cannot well and entirely decoct and ^igest their victuals, although
this also may proceed from too great heat, and adustion; for things over cuted,
and adust, have an unpleasing smell, violent, sharp, or stinking, or else
according to Aristotle, it is because that the air which is within the body,
voideth, and does not moove after the digestion, being that heat corrupts the
Phlegmy, excrements by his immobility* or it appears, that it is overmuch
heat* for it ordinarily ingenders thirstinesse.

Q. From whence comes it, that in winter we see the breath of men and other
animals, as it comes fuming out of their mouths and nostrils, and as they
respire it; and in Summer we cannot see or discern it?
A. It is, because that in Summer the exterior air being more subtle, and
more hot then in another season, the breath which issues from the interior
parts of the body is so heated, that it spreads suddenly through the air,
affecting the same quality, spreads, I say, with so much attenuation, that it
cannot be perceived: and contrarily in the winter, finding the air more
thick, gross, and very cold, it eepes it self unite and close in ^suing, to
resist the coldness in ^e air, which is its contrary.

The hic-up.
Q. WHerefore is it, that the hic-up, especially if it ^e not very violent,
cease in holling the breath, or else if we are ^uddenly frighted or afflicted
with ^ome opinionate unhappiness?
A. Because that the hic-up proceeds of a sudden difficulty in breathing, and
that in holding our breath, it must be of necessity, that we shall a little
after respire; by course likewise, we being made attentive to that which feared
us, and banded us against that which frighted us of some unhappines, makes us
hold our breath, and sometimes with a profound sigh fetched from the stomach,
it hinders the cause of of the hic up, so reasons Alex. Aphrod. but Aristotle
yields another reason not much different from this: it is says he, that the
hic up proceeds from a chilly cold, and the retention or holding of the
breath, heating the inward part, the hic up cease from his cause by means of
a contrary cause.

Q. Wherefore is it, that Vinegar also stays the hic up?
A. Because that Vinegar heateth the stomach, and the hic up proceeds from a
certain cold humor, which stays the air and the breath, this humor being
so heated and thinned, exhaleth, and by the same means gives free way to the
respiration.

Man.
Q. WHerefore is it, that Man, amongst all other Animals is borne naked?
A. To the end, that he should acknowledge his frailty and misery, and
otherwise, that he should praise God, that although he has made him to be
borne naked, yet nevertheless he has created all things for him; and
therefore if he should be afterward covered, that he may cover and cloth
himself as it seems good to him, be it modestly or proudly, lightly or
heavily, according to the temperature of the place of his habitation, and the
diverse seasons of the year.

Q. Wherefore is it, that men resemble not their fathers and mothers, as do
the beasts?
A. In as much as men in the venerian act use it in all times, as also because
of the vivacity of their spirits, which is divine, have some divertisment and
thought of diverse things, whereas the beasts are wholly attentive to their
couplement; and also that men often mingle indiscreetly with women, and with
much heating themselves in the business, which the beasts do not.

Q. Wherefore is it, that men twinkle their eyes more often, and more quick
then any other animal?
A. Because, that (as notes the Philosopher) some Animals have no eyelids, as
the Fishes; and others have none but underneath, as the birds, and foure-footed
beasts, which engender Eggs, not a living animal, and those which have both
above and below as well as men, have their skins more hard, which is the
cause that they have them not so moveable and flexible.

Q. Wherefore is it, that commonly little men are more prompt, more subtle,
and choleric, then ^he great?
A. It is, because that the virtue and natural vigor, together with the
forces of the spirit, being more united in a little body then in a great, and
not having to sustain so great and heavy a mass, have also their motions more
prompt and more subtle; and for this same cause the Physicians hold, that men
which are great and fat, are not so healthful, as those which are of little or
middle stature.

Shame.
Q. WHerefore is it, that shame makes us to blush red?
A. Because there is a respect and reverence of those of which we have that
shame retaining o^ our actions as in suspense, and the blood has leisure to
spread, and run more easily by all the body* and especially to the exteriou^
parts, the redness whereof we suddenly mark, because it is not ordinary; or
else it is, that nature, as to cover us, sends the blood to the exterior parts
of the body, and being it cannot sufficiently cover, teaches us in the same
case to put our hands before the face, as the little children do; for nature
will do it, although they were never showed it.

Q. Wherefore is it, that shame being a kind of fear, we should not rather
grow pale then red?
A. Shame is not an absolute fear, not fear of receiving any hurt in our
bodies, or in our health, but only a fear to be mocked, misprized, or blamed,
by reason whereof nature makes the blood to mount up, and cover the face, and
teaches us to carry the hand before the visage, and to bow down the head
something, to hide us when we are ashamed; but when we fear to receive some
hurt in our bodies, or to lose our lives, nature sends the blood to the heart,
which is the principle of life, to fortify it, and the other parts during that
time disprovided, remain pale and wan.

Q. Wherefore is it, that they esteem young men to be of a good nature, when
they have failed in any thing, which d^e blush for the same?
A. Because that they acknowledge their fault, and that they acknowledging it,
have shame, which is a true sign and testimony that they are sorry, which
gives a hope of amendment.

Oil.
Q. WHerefore is it, that that part of the oil which is most high within the
vessel, that of the wine which is in the middle, that of the honey which is in
the bottom, is accounted the best in all three?
A. Because that of the oil is most clean, ayrie, and light, and is the most
excellent, and that of the honey, the most close and heavy, is on the contrary,
the best: now the parts the most light, mounts to the most high, and the more
heavy, descend to the bottom, and so by consequence those are the most
exquisite in the houey, and those other in the oil: Now for Wine, the part
most low is less pure and sweet, because of the lees; and that above
likewise, because of the neighborhood of the air, the which invirons it on
all sides of the vessels; for the air by his too great humidity hurtheth and
corrupts the wine.

Q. Wherefore is it, that Oil swimmeth above all other liquors, except upon
Aqua vitae?
A. Because it is fat, and by consequent ayry; for fat things hold much of the
air, and that which is airy, is more light then that which is watery or earthy;
and being more light, he rises on the top; by the same reason oil will not
much mingle with other liquors* nevertheless aqa vitae will swim upon the
oil, because it is fiery, and holds of the fire, which is the most active,
subtle, and light of all the Elements: the cause also, why it receives
suddenly the flame, and wherefore also it is denominated burning water.

Q. But why? if oil for being more fat, holds him so above the other liquors,
how is it that it swimmes also upon grease it self, against that Axiom of the
Physicians, who hold, that which is such by the means of another, the same is
yet more such: If then oil is so light that it swimmes upon all other liquors,
because of his fatness, it must be that fatnes it self should swim upon
the oil?
A. Oil swimmes not upon all other liquors, because of a strange fatness, but
because of his own proper; which he holds more of the air, and so this
destroys not this said Axiom of the Physicians, if it swim upon another
strange fatness, with which it has not any participation.

Q. From whence comes it that a leaf of paper platted in form of a vessel,
and filled with oil, will not be consumed by the fire, although that there is
nothing almost more easy to receive fire?
A. Because that the paper being very porous, the heat of of the fire
penetrateth ath wart the pores, and goes working against the oil, which is
more contrary to him, as also that the parts of the oil heated by the fire,
and bearing of his heat, mounts aloft, and they below remaining cold, resist
the heat of the fire, and conserves the paper, until that the fire has
surmounted, and affected all the parts of the oil, without finding any any
more resistance from his action, for then the paper burns and consumes; the
like to this is the kettle full of water, the bottom of which is cold the fire.

Dropsy.
Q. WHerefore is it that those which are sick of the dropsy, though they are
full of water and of humors, cannot for all that quench their thirst, with
great dr^nking?
A. Because that they digest not their drinks; and then specially when they
have the fever, it is heated, and become saltish, and biting, which ingenders
an unextinguishable thirst within them, as also that although they have their
bodies full of water and humidity, it runs not, nor distributeth it self to
the other parts of the body, being dried, for lack of being sprinkled, and
moystned, and from this dryness proceeds their extreme thirst.

Images.
Q. FRom whence comes it that pictures to the life seem to regard us, upon
what side soever we go?
A. This same proceeds from our mooving, in as much as we take no regard to
that, but only to the picture; nevertheless perceiving that there is a mooving
in one action; we attribute through error of the senses, to the aspect of the
picture, neither more nor less, then do those which are sailing within a
boat, they think it is not the boat which goes and remooves, but the shore of
the water, the houses, and the trees, which they look upon.

Joy.
Q. HOw can it be that certain persons have dyed of extreme joy, as the
Roman women, whereof one believing (as they had told her) that her son was
dead at the battle of Trasemena, where the Romans were defeated by Hannibal,
lamenting within her house; but after seeing him enter safe and sound, dyed
suddenly with joy; and the other going out of the Gates of the Town, for to
enquire of her son, with those which came from the defeiture, of Cannes, and
perceiving him there amongst others, dyed in the place with sudden joy.
A. Because that even as oil being powered with moderation within a Lamp, it
entertaines and conserves the flame, but being excessively, and all at a sudden
infused, extinguisheth and choakes it: even so moderate joy rejoices the
vital spirits, but an excessive extreme, and sudden one choakes it; or it may
come thus, because that as natural heat flies with the blood, to the interior
parts of the body, by an excessive affrighting or fear, so by an excessive joy
it abandons the interior, and most noble parts, and by suddenly running to the
exteriours, whereof sometimes insues the dissolution of the soul from the body.

Fasting.
Q. WHerefore is it, that those which have long fasted, are more dry then
hungry?
A. Because that natural heat finding nothing against which it may work, or
to what it may betake it self, sticks to the humidity, and consumes it: so
drying then (by this means) the body, the thirst, which is the appetite of the
humidity and of the cold, sezieth us sooner then the hunger, which is the
appetite of the dry and the hot.

Q. From whence comes it that we are more heavy fasting, then after repast?
A. It is that by the means of the victuals, the Animal spirits which were
dull, are wakened and rejoiced, and being so, under-lift the body;
nevertheless this must be understood of those which eat soberly, and that it
be done for the refection of the spirits, and of the forces, not for to quell
them; for whosoever crams himself full of victuals, shall find himself
after repast, more heavy and dull, then he was fasting.

Q. Wherefore is it that we are more prompt to be choleric being fasting,
then after meat?
A. The cause is, that after the repast, the spirits are more busied in
concocting and digesting of the meat newly eaten, but when we are fasting,
they are easily moved to swel and boil, as also that the nourishment by the
victuals, repaires the loss and continual effluxion of the substance of our
bodies, and we are then merry and joyful after the refection and repast.

Q. Wherefore is it, that sick folks, although they are weak, and by
consequence have more need of refection and reparation of spirits and of
substance, can ueverthelesse fast more long time, then those which are well?
A. Because that natural heat works not so vigorously in them, as in those
which are ^ good and perfect health.

Q. Wherefore is it, that those which are fasting, accomplish the ^enerian act
more nimble, then those which are fully glutted?
A. Because that those which are fasting, have their conduits more open, and
moreover they have ended their concoction and digestion, and that their
natural heat is more free, and the matter of such sports is separated from
that which serves to the refection of the members, and distributed to the
spermaticke vessels.

Swearing.
Q. WHerefore is it, that common swearers and blasphemers are so full of oathe^
for all slight occasions, and so ordinarily are liars and peri^rers altogether?
A. Liars (as the Philosophers say well) bear always the pain of their vice
about them; and although sometimes they tell true, yet they are not believed,
their words being always suspected; for liars then seeing, that folks will
not give credit to their mere words, fortify their Tales with oaths, and
swearing, and so very often they perjure themselves, lying being to them a
degree to pass to perjury, as Cicero shows wisely the same in an Oration of
his.

Milk.
Q. HOw is it, that Milk is so white, seeing that it is made of blood which is
of a color red?
Ans. Because it is very well cocted and recocted, and more, it is purified
from the more gross parts, as it is done within the spongious vessels of
women, so as this matter purified and subtillized as a scumme, becomes white:
In like manner Wine, after its decoction digestion, becomes white; as it is
visible in the Urine of those which are in health, and the victuals being well
decocted, become white within, but for the outward part, the adustion of the
fire causes them to be of another color, the which the natural heat does
not, for it heates and decocts without burning.

Que. Wherefore is it, that the milk of Women, who indiscreetly, and too often
mix with with men, is hurtful to little children?
A. Because that by the venerian conjunction, the best and more subtle parts
of the aliment, goes to the matrix, and to the genitall parts, and that which
is most corrupt, remains for the nourishment of the Infant.

Q. Wherefore is it, that wine after milk is very hurtful to the health?
A. Because that the wine makes it to crudde, so as the milk within the
stomach is as cheese, so as it is after very hard to decoct and digest, and
most often corrupts within the stomach, to the great prejudice of the health.

Letuce.
Q. Wherefore is it that the Ancients eat letuce at the end of their repasts?
A. They used it so ordinarily after supper, when they had eaten, and drunk
much in any banquet, to the end that the letuce which is very cold, should
provoke them to sleep, and further resisting the excessive heat of the wine,
it might serve them as an Antidote against drunkenness.

Q. Wherefore is it that now they eat it at the beginning of the meal?
A. Some do it to sharpen the appetite, especially when the letuce are dressed
in a sal^et with oil and viniger; for ^t serves also well to the viniger, and
the oil is added, to moderate the crudity of the one, and the Acrimony of the
other: Others use it for a better consideration, to the end that the substance
of the letuce (being brought before any other dish, should serve to the
cooling of the veins* and that it might also refresh the blood, and temperate
the over great heat of the Liver.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the Poets feign that Venus buried her fair Adonis
under a letucebed?
Answer. To show the extreme coldness of this herb; the which extincteth
the luxurious appetite.

The Tongue.
Q. WHerefore is it commonly said, that the tongue is the best and worst piece
of the humane body?
A. This must be considered by its works, for the tongue is the deliverer of
the reason, and of the will, and then it is the best piece of the humane body,
if it be applied to the praise of GOD, and to the discourse of things honest
and good: and it is the worst also, when it is employed to evil speaking, and
to undecent and dishonest purposes.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the tongue changes very easily his color?
A. Because it is covered with a skin^e very delicate and simple, and for this
cause it is the more susceptible of the impression of all colors, especially
of potions or drinks, which extincts and paintes it diversely, as also that
being very spungeous, it is imbibed more easily with all sorts of liquours.

Tears.
Q. Wherefore is it, that little children and women shed more abundance of
tears, then men of perfect age?
A. Because that little children and women are more humid, and have the pores
and subtle conduits, by which issue the tears, more open and loose.

Q. How comes it to pass, that many times by great dolor, sorrow, and
anguish, as also for great joy, pleasure, and contentment, we shed tears?
A. Because that dolor and anguish shuts the pores, by which follows this
humor, and strayneth the drops, which we call tears, as one squezeth a sponge
imbibed with some liquour; and joy on the contrary, loses, and makes overture
of the same humor to issue out.

Q. From whence comes it, that the tears of a Boar are hot, and those of a
Dear are cold?
A. It is because the Boar is courageous, and of a nature hot and boiling; and
for this cause his blood is black, hot, and boiling, the which mounting aloft
when he is in his fury, his tears are heated: and the Dear on the contrary,
being fearful, loose, and a flyer, his fear and affright cools him more,
his blood retiring to his interior, so that his tears become so much more
cold.

Washing the hands.
Q. FRom whence comes it, that those which wash in winter their hands in warm
water, feel soon after them more cold, then those which wash them in cold
water?
A. It is, because that warm water opens the pores, and by that means gives
entrance to the cold; and cold water on the contrary, shuts the pores; for cold
is restringent, and hinders the cold from penetrating so easily: I counsel not
for all that, to wash the hands in the morning with cold water, but to mingle
therewith a little Wine, because the water cools the nerves, and causes
shaking.

Laurel or Bays.
Q. WHerefore is it, that the Laurell-tree is so seldom touched with lightning?
A. It may be often touched, but the flash strikes not much, nor leaves much
mark, but in bodies which are more hard, and which make resistance; it does
but pass by the soft and souple without offending them; for lightning is
composed of a spirit, or exhalation very subtle: now the Laurel is very
souple, ayrie, and as a sponge, which is the cause that it resists not the
lightning, nor is by it offended, neither more nor less: then as we see by
experience, that the lightning breaks the bones within the body, without any
way touching or offending; and produces many other strange effects, as I have
showed elsewhere.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the leaf of a Laurel cracks in the fire?
A. It is for the reason aforesaid, that it greatly holds of the air, ^he
which is extremely humid, and pressed by the fire, cracks in goeing out,
because that it takes is way by force, and ontrance, as does the humidity of
the chesse-nut, when it is put under the embers, without being cut on the top.

Moon.
Q. WHerefore is it that Physicians, the laborers, the Mariners, and others,
observe so strictly in the exercise of their Arts the constitution of the Moon?
A. Because she has a particular virtue, and predomination upon the things
here below, and which is more, she is more nearer to us then any other o^ the
Planets, and having a less ^urne and circuit to make, she changes more often
her constitution, and this frequent change, ought to be more exactly
considered, and observed, especially by those men which are to prove every day
the events.

Q. Wherefore is it that victuals corrupt sooner in the shine of the Moon,
then of the Sun?
A. Because that the Moon has her heat weak, and moysteneth more then she
dries, and the Sun on the contrary dryes much: Now excessive humidity being
cause of corruption, it is no marvel, if the Moon, which extends, dilates,
and spreads humidity, and likewise augments it, and aids corruption.

Q. Wherefore is it, that wood cut in the full of the Moon, is more subject to
be worm eaten, and to rot sooner, then if it were cut in any other time?
A Because the Moon then being in her most strong vigor, dilates so much more,
the bodies as well sensible, as insensible, which yields them more subject to
putrefaction.

Q. From whence comes it, that those which sleep in the rays of the Moon,
coming to wake, find themselves all besorted, bebenummed, and as troubled in
their understanding?
A. Because that, as I intend to say, the Moon dilates the humors of the
body, and especially and notedly those of the head, the which mingling with the
Animal spirits, troubles the brain.

Sick folks and Sickness.
Q. FRom whence comes it, that people more often fall sick in ^ummer, and that
the sick dye ^ore often in Winter?
A. It is, that in Summer there ^ more causes of sicknesses then ^ winter,
because that the natu^all heat is spread and diffused ^rough all the body, by
reason whereof the interior being ^sse heated, the stomach is ^lled with
crudities, and undiested humors, and to the me also, add the great quan^y and
diversity of fruits, that people are accustomed to eat, ^ves aid also: as
also that the ^res being open, and the ^inne being loose by this diffu^n of the
natural heat, they (...) ordinarily subject to take cold, from whence ens^eth
many maladies: to the contrary, in Winter, the natural heat being enclosed
within the interiou^ parts by Antiperistice, we digest more easily our meat,
and therefore if we do fall sick, i^ must come from some great and violent
cause.

Q. From whence comes it, tha^ the Springtime and the Autumn^ which are the
most temperate sea^ sons, bring us nevertheless more maladies then either
Winter ^ Summer?
A. It is, because that goin^ out of an intemperate and we^ risome season, to
enter into temperate and an agreeable, the evil humors gathered together,
during the intempera^ season, begin to stir a^ move by this change, and
(...) fect also the body, and make ^ sick; and therefore the Springtime and
the Autumn are two unhealthfull Seasons, and yet more by accident and
inconsequence, then the Winter or Summer, which brings them of themselves.

Q. But why is it yet, that Autumn is more unhealthfull then the Springtime?
A. Because that coming out of Winter, and from the cold, we enter into the
Springtime, and into the heat, which is a friend to Nature: And on the
contrary, we go out of the Summer and heat, and enter within the Autumn,
and approach to the cold, which is an enemy to Nature.

Q. Wherefore is it, that sicknesses are many times infectious to those which
approach near the sick, and health cannot be so communicated?
A. Because that health (as says well the Philosopher,) is as rest, and
sickness is a mooving or stirring, which is many times comunicable, according
to the disposition of the subject, and quality of the disease, for all maladyes
are not infectious, but only those which they call contagious, and striking,
which proceeds from some corruption of the spirits, or which corrupt the
spirits; and which coming to exhale outwardly, infecting the neighbor air,
communicates so their corruption.

Q. Wherefore is it that according to the doctrine of the Physicians it is not
good for sick folks to eat much?
A. Because they cannot well digest it, by reason that their natural heat is
in them, so weakened and hindered by the evil humors, and the s^perfluous
nourishment, mi^g^ed with their evil humors, easily corrupt, so that the
sickness is aided and prolonged to the peril and danger of the subject.

Eating and Drinking.
Q. Wherefore is it, that as the proverb says, one shoulder of mutton will
pluck on another, and that the appetit^ comes in eating?
A. It is that the pores and subtle eo^duits of the body being stuffed with
some thick humor, gross, or gluing, are opened by the victuals, especially
if they have some little pointing or sharpness, the which like a tickling
excites the appetite, or natural heat, as also dissolves or consumes the
humors, the repletion of whom hinders the appetite.

Q. From whence comes it, that hunger passes away in drinking, and thirst
augmenteth in eating?
A. It is because that the drink temperateth all that it finds dry and
unprofitable, by its hardness and weight within the stomach, the which
digesteth better, or more easily, being so temperate, and then after by the
other concoctions the same is distributed to all the parts of the body, and so
hunger passes in this sort: but thirst, which proceeds for want of humidity,
augments the more in eating, because that victuals if they be solid, dry up
the humidity which rests within the stomach.

Q. Wherefore is it, that in Summer one drinks more, and in Winter they eat
more then in any other season of the year?
A. It is because that the Summers heat drying our bodies, we must moysten and
liquour them more then is usual, and by Antiparisticis it comes, that in
Summer the externe or outward heat, is the cause that we have less of
natural heat within the stomach to digest: and on the the contrary, in
Winter, the cold predominating upon the exterior, the natural heat enforces
himself, and gathers all into the interior, by reason whereof we eat and
digest our victuals better.

Q. Wherefore is it then, that in Autumn we eat many times yet better, then
in winter?
A. It is not, that in Autumn we have interiourly more natural heat, but
because we have greater appetite to the new fruits, which is then in
abundance, and likewise that bread which is our daily food, is then made of new
corn.

Morning.
Q. WHerefore is it, that the Mornings are many times colder then the night,
seeing that in the morning the Sun is more near to us?
A. Because that in the Morning the dew which is gathered together by the
coldness of the night, falls upon the earth, and cools the air together,
that the evening and the first parts being less removed from the precedent day
then the last, have some feeling of the heat of the same day, the which
weakening and diminishing by little and little, is extinct or diminished at the
end of the Night.

Que. Wherefore is it, that the Morning-study is best, and most profitable?
A. Because that the spirits are more free after their repose, and the Brains
and Organs of the body are discharged of the fumes and vapors arising from the
victuals, the digestion being accomplished.

Memory.
Q. WHerefore is it, that we retain better that which we have learned in the
(...) ^orning, then in any other time of the day?
Answ. It is, because that the brain is not then hindered and troubled with
vapors, the digestion being entirely perfected, as also because the spirits
are more free, and less occupied, then after the perception of many new
objects, which bring confusion and trouble, ranking themselves in the memory.

Q. But how is it possible, that so many and diverse objects can rank
themselves, and be kept in the memory without confusion?
A. In truth it happens often, that those which know most, confound themselves
also the most, if they rule not their memories by judgment; but this treasure
being prudently dispensed, although that it must be, that the diversity of
things confounds the one the other: But on the contrary, they may be brought
to more advantage: for as a house well furnished and garnished with all sorts
of movables, or as a Farm accompanied with plowed fields, with woods, with
vines, with fountains, and with all other profitable things for a
countreyhouse, is much more to be esteemed, then if it consisted only of one
of these things.

Q. From whence comes it, that a very happy memory is seldom found with a very
great and neat judgment, and a gentle spirit in one self person?
A. From this, that the retayning memory consists in the dry and hard
temperature of the brain, nevertheless it hinders the vivacity of the
spirits: but yet if the organ of the imagination is of a temper soft and moist,
and that of the memory, of a temper mediocrally dry, they both may be found in
one self person, although the same is as rare as excellent.

Q. Wherefore is it that neither young children, nor old folks, have any hold
in their memories?
A. Because that both the one and the other, are in perpetual mooving, the one
in increasing, and the other in declining, which is the cause that the Images
of the objects are not so deeply engraven in their memories, ot else it may be
for this cause, that young children have the Organ of the me morie too moist,
and old folks to dry, so that the one cannot imprint and strongly engrave the
Images of the objects deep enough in their memory, and the other perceive the
object too lightly; nevertheless children may have a good memory for another
reason, that is, because they are not disturbed either with affairs of
importance, that may divert them, nor other ways to charge their memories with
too many things.

Q. Wherefore is it, that those which learn promptly, retain it less, then
those which are long a learning?
A. Because that those which are so prompt, imprint the images of the object
too lightly in the memory, and the others ingrave them profoundly, because they
repeat and inculcate them.

Q. Wherefore is it, that Elephants, Dogs, Horses, and other Animals bethink
them better of the ways, where they have but once gone or been, then men do?
A. Beasts have not properly this bethinking, but a continual thinking, the
which having once lost, they cannot recover, neither by discourse nor
reasoning, because they have it not; nevertheless the beasts retain more long
time their thoughts to mark a way, then men do, because they are not
distracted in their senses by diders things as men are* and by the same cause
country clownes, and rustic people, also mark better the ways, and such
other things more heedfull, then men of knowledge, or those which have their
minds disturbed with many businesses.

Q. How is it possible that we bethink our selves of dreams, seeing that
they are not things done but representations to the interior sense?
A. Because that the soul then represents the Images of things then dreamed,
as truths nor more not less, then when they describe us a Town, a Province,
or they report us a battle, we do then imagine in our selves, that which we
have not seen.

Q. Wherefore is it, that we easily forget dreams?
A. Because that during the time of sleep, the senses being clouded, the
faculties of our soul exercise more loosly their functions, and that the
images of the dreams being but represented as in darkness, and shadows, are
therein less perceived, and less stable.

Q. Wherefore is it also, that we easily forget our souls, being being during
that time distracted, and other-where busied, things which appear during that
distraction?
A. As we have perceived them lightly, so as lightly we forget them: for the
sense being distracted and occupied with diverse objects, the operation is more
weak, the imagination more light, and the images less way imprinted and
engraven in the memory.

Looking-glasses or Mirrours.
Q. Wherefore is it that we suddenly forget our proper images, after we have
seen them in the Glass, and retire our look from the glass or mirror?
A. It is because that we see the image representing us in the Mirror, only
by reflection, and not by imprint or graving in solid matter, and as it is so
lightly represented, it is also as lightly imprinted in the imagination or
fantasy, and by consequent less profoundly graved in the memory.

Q. Wherefore is it, that hollow Mirrours burn things which are opposed to
them in the rays of the Sun?
A. It is, that the solary rays coming to give themselves together, and by a
conjunct form, they incountering in one self point, they yield an extreme
heat by their reflection and redargement, the which heat burns the opposite
bodies, and likewise inflames strawes, leaves, and such other dry and tender
things, as also wood, etc. by the means of which Mirrours and glasses
Archimedes burnt the vessels and engines of Marcellus before Syracusa?

Q. From whence is it, that wood, stone, or any other like body well polished
clean, and united, may serve for a mirror, although that in truth they are
more shaddowish and dull, then diaphanicall or transparent bodies?
A. Because the pollishment of such bodies yields them shining, and shining
bodies return the images of objects opposed.

Q. But wherefore are they shining?
A. Because that they have not in them any slits or enter-opennings, and all
their parts being very equal and united, (provided also they be very clean)
the light is not any way taken from them, as it is in the bodies ill polished,
or full of Crevises, be the Crevises never so little, in as much as the parts
more high, take away the light from the more low.

Moors, or Aethiopians.
Wherefore is it, that the Aethiopians and the Moors have their Teeth very
white, and their skin very black?
A. It is, because that the heat of the Sun which is very powerful and
vehement in their Country, affects the skin, burns the blood and the
humors within, and dries also the teeth, exhales the humidity, and makes them
to appear more white, as also, that the teeth seem yet more white near to
their skin, which is black, because that contraries appear with more
luster, being near their contraries.

Q. How can it be, that the Sun blancheth their teeth, and blackes their skin?
A. It is because as I will boldly say, the extreme heat of the Sun makes
to exhale the humidity from the teeth, and dries them; and the things dried
become more white, but in burning the humidity of the flesh without exhalation,
their skin becomes black.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the nails of the Moors are not also white as their
teeth, seeing that the heat of the Sun does also exhale the humidity?
A. Their nails are in truth white; but they appear not so much as they are,
because of their black flesh which is underneath their nails, and takes away
their shine from the light.

Dumb folks.
Q. FRom whence comes it, that those which are borne deaf, are also dumb?
A. Some say, that there is a certain tie and conjunction of ^he nerves, which
stretch to ^he ears and from the tongue, ^he which being indisposed from the
birth, it must be of ^ecessity* that those two facul^ies should be equally
affected; ^hey agree also, that certain ^icknesses may cause deafness,
without making them dumb; and on the contrary, that one may be made dumb for
all that, without becoming deaf, because that it may so fall out, that the
one branch of the nerve may be offended, without hur^ing the other, but without
searching further into so much subtilty, we may say, that the deaf which have
not heard, nor understood word from their birth, have not known how to learn:
for which cause they seem to be dumb: for it is certain, most part of the
deaf are able yet to yield some inarticular voice.

Q. Wherefore is it that the dumb can express themselves so lively by signs?
A. It is because they have gotten such a habitude, using always signs, as
the others do words and speech, joining to it, that Nature recompenceth their
want of Speech in the invention of signs, to express their conceptions.

Music.
^. WHerefore is it, that singing musically, if ^e base be wanting, they find
it ^ore easily, then if the treble ^re, or another part?
A. Because it is the voice the ^ost gross, and which sings ^e most softly;
for the most ^osse things, and which go ^ith a more slow moving, are ^ost
perceiveable by our sen^es, then those which are more ^ooth and light, as also
that ^e Base is the foundation of all ^e Harmony, the which wan^ng or failing,
all the rest are in ^nfusion.

Q. Wherefore is it, that Music (...) so agreeable to all sorts of people,
^ung and old, learned and igno^ant, civil and rusticke?
A. Because it is composed and ruled with a certain order and well measured
cadency, being a Systeme together, or a consort of many different voices
together well accorded; or as the colors well mingled and sorted, delight the
sight, exquisite perfumes the smell, victuals and sauces well seasoned the
taste: Likewise voices consonant and agreeing, delight the hearing; for in
general, Nature is well pleased in the fair order and temperature, and our
senses in the same imitate Nature.

Que. How is it then possible, that some persons are not pleased with Music,
since that being a thing so well ordained, so sweet, pleasing, and measurable,
and so much according to Nature?
A. It is, because that such men are full of discord, of hatred, of envy, of
cruelty, and felony* briefly, they are wholly unnatural and inhumane, as that
Atheas, King of the Tartars, to whom Ismeneas, a most excellent player on the
Flute, being brought to him prisoner, he was requested to permit him play
before him, which having done, and all the assistance ravished with the
sweetness of his Harmony, excepting only this barbarous Tartar, who said in
mocking Ismeneas, that he took much more pleasure in hearing his Horse hinny.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the most part of those which are ignorant of Music,
are more pleased with hearing an only voice shrill and tuneable, then to a
Music accomplished with all his parts?
Answ. It is as with the ignorant vulgar in the Art of Painting, which are
taken more with fresh colors, in pictures, and white dawbed faces, then with
the delicated draughts, and rare bestowed shadows, and lightnings of an
Apelles, or Michael Angelo, where all the proportions are curiously observed,
and makes more business of a petulant and bawling advocate, then of him which
observes with moderation all the precepts of Rhetoric; likewise those which
understand nothing of music, love better to hear often a long squealing
voice, then a perfect and harmonious consort.

Snow.
Q. HHow comes it, that snow is so white, seeing that when it is dissolved into
water* it becomes black insteede of that white?
A. Because that Snow contains in him much air, by reason whereof he is very
light, white, and as a scumme, but nevertheless in his resolution, we perceive
nothing but water, in as much as the air in him is invisible, because of his
thinnes: Bodin very little to the purpose, as he ordinarily miscounts, in that
which is of natural things, attributes this whitenes to the water; for on the
contrary the water blacks, which experience, makes us to see in things wetted,
of what soever color they be, they seem more black.

Q. Wherefore is it, that snow prositeth much to the fruits of the earth?
A. Form any reasons, first, that in covering them, it defends them from the
extreme rigor of the winter: secondly that it choakes the evil weeds, that
then but begin to peep upon the face of the earth, and are not much rooted
within the same: thirdly, that being scum, it holds something of fatness,
because of the air which is enclosed in it, and coming to resolve into water,
it fatneth the earth: fourthly, that if the fruits thrust too forward forth, it
repulseth their vigor to the root, by reason whereof they are the better
nourished.

Q. Wherefore is it, that in summer there is snow upon the height of the
mountains, and neithe^ in the valleys nor fields?
A. Because that the high mountains are lifted up unto the middle region of
the Air, which, as we have formerly said, is cold in Summer, by reason
whereof, the Snow is there conserved, which falls not so to the lower parts,
where in in Summer the heat is predominant.

Q. How can it be, that hot water covered with straw, conserves and retains
his heat* and that Snow covered also with straw, in a fresh place, remains
in^ire without resolving or melting, retaining his coldness, seeing that heat
and cold are two qualities diametrally contrary?
A. It is because the straw is not properly of himself, neither hot, nor cold,
nor dry, nor moist, and for this cause, it is called of the Greeeks Apoion,
that is to say, exempt of quality: and nevertheless is susceptible of qualities
of the subject to which it is applied to, in as much more easily, that if it
participates of any of them; it is therefore it conserves and entertaines hot
things in their heat, and cold things in their coldness: from thence comes it
also, that it is very proper to conserve the fruits, and to keep them from
corruption and rottenness.

Drowning.
Q. WHerefore is it that the bodies of drowned folks come again to swim
upon the water after few days, and notedly as they have observed, upon the
ninth day?
A. Some say, that nine days after the body is drowned, and sunk under the
water, the gall splits and breaks, and the bitter liquor which was therein
contained, being run out, the body lifts it self upon the water: Others
hold that the gall crackes not for all that, but that all the parts of the body
being attenuated, and thinned by the moisture of the water, and the gross
humors being evacuated, it is then more suple, and comes again upon the
water, some days after it is drowned: But it seems to me, that it is rather
because of winds which engender within the caules, filmes, or membranes, which
cover the intestines and the belly, called of the Physicians Omentum and
peritonium, as an excessive swelling of the belly, shows us; for all corruption
and rottenness is ingender'd of heat, and heat dissolves humidity, and it
ingenders wind, the which reason is subtly brought forth by Cardan.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the bodies of drowned men coming up upon the water,
swim upon their backs, and those of women upon their bellies?
A. To attribute this (as some have do) to the prudence of nature, which has
a will to cover the secret parts of the one Sex more then of the other,
seems to me a reason too light, and I will like better to say, that it is
because of the difference of the parts, of the one, and of the other; for women
have the vessels of before, more ample, large, and capable, then the men, as
the natural parts, the matrixe and the conduits of the Urine, which is the
cause that they are less subject to the stone, and bear their children in
their flancks, besides that, their breasts are spungeous, and drink up a great
quantity of water, which weighs and heavieth much more the fore parts of
their bodies, and by consequent draws it downward, for it is certain that
the most heaviest parts still incline downward: on the contrary men have their
shoulders more gross and large, then the women, and the bones and ligatures of
the vertebres, or back bones more strong, great, and firm, by reason whereof
those parts incline downward, as also that they have the organes and conduits
of the voice, and of their respiration, and breathing, more ample, as it
appears in this, that they have the voice more gross and more strong, which
being filled with air, lifts their bodies upward, and the face toward the
Heaven, and the back upon the water.

Night.
Q. Wherefore is it, that in the night time, griefs, wounds, and other of our
maladies, gather together, and increase?
A. Because that in the day we see, hear, breath, smell, taste, run, and
have many other divertments which allayeth our griefs, and in the night the
sense of the touch is only busied, and is also more affected with griefs;
together, the excessive cold and moisture of the night aids to it also very
much.

Q. Wherefore is it, that we hear better, and more further in the night, then
in the day?
A. Because that the noise of Animals, and an infinite of such like things,
cease in the night, and all being still, in silence and in rest, the hearing
peirceth better upon his objects; and moreover, our other senses, and
especially the sight, distracts us much in the day, not exercising then their
functions, the hearing being then the most sharp.

Q. Wherefore is it, that we rest sooner and better in the night, then in the
day?
A. The reason politic is, that the day is more proper to us, for travel and
labor, because of the light; but the reason natural is, that the night is
more cold and moist, then the day, and the cold, and the humidity provokes
sleep, as also that having traveled hither and thither in the day, we repose
and rest better in the night.

Smells and Smelling.
Q. Wherefore is it that man excels not in smelling, as many other Animals do?
A. Because that man, in regard of his corporal mass, having much more of
brain; then any other Animal, and the brain being cold and moist, and the
Odours on the contrary holding more of hot and dry, is the cause that the
smelling of men is weakened by the neighborhood of the brain; for the faculty
of smelling lies principally in certain little bosses or rundells of flesh,
which the Physicians call Mamelles, which are above the nares or nostrills,
joining to the brain.

Q. Wherefore is it, that those which have the brain tempered with hot and dry,
excel in smelling above others?
A. Because the odours are of the temperament, of the hot and of the dry.

Q. Wherefore is it that those which excel in smelling, have also ordinarily
spirits good and subtle?
A. Because that their brain being of the above said temper, the heat serves
them to the prompt conception of the objects, and the dry, to retain them,
which are the qualities of a fair spirit.

Q. Wherefore is it, that they have seldom a good sight?
A. Because that the instrument of the sight is watrish and moist, and that of
the smell is of the contrary temperature, by reason whereof they cannot much
excel in both the two together.

Q. Wherefore is it, that Arabia Felix, Africa, and other hot regions, are very
abundant, and plant plentiful in all Oderiferous, and Aromatic things?
A. Because that being hot and dry, they have the same temperature as the
odours are of.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the flowers which grow near to Oignions, have a more
violent smell, then otherwise they would have?
A. Because that the Onyon dry and heat the earth, and communicate by that
means those two qualities to the flowers, the which qualities fortify the
odours.

Q. Wherefore is it, that those which are Rheumatick smell very little or
nothing?
A. Because the instrument of the smell being moistened by the the Rheum, is
altered and depraved.

Q. If good and sweet Odours come from heat, wherefore is it then, that
dunghils, and the excrements of the belly, which are very hot, stink
nevertheless, and are of a very ill savor?
A. No, too much, no excess, has no temperature, and in these things, there
is not only heat, but an excessive boiling of them, but to the good smell is
required a temperature, not an excess.

Q How is it, that fishes can smell things under the water, which we cannot?
A. This has bin a doubt whether the fishes can smell, and do affect Odours
under the water, but Experience has showed that they can, being drawn by
subtle unces, and sweet smelling pastes, that the Anglers and crafty Fishers
make for baits to take them with; and the Philosopher has so determined it:
Now the Fishes receiving, or perceiving the odours, by the Fistulaes and
Conduits, (that the Greeks and Latins call Branchia) without any respiration
or attraction of air, covet them, because they have no lungs for the most
part; but in our parts we cannot suck the water without breathing, and in
breathing, instead of air, we attract water, which choakes us.

Q. Wherefore is it, that perfumes are not so sweet smelling, and pleasing
near the fire, especially if the fire be sharp and scalding?
A. Because that the too much asperous he ate of the fire dissipateth that
which is odoriferous, and by that means the odor exhales with the fume; but
if the fire be moderate, the odours are more easily sented.

Q. Wherefore is it, that in Winter we sent less the perfumes and odours, then
in Summer?
A. Because that the cold thickens the air, and yields them more soft and
slowly, and as immovable, to bear the odours; as also, that the odor
proceeds, (as I have often said) of a temperature hot and dry, the cold taking
much of the virtue and perfection of the odor.

Q. Wherefore is it, that hidden flowers smell not so well as others?
A. Because that the terrestrial part mingling with the odor, bemusts the
point of the odor.

Q. Wherefore is it, that dogs have not as good a sent in the Springtime, as
in any other time of the year?
A. Because that the great quantity of flowers which yield diverse odours in
that season, deceives the dogs nose, and makes them to lose the sent of the
fumes and traces of the beasts.

Birds.
Q. WHerefore is it, that we have diverse kinds of passengerbirds, and not of
foure-footed beasts?
A. Because that those birds being very chilly, flying the rigor of the
Winter, and therefore fly into hot regions, as also that it is more easy for
them to carry themselves other-where; then for the other Animals, and to search
the regions more temperate, Nature having given them to that end wings.

Q. Wherefore is it, that Birds being covered with feathers, the which should
keep them mavelous warm, are nevertheless more chilly then foure-footed
beasts?
A. Because that the quilles of their feathers let loose, and inter-opens their
skin, and by this means give way, and make more overture for the cold?

Q. Wherefore is it, that Birds have their sight more sharp and subtle then
other Animals?
A. It is, because they are composed of a matter more ayry and subtle, because
whereof they are light, and can lift themselves up in the Air, and some of
them dare look fixtly, the Sun shining in their face even at noonday.

Q. Wherefore is, that Birds have neither bladder nor tonnell thereto?
A. Because they piss not, and therefore those parts were to them unprofitable.

Q. But wherefore piss they not, since they drink?
A. Because they have need of a great quantity of humidity to nourish and
entertain their feathers withal, and on which they employ their drink, as
also that by drinking they make their excrements more humid, the dry and the
moist issuing out by one and the same conduit.

Q. Wherefore is it, that birds have no teeth?
A. Because that the matter of the teeth is employed in their beak, and that
they cannot have both together, as also, that having their stomachs very hot,
they can digest their victuals without the wing it, and by that reason they
have no need of teeth, for Nature has done nothing in vain.

Q. Wherefore is it, that birds in sleeping, hide their heads under their
wings?
A. Because they may avoid the cold from their heads.

Gold.
Q. WHerefore is it, that Gold is the most heavy of all metalls, seeing that
according to the Philosophers and the Chemists themselves, it is the least
terrestrial?
A. Because it is extremely solid, and more decocted then any other of the
metalls.

Q. Wherefore is it, that all metals leave a thick ordure or taint to the
hands, if by a frequent touching, excepting only Gold?
A. It is because that it is very well decocted, and is the less fat; for this
fatness and ordure of other metalls, is as a kind of viscous grease.

Ears.
Q. Wherefore is it, that the Ears, which have less of blood then any other
part of the Face, nevertheless grow red, and most then when we blush with
shame?
A. Because that the blood mounting with the heat to the visage, covers us
when we are ashamed, runs more willingly to the parts that are void, as to
the Ears, then to the others; or else it is, that they are nearer to the
temples, where the heat ranks it self the most often.

Q. From whence comes it that the Membrane called Mening, or Tympan, where lies
the hearing, breaks easily in the diverse, or those which swim betwixt two
waters?
A. It is, because they are constrained to hold their breath a long time, and
in so doing, this Membrane swells, and the water coming to beat above it,
breaks it, if they bring not some remedy, as is the infusion of Oil, or
stopping the Ears with a sponge, or other such like things.

Q. But wherefore is it, that in holding our breath out of the water, this
happens not to us by the impulsion of the Air?
A. Because that the air which comes to strike within ou^ ears, is not so
gross a body, nor so strong as the water, and so it cannot do such a forcible
effect.

Que. What is the cause of the bitterness of our ear wax?
A. It comes from a putrified and corrupt humor, which gathered together,
thickens and heats there within, and being such, can be no other then bitter;
as are all things overcocted and rotten: this humor nevertheless is not
unprofitable within the ears, but being thickened, fleas, and other little
flies which may insinuate within the ears, may trouble us, are there taken by
this conglutinate humor.

Q. From whence comes it that we cough in scratching within the ears?
A. It is because there is a little conduit which answers to the Lungs; so
that in rubbing or scratching within the ears, there runs often by this
little conduit a little humidity which exciteth the cough.

Q. From whence comes it, that the left ear being peirced, the flesh is much
more consolide, then the right?
A. Because it is more moist, and more soft, and things humid are consolid, and
heal themselves more easily then the dry, and hard; it is therefore that
infants, the which are more moist, are healed of their hurts more easily and
sooner then old folks.

Q. Wherefore is it, that neither birds nor fishes, have exterior cartilages
rising up, and joining with the conduits of the hearing?
A. Because the one may avoid in flying the danger which might happen, of that
side; and the other being without that danger within the water, those
cartilages have been to them unprofitable, and nature has made nothing in
vain.

Q. Wherefore is it, that men do not moove the exterior cartilages of the
ears, as do other Animals which have them?
A. Because that the other Animals have a great volubilitie, and flexibility,
(we must speak so for want of a better word) in the muscles of the ears, the
which should be unprofitable, and indecent to men, which can express their
conceptions, not only by words, but also by other signs, and especially in
their faces, which are open and uncovered; nevertheless there have been men
known, which have had this mooving of the ears, as all the family of the
Flacci of Rome, and I my self have seen in Gascoigne two men which had this
mooving.

Q. How is it, that by a great noise, humming and a whizzing of the ears
cease?
A. It is because that a great noise takes away the less, by the repercussion
of the air.

Q. How can it be done, that if there fall water within our ears, it shall
run out by the infusion of oil?
A. Because that oil swimming upon the top of the water, and sticking to the
same, draws it with him in running out, as also, that Oil is a liquor which
makes gliding those things which are moistened* and so that which is within,
shall flow forth more easily.

Q. Wherefore is it, that in gaping we scratch the Mening, Tympan, or
interior Membrane of the ears, we shall feel grief?
A. Because that in gaping, part of the air which we suck and draw by the
mouth, runs interiourly within the Ears, and makes this Membrane to band his
forces, to thrust it out; so that being so banded, we cannot scratch without
suffering some grief.

Q. Wherefore is it, that nature has made the co^duits of our ears sinewie,
oblique, and awry; and further, rampir'd them with Cartilages within and
without?
A. To the end, that the air should temperate it self within his scrues and
turnings, and not offend many times by his coldness the sense of the hearing;
and to the end also, that the bodies which happen to beat within our ears,
should not offend the Tympan or Mening; and to repulse yet better, she has
been pleased also with an admirable providence, to rampire and defend this
sense within and without, with cartilages lifted up like Bastions.

Q. From whence comes it, that putting the finger within the ear, we hear a
deaf noise like a Taber?
A. It comes, that the finger pressing the air which is within the Crany and
Conduit of the ear, and that air which is very moovable and subtle, coming
to strike against the mening, tympan, or interior membrane of the ear, which
is the instrument of the hearing, ingenders this tabouring and deaf noise.

Q. Wherefore is it, that water infused or shed within the ear, offends the
hearing, although that many other liquours offend not at all?
A. It is because water is cold, and coldness being an enemy to the nerves, it
offends the nerves, which serve to the hearing.

Q. Wherefore is it, that a harsh noise, as the whetting of sythes, turning of
Brass, and such other like things, is very troublesome and disagreeable to the
hearing.
A. Because that all noise, and all sound is heard by the means of a subtle
air, the which by a natural sympathy and affection of the spirits, or that
the interior air, or the hearing it self is so affected, and from thence it
comes that the sounds of sweet and harmonious songs, delight the hearing, as
on the contrary, rattling of Iron, skreeing of wheels, scraping of Brass, and
such rude sounds, are so displeasing* it is also the cause why we sing
sometimes without thinking of it, and are moved to condole with those which
lament.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the Wind being opposite to places, from whence
comes the sound of Bells, the roar of a Cannon or other like things we hear
not so well, nor so far as if the Wind accompany the sound?
A. It is because that the wind being opposite to the place, forom whence
comes the sound, it hinders the motion and agitation of the Air, or
repulseth the Air it self, which bears the Sound to our cares, and blowing
from the same side, from whence comes the sound, it fortifies the agitation of
the Air, and makes it be brought more nimbly to us, more far, and more
clear.

Que. How comes it to pass, that the glass windows tremble, by the noise and
crack of the Thunder, and of the Cannon, although they are very far off?
A. It is because the Air is so moved, agitated, and beaten, to the long, to
the large, and veryfarre.

Q. Can one hear under water?
A. Very well, as the diverse testify, and even the fishes get them away at the
noyce which is made upon the Water, or by the water: Pliny recites that there
were Fishes in the store Ponds of the Roman Emperors, which would come out of
the water, being called by certain names they had given them.

Que. Wherefore is it, that one understands better within the house, those
which speak without, then those which are without, understand those which
speak within the house?
A. Because that the voice of those within, goes out, and extends it self in
the great and vast amplitude of the Air, which weakens it much, and the voice
of those without entering within, cannot be much dilated, but is there as shut,
and is there then more strong and resounding.

Q. Wherefore is it, that we hear less in breathing, then in holding our
breath?
A. Because that in respiring, we draw the air in height, and the spirits
which fill the conduits, hinder, that the sense of the hearing cannot so
commodiously exercise his functions; as also that in breathing, we our selves
make a little noise to our selves, which incommodates the hearing.

Q. Wherefore is it, that we hear better a voice or a sound coming from high
to low, rather then from low to high?
A. Because that the voice is accompanied with a certain watery humidity, the
which being more heavy and light, bears more easily the voice from high to
low, then from low to high.

Fear or fright.
Q. WHerefore is it, that those which are feared or frighted, become pale and
wan?
A. Because that Nature draws the blood into the most noble and interior
parts, even as those which feeling themselves weak in the field, get unto
their Garrisons, their Castles, and Towers best fortified, and most strong: Now
the blood, which gives a vermillion color to the face, and to all the parts of
the body, being retired to the within, it must be of necessity, that the
exterior parts by the want of it, become wanne and pale.

Q. Wherefore is it that they tremble?
A. Because that the nerves becoming cold, slack, and weak, by the absence of
the blood of the natural heat, and of the animal spirits, which are retired
into the interior, cannot support the burden of the body, but the members
shake and tremble.

Q. Wherefore is it, that without thinking on it, they let go their
excrements, by both the conduits below?
A. Because that the muskels ofthe vessels, which contain the excrements, are
so weakened by the absence of the heat, and of the animal spirits, that they
slack, and by that means sometimes they escape, without being perceived.

Q. Wherefore is it, that those which are seized with fear, by an inevitable
peril or danger: as for example, those that are led to execution, have
ordinarily an extreme thirst?
A. Because that the heat retiring, and gathering together, as is said, into
the interiors, dries them, and there exciteth the thirst, although the
extremities of their bodies, as hands, and feet, are very cold and trembling.

Q Wherefore is it, that we are soon frighted in the night and in darkness,
especially being alone; more then in the day, and in the light?
A. Some attribute the same to the danger that one may get by stumbling, or
other mischief, when we can see nothing: but the question is of another kind
of fear, then of the danger of knocks, and stumbling, for I will suppose, that
if one be within a good bed, and stirrs not, the true reason is then, that the
enemy of humane kind, being a friend of darkness, and as the Psalmist says,
marches in darkness, and is then most redoubtable to men, as being a spirit,
and of a nature more strong then ours, and that it is so, there is none that
has not sometimes approoved it, as in going alone in the night, and it may be
without apprehension of any danger at all, bnt in an instant a sudden fear
seiseth upon them, because in my conceit, there is some evil spirit that we
doubt, without seeing it, as the weaker Animals are afraid, approaching to the
Lion, although they see him not: I will not deny nevertheless that the night
also augmenteth all sorts of fear, because of the enterprises, and surprises,
which may be made then with the most commodity, but there is another natural
terror, which comes often to men, when they are in a place of perfect
assurance, and as soon to the most courageous, as to the veriest cowards; for
verily I have seen brave, generous, and magnanimous persons fear spirits in
the night extremely, when weak, and fellows of base courage, have marched on a
long way with firm assurance. Ulysses in Homer durst not go alone in the
night, but would have for companion Diomedes, the most most valiant of the
Greeks, next to Achilles. I will attribute nevertheless willingly, all these
fears come from the force of the imagination, and want of faith; for by the
one and the other, we propose a thousand terrors, but he which has his
confidence in God, and inhabites (as says the Psalmist) under the wing of the
Almighty, shall not be moved at all, with the Arrow which flies by day, or
the Spirits which wallketh by night, nor the nightly horrors shall not fear
him: and to put this in our memories, the church sings this in our evening song.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the hair will stare, and stand up an end, with fear
and horror?
A. It is, because that such passions cool the exterior parts of the body,
and by the absence of the heat, which retyres with the blood into the interior
and the cold binding and restraining the pores, the hair being by the same
means bound and pressed from the root, lifts itself up and stares.

Fishes.
Q. WHerefore is it, that Fish eat upon their backs, and their bellies aloft,
contrary to all other Animals?
A. Because they fear the prey should escape them below, besides that they
should make the shadow of themselves in eating it, if they held the prey, or
the food, below them.

Q. Wherefore is it, that Fish are more gluttenous then other Animals?
A. It is because that being very moist, they have need of the dry, and that
the watery food with which they ordinarily nourish themselves, sustaines them
not so well as the terrestrial, together, that for those of the Sea, the
saltness of which excites yet more their appetites, and makes them so much the
more devouring and gluttonous.

Q. Wherefore is it, that Fishes are not so subject to diseases, as
land-animals?
A. It is, because they are in an Element more pure then the Earth, for the
Earth is much more mingled with mixed bodies, then the Water.

Q. How can it be, that during the Winter, and the extreme rigor of the
cold, when the water is frozen over with Ice, the Fish, which of himself is
also very cold, dies not for all that coldness?
A. It is, because that the cold occupying the surface of the water, the heat
retires to the bottom, and the Fish also for the conservation of their lives.

Q. Wherefore is it, that Fish begin to spoil and corrupt in the head, and
other Animals in their intrayles?
A. Because that Fish have not much ordure and excrements in their intrailes,
as other Animals, the which for this reason begin to corrupt there; but the
Fish having otherwise very little brain, instead whereof there is air
enclosed within their heads, the which being hot and moist, is the ordinary
cause of their corruption.

Gun powder.
Q. HOw is it possible, that so little a quantity of Gun powder should thrust
out a ball ^ bullet so far, and with such a strength or force, as is
mavelous?
A. Because that this powder which is fiery, being a lighted and reduced into
flame, occupies much more of place, then when it was in his mass or earthly
substance, so that for to extend it self, and to make way, to the end, to take
up as much place as he needs, it forces the bullet which is before it, to fly
out with such an impetuosity, that it thrusts it out so very far, that it
makes it break and shatter all that it encounters.

Q. From whence proceeds this great noise and terrible bounce that the Pieces
make?
A. The reason is near the very same that is in the precedent question, and
more, as the fire is active and violent, it forces the air enclosed within
the Cannon, to give it place; and in this conflict the air being beaten and
repulsed with such force with the Bullets issue which is within, and then
ensues this most fearful crack.

Resounding and retaining.
Q. WHerefore is it, that the high places and buildings of hard matters, solid,
and well polished, and are not otherwise subject to humidity, resound, and
retain more then those which are soft, moist, or rough?
A. It is, because that the air beaten by sound, or by voice, is after
rebeaten and repulsed by bodies, hard, dry, and well polish't, and the air
rebeaten and repulsed brings us again the same sound, o^ voice; but this
returning is not done by places soft and moist, because they give place to the
Air beaten or received into them, nor in places rough, because the parts being
one more elevated then another, the Air beaten by the voice lodged betwixt the
two being not equal, nor strongly beaten: and from hence comes it also, that
Music is more dull in hanged chambers, then in empty.

Q. From whence comes it, that old buildings resound so much, if one make a
noise near them?
A. Because that the enclosed Air within them being very dry, serves as a
Tabour, against which the exterior Air moved and thrust by the voice, or
some other sound, comes to strike, and resound by the sympathy that he has
with it, and reports the same voice, the same sound, or the same words.

Q. How comes it, that certain ^laces, repeat, and report, many times the same
voice?
A. According to the number of Cavernosities filled with air, we hear diverse
voices, for so many times as the voice is repeated, so many diverse hollow
Cavernes there are, which the Greeks call Echo.

Blood.
Q. WHerefore is it, that the blood of all the other humors is red?
A. Because it is tincted by the Liver which makes it.

Q. Wherefore is it, that man amongst all other animals bleeds at the nose,
without being hurt or struck?
A. Because that to the proportion of his body, he has more great quantity of
brain, then any other animal, and by the same means there proceeds more of
humidity, so that he is forced when the veins be full of too much excrements,
which mingle them with the blood, to discharge themselves with that which is
the most subtle, by the conduits of the nostrills near to the which the
veins come to knit from the brain (for, as says Aristotle) that blood which
goes out of the nose, being corrupt by the mixture of excrements, becomes more
subtle, then if it were entire; and as it is more subtle and thin, so it runs
more easily, being by it self thrust out by the more gross.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the temperature of sanguine persons, is better then
any other?
A. Because that the blood is hot and moist, which are two qualities most
friendly to nature, and for this cause, even old men which have this
temperature, bear themselves better then others.

Q. Wherefore is it, that those which have their Lungs very hot, have red faces?
A. It is because that the blood boiling in the Lungs, sends up aloft red
vapors, the which staying under the skin, spots it with his proper color.

Sobriety.
Q. HOw is it, that Sobriety and Labor which we naturally fly, keeps us in
health and good cheer; and Idleness, to which we are much inclined, ingenders
the most part of diseases?
Answ. Because that sicknesses proceed ordinarily from the superfluity of
excrements, which come from our incontinent eating and drinking, idleness, and
too much rest: And on the contrary, labor consumes them, and sobriety and
abstinency are the cause that the natural heat being not too much hindered,
makes its function the better, and decocting the victuals, and also consuming
the superfluous humors.

Spittle of Man.
Q. Wherefore is it, that humane spittle serves for an Antidote and
Counter-poison, to swellings which proceed from stinging of waspes, and
hornets, or the touching of toads, or Scorpions, spiders, and such other
venemousthings, and even kills the serpents: And moreover, by what virtue it
heales also scratching, Ring-wormes, or that is called flying fire, and takes
away manginesse?
A. It is certain, that man's spittle, especially when it is fasting, serves as
a sovereign remedy to the abovesaid things, and others the like; because it
has in it a venom more strong, which draws and takes away the other, as the
fire heals slight burnings, now this venom proceeds from the crudities of
the stomach, and of corrupt humors, the which ^ysing from the stomach to the
brain, and descending again into the mouth, the reason wherefore the breath of
people fasting is more sour, and more strong, then after they have drunk or
eaten, and that of sick folks is more stinking, then that of healthful
Persons.

Salt.
Q. WHerefore is it that salt and salt peter, cast into the fire, makes a noise
and cracks?
A. In as much as within salt there is a humidity, the which being attenuated
by the fire, turns into exhalation and vapor, which occupies more of place,
then did the humidity before, so that to give way, it breaks and opens the
Salt, and causes this little*pidling noise, and cracking: Cardan has held,
that the cracking and pidling of the Salt-peeter, is because it holds of the
Earth, the which reason is wholly sottish, and absurd: for if for holding of
the earth, the Salt-peeter should be fizling within the fire, the Earth it
self should yet more fizle and crack, then does the Salt-peeter, which is
notoriously false.

Q. Wherefore is it, that bread without salt weighes more, then that which is
salted, being that all things should remain equal?
A. Because that Salt dries the humidity, and makes the bread much to
evaporate, and much lightening the bread: And from thence it comes also, that
hot bread and tender, weighs more then when it is cold and settled, the
humidity being not yet evaporated in so great quantity.

Q. By what virtue is it* that salt preserves victuals from putrefaction?
A. Putrefaction proceeds from a superfluous humidity, which being dried by the
Salt, which has virtue to consume moisture, the poudered salt-meat is
conserved a long time without being corrupted.

Sun of the Firmament.
Q. FRom whence comes it, that the heat of the Sun tannes our skin, and on
the contrary, whitens linen?
A. It is, because that his heat boiling the humors of our bodies, and it
becomes black, and blacketh by the same reason the hide or the skin: and
linnencloath drying more easily in the Sun, becomes more white, the humidity
being evaporated; for it is the moisture that took away his whiteness,
neither more nor less, then a white wall becomes black by casting water on
it, and whitens in its drying.

Q. From whence comes it, that the Sun blacks more the flesh then the fire it
self?
A. In as much as the heat of the Sun, is more subtle, and infinuateth
further within the flesh, nevertheless without burnings, and the fire having
his heat gross, because of the matter wherewith he is nourished, cannot
black without burning, for near he burns and blacks, and a far off he
neither blackes nor burns.

Q. From whence comes it, that the sun whytens oil in heating it and blacks
our flesh?
A. Because that in heating the Oil, he draws that which is there
terrestrial, and our flesh being wholly terrestrial, cannot he heated without
blacking of it.

Q. From whence comes it, that the heat of the Sun melts wax, and dryes dirt
or mud?
A. We must not only consider, but also the disposition of the agent, as also
of the subject, or patient* so then, though the heat of the Sun, or of the
Fire, which melts wax, be the very same that hardens the mudde, or the Earth,
but so it is, that the disposition of the subject is very diverse* for the Wax
being fusill, that is to say, apt to melt, melts and runs liquid in the Fire,
or in the Sun, the heat mooving the humidity, even the same that is within
it, (for wax is very moist) but the mudde and the Earth being of their selves
very sandy and dry, the same heat draws out all the humidity, which is to
them a stranger, and so it is hardened and dry in drying, and dried in
hardening, nevertheless the fire may be so violent and sharp, that it may
consume the wax, and reduce it into a cinder or ashes, or extremely harden
the clay.

Q. From whence comes it, that sometimes we see a form of a crown, or
roundle about the Sun or the Moon, and likewise two or three suns at a
time?
A. It comes from the reflection, or beating back of the rays, or light of the
Sun, by the opposition of some dewie clowd, that is ready to melt.

Sorcery*
Q. HOw is is it, that Sorcerers can transform men into Wolves and other
kinds of Animals?
A. Error: for that they cannot do; but they charm the eyes of men, and
especially of those which are in an evil estate of their soul, or which have
a weak and wavering faith, for they cannot change form without dying.

Q How can it be that certain wicked persons can be-witch with their only
look, and especially do mischief to little children?
A. This is not, as holds the Platonists, and the Optics, by the rays of
their eyes, but by some wicked and venomous vapor that goes out of their eyes,
or rather from all their body, which hurts more the little children, then
perfect men; because that the children being more soft and tender, they are
more easily affected and infected; yet think I further, that the same may be
done more by charms and spells, or other detestable means that the sorcerers
learn of the author of all accursednesse.

Sweating, and to sweat.
Q. Wherefore is the sweat salt?
A. Because the most sweet and benign part of the food turns it self into
nourishment, and the remainder into the excrements, of which the hardest to
digest, retaining their crudities, have also some pricking and saltness, as
the sweat and the urine.

Q* From whence comes it, that the sweat of the head smells not so ill, as that
of the other parts of the body?
A. Because that being less constrained, it exhales more easily; now it is
less constrained from the head then the others, as it is easy to judge, for
that the hairs grow there, and increase, by opening the pores of the skin
with more facility: so then where the sweat of the head sents not so ill, or
at least, smells not so ill as the other parts of the body, it is because that
it exhales more easily, and does not strive so to get out.

Q. Wherefore is it, that when one wrestles, when one leapes, or does some
other violent exercise, they sweat less, then when they do rest after such
exercise?
A. Because that by these exercises they move the humors with violence, and
nevertheless they give them not the leisure to gather together, during the
agitation, as they do when they rest after so great motion and stirring, or
else that it is because that we retain our breath forcibly, within, during
that time we so travel and labor, which is the cause that the nervs
streatching and spreading the Spirits, stop the Conduits, for the sweat, and
when we repose suddenly after, we breath and blow, so that the Nerves unbend,
and the spirits retire, letting at liberty the sweat to issue, for the
sweating, then so these two reasons, besides many others are brought by the
Philosopher upon this question, but these two seem to me, to be sufficient.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the Sun heates more those which are naked, then
those which are clothed, and yet those which are naked, sweat more then those
which are clothed*
A. Because that it dryes the humors of the bodies of them which it heates
naked, and the clothes turns the heat of the Sun, retayning by that means
the humors, and hindering, that they shall not be so easily dried, and consumed.

Q. From whence comes it, those which rubbes, and dryes themselves, sweat yet
much more, then if they left the sweat still upon their bodies?
A. Because that the drops of the sweat, which are upon their bodies, stoppes
the pores; and hinders the issue of the sweat which is within, but drying away
the sweat which is upon their bodies, they give liberty for that which is
within, to again issue out.

Q. Wherefore is it, that after we have drunk fresh cool drink, especially
in the Summer, we sweat more then if we had not drunk it so cool and fresh?
A. Because that fresh and cool drink thrusts out the heat, the which
constrains with him the humors* and dilates the pores, making them issue to
get forth.

Q. Wherefore is it, that we sweat more sleeping then waking?
Ans. Because that the heat retiring into the interiours by the means of the
sleep, during the which the parts exterior are seized with cold, and so it
thrusts out the superfluous humidity, which he sends also to the brain.

Que. Wherefore is it, that in stews, or hot houses, or within hot bathes,
they sweat more when it is cold weather, then when it is hot?
An. This is by an Antiperistasis, for the cold thrusting and shutting the
heat within the body, it makes to exhale the humidity without by the pores.

Q. Wherefore is it, that we do sweat more going up a hill, then coming
do^ne?
A. The reason is very easy; for naturally our bodies are heavy, and incline
downward, by reason whereof having more pain, and that we breath with more
difficulty in mounting, then in descending, we also sweat the more.

Q. Wherefore is it, the Physicians hold, that cold sweat is a certain index
or sign, that the body is in an indisposition, and hold not so of the hot
sweats?
A. Because that sweat is a kind of excrement, the which being but in a
little quantity, may easily be heated, but when it is in abundance, not: For on
the contrary, it remains cold; now the superfluities of excrements being the
ordinary cause of sicknesses, it must be, that when it is in great quantity,
(as is judged by the coldness) the body is then in a great in disposition.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the Physicians call ^th sweating of aguish folks
unprofitable, if after the same, the Fever torments them strenger then it did
before?
A. Because that such sweats are rather indices of weakness, then of health,
as also that the excrements and the most subtle parts of the evil humors
evaporate only by the sweat, the more gross and dangerous remaining still
within.

Spots.
Q. Wherefore is it, that little white spots come oftener upon the nails of
the hands, then of those of the feet, and sooner to little children, then to
men of perfect age?
A. It is, because the feet by the continual travel and exercise of going,
consume the phlegm, which is the cause of these white spots, and on the nails
of the hands of little children sooner, being they are more flegmaticke, and
more moist then men of perfect age, they are therefore more subject thereto.

Q. From whence proceeds, that the spots which appear in the round of the
Moon, make arepresentation of a humane visage?
A. It is, because the Moon has some parts more thin, more smooth, and
simple then others, the which for this cause are so much the more clear and
transparent; the other parts which are more thick, remain to our aspects as
shaddowie, cloudy, and spotted, showing to us darkely, which are the cause,
that the parts more clear seem to rise up, and to make a resemblance of a
humane visage, being for certain, that things dark appear not so far off so
raised up, as those which are white or clear: Plutarch has made a Treatise
upon this subject, where he has many words without any reason or truth, or
truth-like, but the solution before is of that great Arabian Philosopher
Averroes?

Q. But wherefore is it, that we perceive it rather with a humane face, then
with any other image?
A. It is, because of the roundnesse of this Planet, especially when she is in
the full; for then representing to us a humane head, she after represents to
us the face.

The Earth.
Q. HOw is it, that the earth can subsist in the other Elements, without
tumbling or falling toward, unto the other Hemispheare, seeing that a little
piece of it cannot be sustained, neither in the Air, nor in the Water, but
descends always downward?
A. A little piece of Earth tends always downward, because it is not in its
own natural place, as does all this great and heavy Mass, which maintains
it self in his natural place by his proper weight, and cannot shrink nor
tumble to the other side of the Hemispheare, or Antipodes, no more then from
ours, for that were to mount, not descend, or to fall downward.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the ^arth sometimes smells, and yields a certain
pleasant odor?
A. That happens not always, nor in all earths, but only in those which are
good and fer^ile, and that after long dryness, and heates, there falls some
small ^aine; for the humidity of the Earth being well decocted* by ^he heates,
and dryness, min^les it self with the rain, and ^hen coming to exhale, it
^eelds a certain pleasing sweet ^dour; as things well decocted, ^rdinarily
yield a good smell.

Q. From whence proceed the earthquakes?
A. They either proceed from exhalations, or from winds, ^nclosed within the
Cavernes of the earth, which if they cannot get out, strive to give themselves
way by force, grumbling, and murmuring within, and in the end violently opening
and bearing up the earth.

Wind.
Q. WHerefore is it, that the wind is more vehement in a straight place, then
in a vast or open place?
A. Because that in a straight and shut up place, his forces are more united
and heaped together, and in a vast place they are diffused, and by the same
means more loose.

Q. Wherefore is it, that when the South-winde blows, we find our selves
loose and sluggish?
A. Because that wind by his heat and humidity, loses and weakens the body.

Q. Wherefore is it, that when the south-winde blows, the plants thrust out,
grow, flowrish, and fructify more has^^ly then with other winds?
A. Because as I have formerly said, this Wind is hot and moist, and heat and
humidity, are the efficient causes of generation.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the falling stars ( I mean the exhala^ions, which
being inflamed in the ^yre, and fall to the Earth when ^hey are made very hot,)
are a cer^ain index, or sign of great winds coming?
A. Because that such fires which resemble stars in fal^ing so high, are
ordinarily thrust downward, by the wind which begins sooner to blow aloft
then below.

Q. From whence comes it, that the Winds blow from that side where there are
few on ^^ clouds?
A. It comes from this, that the winds themselves chase the clouds before them,
or dissipate them.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the most cold winds dry the most?
A. Because they carry away with them the vapors and humidities whereupon they
blow.

Q. From whence comes it, that the winds are more weak in places where they
begin to blow, and in extending they fortify themselves always more and more?
A. Because that all things have their beginning ordinarily, little and weak,
and especially things moving; as then the Rivers increase to a measure, and
run over, or overflow, the fields, in receiving the Rivers of all sides; so
the winds augment them with the matters of exhalations, and nevertheless
fortify themselves by blowing more strongly as they still extend; for the
after-movings are fortified by the precedents.

Sight, or seeing.
Q. See we, (or as speak the Philosophers) the vision, or is it made by the
emission or sending out of the rays of our eyes, or by the reception in our
eyes of the species or images of objects belonging to the sight? For example,
when I see a house, a man, or a horse, is it that the rays of my eyes glancing
upon those objects, bring back the image to the sight, or is it, that the
image diffuseth it self through the air, and sometimes by the water, which is
the medium betwixt our eyes and the object, and so is received into the sight?
A. This has been a very great dispute agitated ^long amongst the Ancients,
and even to this day is amongst the Opinionists; but I will resolve it only
thus, that the vision making in an instant it self the object of things most
far, it is impossible that it can make it self by the emission of the rays
of the eyes, because that in an instant it cannot penetrate to the objects: as
in example, even to the very Stars, and then to retire back again, and to
bring the images to the sight; therefore it must be of necessity that the
vision is made by the reception of the species or images from the objects, the
which represents themselves in all the space of the medium, which is betwixt
the objects and our eyes, if some opacous body hinder it not.

Q. Wherefore is it, that coming out of darkness, and going into the light:
or on the contrary, going out of a very clear light place, and entering into a
shadowed place, we see not very clear, but as it were half blinded?
A. Because that going from one extremity to another, the sight is troubled at
the first dash by the object, contrary to the precedent, (as says Alex.
Aphro.) but better and more profoundly to philosophize, it is not the
darkness makes our visuall spirits to retire so much, or far in the within
of the nerves optics, and coming after to the light, our sight is dazeled by
the flash of the strange light: and contrarily, coming into a place very
clear as the Sunshine, or in a place less clear, as within a shadowed
chamber, the eyes not being aided with his great stranger light, which had
dazeled the natural light, and therefore we see not suddenly so clear.

Q. Wherefore is it, that putting our hand before the Sun, or a flame, we see
the object better?
A. Because that the light of the Sun, or of a flame, is more strong and
abundant, and dazleth our sight; but in putting something before it, our sight
is not dazeled, but rather aided, and exercises more commodiously its
functions.

Q. Wherefore is it, that those which cough or vomit, forcibly seem to see
flashing of light before their eyes?
A. Because that the convulsion which all the body receives by such thrust-out
strengths of the visuall spirits out of the eyes, the which being clear and
luminous, represent also a certain clearenesse, or fiery flashing by reflection
to our sight.

Q. From whence comes it that we waking in the night, or suddenly rising, we
perceive a certain kind of light, which we call chiming of the eyes?
A. Because that during the sleep, great quantity of visuall spirits gather
together in our eyes, the which being shut and pressed (as they are fiery and
luminous) produce some kind of light, especially if we rub our eyes in the
waking; for these visual spirits represent to us a certain flashing of fire.

Q. Wherefore is it, that we grow ashamed if one kisseth the sight, or turns
them from it?
A. It is because that the eyes being as the mirrours of the soul, in which
one may see anger, love, fear, and such other passions, also one likewise does
become shamed, and the rather if we bear respect to any one, we fear, and so
have shame to regard them fixtly, and with audacity.

Q. From whence comes it that we sooner see the lightning, then we hear the
crack of the thunder, being that the thunder precedes it, or is made in the
same time?
A. It is because that the sight receives in the instant, the images of things
being presently represented to our view; as within a very clear mirror, and
the Sounds caunot be heard, but in the measure that the menings, or tympans of
the ears are beaten with the exterior Air, which bears the sounds through
the hollow and screwed turnings of our ears, which cannot be done in an
instant: for the same reason also if we look from a far upon one stricking
upon any thing, we shall see him give the Blow, before the Sound will come to
our ears; but if in the same time that the lightning flasheth our sight, we
also hear the thunder, it is a sign that we are not far then from it: It
is therefore that the Latins call it, Periculum, which signifies danger, quia
tunc imminet periculum.

Q. But wherefore is it, that all things being visible by the means of their
color, and that the bodies retain every one his color, as well in the dark
as in the light, we see them not so, for all that, in the dark?
A. It is because that the colors are not perceptible to the sight, but by
being cleared by some light, by reason whereof all things seem dark in the
night.

Q. Wherefore is it, that looking over-thwart the water, the objects seem to
us more great then they are?
A. It is not, as say the Optics and Platonicians, because of the diffusion of
the rays of our eyes, but by the reception of the species; for that is the
cause that the images of the objects dilate themselves in the water, as being
more gross then the air, neither more nor less then a soft body, as wax,
stumbling or hitting upon a body more hard, stretches long and wide.

Q. Wherefore is it, that looking with spectacles, things seem to us more
great?
A. For the reason deduced in the question precedent, for the matter of the
Spectacles receiving the species or images of the objects, makes them to
extend, as being more gross then the air.

Q. Wherefore is it, that a water-mans Oar, or a straight staff, being part
within the water, and part out of the water, seems to be broken?
A. It is, because that the species of visible things represent themselves not
so well, nor so neately athwart the water, which is much more gross then the
air, and so the parts within the water seem more farther.

Q. Wherefore is it, that a smoke or mist appears more thick a faroff, then
near hand?
A. Because that we perceive not a farre-off his tenuity and thinness, and
that the parts seem to us wholly contiguous and shut together.

Q. Wherefore is it, that purblind folks, and those which have their sight
short, look upon the objects so near, and old men so far?
A. It is, because the purblind as is manifest by the whites of their eyes,
have much clarity and internal light, the which has no need of much aid
from the external: on the contrary, they are dazeled with too much external
light, by reason whereof they draw the objects to their eyes, or shut their
eyes half way to regard it: On the contrary, old folks have little internal
light, and are constrained to regard the object a far off, to the end they may
aid themselves with the strange light.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the object seems less a far off, then near hand?
Ans. Because that the species and images of them diminish themselves in all
their parts, coming from a long distance, yea, even dissipate and loose
themselves in the air if they are too far, or too little?

Q. Wherefore is it, that a white color hurts the sight?
An. Because that it is an extreme object, the which dissipateth great
quantity of visuall spirits: or else according to Galen, because that the
whiteness strikes back upon our eyes with too great a flash of light, which
dazeleth, and by too long continuation extincts the interne light of our eyes.

Q. Wherefore is it, that long darkness also hurts our sight?
A. Because it is of the other extreme, and that it sutteth the visuall
spirits far within the head, without which the external light is
unprofitable to our sight.

Q. Wherefore is it, that a light very shining and sparkling offends the sight?
A. Because it is disproportioned to the sense, for it must be, that the
sensible object be proportioned to the sense, thereby to accomplish the enjoy,
but all extreme objects offends the Sense, as too great noise the hearing, a
too violent Smell the Smelling, and so of the others.

Q. Wherefore is it that we see more exactly upon one eye, then with both, by
reason whereof, to better see we are accustomed to close or shut the one?
A. Because that although their mooving be accordant and uniform; nevertheless
being double, it is not so exact and certain, as being simple, because that
proceeding only from one, there is nothing that can, (be it never so little)
yield their mooving unequal, as also that all the two eyes having one self
principal, and one self faculty, and virtue of their mooving and function, it
is more vigorous and certain, being joined and united, for when we shut the
one, and hold the other open, it runs and yields all to that only, which is
open, as is easy to judge, by the example of the question following.

Que. Wherefore is it, that some little fly, or some little straw, falling
within one of our eyes, the soverayneremedy for thrusting it out, is to shut or
halfe-close the other?
A. Because that the visuall spirits, which run, flows, or pass by the
Nerves optic within the two eyes, yielding it self all in gross, into him
which is open, finding the other close, and filling him, thrusts out this
hindering stranger, especially if it be very light.

Q. Wherefore is it, that having two eyes, we cannot for all that look with
one aloft, and the other below, or with one here, and another there, as we
remoove the Arms or the Legs diversely?
A. Because as I have formerly said in the first question, both the eyes
together have one self principal of Seeing, and therefore one self mooving,
nature having so ordained it, to the end that they should not deceive
themselves in the perception of their object, as if they regarded it diversely,
which is not the same of the Arms, and of the Legs, that have every one
their particular principal of their mooving, and of their forces.

Q. From whence comes it, that pressing one of the eyes, either above or below,
we see the object double?
A. Because that by this means the muskells of one eye being more shut then
those of the other, we break the Society of the eyes, which conspire and
accord entirely in their moovings, affections, and passions, and scituating the
instruments of the sight the one more high then the other, it is of force that
we see two objects, for in this sort they making two diverse moovings, also we
see two times, not one only, the which we may understand by the example of
the touch* for if we cross two fingers of one hand, putting the ends the one
upon another, and then roll a little pellet, it will seem to the touch two
pellets, because you touch two times one selfething?

Q. Wherefore is it, that having two eyes, yet we for all that see but one
only species or image of the object?
A. No otherwise, then although we have two ears, yet we hear but one sound;
cause is, the principal of their moving being one thing, and these two organs
making but one and the same sense; but provident Nature has so pleased, that
one sense should have two instruments, to the end, that if we should come to
the perfection of one, the other might remain quiet.

Q. Wherefore is it, that we see not the object which is right against, or
close to our sight?
A. Because that the sight is made by the means or medium illuminated, or
transparent, as the air is* so that if there be not a medium illumined or
transparent, as is the air and the water, clear and clean betwixt our eyes
and the object, we should not see: for according to that Maxim of the
Philosopher, the ^encible object being applied right against us, or close to
the organ of the sense, hinders the ^encibility, the which Maxim is infallible
to the sense of the sight.

Q. From whence comes it, that when we are greatly moved with choler, our eyes
grow red, as Homer said of Achilles, when he grew wrathful against Agamemnon?
Ans. It is, because that then, when the blood boyleth, the more subtle parts
of it mount aloft, and appear principally in the eyes, because that they are
transparent.

Q. Wherefore is it, that smoke, vinegar, onions, and other sharp and biting
things are ill to the Eyes?
A. Because they are extremely delicate, and have moreover the pores and
conduits much open, they are therefore more easily affected and offended with
those things, the which exhale from vapors sharp, subtle, and biting.

Q. Wherefore is it, that being so delicate, they are nevertheless nothing
chilly; for all the cold that such things make?
A. It is because that they have in them Luminous and hot spirits, and moreover
they are furred, with fatty, and many tunicks.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the tears which proceed from sorrow, and trouble,
are hot and salt, and those which proceed from some malady of the Eyes, are
cold, and little or nothing strongly salt?
A. In as much as the Eyes being infected with malady, there is great quantity
of superfluous humidity, which cannot be decocted by the heat, remains cruse,
and by consequent cold, and then when the eyes are not infected with malady,
the heat easily decocts the humidity, which is the cause that so being well
decocted, it is hot, sharp, and saltish.

Q. From whence comes it, that the left eye shuts more easily, then the right,
seeing that the right parts of the body are more vigorous then the left?
A. Because that the left eye is more moist, for moist things are more easy to
restrain and shut: now since all the left side of the body is most moist, it
appears by this, that it is more soft, and less robust and strong.

Q. Wherefore is it, that man is more subject to have his eyes turned, more
then any other Animal?
A. Because that man, especially in his infancy, is more subject to lofty
evils, then any of the other Animals, the which malady by the extreme
convulsions which it gives, may make the eyes to tnrne, as being ^ore moveable,
and more deli^te, and yet sooner then any over part of the body; as also, ^at
man having the eyes more ^eare one to another, then any ^ther Animal, and
looking be^wixt them to the forehead, this (...) the cause that this default is
^ore easily to be remarked in ^e eyes of man.

Q. Wherefore is it, that those which have double balls in their ^es, are
suspected to be witches?
A. As the other imperfections ^f the soul are most often mar^ed by the
imperfections of the ^ody, so this vice of the eyes is (...) mark of this
other vice of the ^oule.

Urine.
Q. WHerefore is it, that in the Urine, the more it is retained within the
bladder, the more it bec^mes stinking, and the fecale and gross matter; on the
contrary, the more it is retained within the intestins, the less it stinks?
A. It is because the urine becomes more greasy, more sharp, salt, and gross
within the bladder, and by the same means more stinking, because that it is
there more decocted, being long retained, and on the contrary, the fecale and
gross matter dries so much the more* as it stays within the intestines, and
stinks less: the reason is therefore different, because the matters are
different, for in the urine the humidity corrupts by the excessive decoction,
and in the gross excrements it is consumed.

Q. Wherefore is it, that Physicians judge of diseases by the urin of the
^^seased?
A. Because that the Urine ^unneth through the body, re^eives and retains the
affec^ion of the humors predomi^ate in it, and by that means discernes the
causes of the diseases, which proceeds ordinarily from the superaboundance and
superfluity of some humor.

Q. From whence proceeds the ^uppression of the Urine?
A. The causes may be diverse, as the gravel of the stone, or the stone it
self, sometimes having viscous Phlegm wherewith the conduits of the Urine are
stopped within the raines, or within the bladder, etc.

Life, and to live.
Q. WHerefore is it, that men lived longer in the beginning of the world, then
since, and the world goes now always in de*clining, both in quantity of body
and in force, be it in days, or in length of life?
A. It is folly to say as some have esteemed, that in the beginning of the
world the years were more short then since* for the Chaldeans, Egyptians,
Hebrews, Persians, Medes, Greeks, Romans, and other politic nations, have
measured their years by the course of the Sun, and those which divided the
years in less then in twelve Months,* composed also the Months with more
days then we do, s^ that all comes to one reckoning: Others will say, that
before the flood, men eat not the flesh of Animals, but only nourished
themselves with the fruits of the earth, the which were very savorous, the
general inundation or flood not having then borne away the fatness from them,
and that this frugality and continence prolonged their days: this in my
opinion might well aid it, but the true cause is, that for the sins of men God
has cut off and shortened their lives, when he ordained, that they should not
after live beyond a hundred and twenty years, although some would have this
hundred and twenty years from the time which passed after that God so said,
until the Flood: If we must yet yield a natural reason, we may say, that it
was expedient, that in the birth and beginning of the World, men lived more
long time, to the end they might engender great number of clildren to people
the earth* but after that the Earth was well peopled, it was not further
needful that they should remain so long upon the same, otherwise all
republics should be forced to disgorge themselves of the affluence of Men, it
would be an occasion of great debates, and noise of Wars, dissentions, and
of all confusion, as also that the Earth were not able to furnish them with
sufficient food to their nourture: and therefore after all this considered, we
ought often to think of our end, and the state of future things teaches us by
the decline of the magnitude and force* of the body, and the life it self, the
intemperance of seasons, the sterility and barrenness of the earth, let them
be to us an assured testimony, that the World waxes old: even as says the
Psalmist and that quickly, and very quickly its end approaches (in speeking of
life, christian reader) bethink thee of thy death, and of a more long and
happy life, in which thou shall know both things natural and supernatural.

Q. Wherefore is it, that those which are of a sanguine complexion live more
longer then others?
A. Because the mixture of hot and moist which is proper to the blood only,
and not to any of the other complections, is the best of all the temperaments
for the conservation of the life.

Age*
Q. FRom whence comes it, that old folk have their color tarnisht and tanned
like lead?
A. The same proceeds from the want of natural heat, even as during the
great colds and frosts of the Winter, the blood being chilled, we have the
Skin tarnisht, the Flesh as rotten, and the color leaden and blackish* or
else it is that all rottenness blacks, and Age being a beginning of
putrefaction, produces the same effect, for it is the blood that gives the
vermillion color, which being dried in our Age, causes this leaden and tanned
color.

Q. From whence comes the wrinkells of old folks?
A. From the lack or default of the heat and moisture, for the bodies of old
folks being very dry, and much cold, their skin with draws, the humidity
consumes, and the cold has the virtue to wrinkle and restrain it.

Q. Wherefore is it, that folks which are very old, tremble, grow croockt
back, stooping down, and cannot carry themselves upon their feet, and also
sometimes their belly and their bladder, discharge themselves, without their
feeling it.
A. All this proceeds from the same default, and lack of natural heat, which
is the cause that the muskells in being weakened, cannot easily further support
the burden and weight of the members* but all the corporal mass trembles,
and boweth downward, now the muskells of very aged persons being so
debilitated, unbend themselves, and the excrements issue by the parts below,
without their feeling it.

Q. Wherefore is it, that troubles make one old?
A. Because they dry the body and consume the good humors, it is therefore,
that those which are afflicted with any grief, are ordinarily thirsty and dry.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the Physicians prescribe and ordain to old folks to
eat often and little?
A. Because that having very little natural heat, they must entertain that
which they have, by little and little, and neve^thelesse must not leave it long
time without nourishment, for even as a little lamp is quickly extinct, by too
great a quantity of oil powered in all at a clap, or time; likewise the little
natural heat which remains in old folks, is extinct by a too great
quantity of food taken all at a time.

Q. Wherefore is it, that old persons are given more to drink Wine then young?
A. It is because that the natural heat is weakened, and begins to fail
them, which they would repair by the means of wine which is hot.

Q. Wherefore is it, that wine immoderately taken, hurts them more then the
young folks?
A. Because that the little natural heat which is left them, it is easier
surmounted by a great quantity of Wine, which is then but as a stranger, and is
more strong.

Q. Wherefore is it, that old folks b^^hink them better of that which they
have done in their youth, then that which they have done not long since?
A. Because that having had in their youth their senses perfect* and vigorous,
and their senses then perfect and strong, they have there engraven more firmly
the images of the objects: but in their age the senses being debilitated, the
memory also weakened, they cannot retain so well that they there lodge.

Q. Wherefore is it, that old folks are so doubtful?
A. Because that having knowledge of the subtilties and humane tromperies and
deceits, they are always in distrust, fearing to be surprised: they are
doubtful says the Philosopher, because they are incredulous, and incredulous
because they have much experience of humane things, in which they have proved
much deceit.

Q. Wherefore is it, that old persons take a singular pleasure to lie with
young children, and the young children on the contrary, love not that?
A. It is, because that the heat of little children that are fat, and pretty
bulchins, heateth sweetly the old folks, the which is their proper want: The
little children on the contrary, feeling themselves infected with their vapors
and corrupt humors, and smelling them stink, they fly their embraces: also it
is certain, that little children which have been accustomed to lie with old
folks, impair much, and yet much more with old women, because of the corrupt
vapors which go out of them, being not able otherwise to discharge their
natural purgations.

Q. Wherefore is it, that old folks are so covetous and holding, and the
young on the contrary, are so prodigal?
A. Because that old folks know by experience, how difficult and hard a thing
it is to get wealth, and therefore are spaning; further, the desire they have
to end their days in rest, feeling themselves weak and incapable of travel,
makes them covetous: but the young folks on the contrary, feeling themselves
strong and robust, and sturdy, promise themselves all things happily, and
ignorant of the difficulty to get and obtain wealth and means, all things are
good cheap with them, and use and abuse wealth with an excessive profusion.

Q. Wherefore is it, that old folks feel less dolor, and less pain
traveling to death, then the young?
A. Because that natural heat being very little and weak in old folks, it is
easily extinct, by reason whereof they dye sweetly, as we see a Lamp extinct,
when there is no more oil; or a Candle go out, when there is no more Tallow:
but young folks being more sturdy and robust, because of their natural heat,
which is in them great and strong, resist much more vigorously, and more long
the assaults of Death, and are also much more and more long traveling and
laboring in the combat: For as Apples that are very ripe, fall From the Tree
with the least Thake, and the green ones ^n the contrary, hold firm, and
cannot be plucked off but with force and violence; likewise men being arrived
to the maturity and ripeness of their age, are easily carried and borne by
death, and the green youth in the contrary resists him, and suffers by the same
means more long and more great convulsions and dolours.

Worms and Lice.
Q. WHerefore is it, that the Physicians hold that it is a presage of death,
when living worms comes out of the body of man, by the conduits above or below
of themselves, without being forced by any drugs or medicines?
A. Because that they feel an extreme inflammation of humors, or a
putrifactio^, or a mortal weakness, which gives them the way of flight, by
the conduits, be it by the fundiment, be (...) by the mouth, or by the
nostrils, knowing that by a certain natural instinct, that they cannot expect
from that body any good nourishment, likewise Lice abounding opon the sick,
show they are near death.

Rats and Mice.
Q. Wherefore is it that Rats and Mice abandon ruinous and falling houses?
A. It is by a certain natural instinct they find, and knowthe walls to
shake, the posts to be unjoynted, and their little holes to be in another
estate, then customeable, they then presage some near ruin, which makes them
dislodge.

Lastly, Death.
Q. Wherefore is it, that all Animals fly death?
A. Because that death is the privation of the present being, and all things
desire naturally to conserve their being.

Q. Wherefore is it, that dead folks weigh more then the living?
A. It is because that the vital or animal spirits, which bear up the body,
being extinct with the natural heat, becomes like to a heavy lump of earth,
and waighes all down, even to the earth or grave.

Q. How is it, that the nails, or hairs grow from the dead?
A. It is not as some have supposed, that the parts covered with flesh, being
uncovered, and unfleshed, that thereby it seems that the nails, and hairs
should grow* but it is that the nails and hairs being no part of the body,
but merely excrements, serving for ornament, and entertainers of the humidity,
by meanswhereof, they yet grow after the separation of the soul.

Q. How comes it, that death is so frightfull, horrid, and fearful, to some
rich men, and criminal delinquents?
A. Because some rich, looking then into the glass of their consciences, and
seeing then (almost too late,) the ugly forms of their wrongs done, to many,
and undone people they had to deal with; as also the uncertainety of their
souls journey, before that Dreadful Tribunal, where Justice it self sits,
holding the scales of equity with a terrible hand, the executioners ready about
him, with all the exquisite torments of a gehenna; moreover thinking how many
goodly houses, pleasant gardens, and orchards, with abundance of utensels,
gold, silver, asalso worldly respects; for having these things which they then
of force most part with, these are the stings of that Serpent Death, so
piercing through an evil conscience, and not unjustly entitled the worm of
conscience, grievously then gnawing, as also their thinking how they shall at
the blowing of that dreadful Trumpe, in vain desire the hills to fall upon
them, and with Dives, be denied a small drop of water to cool their flaming
tongues.

Let them therefore, while they have time, and before their corporal animal
senses are benumbed with this Torpedo, Death, confess their wrongs to God, and
the wronged; make hearty contrition, and by all humble prayers desire Gods
gracious mercy. And because they can yield him nothing, let them restore, and
make satisfaction to those they have (of their Christian brethren) brought into
misery, and not think it enough to build an Almes-house for twelve idle
beggars; as for the delinquents, be they murderers, perjurers, thieves, and
such wicked and ungodly persons, I leave them to the judgment and mercy of
God, and advise them from the sin of presumption. And to conclude, oh how happy
is he, that in the fear and love of God, puts off this mortality, and puts on
immortality, which the Creator of Heaven and Earth, that has made all things
visible and invisible with so infinite wisdom, and has pleased to grant man
a measure thereof, to discern the things that are here formerly spoken of,
grant us this gracious God, that still humbly, with all thankfulness, we may
acknowledge this thy great bounty, which thou have given us above all other
Animals, and grant us by thy mercy, and for the merits of thy Son Jesus
Christ, that we may discern the invisible things of thy Kingdom, and praise
thee among thy Saints, saying honor, glory, and power, be ascribed to God on
high,

AMEN.
FINIS*

