THE APPLICATION OF THE LAWS OF ENGLAND FOR CATHOLIC PRIESTHOOD, And the
Sacrifice of the Mass. DIRECTED TO THE LORDS of his Majesty's most Honorable
privy Counsel, Judges, Justices, and other Studients of the Law.

Mentita est iniquitas sibi.

Psalm. 26. O violentia veritatis, quod semper illa tenuit, inimicorum confessio
confirmauit.

Aug. cont. Donatist. post col. cap. 3. Printed at CVLLEN with License, Anno
Domini. M.DC.XXIII.

The Printer to the Reader.
GEntle Reader, this little Treatise falling by chance into my hands, I of my
self (the Author thereof being unknown unto me) thought it worthy of thy
view; but by reason of an uncorrected original written Copy, and especially
my self being unskillful of the English tongue, many errors and omissions
have happened, not only in the Orthographie but also in the setting down the
allegations somewhat indistinctly, and in false pointing. Therefore I hope
(these circumstances duly considered) thou will be pleased in reading over this
Treatise, to correct them with thy pen: whereof the greater faults are (after
the Printing hereof) gathered by a friend, and set down in manner as follows.

Faults escaped.
PAge 5. in the title, for general Councels, read, Councels. Ibid. line 20.
Antichrist, read Antichrist was. Ibid. l. 21. fled, r. flight. p. 6. l. 17.
which, r. with. p. 8. l. 17. Can. 18. r. Can. 1. p. 9. l. 19. fifth, r. fast.
Ibid. l. 26. your, r. the. p. 10. l. 27. 39^. r. 413. pa. 11. l. 25. Can. 1. r.
Can. 5. p. 12. l. 5. where, r. were. Ibid. l. 13. words of the, r. words of
consecration some. p. 13. l. 14. Retentine, r. Retentiue. p. 14. l. 5. in the
ancient, r. from the ancient. Ibid. title testaments, r. testimonies. p. 16.
l. 10. who, r. of whom. Ibid. l. 22. is God, r. to God, p. 17. l. 17. term, r.
form. p. 20 l. 12. that besides, r. besides. p. 22. l. 27. died, r. lived. p.
23. l. 23. Ino, r. Iuo. Ibid. l. 27. 111. r. 91. p. 32. l. 18. 03. r. 10^. p.
36. l. 15. and so much, r. and that so much. p. 37. l. 7. nor, r. not. p. 38.
l. 10. hashly, r. rashly. p. 39. l. 5. Abbots. And, r. Abbots according to D.
Dove. Ibid. l. 23. theretofore, r. heretofore. Ibid. l. 27. 86. r. 176. p. 10.
l. 7. 165. r. 105. p. 43. l. 25. nor, r. or. p. 45. l. 6. very, r. every. p.
^6. l. ^0. Col. ^48. r. Col. 748. p. 49. l. 22. Angelorum, r. Anglorum. p. 58.
l. 2. first 100. r. 1000. Ibid. l. 22. odder, r. odd. p. 61. l. 17. Reioined,
r. Reioiner. p. 64. l. 15. grates, r. gates. p. 65. l. 23. onwardly, r.
outwardly. p. 67. l. 27. blasphemours, r. blasphemous. p. 70. throughout, for
Bishops, read Fathers. Ibid. l. 15. 819. r. 870. Ibid. l. 18. 1000. r. 900.
Ibid. l. ^9. the 2. Lateran under In. 2. Fa. 1200. p. 72. l. 14. Tostanis, r.
Tostatus. p. 75. l. 4. of the authority, r. the authority. Ibid. l. 17. to
iudggment, r. to the judgment p. 76. l. 7. hence it is that the, r. hence is
the. p. 77. l. 13. Majesty give, r. Majesty p. 11. give p. 81. l. 1. lib. 2.
r. lib. 1. ibid. l. 12. 23. r. 25. Ibid. l. 22. little a like, r. like a little.
p. 84. l. 4. to his effect, r. to this effect. p. 86. l. 3. the might, r.
might. Ibid. l. 26. as once, r. but once. p. 88. l. 17. it was, was it.

Faults escaped in the Margent.
Page 3. at Prescription Fol 149. Ibid. at Limitation Fol. 126. Ibid. at
dissision Fol. 67. p. 9. Pactio in seen Prat. in Serie. p. 10. for Suicio, read
sub Sinicio. Ibid 398. r. 413. p. 14. Petent r. Retent p. 18. Ormerod pa. r.
Orm. fol. 3. pr. Ibid. Call. 1 1. c. 1. r. Call. l. 1. c. 14. p. 23. Chemnit. pa.
3. r. Chemnit. pa. 93. p. 24. Cyrill. Hier. Catch. 4. mist. p. 33. col. 2441.
r. col. 1294. p Cent. 4. Col. 291. p. 47. Bal. cent. 1. fol. 3. p. 49. Holmist
lib. 1. r. Hol. l. ^. pa. 102. p. 51. fol. 137. r. 173. p. 54. Sect. 146. r.
Sect. 164. p. 77. Cast. in defens. transl. p. 170. p. 81. for Genesis v. 2. r.
Genesis v. 11. p. 87. Couel. page 77. p. 78. Powel page 70. p 91. Whit. c. 18. r.
Whit. rat. 8.

In the Table.
Page 96: twelve general, read twelve Councels.

THE PREFACE.
Right Honorable Lords, wise Judges, and other Learned Lawyers.
IT was ever the craft and subtilty of the Heathen, but much more of the
Apostates and Heretics, when they deadly hated and persecuted the Catholic
Christians, and specially Gods Priests, (being the guides, and Pastors of that
Flock, they sought to destroy) to sound their disgraces into credulous ears,
and charge them of disloialty toward their Prince and Magistrate, thereby to
make them odious to their Princes, and hateful to the Commonwealth.

So did that Magitian of Aegipt, least his deceipts should have been impugned
by the Christians, accuse them before the Emperor Valerian, who (as Eusebius
does report) was so favorable to the Catholic Christians, in the beginning of
his reign, that he would not permit any person should wrong them. So did some
wicked persons about the Emperor Aurelian, provoke him to persecute the
Christians generally throughout all the confines of his Empire; who
notwithstanding had most lovingly (as appears by the Writings of Eusebius ad
Orosius) used them in the first six years of his reign. So was holy
Athanasius brought before the Arrian Emperors and Bishops, and accused of
Nigromancie, Adultery, and Conspiracy. So was the Clergy condemned to death,
and exile under Julian the Apostate, under pretense of diverse crimes, and
namely of sedition falsely forged against them. So did the Vandales being
Heretics, extremely plague the Catholics in Afric, accusing them that
they had secret conference by Messengers, and Letters with the Romans against
them. And by this means did the Emperesse Theodora, a woman of the Eutichian
heresy, cruelly persecute the Pope Siluerius, and the Clergy, under the
color of some Letters intercepted by her Council, whereby the Catholic
Christians should have called in the Goths and foreign powers, to invade the
City of Rome and the Empire.

Yet this shameful subtilty and crafty deceit, was never so notoriously used
by the Pagans, the Arrians, the Goths, the Vandals, the Lumbards, the
Donatists, etc. as in the late persecutions and practices of Protestant
Ministers, especially in England against the Catholics, in their Pamphlets and
Pulpits, urging the State to suppress them with death, severe exilements, and
edicts, as if they had been so many Catilines toward their Senate, and so
many Absolons toward their David.

The long time of our persecution: the number of them that were afflicted: the
diversity of their ranks and qualities, and their humors and dispositions:
the perpetuity and variety of temptations and tribulations: the infinite
indignities suffered by the merciless searching and robbing of Purseuants,
Promoters, Informers, and such needy Officers (who cared not by whose fall they
rose) (not having deserts or other degrees to clime to the height of their
ambition.) We passed thorough for so many years; if they had fallen out among
any other constitution of men then Catholics, they might have wrung (very
probably) out of men well mortified, and patient, some action of dislike and
coffeehouse, seeing Tristia pro virtute tollerare, to endure heavy things
for virtues sake is a point hard to be practiced. But yet nevertheless, what
has been our fidelity toward our Prince, and behavior toward our
Magistrates, with all humility, respect, modesty, and subjection? ever either
readily doing what they enjoined, or patiently suffering what they imposed;
Fiant inimici nostri Iudices, Let our enemies be our Judge therein: and let the
Roles, Registers, and Records speak. The true reason whereof was the
doctrine, for by the Religion which we profess, we are taught, that we must
obey our Princes Non propter itam, sed propter conscientiam, not for any
indignation, but for conscience sake; and that to resist them, is to resist
Gods ordinances. And this is the bit and bridle that every true Catholic
carries in his mouth, to restrain him from that by grace and fear of Gods
judgments, which flesh and blood otherwise with the lively sense and feeling
of insupportable miseries and afflictions, might drive him unto.

And if some of us, forgetting our best fortunes at home, did fly from the
storm of persecution, into a place of refuge, (taking such helps as the
charity of other Countries afforded) and there perfected in the course of
virtue and learning, returned into England: our only intent was (as heaven and
earth shall witness with us at the dreadful day of Doom) to win souls from
misbeliefe, and with the sweat of our brows (yea of our dearest blood) to
gleane a few ears, the silly relics of their unfortunate Harvest, who had
misled infinite souls into endless perdition. Alas, what is Priesthood now,
that was not in former times? that it must be accounted in these our days
treacherous, which has ever been reputed both in Parliament, and elsewhere,
the most honorable calling next to the Prince, as the places of our great
Priests and Archbishops bear evidence? Nothing is or can be changed in that
Sacrament: howsoever, the minds and proceedings of Protestants do change.
Neither did or does the Pope or any other Bishop by making us Priests, claim
or get any more authority in England; then they of Geneua or Amsterdam, by
making Protestant Ministers. And as for oaths and promises in receiving holy
Orders, we neither take nor plight any but one common to the Priests of all
Nations, which is a solemn vow of perpetual chastity, a thing rather pleasant
then offensive to virtuous minds. But Gods true Religion being abandoned out
of our miserable Country through our sins, the honor of God, and reverent
respect of his sacred Priests was gone withal: and in steed of Privilege and
Prerogation granted to them by divine and humane Laws, they have been most
subject to injuries, villainies, contempt, and calumnies, of all conditions and
states of the Realm. But if the glorious Doctor St. Augustine Epist. 212.
might have been heard, these imputations had not received such credit against
them: for thus he says to Pancarius an Officer, and honorable person, before
whom a certain Priest named Secundarius was accused of a great crime. Quod
videntur obiicere Presbitero, etc. The crime wherewith they change their
Priest, must be looked unto, so always if those that be his accusers be
Catholics: for against a Catholic Priest we neither can, nor ought to admit
the accusation of Heretics.

But seeing it now pleases our gracious Sovereign, to consider our estate,
and with the eyes of his Peerless clemency to look upon us so long, and so
dangerous sick (of the late Queens evil) whom no Physic can cure, but the
sacred hands of his anointed Majesty, nor no Salve can heal, but the
sovereign Balm of his renowned clemency; And so to qualify our former
pressours, permitting us comedere buccellam nostram sine dolor, to put a bit
of meat into our mouths without sorrow, without frights, without flights, and
without circumuentions of our Adversaries.

Wherefore most Honorable, Reverend, Grave, and Learned Patrones (for I do
presume to challenge this title at your hands) vouchsafe to assist now our
gracious Sovereign in this his Royal disposition, and call to mind your
Predecessors, who (being Religious, wise, learned, politic, and discreet,
and therefore dignified by our Sovereigns Catholic Progenitors) did leave
you to succeed them not only in their sincerity of Justice, and fidelity
toward their Princes, but likewise in their Religion toward God: The law of
nature, the law of Nations, the law of England it self (in that state it is)
requires it; the law of God calls upon you, and brings evidence of this
your obligation; your promise to God, to his Church, when you were first borne
binds you: So many of your noble company as are admitted to the Honorable
Order of the Garter, have (or ought to have) sworn it: you are all
Councillors or Officers to his Majesty, which by title of inheritance, and at
his Coronation, by the Oath and Fidelity of a Christian Prince, has obliged
himself to maintain it: of that which is his office, your places profess
performance; your promise to God, obedience and voluntary submission to his
Church, fidelity to Prince, duty to Country, compassion to the unjust
oppressed daily call upon you to see it done.

Pardon Noble Patrons, if peremptorily without all exception I demand but
justice by the present forcible Laws of England.

Who, for his better satisfaction, desires to see these ensuing points at
length: then read that most worthy and laborious Treatise, entitled: The
Protestants Apology for the Roman Church.

SECTION. I. THE LAW TERMS IN GENERAL PERUSED IN THIS OUR APPLICATION.
RIGHT HONORABLE, REVErend, Grave, and Learned.
SEEING your selves are as it were, the principal passages under his Majesty,
in, and by which is transported, whatsoever is done in execution of Justice. In
which course, of your great and weighty Employment, as you are continually
occasioned, and sometimes importuned, Iudiciously to observe and discern both
of causes, and persons brought in question before you: So are there none, whom
neccessity has so much provoked, to become in this kind your humble
Suppliants, as are the daily dejected, disgraced, and impouerished Catholics

And for as much, as Religion is the matter of their calamity, we have presumed
bereby, (with all humble remo^strance) in their behalf, to commend the same,
unto the serious, and retired view of your leasurable, judicious, and grave
Considerations. The which also we do with more confident, (I confess) and
peculiar respect, in that the method, and grounds of proof, which shall be
observed, and prosecuted, throughout this our humble Application, are in them
selves correspondent, to the like received principles of your own laws, and
as being such, do therefore after a more then ordinary manner, appropriate them
selves to your judgment.

An exposition of certain difficult and obscure words and terms of the laws
of this Realm printed A 1602 Fol 25. Fol 26.
For if I mistake not, but do rightly inform my self from your book of The
terms of the law: your procedings in case of Attainder are threefold: as by
Outlary, where the party does not appear to answer the law: by Verdict,
which is the trial of honest Jurors, upon his appearing to answer the law:
and by Confession, which is the parties own acknowledgement of his offense
Also in case of Title to temperall possessions, there be certain received
grounds in your law of great force to demo^strate the right as fair, ancient,
and unsuspected Evidence, the Testimony of credible witnesses, and even
Praescription it self, where of no memory occurreth to the contrary. In so
much as by the statute of Limitation, no man is inhabled to commence, and
prosecute suite, Fol. 140
for any lands, whereof him self, or his Ancestors, have not been before
seized, within a certain time in that behalf limited: The only Priority of
possession receiving also this favor in your law, that to the party disseised
of such his possession, you afford special remedy, by Writ of Assise, Fol
24. Fol. 47. Fol. 47.
allowing him also the benefit of his Continual Claim, to prevent Descent
upon the other parties dying seized. Moreover where the letter of your Statute
law appears to be in some cases doubtful, you are reported to hold that
sense, and understanding thereof for most reasonable, which is found most
agreeable, with the known answerable Practice of ensewing times.

Besides all this, there are established with you, for the final ending of all
arising controversies High course of Judgment to give definitive sentence, and
the same so given, not by the law it self but by your selves placed, as Judges
to pronounce, and determine what is the law: Against which sentence so once
orderly given, No Writ of error, or Appeal lies, Fol. 82.
whereby to support the party so co^uicted, in the farther humor of his
unsatisfied and endless contention. Of all which I have informed my self, partly
from your foresaid book of the Terms of the law, and some by conference with
others. So as I am to crave pardon, if exceeding herein the boldness of my
profession, I have mistaken, or not dewly observed the apt propriety of
words, retaining yet (I hope) the substance of the matter.

And for as much, as these your civil observations, prescribed for the
inquiry, and setting forth of right, are in themselves no other, then as lively
resemblances, and imitations of those maine grounds, which facred Theology
affords, to the demonstration of Truth: I am now likewise to crave further
leave, to entreat you of your serious, and retired view, of your leasurable,
Judicious, and grave considerations, of this our short Application, of some
principal parts thereof, to the like answerable grounds, and principles, so
plentifully abounding, in proof of our Catholic Religion. But least I should
be tedions to your honors attention, I will but set down one point, for the
which Catholics are so often commanded, to appear before your honors to
answer to the law, and are daily dejected, disgraced and Impouerished: The
point is known to you all, to wit, for entertaining of Massing Priests.

SECTION. II. A verdict consisting of twelve general Councels, al of them
being within the first four hundred and od years after our Savior Christ.
FIrst therefore, concerning your proceeding by Jurors: if that may be esteemed
to be a true Verdict, which is so, by such given, you have then here the same,
given in the fore said point (which might be given in other points likewise of
our Catholic Faith,) by the Ancient Fathers, who being assembled in General
Counsels, and Synodes, and sworn upon the peril of their souls, have in
this, and other many special cases directly found for us. and to that effect,
that those of our Jury, may be the less suspected of you, we will bring them
of the first 400. years after Christ, the which Ages, even your own Doctors
being Judges, were freest from all corruption, and alteration of the true
Religion, and Faith delivered by the Apostles D. Fulke in his Answer to a
counterfaite Catholic page 36. says. The Religion of the Papists came in,
and prevailed the year of God: Anno 607, in the which time (says he) The
Revelation of Antichrist with the Church fled in to the wilderness to wit in
Ao. 607. And Simo^ de Voyo^ one of your Protesta^te Doctors, Simo^ de Voyo^ in
his epist. to the Reader.
in his discourse upon the Catalogue of Doctors, in the Epistle to the Reader,
post medium; affirms, that Anno 605. When Pope Boniface was enstalled in the
Papal throne, Powell pa. 105
then falsehood got the victory. And Mr. Gabriel Powell, in his Considerations
of the Papists reasons says: I grant that from the year of Christ 605. The
professant Company of Popery has been very visible and perspicuous. Perkins
307.
And Mr. Perkins in his exposition of the Creed affirms: That during the
space of 900. years the Popish heresy has spread it self over the whole
earth. Whit. p. 35.
And Mr. Whitaker de Antichristo contra Sanderum, says: During all that time
(to wit of 600. years,) The Church was pure and flourishing, and inuiolably
taught, and defended the faith, delivered from the Apostles.

And the like acknowledgement is made by many other learned Protestants which
were tedions to your honors, In his book of Institut set out in french printed
at Geneua 1562.
to set down in this our short. Application. Only we will conclude which
Calvin your chief man: who albeit he does not grant the flourishing estate of
the Roman Church, the full space of the first. 600. years, after Christ, yet
does acknowledge, that no change of Faith was made until the times of S.
Augustine, Epiphanius, Optatus, etc. which was for 440. years after Christ,
These be his own words in his book of Institutions set forth in French: It
was athing (says he) notorions and without doubt, that after the Apostles age,
until those times, no change was made in doctrine, neither at Rome, nor at
other cities. Thus Calvin.

Therefore having freed our jury from all suspicion, even our enemies being our
Judges, Whitg. in his defense p. 330.
we will place as Foreman of our Jury, that notable and famous Council of
Nice; the which (says Mr. Whitgift a protestante writer,) is of al wise, and
learned men reverenced, esteemed, and embraced next unto the Scriptures
themselves. The 1. Counsel of Nice. can. 3.
This Council was celebrated the year of Christ 325. at the which was present
318. Bishops, who did decree, that Priests that did say Mass, and offer
sacrifice, It is not let at liberty to marry, because exception is taken at
women but the mother, etc
should not keep company with any woman, but with their mother, sister,
fathers sisters, and mothers sisters; but should live chaste, And in the 14
Canon. it makes mention of Priests that do sacrifice
as S. Basile expounds this Canon, in his Epist. to Parcorius. Epi.stry.
As appears in the third Canon, and acknowledged by all the Doctors of your
Church. And not only this point, is approved by this Council, Theod. li 1
hist. cap. 8. Doctrina de Baptis. Can 69. ca. 10. ca. 11.
but likewise sundry others As 1. unwritten Traditions 2. that the Sacraments
by the institution of Christ do confer grace. 3. that extreme Unction was a
Sacrament. The Real presence, Indulgences, with many other points of Catholic
Doctrine, maintained to this day in the Church of Rome

Your honors then do see, that this Council which we have placed as Foreman,
is altogether for us, concerning Catholic Priesthood, and many other points of
Religion in controversy at this day.

2. Conc. Arelat. An. 330
For the second Iuror we shall place the Council holden at Arles, called
Arelatense Concilium, celebrated shortly after the Nicene Council, as some do
think, Anno 330. in the 2. and 3. Canon, does prohibit the marriage of
Priests, and therefore is reproved by Szegedin, a protestant writer. This
Priesthood, can be understood of no other Priesthood, In locis com. p. 327.
then the Catholic Priesthood, our adversaries being Judges; With many other
points of Catholic Doctrine, making most of those Canons, out of the Nicene
Council: a manifest proof, that the Nicene Council did not leave the matter
at liberty, of priests marriage.

The third Jury man shall be the Roman Council Anno 324, Can. 81. the which
makes mention of Cardinals, Bisshops, Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, Acolytes,
Exorcistes, Readers, and Doore-keepers, The which sacred Orders, are no where
to be found, but in our Catholic Church. Which is acknowledged by the
Centurywriters, Cent. 4. col. 873. me^ much esteemed of, by the Church of
England, and disclaimed by others, as by Mr. Fulke, in his Retentiue, in these
words: page 67.
With all our heart we defy abhor detest, and spit at your greasy
Antichristian Orders, But you may see by these his words, that he is
unmindful of the Antiquity of these sacred Orders.

The fourth of our Jury, shall be the Council of Neocaesarea holden Anno 314.
and approved by the Council of Nice, which does decree Can. 1. Can. 1.
That Priests who do marry, should be deposed of their charge, with many other
things concerning manners and good life.

The fifth of our Jury is the Council of Laodicea celebrated about the year
364. The which decreed Can. 13. that the Priest should not be elected by the
people. Pacteolus in Seen Council.
Also Can 19. concerning certain Rites in public service time, as namely
some prayers in silence, others pronounced, then the Pax (or kiss of peace) to
be given, and the oblation to be offered; And Can. 21. That the Subdeacon might
not enter into the Vestry and handle the holy vessels. And Can. 48. that the
Baptized after Baptism should receive holy Chrisme. And Can. 50. the fifth of
lent: and an. 52. not to marry in lent: All the which Canons Osiander a learned
protestant disclaimes from, and rebukes bitterly albeit undeservedly. Osiand.
Cent. 4. p 393.
Now if this Council makes for us Catholics, or you of the Church of
England, I Appeal to your grave Judgment and serious considerations.

The Sixth of our Jury is your Council called Elibertinum, Anno 305.
no less antcient then the fore said Counsels; this Council: can. 27, and
can. 33. decreed most plainly against priests, who marry after they have
taken upon them priesthood; This Council was celebrated about the year 305 in
Spain; The which Council the Doctors of your Church use to object against
Catholics concerning Images, mistaking the intention of the Council.

Anno 396. sub Suiciovt quidem volunt.
The Seventh of our Jury is the 2. Council of of Carthage Anno 386 whereat S.
Austine was present and subscribed thereto which doubted not in like manner to
ground this point upon antiquity, and the Apostles doctrine; so that in the 2.
Canon. it says these words: Omnibus placet etc In pleases us all, that
Bishops* Priests, and Deacons, etc, shall obsteine from wives, which the
Apostles did teach and Antiquity did keep, let us likewise observe; and many
other points does this Council decree for Catholics.

The eight of our Jury is the 3. Council of Carthage celebrated in the year.
Anno 397.
397. at the which likewise S. Austin was present and subscribed thereto;
allows of Confession made to a Priest can. 32. and likewise of other points
of Catholic doctrine, as of Purgatory. can. 29. etc.

Anno 398.
The 9. of our Jury is the 4. Council of Carthage in the year 398. to the
which subscribed S. Austine being there present. Asoc. vult anno 418.
This Council decrees can 5.6.7.8.9. for the inferior Orders of Readers,
Exorcist, Acolyth, doorkeepers, and Subdeacons, further mentioning there
according to the offices yet used, a book of Exorcismes for the Exorcist, the
Church lights for the Accolite, patten, chalice, little cruets full of water,
and Towell for the priests hands: All which are confessed, and reproved by the
Protestant writer Luke Osiander: in his Epitom. cent. 5. p. 4.

The tenth of our Jury is the famous and General Council of Ephesus
celebrated about the year 431 by 200. Anno 431.
Bishops which amongst other Articles and points of our Cath doctrine says in
plain words: Incruentam celebramus in Ecclesiis sacrificii seruitutem: we do
celebrate and offer up in our Churches, an unbloody sacrifice: and in the
words following approoues evidently the real presence, Council Nic. cap 10.
causing the Canons of the Nicene Council to be publicly read with these
words. Incruentum, etc.

The eleventh of our Jury is the first Toletane Council in the year 405.
which decreed can. 20. Anno. 405. sub.
for consecration of Chrisme by a Bishop, and his sending thereof to the
Priests, through his diocese at easter yearly; Also can. 1. for the daily
offering Sacrifice, etc to the great dislike of the Protestant writer Osiander:
who says thereupon; Cent. 5. p 46.
who commanded them to offer up Sacrifice every day.

The twelft of our Jury is the Council Mileuitane about the year 416. Anno
416.
which decreed can. 12. that Masses prayers and ceremonies should not be used
but such as where allowed by the Council, so does the Council of Chalcedon
Anno 451. can. 15.

The second general Council of Nice in the 3. tom. act, 6. says in most
plain terms: Never any of the Apostles or Fathers did call our unbloody
sacrifice (meaning the mass) done in commemoration of the passion of our
Savior, to be the sign or figure of his body: for he did not say, take you,
eat you, the sign of my body, but take you eat you this my body, etc: Albeit
be sore the words of the Fathers did call it (...), the symbol or figure of
his body: So plainly does the 350. Bishops assembled in this Council deliver
their sentence in our behalf

You see (Right honorable, Reverend, Grave, and Learned Lords) the complete
number of our Jury, at whom no exceptions can be taken, even the Doctors of
your Church being Judges, they being all not only within the first 600. years,
in which time was no corruption in Religion according to the confession of many
of our adversaries heretofore alleged, but in the most flourishing estate of
the Church. Of which time your chief man Calvin says: It was a matter out of
all doubt, that from the beginning even until that time, Lib. 4. Instit. cap.
2.. 2.
(viz to S. Austins days,) nothing was changed in doctrine. Also in his book
of Institutions in French printed at Geneua by Conradus Badius Anno 1562. he
says expressly: That it was a thing notorious and without doubt, that after the
Apostles age until those times, no change was made in doctrine neither at
Rome, nor at other cities. So plainly do our learned Adversaries acknowledge,
that no change of faith was made by the Roman Church from the Apostles age
until the time of S. Austin, Epiphanius, Optatus, etc. which was 440. years
after Christ, Mr. Fulke follows his Master Calvin in this point saying in
his Retentine: Page 85.
The Popish church is but an Heretical assembly, departed from the universal
church, long since Augustines departure ont of this life. This is the most
common opinion of all Protestant writers, And thus much with your good favors
concerning the application of your term of law called Verdict, which is the
Trial of honest Jurors.

SECTION. III. THE TESTAMENTI.
SECONDLY: if you respect VVitnesses, you shall find all the Ancient Fathers
for our cause, in so much that sundry of our learned Adversaries doubt not
therefore, to make general disclaim in the ancient Fathers. Hence it is that
Mr. Whitaker a Learned Protestant affirms: cont Duraen p. 423. The Popish
Religion to be a patched couerlett of the Fathers errors, In libel. vita I wely
printed Londini page 212. id^m Fulk. in his petent. page 55. Stratag Satanae li.
6. page 296
sowed together. And that also Mr. D. Humfrey did grievously reprehend Mr.
Jewel for his so bold appealing to the Fathers, affirming therefore of Mr.
Jewel that herein he gave the Papists to large a scope, that he was injurious
to himself, and after a manner spoiled himself, and the church. And Iacobus
Acontius in his Treatise, dedicated to Queen Elizab. speaking of the bad
success that Protestants writers had in citing the Fathers, exhorts them to
for bear the citing of them saying: Equidem perniciosissimam omninoque
fugiendam hanc esse arbitror consuetudmem. Certainly I hold this custom viz
of, etc. to be very dangerous and wholly to be avoided viz: of citing the
Fathers to the writers disadvantage.

But for fear of suspicion of our VVitnesses, we shall bring men so
indifferent to our adversaries and us, that we may say of them, (as S. Aust* in
like case disputing against the Pelagians says, of the Fathers before his
time:) August. adu Iul. Pelag. lib. 2. prope finem and lib. 3. cap. 17. and
lib. 4. cap 12.
Neque nobis neque vobis irati s^nt, etc They be angry neither at you nor at
us: what they have found in the Church, that they have held: they have taught,
what they have learned: and what they have received from their Forefathers they
have deliured to posterity. In so much as your own learned writers are not
wanting in their like answerable commendation. Calvin speaking of them says:
They indeed, (speaking of catholics, Calvin. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 2. Sect. 3.
alleging Antiquity,) set forth their churches very gloriously, etc they
report out of Irenaeus, Tertullian, Origin, Augustine, and others, how highly
they esteemed this succession whereto he there answers and gives his like
reason thereof saying: considering it was a matter out of all doubt, that from
the beginning until that time nothing was changed in doctrine the holy Doctors
took in argument that, which was sufficient for the overthrowing of all new
errors: to wit, that they, viz, the Heretics, oppugned the doctrine, which
even from the very Apostles themselves had been inviolably and with one
consent retained. And Mr. Jewel a famous Protestant in his replye to Mr.
Harding. page 266, says. The godly Fathers, (meaning them before S. Austins
time,) sought to the church of Rome, which then for purity in Religion, and
constancy in the same, was most famous, above all others, this fore said time
was the first. 440, years after christ. Therefore for the further satisfaction
of our adversaries, we shall bring for witnesses even them, who lived within
the fore said time, viz. within and before S. Augustine his time.

If need were, we might bring for witnesses S. Andrew the Apostle; In Epist. ad
Eccles. Achaiae cap. 1.
who in a book made by himself and written by his disciples and generally
received for authentical by the whole Church and Christian world, these
words are recorded to have been spoken by himself: I daily sacrifice to
Almighty God the immaculate lamb, who notwithstanding that he is truly
sacrificed, and his flesh truly eaten by the people, yet does he still remain
whole and living.

S. Clemens Epist 3, no priest ought to say mask without the Bishops leave. S.
Martial Epist. ad Burdegalensis. cap. 3. A sacrifice is offered upon the Altar
is God the creator, not to man, or Angel Of the said S. clement there is
mention made in the Apostle S. Paul his Epistle to the Philippi. ca^ 4. verse.
3. where he is numbered among the followers of S. Paul, and who was third Pope
after S. Peter; who did write many things which he had o^ verbal tradition of
the Apostles, who lived about the year. 80. The before said S. Martial was
sent by Saint Peter into France, who afterward was Bish. of Limoge in France,
who lived in the year 50. of whom Baronius does write. Likewise may be
alleged the five liturgies or Masses of the Apostles, In Mart. 30. Iun.
Proclus de Tradit. diuina.
The first of S. Peter, in defense of which, Willaim Lindane a learned
Catholic writes an Apology. The second of S James the greater, alleged by
S. Proclus Patriarch of Constantinople, who lived in the year 460, The third
of S. James the lesser, alleged by the fore said proclus, whereof mention is
made likewise in the Council of Trull. in the year 680. The fourth, the
liturgy of S. Matthew, which the Aethiopians do use, and is called in their
language Corbon, that is Missah in Hebrew, and in Latin Oblatio; of this
Liturgy or term of Mass writes Genebrard. Genesis in finc primia saeculi. Vbi
sup.


The fifth is that of S. Mark used long time in Alexandria, of this likewise
writes Genebrard. Of these Liturgies writes Coccius, lib. de Euchar. art.
1.4. likewise mention is made of them, in the book called Bibliotheca Patrum
in the 6. Tom. of the edition. 1589.

But least we become tedious to your grave Attention, we will bring only the
Testimonies of some holy Fathers, who lived in the most flourishing estate of
Christ's Church, who be most commended of our Adversaries.

The first of or VVitnesses shall be S. Denis Areopagite disciple of S. Paul, of
whom there is mention made in the acts of the Apostles, Act. 17 14.
who lived in the year 90. of whom Sutcliffe the Protestant writer says: de
presb cap. 13. page 91 Orm. in his picture of a Puritan. pa. 1605. Eccl. hist.
cap. 3.
Dionysius antiquitatis optimus sane testis, videtur enim esse antiquissimus
This S. Denis then, who (as Mr Oliuier Ormerod a learned Protestant writes)
lived in the Apostles times; in his Ecclesiastical Hierarchy sets down
the most of the Ceremonies, that the Catholic Church uses in celebrating the
Mass: viz the prayers the burning of Frankincense about the Altar, the singing
of Psalms, parcells of scripture which be read, the washing of hands, the
giving of the Pax, the Elevation of the holy Host, the Adoration of the same,
the Comunion and receiving of the Sacrament, yea, he affirms, that no sooner
the B. Sacrament is on the Altar, but there be present troops of Saints, This
ancient Father in all his books makes, so much for us, both in this and all
other points of our Catholic Faith, and against our Adversaries, that
Calvin, Lib 1. ca 1. 4 C^n^ 1. li. 2 c 10 col 637.
and the Century writers have no other refuge, but to call in question the
books of S. Denis, albeit most unjustly, preferring the saying and false
opinion of Erasmus and Laurentius Valla (both Grammaria^s) before the authority
of an infinite number of ancient Doctors. Origin, Orig. hom. 2. indiuers ante
med. Athanas in Scholi^s in opera ^ionysii Chrysostom. epist. ad Carolu^ Caluum
gric. hom. 34 Fulk. in his confut. of Purgat. page 353. Coup in his dict. at the
woe d Diony^ius. page 105.
who lived in the year 230. in one of his Homilies alleging a passage of S.
Denis his Caelestiall Hierarchy, terms him Great S. Denise Areopagite, S.
Athanasius, who lived in the year 319 that Great Divine. S. Chrysostom, who
lived in the year 390 that Caelestiall bird. S. Gregor. the Great, who lived
in the year 590. Calls him ancient and venerable Father. And not only are
his books acknowledged by the ancient Fathers, but even by our late
Protestante writers, as by Mr Fulk, Hermanus, D. Bridges Lord Bishop of Oxford,
who did think him to have been before S. Basils days, who lived in the year
370. by Mr. Cooper late Bishop of winchester; by Mr. Oliuier Ormrod in his
picture of a puritan in proof of the Cross made in Baptism; And by the
Archbishop of Canterb, in his answer to an admonition. And this concerning our
first witness.

The second of our VVitnesses is S. Ignatius, Scholar unto S. John the
Evangelist, who lived in the year 100. writes thus in his undoubted Epistle
ad Smyrnenses, Ad Smyrnenses.
that the Bishop is as high Priest in respect of his Priesthood, affirming
further, that in the Church nothing is greater then the Bishop who sacrifices
unto God for the safety of the whole world, because it is (says he) not
lawful without a Bishop to offer immaculate Sacrifice, Ibidem.
to celebrate the mass, etc. This saying of S. Ignatius is acknowledged, and
not gainsaid by the late Bishop of Canterb. Mr. Whitgift in his Def. page 408.
For further proof of this and like sayings of S. Ignatius see S. Hierom lib.
de viris illustribus. ibidem: it is not lawful without a Bishop to offer
Sacrifice, or to celebrate mass.

The third Witness is S. Irenaeus Scoller to S. Policarpus, who was Disciple
to S. John Evangelist, and lived in the year 170, who some times was Bishop of
Lions in France; Lib. 4. aduersus Haeres.
This Irenaeus affirms, that, besides the spiritual Priestly Order of all
the Just, another peculiar Priesthood of the Apostles, who are in respect
thereof to attend dailye upon God and the Altar.

Dialog. cum Tryph.
The fourth Witness is Justinius Mart. who lived in the year 130. he
affirms, that the sacrifice of the Eucharist is by the Institution of Jesus
Christ, and that it is celebrated throughout all the world by the Christians,
Eusebius. li. 4 c. 17 Hier. in catalog.
and that by the Priests only, his books and works are reported by Eusebius
and S. Hierom.

Origin. hom 21. in Number.
The fifth Witness is Origin, who lived the year 230. In his 21 homily on the
book of Numeri, (the which homilies he did write before his falling into
error,) does Judge, that it appertains only to the^, that live chaste
continually, to offer sacrifice,

The sixth Witness is S. Cyprian, Epist. 63 ad Caecil.
who lived in the year 240. in his Epistle ad Caecilium says thus: If Jesus
Christ our Savior and God, be himself chief Priest of his Father, and the
first who did offer up himself as a sacrifice to God the Father, and commanded
us to do the same in commemoration of him; Truly it follows, that the
Priest, who imitates that, which Christ did do, is in the place of Christ, and
does offer up to God the Father a true, and full sacrifice, whenever he
begins to offer according to that manner, as was offered by Jesus Christ,
this S. Cyprian; for the which words the Century writers do reprove and reject
him.

The seventh Witness is S. Basil, Liturg. Eccles. Cappad. apud Cocc. li. de
Euch.
who professed a monastical life, and lived in the year 370. He sets down
the ceremonies and form of the sacrifice of the mass, which were observed
within his diocese, he being then Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

The 8. Witness is S John Chrysostom, Lib de Sacerd.
who lived in the year 390. in his book de Sacerdotio. speaking of the
consecration of the host in the sacrifice of the mass says thus. The words
are pronounced by the Priest, and are consecrated by the grace, Chrysostom. orat.
co^tra ge^tes quoth. vnus est Deus.
and virtue of God. The book, which he makes of Priesthood, is a sufficient
proof of his opinion, in this and other points of our Catholic Religion, in
the which book he affirms, that in Britanie there were Altaria Christo
dedicata.

The 9 Witness is Tertullian one of the Latin Church, who lived in the
year 220. whose authority is reverenced, not only by the Ancient Fathers, In
his picture of a Purit. pa 3
but likewise by our adversaries. Ormerod a Protestant writer does allege
Tertullian his opinion of the sign of the cross Baptism against his Puritan
Brethren. This Tertullian amongst the other traditions of the Catholic
Church, Lib. de Coron. milit cap. 3.
reports of the saying of mass, or oblation at the end of the year for the
Souls departed The which sentence is acknowledged by Mr. Fulk to be of
Tertullian. And in his book de cultu faeminarum, In his confut. of purg page
362
he says, that a woman should not go abroad, unless it be to visi^t the
sick, hear the sermon, or assiste in the Church at mass.

The Ninth Witness is S. Ambrose, who lived in the year 3^0. and whom the
Century-writers do reject, Lib 4 cap 4 col. 295
for his to much writing in favor of the sacrifice of the mass and Catholic
Priesthood. Amongst other of his sayings he confessed of himself, that tumult
being risen in the assembly where he was, Ambro. lib. 5 Epist. 3
yet he was not forgetful of his office, but did begin the mass.

The eleventh of our VVitnesses is S. Augustine Scoller to S. Ambrose, he died
in the year 430. he is plentiful in this and other points of Catholic
doctrine, even in the Judgment of our Adversaries, Chemnit^us in his Exa^.
part. 3. page 3.
he named the word mass in one of his Sermons saying, let no man be absent
from the mass on sunday. And again he named the word mass in another Sermon
saying, these words, which shall be read at the mass, and else where. August.
sermon. 51 de tempore. Ser. 91. de tem. Ser. 337.
Unjustly therefore do our adversaries object against us, saying that S.
August. did never name the word mass. And within S. Austins time the 2.
Council of Carthage in the 3. chap and the Mileuitan Council cap. 12. does
name the word mass. And before S. Austin, S. Ambrose, who lived anno 390. in
his 5. book of Epistles, Epist 33 S. Damasus Pope, who lived about the year.
384. in his book of the lives of the Popes. And S. Macharius, who lived about
anno 319. in his decret. de consecrat. named the word mass. S. Fabianus Pope
in one of his Decrees, who lived about the year 242. S. Sother Pope and
Martyr, who lived about the year 171. in one of his Decrees which are extant
Tom. Council. S. Pius Pope Anno 147* in one of his Decrees. S. Higinus Pope and
Martyr Anno 144. in his Decree as Ino. lib. 2. testifies. S. Alexander Pope
and Martyr Anno 121. Epist. 1 ad omnes Orthodoxos, which is to be seen in the
Council of Tribury cap. 19. S. Clement third Pope after S. Peter Epist. 3.
Anno 111. S. Ignatius the Apostles Scoller. Epist. ad Smyrnenses. All which
holy men did name the word Mass properly, and in that same sense, that the
Catholics at this day do use. Yet for all this forsooth our Adversaries would
make the world believe, that the word Mass, is a word newly invented, and not
found in the primitive Church. But they deal with us in this, as in many
other things, which must proceed either of malice, or of gross ignorance.

The twelfe of our VVitnesses is S. Hierome, who lived in the same time that S.
Austin, did. Ao. 430. He is generally holden of our Adversaries to be for the
Catholic Religion in this, Epist. ad Heliod.
and other points: He did reverence and respect holy Priesthood very much,
saying: God forbid I should speak amiss of them, who succeding, do
consecrate with their mouth the body, Cyrillus Catech Cyrillus Hieros. catech.
12. Gregor N^ssen orat. in muliere^ peccat. Ep ph. Haeres. 73.
and blood of Jesus Christ. To these VVitnesses we might add infinite more,
if it were not tedious to your honors. As S. Cyrill of Alexandria contemporaneo
to S. Hieron. S, Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus Anno 320. S. Gregory of Nyssen.
Epiphanius, Athanasius Anno 319. Optatus Anno 350. lib. 6. aduersus Haeres.
Athan. quaest. 34.

Right honorable, Reverend, Grave, and Learned, these be our VVitnesses who did
direct our fore said Jury in their Verdict: at whom our Adversaries can take no
exception justly, seeing they were men indifferent and not angry neither at our
Adversaries not at us; and who be much esteemed of, by the more advised and
sober Protestants, chemint exam. Council. Trid. part. 1, page 74.
who (to use their own words) doubt not, but that the primitive Church
re^eaued from the Apostles, and Apostolical men, not only the text of
Scripture, but also the right and native sense thereof; And that we are greatly
confirmed, Confessio Bohemi page 400
in the true and sound sense of Scripture, by testimonies of the ancient
Fathers; And that they are the true and best Masters of posterity, going
before and leading us the way: and as Mr. Bancroft late Bishop of Canterb,
says: Bancr. survey. page 379.
for Mr Calvin and Mr. Beza I do think of them as their writings deserve, but
yet I think better of the ancient Fathers, I must confess.

SECTION. IIII. The Confession of twelve of the learnedest of the Adversary
parties.
THIRDLY if the parties own Confession be of force (as doubtless in all reason
it is no less then Conuincing) your Wisdoms shall hear the grauest of your
Adversaries confirm by their ouwne Confession, this point of doctrine for us.

1. Calvin our Adversaries prime man speaking of Irenaeus, Tertullian, Origin,
August: and others, how highly they esteemed the Church of Rome, Inst lib 4 cap
2.. 2.
in respect of the Succession of the Roman Bishops, answers and gives his
like reason there of saying: Considering it was a matter out of all doubt, that
from the beginning even until that time (viz till S. Austins time) nothing was
changed in doctrine, the holy doctors took in argument that which was
sufficient for the overthrowing of all new errors; viz, that they viz: the
heretics oppugned the doctrine, which even from the very Apostles themselves
had been inuiolably and with one consent retained Again in his book of
Institutions set forth in French he says expressly, Instit in French printed at
Genaua anno 1561.
that it was a thing notorious and without doubt, that after the Apostles age
until those times viz: ( S. August his time) no change was made in doctrine,
neither at Rome nor at other cittyes. Now seeing aluine affirms that without
all doubt there was no change of doctrine in the Church of Rome, from the
beginning (that is from the Apostles times) until S. Aug. his time, which was
for 400. and odd years after Christ, it must follow in Caluins opinion, that
the doctrine we have heretofore alleged, by the testimony of our Jury (viz the
Counsels) and witnesses (viz the Fathers) they being all both Jury and
witnesses within the said first 400. and od years; is pure doctrine, and
inuiolably and with one consent retained, from the very Apostles themselves.

2. BEZA Scoller to Calvin, Confess. Gen ca. 7. Sect. 12.
says that Leo who was Pope Anno Domini 440. did clearly breath forth, the
arrogancy of the Antichristian Roman Sea. Now seeing S. Sixtus 3. who was
predecessor to this Leo, did confirm the Canons of the general Council of
Ephesus, which proves the mass to be a Sacrifice, vt supra
and that unbloody which is offered daily in the Church, therefore I say it
follows, according to Beza his opinion, that this Pope Sixtus did breath
forth no arroganty nor Antichristan doctrine, seeing he was before Leo, who was
the Antichrist according to Bezas saying, and consequently the mass not to be
Antichristian doctrine, but Christian and true doctrine.

3. MELANCTHON says: In locis postremo editis.
Zozimus (who was Pope Anno 420) was the first Antichrist; and that since there
was never any true Bishop of Rome. Now if Zozimus was the first Antichrist and
false Bishop, it follows that Innocentius (who allowed of absolution from
sins by a priest, Innocent Epist. 1. Vecentiu^ ca 7.
who was predecessor to Zozimus) was no Antichrist, but a good Christian and
true Bishop, and did teach Christian and true doctrine, And not only he, but
also all the rest of the Bishops of the Roman Sea, who were before Innocentius
the first (the number of which amounted to 41.) were true Bishops and did teach
true doctrine, And consequently Catholic Priesthood teached, allowed and
practiced by them, is true and Christian doctrine, even according to Melancthon
his opinion.

Lib. de Antichr sto contra Sand page 35.
4 MR. WHITAKER a learned Adversary, being urged by the Catholic writer D.
Sanders, who affirms that the Catholic and Roman Church was not changed
during the first 600. years after Christ; acknowledged the same to be true
saying, during all that time the Church was pure and flourishing, and inuiolably
taught and defended the Faith delivered from the Apostles. Now according to
this Adversaries Confession, it follows that Catholic Priesthood, and other
points of doctrine, taught by those Ancient Fathers, brought as witnesses
heretofore in defense of our cause, must be pure doctrine, and inuiolably
delivered from the Apostles. 5. In his Conf. of purgat. page 373
MR. FVLK does grant that the cause why Irenaeus, Cyprian. Tertull. Optatus,
and Vincentius Lyrinensis, Hierom, and Augustine did name the Church of Rome,
was because the Church of Rome at that time, as it was founded by the Apostles,
so it continued in the doctrine of the Apostles. Now seeing those very same
Fathers, are alleged by us as Witnesses, in defense of our cause, it
follows, by Mr. Fulkes own Confession; that our doctrine in this point, is
the doctrine of the Apostles.

6. MR. NAPPER (that renouned Protestant) avouched to his Majesty that Pope
Siluester who lived about Anno 313. Upon the reuelat. p. 66. 68.
was the Antichrist but seeing all these Popes, who were before Pope Siluester
his time (he being but the thirty fourth Pope) were all Priests and practiced
there Priesthood by saying of mass, etc did practice or teach no Antichristian
doctrine, seeing (as Mr. Napper affirms) the Antichrist was not as yet come,
but Christian and wholesome doctrine was taught by them, and consequently a
Massing Priest, to be no new or Antichristian doctrine.

7. MR. GIFFORD in his demonstrations that Brownists are Donatists, etc. says:
page 38.
To offer oblation for the dead, was general in the Church, long before the
days of S. Austin, as appears in Cyprian and Tertullian. Now seeing that
Cyprian and Tertullian lived within 240. years after Christ, all the which
time yea even to S. Austins time, the Church did flourish, and did maintanie
the doctrine of the Apostles heretofore confessed; It must follow that Oblation
for the dead was good, and faithful doctrine, seeing it was generally holden,
and maintained by the Church. Of the Church li. 3 c 29 pa. 138.


8. MR. FIELD reporting the errors of Aerius the heretic says: Aerius
condemned the custom of the Church, in naming the dead at the Altar, and
offering the sacrifice of the Eucharist, that is, of thankesgeuing for them:
he disliked of set Fastes, and would not admit any difference between a
Bishop and a Presbyter, etc. he was justly condemned thus he. Now seeing that
Mr. Field says, that Aerius was justly condemned, for not allowing the mention
of the dead, made at the Altar, and the offering the sacrifice of the Altar,
etc it follows, that Mr. Field allows of mention to be made for the dead at
an Altar, and of a sacrifice, (albeit he call this sacrifice of the Eucharist a
Thanksgiving, but I must confess most improperly,) but none of those be
practiced this day in the Church of England, all Altars being destroyed, and
the word (Sacrifice) banished; And consequently in Mr Field his opinion,
mentioning the dead at the Altar, and offering sacrifice is sound doctrine, and
the contrary is error, justly condemned by the Church.

Page 3.
MR. GODWIN^ in his Catalogue of the Bishops of England, speaking of S. Gregory
the great Bishop of Rome, says: That blessed and holy Father S. Gregory was
the occasion of replanting the Christian Faith in our country: But none of our
Adversaries can deny, but S. Gregory did allow of massing Priests, yea he
being one himself, and likewise of every particular point of our now professed
Catholic Faith, As Altars, Vestiments, Images, Chalices, Crosses,
Candlestikes, Censers, holy vessels, holy water, the sprinkling thereof: with
many other points, and Ceremonies reported by the Protestant writer D. Humfrey
in Iesuitismi part. 2. And therefore according to Mr. Godwine it must follow,
Cap. 5. page 5.
that all these points, are points of Christian doctrine, seeing these be the
points in which we Englishmen were first instructed, by S. Augustine, sent for
that purpose into England, by S. Gregory the great Pope of Rome.

MR. JEWEL, Hooker. l. 2. sect. 6 p. 112.
(whom Mr. Hooker in his Eccles. Policij, terms the worthiest divine, that
christendom breed for some hundred years past,) in his reply to Mr. Harding
page 246. says: As Well S. Austin as also other godly Fathers, rightly yielded
reverence to the Sea of Rome, etc. for the purity of Religion, which was there
preserved a long time without sport: thus he. But seeing not only after, but
likewise before S. Austins days, the Church of Rome did allow of massing
Priests, and other points of our now professed Catholic Faith (as we have
showed at lardge heretofore in our said Iurye: Therefore according to Mr.
Jewels saying, Catholic Priesthood is a pure and Christian doctrine.

MR. RIDLEY says in Mr Fox Acts and Monuments: pa. 1359.
the Patriarch of Rome (so he terms the Pope) in the Apostles times and long
after, was a great maintainer and setter forth of Christ's glory, in the which
above all other countries, and regions was preached the true Gospel, the
Sacraments were most duly administered, etc: After the Empors became Christians
(says he) the Gospel there flourished most: But all the Popes who were in the
first, second, and third hundred years, did allow of Catholic Priesthood,
Witness of this is S. Clement Pope, who was third Pope after S. Peter, and
lived about the year 102 who says, Ep. 3.
thus in one of his Epistles: Let noe Priest say mass in his Parish, without
the license of his Bishop. And by saying of Mass, the Eucharist was given and
received o^ the people, as is witnessed by S. Dionyse, S. Ignatius, and S.
Marcellus who lived in the second Age, as before has been showed: After S.
Clement succeeded S. Anaclete, Anacletus Ep. 1
in the year 03 who commanded that mass should be celebrated, only in holy
places After him S, Alexander who died for the Faith in the year 131. Baron.
in mart. 3 May.
he did confirm the Apostolic constitution, of mingling wine with water in
the sacrifice of the mass. In decretis Sixti Papae.
After him was S. Sixtus Romanus, in the year 142. who commanded, that the
sacred vessels used at mass, and at other times should not be handled, nor
touched by any man, but by the who were in holy Orders. After him was S,
Felesphor^ who had binan anchorite in Greece, he died in the year 154. he
ordained, that the mass should be celebrated in the night in Christmasse even,
etc. After him succeeded S. Pius an Italian, who died in the year 167. in one
of his Epistles to Iustus Bishop of Vienna he says: Tom. 1. Biblio SS. Patru^
we do celebrate the mass in the Church of Euprepia, etc. After him, (or as
some say, before him) succeeded S. Anicet, who died in the year 175. he would
that the Priest should bear a shaven crown; Anacletus Ep. ad Gallos.
his decrees are extant Tom. 1. Council. After him succeeded Soter, and died
179. who commanded, that none should celebrate mass without one to help him.
And so successively one after another until S. Siluesters time, who was Pope
in the time of Constantine the great, the first Christian Emperor, who was
Christened by the said S. Siluester. These be the Bishops of Rome, (whom Mr.
Ridley terms Patriarchs) who did maintain pure doctrine. All of them being
before Constantine the first true Christian Emperor. And as for that he says,
that in the first Christian Emperors times the Gospel did flourish, it is most
manifest that Constantine, who was Emperor in the year of our Lord 306. did
allow of Monks through out Syria, Palestina, Bithynia, etc. Cent. cent. 4. col
2441.
did keep in his company and court Massing Priests, with all provision to that
effect, as Zozimus affirms; he did attribut supremacy to the Bishop of Rome,
Zozim. hist. li. 1 cap. 8. Frig. in his palma ad Sereniss Regina^ Aug.
as affirms Frigiuellaus Gauius a Protestant Writer: with other points of our
Catholic doctrine, in whose time, the Churches doctrine was one and the same
as it is at this day, concerning Freewill, justification by works, Confession
of sins to a Priest, Inioined penance; Absolution of such as had confessed,
given by imposition of hands; Also with affirming penance to be the second
table after Shipwreck, unwritten Traditions, invocation of Saints, Purgatory,
Altars consecrated, with the sign of the Cross and Chrisme, the real
presence, and Transubstantation, Cent. 4.
sacrificing for the dead, and many other points which the Centurists of
Magdeburg call errors, of that time, Now seeing that Master Ridley says, that
the first Bishops of Rome, and the first Christian Emperors did set out Christ's
glory, and did administer duly the Sacraments; It follows, that in his
opinion these points defended, and taught by the Church in those times, are no
less now pure and true doctrine, and that the Eucharist is duly administered
by massing Priests.

Sect 6.
MR. HOOKER in his praeface to his books of Eccl. Policy says: That we are
right sure of this, that nature, Scripture, and experience have all taught the
world to seek for the ending of contentions, by submitting it self unto some
Judicial and definitive sentence, whereunto neither parties that contend, may
under any pretense refuse to stand. Now seeing all General and Provincial
Counsels, have given their Judicial, and definitive sentence concerning this
point in favor of us Catholics; And on the other side, seeing neither Mr.
Hooker, nor any Protestant can allege any general Council or Provincial,
or any Synodicall Conuenticle before this last. 100. years, to the contrary:
It follows, according to Mr. Hooker, that we should allow of the Sacrifice
of the Mass, seeing Councclls in their Judicial, and definitive sentences have
allowed of it. And much more because he affirms most constantly in his books
of Eccl. Pol. that the Church of Rome is to be reputed as a part, and limme of
the Church, Lib. 5. page 188.
and house of God.

But because I can not tell whether our adversaries, Will allow what their
follows did write or teach in the days of Queen Elizabeth, seeing they
defend, (as D. Dove a Protestant writer affirms perswas. page 31.) they may
often change, and do (at least) at the change of every Prince. These be his
own words, When the mass was first Put down, King Henry had his English
Liturgy, that was judged absolute without exception But when Edward came to
the Crown, that was condemned, and an other put in the place, which Peeter
Martyr, and Bucer did approve as very consonant to Gods word. When Queen
Elisabeth began her reign, the former was judged to be full of
imperfections, and a new was divised, and allowed by the consent of the
Clergy. But about the middle of her reign, we grew weary of that book and
great means have been wrought to abandon that, and establish another, which,
although it was not obtained, yet we do (at the least at every change of
Prince,) change our book of common prayer, we be so wanton, that we know not
what we would have. Thus Doctor Dove. Therefore to give our Adversaries all
advantages, you shall hear the report of those Protestant writers, who have
written since the beginning of his Majesty's reign in England, and so much,
and so incharitably against us Catholics, that for that cause one of their
own number, (Ormer pict. Pap. in postscript.) adiudgeth many of their books
to the fire, and their Authors worthy of death.

MR. MIDLETON Papistomast. page 137. 138. grants with S. Chrysostom. S. Aug.
S. Epiphan. That Sacrifice, and Prayer for the dead was an Apostolical
Tradition.

D SVTCLIFFE against the three Conuers. page 791. says: Christ's true Church
is a diligent, and wary keeper of doctrines committed to her, and changes
nothing at any time, diminishes nothing, adds nothing superflius, loses
not her own, nor usurps things belonging to others. But seeing. D. SVTCLIFFE
can not deny, but the church of Rome was once Chrysts true church, therefore it
follows, according to D. Sutcliffe opinion, that the church of Rome must
needs have diligently, and warely kept the doctrine of such a maine, and
essential point of her chief function, as is the Sacrifice of the Mass, nor
changing nor adding any thing superfluous thereunto.

MR. WILLET antilog, page 144. assures you, that diverse of the Roman Church,
not only of the ignorant, but of the Learned, be saved and Saints in heaven.
His words be these. It is not denied, by any Protestant, but many renowned
Kings and Queens, (who might not plead ignorance of the Roman Faith) are
saints in heaven. And speaking of his majesty's Mother, he attributes such
holiness, and truth to her Religion and her, that it prevailed with God, not
only for her self, but her son our sovereign also, his words be. Willet
antilog Engl. praef. to the K. The child of such Prayers, and tears, cannot
possibly fall away. Now if to assist at the celebration of the Mass, is to
committ idolatry, (as our adversaries would have it,) Mr. Willet could never
have accounted these Kings and Queens, to be saints in heaven, whose cheiffe
and daily exercice of devotion was to assist thereat.

D. Couell writes of the Church in these words in his def. of Mr. Hooker
page 30 art. 4. That, which by her Ecclesiastical authority she shall
probably think, and define to be true or good, most in congruity of reason over
rule all other inferior judgments, whatsoever; and to the^, that out of a
singularity of their own, ask us, why we thus hang our judgments on the
Churches sleeue, we answer with Solomon. Two are better then one, for when in
matters of less moment, it was never thought safe, to neglect the judgment of
many, and hassly to follow the fancy and opinion of some few. Now, but that
the Church of Rome has had the definition of general Counsels, and consent
of Fathers in behalf of Catholic Priesthood and other points of Religion
contradicted this day, neither D. Couel, nor any man ever douted, and hence it
is, that D Couel (vbi supra page 73.) concludes thus. It is strange for any
man to deny them of the Church of Rome to be of the Church.

D. Murton part. 2. apol. page 340. lib. 4. cap. 18 avouches confide^tly, that
a general Counsel is highes^ judge; so does the Bishop of Winchester, (B.
Bilso^^ survey page 85.) and others; but all men know, the Protestants not to
be able to produce any genera^ Council consisting of mere Protestants, as
the Protestant Relator of Religion. (Relat. of Relig^ cap. 47.) ingeniously
confesses, and let it suffice t^ Catholics to bring the late general
Council of Trent, at the which Protestants Religion was nominatim condemned as
heresy by six Cardinals, four Legates, three Patriarchs, two and thirty
Archbishops, 228. Bishops, and 4. Abbots. And so D. Morton must acknowledge the
highest judge to be for us.

D. Dove pleading for an union betwixt Catholics and Protestants, speaking in
favor of the Church of Rome, says. No Church can be condemned, and adjudged
heretical by any private censure, but it must be public by a general
Council. (D. Dove persuas. page 14.) and page 27. 28, he says, that according
to the Catholics definition of a Sacrament, there be as many as they teach,
and this shall not breed any such jar between us, that therefore we should
refuse to communicate together, and transubstantation it self shall be no
bar. The Bishop of Winchester in his survey, (B. Bilsons survey page 85.)
writes thus. The ancient consent of Godly Fathers, is with great care to be
scearched, and followed of us, chiefly in the rule of faith. Now seeing the
ancient Fathers make for us in this point, as has thertofore been showed, it
follows the B. of Winchester must allow of this point in controversy, seeing
it is there doctrine

Mr. Parkes against Limbom^stix page 86. cites, and approves the Council of
Lateran, as a rule of Faith, but that this Council allows of
transubstantation, Can. 1. of Confession to a Priest, Can. 21. Celebrating of
Mass, Can. 58. of Relics, can 62. may easily be seen by any man, who will
but read this Council.

D, Downam lib. 2. Antichrist. page 165. grants with S. Aug. and Victor
Vticensis, that, to adheare to the Church of Rome, was a marcke of a true
Catholic in those times. But what the Church of Rome held in those days
concerning Catholic Priesthood, and other points of controversy, it may be
seen by that, which has been heretofore said.

But not to seem tedious to your wisdoms, I will conclude this section with
the report, which one of our adversaries themselves makes of Catholics, and
of their Religion, Relation of the stat. of Relig. cap 48. the Authors words
be; There are among them, (undoubtedly) in great multitude, men virtuous,
Learned, fraught with the love of God, and the truth above all things, men of
memorable integrity of heart an affections, (cap 6.) in their Sermons much
matter, both of Faith and piety is eloquently delivered by men of wonderful
zeal and spirit, etc. (Ibidem.) The outward state and glory of their service
does engender, quicken, increase, and nourrishe the inward reverence, respect,
and devotion, which is dve unto Sovereign Majesty, and power (cap. 9.) there
deeds of charity are exceeding, (cap. 48.) we find amongst them excellent
order of government, singular helps for increase of godliness, and devotion, for
the profiting of virtue.

SECTION V. OF PRIORITIE of possession.
RIGHT wise and Learned Judges, we are not ignorant, but that Prioritie of
Possession amongst you receaueth this favor in your law, that to the party
disseised of such his possession you afford special remedy by Writ of Assise,
allowing him also the benefitt of his continual claim, to prevent descent
upon the other parties dying seysed. Therefore we require your grave
considerations concerning this point of Prioritie of Possession, how it makes
for us, and against our adversaries, even they being Judges.

The holy Fathers doubt not upon this ground of Prioritie of Possession to urge
the Succession of the Roman Bishops, as a strong and unanswerable argument
against the Heretics of those times. So Irenaeus against the Heretics of his
time; you ought (says he) to obey those, Irenaeus lib. 3. adu haereses. cap. 3.
who have their Succession from the Apostles, etc So Tertull. lib. de
praescript. aduersus haeres. let haeretikes set forth the beginnig of their
Churches, let them recount the order of their succeeding Bishops, if they can.
And after setting down in rank the Bishops of Rome from S. Peter to
Eleutherius, he says: Confingant tale quid Haeretici^ etc. let Heretics bring
forth any such thing, S. Hier. vnic. Lyr.
etc. So S. Hierom in Apol. 1. adu. Ruffinum. So Vincentius Lyrinensis adu.
Haereses. Commends the Roman Church for maintayning always, with so great
force, study, and contention, (Susceptae semel Religionis integritatem) the
purity of Religion, which it first received. So did S. Austin against
Manichaeus; these be his words: August co^t. Ep. Manich cap. 4. Tom. 7.
Multa sunt quae in Ecclesiae gremio me iustissime teuent, etc. I am held in
the besome of the Church by the Succession of Priests, and Bishops, that have
come down even from the first Seat of S. Peter the Apostle to the present
Bishop of Rome Anastasius, that holds the Seat at this day; thus he. Reyn in
his confer with M. Heart. page 443
The which saying of S. Aug. being urged by a Catholic Writer Mr. Heart against
Mr. Reynoldes; He makes him aknowledge, that the Succession of the Roman
Bishops was a proof of true Faith in the time of S. Augustine, Epiphan,
Optatus, Tertullian, and Irenaeus. The like acknowledgme^t or answer thereto
is made by many other Learned Protestants, as by Mr. Ridley in Mr Fox his Acts
and Mon. page 1359. by Mr. Jewel in his Reply to Mr. Harding. page 246. by
Calvin in his Instit. li. 4. ca. 2. Now if Possession and Succession of some
hundred years were so esteemed of by those holy Fathers, yea even by our
adversaries themselves, as a proof of true Faith and Apostolical doctrine;
Shall not the Possession with a continual, and not interrupted Succession of
239. Bishops, during a thousand six hundred and odd years, be of great force
and value? and shall not such a Prioritie of Possession receive favor in your
law? seeing it is but the last day, and as yet within your own appointed time
of Limitation, since we in this kingdom were thrust out of our former
rightful, and so long continued possession, (all contrary to the Ancient
laws of Nations) condemned of crime, and transgression in the matter of
Religion, not so much as having our accusers before us, nor place to defend us
concerning the crime.

But our Adversaries, being not able to deny this Succession of Bishops in
the Sea of Rome, for so doing it were to oppose themselves against all writers,
both sacred, and profane; they Imagine a supposed change of Religion during
the fore said succession.

Pleases it therefore your wisdoms, we show further demonstration of her not
change in this point mentioned in our application, neither in any Article of
Faith, by manifest testimony of our learned adversaries. It is generally
confessed by our Adversaries, that our now professed Cath. Faith concerning
Cath. Priesthood, and likewise all other needful points of Faith, professed
not only by the Catholics of England, but of all Nations where the Cath. Faith
is professed, is one and the same, which has been taught, and defended these
last 1000. years, even since our conversion from Paganism to the Christian
Faith by S. Austine the Monk, sent by Pope Gregory into England; that it was
most undoubtedly our now professed Cath. Faith, it remains yet to this
present day evident in two special respects: As first by our established
continuance in our Cath. Faith without any other noted, or known beginning
thereof, or of any one part thereof from this present age, up to the first time
of our first conversion, for otherwise, could the English Cronographers of
every of those mean ages make dalie mention of the other Alterations, and
changes, which happened in this Kingdom either in temporal, or Church
affairs? could could they recite in particular the noted heresies arising, (As
the heresies of Lollards, Wicklifists, and the rest, arising in England and
noted by the ancient Historiographers, and by our late Writers, Mr Stow,
Holinshead, Fox, and the Century-writers in the fifth chapter of very Ctntury,)
of foundations of so many Bishops Seas, cathedral Churches, colleges,
Monasteries, etc. (as are noted by Mr. Harrison in his description of England,)
Cap. 2. pa. 140.
Togethr also with the alteration of our temporal laws, and so many mutations
in government by Saxons, Danes, Normans; and otherwise the many battles
fought, the many rebellions attempted, the succession of Kings, and times of
their deaths, the creation of nobility, the onerthrow of noble families; and
be withal yet wholly silent in that so great change of Religion? Mr. Godwin in
his catalogue of the Bishops of England, reporting distinctly the very names,
and succession in so many several Seas of our English Catholic Bishops, even
from this present age up to the foresaid Augustine, once Bishop of Canterbury,
reporting likewise their acts good or evil; yett makes no mention of any
change or innovation brought, or assented to by any one of these many Bishops,
so much as but in any one point of our now professed Catholic Faith. Whereas,
(on the contrary part) we are able to show to them the beginning, and
contradiction of the adverse doctrine, not only of these innouatouts here in
England, as of Wicliffs and Tindall, their old and new Apostles; but likewise
of all haeresies, Innovation, Contradiction with the time and place thereof,
even since the Apostles times. Your wisdoms therefore may discern, that our
now professed Cath. doctrine, thus perpetuating it self by the hand of time
with a current, and not interrupted succession but continued even from the
Reign of King Henry the 8. up to the first time of our said conversion,
demonstrateth it self most plainly thereby, to be the same undoubted Cath.
Religion, whereto we Englishmen were first converted by S. Austin.

Secondly this point is made as yet much more certain and evident, in that
sundry of our adversaries, yea the most learned amongst them as D. Humfrey,
Humf. in Jesuit. part 2. ra^. 5. p. 5
Carrion. l. 4. in Cron. p. 567. Luke Osiander in his Epit. hist. Eccl. cent. 6.
page 289. and 290. the Century-writers of Magdeburch. Cent. 6. cap. 10. col 148
and others, do describe the particulars of Religion, so then taught, and
professed by S. Gregory and S. Augustine, writing and affirming the said
particulars, to be Altars, Vestiments, Images, Chalices, Crosses,
Candlestickes, Censars, holy Vessels, holy water, the sprinkling thereof,
Relics, Translation of Relics, Dedicating of Churches to the bones, and
ashes of Saints, consecrating of Altars, Chalices, and Corporalls, consecration
of the Font of Baptism, Chrisme, and Oil, Consecration of Churches with
sprinkling of holy water, Celebration of Mass, the Archbishops Pallatt solemn
Masse-time, Roman Mass books, a burden, (as they term it) of ceremonies,
Free will, Merit, and Justification by works, Penance, Satisfaction,
Purgatory, the Unmarried life of Priests, public invocation of Saints, and
their worship, the worshipping of Images, Exorcismes, Pardons, Vows,
Monachisme, Transubstantatio^, Prayer for the dead, the Roman Bishops claim,
and exercise of Jurisdiction, and primacy over all Churches; and lastly even
the whole Chaos of Popish superstition, (as these Protestant Writers
blasphemously term it.) So far the foresaid writers affirm these
particulars to have been taught by the Church of Rome, and in the which the
English men were first instructed by S. Augustine, sent by S. Gregory, Printed
at Basil. 1558.
as Io. Bale in Act. Rom Pont. page 44. 45. 46. says, that Augustine was sent
from Gregory to season the English Saxons with Popish faith.

Even here, (Right honorable and wise) might we make our stand, and so presume
without all further proceeding humbly to offer up to your grave considerations;
whether it were not a point of high Judgment, and altogether unworthy your
mature and learned judgments, to condemn, reject, and make penal, Catholic
Priesthood, and that faith so long continued, not only in England by English
Catholics, but likewise throughout all Christendom, whereunto we Englishmen
were converted by S. Greg. one of those Fathers, by whom Mr. Jewel, (a famous
Protestant) in his public Sermon at Paul's Cross desired to be tried, which
never the less the bouldest adversary, (as I believe) dare not perform.

Neither did our now professed Cath. Faith take its beginning in S. Gregory's
time, but reached up even to the Apostles times, which appears also by
conferring our foresaid confessed Religion, taught us by S. Greg. and S. August
with that primitive Faith, whereunto the Britains of Wales were converted in
the Apostles times: For whereas our learned adversaries do affirm, that our
neighbors the Britains of Wales received the faith of Christ by the preaching
of the Apostles, and held that Faith at Austins coming; so affirms Mr.
Camden in his Britannia, Page 40
Mr. Harrison in his description of Britannie volum. 1. p. 23 Mr. Fulke his
book against Heskin Sanders, Page 561.
etc. by Godwin in his Cata. og. of Bishops page 1. Mr. Fox in his Acts and
Mon. page 463. says: The Britains after the receiving of the Faith never
forsook it, for any manner of false preaching of others, nor for torments,
etc. Again Mr. Midleton in his Papistomastix proves by ancient Authors, that
the Gospel was taught and preached there by Simon Zelotes, Joseph of
Arimathaea, S. Paul the Apostle. More over, Beda hist 2. ca. 2. Holmist vol. 1.
li. 1. ca. 21.
it is also recorded by the Protest. writers, that upon conference betwixt S.
Augustine and the British Bishops then had at a place called in S. Bedes time,
Austin-izet, of the which place makes like mention Holinshead in his great
Chronicle of the last edition. The greatest difference then stood upon between
Austine and them, were expressly, and only mentioned to be certain tolerable
differences: viz: Their dissent from the use of the Roman Church in their
Ceremonies, or ministering of Baptism, and keeping of Easter. Beda in his
history reports, how Austine said to the Britains, viz: Li. 2. ca. 2.
Si in tribus his obtemperare mihi vultis, vt Pascha suo tempore celebretis, vt
ministerium baptizandi, quo Deo renascimur iuxta morem Romanae and Apostolicae
Ecclesiae compleatis, vt genti Angelorum vna nobiscum praedicetis verbum
Domini, caetera, quae agitis quamuis moribus nostris co^traria, aequanimiter
cuncta tolerabimus. By which their so earnest dissenting about these only
matters of smaller importance, is most plainly signified their full agreement
in all other substantial, and head points of Faith; for the Britains, who
contradicted Austine so earnestly in these so few, and smaler points, would
never have bine silent, but much the rather have with-stood him in the other so
many, and incomparably much greater points of Faith, had they in like sort
disagreed from him therein, which thing is also as yet more certainly evident,
as well in that the Britain Bishops then confessed, that it was the right way
of Justice, and righteousness, which Austine taught, (as Bede does testify;
Bed. hist li 2. ca. 2. Fulk. in his conf. of purg. pa. 335.
) As also for that Austine did, (as Mr. Fulke affirms) at the last obtain
the aid of the British Bishops to the conversion of the Saxons; The same
affirms Holinshead heretofore alleged. So evidently therefore does that
Faith, which S. Austine taught us, and which our adversaries acknowledge for
Popish, demonstrate in general to be consonante, and agreeable with that
Primitive Faith, whereunto the Britains of Wales were, (as is confessed)
converted in the Apostles times. Which point is also made evident by like
further observations of so many other remote nations, converted in the Apostles
times, as namely of Graecia, as appears by S. Paul's Epistles to sundry of
that nation, as to the Corinthians, Ephesians, Thessalonians; of Armenia, by S.
Bartholomew; of India by Saint Thomas; which although they be in some things
departed from the faith whereunto they were first converted, yet by their
remnant of Religion to this day preserved, sufficiently appears, which faith
it was whether, Catholic or Protestante, whereto they were at first
converted; witness hereof are the several public Liturgies of the Graecians,
Armenians, etc. the which, trauailers affirm and make so known and certain,
as impudency it self may not deny it. Andrew Theuet an Author of great
credit in his Cosmographie universal Printed in French at Paris Anno 1575.
Tom. 1. Fol. 137.
affirms upon the experience of his travails, that he found at Jerusalem
in the holy Passion week more then 4000. Christians of several Nations, as
Abissines, Armenians, Monouites, Georgians of Persia, Nestorians, Iacobits,
Sirians, Iauians, Butirians, Darians, men of Quinsay most remote of all the
Oriental India, etc. himself being sole among them with an Almaine of the
Roman Church; The which Nations, (says he) Chantent la Mess auec pareille
opinion sur le Real praesence du corpse and sang de nostre Seigneur come nous
la tenons, that is: Do celebrate Mass, holding the like opinion of the Real
presence of the body and blood of our Lord, as we (of the Latin Church) hold.
Nothwithstanding, (says he) that they do not acknowledge either Pope or
Cardinal, King or Emperor of ours, but profess themselves to have received
their sacred mysteries from the Apostles. The like testimony gives the
Protestante writer, Page 22
D. Philippus Nicholai in his comment. de regno Christi of these remote
Nations; by which foresaid examples of so many remote Nations so far distante
each from other, converted undoubtedly in the Apostles times, and agreeing so
far with us, and against our adversaries, in so many principal points of
Faith, is not obscurely signified, that our now Catholic Religion is that
Primitive Faith, which the Apostles themselves first planted in all Nations.

The Antiquity and Prioritie of this our Possession of our professed Catholic
doctrine thus showed and handled, but in general, is also made as yet much
more probable, or rather evident throughout each particular, by that which our
learned adversaries themselves do acknowledge, chardging the most ancient
Fathers their opinions in these points, as errors. To go through every
particular would be over tedious. But the Reader for better satisfaction may
read the Protestants Apology, Tract 1. Sect. 3. Subdi. 1
where he shall find all things at large set down, and most clearly and
evidently handled. Forbearing therefore all other points, we will give instance
only in that point undertaken chiefly in this our Application, viz: of Cath.
Priesthood.

The Priesthood of our spiritual Pastors in this out Cath. Church, who as, S.
Aug. says, are now, not improperly but properly called Priests in the Church:
De ciuit. Dei li. 20 cap 10.
and to whom therefore the word Presbiter and Sacerdos are indifferently
referred, (as likewise S. August. there affirms) in respect of the Blessed
Sacrament, which is by them offered to God under Christ the high Preeist, and
in his steed and place. (as S. Ambrose and S. Cypr. do affirm) as the Churches
external and acceptable oblatio^, Ambr. in 1. Tim. ca. 4.14. S. Cypr. li. 2
Ep. 3
and acknowledged by learned Protestants to have been for such accordingly
offered, not only for these thousand years last past, but also for so many
other praecedent Ages.

For these last thousand years it is a general opinion amongst Protestants.
Fol. 344.
Mr. Beacon in his Treatise entitled, The Relics of Rome, affirms saying,
The Mass was fully finished by Gregory the first about Anno 600 etc. And from
Charles the Great unto Charles the 5. the Mass reigned, as a most mighty
Queen in all the Churches of the west part of the world. Melancth. lib. 4.
Fol. 186.
Chronic. in Henr. 4 says of S. Greg. that he allowed by public authority the
sacrifice of Christ's Body and Blood, not only for the living, but also for the
dead; The Same is affirmed by many other Protestante writers. Before Gregory,
was Pelagius, whom Masculus loc. com. de Caena Domini, page 336. And Mr.
Simonds upon the Revel. page 81. (both of them being Protestante writers) do
directly charge with the opinion of the Mass helping the dead. Symachus was
Bishop of Rome Anno 501. of whom the Century-writers say, Cent. 6. ca. 10.
col. 664. Fol. 27.
Notas Antichristi and hic habuit, Missam enim in formam redigit. Before him
was S. Leo Anno 440. of whom Mr. Bale in his Pageant of Popes says: Leo the
first allowed the sacrifice of the Mass, etc. Before Leo was the fourth and
fifth, Council of Carthage at which was present S. Augustine* the one reproved
by Pelargus in his Schola fidei for allowing prayer, Page 13.
and Mass for the dead, the other by Luke Osiander cent, 4 page 16. for that
in the 27. Canon of this fourth Council mention was made of Prayers, and
oblations for the dead, Before these Counsels was S. Ambrose Anno 370. whom
the Cent. writers cent. 4. ca. 4. col. 295. Do charge with not writing well de
Transubstantiatione and applicatione pro mortuis. Before him was Gregory Nissen
of the Greek Church Anno 340, whom Andraeas Crastonius in his book against
Bellarmine charge for allowing the Euchariste to be likewise a sacrifice.
Crasto. de opificio Missae. lib. 1. Sect 146.
Also S. Cyrill. of Jerusalem another Father of the Greeks flourished Anno
320. Holpinianus charge him for his acknowledgment of Mass, Hosp. in Hist.
Sacram. page 167.
and Prayer for the dead. Before these times lived S. Cyprian Anno 240. of
whom the Cent. writers do say: cent. 3. cap. 4. col. 89. Sacerdotem vice
Christi fungi in Coena Domini superstitiose asserit Cyprianus. The same
affirms Mr. Fulk. against Sanders: page, 100 Before him lived Tertullian Anno
220. whom Osiander cent. 3. lib. 1. cap. 5. and Mr. Fulk in his Conf. of Purg.
pa, 265. do charge for allowing of Mass for the dead. Before him was Irenaeus
Anno 170. whom Calvin charge for affirming the sacrifice of Melchisedech to
have been a figure of the sacrifice of the Mass. Call lib. de vera Eccl. refor.
Cent 2. cap. 4. col. 63.
Before him lived Ignatius, the Apostles undoubted Scoller Anno 90 whom the
Cent. writers do charge for saying, that it was not lawful to offer, or to
sacrifice without a Bishop. Lastly Mr. Beacon in his relics of Rome, being a
great divine amongst our Adversaries, affirms seriously saying, Fol. 344.
the Mass was begotten, conceived, and borne anon after the Apostles times, if
all be true that Historiographers do write. This same says Sebastianus
Francus; Heb Ep. de abrog stat. Eccl.
and Hospinianus in Hist. Sacram. li. 1. ca. 6. page 20. affirms, that in the
very Apostles times this was the opinion of many men.

Now therefore may it vouch safe your wisdoms to consider duly this Priority
of our possession, and successiue continuance of this our Cath. doctrine,
deduced from the Apostles times, even our Enemies being Judges: And take heed
of that saying of S. Aug. in no, and vet. Test. quaest. no. Heretics, (says
he) do trouble and break the order of succeeding Bishops begun by S. Petr.
and brought down by offspring, one Bishop succeeding another, and so challenge
unto themselves a certain order with out beginning.

SECTION VI. OF PRAESCRIPTION.
IF Praescription it self, whereof no memory occurreth to the contrary, be a
matter of any importance, with your honors, (Right grave and Learned Judges)
you shall then here find our now professed Catholic Religion deduced from the
Apostles times, and by your learned writers confessed. Surely I persuade my
self that if any one Baron, Earl, or Duke in England could show, but half of
these years, we can show for the continuance and possession of any temporal
state, Lordship, or land in England, he would highly esteem thereof, and thereby
make a glorious defense against any wrangling companion, that should pretend
the same, and deprive him thereof, if he should truly say, and prove, (as we do
the cause of our Church;) neither were it credible, that the Judges of his
cause should give the definitive against him; But no man can prescribe any such
time in temporal matters, and therefore are they well called temporal, for
that they change in a little time; No Dukedom or Earldom, continuing lightly
3. or 4. generations together in any one name or family, as may be easily seen
in Camdens story, where he takes upon him to recount the Earls, and Dukes
that had their states and titles over such a shire. But, as for matters of
Religion, Almighty God has given another manner of force, unto succession both
of men and faith; as for example, in the law of nature he made the same to
endure, by only tradition without writing for more then 2500. years under the
Ancient Patriarchs before, and after the Flood of Noe. And afterward again in
the written law, the jews continued the possession of their religion by
succession of Bishops, and Ecclesiastical Governors from Moses unto Christ
above 1500. years, not withstanding of all the variety of times, and
calamities. And no less from Christ to our age, has he continued the same in
a much more gracious sort, and manner, notwithstanding so many mutations, both
in the Roman Empire, and all other Realms and Kingdoms, and yet ever has
succession of Pastors and union of faith remained,

First therefore our adversaries will not stick upon the first 100. years,
which reached to S. Gregory's time, but will grant unto us that the Mass, and
Catholic Priesthood was a general doctrine throughout the whole world. Pow.
Page 105.
So Mr. Powell in his considerations of the Papish reasons: I grant (says he)
that from the year of Christ 605. the professant company of popery has been
very visible, and perspicuous. Perk. pa. 307.
Mr. Perkins in his exposition of the creed affirms, that from Gregory's
days to Luthers, (which was 900. years) the Popish heresy had spredd it self
over the whole earth. The like acknowledgement does make Simon de Voyon, Mr.
Fulk and others heretofore cited.

Nap. page 68.
Mr. Napper, that so greatly commended adversary, in his Treatise upon the
Revel. dedicated to the K. Majesty, granted us 1260. years of prescription,
saying, that betwixt the year of Christ 300. and 316. Anti-christia^ reign
began reigning universally, and without any debatable contradictio^ 1260.
years; and the same affirms Mr. Brocard upon the revelation Mr. Gifford
against the Brownists page 38. grants us 1300, Fo. 110.
and odder years saying: to offer oblation for the dead was general in the
Church long before the days of S. Austine, as appears in S. Cyprian. and
Tertull. who lived about the year 240. Hamelmannus de Traditionibus, Fol 741.
reaches up to S. Denis of Areopag. who lived in the in the Apostles times,
saying, that Denis did write much of Churches, of Altars, of places sanctified,
of Consecrations, Monks, and sundry Ceremonies. Sebastianus Francus Epist. de
abrogandis statut. Eccles. says, that immediately after the Apostles times the
Mass begun. Hospinianus in hist. Sacram. lib. 1. ca. 6. affirms, that it was
even in the Apostles times, they being yet alive. Mr. Ascham, a prime
protestant in his Apol. pro caena Dom. page 31. acknowledged, that no beginning
thereof can. be showed. Mr. Gab. Powell, page 43. in his consideration of the
Papists Supplication; being provoked; that, if our Catholic doctrine be
error, then to tell us when it came in? who was the Author of it? etc.
Answers thereto acknowledging and saying. We cannot tell by whom, or at what
time the Enemy did sow it, neither indeed do we know, who was the first Author
of every one of your blasphemous opinions. And Mr. Whitaker in Resp. ad Camp.
rat. 7. page 101. confesses, that the Roman Churches change cannot easily be
told.

Now if that rule, Aug Ep. 118.
or proof of Apostolical doctrine of S. Aug. be true: viz. Whatsoever opinion
is not known to have begun since the Apostles times, the same is not new or
secondary, but received, it is original from the Apostles themselves. The
which Rule says Mr. Whitgift, (some times Archb of Canterb.) in his defense
page 352. was of credit with the writers of our time, namely with Mr.
Zuinglius, Mr. Calvin, and Mr. Gualter; and surely, (says he) I think no
learned man does dissent from them: the which Rule he likewise urges against
Mr. Cartwright his Puritan Brother, in defense of the names Metropolitanes,
Cartwr. ag. whilg. page ^03. and 352.
and Bishops, to whom Mr. Cartwr. answeareth saying. I appeal to the
Judgment of all men, if this be not to bring in Popery again, to allow of S.
Augustins saying, etc. Further he affirms, that thereby a window is open to
bring in all Popery. Therefore seeing, according to S. Augustins rule, the
opinion and doctrine, whose beginning is not known, and whose Antiquity cannot
be found, is a proof of Apostolic Doctrine; it follows, that the opinion,
whose beginning is known, the Antiquity and Author thereof found, is a
sufficient proof of false doctrine. And hence it is that S. Hierome says: To
reduce an heresy to a beginning is a confutation of it. Hiero. ad Clesiphont.
And seeing, that our adversaries ca^ show no beginning or Author of the
foresaid point of Catholic Priesthood, (yea not of any one necessary, and
essential Article of Catholic doctrine;) and on the other part, seeing we ca^
reduce every point of adverse doctrine to his beginning, Author, time and
place from Christ to this day, according to the promise made by God himself to
his Catholic Church, that Pastors, Ephesians. 4.12. Isa. 6^.6.
and Doctors must be in the Church till the Consummation of Saints, who shall be
as watchmen all the day and all the night, for ever they shall not hold their
peace, but shall always resist false opinions, and innouations with open
reprehension. Consequently it follows, this our Catholic doctrine, whereto we
were so many Ages since converted, to be no new or secondary, since the
Apostles times, but truly primitive, and undoubtedly Apostolic. And
contrariwise, our adversaries doctrine to be new, secondary, false, and
Apostaticke. And this concerning Praescription.

SECTION VII. OF CONTINVALL CLAIM.
IF Continual Claim be a matter amongst you, whereby Right and title are
preserved: It is more then evident, that this our Catholic Church has been
ever waking, and ready, even within the year, and day so to preserve her right
in this, and other points, against all Sects and heresies whatsoever, and
howsoever divided otherwise among themselves, did generally conspire to oppose
themselves, as against their capital enemy. This is evident to this day in
Anabaptists, Swenckfeldians, Libertines, Antrinitarians, etc. Who think the
reformation of Religion to consist specially in the abnegation of our Catholic
Faith, terming themselves in such respect reformed Churches, and every one of
them thinking themselves so much more reformed then others, by how much they
are further, then others, dissenting from our Catholic Religion, it needs no
better proof, then that of the Protestants and Puritanes in England. We have
not been wanting to this Continual Claim before Luthers time, by reason of
our former confessed quiet possession even in the judgment of our very
adversaries. And our need since his time has been but in some countries, in
which our Claim, has been so daily continued, as we hold it needless to
prove the same: so that our adversaries are forced to say, their Church was for
many years invisible, contrary to that promise made by God himself to his
Church, Esaias 62.2.
saying: upon thy Walls o Jerusalem have I set watchmen all the day and
night, for ever they shall not be silent.

Page 191. 188.
Mr. Napper in his book upon the Revelation dedicated to the Kings Majesty,
affirms, that this abiding of Gods Temple so long latent, and obscure is most
certain: Noe true visible Church, nor sincere doctrine publicly opened, that
any man may have access unto. Again, from the year of Christ 316. Page 161.
God has withdrawn his Church from open assemblies into the hearts of
particular godly men, where it abode invisible to these our days, the space of
1260. years, acknowledging likewise, that during the foresaid space of 1260
years, the Catholic Roman Church did possess the foresaid Continual
Claim, affirming that from Constantines time till those our days even 1260.
years the Pope, and his Clergy have possessed the outward visible Church of
Christians. Page 43.
Mr. Gab. Powell in his consideration of the Papists supplication, says: We
cannot tell by whom, or at what time the enemy did sow, etc. (meaning our
Catholic doctrine.) Mr. Fulk. in his Reioined, Page 265.
being urged with this demand, I answer (quoth he) my text says it was a
mystery not revealed, and therefore could not be at the first preached against.
And Mr. D. Field of the Church answers our demand in this manner, saying:
Page 8^.
The errors of the Church of Rome were so brought in, that both they, that
were the Authors of them, and others, that never fell into them were of one
Communion, and therefore it is most absurd to require us to show these
circumstances, viz: concerning any beginning of our Catholic doctrine since
the Apostles times. But I appeal to your honors grave Judgments, if the answer
of this divine be not more absurd, then the demand. But such euasorie
arguments as these, be all we can get of our Adversaries.

Hier. 33.18.
The Prophet Hieremie speaking of the Pastors of Gods Church, says: that they
shall be multiplied to minister unto him, not with interrupted seaso^s, but
continually even as the Prophet Isay says, from month to month, Isa. 66.21.
Dan. 2.44.
and from Sabbath to Sabbath: neither, (says Daniell) shall this kingdom of
the Church be given over to another people, but shall stand for ever, Isay. 60.
Again Isay says in plain terms, that Kings shall minister unto the Church,
and her grates shall be continually open, neither day nor night shall they be
shutt, that men may bring to her the riches of the Gentiles. Hence it is, that
one of your writers confesses, The saying of one of their late writers.
that if our faith has been interrupted, (quoth he) since Christ's time so much
as one year, month, or day-were sufficient to prove us no part of the Church
of God, so Mr. White in his book, the way to the true Church, page 86.

Matthew. 16.
The like promises are mentioned in the new Testament: Upon this Rock, (says
our Savior) will I build my Church, and hell gates shall not prevail against
it. Again: Lo I am with you even to the consummation of the world. And S.
Paul, Matthew. vlt.
speaking of the privileges granted to the Church, says* He gave some
Apostles, and some Prophets, Ephesians. 4.
and other some Evangelists, and other some Pastors and Doctors to the
consummation of the Saints, unto the work of the ministry, unto the edifying
of the body of Christ, until we meet all unto the unity of faith, and
knowledge of the love of God into a perfect man, into the measure of the age of
the fullness of Christ: That is, according to all Expositors even Protestants,
Call. Inst ca. 8. Melan. in loc. com. Fulk. against the Rhem. Testam.
unto the worlds end. But those ministerial offices of Pastors and Doctors,
etc. cannot be exercised, where the Pastors know not their sheep, nor the
sheep their Pastors; which could not be when the Church was invisible, and
withdrawn from open assemblies to the hearts of particular godly men for the
space of 1260. years, as Mr. Napper affirms on the revel, page 161. Neither
can it be said, which D. Field in his foresaid Answer affirms, that they, who
where of the true Church, and they that were not, were of one Communion: seeing
that no man can be saved, that inwardly houldeth one Religion and onwardly
professes another, as our Savior teaches Math. 10, and the Apost. Romans 10.
For so Mr. D. Field will have me^ to be in the true Church, and yet not be
saved. Which implies a flat contradiction, and so he imagines absurdities in
other men's sayings, but he sees not the contradictions in his own. If S.
Austine were alive, he would deal in no better terms with these our
adversaries, then he did disputing against the Donatists for maintaining of a
pretended invisible Church: these be his words: Aug. in Psa 101.
Belike (says he) that Church, which was the Church of all Nations, is now no
more, she is gone, she is lost, this say they that are not in her; o impudent
speech, she is not, because you are not in her; take heed least thou thy self
be not therefore, for she shall be, though thou be not: And then does he bring in
the Church speaking thus: How long time shall I be in this world? Tell me for
their sakes that say, there has been a Church, but now there is none, she is
become Apostata, she is banished away from all nations. It was showed me. Who
showed me? even the way himself. When? Lo I am with you even to the
consummation of the world. Neither can it be said, that S. Austine speaks of
a Church invisible, for that never to have perished the Donatists did willingly
admit, as here also he testifies. What other argument (I pray you) did Luther
use against the Jews to prove, that the Messiah was come, but that these
promises of the Prophets were fulfilled, not in their Sinagogs, which were for
so long time together scattered, these be Luthers words. Quomodo hoc
quadrabit, Luther. lib. de Iudae is Tom. 7. printed at Wittemb.
legem ipsorum esse duraturam in aeternum, cum iam annis plus 1500. sacerdotium
templum, cultus, omnia deleta and funditus euersa iaceant, supra modum and
vehementer ridiculum est, quod nos Gentes, Iudaei persuadere volunt ad suam
inter-mortuam absoletam legem, quae nunc per annos 1500, antiquata and abolita
est, etc. Was not this pretended latencie and Inuisibility cause of the revolt
of sundry of the learnedest men among our adversaries? Bernardine Ochine, (whom
all Italy could not match for learning, Call. lib. de sca^d.
as Calvin says) having entered but into examination of this forsaid scruple,
began here upon to stagger, and become perplexed, saying: When I did consider
how Christ by his power, wisdom, Bern. Ochin. in praef. suorum Dialog.
and goodness had founded and estabished his Church, washed it with his blood,
and enriched it with his spirit; and again I had discerned, how the same was
utterly over thrown, I could not but wonder, and being desirous to know the
cause, I found there had been Popes, In so much as he proceeded from this
conceit of the Popes prevailing, further to teach Circumcision and Poligamie;
in defense of the which last point, he wrote a book in Italian. In hist.
Georgij David is printed at Anno 1568.
David George the Hollander, considering the promises made by God himself of
the continuance of his Church, and not fulfilled in the Protestants Church,
became a blasphemours Apostata, affirming, our B. Savior to be a seducer:
saying; If the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles had been true and perfect,
the Church, which they planted, etc. should have continued, etc. The like
befell unto Sebastian Castalion a learned Caluinist, Castal. in the preface to
his Latin Bible.
who staggering in his Religion, fell to doubtful searches of our Christian
Faith. Neither is England wanting examples of diverse Professors, who have in
the end denied the divinity of Christ, whereof in Q. Elizabeth's time two were
burned at Norwich. Rogers of the Church of England page 9.
By these examples your VVisedomes may easily perceive the inueterate, and more
then Vatinian hatred, wherewith prejudice of opinion has so strongly possessed
our Adversaries against our Church and Religion, that not discerning themselves
able to justify their own Church in accomplishment hitherto of those
praedictions, which are fore told of Christ's true Church, many and not the
meanest of them: yea rather then they would yeald to preserve in this common
danger their Christian profession by acknowledgment of our Catholic Church, in
which the said praedictions are most clearly accomplished, have finally, (o
tempora! o mores!) betaken themselves to most dreadful Apostasy.

Therefore we appeal to your grave Judgment and serious considerations, if
this solate entry (since King Henry the 8. time only) made by our adversaries
at their own hand, on this our possession, be not against all course of law,
and they convict of secret and stolen Disseisnie. And thus much briefly
concerning Continual Claim.

SECTION VIII. OF THE DOVBTFVLNESSE of the statute law.
MOREOVER if where the letter of your Statute law appears to be in some cases
doubtful, you hold that sense and understanding thereof for most reasonable,
which is found most agreeable with the known answerable practice of the ensuing
times. Then your Wisdoms shall find the doubtful letter, (whether of
scripture, or of certain obscure sayings of the Fathers) made plain on our
part by the answerable practice of all succeeding times concerning this point
of Catholic Priesthood, (and other points of our forsaid Catholic doctrine)
by consent of Counsels, judgment of Fathers, and confession of our
adversaries, as has been most plainly heretofore throughout demonstrated. For
what fairer evidences can be desired, then the consent of 18. General
Counsels, viz: of Nice under Pope Siluester about the year 325. at the which
were present 318. Bishops: Of Constantinople the first under Pope Damasus in
the year 384. Of Ephesus the first under Pope Caelestine about the year 434.
at the which were present 220 Prelates: Of Calcedon under Pope Leo the great
about the year 454. at which were present 630. Bishops. Of Constantinople in
the year 553. ended under Pope Vigilio, at which were present 165. Bishops: Of
Constantinople the 3. in the year 681. under Pope Agathon; being there
present. 290. Bishops: Of Nice the 2. under Pope Adrian in the year 781. there
being present 370. Bishops: Of Constantinople the 4. in the year 819. under
Pope Adrian the 2. at which were present 375. Bishops: Of Lateran the first
under Pope Calist the 2. in the year 1119. at which were present ^^00.
Bishops. The 3. Council of Lateran under Alexander the 3. in the year 1180.
there being present 300. Bishops: The 4. Council of Lateran under Pope
Innocent 3. in the year 1215. in which were present 1200. Bishops: The first
Counsel of Lions under Innocent 4, in the year 1245. at which were present
140. Bishops. The 2. Council of Lions in the year 1274. under Pope Greg. the
10. being present there 700. Bishops. The Council of Vienna under Clement the
5. in the year 1311. there being present 300. Bishops: The Council of
Florence under Eugenius the 4. in the year 1459. there being present 141.
Bishops. The 5. Council of Lateran under Pope Leo the 10. in the year 1517.
being present 114. Bishops. The Council of Trent in the year 1545. under Paul
the 3. and continued under Julius the 4. Marcellus the 2. and Paull the 4. and
finished under Pius the 4. in the year 1563. These be all General and
approved Counsels, one succeeding another from age to age. Neither were there
wanting throughout all these Centuries of years, Fathers and Doctors, who did
maintain this our Catholic doctrine. For in the 1 Century were Martial,
Denis of Areopag. who were in the first hundred years after Christ: In the 2.
Centurie Ignatius, Policarpus, Justinius, Irenaeus: In the 3. Cent. were Clemens
Alex, Cyprianus, Arnobius. In the 4. Cent. Lactantius, Victor, Afer, Hilarins,
Athanasius, Cyrillus Basilius, Epiphanius, Gregorius Niss, Gregorius Nazian.
Optatus, Ambros. Ruffinus. In the 5. Cent. were Chrysostomus, Hieronimus,
Augustinus, Paulinus, Cassianus, Theodoretus, Chrysologus, Hilarious, Leo
Magnus, Prosper, Fulgentius In the 6. Cent. were Eusebius Emiss. Cassiodorus,
Climacus, Gregorius Turonensis, Euagarius, Gregorius Magnus. In the 7. Cent.
Leontius, Sophronius, Isidorus Hispal. Leander, Branlius, Hildephonsus. In the
8. Cent, Venerabilis Beda, Ioannes Damascenus, Paulus Diaconus, Alcuinus,
Vsuardus, Paulinus Aquiliensis. In the 9. Cent. Haymo, Rabanus, Ioannes
Diaconus, Theophilactus, Anastasius, Hincmarus. In the 10. Cent. Odo cluniac.
Ado Viennensis, Lintprandus, Radulphus, Rathodius, Abbas Floriacensis. In the
11. Cent, Petrus Damianus, Humbertus, Lanfrancus, Anselmus, Algerus, Oecumen.
Bruno, Iuo. In the 12. Cent. cedrenus, Rupertus, Bernardus, Euthymius,
Gratianus, Richardus de S. Victore. In the 13. Cent. caesarius, Alexander de
Hales, Albertus, Thomas Aquinas, cantipratensis, Durandus, Scotus, Bonauentura.
In the 14. Cent. Nicephorus, Paludanus, Aureolus, Occam, Lyranus. In the 15.
Cent. Thomas de Kemp Laur. Iustinianus, Bernardinns, Bessarius, Tostanis. In
the 16. Cent, Ioannes Eccius, Thomas Morus, Roffensis, A castro, Sanderus,
Hosius, Alanus, Driedo, Baronius, Bellarminus, Suarez, Salmeron, and many
others; by the testimonies of these Fathers renowned for their virtue, piety,
and learning throughout all the world, (even our adversaries being Judges)
their works bearing witness, you shall find the doubtful letter of Scripture
or of certain obscure sayings of some Fathers made plain by the answerable
practice of all these precedent ages, concerning this point of Cath.
Priesthood, yea they being Priests themselves. Now as Tertullian lib. praescr.
adu. haeres, confingant tale quid haeretici. Let heretics devise such a
prooffe.

SECTION IX. OF HIGH COVRTES of Judgment.
BESIDES all this, there are established with you for the final ending of all
arising controversies and suites of law, high Courts of Judgment and parliament
to give definitine sentence; and the same so given, not by the law it self, but
by your selves, placed as Judges to pronounce and determine, what is the law,
against which sentence so once orderly given in your highest court of
Judgment, and perliament, no writ of error or appeal lies, whereby to
support the party so convicted in the further humor of his unsatisfied and
endless contention. Therefore if high Courts and perliament be authentical,
and of so much credit with you, then you shall find on our behalf so many
general Counsels, judgment of Fathers, (even in the time of the primitive
Church) concerning this point of Catholic Priesthood, (and other points of
controversy) pronunced and determined against Nouellists, and heretics of
those ancient times. S. Ambrose witnesses of the Nouatians, Lib. 1. de Paen.
cap. 2.
who denied, that Priests could remit sins; And S. Augustine of Aerius for
denying the sacrifice of the Eucharist for the dead; Haer. 53.
For the which D. Field a Protestant divine says, Field of the Chur. l. 3. c.
29. page 138.
that Aerius was justly condemned. All these twelve Counsels before alleged
by us in setting down of our Jury are most plain in this point, and need no
more proof, then what has been there said. Now if one high Court or
parliament gathered of the most sufficient, and wisest men of one Kingdom be
of so great force, that no place of contention, writ of error or appeal
remains to the party once convicted, shall not a general Council gathered,
not of the wisest and learnedest men of one Kingdom only, but of many
Kingdoms, and assisted by the holy Ghost, (o shall it not) have no force, nor
no credit for the final ending of arrising controversies, and contentions in
matters of Religion? but notwithstanding the sentence pronounced and arrest
given, yet it shall be lawful for every one to follow his private judgment,
appealing to the written law of only Scripture; the which course your own
answerable grounds, and principles do sufficiently inform you, that their
endeavor herein is no other then absurd, preposterous, and infinitely
contentious. Who is so blind, as sees not this to be the very same escape,
and flight of the Nouellists of these our times? Thus Mr. Cartwright, (the
Puritan Brother in Mr VVhitgifts defense page 111.) auoydeth the Protestants
arguments. In this sort is Beza himself noted to euade, saying; Bancro. survey.
page 219.
If any shall oppose against my exposition of the authority of certain of the
Ancient Fathers: ad verbum Dei prouoco. I do appeal to the word. Where upon
Mr. Bancroff* sometimes Bish. of Canterb* infers, saying: How crankis Beza
with the ancient Fathers? Thus the Brownistes of Amsterdam (in their Apology
page 103.) labor to shrowde themselves. Thus do the Anabaptists seek to
escape. Thus also does Socimus give the slip in defense of his error against
the divinity of Christ, saying to his Protest. Socimus in lib. de Christi
natura contra Volanu^ page 2.
aduersarij Volanus: we propound to us in the question none for Master or
Interpreter, but only the holy Ghost, etc. We do not think, that we are to
stand to Judgment of any man, though never so learned; of any Counsels,
though in show never so holy and lawfully assembled; of any visible Church,
though never so perfect and universal, etc. thus he.

This kind of tergiuersation under pretense of only Scripture, is, and has
been the ordinary euasio^, whereby almost all Nouellists of present, and former
times have dalie exempted themselves from all authority of contrary
Judgment. Hence it is, that there be so many Sects amongst the Protestants in
England, and other countries. Hence it is, that many of the books of the
scripture it self are rejected, even by the chiefest Protestants, as S. Paul's
Epistle to the Hebrews, the Epistle of S. James, and S. Jude, the 2. of S.
Peter, the 2. and 3. of S. John, and the Apocalipse, by Luther, Brentius,
Kemnitius, and the Magdeburgians. Hence it is, that the manifold, variable, and
different translations of Scripture, the translation of the new Testament by
Luther is condemned by Zuinglius, saying: ad Lutherum de Sacram. page 412. Thou
Luther do corrupt the word of God, Hospin. in hist. Sacram. Part altera. fol
183. Beza in resp. Castal. Beza in Annot. in Matt.
etc. Luther in like manner does reject the translations of Zuinglius. The
translation set forth by Oecolampadinis, and the Divines of Basile is reproved
by Beza, calling it wicked, and altogether differing from the mind of the Holy
Ghost, The translation of Castalio, so much commended by Protestants, is
condemned by Beza. As being sacrilegious, wicked, and Ethnicall. And concerning
Caluines translation, the learned Protestant Writer Carolus Molinaeus in
translat. Test. noui part. 12, fol. 110. says thereof; Calvin in his Harmony
makes the text of the Gospel to leap up and down, he uses violence to the
letter of the Gospel, and besides this, adds to the Text. As touching Beza
his translation, the foresaid Molinaeus ibidem part. 20 30. etc. says of him;
He actually changed the text, And Castalio, that learned Caluinist says of
Beza, that to note all his errors in translation would require a great volume.
All which confirms the Kings Majesty's Grave and learned censure in thinking
the Geneua translation to be worst of all. In the sum of the confer. before the
K. Majesty, page 46.
And concerning the English translations; Mr. Carleil, in his book that Christ
descended not in to hell, page 116. says: that they have depraved the sense,
obscured the truth, and deceived the ignorant, that in many places they do
detort the scriptures from the right sense, they show themselves to love
darkness more then light, falsehood more then truth. The Ministers of Lincolue
diocese in the abridgement of their book to his Majesty, give their like
public testimony, tearming the English translation, that takes away from the
text, that adds to the text, etc. a translation which is absurd and
senseless. And the Puritanes in their petition to his Majesty page 76. do
charge the translation of the Psalms to differ from the truth of the Hebrew in
addition, substraction, and alteration in 200. places at the least: in so much
as they do therefore profess to rest doubtful, whether a man with a safe
conscience may subscribe thereunto. Not without cause did his Majesty therefore
affirm in the conference before him page 46. that he could never yet see a
Bible well translated in English. And as our learned adversaries do thus agree
to disagree in their own translations mutually condemning each other, so also
have they upon a second and more due consideration afforded honorable testimony
even of our vulgar Latin translation had from Rome Beza annot. in 1 cap Luc.
verse. 1. says: The old Interpreter, (meaning our Latin edition) seems to
have interpreted the holy books with marvelous sincerity and Religion.
Conrad. praefat. in Psalt. Couelin his Answer to Burges page 94.
The which religious observation is acknowledged by D. Humfrey de rat.
interpret. page 74. by Carolus Molinaeus, by Conrardus Pelicanus, by D. Couel,
and other Protestants.

Wherefore justly may we exclaim with S. Aug. cont. Donatist. cap. 24. saying:
O truth more forcible to wring out confession, then is any rack or torment!

And for so much, (most honorable Lords and grave Lawiers) as it is the course
of our adversaries, under the deceiptfull veil of this their so naked,
uncertain, and doubtful pretense of only scripture, to undertake liberty of
rejecting all proofs, and arguments drawn from the authority of all general
Counsels, though never so ancient, never so universal, and never so lawfully
assembled; from the Judgment and consent of the Fathers, though never so
learned, never so holy, and neur so ancient; from the practice of the Church
though never so continual never so agreeable, never so universal, and never so
primitive; And so thereby in the end making themselves, and every of their
followers Judges both of Scriptures, and of all Interpreters, restrayning all
things to their co^ferring of places, which they can in their own private
opinion, collect to be true; In so much that we may say with S. Hierome Epist.
ad Paulinum: Sola Scriptura ars est, quam sibi passim omnes vendicant, hanc
garrula anus, hanc delirus senex, hanc Sophista verbosus, hanc vniuersi
praesumunt, lacerant, docent antequam discant. The Scripture only is an art
(or science) which every one challenges to themselves, this the chatting old
wife, this the doting oldman, this the prating Sophister, this every body
presumes, rent, and teach before they learn. Again writing against the
Luciferians, tom. 3. he says: Nec sibi blandiantur, si de scripturarum
capitulis videntur sibi affimare quod dicunt, cum and Diabolus de Scripturis
aliqua sit locutus, and scripturae non in legendo, sed intelligendo consistant.
Neither is this different from the public doctrine thus decreed in the 20.
article of their Religion* The Church (say they) has power to decree rites or
ceremonies, and authority in controversies of Faith.

I appeal therefore to your learned Judgment, that if your temporal high
Court and parliame^te be of such force, that men are to rest and rely on the
Judgment given, and sentence once pronounced, our spiritual high Courts of
General, National, and Provincial Counsels, unity of the Church, and
consent of the Fathers, be any ways inferior to your temporal high courts,
and to have no authority, no force, to give out Judgment, pronounce sentence,
and decide controversies, so that no writ of error or appeal lies, whereby to
support the party so convicted in the further humor of his unsatisfied and
endless contention.

And to omit much other correspondence that may be alleged, and applied even
to your own principles, not to seem offensive or tedious, we will here
briefly insinuate some other proofs, of no less force then the precedents.

SECTION X. OTHER PROOFS.
VOVCHsafe therefore, (Grave and learned) to add unto that, which has been
spoken, the answerable doctrine of these religious, and ancient Jews, (who
lived before Christ's coming) foretelling and writing (by special instinct)
concerning our Cath. Church, and B. Sacrifice commonly termed the Mass, and
that so plainly, that as Galatinus a learned catholic in his, arcanis
Catholicae veritatis, lib. 2. cap. 3. affirms, they may be thought not so
much to have foretold things to come, as to have reported Evangelical things
already done. To this end says Rabbi Cahana: The Sacrifice, Rabbi Cahana ad
cap. 49. Genesis Verse. 2.
which shall be offered of wine, shall not only be changed into the substance of
the blood of the Messiah, but also into the substance of his body. The
Sacrifice, which shall be of bread, notwithstanding that it be white as milk,
shall be converted into the substance of the body of the Messiah. Rabbi Judas,
In like manner Rabbi Judas in 23. Exodus says: The bread shall be changed, when
it shall be sacrificed, from the substance of bread in to the substance of the
body of the Messiah, who shall descend from heaven, and he himself shall be the
sacrifice. Rabbi Simeon, Rabbi Simeon.
says: in libro de reuelatione secretorum: The Sacrifice, which after the
Messiah his coming, Priests shall make, etc. they shall make it of bread and
wine, etc. and that sacrifice, which shall be celebrated upon every altar, shall be
turned into the body of the Messiah. Rabbi Barachias in Ecclesiast. Rabbi
Barach.
teaches, that at the coming of the Messiah food shall come from heaven little
a like cake; This same is affirmed by Rabbi Ionathas lib. collect. in Psalm. 72.
Rabbi Ionathas. Rabbi Moses.
and Rabbi Hardarsan in Psalm. 136. and also by others alleged by Petrus
Galatinus de arcanis Catholicae veritatis. These Rabbines affirm likewise,
that Melchisedechs offering of bread and wine in sacrifice, was a prefiguration
of that Sacrifice, which was to be offered after the Messiah his coming. So
Rabbi Samuel in Bereschith in cap. 14. Rabbi Samuel.
Genes. auerreth, saying: Mechisedech set forth the acts of Priesthood, for he
sacrificed bread and wine to the Holy God. Rabbi Phinees
Rabbi Phinees ibidem, says: In the time of the Messiah all sacrifice shall
cease, but the sacrifice of bread and wine shall not cease, etc. As it is said
Psalm. 110. Thou art a Priest for ever according to the Order of Melchisedech.
The Same affirms Rabbi Moses Hardarsan, ibid. in cap. 14. Genes This point is
so evident in the old Jewish Rabbis, that Theodorus Bibliander, (a Protestant
of great fame) lib. 2. de SS. Trinit. page 89. doubted not accordingly to
confess the same; In so much also as the ancient Fathers of the primitive
Church are likewise by our learned adversaries, (as Mr. Fulk against Heskins
page 99. Andreas Crastonius, de opific. Missae, lib. 1. page 28. sect. 66.
confessed to have believed accordingly the foresaid sacrifice of Melchisedech.

Neither are the Prophets wanting in this point foretelling a Priesthood and
sacrifice; and the same, not the offering upon the Cross, which is now an act
of Sacrifice transitory and past, but to continue for ever; and not in bloody
manner, but according to the order of Melchisedech. Psalm. 10. Malach. ca. 1.10.
So the Prophet Malachy fore showing the rejecting of the Legal Priesthood and
sacrifice, foretells of the now Sacrifice of the Christian Gentiles to
succeed, which he terms a clean Oblation; which is the Sacrifice of the
Mass. The Prophet Daniell fore showing likewise the end of the world and
Antichrists coming, Dan. ca. 12.11.
foretells in like manner that as then the daily Sacrifice shall be taken away;
which one Sacrifice cannot be understood of the many spiritual sacrifices of
prayer and thanksgiving; for that Antichrists persecution shall rather
increase, then take these away. Neither can Malachies prediction of that one
Oblation be taken to signify those said spiritual sacrifices, because that
they are many, and but improperly called Sacrifices, or were not new or
peculiar only to the Gentills, but were also belonging to those of the old
Testament, no less then now are to us, Adoration, invocation, Psalms,
Festival days, fasting, alms deeds, and the like. The Prophet Isay
foretelling the Ecclesiastical Ministers of the new Testament terms them
Priests, which has relation to a sacrifice.

More over the words of the Evangelist Matthew. 26.28. Mar 14.24. Luk 22.19.20.
And of S. Paul. 1. Cor. 11.24. are literally answerable hereunto, saying: not
that, which (shall be) given or offered; but, which (is) given: and not (to you,)
but (for you;) the Greek being the present tense in all the Evangelists, and
in S. Paul's epist. speaking of the body, and in S. Luke also in the Latin; and
our adversaries themselves so put it in their translations. Heb. 13.10.
The Apostle to his effect called our table (...), an Altar for sacrifice.
Ignat.
A word used by S. Ignatius, the Apostles undoubted Scoller in his Epist. ad
Philadelp. by Nazianzenus, Nazian.
in oratione pro Gorgonia. By Chrysostom, Chryso.
in demonstrat. quod Christus sit Deus, and by S. Austine Epist. 86. Aug.
and that in a very proper sense to sacrifice Christ's body upon, and so called
of them in respect of the said body sacrificed.

Fourtly this is evident by the institution of the Euchariste it self: for
Christ commanded his Apostles, and in them there Successors, to do the same
which he did: But he did truly sacrifice, as performing the office of a Priest
according to the order of Melchised. King of Salem, who offered up bread and
wine: Therefore necessary it was, that Christ should institute an unbloody
sacrifice under the forms of bread and wine, and that to continue in his
Church until the worlds end, because he otherwise could not be truly said to
be a Priest for ever; for Priest, and Sacrifice cannot be asunder: Neither is
he Priest, that has no Sacrifice to offer up as S. Paul says: Heb. 5.8
and seeing the sacrifice of the Cross was to be performed as once, and cannot
be again repeated, it must follow consequently, that there is in the Church
some other sacrifice, which Christ the high Priest may be said to offer by his
Ministers for ever; which can be no other then the Sacrifice of the Mass, once
offered up by himself instituting the Euchariste, and now by his Ministers.

Fifthly seeing the figures of the old testament, as the Paschall Lamb, the
blood of the Testament, and generally all the sacrifice of the old law, were,
(according to the uniform doctrine of all the ancient Fathers) signs and
figures of the Euchariste: But they were truly Sacrifices: therefore the
Euchariste no less: otherwise it should follow the figures to have been more
perfect, then the things figured.

Sixthly, Act. 4.
If Miracles in all ages have been of great force to confirm true doctrine,
(as we may see in our Savior and in his Apostles*) so that S. Aug. Aug. cont.
ep. Manich. cap. 4 and lib. 8. de Ciuit. Dei.
places the same among these things, which most justly held him in the Churches
besome: Then, who will but read the Fathers, shall find them plentiful even in
Miracles wrought in confirmation of the Sacrifice of the Mass. S. Austine
reports of his own time and country; Aug. de Cant. Dei lib. 22. cap. 8.
how that one Hesperius having his house infested with wicked Spirits, to the
affliction of his beasts, and servants, desired, (says S. Austine) in my
absence certain of our Priests, that some would go thither, etc. one went,
and offered there, (says he) the Sacrificie of the body of Christ, praying
what he might, that the vexation the might cease; and God being thereupon
merciful, it ceased. Chrysostom. Greg.
In like manner S. Chrysostom lib. 6. Sacerd. S. Gregorij lib. 4. Mor. and S.
Bid hist. lib. 4. cap. 22. do report sundry miracles to this same effect.

Seauently reason, and nature do confirm this; For Religion and Sacrifice are
so conjoined together, that the one cannot be without the other; for never was
there yet any nation in the world, that had not some kind of Religion and
worhipping, and that did not think Sacrifice necessary to the worship of God,
seeing Sacrifice is the highest external worship, that can be exhibited by man
to God, for, things are more excellent then words, specially whose substance
is consumed upon Gods honor. But certainly the universal consent of all
nations proceeds from the instinct of nature.

Lastly, the more sober and learned sort of our adversaries do afford to us
Catholics the hopeful promises of salvation, affirming this to be the
judgment of all learned Protestants: as D. Some affirms in his defense
against Penry the Puritan, page 176. D. Some. Couell.
This same auerreth Mr. Couell in his defense of Mr. Hooker page 68. accusing
his brethren that affirm the contrary, Cassander.
of ignorant zeal. Georg. Cassander lib. de officio pij viri, page 14. says:
The Church of Rome is to be reverenced, as being the true Church and temple of
God. Hooker.
Mr. Hooker lib. 5. page 188. says in his Eccl. Policij: that the Church of
Rome is to be reputed a part of the house of God, a limme of the visible Church
of Christ, etc. So says Mr. Bunney in his Treatise tending to pacification,
sect. 8. page 109. Bunney. Baro. Morton
So Mr. Baro in one of his sermons; sermon. 3. So Mr. Morton in his Treatise of
the kingdom of Israel, and of the Church, page 94. So Mr. Field in his
Treatise of the Church lib. 3. cap. 46. And Mr. Couell in his treatise
published by authority, and dedicated to the Lo. Arch. of Canterbury, defended
this opinion at large, and concludes saying: We affirm them of the Church
of Rome to be parts of the Church of Christ, and that those, that live and die
in that Church may not withstanding be saved.

SECTION XI. A DISCOVERY OF CONTRARY doctrine.
THIS then (Right honorable, Reverend, Grave, and learned) being our confessed
Religion and Catholic doctrine, and thus made so evident by so many conuincing
arguments, and irrefragable proofs: I am now likewise most humbly to entreat
you, not to seem offensive or tedious, if also I make bold to put your
Wisdoms in remembrance, by what instinct this so generally confirmed,
received, and continued doctrine of the Mass it self, (become as now to you
so odious, and to us by your laws so penal) has been now of late so impugned
and traduced. The principal man and most notorious was an Apostata Monk
Martin Luther, Luther. Whitak. in resp. ad rat. Campi. Jewel in his def. page
426. Alberus contra Carolstadianos. Powell in his considerations. Luther tom.
7. Witte^b. an. 1558. lib. de Missa priuata fol. 443
whom Protestants reverence and name their Father, and a most excellent man,
sent of God to lighten the whole world, and whom the Lutherans gloriously
vaunt to have been the first, that impugned the Mass. Mr. Powell a Protestant
writer terms him, holy S. Luther. But by what instinction or genius, from
what ground work, (I pray you) it was, which so directed Luther to impugn the
Mass: not by any other, but by the suggestion and persuasion of Satan, (with
whose affrighting and apparitions he had been infested from his youth:) For it
chanced, that upon a certain time, (as himself reports the matter) he was
suddenly awaked about midnight, then (says he) Satan began this disputation
with me, saying: Hearken right learned Doctor Luther, thou have celebrated
private Mass the space of 15. years etc. And so the Devil with arguments,
(which Luther himself there at large sets down) endeavoring to dissuade
Luther, any more to say Mass: but as yet Luther standing in defense thereof,
justifying to the Devil his saying of Mass. Tom. 7. Witte^b. of anno 1558
fol. 229.
But (says Luther) Satan replied more vehemently, etc. Thereupon in the end
Luther yeldeth, and embraces the doctrine so delivered by Satan, and there
upon now altogether abandoneth the Mass. This is confessedly defended even by
Luthers dearest Scollers, as Hospinianus in histor. Sacram* fol. 131. part.
altera: Hospin. Io. Regius.
Ioannes Regius considerat. censurae, page 123. Neither was this conference
between the Devil and Luther spiritual only, or a dream; but as Balduinus,
Balduinus.
(a follower of Luther lib. de disput. Luther cap. 4. page 83.) says: a real
truth written by Luther (says he) not hyperbolically, but seriously, and
according to the truth of the history. And if we look to Luthers life after
his Apostacy, we shall find it answerable to his doctrine, both tending to
liberty; it needs not any other testimony, then that, which the Protestants
themselves acknowledge: For (say they) Luther became so arrogant, Ioac. Camar.
de con^ugio Lutheri. Conrad. Regius de caena Dom.
insolent, and possessed with the sin of Pride, that God therefore did
withdraw his true spirit from him. This we may manifestly gather out of his
own writings, Tom. 2, Germ. Fol. 9. and praefat. lib. de abrog. Miss. where he
acknowledged his conscience accusing him, and condemning him of singularity
against the whole Christian world, all times, places, persons, and authorities;
These be his own words: how often has my heart panted and reprehended me
obiecting against me! what? art thou only wise? can it be credible, that all
others do err, and have erred so long time? have all generations so often ever
been deceived? What if thou do err, and bring so many into error, that
shall be damned for ever? art thou only he, which has the true pure word of God?
Has no man in the world the same but thou? that, which the Church of Christ
has hitherto defined, and so many years observed as good, do thou overthrow
it, as though it were evil, and so do dissipate by thy doctrine both
Ecclesiastical, and civil commonweals? Thus his conscience, so long as he
had any, condemned him, thus he repented his disobedience, and said, ( in
praef. in tom. 1. Germ. Ientacul.) that he hoped the books which he had
written, would be burnt and infect no more; but when the bridle of Obedience
was altogether broken, his conscience extinguished, and the plumes of pride,
and sensuality had mounted so high, and carried him so far, he behaved
himself in his apostacy, Suet.
as by the testimony of Suetonius (in vita Iul. Caes.) Julius Caesar did in
his temporal Rebellion against the Roman state; who in the beginning doubted,
whether he should go forward, or no; Luther in colloq. Mensal. fol. 241. Tom 5.
Germ. 121. Osiand. cent. 13. lib. 1. cap. 4. page 329 The ce^t. writers* cent.
13. cap. 5. Fulk. in his retentiue. page 124. Mela^ct. loc. co^. de potest.
Ecclesiast. Whitak. cap. 18. Osiand. Epist. cent. 16. page 86. Conrad. in Theol
Caluinist in proaem.
but when he had cast of shame, he brake out into this speech Iacta est alea:
my chance is thrown. So Luther when shipwreck was made of shamefastnes,
uttered his unreasonable resolution of obstinate persisting in these terms:
Because, (says he) I have entered into this cause, now I must look unto it,
and of necessity say, it is just: If you ask a reason, Doctor Martin Luther
will have it so: sic volo, sic iubeo, sit pro ratione voluntas. And thus much
briefly of Satan's laboring by the ministry of Luther to impugn the Mass,
and never known to have been in any age before impugned, otherwise then by the
Albigenses, Apostolici, Almericus, VVickliffs, and such other, as in regard of
their other opinions, were co^fessedly even in the Judgment of our very
adversaries all of them noted, and known heretics: whose opinions in this,
and other particulars were private, and by the said parties afterward recanted
and called back, or else died with them. And as for Carolostadius, and
Zuinglius, co^temporanean to Luther, (whom Protestants name brethren) their
proceedings to impugn the Mass, was not different from that of Luthers, viz:
by illusions of Satan, as Protestants themselves do with dislike report of
them Luther in loc com class. 5 page 47. speaking of Carolostadius, calls him
a man given over into a reprobate sense; and of Zuinglius he says, he
condemned and avoided him with all his heart, as despayring of his salvation, as
Hospinianus witnesses in histor. Sacram. part. Whitak. contra camp. rat. 8.
alt. page 187. And the same they think of Luther. So well agree the Fathers,
and the Brethren as Protestants call them.

SECTION XII. THE CONCLUSION.
PARDON me therefore, (Right honorable, Reverend, and learned) if I be so bold
now to appeal to your VVisedomes grave and mature Judgment: Vt sup.
whether Luthers doctrine concerning the Mass, which had its growth in this
age by apparitions from the Devil, (as him self and his dearest Scholars do
accordingly confess) be of greater credit and authority, then that doctrine
and Religion, whose undoubted proofs are answerable and correspondent to the
like received principles and grounds of your own laws: then that Religion,
which remains in it self beautified with manifold and confessed ornaments
from ancient and memorable testimonies of your own nation, of all Christian
nations, and of all precedent times: then that Religion, whereto the English
nation was in the Apostles times confessedly first converted: Then that
Religion, which has founded your ancient municipall laws and courts of
judgment, erected your Churches, Bishops-seas, Religious houses, Colleges,
Universities, and many other known monuments of piety: Then that Religion, to
which so many Kings and Kingdoms of Gentiles have been converted according to
the sundry plain praedictions of the Prophets, had in that behalf of Christ's
true Church, which said praedictions otherwise then in, and by this Religion
are yet hitherto co^fessedly left unperformed. Then that Religion, whose
Priesthood and sacrifice was foretold by the Prophets, and acknowledged by
the Apostles. Then that Religion, which is answerable to the doctrine of those
Religious Jews, who lived before Christ: Then that Religion, which even then
long since was universally professed in the Christian world: Then that
Religion, in which was then also confirmed to us from heaven with testimony of
undoubted miracles: Then that Religion and Faith, approved of by the consent of
so many General, National, and Provincial Councels, by the Judgment of so
many holy, learned, and ancient Fathers practice of all times, and ages, and
even by the confession of our adversaries: Then that Religion, against which
all Sects and heresies whatsoever, (howsoever divided otherwise amongst
themselves) do yet generally conspire: Then that Religion, to which our
adversaries afford to the members and Professors, thereof the hopeful promises
of salvation: Then that Religion, which only is ratified by all authority, all
Scriptures, Traditions, Prophets, and Sibills Rabbis before Christ, by the
Apostles, Evangelists, all holy and learned Fathers, Historians, Antiquaries,
and Monuments, all Sinods, Councels, laws, Parliaments, Canons, and decrees of
Popes, Emperors, Kings, and Rulers; all Martyrs, Confessors, and holy
Witnesses; by all Friends and Enemies, even Mahometans, Jews, Pagans,
infidells, all former Heretics, Schismatikes, and these Protestants
themselves, when they were most probable to speak truth; and all Testimonies
that can be devised, not only in this world, but of God, of Angels, and
glorified souls, whose evidence cannot be untrue; of devils and damned souls
in hell condemned for their contempt, or negligence thereof; of souls in
Purgatory, and whatsoever can be cited for witness in such cases, as is most
evident in this brief treatise.

In respect whereof, your known Wisdoms in other matters, cannot be wanting,
or transported herein with general prejudice of our cause; but observing your
own principles, and abandoning all prejudice of opinion, try the spirits if
they be of God, and prove all things, houlding that which is good, as S. John
says in his 4. Chapt.

To the reading therefore and careful examination of this our Application do
we humbly request you, and that by the tender care had of your country, by the
dear respect of your salvation, by your Christian zeal unto true Religion,
and by whatsoever else is sacred and holy,

Your poor Countryman. M.E.

A TABLE OF THE SEVERAL points handled in this treatise, divided in to 12
Sections as follows.
The first Section.THe law terms, in general perused in this Applicacation.
page 1. Sect. 2. A verdict consisting of twelve general Counsels, all of them
being within the first 400. and odd years after our Savior Christ. page 5.
Sect. 3. The testimony of twelve lawful and credible witnesses. page 14. Sect.
4. The Confession of twelve of the leardenest of the adversary party. page 25.
Sect. 5. Of Priority of Possession. page 41. Sect. 6. Of Prescription. page 56.
Sect. 7. Of Continual Claim. page 61. Sect. 8. Of the doubtfulnesse of the
statute law. page 69. Sect. 9. Of high courts of Judgment. page 73. Sect. 10.
Other Proofs. page 80. Sect. 11. A discovery of the contrary doctrine. page 87.
Sect. 12. The Conclusion. page 92.
FINIS.

