A MOST Heavenly and plentiful Treasure. Or A rich Mineral full of sweetest
comforts. The Contents the next page will show.

Printed at London by H.L. for Henry Fetherstone, at the sign of the Rose in
Paul's Churchyard. 1609.

The Contents of this mass of holy Treatises.
1 The holy love of heavenly wisdom, for instruction, and institution of a
Christian life aright. page 1. 2. Heavenly Meditations of the seven
penitential Psalms of the holy Prophet David, for stirring up in every godly
heart true remorse, and sacred sorrow for sin. page 131. 3 Most comfortable
Meditations of the seven Psalms of David's consolation likewise, for raising
up the humbled sinner, and curing of the wounded soul. page 211 4 A powerful
Meditation of the Lords prayer for holy instruction, and more certain direction
how to pray aright, and so to obtain. page 329 5 Most fruitful Meditations of
the Lamentations of Jeremie, for stirring up of Repentance, in time of sin
abounding, and Gods hand for sin striking, as now by visitatio^. page 349 6 The
sweet song of holy Ezechias. Isa. 38. for assuring of every penitent sinner,
that GOD will never reiecte them, but in greatest extremities send them
comfort, and turn their tears into Joy. page 439. 7 A most Christian, and
profitable exhortation unto a sanctified and civil life. page 112. 8 The
learned and most worthy Epistle of Saint Basile unto Saint Gregory the
Divine. page 97.
TO THE TRVly Noble and Right Honorable, EDWARD Lord DENNIE, Barron of
Waltham etc. and To his most worthy and thrise-noble son in Law, JAMES Lord
HAY, etc. S.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
AS Man, who was created at first to the Jmage of God perfitly, having breathed
in his face the breath of life, in that earthly Eden (and is now regenerate or
created anew to the same Image, albeit imperfectly; having breathed in the face
of his soul the breath of the life of grace in this spiritual Eden of Gods
Church) does Image-like herein resemble God plainly, in respecting or
desiring not so much external and eye-offices or offerings, as the integrity
of affection and unfeigned internal love of the heart; which is the root from
whence the fruit proceeds, the spring from whence the stream does flow, the
ground from whence the offices arise, and altar on which the oblation is made.
And if the ground be found to be found, the spring seen clear, the root
good, and the Altar clean and upright, albeit a mite of penury be cast in,
or a drop of water issue out, the one is more accepted then the superfluity of
plenty, and the other then a puddle Ocean. Even so likewise let your Honors
adumbrate, type, and resemble the Image both of God and true Nobility herin, so
to accept of this small gift, as being offered with a duetifull hand,
proceeding also from an affectionat and officious heart, and tending to the
te^dring and encouraging eyes and hands of al virtue and piety, eue^ your
Honors, the patrons and patterns thereof. So the God of al grace and glory,
ple^tifull in the one, and all beutiful by the other, increase the measure of
his graces in you here, and beautify you also with the fulness of his glory
hereafter.

Your Honors in all duty, WILLIAM GVILDE.

To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, Drink here of the waters of the heavenly Cisterne,
ouer-flowing with the water of life, smell of the pleasant fruit of the tree of
life, placed in Paradise; and taste thereby how good the Lord is: gather here
the pleasant flowers, and reap, if not the harvest, yet the gleanings of
comfort: with judgment and humility, learn wisdom of the spirit of true
wisdom: and suffer thy eyes to behold the beams of co^solatio^, life, light,
and love, proceeding from that eternal Sun of safety, the only beloved of
God, the true light and life of the world, and longed-for joy of men. And for all be tha^kful to him to whom al praise belongs. So, the Lord give thee
understanding in all things. Farewell,

In Christ. W. G.

The holy love of heavenly Wisdom.
WE are like unto that kind of people, who having been led captive into some
far country when they were young, have not only lost their time, but have
forgotten also both their country, natural language, and the amity of their
own kindred. For, we are no sooner out of our cradle and swaddling cloutes as it
were, but that our perverse and froward affections surprise us, as a man would
say, like violent winds, and filling the sails of our desires, with a
thousand delicat gales, make us mightily degenerate from our own natural
inclination, driving us thereby from all true and right reason. For, let our
soul continue never so little a while in this banishment, she by and by
forgets her original being, leeseth the remembrance of her principal
benefit and good, and in the end, which is a far greater mischief, she
forgets likewise the knowledge of her self. Now then there remains nothing
why we are not altogether like unto these miserable captives. For, if they
after their long captivity, have never so little hope of their return, or do
but hear their country spoken of, a man shall perceive their hearts to leap
with joy in their bodies, so greatly does this kind of news please and like
them. But contrariwise, we utterly mislike those men, who labor to call us
home again unto the place where we had our first being, and abhor nothing
more then when we see them mark out unto us the ready way to come thereto.
These men will leave the fortunate Islands, and return unto the Ithaque, set
fast like a neast built upon the very top of a sharp steepie rock. And we
will not only leave the mire and dirte wherein we sit fast mortrized, rather
then we would possess and enjoy most assured and everlasting felicity. Now,
some man may peradventure say unto me, I beseech you Sir, where is that
felicity which you talk of? show it unto us, for that is it that we desire:
for what man is he that would refuse to be happy and blessed? Alas my good
friends, I know that the word likes you well: but without doubt ye fly from
the thing it self: or at least, ye follow naught else but the shadow, and
leave the body flying from you, and hunting after a vain cloud of delight,
reject the true, sound and incomparable pleasure. Where then is it, say you?
show unto us the way and tract, that we may speedely take hold thereof. Shall I
tell you my good friends one thing, and that is this, would it not think you,
make you laugh to see a pore or sand blinded man come unto Pylo^, a most
excellent counterfeitor in painting, and importune him to show him his pictures
and exquisite paintings, or to see a deaffe man press in to hear the sweet
music and hermonie of Bayf a most excellent musition, would not the first man
say, unto the sand blinded man, go thy way, and remove first from thee that
running humor which is the cause of the dimming of thy sight, and unto the
other, go thou and dry up the catarre which is the occasion of thy deafness,
and then thou that art blindish, shall see our excellent paintings, and thou
that art deaffish shall hear our delicate and pleasant songs? For, as the
pleasure of the senses cannot be well tasted nor relished, but by such as have
whole and sound bodies, no more can the contentation and delight of the mind,
wherein rests our chief felicity, be perceived by any, but by such, as have
cleansed their souls of all sinful and corrupt lusts, which as filthy
botches and blaines extinguish the vital spirits in that part of the body
wherein they are engendered. Here then you see what you must do, if you
determine to make your selves capable to taste of the fruits of this
everlasting happiness. I right well know, that ye are so brought up, even from
your youth, in the pleasures of your senses, and make so much of them, as that
you are afeard ye shall lose them, without I leave this as a pawn unto you,
which will bring unto you far more infinite greater pleasure, and wherewith I
will feast you, and quickly show it you. But who is able to make men, that are
no better then dust and ashes, to see the estate and disposition of a pure and
innocent soul, whose action is perfectly blessed, and altogether heavenly,
wherein consists this most excellent contentation? In very deed, you press me
too too sore, and crave at my hands more then I am able to do. But because I am
loath to discourage you, and make you mal-content, I will do for you whatsoever I
am able. And I will deal with you, as the carriers about of monsters do: For,
they set up their pictures at the corners of the streets, and hang out the
portraitures of them at their own lodgings, and when the people have paid
their money at the coming in of the gate, then they show them their natural
and lively bodies. Now, the sight which I inuit you to see, is this Wisdom,
which we may rightly say, to be the very truth and knowledge of all things, but
especially of heavenly things, which is full of unspeakable cleerenesse,
brightness, and splendure, and which also, if we might behold face to face,
and in her natural excellency, would ravish us with her love, and cause us
hate these base and earthly things, with the love of which we are so far
sotted, even to our very destruction. I will here hang up, as it were, upon
the beaten high ways, pictures and images, so that if ye be disposed to go
right on to the gate, ye shall see both the image and the embosting of them:
which is without all doubt most marvelous, and when you have paid your
custom, and passed the borders and limits of this life, you shall see that,
which no tongue is able to utter, nor ear able to hear. But to make you
acknowledge at length what this is, and plainly to prick out unto you some
draughts hereof, I beseech you consider even of the things which you so wonder
at here in this world, and so greedely and egerly labor for, and hunt after,
and you shall find, that if you go only step by step on them, and follow
still your way, that they will at last bring you unto the knowledge of that
which you at this day desire. But because that in stead of going on them, you
settle your selves, and sit fast down upon them, you your selves become most
vile and filthy by them. Now, let us see a little why you thus satisfy your
senses, and from whence this pleasure and tickling delight springs, wherein
you establish the seat of your worldly felicity. Comes this from the object
of natural things, that are grown unto perfection? Are these the well
mingled, sorted, and settled colors, and the exactly observed proportions and
dimensions, which thus please the eyes? What other thing admire you in a meadow,
ennameled with a thousand goodly and odoriferous flowers, and so richly in
diverse places, with sundry colors bedecked? What other thing admire you in
the stately buildings of kings, in their Bracelets, Chains, and other Jewels,
and in the Tables of most excellent Pictures, but only this curious
observation? Yea what other estimation make you of the most fair sweet faces
of women, with whom ye effeminately burn in love, but an equal proportion,
and exact diligence of nature, in the conformity and assembly of many things
differing one from another? What other thing is the sweetness of one especial
voice of a man, or the melody of many together in consort, but a just and
orderly continuation of them all together, or sudden motion of many voices,
according to a natural rule and proportion of the same? And what other thing
is the most pleasant and sweet savor that a man can possibly smell, but a
certain temperature both of heat and moisture, and a certain quality
imprinted in a body, by the sudden motion of one or many causes? Neither is
any thing sweet and pleasant in the most delicate meats and sauoures, but a
certain measure of well mixed licoures. Neither does the touching of them
bring or yield any other pleasure, but a certain equality and length which we
find in natural bodies. Now mark then all the pleasures which your senses
can possibly receive: ye consume the whole time of your life, only about
the^: for, for them alone, ye weary your bodies with continual toiling and
moiling, and for them alone, ye strive against the winds, and cross the seas.
If then ye find that all these particular things do possess your minds by a
certain vain show of beauty and excellency, what will ye then say, when as
ye shall consider of them all at once, and at one view, even from their first
beginning, unto the highest degree of their perfection? Shall ye not see the
self and the same difference between them, that is between one stone alone,
and an whole proud and costly Palace, and between one voice, and a complet
and full noise of music, and between one finger, and the whole body? What
matter can you make of all these particular things, especially of these earthly
things, when as in lifting up your eyes toward the Sun and Stars, ye
behold the world, from the highest part of heaven, to the lowest part of the
earth, even from the beginning of the same unto the end thereof, and consider,
how many wonderful things are depainted and set forth on every side? If so be
then, we have done it to feed and satisfy our senses only, with the
communicating of these beautiful and excellent things, it must needs be that
we have done it at the least by reason of the whole workmanship and frame of
the same, the elegancie whereof consists in the accordance and assembly of
all the other particular beauties and ornaments thereof. But our soul, which
lancheth and stretches forth her desires and wishes far above the reach of
our senses, without we will violently captiuate, choke and strangle her, has
no desire to stay here. For she finds nothing here, which can any way
retain, or yet contain her. But she is more honorable then so, for she
embraces heaven and earth, compasses all the whole world, pierces the
bottomless depths, knows all things, and bestirreth and manageth her self,
and is so glorious, as that if we conserve her in her natural excellency, all
the rest of the things of the world, in respect of her, will seem to be most
filthy and ouglie. After she has beheld her self, and exercised her self
about the searching out of causes and sciences, finding nothing in all this, no
not any thing in her self, that likes her self, and resting her self in a
desire which she has to learn, she is enforced to lift up her self far
above the world, yea and far above her self, and suffers her self to be
guided by the works of the worke-maister. And there she sees all at once, all
sorts of beauties and perfections, abutting and assembling themselves even from
their very first original, and by so much the more they appear most excellent
and wonderful, by how much the nearer they come from thence from whence they
first came. Altogether like unto the Sun beams, which, the nearer they are
the body from whence they shoot and spread themselves, the greater, the purer,
and the brighter they do appear. I use especially in this behalf this
comparison, because that of all things which we know here below, nothing more
proportionably agreeeth with our soul, then our sight, which is the most
noble, lively, and quickest action of all our senses, nor nothing more
proportionable unto God then the light, which is the most pure and most
excellent thing in the world. And the ancient wise men have said, That the
light was Gods body, and the truth his soul, representing, showing, and
giving us a taste as it were, hereby, of one of the greatest secrets of the
Godhead. We must therefore open and vnseele the eyes of our mind, that we may
pearse into this heavenly light, even unto the depth of the everlasting truth.
If we will never so little help our selves, and lift up our soul, that she
may ascend by those steps, which offer themselves unto her, and hoise up her
sail on hie, what delight and pleasure might she not hope for, but wish, not
wish for, but say, not say, but think, which we enjoy not in full measure? yea
such pleasure as that we should feel increase and redouble in us, until the
time that being ascended unto the feast, we should be joined unto that first
and most high light. So as we then being compassed with brightness, and
ravished with the sight of this wonderful beauty, should feel the pleasure
most infinitely to be increased, and be filled with incomparable joy, and to
make us generally scorn these fleeting and perishing delights, al these fading
and cha^geable sweet pleasures, which occupy our minds here below, and none
otherwise to be desired, then as a small spark of beauty spread over us like a
scarf. Then shall we enter into the shop where all these rare and strange
works were cast in a mould, where we shall not only see the patterns of
them, and not only handle the tools and instruments, but shall also see, and
familiarly know the very workemaster of them: who will not only show unto us
his workmanship, nor descifer only unto us his purposes, but will also teach
us his art and science, and make us all perfect and godly according to him
self. There shall we see the beams of this Deity spread all over, and reunite
it self unto this body of light, whereunto, when we shall see our selves
conjoined in thought, we shall then perceive at once all the causes and effects
of the eternal wisdom, which particularly, and separably may seem to be
able to be furnished with matter to our great contentment. Here then we see
wherein consists our felicity, that is to say, in this vndriable springhead
of beauties, in this deep sea of all bounties, whereinto all the rivers and
streams of the world must run. That is to say, into this original light, unto
whom we must turn our selves, and upon whom we must fast fix and set the
eyes of our souls, if so be we love the eternal blessedness. Alas, how
excellent was this last sigh of the Philosopher Plotin, who having now his
soul giving up her self between his lips, called his scholars unto him,
giving them this farewell. My good friends, God grant you to live, both now,
and hereafter, in bliss for ever, and always turn that godliness that is in
you, unto that ancient and principal Deity. O noble speech, and worthy the
closing up of the mouth and life of a Philosopher! But what shall we do for the
returning of our selves unto God, and to approach, reunite, and become one with
him? Shall we present our selves unto his majesty in that estate wherein we
commonly stand? No surely, for if we, before such time as we lift up the eyes
of our souls toward this clear and bright burning light, do not wipe, and
cleanse our selves, we shall, in stead of enjoying this glorious and pure
light, have that little sight that we have utterly put out. For, as in the law
of the Jews, the woman that offered her self unto the trial of the jealousy
offering, received no hurt by the bitter and cursed water if she were chaste and
sound, but was quit and free from all blame and suspicion: and contrariwise, if
she had broken her marriage promise and faith, remained infected, and so rotted
and burst in sunder: even so also those me^, who, as the members of the Church
of God, have married his only Son, if they offer themselves poluted and
defiled to touch the holy fire of his holy spirit, are rather blinded, then
enlightened, yea rather consumed, then warmed. And this is the reason why God,
when as he, having compassion of our ruin and fall, is willing for our
salvation, to disclose unto the world this light of wisdom, he sends his
herault before to wash and make clean the souls of all such as he would have
behold the brightness of his glory. We hear every where the sound of the holy
voice of this Prophet, crying, Make straight and plain^ the ways of the living
God, repent, and bring forth the fruits worthy of repentance, for he will come
with his fan in his hand to winnow the Corn from the Chafe, lay up the
Corn by it self, and cast the Chafe into everlasting fire. Seeing then that
we desire this great felicity, and that before we present ourselves unto him,
we must cleanse our hearts and minds, and make them capable to conceive of
heavenly things, let us see what remedies we have for that purpose. Howbeit,
let us somewhat a little before, consider, how and in what sort we have so
defiled our selves, that we might thereby the more easily find out the meetest
means to cleanse our selves: and let us see from whence and which way we are
fallen, that thereby we may perceive by what means we may be able to lift up
our selves again. For, God saw nothing amongst all his works which any thing
drew near unto his perfection: and therefore he himself was then desirous to
mould and fashion a living image of his Deity, which should be his chief and
especial work, and set him in the midst of the world. Whereupon, man
forthwith showed himself in the midst of the earth so perfect and complete,
as that nothing could be wished to be more excellently perfect. For, he being
made a lively image, and being also as it were but a short and half picture,
having withal, many the lineaments both of the air, and of the grace of the
principal subject or matter, was most wonderfully perfect. The holy fire which
God had breathed into him, being very pure, enlightened his understanding, and
filled him with the knowledge of all things, in so much, that he having truth
for his guide, and virtue for his aid, all his actions passed within the
compass of reason: and turning him self continually unto his Creator,
received to himself as in a very clear looking glass, the form and fashion
of the Deity: in beholding of whom, he fixed and stayed all his thoughts, and
thereby became very blessed, for he lived in God, and God in him. But when as
this mirror which was beautified and adorned with the object of the Deity,
would needs run him self amongst the troublesome and dangerous storms, and
thereby defile and sully him self, then this immortal brightness disdained
any more to show himself unto him, and left him altogether to remain in
darkness and obscurity. So that man, before such time as he had turned his
back upon God, being filled with a most sure knowledge of all things, is now as
it were become brutished, and in stead of truth, is full of error and lying:
and in stead of a ruled and moderate will, is now full of burning lust, so as
all his thoughts which before were reunited to the beholding of his creator,
have now spread themselves over the creatures, and roame about at all
adue^tures without either guide or reason. This concupiscence and lust then
having thus prostituted her self, forthwith conceived sin, which coming to a
full growth, amended death. And death in deed, brought forth the extremity of
al evils, and death I say, the hope of all horror and obscurity, wherein, all
the while that man was swadled and wrapped, was never since ever able to
receive the brightness of the immortal light, ne yet attain again unto the
conduct of the truth, the only beholding whereof is able to keep him back from
coming to the point of his felicity. When man saw himself thus defaced, he
was displeased with himself, and cursed his life as a gulf of misery, where
he saw nothing before his eyes but confusion and darkness. And all his
animaduersions were nothing but of evils, and all his hope of nothing but of
calamities. For, God being nothing but righteous, and man, nothing else but
sin, what measure or end could there be of his punishment? Howbeit, the
eternal wisdom who wrought with God in the creation of man, having
compassion of the loss and destruction of such a work, came, as Tertullian
says, to lay a steep the poison of death in his own blood, to wash and
cleanse us, and besides, to turn away the just wrath of his Father, that he
might have mercy upon us, and so turn unto us again. Thus we see how we are
entered again into grace with our God, purified by his mercy, called again
unto the knowledge of his truth, and the beholding of his glory. Howbeit, we
are so perverse and obstinate in our cursednesse, and so great enemies to our
own felicity, as that so soon as this eternal light would begin to appear
and shine upon the clearenesse of our consciences, there to express and
reimprint the face of his Deity, and relieve and recharge the lineaments of
this divine wisdom, which are so shamefully defiled, and as it were utterly
defaced, as that we make a thousand foul blemishes rebound upon our selves,
which blind and defile us, and thrust them selves between us, and the grace
which should enlighten us. We must therefore as often as we defile our selves,
so often also lay too our hands to wipe away our foul and filthy stains, for
the cleansing and clearing of our souls, so that we thereby being polished,
the beams of our principal bounty and goodness may cause the clearenesse of
virtue and truth most clearly shine, and brightly burn upon us. Here then we
see the means which we herein must hold and keep: let us now look what the
cause of this evil is, and then let us also wisely consider of the remedy for
the same. In very deed, our perverse and corrupt judgment, is the very
fountain of all our offenses, and the springhead of that pestilent humor,
which so infecteth and spoyleth us. The things which spoil and trouble us, are
the delights and pleasures which on every side alure us, and make us drunk
before we are fully awake. This licour then being mixed amongst our tender
senses, by reason of the infirmity of our age, so delicately seasoneth us, as
that we can never after lose and forget the savor thereof. We content not our
selves with moderatly drinking, but we will be over head and cares also,
tarrying still by it as if we would have the tide ouerflowe us, leaving our
selves drowned as it were upon the swallowing quicksand of miserable old age.
Now these sweet licours wherewith we so fill and glut our selves, turn by and
by into bitterness, and fill our hearts and minds with a venomous humor, which
infecteth and corrupts us. For, the affection which we bear unto the beauty
of these created things, being entertained and flattered by us, changes it
self into a furious and mad lust, which peruerteth and overthrows our
senses: for, the flattering and dissembling desire which we have unto these
worldly riches, turns it self into a blind and senseless passion, and are
none otherwise to be esteemed in this world, but as the ordure and excrement of
the earth: and the love of false honor conuerteth it self into a foolish
desire to be far more then the rest of the world, and chalengeth unto it
self the reverence and service that is due unto God himself. The pleasure
which we take in our feeding, is turned into beastly and shameless gluttony:
The care that we take in preserving our bodies delicately, grows into beastly
uncleanness, and filthy lust, and the worthiness that we believe too too much
of ou^ own courage and valor, turns it self into outrageous choler and
rashness. And surely, our minds being stopped and oppressed with so foul and
slimie humors, can never breathe forth any thing that is pure and clean. Now,
for the purging of all these subtle and mortal passions, and poisons of the
mind, we must see what remedy we can find out for them, and it may be, it
will be to good purpose to use the counsel which a good ancient Father gave
unto a religious nouice of his house. Like as wise nurses (said he) when they
will weane their children, will rub the neble of their teate with wormwood,
and other bitter druggs, even so must we be dealt withal for the making of us
lose the taste of our delights and pleasures, for we must set down unto our
selves a certain punishment for our lusts, and change the hours of our
pleasures into rigorous and austere exercises, and at what time we are wonted
to take our foolish and dissolute recreations, let us examine with all
humility, what pains and torments our sinful and detestable life deserves.
I cannot tell whether this good old Father in speaking this, thought upon the
custom which the Hebrews used, who made a solemn feast upon that day that
they began to weane any of their children, or whether they rejoiced in that
their children left their weaker food, and fell to more strong and marrowye
meats, either else to stir them up by their example unto a new kind of
diet. For we may very fitly apply this example unto the instruction of our
minds, if so be we will weane our selves from the milk of our delights, and
swear an irreconciliable divorce between us and our sins, inuiting our
selves unto the like feast, as he amongst those holy religious men, of whom
Phylo, in the book of a contemplative life, makes mention, did. They met
together at this banquet, and the first, principal and most delicate and sweet
dishes, were the most beautiful and best tasting fruits of true wisdom,
which were presented unto them by a most elegant preaching of the Prophets and
commandments of God, as pure and undefiled vessels. Their rejoicing, was
consolation, their pastime, austeritie, their delicate dishes, abstinence.
Their minds being satisfied with such marrowy meat, they were in a marvelous
great and firm tranquillity, to be at leisure to follow their most happy
contemplation. And surely this exercise would become us all very well,
nevertheless, we had need every one of us particularly to accomplish this our
purging of the soul, which we call repentance, by means whereof, our soul
returning into her self, shall be able to wipe out spot by spot, the blots
that there most filthely do savor. Seeing then that this repentance should be
unto us as it were the entrance and preface of a good and perfect life, which
should make us clean, we should therein exercise our selves both carefully and
ordinarily. For, seeing we are determined to erect a Temple in our soul,
wherein to lodge the Deity, we must therefore thoroughly wash and rewash the
same with this purifying water, and think that it is to us unto whom Ezechias
speaks, when as he said unto the Leuits, Listen unto me, and sanctify your
selves, make clean the house of the Lord, and thrust the filthiness out of
the Sanctuary. We will have our Spirit to be his Altar, our thoughts, his
offerings: our prayers, his presents: and shall we offer them in a filthy
place? would he not then say unto us, that which was spoken unto the Jews by
the mouth of Malachy, saying, I have not set mine heart upon you, neither will
I receive any sacrifice from you, because you are most filthy and full of
p^llution. But how shall we begin to perform such a glorious and profitable an
action? Saint John Chrysostom teaches us, and gives unto us an excellent
instruction hereof: We must (says he) look well unto our selves, and having
compassion of our misery, we must rub and make lean our hearts: so as we must
always have our mouths full of the confessing of our sins, and the rest of
our actions, in great and singular humility. The filthy, stinking, and brutish
concupiscences of ours, finding our hearts void of the grace of God, place
themselves there, and in such sort puff up and harden our hearts, as that no
goodness can now enter them, without we first press and squeeze them between
our hands with sharp and earnest contrition. To be short, if we shall not have
blown this bladder full of wind, we shall never find this spiritual licour, and
this holy oil of consolation ever to be placed there. This was the presumption
that first assaulted the Angels, and since that time has set a snare or
pitfall to trap our feet in. This is that thing which as an heavy counterpoise
keeps us continually tied unto these worldly lusts, and which settle our
desires in our selves, and makes us believe that we live only for this world,
and stays also the sail of our souls from lanching toward heaven. How
shall we then rid our selves out of this? Forsooth, in casting back our eyes
upon our life, in considering of our foulness and deformity, and in
beholding how many miseries and afflictions continually surprise us, which we
never once looked for. If the justice of God, ouer-compassionat in our behalf,
did not sufficiently furnish us with matter to be angry with our selves, or if
because we are too near unto our own harms, we cannot see them, let us
turn our eyes upon the infinite millions of men which now are, or yet
heretofore have been, and let us mark what a small and short thing their life
is, and has been, and yet although it be never so small and short, yet it is
environed with infinite sorrows, griefs, and cares, which are the very
fruits of their sins and transgressions. Do not all men living continually
cry and complain of their miseries and mishaps? Now, it is no reason that we
most sinful and filthy wretches that we are, should seek out of our selves
the mat^er for which we should be angry and grieved with our selves. For, our
consciences do commonly tell us, and continually represent unto us in despite
of us, the register of our sins: agreeing with that of Democritus saying,
That he heard the voice of malice and sin accusing her self. Over and
besides all this, the heavenly justice, or the fatherly care of God,
continually shows unto us his rods, sometimes striking us with them, to make
us awake, and leap out of this miserable, filthy, and dirtie puddle. But if
nothing will cause us to hate our selves, and detest our miserable sinful
life, let us consider with our selves, and think of this hideous and terrible
image of death, unto whom our sin has delivered us up. For, death follows
us hard at our heels both by sea and land, he embarketh himself with us, and
rides on horseback behind us, and leaves us nothing save only our shadow.
We do nothing else all our life long but fly from him, and yet we are still
nearer and nearer him. It is he that in a moment cutteth off the thread of our
desires, and he, who upon the sudden, bereaueth us of all that we have
scraped together with great pain, and in the end takes our selves away clean
out of the world. Seeing then that his image is pictured out to be so fearful
in all the corners of our life, let it be a bridle to restrain our filthy
lusts, and let us step back when we see such a bottomless deapth lie wide
open before us. But if we have so engaged and bound our selves before hand, as
that we cannot go back, yet he at least forewarneth us of the danger, and let
us forsake this vile and heavy burden of baggage, that we may the lightlier
leap, and lustelier skip over this dangerous breake-necke, and leap into that
goodly and flourishing plain, which we see to be on the other side, which is
that everlasting life that we all wait for. Howbeit, if the remembrance of
this temporal and corporal death cannot possibly wither and dry up our
thoughts, who is he amongst us when as we shall but once think upon the other
death which afterward threatens us, which is this spiritual and eternal death,
that will not tremble and gnash his teeth with fear? yea a most horrible death,
because that they upon whom it lays hold, do dye eternally, not looking for
the blessedness whereof they deprived themselves for ever, and yet live for
ever, but altogether in sorrows and torments, whereunto they are eternally
reserved. Alas, are not we able so terribly and horribly to picture him out, as
that we never dare once behold his looks? Let us picture the dart which he
carries in his hand, with fire and flame round about it, and arm it with hell
fire, and with fireforks and tongs. But we contrariwise garnish him with all
manner of ornaments to make him seem pleasing unto our eyes, and set a false
color upon him, to make him show more agreeable unto our liking, we erect
aulters unto him, and never make feasts of rejoicing, but when as we consecrate
our souls unto him. And when is that? forsooth even then, when we bath our
selves in these worldly pleasures, or rather, when we plunge our souls into
that infernal river of forgetfulness, which puts out that heavenly fire
that is in us, rocketh us asleep, and makes us become most brutish and
beastly. And yet notwithstanding we then say that we live, not counting any of
those days any part of our life, which we pass not over in pastimes and
merime^ts, nay rather which we pass not over in, sins and tra^sgressio^s.
Surely we are much like unto those sailers which turn their backs upon the
place where they mean to go ashore. We make a show as though we would eschew
this death, and yet according to the course of our lives, we run unto it with
open mouth. Let us therefore look wishly upon this death, and on as many other
rocks as we must sail and flote by in this voyage, that we may fear. And let
us consider, that we are now so wounded and bruised, as that if an especial
favor from heaven save us not, we shall be hardly able to avoid shipwreck.
This is the contritio^ which should be in our souls, and this is that bitter
repentance which should draw bloody tears even from out of the bottom of
our bowels. This is it that should make us hate even our own selves for the
reco^ciling of us unto our God, and to renew our life of sin and wickedness,
into purity and cleanness. This is it that should cause us to enter into
judgment with our selves, that we might not be reserved unto the day of that
most heavy judgment. For what man is he that is able at that day to justify
himself? Now, it is not enough that we have had this compunction and
repentance in our hearts, but we must also lay open our sins, and the justice
of God, that we might receive from him his mercy and comfort. And it is he that
must accept of our sorrow and grief, and he, unto whom we must make an
honorable amends, and simply and plainly confess our errors. For, seeing it
is his pleasure, that his goodness which he is able to keep and reserve unto
himself, should be poured out upon all his creatures, and that he has made
all things to manifest his glory, and bestowed the use of our life only to
glorify him, neither are we any way able to repare the offense which we commit
against him, by the corrupting of the use of our life, but in manifesting that
he has created us to do good, and that we our selves have converted our selves
only to do ill. And therefore we must of necessity undoubtedly declare that he
is liberal, and we most unthankful, we must say, that he is good, and our
selves to be most wicked, we must also pronounce his righteousness, and our
sin, we must set forth our own griefs and his mercy, we must protest that all
the evil which is in us, comes of ourselves, and all the good which we hope
after, to proceed from him alone. For, if so be we shall be silent, after that
we have once acknowledged our evil, it is to be believed that we will
persevere with this silence all the days of our life past, and so approve by
this silence, that we cannot freely be found fault withal. And Tertullian
exhorting us unto this confession, tells us, that we do not confess our
selves unto God, as if he knew not our sins before hand, but because
confession is a counsel unto satisfaction, and makes us apt unto
reconciliation, and reconciliation unto mercy, and mercy unto everlasting life.
Now, the satisfaction which we look for, comes from his favor and grace, by
which only we must, and may be restored unto immortality, and this grace is
not given unto any, but unto such as acknowledge themselves to be miserable
sinners, and not given by any, but by him that is chief in power. It must
needs therefore be, that the word which he has bestowed upon us to glorify
him withal, must be employed to the manifestation of our misery, because the
confession of our sins, justifies the goodness of God, which we have as much
as in us lies utterly perverted. We must therefore pray unto him to forgive
us, as if we should say, that he may and ought to punish us, and so thereby
testify his power and righteousness. For this cause it is why the Prophet
Isaiah calls us, when as he says, Go your ways with those that are
sanctified, and present your Confession unto God with the living. O says
Ecclesiastes, it is a good thing when as he that is sound in a fault will
manifest his repentance. And truly it were a great glory for us, if we would
be once so courageous as openly to confess our sins, and show that as we
have been the first that have sinned, so also we are the first that do repent.
Howbeit, there remains in us a foolish shame, which abides with us as the
skarre of sin, and causes us the slowlier and hardlier to do it. This was
the cause why the ancient Fathers in fitting themselves unto this our
infirmity, and unto the weakness of such also which might be offended in the
reciting sometimes of very strange sins of ours, were contented that we
should put down and pour out the secrets of our consciences into the bosoms
of those unto whom they had given power to bind and lose, and apply unto us
the grace by which we are redeemed. And from this mystery we receive a
marvelous fruit, when as it is worthily administered unto us. For first, he
that is appointed to the dispensation of this grace, being made unto us the
father of the spirit, is to bring the same unto us for the comfort of the
mystery which he finds in us by the trial of our life, even the very self
same affection which a loving father in the behalf of his very sick son, unto
whom he brings besides help and remedy, the hope of health, wherewith he
feeds him. For he should in the fellow feeling of our misery, and taking upon
him the burden of our sins, help to relieve us, eue^ then when we faint in the
midst of our course. This example which God has set before us, who (as
Isaiah says) came himself first, and has laid upon his own back all our
miseries, and borne upon his shoulders all our diseases. After he has thus
imparted unto us this comfort, he is to direct us unto the way of truth, and
with the instrument of the word of God, wherein he is exercised, to till the
faith which he has sowed in us, which, ^y reason of the barrenness of the
ground wherein it is cast, had always need to have the help and care of the
husbandman. For we are properly like unto a small Boat, which is forcibly
rowed with ores against the stream: but if the watermen never so little leave
rowing, she fleeteth back more in an hour, then she did in a whole days
rowing. The end and consummation of this holy action is this, that when we call
upon the holy Ghost, our grace is pronounced unto us, and confirmed as it were
by the judgment of the church, which is a certain pawn and testimony, that
as we are here in this world kept fine and clean by him or them upon whom
such graces are bestowed, so should we also be in the other, by him, upon whom
he has appointed them. There rests the^ nothing after this, but that we
humble our selves in acknowledging the grace which we have received, a thing
that we hardly can obtain at our own hands. Now we will not greatly stick to
admire at this, but we will never follow the example of our fathers, which at
that time used this holy repentance. Yet should have seen of these men, says
this Tertullian, kneeling at the feet of the Aulters, covered with sackcloth
and ashes, bewailing bitterly their sins, and wringing the mercy of God from
him. But these are remedies which we never seek after but by maine compulsion:
for the shame which we have of doing these good things, rebateth and
strangleth whatsoever good thing we are any way forward in. And it is great
pity, that that which neither the voice of the holy Ghost, the counsel of
the Prophets, nor the example of the holy Fathers, is able to draw us unto, the
wrath and vengeance of God will bring us unto, manger our heads. In very deed
we put on sackcloth, but we do it when we can no longer tarry: we cast ashes
on our heads, but we do it hypocritically, before such time as the wrath of God
comes, which finds us out. And we creep and lowte under the Aulters, but
it is because we would fly from his hand that pursues us. O rebellious and
cursed servants that we are! for we never reverence our master, but when as he
ho^deth his scourge over us to correct us, and we never cry him mercy until
such time as the sword is ready to cut our thr^tes. And therefore we must so
humble our selves before him, as that we thrust not from us, by vain and
presumptuous thoughts, the grace, by which we are cleansed and purified. Now,
when we shall have thus gathered as it were into our hands the sins, which
are the briars and brambles of our souls, and watered the field of our
consciences with tears, and softened and made them tender by this manner of
dealing, and driven away the clouds which did so ouer-shadow us, and that the
Sun of the grace of God, shall begin to shine upon us and warm us, we must
then heerevpon sow such seed as may in the end bring forth for his fruit, an
heavenly and immortal life. And this seed is our will, which as it bloometh
either well or ill, even so brings it forth either good or bad deeds. Now
this argues well with the meaning of Theages the Pythagorist: for he says;
That this will was as it were the hand of our soul, wherewith she turns all
things either unto good or ill: which is the very self same that the scripture
teaches us; That God in the beginning made man, and left him in the hand of
his own counsel, he set fire and water before him, that he might bear them
in which hand he would: Which was the thing that might address this will unto
good, and this is the sound reason, which is the rule that guides all things
unto that end whereunto God has created them. Because man might the better
discern, that it was easier for him to do good, then to do ill, and that he
hung not always upon any doubtful determination, and besides the natural
light, which he had given unto him, he gave him also his law to preserve him,
if he would keep it, and to as many of us as live in his faith. And besides
his law and commandments, he has given unto us his grace, which so long as we
keep it, makes us to do nothing but that which agreeeth with his
commandments, and consequently with all good reason. Now, this rule of well
doing, consists not in sharp witted propositions, full of subtlety and
sophistical definitions and conclusions: for the resolving of which, a man had
need to have a whole world. For all this knowledge consists in these two
points, To love God with all thine heart, and thy neighbor as thy self. And
yet nevertheless, for the making of the way more plain, and to lead us as it
were by the hand into our works, we have certain precepts to examine, and put
to every of them, by our actions, and to find the means, wherein the
comeliness of that which we would do consistieth. This goodly seemlinesse, or
rather disposition of the mind, being there placed, we call virtue. But
because she changes and takes her particular name according to every action
wherein she shows her self, it shall serve to good purpose, as I think, for
the matter that we have in hand, to salute by the way as we pass, the
especial sorts, out of which she represents her self oftenest unto our
sight. The Philosophers began to teach, that virtue was a persuading to
greatness of courage, and an emboldening unto generositie and valor. But my
desire is to follow the discipline of those whose lives and conuersations, I
would gladly follow. Philo the Jew, speaking of the religious men dispersed
throughout the deserts of Egypt, and who in great perfection of life bestowed
their time in contemplation, says; That they laid up in their souls
Temperance, as a good, firm, and sure foundation, whereon they might afterward
settle and establish all manner of virtues: and therefore we must begin at that
end. For, if Plato with some reason compares our souls unto horses, which
must be ridden and broken ken by a skillful rider, for a cunning horseman, will
first of all be sure to have the Bitte in the horse mouth, before he give him
the spur, that he might restrain him from going out of his lists, and
thereby be able both to manage and turn him euenly, and not suffer him to beat
himself and fling and leap at all adventures. We call this temperance, the
authority and power which ^eason ought to have upon the lusts and violent
affections which carry our will unto pleasures and delights. This then must be
the reine as it were unto our souls, or rather serve us as a fit instrument,
to scum the boiling desires which arise in our souls, by reason of the heat of
blood, that they might be always joined and egalled unto reason, where unto
they must be proportionable, not regarding nor yielding themselves unto the
sensible objects, which offer themselves unto them. But contrariwise so to
yield unto them, as that they cause those objects to serve them and reason,
whereof, they should be altogether in very deed made. Now, of all the passions
over which temperance must have an especial eye, to arrange these unto reason,
filthy concupiscence, is the most ordinary, which tieth us unto the lust of
the flesh, making us to seek out, in the conjunction ordained by God, not the
blessing of a long and happy posterity, to substitute in our steads, servants
unto our creator, but a beastly pleasure and infamous delight, which blinds
our souls, and makes our spirits drunk. God having heaped in man so many
sundry perfections, meant yet notwithstanding as it were to finish the same,
and did communicate with him that, which is the most wonderful in all the
deity, which was, the making him a creator like unto himself. For as he
created the world that his power might be seen and established before him, his
wisdom in his works, so also would he, that man should beget another, one like
unto himself, that he might see also himself in his own work, and love and
cherish that which came of himself. And therefore he gave him a wife, to be a
companion with him in this workmanship. Nay, he did more then this, for his
meaning was, that man, who was bond and thrall unto death, looked that there
should one day, one of his posterity, be borne of a Virgin, who should be the
Savior and redeemer of the world, stirring him up as it were religiously to
use an holy union, which should serve to the ministry of his redemption.
Wherefore, as the use of this conjunction at this day, is no more necessary
for our salvation, which for us is fully purchased, neither left unto us, but
as a lawful intempera^ce, if so be we are not able to pass it, yet let us use
it at the least as a remedy of infirmity under the authority of the law of God,
for the cooling and mortifying of the lusts of the flesh, which bud and spring
out in us. And seeing that the desire which casts us out of our selves cannot
drive us to love God as we should, let us yet, at the least, keep it within the
chaste bosom of her, whom God has destined for our wife and companion. And let
us take great heed that we make not our members filthy stinking vessels, and so
defile the Temple of God (seeing he vouchsafes to dwell in us) by the impure
dealing with those kind of women, who in violating their bodies, violate also
therewith all manner of laws. For, first they break the law of God, who
commands chastity: the law of nature, which forbids to make that common,
which is borne for one alone: the law of Nations, which has brought in
marriages: and the law of families, unjustly transferring the labor and
travel of another unto a strange heir. Truly, from this abominable and
unbridled concupiscence, come, and are derived a^ from a lively and pleasant
Fountain, all public and particular calamities as it were. For when this
foolish love is once formed in our souls, which being nourished with
belly-cheere and idleness, begins there to grow and increase, and has as
heady wine run through our veins, it by and by brings our senses a sleep,
and benummeth our members, bereaueth our reason, and so furiously reigning over
us, carries us away violently into most furious purposes and practices. Do we
not see at this day the mightiest kingdoms, to be by it dug down as it
were with Pickaxes, and Empires to stumble and fall down to ruin. And do we
not see that it deuoureth in one day the riches and conquests of infinite
worlds? That it opens the gate to all injustice? Has it not brought ielowsie
between brethren, and quarrels between Fathers and their children? But the
worst and foulest of all the effects that it has wrought, is, the uncertainty
that it brings into the minds of kinsmen and families. For, in defiling the
marriage bed, it takes from the children the love of their father, which cannot
be conserved but by the good opinion that the husband has of the chastity of
his wife, and it breaks also the piety of the children toward their
fathers, which cannot be founded but upon the self and same consideration. Now,
when these bonds of affection and good will are lost amongst me^, how can they
contain themselves within any civil amity and society? how can they join and
unite themselves together, to serve God and obey his commandments? This sin,
as an ancient father says, is the devils haven, which floting and flowing in
us through voluptuousnes, continually rebloweth the bellows of our senses with
new hot desires, which set our souls on fire, and there nourishes them with
smoke, taking from them both sight and judgment, which should guide them to
every good thing. And therefore how far soever we can see this foolish love, we
must hunt it away, and detest it, as the very poison of our souls. Howbeit we,
contrariwise, call it unto us, and make much of it, how far soever it be from
us. For we inuit it to give it reward, and the rewards of honor are for none
but for his officers, and all the most fine and rare wits take the greatest
delight to impe his feathers, that he might the speedelier and more contentedly
come flying into the palaces of Princes. Now, a Christian man especially such a
one as would attain unto this blessed conte^platio^ whereunto we prepare him,
will bereave his soul of all these filthy lusts, and using himself unto this
continual contine^ce; will endeavor himself, if he possibly can, to co^serue
this treasure of virginity, wherein lies a great purity of the mind and
perfection of understanding: and they chiefly conserve the same, which
communicate themselves with the spirit of God. which gave S. Jerome occasion to
say according to Varro; That the reward of virginity was divination: because
that divination is nothing else but the knowledge of the truth to come, which we
attain unto by communicating with God, that, which we never can obtain,
except we keep our selves pure from all earthly and beastly affections. So as
(as we have before said) if that our infirmity surmounteth our discourse, we
may make our intemperance lawful and excusable, in rightly using the remedy
which God has given unto our infirmity, and so be like unto those first
Christians of whom Tertullian said; That they were not borne men, but for there
wives. Let us therefore with reverence enter into this society of marriage,
and let it be a conjunction both of the spirit and will, a communion both of
faith and religion, wherein nothing is proper ne yer particular, no not so much
as the very secret thoughts themselves. This is, as Themistius the Platonist
said, a full mixture of all together, as wine and water, which being once
mingled together, can never be separated again. Hereby we see wherein the
principal effect of this Temperance should rest. To stir up men unto
sobriety, and detest infamous foul gluttony, or filthy delicacie of meats
and drinks, neither is virtue thereby any whit impeached, but through bond
slaves and transgressors; for such lusts very seldom grow in an honest mind.
Such lusts are very seldom found in the minds of wisemen. Although the ages
heretofore have borne and brought forth monstrous Sardanapales, who made
their bellies their God. The common cry of the people themselves detest them,
and are sufficiently reproved by the voice of the multitude, although wisdom
should no way deal with them about the matter. It is very true, that when such
spirits are choked with great cheer, they can never talk of any thing that is
either honest or yet godly, which should make them capable of that
contemplation, whereunto we call them. Now, when as Philo describes out unto
us the lives of these good religious Egyptians, he therein notes out unto us
such a notable sobriety, as that it is impossible for bodies which kept such a
diet could any way hinder the beautiful actions of their soul. And therefore
let us use meats, and such other like transitory good things, for the
strengthening and upholding of the infirmity of our bodies, as the necessary
instrument of the spirit. But we must not so deal with our bodies as men deal
with the garments of the magnificence of Princes, which are so stiffened with
embrodery and Goldsmithes work, and so beset with Pearls and precious stones,
as that a man can scarsly stir himself when they are on his back but we must
make us such a garment as must serve for every day, and take such a fold as
pleases us to give it. There is also another thing which hinders our souls
no less the^ these passions whereof we have already spoken. And that is choler,
which to speak truly, is the fairest flower of folly: and that is that
passion which blinds us all at once, when as it has once taken hold of us,
and makes things appear unto us, as it were through a clowd, clean otherwise
then in deed they are, and is so much the more dangerous a guest, by how much
the more that they that are possessed therewith, are mighty, and of great power
and authority: for the choler of princes which is aided by reason of their
power, flies out like lightning, and breaks out before such time as a man
can see the flash, or hear the crack thereof: and as the thunder and lightning
breaks a sword in the scabard, eue^ so does choler punish, without knowing
any cause, insomuch that they pursue their actions for the most part with most
tedious and unprofitable repentance, being able to do no more as great as they
are, but to wish that that which is ill done, were undone. For as Pyndare
says, God himself has no other power over that that is past, but to forget,
and so they are for the most part, driven to repent them of that at leisure,
which in their have they had committed. Howbeit, for the repressing of this
furious have, we must frame a moderation of the spirit, which we call Clemency,
by which, our wills being unadvisedly pricked forward to wish evil to another,
and the desire of revenge are restrained and repressed, when as we shall have
this clemency rightly framed in us by the perfect observation of our manners,
she will temper us with such a mild and gracious behavior, as shall defend
our reason from such a tedious and strong impression as choler is. She will
make us take leisure to judge of things by weight and measure, to counsel our
friends thereunto, and dissuade us from believing and trusting too much to our
own selves. Wherefore she will infinitely serve us to persuade our selves,
that we cannot be offended but with our selves, neither yet once keep in our
breasts those injuries which others have done unto us. For, if our actions be
pure and sound, and our life holy and innocent, can our venomous and hateful
tongue change it self against our neighbor? And if we at any time propound
unto our selves to live to the good liking of any one man, when shall we be
able to find the means to please all the world, and content both good and bad
together? if we justify us before God and our selves, and have clean and
undefiled consciences, nothing shall then do us hurt. Thou would hurt me in
my good name, and think by falsely accusing me of my life, greatly to wrong
me: and I have God, men, and mine own conscience to testify against thee, to
assure and justify me. Thou may have a will to hurt me, howbeit I need not
feel it without I will. Thou take and carriest away my goods from me, all
this moves me not: or the time was that I had none, or I had them when I was
so young, as that I knew not what to do with them: and lastly, although thou
had left them unto me, yet carried I not them with me when I dyed: and I
must either leave them, or else they must leave me. And why should I be more
sorry for the one then for the other? Well thou greeuest me in my body, thou
beatest and hurtest me, and behold the Soldier which returns very joyfully
from the skirmish, carrying his arm in a scarf, makes more account of his
wound, then he does of his life, if so be he bring from thence a great gash,
either in his head or in his face, the more he beholds himself, the more he
wondereth at himself: If he come home with the string halt of one of his
legs, he goes not a step, but he rejoices that he was so gloriously marked.
Wherefore they are not our wounds that do so grieve and trouble us, but the
occasions for the which we receive them, and they bring us either honor or
dishonor, neither is any thing esteemed for the thing it self, but for the end
why we do it. If we endure all things for the honor of God, and for the
salvation which we shall obtain through our patience, then that which we call
evil shall turn to our good, and that which once seemed to us to be bitter,
shall in the end be found very sweet. The patience which this moderation of
spirit shall bring us, will be a secret testimony unto us, that we are the
faithful servants of our master, that we spare our selves no whit at all to
obey him, nor yet refuse any travel or pain, to put his commandments in
execution. There is nothing, surely, so honorable in this world, even in the
judgment of the very heathen, as to understand how to forgive and pardon. The
laws permit every man to pursue the wrong done unto him: but to pardon and
forgive, belongs unto a Prince alone. And therefore if thou will be a king
over thy self, forgive thy self freely: for the glory of a Christian
consists chiefly in this love, by which he binds his neighbor to love him,
and to be void of this worldly desire of revenge, which as a worm gnaweth the
heart of those which are infected therewith, tosseth and turmoileth them all the
day, and keeps them waking all the night. And therefore the spirit will
compose it self with this equality, as that it will not suffer it self to be
carried away with hatred and evil will. And from thence will ensue another
excellent disposition of the soul, which is modesty and moderation, which
brings with it a certain comeliness unto all the actions of the body, and is
a testimony by them of gentleness and goodwill, and virtue, which can do more
then all the rest, to make us sociable, and to get us the friendship of those
with whom either our nature, good hap, or choice, co^ioineth us. This gracious
manner is so agreeable unto me^ as nothing more, for she wringeth out of the^
that, which force is no way able to do: for she desires no superiority over
the rest, but according to reason, which is a kind of weapon that will cut
deeper then either iron or steel. But these proud, frowning and scornful
people, which look at all the world over their shoulders, which are therewith
swollen so full as their skins can hold, and look at their tails like unto
proud Peacocks, do reason great wrong, when as they so do, clothing him with
such talk as utterly disgraceth him, and makes him odious. And believe me, it
is a very hard thing for these men to come any thing near this holy
Philosophy or wisdom, which dwells amongst the graces that guard and
e^iron her on every side. Tertullian, who is desirous to have us learn, how
greatly mildness and simplicity serve us to prepare our selves to receive the
gifts and perfections of the holy Ghost, says precisely, that he appears
oftenest in the shape of a Dove, to show unto us that he dwells not but in
such as are without gall as a Dove is, but are very gracious and gentle. Now,
because that for the most part it comes by reason of our infirmity, as
thinking to fly one sin, we fall into another, we are to fear, that because
we are not well confirmed in virtue, thinking (...) hold us in humility, we
fall to become very cowards, when as in deed w^ should rather fall to banding
and cha^ging. And therefore it shall not be ^misse, that we add unto that
which we have spoken, of temperance and mildness, certain considerations to
raise us up to be most courageous, when as it shall stand us in hand to be so.
Which will principally serve us, to keep us in a strait and an assured course,
against all whatsoever shall offer it self to amaze and turn us from obeying
the commandments of God. For, first we shall on the one side have rash
presumption to egg us forward to desire more, then that whereunto God has
called us, and oppose our selves unto his constant and firm purpose. Our
happy successes, and prosperous encounters or accidents, will so tickle us, as
that they will make us laugh, our good hap will promise us high and great
things, and yet for all this, we will not once change our visage nor
countenance. We will scornefully behold and look upon, and that with a leering
eye, the presents of fortune (if I may so say) like unto the fair and fresh
colored Apples, which grew near to the lake of Ghomorre, but they were no
sooner touched, but that they fell forthwith into powder and ashes. But if
reason tells us that we must take them, we will then use them with great
equality of mind, and facility of manners, and make none other estimation of
them. On the other side, we shall have afflictions, dangers, griefs, and
poverty, which in the judgment of the common people, wrappeth up all manner
of miseries. And it is against these enemies chiefly that this virtue must
boisterouslie stretch forth her arms: It is through them that she must make
way, if she mean to come to the end of her purpose. Howbeit if we our selves
stand in no fear, and fly not before such time as we see the enemy, what
mischief may they do us? Forsooth, they will spoil us of all our goods, and
so we shall go the lighter: seeing then that the reward is reserved for him
that comes first, and shall the longer while enjoy the immortal gods which
soonest comes thither, shall we then fear to lose the baggage, for the
obtaining of such a glorious victory? And now behold the breach is made, and
our Captain within that calls us, and we our selves busy our selves to
shoot at him that arresteth us by the cloak, and put our selves in hazard to
remain prisoners in the hands of the enemy, that will cause us loso both
cloak and honor, and the fruit also of all our travel. We are threatened
with death, and what other thing else is it that we seek after? We have not
clothed our selves with this transitory and mortal life, but only to pay the
tribute, and discharge the toll at the coming in of everlasting life. These
are good news, seeing we are called upon to pay, for it is a token that we are
come on shore. But what is this death that thus terrifieth us? What? is he so
to be feared, as that he will make us turn our backs upon him, and forsake the
field of virtue, and ^ly hid in the trenches, or rather in the sand holes of
s^thfulnesse and cowardice? If we think it an evil thing, it is because we
feel it to be so, or else because others think so of it. Have we not heard
the plaint of those who have courageously died, either for the honor of God, or
else for the service of their king, or for the defense of their country? Was
there ever yet any nation so barbarous, so void of humanity, or as we
commonly say, so far from the sun, as that commend not with great praise,
the valor and worthiness of those that have spent their lives for the
commonwealths sake? Has not the memory of posterity, taken them out of
their graves, to make them alive again in the remembrance of men? And if we
should come to number out the parts of the life of man, shall we reckon the
time which they have bestowed in eating, drinking, and sleeping, or rather
principally bring into a short accoumpt, the days wherein they have most
valiantly fought for virtue? And therefore that which we call life, is but a
death, because it dies without leaving any memory thereof: for, that which we
call death, i^ in very deed life, because it is that which makes us to be and
continue for ever. Neither are we to regard how long we live, but how well we
live: neither comes death too soon if he bring honor with him, neither is it
for the only opinion of another, and for the honor which we shall get by well
dying, that ought to make us contemn death, but for the love of that second
life, whereinto we must enter. The Druydes, had some forefeeling of the
immortality of our souls, which caused them to be more valiant then all the
people of tho world: for, they made a skorne to save their lives, saying, that
they made no more accoumpt of them, then of the head of a willow tree. And the
Philosophers, who made a jest at them, confessed yet, that they held a blessed
error. Howbeit, we say, that their wisdom was blessed, by tasting of this
opinion, whereby they found groping in the dark, the very resting place of
felicity, and had found out the counterpoyson, which drives away and slays
fear, the very poison of our souls, which dries up, and feeblisheth our
hearts and minds. But we, being brought up and taught in a better School then
they were, do not only know, but constantly believe, and not only believe, but
are glad also as a man would say, of this second immortal life. For, we have a
spirit lodging in the inward part of our soul, which says and sounds
continually, if so be we will hear it, nothing else but this life to come. And
unto this voice it is, that so many millions of Christians have in the midst
of their afflictions and torments followed the standard or ensign of their
Captain, spilling and sheading their blood in all the corners of the earth, as
the true and pure seed os faith. This is that Trompet which has encouraged
them to fight this combat, from whence they have returned very bloody, but yet
have been triumphant, and crowned victorers. If ambitious honor drives us unto
most strange hazards of war, if this affection, to be esteemed and honored of
those before whom we live, hastneth and kindles the course of our actions,
what greater hope is there of these which have obtained this? for they have not
only been honored whilst they lived, but we also reverence their ashes after
they are dead, their bones are holy unto us: the memory of their lives is
yearly renewed with devout commemorations and prayers: we honor them in our
very thoughts, we humble our cogitations before them, as placed in a great
degree of honor in the Church of God, and as having found grace before the face
of our Lord and God. And therefore we must not be void of courage for the
effectual bringing to pass of good and holy things, seeing that the very
wicked them selves, are the better part of their days so valiant in executing
these wicked and most detestable things. For with this patience and strength of
courage, must we enter triumphing into the kingdom of glory, we having been
told by Toby this goodly and holy Oracle, That he O Lord which serves thee
with all his heart, if his life be put in hazard, shall be without doubt
crowned. And for this cause it is why the Scripture tells us, that this good.
Father being brought into miserable captivity and thraldom, did never for
all that forsake the voice of the truth. And to say truly, we can no way justly
attribute unto our selves the name of Christians, if we reject and forsake the
Cross which is left unto us in stead of all other manner of weapons, and is the
very sample and pattern that Jesus Christ has given us, to make us understand
when we shall come unto him, and the watchword that witnesses unto us that we
are his. For, we have no means that can make us perceive that we are instructed
in his discipline, but by this patience, the very mother of all the other
virtues. And Theodoret also says, That the Martyrs run unto ^orments as unto
the school and exercise of virtue. It now follows that we see how we should
behave and carry our selves in the disposing of the benefits which it pleases
God to bestow upon us. In very deed, the rule which hereof is set before us,
and the habit which we take upon us to use them well, is called Liberality.
Now, the first precept which we are to learn, is to acknowledge, that all the
benefits which we have, we hold of the goodness and grace of God: the ordinary
exercise whereof, is to do good unto all the world, and to spread upon us his
blessings, albeit we no whit deserve them. And the reason why he so bountifully
destributeth them amongst us, is not to the end we should lock them up, and
let the gold and silver mould, which are no way good nor profitable but when
they are well used: but to the end that as he has created us unto his own
image, so also we should imitate him, in well doing unto our neighbor,
according to our abilities. And truly we have far greater occasion to do it
then he. For, that which he gives is his own, and he gives it to such also,
as be no way able to do him good. But we, are another ma^s purse-bearers, we
give the goods of our God, and we give them to such as are not only able to
pay us again, but also to lend us as much when we stand in need. And although
they should be unable to pay, yet God, by whose commandment we give them,
answers us the same for them, and makes it his own debt, and charge
himself also not only to pay the principal, but to give usury for it, yea
double, treble, and an hundredth fold. And we are besides to consider, that all
these benefits should be dealt proportionnably, for our necessties, and that by
the law of nature, they belong not unto us, no further then we have need of
them for the maintenance of our life. The measure of our benefits are heat,
cold, hunger, and thirst: and if the custom of the country wherein we live,
and fashions of our countrymen, induce us to any neatness and finenesse, we
must not either too too austerely refuse it, neither yet ouercuriously affect
the same. Wherein, we are first to regard in what state and degree of honor
God has placed us amongst our brethren, and which is sortable unto the estate
whereunto we are borne or called, to the end we might appropriat our goods
unto our selves, and not our selves unto our goods. Now, when we have furnished
our selves with as much as is needful for our estate, we must lay the rest by,
and be very watchful in the well bestowing thereof. And that which may serve to
direct us thereunto, is to take away the merit and the necessity of such as
we would bestow the same on: for, it is the equal proportion and measure,
which chiefly makes the deed holy and pleasing unto God, who has disposed
all things by measure, and has given unto us reason as a compass, to make all
our actions just and even like unto his. For if I give my goods unto him that
has no need, and see a poor man dye at my feet for want of food, this is an
indiscreet liberality in the rich, and manslaughter unto the poor man. If I
for the helping of a stranger, let my father and mother want, the order of true
and natural affection is perverted, and mine action is disgraced. We are also
to observe the things by which we mean to place our good deeds, and some be
more urgent then othersome: for, we may doubt of some of them, in our giving,
and othersome of the^, may pluck the good deed into our own hands: howbeit we
are principally to take heed, that we give not away that which is another man's:
for, they that take from one man to give to another, are abominable before
God, and their alms and offerings stink in his nostrels, and he turns his
face clean from them: and according to the saying of the Wisema^, who says,
That he which offers unto God the fruit of his iniquity, that offering is
most foul and filthy. We should make a great accoumpt of this virtue, to
frame and fashion it very entire and sound in our minds, as being full of all
spiritual grace, that might greatly further us unto our salvation, when as it
shall accustom us, liberally to distribute our goods to those that have need
of them, and our alms unto his honor which has given us them. Saint Augustine
was not afeard to say, that alms is another Baptism: because, that as water
puts out the fire, even so does alms kill sin. This alms (as Chrysostom
says) is Gods friend, which obtayneth at his hands whatsoever she craves: she
sets prisoners at liberty, calls home again those that are banished, and
obtayneth pardon for the condemned. For, the hand of the poor, is Gods purse.
Have we any thing to buy of him? let us then give him our money. And the best
way for us to bestow our goods, is to put them into Gods bank, for he will
assure it us not only on the land and the whole continent thereof, which is
his, but also in heaven, and in eternal bliss, wherewith he will sease, and
inuest us. Why should we then be so foolish as to suffer our gold and silver to
rust in our chests, and so, always blindfold our minds, with laying up crown
by crown, seeing we suffer the time to pass for the doing of our employments,
and that all which we gather and scrape together, is nothing but toil upon
toil heaped up together? Surely, all these goods which bring with them nothing
else but sorrow and grief with their only abundance, and in which are never
fullness nor yet measure, are nothing else but a cage of gold, and a prison of
silver unto their masters, to hold them fast bound to the upper part of the
earth, and thereby bereave them of their liberty for going unto heaven. This
is the water that is powered upon the Egles wings, because he should not fly up
unto the Sun. Even so must they that will taste of the fruit of
contemplation, and attain unto perfect felicity, where the course of our
soul must rest, take heed that they hinder not them selves, but as little as
they can in the dirty dunghill of riches, which are no better then very clay
and earth, what great account soever they make of the^. And yet notwithstanding
it is for this dust that we kill one another, and this is it which we set both
our souls and bodies on the teinters for. For this, great and mighty cities
band themselves one against another in arms and battle: this, is the very
plague of civil society: this, is the water of seperatio^ which parts
brethren asunder, yea which seperateth the father from the child. And therefore
we had need set a fourth and the lost bar betwixt us and our affections, to
keep us from desiring that which is another man's, and to teach us to give to
every one that which is his own. And this virtue, we call Justice, whereof if
we consider in general, wrappeth within her self al sorts of virtues: and her
office, as Lactantius teaches us, is first to join men together with God,
secondly, to reconcile one man to another, which are two things very nearly
knit together. For, if the first keep us within that duty wherein God has
created us, which is, to fear, love, and serve him, and do good unto our
neighbor, it cannot be but that we must stand in the grace and favor both of
God and men. Or if we will more particularly consider of this virtue, and
wherein she disposes us to live justly and lawfully with men, her action may
very fitly be divided into three parts or heads. The first is, to live
honestly, without breaking the laws either of God, or of our country. The
other is, not to offend any man, either in word or deed. The third is, to give
unto every man that which is his own. Now, if as much should be spoken of this
argument as might be, we should exceed that measue that I have prescribed and
set down for this small treatise. And therefore it shall suffice that we
speak of the principal thing which is recommended unto us by Justice, which
is, to keep our faith in all our doings, to take in hand nothing craftily and
cu^ningly, but to deal plainly and openly in all our affairs. For over and
besides, that faith is the knot and common band of the amity and society of
me^, so also is it unto us as gage, of the grace of God which he has
vouchsafed us, to communicate himself with us. And seeing that by this and the
self same word, is signified unto us the assurance which we have of our
salvation, and constancy of our promise, we are verily to believe, that
whosoever shall abuse this pawn amongst men, will lightly abuse that gage
which God has given him. And in very deed, whosoever he is that shall set
before his eyes the law of God, the judgment which therein is denounced, and
the pains that are prepared for the wicked, is it possible that that man will
ever have the heart to deceive him, whom the law has commanded to love as
him self? will he, by defrauding of his neighbor, deceive his own soul of
that everlasting blessedness, whereof those men can never be partakers, who
communicate with the father of lying, and of lies? For, truth comes from
heaven, and falsehood, in the daughter of darkness. All kinds of fiction,
coulored and counterfeit shows and all leasings, are the crafty devises of
the devil: and he that entertaineth them, and uses them, couenanteth with the
wicked spirits, and makes himself the bondslaue of sin. And therefore all our
actions should be sincere and faithful, but especially their actions who are
in authority to govern the people, and are put in trust to render justice
unto every particular man. They must not do as the Egiptian Judges did, that
ware the image of Justice about their necks, but they must have it imprinted in
the bottom of their hearts, and between their lips, for she alone it is that
must direct their judgments, so as neither love nor hatred, must at any hand
make the balance or scales which they hold in their hands, lean either one
way or other, but reason alone must cause the law spurn and kick against
iniquity. Surely, no man can have a better testimony unto his conscience of
his election, then when as he feels himself to take pleasure in dealing
justly and rightuously: for whosoever he is that loves justice, is a man of
God: for, the light shines on the righteous man, and upon him that is of an
upright heart. The way and path of the just, is like unto the dawning of the
day, her light increases by little and little, and becomes like unto the
noonetide. The wise man could not more properly compare justice unto any thing,
then unto the light: for, as the light shines not for it self, but causes
others to see: even so this most excellent sound virtue of it self, looks
not but unto the benefit and profit of another, having none other end but by a
well willing and righteous affection, to conioyne and entertain one another of
us. When this virtue is grown unto a full perfection, she straightwayes
begins to love, and may very well take unto her that name, because that she,
having united and conioined us together, teaches us to account our selves to
be one another flesh, as being the members of one body, or rather, the body of
one head, leaving in us a charitable affection, which is the souldering and
sinowing of our bodies together. For, as we see in the constitution of our
persons, every member to be so framed therein, as that, that which is fardest
off, moves it self forthwith in affection and good liking unto the rest: so
as if we have any pain in our foot, by and by the eye looks unto it, and
straightways we put to the hand, and in the end bend the whole force of our
body to help to do it good. Even so fares it with the mistical conjunction of
the body, and in the holy congregation of the faithful, whereof we are all
members, and the spirit of God which does rule and govern us, teaches us,
that for our own conservation, we must needs make one of another, and make
both our adversity and prosperity common, that we might contribute unto the
necessities of one another. For, our christian righteousness, restrains not us
only, to discharge the civil and politic bands which may be amongst us, but
also acquiteth this natural obligation, which binds one man to another by
mutual good will and love. It remains now, that this righteousness must
conioyne us unto God, and bring forth her most excellent effects, which keeps
our soul upright quiet, and capable of the will of God, and as it were fast
tied unto the love of everlasting bliss, which is done by the gifts of faith
and hope. For, after we have purged our selves of the perverse and filthy
affections, which our soul has gotten into her by living on earth, and so
blinded our will, as that she cannot return to ill, yet must she go on to her
mark, and guide her self unto her resting place. Now, as we are cast down into
the darkness of this world, into the deserts of sin, and bottomless deapths
of perdition, we cannot see our end without light, nor find our way without a
guide, ne yet sustain our selves and go forward without stay: and our light,
guide, and stay is, the revelation which God has showed unto us out of his
will, the knowledge which he has given unto us by his grace, the spirit, by
which he communicates himself with us, and in the end comes himself unto
us, because we are so feeble, as that we cannot go unto him. We call faith the
sound and right affection, whereby we receive that, which he declares unto
us, and which we consta^tly believe, and by which, we judge of him in the
goodness and simplicity of our hearts. This is it with which we humble our
senses, and with which we deny our selves to give credit unto his truth, in
acknowledging our infirmity, and by which we allow his almightines, reverence
and admire the effects so often reiterated, for the reconquering of our
salvation, and deliverance from eternal death. Now, when as our soul has
once found her self disposed to believe this, and received this impression from
the word of God, she then clearly sees the mark whereat she aims, and
knowing thereby the benefit which is set before her, she is touched with a
certain effectual feeling of pleasure, which eggeth her continually forward to
wish and look for the salvation which is prepared for her. This is that hope
by the which she foreseeth the happy hour of her felicity, by which she is
kept for the loking for her blessedness, and vpholden and double strengthened
against all the griefs and miseries which might shake the same, and cross her
in the way. Here then we see how we must prepare our soul to make it capable
of this felicity. We must now then necessarily see and behold by her dealing,
how she delights her self in this most excellent pleasure. And it is to be
considered two manner of ways, the one is, that whilst she is clad about with
this flesh, and detained here in this vile world, yet she still joins and
unites her self unto God her creator, by means of her pure and holy
disposition, and of her good and charitable works. The other is, that when she
is delivered and despoiled of the earth, and the world, she wholly unites her
self unto her first and original being. In this first estate we shall see her
rejoice in such happiness, pleasure, and contentment, as infinitely surpasses
all the other delights which we possibly are able to wish or desire here below.
And such in very deed, as are no way comparable unto those pleasures which we
know to be prepared for us in the life to come, and such in truth, as our
thoughts cannot apprehend. For it is very true (which Esdras says) That man,
that lives here in this world, can comprehend nothing but earthly things. And
it is said in Ecclesiast. That we must not search into things above our reach,
but think upon that which God has commanded us: for it is not fit for us to
look unto that which God keeps secret unto himself from us. Now, the
blesseddest and chiefest pleasure of our soul, consists in conforming and
addressing all her doings to that end whereunto she is created, which is done by
action, prayer, and meditation. For, God having caused us to be borne to be
members here of this vile world, every part of us observing the duty and motion
whereunto he has ordained the same, serve for his glory, and testimony of his
power. It stands us therefore upon, so long as we live here, to keep well our
part, and beware that in our particular discording, we break not the
universal right note and harmony, wherein the beauty of his workmanship
subsisteth: for, he has called every of us unto a certain ministry and
office, whereof he has made some Kings, some Princes, some Magistrates, some
private men, or to say as the Apostle says, he has ordained, Some to be
Prophets, some Evangelists, some Preachers, and some Doctors. And therefore let
us take heed that we fulfill the ministry which is laid upon us. For if so be
we deal lamely and haltingly in the charge which is given unto us, we fail
not only in our own duties, but we also bring a general confusion upon the
whole people, and so become culpable of the sins of all the multitude. Where
contrariwise, if so be we deal justly and truly in our office, we shall be
like unto good and skillful musicians, who, over and besides the great pleasure
of the excellent and sweet sounding of their voices, they feel a marvelous and
incredible delight by the even meeting of one another voice, which falls
into theirs, with an agreement and accord, full of sweet melody. And therefore
it is surely a great pleasure to do well, neither is there any pleasure so
great, as the contentme^t which we feel in our consciences, when we perform
any godly and commendable action. Neither is there any thing that more gladly
tickleth the spirit, then the glory which it offreth and promises unto that
man or woman, who virtuously behave the^ selves in their lives and
conuersations. I mean not such glory as is fed either with wind or smoke,
which pleases men only, but such glory as makes us see a far off, the crown
which is prepared for us. Neither must we stand upon the outcries and clapping
of the hands of the people, which favor the course that we take in hand, no
more then a valiant Champion ready prepared in the lists to fight the combat
does: but let it rather hasten us to run the swiftlier unto the goal and
garland of prize, which attends our victory, and lift up our souls with
such a cogitation, as that all our actions being referred to this end, may be
full of that joy and contentme^t, wherein consists our whole blessedness.
Neither may we ne yet can we continually tie our selves unto the affairs and
bus^nesse of this world: for, after labor, ensues rest, which is in very deed
the true operation of the soul, and that is Meditation. And in very truth,
most blessed are they whose vocation is wonderfully farthest off from the care
of these worldly affairs, and whom God has withdrawn from the tempests and
storms of the world and placed them as it were in a calm and peaceable haven,
to behold a far off the shipwreck of others. And this meditation consists
only of the knowledge of the truth, and glory of God, which we must seek after
as well by the contemplation, and exact consideration of his works, out of which
shines forth euerywhere his power and incomparable goodness, as by the ordinary
reading of his word, by which he opens unto us the treasure of his wisdom,
and draws the curtains of heaven, to make us see his majesty face to face,
as much as our infirmity is able to bear. And the works of God undoubtedly,
are as scaling ladders set up for us every where to climb up unto him. For, let
us turn our selves which way soever we will, and we shall find here in the
world wonderful things: for if we look down into the depth of the bowels of
the earth, we shall see there such a number of veins of gold and silver, such
a sort of precious minerals, and such spring heads of lively waters, as is
wonderful. Again, if we look upon the face of the earth, we shall find such
variety of herbs, flowers, fruits, trees, beasts of the fields, and in them
such virtues, and secret properties, as that it would make us altogether
astonished. And are the seas less admirable, by reason of their ebbing and
flowing? the multitude of fishes, and the diversity of monsters, which they
feed and bring sorth? And will not the airs replenished with fowls, clouds,
raines, snowes, hayles, lightnings, and thunders, make us wonder? And when as
we lift up our eyes far higher, and behold the curtains of heaven spread upon
the face of the earth, behold the brightness of the Sun, the clearenesse of
the Moon, and the ruling of their course, observe and mark the goodly and
beautiful order of the Stars, their course, effects, and influe^ces, must it
not needs altogether amaze us? And yet all this gear together considered in
gross is nothing in respect of the matters which we have now in hand, when as
we shall have examined the^ a part and by piece meal: for, when as we shall
have seen that the very least things in the world, have in their constitution
such a marvelous prudence and wisdom, we must of necessity find out the
author and creator of them, in heaven. Let man but look into himself, and
consider with himself what manner a thing he is, and how so little a moist humor
could make him grow unto such a fashion, to be framed a body of so many sundry
parts, with such proportion. And let him not content himself to see himself
stand upright upon his feet, with his face upward, his eyes open, and
removing all his members, but let him a little uncover his skin, and guess how
the flesh and the bones are so workemanlike set together, and understand how
many sinews and muskles are drawn down even from the neck, unto the most
base and outermost parts of the body, to bind, loose, and remove to all the
parts, unto all sorts of mouings: and let him behold how so many veins are
spread throughout the body to carry the blood and nourishing juice unto every
member. Let him also see what a number of arteries are guided from the heart,
and divided to accompany all the sinews and veins, to hold in the vital
spirits in every part, as the messengers of his will, to the end, to command
the sinnewes to move, or not to move. Let him then if he will, lay open his
stomach, and see how his life is maintained, how the meats sent down into
the stomach, are transformed by a secret and incomprehensible power, how, by
laboring and stirring in the stomach, they run into the paunch, how the good
juice flows through the small veins into the liver, which is the shop of the
blood: how the liver discharges her superfluities into the gall, spleen, and
kidneys, how it distributeth the blood into the veins, and how it is sent into
the heart to be there made thin and subtilized, even unto the confection of the
vital spirits. If he behold the moving and breathing of the lights, which
refreshes and moderateth the heat of the heart, if he see the artificial
turnings and wreathings of the guts, let him not think the same, to be fallen
out of the clouds, neither yet that he sees any other thing within, then he
sees without. Howbeit, when as he shall come to consider of the head, which is
the treasure of the senses, and seat of reason, let him dream amongst other
things, what an especial work the eye is, and with how many filmes and thin
skins, this lightsome spirit is garnished and defended, which in very truth
is the pleasure of the life, he shall remain as it were astonished and amazed,
but yet not so much, as when he comes to pierce the brain, where he shall
perceive the manner whereon the portracture and images of things are borne by
the senses, as faithful messengers and interpreters, to be received and
exercised therein by the common sense: and afterward to be ordered and placed
within the custody of the celles of the memory. But the thing that most
astonisheth us, is this, when as we desire to understand what our soul is,
which manageth and governs all this whole workmanship, what a power it is
of, that thus strangely moves and works, which awaketh when we sleep,
comprehends so easily and things, reaches into the deepest matters, and by
discourse, finds out the cause and reason of the most secret things. And we
see and feel these effects in our selves, and yet we can neither see nor yet
conceive them. Certainly, when we, in the contemplation of these things, are
lifted up by faith, we feel our selves forthwith led unto the author of these
works. And to say truly, when as we see so many marvelous things dispersed
throughout the whole face of the earth, for what other purpose serve they, but
to be as a book left wide open, for us to read out thereof, the greatness and
almighty power of God, who is hereby so gloriously expressed? The only
beholding whereof, is able to stay our senses and spirits, and furnish them
with an abundant and sufficient contentment, whereon hangs our felicity.
This is it, whereon we should study day and night, and not content our selves
with the bare looking of the cover only, but diligently to way the periodes,
yea, even to pluck out the sillabes and meanest points, which contain
excellent and holy secrets. And this was a very good answer in my opinion,
which the good Heremite S. Anthony (as Socrates writes) made unto a
Philosopher, who asked him how he could possibly dwell in a solitary place,
without having of books about him? Surely (quoth he) I lack no books, for
the world is my book, and my study, is the contemplation of nature, wherein I
read day and night, of the glory of my God: howbeit, I can never attain to
the end thereof. O happy life void of such a number of boiling sorrows and
greefes, which undermine and consume our years, gladding and rejoicing in this
gracious rest, and having good leave to thrust our hands up to the elbowes into
the treasures of the Deity, which feedest the desires of the soul, with the
knowledge of immortality, and swondest and die within the burning flames of
eternal wisdom. These are the delights, and these are the alluring baits
which kept Acepsenas, a recluse, within his cell in the wilderness, full
threescore years. These are the allurements which stayed that Simeon all his
life long, upon the top of a pillar. What a merueilous desire (think you) had
those men, who being lifted up above the earth, did swim in the air,
communicated with the Angels, and beautified themselves before they dyed?
Without doubt, our blood is wonderfully congealed and gross about our heart,
and we very dull, and as it were in a swound, if we admire not their
blessedness, neither have we compassion of our own miseries, our spirits are
mightily mortified, if so be we comprehend not, that in this life, in this
contemplation, and in the knowledge of this eternal verity, our consolation,
contentation, and felicity, l^eth, consists and rests. Now God, who loves
us as his children, means not to leave us unto the darkness of this world,
and to make us seek after, gropingly as it were, amongst his works for this
his truth. But having left his spirit with us, he has also left unto us his
word, as an interpretor of his will, wherein we shall be sure to find sure
and faithful directions, to bring us unto this verity, and easily understand
his marvelous works. This is that voice, which is called the burning word;
this is that word which is called the light, which, as Eusebius says, is like
unto fire, because it does not only heat, lighten, and make ripe, but also
melts, softeneth, and hardens. And therefore we should follow those good
Egiptian fathers, whose lives Philo describes, who loosing their eyes to look
far above the works of God, cast them forthwith into the reading of the
Prophets, and of the holy books, as upon the commentary and interpretor of
their meditations. And these are they that have most profoundly entered into the
divine wisdom, and who for that occasion, are in the scriptures called Seers:
for they are they, by whom we have had the mysteries of eternity revealed, and
not by any human industry, but by the inspiration of the spirit of God, have
communicated unto us the miracles of heaven, and opened the entry into wisdom
with the which when as our soul is mixed, and from thence has received her
form and perfection, she must then bring forth her fruit, according as the
same Philo has taught us, That that is the property of every perfect thing.
The fruit of a meditating soul, or rather the infant thereof, if we will
speak as Eusebius does, is prayer, which being conceived in the inward part of
our thought, discloseth it self betwixt our lips, even as the child is
conceived in the mothers womb. For, the knowledge of God, and the effectual
feeling of his goodness, which are imprinted in us, by an holy cogitation,
engenders also in us this motion of courage which Mercury the great calls,
The inward word, which being well fashioned within, and aided by the spirit and
the body, thrusts out it self, and utters this outward word, which we call
prayer, we take not this only for ordinary praye^, which proceeds of our
infirmity, and should be the beginning of all our works, and which we are not
to keep to be the last action of the soul, but for that, by which we express
that affection which is borne in us, by perceiving of that which we have from
the goodness of God, which, after that we have by holy thoughts prepared our
tongues for it, rules and governs the same, and makes it the instrument of
his glory, by which we try whether we converse therein holily yea or no, which
is such a wonderful contentment, as that there remains not in our spirit to
receive any other cogitation at all into it. For be it that we prostrate our
selves before him, to beseech him of his favor and grace, or require his
benefits, or to give him thanks for his favors daily showed unto us, our
spirit is as it were ravished and in a swond, and we feel his hand already
coming faster upon us, then we are in calling upon him: having assured our
selves a long time together, that whatsoever we should crave at his hand in a
lively faith, he would grant us, whether it be that we at al times, as indeed
we ought, cause our voices resound his praises, preaching and setting forth his
wondrous works, singing as he has commanded us, songs unto his glory, and
answering one another with hymns and spiritual songs, our hearts rebound and
leap in us, and our spirit lifts up it self above the heavens, and ioineth
in thought with our creator. And what hour, nay what moment of an hour ought
we to cease, turning the eyes of our souls toward him, who continually
stands with his arms wide open, to embrase us, bends his favorable ears
unto our prayers, hearkeneth lovingly unto our vows, and is not jealous of the
praises which we sing unto him? Is it meet then that there should be either
business or sleep, to bereave us of this pleasure, or rather that we our
selves should bereave our souls, and so bring our selves a sleep even then,
when the sweet songs, earnest and fervent prayers, should gather our spirits
together, and assemble them to strive with the grace of God, which works in
us? Is it fit that we should become deaf, even then, when he touches the
instrument of our souls, to cause us agree unto the tune of his will, and
content our selves with the melody of this sweet and perfect hermonie, which
sounds from the conjunction of our understanding of his deity? O immortal
delights, who shall separate my soul from thee, who shall pluck me from out of
thine arms, to draw me out of heaven unto the earth, from clear shining
brightness, into miserable darkness, and to lead away my senses from purity
and cleanness, into a most filthy dunghill or iakes? And therefore O thou my
dear soul, live, yea live I say, and settle and resettle thy self amidst
these heavenly delights, which as pearls and diamonds, have banished
themselves into the wilderness and uttermost parts of the earth, and are such
an excellent market as can possibly be wished, unto all such as have the hearts
to go thither to seek after them, and live thou this blessed life, which is
the way of immortality, that pleasantly leads us even into the entry of the
heavens, following our God, step by step, and holding him by the garment, where
being arrived, we shall be bereaved but of that clothing that hinders us, and
be cast with a lost body into the midst of the depth of his glory: where,
being full, not of pleasures, ease, rejoicing, delights and voluptuousness,
but with an unspeakable and vnbeleeueable contentment, which surpasses
whatsoever we are able not to speak of, but to think of. We shall begin the
course of this immortal life, which never shall have end, and enter into this
eternal blessedness, out of which we shall never come, and be enlightened with
that most heavenly glory, which never shall be darkened. But because that this
last and most perfect felicity, consists in beholding the face of the father
of light, wherein we shall see the springhead and original beginning of all
goodness and excellency, and will not have us see him face to face, so long
as we are encompassed about with the darkness of this world, but only his
back part as it were passing by, we might hold our peace, and with silence
admire, that which we know to be, but we know not how, neither are we once able
to speak thereof, but that we must needs accuse our own ignorance, and that,
whereof we are not able to affirm any thing, save that we know not any thing
thereof by any of our senses, but is a thing which beyond all measure
surpasses all perfection else whatsoever, for our senses can no way possibly
pierce so far into it, and the more that our spirit strives to enter into
it, the more it stumbleth thereat. What is there then for us to do? Forsooth a
most assured hope, that if we live here in this world holily and rightuously,
and make our selves worthy of the grace and favor which our heavenly father
offreth unto us, and withdraw not our affections from him, and give not the
honor which we owe unto him, upon and to these earthly and worldly things, we
shall one day enter as his children and heirs of his glory, into the treasury
of his heavenly riches, and enjoy according to his promises, the brightness
of his eternity.

I Have adjoined this Epistle unto the end of this treatise, because they are
both of like argument, and because also we should not so esteem of our own
inventions, as that we should not commend likewise the works of the ancient
fathers, who have far exceeded us, both in age, zeal, and knowledge. And
that small diversity that may be found in the translation, may be imputed unto
the bare^nesse of our language, wherein, as in a painting, men are enforced to
imitate by shadows and images the help of natural bodies. And let a man do
whatsoever he can, yet is it a rare and strange thing to make the counterfeit of
any thing, equal unto the thing it self.

The Epistle of S. Basile the Great, unto S. Gregory the divine.
I Have forthwith reacknowledged your letter, as men reacknowledge their
friends children to be like unto their parents: for there is no man that can or
may better mislike of our heremitages, than you your self, nor know before
hand what our manner of life and ordinary conversation is, to uphold and
maintain that the choice of places can any way enlarge and increase your heart
unto devotion, and that there is nothing therein at all which may cause you to
hope for any such sweet delight and felicity, which we herein promise unto our
selves. In very deed I should be ashamed to cause you to have a desire to write
hereof that, which I my self day and night, do here in this wilderness. For
although I have left the city, and all those tedious dealings which brought
unto me with them a thousand mischiefs, and a thousand discommodities, yet can
I not possibly leave my self, but am even properly most like unto them that
being not wonted unto the sea, grow so sick when they are a ship-borde: and
thinking the greatness of the vessel, and rolling thereof, to be the cause of
their sickness, are desirous to go down into the cockboate for the easing and
bettering of themselves, and when they are there, they grow sicker then they
were before, because they carry with them both their stomach and choler also
into it. And after that manner fares it also with me, for I carrying with my
self, both my private and particular passions, am continually in the very
self same trouble and unquietness that I was before, and so I have gotten
nothing by withdrawing my self from the world. Howbeit, whosoever he be that
would do that that should further his salvation, and follow the way of him
which says; If any man will follow me, let him forsake himself, and take up
his cross and follow me, the same man without doubt shall find rest unto his
soul. For as the eye which continually moves, and rolleth it self hither
and thither, sometime high and sometime low, can never look strait upon any
thing, and therefore if he will look well, he must steadfastly cast and fix
his eye altogether upon one point: even so, man's understanding being drawn
away with a thousand sundry cares, cannot well bend it self aright unto the
knowledge of the truth: for the unmarried man shall be carried away with foul
and beastly desires and lusts, troubled with foolish and furious love toys,
and other unbridled desires. And on the otherside, with how many cares shall
the married man be thwarted, for if he has no children, that will be a great
corsiue to him: he must also have an eye unto his wife, he must provide for the
necessaries of his house, he must be at charges with his servants, he shall be at
variance with his neighbors, he shall always be at sure in the law, his
merchandise shall be in hazard, and the manuring and storing of his grounds
will be a great pain and charge unto him, he shall every day have new troubles
in his mind, and the night which brings with it all the cares of the day
forepassed, will toss up and down in his fantasy. And there is but one only
remedy for all this, which is wholly to forsake the world: neither must he
abandon his body only from the world, but he must with a sweet and an assured
resolution, separate his mind clean from the world, yea he must as it were,
violently pluck away his very cogitations from it, and make them fly, have
nothing proper unto himself, keep no company, he must be poor and without
substance, and without all worldly dealings, far from any negociations,
ignorant of politic sciences and trades, and only prepare himself to receive
into his soul, the instructions of holy wisdom. And we cannot better prepare
our selves hereunto, then to forget wicked conditions, and naughty dealing,
wherein we were heretofore brought up in and instructed, for it is impossible
to write any thing upon a written pair of tables, except we first wipe that
out which before was written; Even so likewise it is impossible to engraue in
the heart of men, the will and word of God, if ye first of all pluck not out
thereof the fore conceived opinions, which before have been therein imprinted
by a wicked kind of life. And hereunto the solitary life is wonderful
profitable, because that it overcomes all our perturbations, and gives
reason, time and leisure, to draw them out of the soul. For as wild beasts
are easily tamed when as they are made much of, and dealt gently withal; even
so our lusts, choler, terrors and sorrows, which are the very poisons of our
souls, are with greater ease ruled and governed by reason, when as they begin
to quiet themselves, and are not provoked and made savage by a continual
cogitation. And therefore such a place must be chosen out as this which we are
in, out of all company, to the end our continual meditation be not interrupted
by any resort, for this godly meditation nourishes the soul with sweet and
heavenly cogitations, and what a more blessed thing can there be then to
imitate here upon earth the life and accord of Angels? And to be up by the
sun rising, to pray and sing himnes and songs unto the creator, and when the
sun is at the highest, to begin his labou^ again, and licor and season his
travail in the salt of devout prayers and spiritual songs? For there is
nothing that so much gladdeth the mind, and makes it more merry and strong,
then the consolation of holy songs: and therefore quiet rest is the very right
preparatiue for the purging and clensing of the soul. For, because the tongue
is not then impeached for the discovering of the affairs of the world, neither
are the eyes yet occupied about the judging of the brightness and diversity of
colors, or of the proportion of bodies, neither does the hearing spend and
waste the forces of the understanding, to hear pleasant songs, which are made
to tickle the cares, or yet matter of laughter, foolery and knavery, which
serve for none other purpose but to weaken the force and intention of the mind.
Now when the soul is not carried away with thinking of outward things, and
spread abroad as it were by the senses upon worldly things, she comes back
unto her self and returns wholly into her self, and afterward of her self
raises up her self even unto God. Then all the clearness and brightness of
this divine most bright shining light, forgets all her natural actions, and
cares no more for food and clothing, no she not so much as once thinks of
any earthly thing, but transferreth all her study for the getting of eternal
benefits. She addicteth her self, and studieth how she may become temperate,
how she may frame her actions according to righteousness and prudence, how she
may become courageous, and generally, all other virtues which devout persons
learn, to address al their actions unto comeliness and perfection of life.
The plain beaten high way that must bring us hereunto, and keep us within the
compass of our duty, is the reading and meditating of the holy scriptures, for
therein we shall find the most virtuous and excellent instruction to cause us
to do well, that possibly may be, and examples and histories of the lives of
holy and religious persons, which are so many lively images, and exemplars of
all good manners, and holy conversation, which are there set before us to
follow. Wherefore, whosoever he be that shall feel any infirmity in him
self, and staieth himself hereon, shall find therein as in a rich and well
furnished Apothecaries shop, every necessary drugge that is fit to recover his
health, for let him that loves temperance and modesty, read over ordinarily
the history of Joseph, and therein he shall learn actions full of great
continency and chastity, and find, that he was not only chaste and a
resister of filthy lust, but by reason of long exercise, confirmed also in all
sorts of virtues, he shall likewise learn by Job a rare courageous mind, in
seeing the adversities which he endured, as being become from a great rich
man, to be a most miserable poor wretch, and from a father of a noble and
great family; a man alone and without children, standing courageously and
continually unto his tackling, his mighty constancy being never abated, nor
his heart any whit at all lessened. And when his friends which came to comfort
him, had provoked him, and fell a jesting at him for his talk, and stirring
his mildness, yet could they never thereby drive him into choler. But if any
man would dream, with what magnanimity he could be able to hold himself
courteous and gentle, and being angry against sin, love and make much of the
persons that offend, he shall find David, who was a most brave and valiant
expert man of war, to be notwithstanding such a one, as was far from
revenging himself of his enemies. Such a one was also Moses, and yet
notwithstanding he would be mightily angry against those that blasphemed the
honor of God: but unto such as offended and slaundered himself, he would be
merueilous calm and gentle. And therefore we must do as good Painters and
Counterfeiters do, who taking upon them to draw out the counterfeit of some man
or beast, or any other thing else curiously wrought in a table before their
faces, looking oftentimes upon the thing which they are counterfeiting, do draw
the liniaments one after another, until they have finished and ended their
work: that is to say, looking upon the lives of holy men, as upon lively
images, draw out of them the most excellent liniaments of virtue, to make us
perfect, and to make ours by imitation, like unto them in all goodness and
excellency. So we returning from labor unto prayers, shall by them make our
minds and spirits more lively and merry, as heated and enflamed with a true
godly love. For a good and faithful prayer engenders in our souls, a
manifest knowledge of the goodness of God: for that makes God, as it were, to
dwell in us, as having settled him deeply in our remembrances, and so by this
means we are made the temples of God, when as the intent of our mind is not
interrupted by any earthly cogitations, nor our soul troubled with any
sudden motions, but flying and eschewing all other thing, retireth her self
toward God as to her friend, and driving away all perverse affections which
move us unto intemperance, gives her self wholly unto the study of those
knowledges which lead her unto virtue. And first it is very meet we take heed,
that we speak nothing impertinently to the purpose, but to find out things
after a gentle manner, and without contention, and to answer unto that which is
demanded without affectation, and not interrupt him that speaks to the
purpose, of any thing, and to keep such a moderation in hearing of him, as
that it might not seem that he meant by any vain ostentation, to thwart the
matter at that time set a broche. Neither must any man be ashamed to learn, or
yet hide that which has been taught him by another: dealing like unto wicked
women, that rob other women of their children, and make their husbands
believe that they are theirs. But we must give unto him that has taught us,
all the honor and glory. It is best, as I think, that every man speak
moderately and temperatly, so as his words be not lost before they come unto
the ear, neither yet must they be over loud, nor rashly spoken, nor yet
unadvisedly, for a man must first consider with himself, what he will say, and
then afterward utter it, carry himself graciously in reasoning, and to give a
good liking in particular conversation, not with meriments, but with
benevolence, gracious communication, and natural courtesy, always flying and
avoiding, when there is any need of reproouing, all bitterness, and eger
words. He must first frame himself to be of an humble and meek spirit, that
he might like and please him who has need of his discourses. The manner which
the Prophet used in reproouing of David, is very many times good and profitable
for us, who would not by and by, and upon the sudden, accuse him of the foul
fact which he had committed, but told him of his fault under the title of
another, whereby he made him the judge of his own sin, so as having
condemned himself, he could by no means take any occasion to fall out with him
that had reproved him. Now he that is humble and cast down in his cogitations,
looks always downward, wears his apparel carelessly, his hair long, and
his garment not made after the fashion, so as that humility that mourners
fashion themselves unto, is natural in him. His Gown must be girt unto him,
but not above his loins, for that is somewhat womanish: neither yet too loose,
for that bewrays his slothfulness. His gate must not be slow; because it
signifies a soft spirit, ne yet ouer-hastie, for fear he be noted to be
haggar headed. The garments are made but for one thing, which is, to keep the
flesh from heat and cold. He must not hunt after colors, to please the eye,
nor exquisit fashions for delicacies sake: for, they that hunt after these
sorts of attires, are womanish, who beautify their smooth well colored cheeks
and their hair, with many strange and diverse colored paintings. The Gown
must be made of such stuff, as that we shall not need to cast another upon it,
to keep us from the cold. His hosing must be of a small price, but yet of such
a price, as may suffice the necessity for which he uses it. And generally, as
in his garments, so must he also in all other things have regard unto
frugalitie and profit. As for meat, bread will staunch hunger, and water
quench the thirst of a sound man. He may use salads of herbs as far as is
necessary to strengthen and brawne the body. He must not at his meals eat
rauenously like an hunger starued Wolf, but show himself always like unto
him self, sober, and temperate in all his desires: neither must he in the
mean while occupy his mind in playing the fool, but dreaming of the nature
of things wherewith we are nourished, take occasion to glorify God, who
governs and moderateth all things, for so much as he has devised and brought
forth so many sundry sorts of meats, which by a singular property are applied
unto the use and maintenance of our bodies. And therefore before we go to
meat, we must give God thanks for that which he has bestowed upon us, and
beseech him to bestow upon us in time to come, that which he has promised
us. We must have but one hour in the day for our meals, and that must be also
observed in good order, so as in the xxiiij. hours of the day and night, we
must bestow this one hour about our body, and all the rest of the time must be
spent in spiritual exercises. We must make but short sleeps, that we may wake
quickly, and our sleep must be after the manner of our life, which is
oftentimes interrupted by great and earnest cogitations. For to be tied to a
deep sleep, as if all our members were benumbed, and by such rest to give
place unto dreams, and foolish imaginations, is to dye always. Their morning,
which make a devout profession, is midnight, for then do they take their time
to praise God, because that when as the rest of the night turns away their
hearts from whatsoever might occupy their eyes and ears, it keeps their
thoughts fixed on God, gives them the means to amend their consciences by
recording of their sins, and to set bars unto their souls to keep them
from evil, and to implore the goodness of God, that it might work together in
them this perfection of life which they hope to aspire and come unto.

AN EXHORTATION of a civil life, unto Monsieur de L.
I Am very glad that there is something passed my hand which likes you: And I
never think my watchings better bestowed, then when as they content such as
with their friendship honor me, and unto whom I have vowed my service as I
have done to you. Howbeit, if the Epistle of Saint Basile which I have put
forth into French, have done you any pleasure, it is not to me that you should
show the favor: not unto me, I say, who have rather empared then amended the
work of so great a Clarke, in making it to change the tongue, and to speak out
french language. Truly, amongst all the Fathers of the Grecians, there is not
one amongst them all that I better like of, then I like of him. Every man has
his liking, and I will leave other men to the commending of that which they
best like of: but as for mine own part, I will rather use this man which
pleases me, for this is the man that I chiefeliest make accoumpt of.
Nevertheless, there is one thing in your letter which you wrote unto me that
misliketh me, and that is this, You write, that the often reading of this
Epistle, which you say, you read over as it were every day, has brought you
into a desire to get you into some Monastery, and there to pass the rest of
your days, that you might turn away your eyes from beholding the great
miseries which this miserable civil war has hatched and brought forth, and
wholly convert your mind and thoughts unto the honor and service of God. This
purpose of yours, I must needs confess, proceeds from a most godly heart, and
a very good forecasting mean to bring unto you in your own particular cause,
some quietness of mind, and peace of conscience, which I suppose to be one of
the greatest benefits which we can any way lock for. But it would sore grieve
me to be bereaved of so sweet and dear company, and so great hurt unto the
common weal. You should (believe me) in my poor opinion, do marvelous wrong
both unto your country, and to your friends: and every man is to seek his
own benefit, but yet so, as that it be not to the hurt of another. For, we
are not borne here in this world for our selves: and besides, we are but the
lesser part of the whole, and therefore bind and tie your self unto the great
and principal parts thereof, with most straight bonds, which allow us not to
withdraw our selves in this dangerous season, without violating and breaking
both the bonds of charity, and also of godliness. And yet for all this, I
would not have you think, that I will gaynesay, or yet diminish the
commendation which Saint Basile, and so many ancient Fathers, and my self
with them, have given unto solitary life: for I greatly commend it, yea, and I
love it, it may be too well. But I wish you did love it as they do, and upon
the selfsame considerations, and not for any discouragement, the rather to
avoid the thwart and tedious dealings of a civil life, then for to follow
the pleasure that is in contemplation. Follow (if you please) the examples of
the ancient Fathers, but follow them with that wisdom and moderation which
they do. Believe me if you will, it is now no time for their example of life,
to call such men as you are, unto solitary life. For monastical life came not
in, in a troublesome time, ne yet for such men, as whose wisdom and fidelity
was necessary unto the government of the weal public. Neither do we see,
that in the first beginning of the Christian Church, although it was every
manner of way, and with all sorts of troubles and afflictions tossed and
turmoyled, that the Fathers withdrewe themselves into the deserts and solitary
places, there to serve God quietly. But their lives being full of actions,
and those public also, hindered them to establish the Churches, to discipline
the people, to conserve the peace and union of cities and provinces, and to
serve for examples of modesty and temperance unto the whole world. But when as
the Christians had full liberty and assurance, and that the Emperors and
chief Governors had embraced the Religion, and kept the same under the covert
of their arms and power, and favored such as made profession thereof, the peace
then of it being established, and the common weal being able as it were to be
maintained of it self, upon the good and sure foundations, which so many wise
and holy personages had before laid, it was permitted unto great learned men
to enjoy the sweetness of solitary life. But of what age were they when they
thus did? Forsooth it was even then, when they had spent the strength of their
young years in the government of the civil life, and in worldly affairs
amongst men. And about this age, and after this manner, did Saint Basile, and
Saint Jerome withdraw them selves. And yet notwithstanding when as the
necessity of the common state required their aid, some of them were called
away, and enforced to enter again into their former charge for the good of the
common weal. And othersome of them remained all their lives long in solitary
life, and it was by reason they were not t^ght competent and necessary me^
about those affairs which then were eminent. And to say truly, what man is
able to abide to see, during the tempest (when as the billows roll most hye,
the sea fometh most furiously, the winds blow most outragiously) the most
expert pylots leave the helm unto passengers, to fall to their sleep? For, so
long as it is calm, every man may guide the st^rne, for then, skill is to
small purpose, and ignorance does no great hurt. But so long as the storm
continues, the direction and wisdom of him that governs is seen, upon
whose direction and wisdom alone hangs the lives of all those that are
embarked with him. Now, your study, age, and experience, have brought unto you
great sufficiency, and ripeness of counsel, and your wisdom, and
sincerity, have made you in such sort affect the common weal of your
country, as in deed you ought, so that you have thereby gotten your self such
credit amongst your natural contrymen, as the time yields and affoordeth
for honest men to have. For, with what pretense can you any way abandon the
common good of your country? It may be, you will say, I am not able to abide
the outrages which reign amongst the people, I can not away to see the
disorder and confusion where-into all things are fallen. Tell me, I beseech
you, does this agree with the words which I have heard you oftentimes speak,
that our Country is in the stead of our Father and Mother, and to this effect
it is called Patria, by a name, the deriuation whereof, signifies a Father,
and the feminine termination signifies a Mother, as conioyning them both in
one word, and signifying Patrie, and Matrie, both together. Put the case that a
Father should wax mad, and be out of his wits, upon whom would you bestow
the care, keeping, and oversight of him? would you not say, upon the Children?
Now, if the Children would excuse them selves, and say, that he had punished,
iniuried, and beaten them, and therefore would not take it upon them, would
you not find fault with them, and with checks and taunts enforce them to do
that duty which both nature and charity commands them? Peradventure you
will say, that there are two things which withdraw you, and they seem to
excuse you for putting too your helping hand, and meddling in and with these
affairs. And the one is, that it is lost labor, that the pleadings of honest
men are utterly unprofitable, and serve for none other purpose, but to make
them to be enuyed and hated, without bringing any benefit to the commonweal
at all. By this, the wound is no whit the more cured, and liberty has
overmuch won upon reason. For, honest men are no whit bound to travel for
the proffit and commodity of the commonweal, but so farre-foorth as their
travel may do good, and that there is thereby some hope of well doing. For,
men must deal in a State, as Physicians do with their physic, for, they must
not minister physic unto diseases that are incurable, which brings nothing
else unto themselves but shame and dishonor. The other that you tell of, is
this, that there are some things which an honest man may not by any means
possible support, nor dissemble. Well, patience is a marvelous great virtue,
and greatly beseeming, and necessary for the life of men, and yet she has her
bounders, and the mischief grows sometimes unto such an head, as that they
which both love and fear God, are no way able to abide it. For answer unto
the first, this I say, that it is a cowardly, idle, and slothful excuse,
grounded rather upon our pusillanimitie, then upon wisdom which it so
vaunteth of. For, who is he that can have any just occasion to despair of the
good of an Estate or of a City, since we see by the course of histories how
uncertain, both their ruin and preservation is? For, how often have we seen
kingdoms and cities fall, even in their most flourishing time, by a sudden
earthquake, and by great winds; and other some, altogether tottering, and
almost half fallen, maruelously holden up, raised, and set up again in the
midst of their ruins? For, this power of God, which men foresee not, has
caused them to hang between fear and hope, neither was there ever any thing
so sure, as that the fall of it was not to be feared, nor any thing so
staggering, as that there was not some hope of the staying thereof. And this is
without all doubt most true, that if our salvation lay wholly in our own hands,
we had already been damned. Howbeit, God fights for us against our selves,
and will save us whether we will or no. Now, although we were sure to be
ruined, and saw it never so clearly, that it would light upon us, as in very
deed we see not so much as one jot thereof, is it not a part of the duty of
good children and good friends, ^o assist those that are incurably sick, even
unto death, and ^ourd them with fair words, whom we can not possibly heal?
You will perhaps say, that you are not able to abide the unbridled liberty,
which some private men take upon them, as the oppression of Justice, and the
disorder and confusion wherein we live. What is it then that you would have?
Would you see all things as they should be, as to see good men in authority,
ill men suppressed by laws, and Justice to rule and reign? Surely, these are
worthy wishes of you, and worthy an honest man; howbeit, the world is not
governed by wishing and woulding. A man may lawfully desire good things, but
let them be as they may, we must needs bear them. There will be vices ynow in
the world, so long as there are men in the world. And this is to heal and ease
these disorders whereunto the common weal and your duty call you, neither
must you bring with you, your eyes alone, but your hands also, to heal your
country of so grievous wounds. I right well know, that you shall not therein
be able to do as you would, neither is the mischief to be meddled withal, but
you must do what you can in it, and as the condition of the mischief will
suffer you. This is an occupation, out of which we choose not the matter, but
is given unto us: for, a good workman, is oftentimes enforced to work in a
rotten piece of wood, and yet for all that he must not give it over, but make
the best he can of such an ill-favored piece of wood. When Solon was asked
whether he had given unto the Athenians the best laws he could, he answered
no, but I have given them the best that they are able to abide. And we must
apply remedies according to the strength and nature of the diseased. To be
short, we are not warranted in our affairs none otherwise then with our
counsels, and having done the best we can, because it is to be done, we are
thereof discharged both before God and men. And as for the particular injuries
which we receive thereby, where ca^ we better bestow our charity and patience?
where shall we exercise that which we learn out of the school of Christ, if
we can not bear the injuries and slanders of the people with whom we live?
yea, when shall we hope that by our patience we shall appease the popular
furies, bring again the rebellious people into their right wits, displace the
wicked from their authority, and set good men in their rooms? It is most
certain, that these diseases are sooner cured by winning of time, then by
applying of remedies, it is far better to entertain them by wisdom, that
they empaire not, for in the end, it is length of time that must ripen and
heal them. For, the people by experience recover health, and then they seek
after good and honest men, and abhor those whom before they had made much
of. They are like unto pale-coulored maids, which eat all the worst things
that possibly they can get, but they cast them by and by up again. For, so
soon as they are stirred and moved, they use for the serving of their turn
the most desperate and most wicked men: but they are no sooner quieted and in a
good mood, and that this inconsiderate boiling heat has run over, they by
and by make no account of those villains, but are the first that will lay hold
on them and plague them. And therefore is not the commonweal greatly
benefited, when as good men preseru^ them selves for such a dangerous time, and
forsake not, either through anger, or despair, the ship wherein they see the
drunken passengers for a time rage and storm? I confess in deed, that he must
needs in such a case run into a thousand hazards, and suffer a thousand
indignities. But whosoever takes the pain, to him b^longeth the merit and
reward: and through travel, glory increases. But especially amongst us
Christians, who make profession to endure and abide by it, and have enrolled
our selves under a Captain, that lays before our eyes an hard and tedious
warfare, and assigns unto us no crown, before such time as we have sustained
many strange afflictions, and innumerable trials and corrections. He braggeth
no whit of his victories, n^ yet of his soldiers that have followed him,
otherwise then for their patience. By this only virtue have they conquered so
many Provinces, Kingdoms, and Empires, and were no way glorious, but by the
receiving and bearing of injuries. How can we then better follow him, then by
hazards, opprobries, and injuries? And in what a more worthy and recommendable
occasion can we endure all this, then to serve, for the good and preservation
of our country? If love, which God has so highly commended unto us, may so
prevail with us, as to hazard our goods and lives for the safety of our
neighbor, what ought we to do for such an innumerable number of men, and such
a number of cities and provinces, unto which nature has conjoined and allied
us by all one law, language, manners, and secret affection, which she has
imprinted in us, from the which, whosoever separateth himself, is adjudged of
all the nations of the world unworthy to behold the day light, and to live and
be esteemed amongst men as an unnatural and cruel Parricide. Now, God came
not into the world to dissolve and adnihilate this natural obligation, but
contrariwise, more surely to strain and tie the knot by this love, which he
has so greatly recommended unto us. Even so we also see, that when we once
begin to cut asunder the bond of the common affection unto our country, that
all manner not only of disorders, but of most abominable crimes and
wickednesses set in foot; and thefts, murders, rapes, extortions, and
sacrileges, forthwith rule and reign. Now, what is it in the whole world,
which a man can more mislike, more abhor, kindle his fury more, and more
stir and provoke him to ruin, and confound people? What shall we then say?
whilst so many labor headlongly to overthrow both themselves and their
country, will you, even you, I say, that have always had charge, and whose
office binds you to take pains for the common weal, remain as it were
carelessly in the desert, to see, your self being safe, the fire burn your
country, and reserve your self to behold the ashes thereof? What a grief
would it be unto you, not to have brought the aid which you might have done,
or at least not to have made an assay and proof thereof? Do you not daily see,
that after our friends are dead, we say even with sighs, if we had done such a
thing, it may be that he had been alive? Come therefore, and contribute with us
your wisdom, and resolute counsels, that we may save that which in this world
is most dear unto us. Forbear this purpose of yours to live a solitary life,
and draw you unto your rest, even then when we shall all at once have brought
the Ship to the haven, or else being overcome with that foolish opinion of such
as would willingly cast away themselves, be saved with some board of the
wrack. But if we perish therein, death, which way soever he may come, shall
have showed us no small favor, in taking us away from the beholding of so
lamentable a spectacle or sight.

A MEDITATION OF THE PSALMS OF David his repentance.

printer's device of Richard Field (McKerrow, 164) ANCHORA SPEI

1594.

A MEDITATION upon the Psalms, of David his repentance.
Lord in thy wrath reprove me not. etc.

Psalm. 6.
TAke away (o Lord) the arm of thy seueare and heavy vengeance from me, for it
will else drive me down headlong as a violent stream into everlasting death
and condemnation, and consume me like fire, and the rest of my body shall be
turned into ashes. And what eye shall be able to abide, but must needs perish
with fear, to behold the only look of thine angry face, when as in casting
thine eye upon us, thou shall pierce the very bottoms of our hearts, and
discover the secrets of our unclean consciences? For our abominable sins
will blow the bellows of thy just anger upon our heads, and thine hot
burning wrath will all at once cast us down headlong into that fearful gulf
of pains, torments, and miseries. And therefore before such time as thy fury
does arise against me, and that thou with just disdain come to overthrow
and destroy me, I beseech thee to give ear unto the humble and grievous
groans which my fearful heart powers out unto thee.

2 Mercy therefore o Lord, mercy I crave: Oh my God, what will thou do? Shall
thy mighty power and strength make trial of mine infirmities? Think thou
my God, that I come before thee to wrestle against thy mighty power? No, no, O
Lord, it is unto thy clemency that I run, it is under her wing that I place
my self, that she might arm herself against the rigor of the condemnation
which I most justly have deserved. Appease therefore somewhat what thy
countenance, and seeing that I have a long while called upon thy goodness,
help and deli^ me from all those evils which do ^siege me, for behold I lead
my life in most pitiful manner, and me thinks that all my bones are bruised
and broken.

3 Howbeit, it is not my poor body only that is thus cruelly afflicted, but
my miserable soul also does sorrow and grieve. This soul of mine, O Lord, yea
even this soul of mine, who is fully and wholly purposed with her voice to
glorify the author of her life, is cast down and become desolate, without
either courage or strength. And as the fearful Dove hides her self in some
small hole or creauie at the noise of thunder, even so my soul when she
beholds thine heavy indignation, seeks the darkest and obscurest places
for her retraite. But how long O Lord will thine anger last?

4 Howbeit, come O my Lord, come, and look upon me with thy pitiful eyes,
with which thou can not blot out my sin alone, but all the sins of the
world also. For, I feel my ^oul^ stick fast in a most filthy and deep
puddle of iniquity, therein she lies drowned over head and ears, and
stretches out her hand, O Lord unto thee: alas, pluck her out of it, O Lord,
and set her again into the way of salvation. Save her, O Lord, for she
coniureth thee thereunto, by thine infinite goodness, and incredible mercy.
True it is, O Lord, that she no whit deserves the same, neither oughteth she
to hope for any help at his hand, whom she has so cowardly forsaken, against
whose honor she has so wickedly conspired: the reward of whose sin
deserves no favor, but hell fire and eternal death.

5 But who, O Lord, shall sing thy praises, and sound thy name in the infernal
pit; and in the bottomless depth of death? For it is the house of sorrow, for
there is nothing heard and seen, but howling and torments, where contrariwise,
thy praise consists only in setting forth of thine infinite mercy, goodness
and clemency.

6 And besides, behold on the one side, how humble repentance makes
intercession for me, and has sworn that she will never depart from me until
such time as she has reconciled me unto thee. And on the other side, consider
how humble prayer importuneth thee for me, and has sworn also that she will
never be from thine heels, until such time as she has reconciled me unto
thee. O my God, thou have often times seen my tears and heard my groans. I
daily wash my face with tears, through the remembrance of my sins, and I cause
my bed to swim with the tears that trickle down my eyes what is that O Lord,
which repentance commands me, that I do not religiously observe?

7 I cast down mine eyes, and tremble with fear, when I behold thy angry
countenance. I patiently bear the rebukes of mine enemies, and take in good
part their reproaches, as a just punishment for my sins, I walk before their
faces in sackcloth and ashes, and with the confession of my mouth, I kneel at
the feet of thine aulters. I with rods make lean my flesh, which caused my
soul to sin, howbeit mine enemies do but laugh at my trouble, which place them
selves round about me, with mocks to betray me.

8 But when as thou have mercy upon me, I will say unto them. Away from me ye
children of iniquity, ye shall no longer laugh at my misery: The Lord has
heard my prayer, and my tears have appeased his anger, and behold I now enjoy
the fruit of his holy favor. The light of his goodness has shined upon me,
and behold the storms that came about my head, are calmed and dashed in a
moment.

9 With much a do have I opened my lips to call upon him for aid, with much a
do could I get mine heart to cry him mercy, and I have found his grace to be
powered upon me, comforting and quickening my languishing and sick soul, even
as warm water refreshes a poor surbatred trauller. O incredible clemency!
how ready O Lord art thou to pardon and forgive? I run to offend thee, and
yet thou will show me favor, I have bestowed all the days of my life both by
sea and by land, to hunt after ambition covetousness, and filthy lust, and
when I have been over head and ears, and utterly undone in my beastly
delights, yet have thou in a moment pierced the heavens and the cloud^ to come
down to deliver me: so as behold me now triumphing over my sin; which most
humbly followed the trophes of my repentance, which has found grace before
thee. And so, the hope, which my sins had as it were strangled, is now more
lively then ever it was before, which promises me not only the Empires of the
world, that bend themselves which way soever the Lord enclineth them, but also
opens unto me the highest heavens, and assures me after an happy life here
in this world, to enjoy the heavenly immortality.

10 What will mine enemies the^ do, when as they shall see me stored with so
great felicity? They will then surely blush with shanie, and their souls will
be greatly troubled, and return altogether confounded and amazed: for he, whom
they thought to be utterly overthrown, is now set in an higher degree, then
ever before he was. Alas, they all made a scorn at my ashes, they laughed at
my fastings, and whilst I with abstinence straue against my flesh, the very
enemy unto my soul, they bathed themselves in the pleasures of the world but
lo the arm of the Lord is ready to thunder and lighten upon their insolency.
O my God, give them a long time a acknowledge the extreme danger wherein they
are, and to call unto thee from on high, for the only remedy of their disease:
and as for my self, who feel my soul purge her self of the filthy matters
which are in and about ^er, who feel my spirit inflamed with the fire of thy
love, teach my lips to set forth thy praises, lift up my voice to resound thy
mercies, and guide mine affections sincerely to love thee, and to establish in
the knowledge of thy t^th, my sovereign happine^ and ch^efest felicity.

Blessed are they unto whom, etc.

Psalm. 31.
BLessed are they my God, whose sins thou have pardoned, and whose iniquities
thou have buried in the toombe of oblivion. Alas, what shall become of him,
whose just punishment thou do still continue upon him for his iniquities? An
army of evils encompasse him, poverty assaulteth him, sickness afflicts
him, famine presses him, and death it self, which he thinks to be the port
of this tempestuous navigations, is the bottomless pit which must draw him unto
everlasting torments.

2 And therefore they are three or four ^imes blessed, whom God calls not
unto a reckoning for their deeds, but is contented to have them humble
themselves before him, acknowledging their infirmities, and opening unto him
the very bottom of their hearts. For we must by true confession, and with a
sincere con^ience, call upon him (...) his mercies: and he that will be heard;
must humble himself before him, for as he that goes unto a river or pond,
puts down the mouth of his vessel to take up the water: so must he also do
that humbles himself before his creator, that will draw and taste of the
water of this holy spring, from whence runs the moisture, which only
purges and cleanses our consciences.

3 I have sometimes thought, O my God, to hide my sins away from thee, and
have said within my self: how shall he understand what I have done or not? And
so have my sins putrified within my bones, and as the ulcers and foul sores
of a shamefast diseased man, who dares not show his disease unto the Surgion,
increase and wax worse, even to the utter overthrow of the body: even so have
the sins which I have hid from thee mightily infected me.

4 But in the end, thou have day and night, so heavily laid thy hand upon me,
and made me taste of such a number of sorts of miseries, amongst which my so^le
^aketh (...) rest, being overcome ^ith (...) continual pricking of ^y
conscience, the pierces even through mine heart, that I have acknowledged my
fault, which I presently hear upon ^ine hand. Behold and acknowledge this my
God, but not in thine anger, for the dropping tears which with much weeping
have almost put out mine eyes, ought also put out thy justly hoate burning ire.
And besides, am not I the work of thine own hands? nay, am not I rather the
very lively image of thy Deity? And what is he that is so angry, as that he
will bruise or break the work, which it pleased him so to polish and make
perfect, when as he sees it to be foul and filthy? In very deed, I must needs
confess, that this image is laden with filthy matter, but is it not better to
make it clean and neat, then to break it in pieces and tread it under feet?

5 Teach me then my God, what satisfaction I shall make, for I have now laid
open unto thee all the sins which before I had concealed. For, the fear
wherein I was, when I hid my self from thee, is at this present that I have
discovered my self unto thee, changed into hope of grace and pardon. And now I
cast my self between thine arms, as into the most assured defense I have,
even with such a countenance, as the poor pacient that shows his wound to
the Barbar looks wishly upon him, and courageously suffers his searching
and lancing, by reason of the desire and hope that he ^h to be healed. But that
which g^th me a greater hope of health, is, that the sins wherein I before
took pleasure, make me now abhor to see them, even as the mea^es wherewith a
man in health gorgeth himself, are very loathsome unto his stomach, when he is
weak and sickly. And that which made me before bold ^d malepart, I am now
ashamed of, when as I consider the hazard of death whereunto my pride had
exposed my poor soul. I give my most hearty thanks for the day wherein I was
enlightened to acknowledge my sin. I do acknowledge my God, that day to be a
singular testimony of thy goodness toward me; grant then that the delight
which I have taken to be displeased with my self, may likewise continue as
long with me, as I have had pleasure to dwell in my sins. For, if (...) take as
great pleasure in my repentance, as I have taken in my sin, my felicity
shall be without doubt equal with thine angels and shall see me in the
humiliation of my self before thy maiest^ ascend to the highest ^op of ^hy
(...).

6 Who doubts, O Lord, that thou will not receive me unto mercy? whose mercy
and benignity, no tongue is able to express, nor heart comprehend? I did never
think so soon to return unto thee, as thou wast always ready to offer thy
self unto me. I did never sooner say that I would confess my sin, but that
thou did by and by grant me thy grace I have no sooner acknowledged the
punishment which my sins deserved, but that thou have remitted them, I have
taken the rods into my hands to scourge my flesh, and thou have pluck^ them out
of my hands. To be short, I thought thou would have proclaimed open war
against me, and thou offeredst m^ a most charitable peace and reconciliation. O
Lord, how far readier and more willing art thou to forgive, then to punish?
Can a good father receive his child more graciously, that cries him mercy,
then thou have received me when as I have humbled my self at thy fee^e? my
heart also leapeth with joy, and boileth with an holy feruentnesse to praise
thy name, and re^yceth in the grace that thou have showed unto it, accusing
none but it self of that that is past, and ^eth out, saying (...) is I that
have ^ed it, it is I (...) have done it, it is I that have taken pleasure in
it, but yet my God has had mercy upon me.

7 How could he deny me his mercy, seeing that the Saints which are the holy
men and women living, have prayed, do pray, and will continually pray for me?
They are they which beseech his majesty for me, and are a mean of his grace
and favor toward me? What can they O Lord crave at thy hands to greater
purpose, and obtain of thee more easily, then when they pray for me? Alas, it
is very meet that they should cry and call upon thee for me, seeing that the
impiety of mine heart, has so blinded my senses by wicked thoughts, as that
my soul cannot any more lift up her self toward heaven, to stretch forth her
hand unto him, who alone is both able and willing to save. And therefore what
more remameth, but that they whom thou vouchsafest to come near unto thee by
faith and holiness of life, may pray for me unto thee, that thou would have
mercy upon me? As for my self, who am mine own capital enemy, I have never
had either ^kill or yet will to pray unto thee for my trespass. And therefore
I do presently comfort my self, to see how thou have opened mine eyes, that I
may behold what a foul and black conscience I have, and have mollified mine
heart, that I might lodge contrition in my soul. And although it has not
been so soon as it ought to have been, yet it never came so late, but that
thou vouchsafedst to receive me, as thou art wonted to do those that have not
ouerslipped the occasion to repent themselves.

8 For they that hasten themselves to sin, and willingly neglect to repent,
when as they might have acknowledged their sins, and have had the means to
do it, but have tarried unto the very end of their lives to cry thee mercy,
and make their eyes burst out into a deluge of tears, it is very dangerous but
that they must deceive themselves, and that true repentance can never after
enter into such hard hearts, and their weeping and wailing to be but the
^o^owes of desperate people, and thy mercy to show it self deaf unto their
over late repentance.

9 But as for me, I ran in a blessed time unto thee, as to my refuge, and to
the end of my hopes, and unto my comfort in the trouble which after that manner
has encompassed me, as the fear of death takes hold on him, who is destined
unto a shameful punishment. And therefore I beseech thy majesty, make me
taste and feel that pleasure, which he feels that is delivered and freed
from his bonds or chains, set at liberty out of prison; and delivered from
the punishment wherein his enemy had long time held him ^aptiue. And
contrariwise; that the enemy of my soul shall blush with shame, when as he
shall see; that I shall so devoutly call upon the aid of my good God, who with
the very wink of his eye is able to deliver me from the voluntary bondage
which I had vowed unto damnable voluptuousness, even then when I drank the
sweet honey of the delightful pleasures, which she with a deceitful hand gave
unto me, within this foul and filthy cup of the world.

10 Alas, when as I remember the time that thou returnedst thy self after that
sort unto me, and with this merciful eye of thine, gave me a sign of
pardon, mercy, and salvation, me thought verily that I then saw the bright
sun rising, upon the tempests, and fell storms of the sea, which by little
and little, cutting with his beams between the clouds, brought again clear
and pleasant weather, and calmed the raging and billowing surges. And me
thinks I do always hear this sweet and gracious saying, when as thou
say unto me; Fear not, for behold my spirit, which shall guide thy foot
steps and ways: neither shall he lift ^p his eye above thee: and thou shall
now march under the conduct of him, who brings pure and clean fowls into
my kingdom of glory. All so soon as I heard these words spoken, I fixed
mine eyes upon my guide and leader, not once looking off, no more then a
careful and diligent master of a ship easteth his eye aside from the pole,
or bright shining star, by which he guides and orders the course of his
navigations. O my God, what rest shall I enjoy when as I shall have walked in
the ways which thou have taught me, to go in, even I my self, I say, who have
troade beside the path which leads unto thine holy tabernacle? I was already
entered into this thick forest of the world, where all they easily lose
themselves, who, for the enjoying of the pleasure of thick queachie shadowie
places, leave the day light which should show them the way. For even by and by
the doleful sight of the night brings them together, and puts them forth
as a pray to the wild beasts, who will pluck them in pieces, and cruelly
devour them. And thus was I hindered and stayed in this labyrinth, without
hope to have ever come out of it again, had dest thou not put into my hand the
bottom which I must needs wind up to bring me out of this perilous prison. And
now lo, I am at liberty to serve my God, who has so delivered me, and to
present before him his own^ pure and clean image, and to vow into his
goodness so many favors wherewith he has pleased to gratify me. And he
has not only heard me before all the rest of his creatures, granting unto me
the use of divine reason, but also has lifted me up amongst men, into an
honorable and magnificent throne, so as there remains nothing unto my
felicity, but to learn to know: and after that I had forgot my self, he
enlightened me by his holy light, and gave me time and will, to bewail my
sinful life past, and to amend it also for the time to come.

11 And therefore my good friends, do as I have done, and recover his favor in
good time; for he himself calls you unto the way of salvation; and do not as
the melancholic and froward Moyle does, who kicketh at him that pricketh him
to go right forth: because he wants both sense, knowledge, and judgment.

12 And so thereby he has a bitte put into his mouth, and is continually
spurred about the flanks. After the same sort; The Lord, at the first summons
that he sets you in his ways, if ye submit not your selves unto his will,
he will power down upon you an huge heap of calamities, which will make you
more wretched and miserable then misery it self.

13 Ye right well see how cleerlie the stars shine in the heavens, and the
sand which rolleth on the sea shore: howbeit, there is not so much sand in the
sea, nor so many stars in the skies, as the obstinate shall endure plagues
and punishments. Their cursednesse hangs over their heads, their miseries
follow them at their heels, even until such time as that they are cast down
headlong into that gulf, the thinking whereof does terrify whom soever
remembers it, and whose pleasantest resting places, are full of weeping,
crying, howling, and groaning, where the pain is without end, the dolor
without remedy, and the repentance without mercy: where death is immortal,
the body lives but to die, and the soul, but to suffer; where the soul
feels nothing but her sin, and the body nothing but his pain. But
contrariwise, they that cover themselves under the grace and favor of the Lord
Jesus, which make his mercy their shield and buckler, hope in nothing but in
his gracious goodness, follow his commandments and precepts, and are
iealious of his will, what felicity and happiness is there which they shall
not attain unto? Nay, what is there in heaven never so good and precious, that
is not opened unto them? They shall sit cheek by cheek with their God, and
being all encompassed with glory, shall be filled and heaped up with so many
blessings, as that the heart of man can no way possibly be able to conceive
the least part of them, so far of is it then, as that my babbling tongue
cannot possibly express the wonderfulnesse of them.

14 I will therefore rejoice, my God, in carefully waiting and looking for the
manifold benefits which thou reseruest in heaven, to crown the righteous
withal. Unto this cheerfulness do I inuit al those whom thou have sworn in
the word of Savior, which love the law of his righteousness: This is it,
that attends the recompense of your travels. This is it wherein you shall be
placed in honor and glory: This is it, that shall change the sharp thorn of
the world, into the flourishing and beautiful Lilly of all eternity. Oh,
then shall the dropping and painful sweating of your afflictions find most
gracious rest. The gold comes not out of the fiery furnace, more pure nor
brighter, to be cast, to make the image of some great Prince, and afterward to
be set up as an ornament in some rich closet, then the heart of him that loves
his God, he will draw him pure and clean out of the miseries of the world, and
compass him with brightness and glory. What is there now in the world, that
I shall like of? What shall stay and let me from entering into the house of the
Lord, to live to serve him? What day of my life shall I cease to bewail my
sins, which have so far estranged me from his grace? And therefore I
humbly beseech thee my God, to reconcile these two contrary passions in me,
repentance and joy: to the end, that as the poor traveler, wandering in the
deserts out of his way, is glad when he sees the dawning of the day peep, and
yet cannot forget the great darkness out of which he is but newly gotten, ne
yet cast of the fear which he had of so tedious a night. Even so also have I a
continuuall horror of my sins past, and yet a sure and joyful hope of
enjoying that everlasting blessedness, which thou have purchased for us with
the blood of thy dearly beloved son Christ Jesus. O Lord, what a love is
that, when as a master does not spare the life of his own only son, to
redeem his slave? Wherefore, O most loving Savior, seeing that I being formed
with thine own hands, bought with thy blood, and purified by thy mercy, I do
here offer my self an obedient sacrifice unto thee my God and Savior, and
therefore reject me not.

Lord in thy wrath reprove me not.

Psalm. 37.
I Must, O Lord, return unto thee, and begin again to call upon thee, and
to beseech thee of thy mercy: For it seems to me that thine anger is
rekindled against me. Alas my God, will thou chastise me in thine anger, and
make me feel the violence of thy just fury, which my sins have provoked
thee to do? The flame being consumed by the fire falls into ashes, and I
being devoured with the heat of thine anger, do so vanish away, as that there
remains not so much as the smoke.

2 For, I see my God, that thou have discharged the sharpest arrows of thy
vengeance against me: thou have touched me with thine hand, and never take
away the same from me. I feel the gnawing and terror of my conscience which
astonish and bruise me eue^ as it were thunder and lightning: my miseries came
upon me one after another, and one mischief presses another: war is no
sooner finished, but that the plague assaulteth me, and in the end, death
bereaueth me of the dearest pawnes I have in this world. Wherein then shall I
take comfort my God? shall it be in my self?

3 Out alas, my good God, I have never an whole member in me: for my misery is
entered even into the marrow: neither is there any part of me that reprocheth me
not with my sin, and for the which I am not pained. I languish in my grief,
and there is none to comfort me, mine eyes serve me for none other purpose, but
to look upon my misery; and my soul, for nothing else but to acknowledge my
cursednesse.

4 I look round about me, and so far as the eyes of my body and eyes of my
soul can discern what is past, I see nothing either above me, or below me, or
yet on any side of me, but sin which inuironeth me round about, and mine
iniquities which press and overthrow me. They ly^ heaped upon my head, as a
very heavy burden, and lo how ready they are to throttle and strangle me.

5 How shall I be ever able to resist them? What strength have I to defend me
from them, seeing that my body is ready to fall in pieces? The very filthiness
of them flow on every side me: my ulcers and sores are no sooner closed up,
but that they break out again, and if my body be ill, can my soul be well?
Must not she be altogether ashamed, and tremble with horror and fear?

6 After the same manner that a disease undermines my body, and makes it
stoop to death, and sorrow undermines my soul, and bereaueth her of her
strength, and as great cold congealeth in the bud, the tender blossom,
withers and dries it up, even so does the finger of the Lord, which has
touched my soul, cause it to languish and to be out of heart.

7 But alas, my God, what courage can I have, when as I see my self thus
covered over with wounds, and no part of my body free from pain, and ever and
besides this my misery, the rememberance of my dissolute pleasures is still
before my face, and reproach me with my sin, and laugh at my vanity. Then say
I thus unto my self, must I season my life with the honey of so many delights,
and afterward kneade them with the gall of so bitter anguishes? Where now art
thou o thou deceitful voluptuousness, which drownest my soul in the sweet
licour of thy pleasures? Oh, what drink is that, that thou leauest me?

8 Have not I, o Lord, endured enough? has not mine humility sufficiently
chastized mine arrogancy? If I have through fond presumption sinned, alas, I
have sithence that, crepe upon the earth, I have covered mine head with ashes,
and with mine arm have I prevented my pain. I have cut through mine heart
with crying out, I have drowned mine eyes in tears, and yet thine anger
continues still.

9 Is it of set purpose, o Lord, that thou have not perceived my tears? It is
thou I say, who with the twinkle of ^hine eye trauersest both heaven and earth?
even thou I mean, whose sight goes beyond the depth of our hearts. It is thou,
o Lord, that have read even my very thoughts, and known mine intent. What have
I desired but thy mercy? Wherein have I trusted but in thy goodness? Why have I
made open profession of repentance, but to condemn my self? If my tongue has
not thoroughly expressed my mind, and caused my desire to be understood, alas,
o Lord, thou know what we would have, before we once think of it. It is
enough for us to lift up our hearts unto thee, and thou forthwith grauntest our
petitions.

10 Why stayest thou, o Lord, so long, before thou geuest me that holy
consolation which thou have promised me? I am quite spent, my heart is gone, my
senses are trouble, my strength fails, my sight waxes dim, and my soul is
upon the shore of my lips ready to fly away.

11 All my friends are now about me bewailing my death, they are out of all
hope of my health, they dream of nothing but of my funeral, saying, where is
now that help which he looked for to come from his God? where is his favor
which he so promised to himself?

12 The flatterers are gone away from me, they thought to have parted my goods,
they meant to have prevented my fatal hour, I am noisome to the whole world,
in the case that I now stand.

13 They whisper in mine ear, and tell me a thousand tales: They daily bring
me in new acquaintances, and think of nothing but to betray me. He lies, say
they, on his deathbed, and will never rise up alive again: What? do we fear,
that the shadow of his bones will bite us?

14 And I, as if I had bin deaf, made show that I heard them not, and as if I
had bin dumb, spoke not one word unto them: for, my patience was my buckler,
and my constancy my rampart.

15 And every man seeing me so patie^t, said, surely this man is dumb: for, when
he is touched, he says not a word: would he abide all these indignities, if he
had any feeling of his honor and credit, or yet the least courage in the world?
And therefore it may well be said, that he is very guilty: for, an innocent man
is always bold in his own defense. And yet all this could never move me.

16 And why so? verily, because I trusted in my God, and fully assured my self
that he would assist me. For, although the whole world banded against me, and
heaven and earth coniured my ruin and overthrow, yet if he be mine ayder and
defendor, I am sure always to conquer. For, with the breath of his mouth he
made all things, and in breathing again upon them, he will destroy them all if
it please him: and therefore I will fight under his cloth and liuerie, because
I shall be sure to have the victory.

17 I have said unto them many times, Rejoice not at my misery, and although I
be never so much tormented and afflicted, yet brave not your selves upon me,
for the hand of the Lord is able even to reach you: and therefore trust not his
patience over much, for as his feet are of wool, so are his arms also of
iron. For, if he once lay them upon your heads, o ye impotent souls, he will
so crush you together, as that a man would think that you had never been.

18 And I, have taken the rods in my hand, and imprinted with them upon my
shoulders, the condemnation of my sin, I have appeared before thee o Lord
with weeping tears, with repentance in my mouth, and with a sorrowful heart,
and have fought with my self, that mine enemy might not triumph over me.

19 I have openly confessed my fault, I have in an happy hour showed forth
my sin, and I had great care to run unto thy mercy whilst time and season
served.

20 But the more I humble my self before thee to draw the running water out
of this fountain of thy grace which flows from thy goodness, the more mine
enemies glut me, and deal cruelly and butcherlike with me, their troop daily
increases, and join them selves together on every side, never foreseeing the
tempest that will shake them in a thousand pieces. They, through their pride,
blow the hot burning coals of thine ire, they despite thy power, which they
will too too soon make trial of, to their great destruction. To be short, in
setting most confidently their brazen faces against heaven and earth, they
wallow and welter them selves in their filthy pleasure, and blot out as much
as in them lie the mark of the deity, which thou have sealed in their souls,
and close up their eyes against the hope of salvation which shines brightly in
thy word.

21 I cease not, o Lord, to admonish them of it, but they repay me ill for
good, and laugh at that which I by my good example do, to please thee. They
walk at the corners of the streets sla^derously to accuse me, and burden me
with a thousand villainies: I confess o Lord that hereby I lose my patience.

22 But I beseech thee, o Lord, to strengthen my weakness, and in no wise
forsake me, for else I shall stumble as a young child at the first headlong
breakneck which shall offer it self unto me. Increase in me o Lord strength
and courage, equal unto mine affliction, and hold me under thy wing, giving me
always that co^stancy and firmness which I shall have need of for that
purpose, neither more nor less, then a loving mother does, when as she gives
the teat unto her sucking child, so soon as she perceives it begins to cry.

23 Nourish me therefore, o Lord, with the milk of thy holy love, to the end
that I being somewhat able to stand, may day and night walk the trance of thy
paths, that I may come unto salvation, the hope whereof shines in thy
promises, so as if my sin shall go about to cut me off in they way, I may
unclose mine eyes, and never shut them again, until such time as I have
drowned and swallowed them up in my tears.

Have mercy on me o Lord.

Psalm. 50.
Have pity on me, o my God, according to the greatness of thy clemency, and
in the multitude of thy mercy, forgive me the punishment which I have justly
deserved. For, if thou look that my fastings, watchings, and prayers, should
make satisfaction for my sin: Alas, o Lord, when would that be? Mine offense
exceeds heaven and earth, and has surpassed, as far as it can, the
greatness of the whole world. Who can then bring it to pass for the utterly
blotting of it out, save only thine holy mercy, which is so much the greater,
by how much thy righteousness excedeth ours? It is thy mercy, o Lord, that
enuironeth the universal world, and which vpholdeth all the staggering corners
thereof that are ready to fall upon our heads, to bury in the ruin of it
with us, the remembrance of our sins, to turn away thine eyes from our
unthankful disloyal, unmerciful, and stiffenecked race and generation, which
disauoweth thee her being, creation, and conservation. Let this merciful
goodness of thine therefore, o Lord, which shines in thy deity above all the
rest of thy virtues, spread it self now over me, not thinly and sparingly, but
flowingly and bountifully. And as thou did once let the waters ouerflowe
the tops of the highest mountains, to extinguish and swallow up the wicked, so
also make thou a brook of mercy, o Lord, to disgorge and pour it self forth
upon me, not to drown, o Lord, but to wash and cleanse me.

2 Howbeit, thou art not contented to purge me for once, neither do thou say
unto me, that thou have regenerated and washed me, in the blood of the
undefiled and innocent lamb, for how pure and clean soever thou once have made
me, thou shall now find me as foul and filthy. For, I am now fallen into so
deep a filthy sink, and am so bemired and besmeared, as that thou would
never know me, by reason that I am so disfigured. For I sometimes question with
my self, and ask my self, whether I be he or no whom thy hands created, but
mine heart is so confounded and ashamed, as that it dares not give me any
answer. O my God, thou createdst me of the clay and slime of the earth, and
lo, o Lord, I am even the very self and same that I was, before thou did
put thy hand unto me. I have quite and clean marred my shape and countenance,
by clothing my self with clay and dirt. But why do thou not o Lord,
reform me anew? Is thine hand shortened? Is thy will in doing good to thy
creature, abate? Alas, thou art Almighty, thou art al^ogether good, why then
make thou not haste? O Lord my God, the work of thine own hand sets it
self against thee, and takes pleasure in disfiguring and deforming of it
self: but set thou, o Lord, thy self against thy workmanship, and make it
glorious and perfect, in despite of it self. But I, o Lord, will no more
peruersely deal against thee, take me and hold me, and turn me which may
soever thou will, knead, mould, and make new again this lump of earth, for it
is ready to follow thy will. But when thou o Lord, shall thoroughly have renewed
it, do not then I beseech thee forsake it, but put a bridle in the mouth
thereof, to the end that by abstinence, it may keep it self from surfeiting,
which pricketh it forward thereunto, that it may by a chaste life, keep in a
good ^mper unchaste and hot burning lusts, that by humility, it may abate the
pride, which biting envy stirs up in her, that pitiful charity, may chase
from her hatred, and greedy covetousness, and, that a godly care to serve and
honor thee, may continually set spur to the flanks of her slothfulness, and
filthy negligence.

3 For I have already, o Lord, made ouer-great a trial of this troop of sine
which enuiron me, so as they will in such sort pull down and tear in pieces
thy workmanship, as that when thou shall come, thou shall find nothing there
but the shreds thereof, shiuered and broken all to fitters. I have had
experience enough of them, and these are they that have brought me into that
estate wherein now I am, and nevertheless, see yet at the tail of these, a
company placed about me, which cast in my teeth the spells and blemishes
wherewith they themselves have defiled me, and make me culpable of the
injuries which the^-selues have done unto me. For thus they say, It is thou
that have sinned, and it is thou that art so foul and filthy.

4 It is true in very deed that I have sinned, o my God, I lay open unto the^
the very bottom of my heart, thou know my whole life. I have sinned in the
sight of heaven and earth, and all the world can bear witness of mine
iniquities. But if I had not sinned, unto whom should thou have been
merciful? How would thou have discharged thy self of the promises of
grace, which thou had so long ago announced by thy Prophets? And when as
thou shall come to sit upon the eternal Throne of thy Justice, who is he that
would not be afeared of thee, yea although we were even all rightuous? Howbeit,
to the end that thy greatness might be known, we must when we shall be assigned
a day to come before thee, humbly fall down upon our faces before thy
majesty, and cry out and say: Most merciful Lord, we will not stand in
defense before thee, because our fault is manifestly known: but lo, our grace
and pardon is in thy hand, for thou thy self have granted it us, behold a
token of thine own blood sealed in our image, which, for our redemption was
imprinted in the weakness of our flesh.

5 Do thou thy self, my God, attend and look, that when I shall come
before thee, that I will make a rampart of mine innocence, and that I am so void
of understanding, as that I would justify my self in thy presence? Alas, o
Lord, I right well know, that I was not yet borne, and that I was also nothing
but sin, my mother likewise thought to be delivered of a child, and was
brought abed of sin: But it had been a great deal better for her, that she
had been delivered before her time of such monstrous fruit, which shameth the
tree that bare it, and the earth, that nursed it, and heaven that ripened it. I
was nursed of sin within my mothers womb, and sucked her milk, and behold, it
is so grown up with me, as that it shadoweth my head, and blinds mine eyes.

6 But when I see the eyes of my body so seeled up with sin that is about
me, I then open the eyes of my soul, and begin to see a far off the beams
of thine infallible truth, and acknowledge thy marvelous secret wisdom,
which thou have manifested unto me: And then my soul forsaking the impurite of
my body, lifts her self up unto heaven, and perceth through the incredible
brightness thereof, and casting her eye upon the book of eternity, she
therein reads the draught of the new covenant which thou art to make with
men: and then returning into her miserable body, she fills her self with
hope and joy, and promises unto her self assured victory over her sin.

7 For, she has learned in heaven, that thou will take into thine hand the
Sprinkle of sweet smelling hysope, and sprinkle upon me clean and purified
water: Thou shall wash me, and I shall become whiter then snow, and none shall
see upon me no not so much as the very trace and steps of sin. But, o Lord,
what lees shall that be that shall be made of the ashes of my sins consumed
with the fire of thy love, with the water of the tears which my repentance
shall distill from mine heart, and in the Sun of thy grace, wipe away our
tears, and cause a spiritual rejoicing to grow in us, and in the end, make
us white with the purity and brightness of righteousness, that we may one
day shine far more excelle^tly then the stars of the firmament.

8 And then shall we hear nothing but the pleasant sound of the Trompet of
salvation, which shall deliver out grace and mercy unto all those that will
receive the same. Then shall we see the rotten and consumed bones rise again,
and take their fleshie body upon them, to partake that universal joy,
whereunto thou have called the whole world.

9 Now, to the end I might then appear so honorably apparelled before thee, as
such an honorable magnificence is worthy of, I beseech thee my God, to cast
down all my sins under thy feet, and bury them all in the midst and
center of the earth, that no eye may be able to pierce through to see them: and
separate me for ever from mine iniquity, which at this present I repudiate,
and do swear an irreconciliable divorce between me and them.

10 Thou see here my Soul, what an offer I make unto thee, and therefore
make thy self pure and neat, renew in mine heart a new spirit, which will
conceive nothing but holiness and righteousness. O Lord my God, establish
therein an house for thine holy spirit, to the end, I never hereafter, either
think, breathe, or utter forth any thing, but the praises of thee my God: and
let thy will be always printed in my mind, and thy glory, written upon my
lips.

11 When thou have thus clothed and furnished me with piety and integrity, I
shall be then very assured that nothing shall keep me from thy presence: and
then, as the Eagle naturally looks full upon the Sun, even so will I fix
my sight and eyes upon thine everlasting face, and (...) thereby I shall see
in thy wonderfu^ countenance, all the perfectio^s which I at this present am no
way able to conceive: neither shall thine holy spirit ever dwell out of mine
heart, for it is he that under the wing of a zealous love, shall carry me even
into thine arms, to associate me unto this heavenly joy.

12 Make me therefore rightly to taste the sweet pleasures of this immortal
life: Save me speedely from the rocks of this world, which on every side
threaten my soul with wrack: And as the Mariner when he is come to the
haven, crowns the maste of his Ship with flowers, in token that he is in
safety, even so, O Lord, crown thou me with the precious gifts of thine holy
Spirit, as pawnes of thy everlasting blessedness which thou have promised me:
With the gifts (I say) of that Spirit of thine which reigns amongst thy
faithful, which distributeth faith unto thine elect, love, unto thy best
beloved, and hope unto those whom thou have predestinate to everlasting life.

13 Now, all the while that my soul rests thus banished, looking still to be
called home again unto thee, I will teach the wicked to walk in the way that
may best please thee, and set them also in it, for fear they hurt not
themselves in the darkenesses of this world, against the stumbling blocks
which they may suddenly light upon, lying before them. And so, they will
believe me, and return unto thee, o Father of lights, and with all their
hearts embrace thy faith, and walk in thine obedience.

14 I know, O Lord, that there will be some such found, as will stop their
ears at my words, and will obstinatly continue in their sins, conjure my
death, and defile their barbarous cruelty with my blood. O my God, deliver me
out of their hands, and reserve me to declare thy righteousness, and to
pronounce their condemnation. I will foretell them their miseries, and they
shall feel them, and I shall no sooner hold my peace, but that thy hand shall
be upon them, and thy hand shall no sooner have stricken them, but that they
shall be broken to fitters, and be utterly destroyed.

15 And then thou shall open my lips, and my mouth shall set forth thy
victory: for, the air shall be still, the winds shall be calm, and the
floods shall be quiet, to hearken unto my resounding voice, which shall sing
out the wonders of the eternal God. For, thy praise, o Lord, shall be the
sacrifice that I will always offer up unto thee, and which thou also wilt ever
have good liking of.

16 I would gladly have embrued their Aulters with the blood of a great number
of cattle, I would gladly have cut the throats of a thousand oxen, and of a
thousand lambs to have done thee honor, but blood stinketh in thy nostrels,
neither take thou pleasure in the flesh of beasts: The smoke of such
offerings the winds carry away, so as they never ascend unto thee: But the
voice only of a just man passes above the heavens, and the Angels present
the same before thee.

17 O what an acceptable sacrifice before thee, is a broken and contrite heart!
and an humble heart that acknowledges his sin, thou will never reject: for
if it will come up unto thee, it must first come down, and if it will touch
the heaven, it must first crawle upon the ground, if it will have thee to
hear it, it must first be silent, and if it will be crowned in thy kingdom,
it must first be beaten and scourged in the world. These are the Sacrifices, O
Lord, wherewith we must he reconciled unto thee, and enter into covenant as
thou have set it down unto us.

18 But if it be thy pleasure, o Lord, that we shall offer bulls and bullocks
unto thee, and perfume thine Aulters with the blood of beasts, if thou will
that we by the death of an innocent burnt offering, should represent unto thee,
the death and innocence of him, whom thou have destined to redeem our
souls: If the figure of that which should come in the person of the unspotted
lamb does please thee by the killing of Weathers and Sheep, look then with
pity upon thy poor people, comfort thou desolate Syon, and encourage her
poor enhabitants, to the end they may set up again the walls of thine holy
City, and reedifie thy Temple, not according to that equal proportion, O
Lord, which thou deseruest, but according to the wealth and industry that the
poor world can possibly afford.

19 Thither shall come from all parts thy faithful in great multitudes, to
offer up sacrifice unto thee, and there, shall the expiation and purging of
their sins be acceptable unto thee. But it shall neither be the death of
beasts, that shall wash away their spots: for, the cleansing of their
disobedience, and preuarication, was prepared from all eternity. This is an
inestimable sacrifice, a burnt offering without spot, which shall draw away
the curtayne, disperse and destroy the darkenesses, break down the wall or
hedge, that we may see the truth of our salvation, face to face, make the
beams of his divine mercy shine upon us, and reassociate us unto the
communion of that everlasting bliss, which we willingly have renounced. O most
merciful God, which have vnseeled the eyes of mine understanding to see the
mystery of my salvation, make me, O Lord, to taste the excellent fruit, which
flourishing upon the tree of the Cross, shall, with the juice thereof,
quicken and give life unto our dead souls, preserve and warrant us for ever,
from that ruin and calamity which has so miserably brought together the race
of mankind, and ouerflowed them through their disobedience.

Lord hear my Prayer.

Psalm. 102.
I Have o Lord, cried and called upon thee a long time for thy mercy, and do
yet look for aid and help from thee. The air is filled with my cries: The
winds have carried the voice of my dolor and grief even unto the uttermost
parts of the world, and thine ear which hears and understands whatsoever
is done in the bottomless pit of hell, does not yet hear and understand my
prayer, which reaches and beats the very heavens. Will thou therefore be
deaf only unto me? and shall all the world hear me save thy self alone? No,
no, my God, thou have oue^-long stretched out thine arms, now to reject me
when as I come unto thee for refuge.

2 And now that I feel a thousand and a thousand sorrows, and that miseries
assail me on every side, do not turn thy back upon me, o Lord. Alas, have I
settled my whole power and strength upon the sweet countenance of thy face? Have
I divorced my self from the world, to the end I might draw near unto thee?
and have I forsaken the children of the world, that I might join my self unto
the master of the heavens, and would thou now forsake me? O Lord, deal not
so with me, but assist mine infirmity all the days of my life.

3 Let my voice no sooner cry and call unto thee my God, but that I may also
soon feel thee: and let thy grace descend as speedely upon me, as an Eagle
hastes her self to aid her young ons. For, if thou assist me not, what manner
of fight shall I be able to make against the enemies of my soul?

4 My strength and life would daily vanish away, as the light smoke does in
flying in the air: for the eye which sees it go out of the fire, sees it
also forthwith consumed, and in a moment accompanied both with his original,
and his end: and if any should ask what is become of it, there is not one that
can so much as tell where the trace only of it is to be found. He that has
seen the loppings of wood wither in the sun, and loose their strength and
verdure, has also seen my poor bones become both dry and consumed, mee^e
for none other thing but for the grave. The grave, yea surely the grave, which
is the happiest thing that can betide me, if so be so small a pit may be able
to stay the violent course of mine extreme misery.

5 Who soever he be that has seen grass cut down, and tanned with the Sun
in the field, and lose the coulor, and wither, and look upon my g^stly and
deadly face, he would think that I were able to make death afeard. Mine heart
is parched within mine entrails, and my blood dries up within my veins, for,
I remember not to put bread into my mouth, and do still forget to eat my
meals.

6 My mouth serves me for none other purpose, but to cry out and lament, and
the ordinary voice of my grief is so strong, as that it draws after it, all
the rest of my strength. Now if so be that my body being so extremely full of
heaviness, consume it self by little and little, and my bones horribly stick
through my skin, what cause have I to take care for the sustayning of this
miserable body of mine, which is the matter and substance of all my miseries?
Wherefore should I be watchful for the conseruing of this life of mine, which
wrestleth against so many enemies, and is cast down with so many afflictions?
Were it not much better for me, in ending my life, to make also therewith an
end of all miseries?

7 Is the Pelican more full of grief then I, who living in the most solitary
deserts of Egypt, tormenteth her self for the killing of her young ones, and
washes them in her own blood, to restore them to life, which she had taken
from them? Is her sorrow greater than mine? Has nor my sin procured the
death of the child, whom I more dearly loved then my self? And now that I
have dried up all my tears, the blood will gush out of mine eyes, for fear I
should be void of tears in so lamentable and cursed a case. But the Pelican
has redeemed with her own blood, the price of her young ones, and I most
miserable wretch that I am, shall be deprived for ever of the child which I so
tenderly loved. And I will also abandon both the day and the light, and confine
and limit my self within the most dark places that I can find out, even as a
shritch owl does, that comes not out of his hole, all the while it is day
light.

8 I am continually kept waking, still dreaming of my misery, and seeking to
hide my self before such time as the infelicitie which runs upon me
enforces me. And being altogether mated and out of heart, I seek after some
corner to hide my self in, even as the wild sparrow that flies out of the
rain and wind, seeks after some covert or sun shine place to bathe and
dry her self in.

9 Mine enemies seeing me in this case, and with such a countenance, stand
mocking of me therewith, and cast my misery in my teeth: and they which were
wont to make a great account of me, instead of sorrowing with me in mine
affliction, have coniured against me. What reckoning then should any man make
of the wealth of this world, and if he were able to get as great richesse and
as many friends as were possible, and then to have his friends so traitorous
and so double, as to make little or no account of breaking their faith and
promise?

10 And surely my strength is decayed, the flower and beauty of my well
colored and smooth ruddy checkes, is quite and clean gone, for I have sown
my bread upon the ashes, and moisted my drink with my tears. And shall I for
all this become a laughing stock unto this infidelous generation?

11 It is very true, that I have been met withal before thy face, in the day
of thy wrath: thou have laid again upon me, the arm of thy vengeance, and am
become therewith frushed in pieces. Men have had me in great estimation and
honor, and lo how I am now dressed and dealt withal. O vain presumption, unto
what steep breakneck have thou lifted me up, to make me leap such a leap?
Alas, what did I find in my self, why I should conceive in mine heart such an
opinion of my self?

12 As we see the shadow of the body by little and little decrease, when as the
sun is risen above the same, and reduces it, as it were unto a small point,
even so all so soon O Lord, as thine anger is upon me, my life, my goods, and
my greatness, is by little and little dispersed, and come to nothing, in such
sort, as that lo, I am like unto the grass that is tedded abroad without
grace and color, which men cock up to give unto the cattle to feed on, and
like unto a great many goodly sweet smelling flowers, bound up in a bottle
amongst a sort of thistles.

13 But do I for all this lose my hope? No, no, my God: for thy power is
infinite, and lasts for ever, and thy mercy immeasurable, which will spread
it self over all such as shall trust in thee. One age shall pass after
another, but the remembrance of thy goodness shall never have end: one
generation shall succeed another, but it shall be always for the setting forth
of thy praise and good dealing.

14 Thou will one day, my God, awaken, to have mercy upon Sion, for the time
of mercy draws near. And lo, I see it even at hand. The floods and rivers
power not out so much clear water into the deep sea, as thy goodness will
spread abroad thy favor and grace upon the face of this earth. Open your
hearts, ye people, open your hearts, I say, for the liberal hand of my God,
will fill them with an holy zeal, which will make thee far purer and cleaner
then the gold in the fining pot.

15 Now the house of Sion, O Lord, is the refuge which all thy servants look
for, it is it which they so greatly love, and which they so earnestly desire;
it is it where they look to find mercy; it is the temple, O Lord, which thou will destroy in three days, and raise it up again in other three, that it may
be the house of everlasting life, the seat of salvation, the treasure of grace,
and temple of eternity.

16 Then shall all the nations, my God, be afraid, and all the kings of the
earth tremble at the brightness of thy glory. What corner of the world shall
be so secret, where the noise of thy blessed coming shall not sound and be
heard? where shall that people be so far from the sun, so confined and
limited in darkness, as will not vnseele their eyes to behold the clear
burning brightness of salvation, which will shine upon them? Yea heaven it
self shall increase his flames, to give light unto this thine entrance into
the world, and the kings shall run from all places to do homage unto the king
of kings, unto the governor both of heaven and earth.

17 For he has set up and advanced his kingly throne upon Sion, in great and
costly array: there shall he be seen wholly encompassed with glory, darkning
the Sun and Moon with the brightness of his face.

18 But why have thou, O Lord, so highly exalted the throne of thy glory? have
thou done it, because thou would not vouchsafe to hear the prayers of thy
faithful servants? And because thou would make no reckoning of the whole
world, which in deed is nothing, in respect of thy greatness? Alas no my God*
Thou have lifted up the self upon an eminent place, that all the inhabitants of
the earth might see and acknowledge thee, and so run unto thy grace and mercy:
for thou should be always ready to come at the humble summons of thy
servants, and never disdain their pitiful petitions. And behold them also
standing as miserable offenders, condemned unto bolts and shackles, looking for
the coming of some king, that should set them free at the entrance into his
kingdom. Even so, o Lord, deliver thou them who have given themselves up into
the bondage of sin, and with the only twinke of thine eye, the mainacles
shall fall from their wristes.

19 Then shall they be all heard to sing a glorious song unto the victorious
king, their voices shall be heard throughout all the corners of the earth, and
the remembrance of thy singular bounty and infinite mercy, shall be engraued
within the memory of men, and so pass from age to age, even unto the last
posterity. The earth shall then be consumed, all the waters dried up, the air
vanished, and the heavens have an end, which shall as yet sing the glory of the
eternal God.

20 The eternal God, who has vouchsafed merely and joyfully, to cast down
his eyes from the highest heavens, into the very deepest place of the bowels of
the earth, for the acknowledging of the torments of the miserable detained
captives in hell, and heard their groans, is himself suddenly run thither,
to unbind and set at liberty his poor captive prisoners, and all their
posterity, where death with the weapons of sin, had overcome them, and
confined them, in his most dark prisons. But the God of life has overcome
death, and has freed and cleared them quite from thence.

21 To the end, O Lord, that they might set forth thy praise in Sion, and
preach thy loving kindness in Jerusalem. And although every one of them had an
hundredth mouths, and their voices as loud as thy thunder, yet should they
never be able to attain and reach unto the greatness of thy glory. All the
parts of the world conspire not, nor join not themselves together, save only
to represent in their motions, a part of thine infinite power and goodness:
howbeit, they never look to come near thereunto; for they are more then
bottomless depths, which have neither bottom nor yet brinke, and therefore they
must only behold them a far of.

22 And therefore I most humbly beseech thee my God, to be contented that thy
people assemble and reunite themselves both in bodies and minds, devoutly to
offer up unto thee that holy will which they have to honor thee, for the
effect can in no wise otherwise be able to come near that which thou
deseruest. Accept therefore, O Lord, the humble submission of the kings of the
earth, which come before thee to yield unto thee their homage and service due
unto thee, as unto their sovereign and chief Lord. They shall cast their
scepters unto the earth, and their crowns at their feet, and present for a
sacrifice unto thy majesty their humble prayers, and innocent consciences. And
I will be the first my God, which will cast down my self before thee, to
worship and serve thee with all mine heart, to thee alone will I consecrate my
spirit. Quicken it therefore, O Lord, that being purified by the holy zeal of
thy love, it may receive in it self, as it were in a clear looking Glass,
the image of thine incomprehensible excellency and perfection, and feel in it
self the reflection of thy sincere amity, as well as thine infinite goodness,
accompanied with the number of thine elect, to be an inheritor with them in
everlasting life.

23 Now I have already felt, my good God, that thou have enlightened my soul
with thy grace, and have presented the favor which thou would show unto all
the children of the earth. Heretofore has my spirit a far of, taken a note,
how thou proceedest for the deliverance of the world, but it has been afraid
to die before such time as thou were come: and that is because thou have heard
it call upon thee, saying, Tell me, O Lord, how long the course of mine age
shall b^, and when thou will end my days.

24 Go not about, O Lord, to cut of the thread of my life at the first or second
winding up of the spindle, neither stay it over short in the midst of the
course. Attend, my God, until the time be come, when thou must set open the
treasure of thy graces, to make an entrance for men unto the largeness of
salvation: or if thou have at least appointed mine end, and that my life cannot
stretch so far, yet remember my posterity, and let him be borne of my race
that must sanctify the world by his coming.

25 I right well know, O Lord, that at the first, thou made heaven and earth,
and whatsoever excellent thing we see here in this world, to be the work of
thine own hands.

26 But all this shall come to an end, even as an old worn garment; a man
shall enquire what is become of it, and there shall be no mention made thereof at
all. It was made, and it shall be unmade; it had a beginning, and it must have
an end. But thou alone, O Lord, which have been from all eternity, shall be
always one and the same. For age, and time which consume all things, serve for
none other purpose, but to confirm thine euerlastingnesse, and to set forth
thy Deity, and men seem to remain here upon the earth for none other cause,
but to behold round about them, thine incomprehens^ble greatness, on the one
side, and their infirmity, on the other side.

27 A man changes not his shirt so often, but the earth oftener changes her
inhabitants: one puts forth another, and all is renewed even in a moment. But
thou, my God, art even the same at this day, that thou wast at the beginning.
Every province of the earth has a great catalogue of kings, who have there
commanded, one successively after another, but the heavens and the earth,
continually sing unto us, that thou have always been alone, ever like unto
thy self, and that neither the time past, ne yet the time to come, can any
ways alter not change thee.

28 Now, my Lord, although we must depart from hence, yet do I not doubt, but
that I shall one day taste of that sweet fruit, which shall heal (...)
contagious disease of ours, which (...) fathers transferred over unto us, ^uing
eaten the fruit of death and of sin. For our children shall come after us,
and therefore, O Lord, show us this favor, as to continue our posterity from
age to age, until such time as we altogether shall appear before thy face,
not to receive sharp ^d severe judgment, but to enter by the merit and
intercession of thy dear beloved son, into the enheritance of the eternal
blessedness, which shall be purchased for all thy faithful, by the adoption
of thy son in the house of thy servant David.

From the depth of depths.

Psalm. 129.
FRom the depth of depths have I cried unto thee, my God, being lost and buried
in the most fearful caves of the earth, I (...) called upon thy name, hearken
(...) my voice, and hear my prayer. (...) all hope of succor is taken from
(...), and I see nothing about me but horror and trembling, and yet have I not
been discouraged, and do wait for at thy hands, that which thou have promised
to all such as shall live in the fear of thy name, and in the obedience of thy
commandments.

2 Give thou therefore, O Lord, a favorable ear unto mine hearty prayer. If
my sin stand between thee and me, to whet thee against mine iniquity, and
to make thee contrary unto the prayers which I make unto thee, beat back the
same with the look of thy merciful eye, or else O Lord, shut up for a time,
the eyes of thy justice, until such time as the ear of thy loving kindness
has received my confession, and the humble request which I make unto thee for
grace. For, I come not before thee, to brag of mine own justification, but
of thy great loving kindness and benignity.

3 If thou should keep a regiser of our sins, and we come to an ^dite
before thee, who were able, (...) God, to abide thy severe iudgeme^ For, what
day of life is there that (...) not deserved a world of tormen^ Thou might
draw out, O Lord (...) the pains of hell, and yet the greatest part of my sins
should go unpunished.

4 But although we have mightily offended, yet for all that thou ceasest not to
reciue any sinner that comes unto thee with confession of the mouth, and
contrition of the heart. He has (...) sooner looked toward thy mercy, but
that he feels it working in him, and breaks and destroieth the sin which
freeseth his heart with fear and horror. And the punishment which hangs over
his head, recoyleth far away from him, and caryeth with it, this miserable
carfulness, which torme^teth the consciences defiled with iniquity. And
therefore O Lord, have I not forsaken thy laws, but have always waited to see
when it would please thee to grant me favor and grace: for the unwise man
that despaireth by reason of his sin, and gives over his soul (...) ^emned,
is like unto the abho^ ^ole usurer, who having sustained (...) in his goods, by
and by be^ himself of his life also.

(...) soul has not done so, my (...) although she has felt thine ha^ lying
most heavily upon me, executing part of the punishment which my sins have
deserved, yet has she always conserved in her self that sound hope which she
has had in thy promises. Even as the blows light upon my back, I cry out
and say unto thee, O Lord my God, thy will be done, and give me as great
strength as thou layest affliction on me. Measure my punishment by my strength,
and as my torment increases, even so augment my courage, and so have thou done
O Lord.

6 Let Israel therefore look up and trust in his God, even from the day
break unto the shutting in of the evening, and look for none other help but
from him. For, his help is ready and sure for him that calls upon him with a
sincere conscience, and a pure will. And although the misery has been never
so great and extreme, yet so soon as the Lord has understood the cry of his
servants, they have all so soon felt also their deli^rance.

7 For he most bountifully (...) out his mercy, and is infinitely ^full to all
those that come unto him. Insomuch, as that his goodness puts out as it
were the sorrow which we have for our sins, and makes us as it were rejoice
in our fall, as being the cause whereby we have made trial of his loving
kindness. For, if our sins surpass all measure, his g^ce exceeds all our
thoughts. We have deserved long and hard captivity, and lo who it is that
freeth us, and has brought us a most sweet liberty. We have blinded the eyes
of our spirit, and lo who comes to enlighten them.

8 O Israel, thou have offended the Lord, thou have scorned his laws, thou
have made a jest at his commandments; thou have forgotten the good turns
which he favorably has bestowed upon thee. He has drawn thee out of most
miserable captivity, fed thee with the bread of heaven, ^de purposely streams
flow out of hard rocks to make thee drink; has chosen for thy dwelling place,
the most delitious garden in the world, made a covenant with thee, given thee
his will to keep, and thou have co^red against his honor, gone an whoring
unto strange gods, trodden his laws under thy fe^e; To be short; thou have
deserved more punishment then there is to be had in hell. And yet
notwithstanding he offers to grant thee grace, and with the price of his own
blood would redeem thee from the bondage of sin, whereunto thou most
voluntarily boundest thy self. Behold him, who has himself paid their
ransom that betrayed him, who took upon him the punishment which we deserved,
and satisfied for our transgressions. With what words then are we any way able
to thank him for all these mercies? Open my lips therefore my God, my Creator
and redeemer, that my voice may be heard, and mine heart enflamed with a
boiling affection, to praise and thank thee, and humble me also in the
acknowledging of my self, to the end thou ^st hear me in the knowledge of the
holy mystery, by which we are ^incorporate into thee, and renewed in thy
covenant, that we may enter into that blessed fellowship of glory, in which,
all they shall triumph, which shall be partakers of the merit of the passion of
thy best beloved son, the true and only Savior of the world.

Lord hear my prayer.

Psalm. 142.
O Lord, man in the end is weary of all things: a continual course brings
him out of breath, overmuch starin^ dimmeth the eyes, and a shrill sound
deaffeth the ears: but the more my voice cries unto thee, the stronger it is,
my courage increases more, and my prayer bette^ pleases me. And therefore do
I begin again daily to cry upon thee, Lord hear my prayer, give ear unto my
complaint: for in praying to thee my God, consists all mine whole comfort. It
is my prayer, O Lord, which coniureth thy loving kindness^ to purge my sins,
not by reason of the severity of the punishment, but by the means of the
effect of the grace which thou have granted unto us, by which thou do
abolish by thy sovereign and absolute power, the remembrance of our sins.

2 And therefore enter not, O Lord, into judgment with thy servant, ne yet
leave him unto the rigor of thy laws: for, no man living that shall appear
before thee at thy judgment seat, shall be justified. No man shall escape
this fearful condemnation, the punishment whereof is not only cruel, but
immortally rigorous also. Alas, O Lord, who can be saved before thee? It is
thou that art offended, it is thou that wilt ^ccuse us, It is thou that have
seen ou^ iniquities, and wilt attest them, and it is thou that shall judge us.
When the accuser shall be witness, and the witness, Judge, what shall become
of the offender? What defense can he make to justify himself? O Lord my God,
I will not ^rrie until this blow light upon me, I will defend me with ^y
favor and grace, to oppose it unto thy Justice. And thy grace is obtained by
the acknowleding and confessing of our sins, and the humbling and submitting
of our minds. Lo, I here cast down my self prostrate before thee, and lay
open my sins, and therefore I beseech thee, O Lord, to have mercy upon me.

3 My sins, my God, the capital enemy unto my soul, have so terrified me,
and cast me down, as that I now lie crawling upon the ground, daring not once
to look up unto heaven. For, so soon as I lift up mine eyes, I see the light
which shines upon me, discover on the day a great many of sins, which accuse
my conscience. And then I feel forthwith shame take hold on my guilty face,
and to make me cast down my countenance unto the ground, a countenance
unworthy to behold the heavens, the master whereof she has so grievously
offended, too too cowardly a face to cast the eyes thereof upon such places
which have so many thunderbolts prepared to root out the guilty.

4 My spirit therefore has led me into dark places, and buried me as a dead
man in the cranuies of obscurity. My soul is made very sad in me, and mine
heart stirs it self like unto one walking with his nose lifted up into the
weather, who through his retchlesnesse falls into the bo^rome of a well,
having forthwith thereby been amazed, is incontinent void of judgment,
falls out with himself, and tormenteth himself, until such time as being
come again to his wits, he knows both the place wherein he is, and
understands the manner how he fell in: and then begins by little and little
to get up again unto the top thereof, and yet is scarslie able to note and
mark the place whence he so easily fell.

5 And so having called to mind as far as I possibly could, the memory of
things past, having set before me in a deep meditation, the works of thine
hands, and having exactly considered the perfection thereof, yea, and
remembering the estate wherein thou have created us, and besides, setting before
me him, by whom I feel my self now, as it were oppressed under the
destruction of sin, I cursed in my self the hour wherein my mother conceived
me, I abhorred the day which first opened unto me mine eye lids, whereby I
might see heaven and earth, witnesses of mine infirmity: and in the end;
finding nothing in the world, that in this distress might comfort and help
me, I at last, addressed my self unto thy most excellent majesty.

6 I fell on both my knees before thee, I stretched out mine arms and hands
unto thee, and my soul thirsting for thy grace, waited with a great desire for
the same, as the chapping ground through heat, looks for a gracious and sweet
shower in the hoatest days of summer.

7 Make have therefore unto me, O my God, for I am already out of breath, for
lo mine heart faints, and I am at the point to swound, will thou stay until
I be dead? I am already so, if thou make no^ have, for my senses do by little
and ^tle fail me, my soul glideth gently out of me, leaving my body without
moving, and I am like unto him, who letting his foot bleed in the water,
loses his life with his blood, without feeling the occasion or cause of his
death.

8 If thou O Lord hold thy self aloof from me, and turnest thy face ^ay. I
shall become like unto those that go down unto the bottom of hell, ^le death
will make my face look wan^, and my feeling to sleep: ^ay a worse thing then
this will betide me, my God, for spiritual death will kill my soul, make it
horribly a feared, and take from her the acknowledgement of thy singular
goodness, and the hope of grace which shines in thy miracles, as a bright
shining star in a dark night.

9 Make me therefore, O lord, in thy good time, to understand and feel the
effect of thy mercy: and when the sun rises in the morning upon the face of
the earth, let then thy loving kindness rise upon me, for the enlightening of
mine ignorance, and lead me in the way of thy will. But let it not deal with
me, O Lord, as the sun does, who at his fall plungeth him self into the
sea, keeping away his light for a time, from poor wretched and distressed men.
But let thy favor and grace continually assist and defend me, and never
depart more from me, then my soul does from my body: for thy mercy is far
away more, (...) of my soul, the^ my soul is (...) l^fe of my body.

10 And therefore let (...) never forsake me: but let (...) ^ight direct my
footsteps always in thy ways, and lead me continually in the way which must
bring me unto thee. For, my spirit which has run it self through the strange
^ches of this world, and strayed into the broad and thick bushes thereof, can
never find out her tract again, but rusheth out at all adventures, and loses
both her path, and also her pain, going always back from the abiding place
whither she was dete^ned to go. But, I, my God, do always attend thine aid,
for, it is from above that I look for help.

11 I am a captive in the hands of the most cruel enemies of my life, and
therefore I most humbly beseech thee, o Lord, to make haste to deliver me: I
fly unto thee for refuge, receive me into thy protection? Teach me what thou
would have me to do, for thou art my God, whom alone I am resolved now to
serve. And now away away from me deceitful pleasure, which heretofore have
bewitched any poor soul, and poisoned my spirit: thou have with thy sweet
delights fed me, and made the wi^h a little ba^ of honey to swallow a deadly
potion, which running through my members, has so astonished and mortified me,
as that there is no difference between me and a dead man: nay worse then that,
for it is not my body that is thus mortified, but it is my soul, wherein
consists the principal matter, both of this present life, and also of the
life to come.

12 And therefore thy holy spirit must light upon me, to rewarme and fetch
again my dying soul, and take it by the hand to quicken, and set it in a safe
place, imprinting therein the image of thy righteousness, to serve her as a
sauegard against all tentations which besiege her on every side, and threaten
her destruction.

13 Thou shall come therefore, and at thy coming shall draw back my soul from
tribulation, and in showing of me mercy, shall destroy all those that have
coniured against me. And then shall my sorrow have an end, and theirs shall
begin, and the beginning of their sorrow, shall never c^se: But as the streams
coming out of the spring heads, do still grow larger and larger, until such
time as they enter into the deep Seas, where is neither brinke nor bottom,
even so shall their misery, day by day increase, and in the end will heap
upon them extreme dolor, and infinite distress.

14 And so shall all they perish which shall vex my soul: for I, o God, (...)
thy faithful servant whom thou have remembered, and wilt remember all those,
who in disdain of my Lord, have thus shamelesly troubled me. They laughed at
my miseries, but now behold the season wherein they shall bewail theirs. Thy
vengeance begins to wax hot against them, and a man shall see them fall
like unto the leaves of trees in the beginning of winter. O God, what glory
shall I render unto thy name? and at what end shall I begin to set forth thy
praise? Shall I publish thy goodness, in creating so many wonderful works
which are under the Sun? Thy wisdom in the conseruing of them? Shall I
preach abroad thy justice in the condemnation and vengeance of the pride of the
Angels, and the disobedience of men? Shall I sing forth thy mercy in the
redeeming of those who by transgressing thy laws, have cast themselves down
headlong into the bondage of eternal death? unto what part of thy praises, may
the sound and tune of my voice attain and reach? Yea, and put the case that my
voice were sufficient thus to do, where are the ears that are able to receive
them? I want all things, o Lord, for the taking in hand of this enterprise,
saving courage and will, which being full of fervent affection, cry out as much
as i^ possible, unto thee. And therefore I humbly beseech thee to aid their
weak endeavors, and seeing that the tears of my repentance have washed away
the filthiness of my sin, wherewith my spirit was greatly charged and burdened:
give unto it now the wings of faith and hope, that may swiftly carry the same
into thine arms, to reunite it self unto her first original being, without
having any other thought, but such as may tend to the honor of thy service, and
advancement of thy glory.

A MEDITATION UPON THE SEVEN PSALMS OF the Consolation of David.

1594.

A MEDITATION upon the seven Psalms, of the Consolation of David.
The Lord is my light etc.

PSALM. 26.
AFter I had laye^ in so^ min^ (...) in ^y tears, and sighed a thousand times
with sorrow in the ^eckning (...) of my sins, I thought, o Lord, (...) I h^
app^ised thy with, and thereby forthwith to have ended my mi^e^. (...) alas, as
I look unto the world, and think with an innocent life, ^o converse amongst
men, I see their (...) turned upon me, and all their purposes and drifts
directed to d^ ^e (...) ^o (...) stand in doubt whether I be reconciled unto
^ee or no, and whether thou be satisfied with this my repentance. But in
turning mine eyes every way, I perceive that this affliction is common to me,
and to all honest and good men, by the parts that I see played them on every
side, and how their constancy is always in danger: and contrariwise, to see
how the wicked easily regorge pleasure, and all manner of benefits, makes me
confounded and astonished. For, on the one (...), I ca^ to mind that thou art the
great and mighty God of (...), whose (...) seeing all ^hi^gs, ^weth the dee^
and ^ecr^ cor^, and whose (...) hand reaches unto the farthest parts of the
world. And on the other side, I see those that lift up their heads against
thee, and oppress thy poor and ^no^ (...), prosper in thy ^ight, and daily
pride up themselves in the happ^ ^uc^e^ of the (...) godl^ne^. I confess, o
Lord, that I stand like a block, and as one being blind^ed with this (...), am
not able to p^erce through these thick mists, which thus enuiron (...) eyes of
mine understanding. ^u^ in the end, o Father of lights, thou vnseeledst mine
eyelids, and enlightening me with the beams of thy wisdom, have made me
understand why thou so use them, and delivering me from the pain and care
wherein I was, have filled me with the assurance of my salvation, and given me
a most certain consolation and comfort. So as I do not only at this present
care for the thretnings of threatners, and disdain their insolency, but being
r^mpard with wonderful constancy, and great courage, I offer my self unto
the combat, and cry with a loud voice, Come who so ever will and dare, for, I
now fear nothing. For, although God for a while exercises his faithful
servants, yet forsakes he them not when they stand in need, but in such sort
compasses their adversity with their forces, (...) that they become always
conquerors in this fight. And to say truly, so long as I am assured of his
mercy, what occasion can I have, ever to fear?

2 He has now taken my life into his protection, and covered me all over with
the wings of his power, who can enforce him to set me ashore? What shall I need
to fear, seeing that all the world fear and dread him which defends me? his
forces are not the armies of men, but legions of Angels: his ministers are not
Princes and Captains, but thundering, lightning, and storms: his wrath is not
blows and hurts, but earthquakes, swallowing up of Cities, and drowning of
whole Countries. Thou have already, o Lord, all these armies and hosts in
thine hand, and art ready to thunder them against the proud boldness of the
wicked, that have coniured the ruin of good men. But because my God thou
hold back for (...) time the arm of thy divine vengeance, comfort me in
the mean while with a sure hope, that thou will never forsake me: And me
thinks, that thou say continually unto me, tarry a little, for, the
time is not yet come which I have appointed, and in the mean while, trust thou
assuredly unto my promise, and look whatsoever affliction thou ^a^t endure, be
thou assured that I will ge^ thee strength to overcome it. My courage, o Lord,
increases, when as I feel thee thus to second me: and this thine exhortation
emboldneth me more unto patience, then all the applause of the people does him
that fights a combat, when he is most strong and lusty in his fight. There is
nothing now that I am afeard of: for, all these conspiracies, all these
slanderous reports against mine head and honor, seem to me like unto the foming
raging billows of the sea, who roting far off, furiously break themselves
against the foot of a rock, and scatter themselves abroad at the first stroke,
and the blow is but a vain sound, which is the end of all these great threats.
Certainly, the conscience of an innocent man, founded and grounded upon thy
grace, is more stable and sure, then all the greatest rocks, and cannot be
shaken nor moved by any injurious brags.

3 What shall I now fear any more? Shall I fear a rout of the wicked, that
go about to beset me round, and cluster about me, to see if they could take
me? They give out sometime one sign, sometime another, to assay if they can
lay hold on me. Behold, and see diligently how they note and mark me, and how
they bend their brows, and grind their teeth at me: I verily believe, that the
greatest thing which they desire, is to eat me with their teeth, to tear me
in pieces, to fill themselves with my flesh, to gnawe my bones, and to drink
my blood. O cruel and savage beasts, how can you thus despise your own flesh,
how can you thus abjure all humanity? Do you think that although you have
forgotten God, that God has forgotten his servants? Do you think that his
servants are so far from his hand, as yours is far from justice?

4 Well go too, ye have like mad Tygres fomed out upon me your poison, ye
have cried out, and houled at me, fastened your teeth and clutches upon me:
howbeit, all your blows slip over me, as it were over a most clear crystal,
they cannot hurt me, mine innocence is not to be wounded with all that ye can
devise, but are in the end enforced to retire all wearied, and gasping for
breath, lying upon the belly, ye ^ay grin and mutine with very anger, but it is
without power: and there is but one weapon amongst all the rest left you, and
that is, a will to do ill. But nevertheless, because your voice is abominable
before God, and that with your threats ye blaspheme him unto his face, he will
utterly root ye out, and throw upon you the mountains which your ambition and
covetousness have heaped up so hye, thinking thereby to scale his Throne, and
to rob him of his glory.

5 O Lord, what a spectacle have thou made for mine eyes to behold? nay, I am
now so assured of thy mercy, so comforted by reason of the care which I see
thou have of thy faithful servants, as that although I should see the greatest
army that possibly could be, yet would I not be afeard of it. Let there an
army be brought against me, composed of all the nations of the world, and let
there be placed in the vauntgard on the right hand, a battle of Scythians, and
on the left hand a battle of Ethiopians, and in the reregard the East India,
and America, and all the rest of the world in the midst to serve for a
battle, and add thereunto whatsoever Art ^d skill for the killing of men,
was eu^ able to find out or devise, and yet, if my God be my conductor and
leader, I will pass through them all without any fear. Again, if he be
angry with the world, and shall like him to serve himself with my hands, to
be aduenged of them for their ungodliness, I my self will cut them all in
pieces, not leaving so much as a tail of any of them.

6 Nay, I do now rejoice when as I hear say that the wicked band themselves
against me, and do assure my self, that it is God which wi^ lend me matter
wherein to glory. For, be thou, O Lord, only near me, bless my weapons,
and mine enemies are confounded. But what weapons? verily do thou but blow
only upon this people, and thou shall scatter them all, as a great wind
drives the dust too and fro: nevertheless, O Lord, I beseech thee blow not
upon them the wind and blast of thy curse, but tarry a little while if thou
please, to see if thy patience will bring them back to do their duties. And as
for my self, although I be covered over with their wounds, and defamed with
their injurious dealings, yet had I rather have them subject unto thy mercy,
then unto thy justice: and desire, if thou think it good, that their injustice
might rather serve to try me withal, then for their condemnation.

7 Thou know, O Lord, my desires, thou read them in mine heart, neither
have I ever called upon thee for vengeance: my vows conjure nothing but thy
mercy, and my thoughts are addressed unto nothing but unto peace. Would
thou understand the sum of my desres, and the end of all my prayers, it is, O
Lord, that I may pass my days in serving thee faithfully, and that thou
would grant me thine holy house to dwell in, and that all the while that I
am separated from thee, and a great way off from thi^e heavenly Tabernacle,
tied unto the earth by reason of the counterpoise of my body, I might unite
and tie (...) my thoughts unto thee, and conform and frame my self wholly
unto thy will. O blessed habitation, that is able to cover us from all worldly
passions, from all the lusts of the flesh, and to be short, from all the
assaults of the Devil. For, there o Lord, thou art present with us, and
come down from the heavens to keep company with us, and fillest us with
thy self, that we might be void of sin, and conuertest our carnal will into
a living and quickening spirit, that we might effectually feel thy marvelous
works, comprehend thy mercies, and conceive of thy power and almightinesse.

8 Suffer therefore, my God, that I being incorporate ^to the^, so f^rre-forth
as mine infirmity, and thine infiniteness will permit, I may be enlightened
with the beams of thy wisdom, to the end that m^ne understanding being
enlightened, she may learn me to know thy will. For this is the thread, o
Lord, which may assuredly guide ^e through the windings and turnings of the
laberinth of this world, and this is the passeport which must being us unto
that everlasting life, which we so ^cessantly gape and sigh for. Reveal unto
me therefore this thy will, and lay it up in my soul, that I may there keep
it most dearly, and in the midst of thy Church, I may set up an Altar in my
mouth, presenting the same daily unto thee for an offering, under the holy
veil of thy most holy word.

9 For, seeing o Lord, thou have mortrized me within thy holy Tabernacle,
showing me the holy mysteries of thy divinity, that in the hardest time of
mine adversity, thou have gathered, hid, and drawn me under thine Altar, and
yet not content with that, have made me to enter into the holy of holiest, and
bottomes of thy Sanctuary, where thou wast w^ to reveal the greatest secrets
of thy will, grant that I may so well conceive them, as that I may cause thy
faithful servants faithfully to understand them.

10 For, since thou have adua^ced me into so eminent and high a place, as one
set upon an ^ye rock, to be seen of the whole world, and honored above all
mine enemies, let the foundation of my faith be as firm as any stone, and the
grace which thou shall bestow upon me, to be a testimony of thy
righteousness, making me worthy and capable of the benefits which it shall
please thee to vouchsafe me.

11 As for my self, O Lord, I will take pains reverently to use the
ministry which thou have committed unto me. Thou know how I have carried
my self therein. I have turned my self every way to reknowledge that which
might best like thee. I have most willingly offered unto thee calves and sheep
in sacrifice: I have willingly hathed thine Altar with blood, but that was too
too small an offering for thee. I have, o Lord, sacrificed mine heart,
consecrated mine affection, vowed my thoughts, and having plucked them from the
very bottom of mine heart, I have offered them unto thee with my voice,
whereby thou have understood whatsoever my soul has desired, which was
nothing else but to please thee in all mine actions. My crying out then has
been my offering, which thou did graciously accept, opening the heavens to
gather them together, and to receive them. And therefore, o Lord, I will all
the days of my life, sing thy praise, and recite an Hymn of thy glory.

12 Hear, o merciful God, my songs, and receive in good part the voice which
testifies thy goodness, and publishes thy mercies. Increase my strength and
courage, that I may strain my cries and spirits to thee. And since thy mercy
is never deaf unto those which sincerely call upon thee, incline the same to
me: for, all sorts of felicities follow her continually. Incline the same, I
say, o Lord, for thou have promised it unto all those that call upon thee.

13 How often have thou heard mine heart, I say mine heart, and not my mouth:
for, I speak not unto thee but with mine heart, which cries out, saying unto
thee: O Lord, why have I sought thee so carefully day and night, both in peace,
and war, in quietness, and in trouble. I have desired nothing in the world,
but to see thy face, I mean not, O Lord, thy divine face, wherein is imprinted
that fearful Majesty, which shines as the lightning, which no man's eye is
able to abide to behold, but that face at the least, which is covered and
courtayned with thy works, which, although no man is able to see but the very
hinder parts thereof, and that very hardly also, yet me thinks it to be most
wonderful, and makes me beside my self as it were. Since then, O Lord, if
thou be that increated word which has created al things which does part of thy
will, and thy will, a part of thy self, does it not represent it self unto
me, as thy face, for me to note and mark therein, such a great number of
beautiful and excellent lineaments of Divinity, which shine most brightly in
every part thereof? O Lord, I am in love with this rare beauty, neither have I
any other care and thought, but that I may enjoy this thy presence, which
offreth it self unto me in thy word, as in a looking glass of thy Deity.

14 Seeing then that thou see mine holy and sincere love, deprive me not
then of this holy object, which sanctifies and blesses my cogitations and
thoughts. And although my sins which are most foul and filthy make thee to
be displeased with me, yet I most humbly beseech thee, not to be angry with me,
neither turn thou away this thy fair and wonderful face from me. For, thou O
Lord, art angry with none, but with such as glory in their sins, and
stubburnely persist in their iniquities. But I, thy servant, my God, humble my
self before thee, and do acknowledge, most unworthy sinner that I am, not
once to dare appear in thy presence, if thy loving kindness did not bring me
in unto thee. And therefore thou art not to reject me: for, if thou should,
thou must also therewith reject thy mercy whereunto I am coupled, and so fast
linked, as that as it cannot be separated from thee, so is it also now fast
linked unto my repentance.

15 And therefore thou should, if it might so please thee, dwell and remain
with me, and seeing it has liked thee to allow me for thy servant, and to
thrust me into this combat, thou art not to leave and forsake me in it, for if
thou should, my destruction would turn to thy shame, where on the other
side, my victory will turn to thy glory. And therefore, O Lord, I beseech
thee to help me evermore. For, as mine infirmity strives commonly against me,
so also have I need to have continual help on every side of me. For, if thou
keep thy self never so little awhile from me, my soul will even vanish away,
and so will also my body, if my soul be once gone. For thou, O Lord, art
far away more, the soul of my soul, then my soul, is the soul of my
body. I right well know that thy Divine Majesty has a most unworthy
dwelling place in me, but yet I humbly beseech thee, disdain not to come
into it: for, where thou once entrest, all magnificence abounds, and there is
always honor sufficient where thou art. And besides, O Lord, thou receyuest no
honor by coming to visit me, but I thy poor servant am honored by thy
presence. Why should thou leave the glorious bright Heavens, and bright
shining Stars, and to come down here below, to seek for nothing that can
be said to be honorable? But it is, as I think, because thou would have
thine Angels know and understand, that they ought not to pride up themselves
in their magnificence, seeing they are thy creatures, and that thou can make
the most vile enhabitant on the earth, as honorable as any one of them. This is
it why thou come down from the heaven of heavens, to have mercy upon us,
and having the like feeling of our miseries, thou come to reestablish us in
our ancient perfection. And because that we, as much as in us lies, have
defaced the image of the Deity, which thou had imprinted in us, thou
come to recharge and recover the liniaments of our first nature half
defaced. It is thou then, who as thou wast our Creator, so also wilt be our
Redeemer, and, as thou have been our Father, so also wilt be our protector and
defender. And it is thou, O Lord, who, although the whole world has rejected
us, yet have stretched out thine arms, and gathered us together under the wing
of thy loving kindness.

16 And so is it most meet, for I know not whither else to go. My Father and
my Mother have forsaken me, I mean, the Father that begot me, and my Mother
that tenderly nursed me, and brought me up, did abhor me, when as they saw
me set my whole heart upon thee, and leave the vanities of this world. They
never looked on me, but with grief, and held me but for a castaway. My
brethrens making much of me, turned into disdain: the kind and sweet amity
of my sisters changed into contempt, and the gracious meetings of my dearest
friends, were turned into mockery. Whither then must I fly? If my dearest
friends entreat me after this sort, what will mine enemies do unto me, whose
mouths are full of gall, and their tongs full of deadly poison, whose
ordinary actions and exercises are nothing else but doing of wrong, and
speaking contumeliously? But even then, when I am most given over, then art
thou nearest unto me, embrasest me most favorably, and powrest upon my head
the treasures of thy mercy, most largely.

17 Now, seeing it has pleased thee, thus to enlarge thy grace toward me,
that I might be conserved, teach me, I beseech thee, how I may serve thee:
Learn me what thy law is, and how I must direct my steps, that I may
continually walk a right in that narrow and thornie path, which must conduct
me unto the port of salvation. For, it is long sithence, O Lord, that I left
that broad and easy way, sowed with the pleasures of this world, and which
brings all those that follow the same, unto destruction and damnation. Show
me therefore, my God, thy way, for under such a guide, I can never stray, show
it me, O Lord, I say, for if I go never so little out of it, I am utterly
undone, mine enemies lie in wait to surprise me, and to make me subject, to
dishonor me, and so consequently, thy self, O Lord, because they know that I
serve thee faithfully.

18 Deliver me not therefore into their hands, that they may deal with me
according to their hearts desire. For then were mine honor at an end. They
have already made strong their part, suggested a thousand accusations, and
framed a world of witnesses, but their leasings have returned upon their own
heads, and borne witness against themselves, for lying cannot be hid, she is
full of crackes on every side, and truth pierces it on every part. For she is
made of many odd pieces, which fall away one from another, as soon as they are
touched, and in opposing her self unto innocence, she melts away as snow
against the Sun.

19 But although they had me even as themselves would wish, oppressed with
slanders, quelled under the burden of their injuries, yet would I not for all
that be discouraged. I have not, O Lord, put my trust in the benefits and
honors of this world, for that is almost always the portion of the wicked,
and are as it were, the rewards of their unfaithfulness, dissimulations, and
wicked dealings: this is the merchandise which most commonly, is not bought but
with this money. My hope, O Lord, is altogether in thee, the world is not
capable to be able to contain it, the fruit of my labors grows not in the
land of the dying, but that which I look to gather together, O Lord, is in the
land of the living, there it is that I hope to see my felicity, nay rather
thine, my God. Others look for the fruit after the budding and blooming time,
but I O Lord, look for it, after the fall of the leaf. For, after the leaf
of the body shall be fallen, I hope and trust that my soul shall bud in new
fruit, and be clothed again with the everlasting verdure of immortality for
ever.

20 And therefore, my soul, have patience, and carry thy self man-like,
redouble thy courage valiantly, and attend until my God comes unto thee. Be
not astonished or affeard, to see the prosperity of the wicked, neither be thou
amazed to see them oppress the godly, but stand to it to the end. And when
thou see O Lord, that I am not of my self strong enough, assist me, and lend
me thy shoulders, for fear the afflictions of the wicked cause me to depart
from my stand where thou have placed me, second my feruentnesse and zeal, that
having courageously sought at the place where (...) enemies assaulted me, I
(...) found at the gate when thou (...) it, to enter with thee in triumph,
(...) at thy feet, when as thou shall judge b^th the quick and the dead. Then
shall we see what a great change there is between, our life and theirs, and
what payment tarrieth for them: they have had their felicity in this world,
therefore then shall it be said unto them; Stand aside (for ye owe the rest,
and consider that ye shall render an accoumpt of those benefits which were
given you to keep, and be amerced for your abusing of them. Your habitation is
prepared for you as you deserve, depart into everlasting pains and torments:
ye have been many times told of the rigor thereof yet have you not so much
as a very little turned away from your cursed lives, and therefore shall ye now
feel it, seeing you would not as then any whit fear it. And as for those, o
Lord, which have been pacient for thy names sake, and suffered for thine honor,
the rage of the wicked, thou shall say unto the (...) Come ye blessed children
of my father, enter into the Tabernacle of glory, that ye may judge with him
both the quick and the dead. Comfort thy self now therefore my soul, with
this expectation and hope and trust in God, even in the almighty and most
merciful God, who never forsook the just in adversity, nor stopped his care
against the oppressed innocent.

I will at all times bless the Lord, etc.

Psalm. 34.
1 BLessed be thy name, o Lord, which have comforted me in misery, and blessed
be he for ever, that has helped me (...) mine affliction. All things have
their time, and all men's actions are distributed by times and seasons, change
serves for rest, and rest, for the refreshing of the ordinary labor of the
living: neither can any thing continue without rest in any occupation and
trade. Nevertheless, herein this rule fails, that is, I do bless, and for
ever will bless, thy name, O Lord: at the sun rising, I will praise thy name,
and at his going down, I will praise the same, at that, will I begin both
months and years, and at that also will I end them. O eternity, I have no
feeling of thee in this world, but in this my will, to praise and glorify my
God for ever. My body melts away with age, and my forces vanish and decay,
but my soul which stoutly stands against human corruption, does not only
continue, but also daily increases in this holy affection. For if I think to
take my rest, mine heart stirs my thought. And if I think to stop my mouth,
my soul is ready to break out between my lips, and forceably frames my
voice to set forth the glory and praise of my God. My soul, who makes thee
so eager to praise thy God? Thou know right well, and I also see it very
well, that thou have had thy being from him, and look by him to be
glorified: what usury make thou with him? Thou give unto him a parcel of
his praises, and by this means thou look that he should associate thee with
the riches of his glory. For from him alone, thou must hope to have some honor.
The heavens shall pass, and wear away like an old garment, and be changed as
men change a covering. But God shall continue still triumphing over the
destruction of the world. The peaceable and meek people shall sit by him, and
hear the triumphant hymns which shall be song in his victory and conquests,
and all, full of melody and reioicing, shall join their voices unto the
trumpets of the angels.

2 Let us begin therefore betime, to learn to sing the praises of his glory,
magnify him, and exalt his name, as high as our voices will serve us, let us
strain out our cries, to the end they may ascend as high, at the least, as we
are able to see, so as the air being filled with our songs, it may ca^y them
upon the wings of the winds unto the utter most parts of the earth to the end
that every one may be awakened with the sound of our notes, and rejoice in
hearing the name of the Lord of heaven and earth, thus sounded out, who is the
most faithful and most assured helper of all those which call upon him.

3 I have sought after him, and he forthwith has understood me. I knew not my
self whither to go, and after I had turned mine eyes on every side, and being
forsaken of the world, could see nothing which was able to help me, I returned
into my self, and pitifully beheld my self, bewailing my calamity: and all
at once, he gave me courage and strength, and making mine heart to leap out of
the gulf of heaviness and tribulation, which had swallowed me up, said unto
me; trust in me, for lo here I am. Then cried I out and said, O Lord, where
art thou, make have to help me quickly. And I had no sooner spoken, but that
his spirit descended into me, and as a strong and mighty wind drives the
clouds before is, even so did it drive from round about me, all manner of
griefs and afflictions.

4 Come therefore and run unto him: come then, for the way is easy and open
on every side, he shows himself in all places, and in what place soever we
are, he calls us unto him. He is so afeard of us, that we would go astray, as
that he comes down from heaven to carry a lamp before us, to give light
unto our feet, he is also the father of lights, which more clearly and purely
lights our souls then our bodies. For the light which lights our eyes, is
to cause us to see that which we are either to follow or to eschew, but this
light of all goodness and bounty; enlighteneth our souls, and of it self,
puts far from us, and drives away whatsoever may hurt and offend us. Come
therefore, and draw near thereunto* for so long as it shines upon us, you
shall be sure to go upright, and nothing shall be able to do you hurt, your
strength shall renew in you, and nothing shall confound you: for if your s^les
shall appear, it shall disperse them, and if your (...) come thither it will
send them back and overthrow them.

5 Will you see a most excellent proof of his aid and singular mercy? Behold
then this poor and miserable caitife, who is held to be an especial unhappy
man, yea such a one as is thought to be a man without all hope of recovery,
the only comfort of all miseries, who has but a very little cried out unto
God, and he forthwith heard him, and delivered him out of the misery wherein he
was, he has brought him to the port, and settled him in a place of safety.

6 He sends his angels to help his servants, who compass them about as a
most sure guarde, and will not suffer them to stir a foot from them, before
such time as they have rid them out of danger. For, as he himself is great, so
has he also mighty and strong ministers, and although he of himself is able
to do all things, and yet notwithstanding all his greatness, he executes his
will, by his creatures, governing the lesser by the meaner, the meaner, by the
higher, and the higher by himself.

7 Taste thou and consider a little, how kind and favorable his goodness and
mercy is, and how blessed he is that puts his trust in him. The Swallow is
very careful of her young ones, and yet she oftentimes leaves the^ to cry by
reason of hunger, and sometimes she gives them the sower with the sweet, but
our God comes at the first call, nay, at the first sign we make, yea at our
first wish, and so soon as he sees us thirst for his help, he puts his
most sweet and delicate dugs and breasts of his bounty, unto our mouths, and
streameth the sweet milk of his grace into our lips, which stancheth and
cools the thirstinesse of our infirmity, and quenches the heat which our
sin, as foul and filthy ulcers and sores, have engendered in our consciences.

8 And therefore, seeing he is so good and gracious unto us, and denies us
nothing that we ask, look somewhat unto your selves I beseech you, I speak
unto you, upon whom he has bestowed so many benefits, whom he has sanctified
with his holy blessings, and whom he has set a part to be his elect, and
partakers of his love. And beware ye offend him not with your unthankfulness,
and thereby make you vnwortthie of his benefits, through distrust and
incredulity of his beneficence. For, they that fear him want nothing, in
fearing him, they trust in him, and they fear him with a fear that proceeds
of love, not with a fear that he will do them some ill, but with a fear, not
to offend him, but rather with a fatherly reverence, who is far readier to do
us good, then we are careful to demand of him. For, he knows of himself
what is most necessary for us, and preuenteth forthwith our desires, if they be
agreeable unto his will, and enricheth us when we are most poor, and makes us
valiant when we are most weak.

9 And contrariwise, the richmen of the world, whose goods he has not blessed,
they I say, are not worthy of their riches, but starve with their abundance,
their goods melt into poverty, their great magnificences vanish away into
smoke, and become like unto a stream, whose springhead is dammed up, his bed
becomes parched with dryness, the skirts of his garments lose their beauty,
and his trees which he has planted on a row, wither, and dry up. But such as
have recourse unto God, and forsake him not, and refer all unto his honor,
shall never want any good thing, because the spring head of all goodness which
is the love of God, flows over their souls, and spreddeth it self
throughout all the parts of their bodies.

10 Now, since that you see, that the fear of the Lord brings so great
profit, and that his fear is it, which reconcileth us unto him, his
conciliation gets us grace, enlarges our felicity; come ye unto me, that I
may learn ye how ye shall fear him as a most good and merciful father, who
never denies mercy unto him which acknowledges his sins, and gives
himself to walk in the way of well doing.

11 Desire ye to please him, and by that means to live in his grace, that is
to say, to live blessedly, and pass your days with a quiet mind, and
abundance of whatsoever is necessary for this life, and yet to go forward on
the way of this immortal life, which attends us after we shall be departed
from hence. To be short; desire ye his blessing, that is to say, firm and
assured prosperity, which engenders in you spiritual rejoicing, which lays
your heart continually open to breath out his honor, and co^tentedly to use the
benefits which he lends unto you here in this world? I will deliver out unto
you in few words, how ye shall attain unto this means. For I know wherewith
he is pleased, and what actions of ours they are, that are agreeable unto his
liking.

12 The first thing that ye shall do, is this; Keep your tongue that it speak
nothing to the dishonor of God, nor utter any bitter and angry talk. Mark what
a small and little thin member this is, and yet it is the stern of our life,
which turns and windeth our spirit which way soever it pleases. For when it
is once filled with corrupt and filthy speech it carries the passions of our
hearts from whence they are conceived, even into the bottom of our
understanding, and in such sort waters them, as that they are like unto an
earthen pot over much soaked in water, and so loses thereby the form and shape
of the reason which God had breathed into it. See ye not that one spark of
fire sets an whole house on a burning flame? Even so the tongue, as the
bait of sin, gives it an entrance into us, brings it deafly in, and
setting by that means our souls on fire, wastes and consumes whatsoever good
thing is within us. Let us then command our lips to receive nothing but the
bare and simple truth; and banish lying and deceit for ever from them. For, if
we keep in fast shut, the wicked thoughts which may arise in our hearts,
without giving the^ vent, they will in the end choke themselves, even as fire
that has no air.

13 And therefore, let us first of all, put all lying and deceit far away from
us, for the true praise which God looks for at our hands, is, that we should
imitate him as much as our nature will permit. Now, he is the God of truth and
of justice, who can neither love not make much of us, so long as lying which is
contrary to him, shall dwell in us. Secondarily, we must estra^ge our selves
from all sin whatsoever: for, to eschew ill, is the beginning to do well: and
always provided, that if God finds us void of wicked intents, he will fill
us with good ones, and teach us that which we ought to wish and procure, and
the thing which we ought principallest to desire, he teaches us. And that is
peace, which he would have us desire with all our hearts. First, peace with
him, which is the storehouse of all goodness, which we can never have, except
we yield him that obedience which we owe him. And then, peace amongst our
selves, without the which we can never have hi^. For, he has commanded us to
love our neighbors as our selves, so as, if in stead of this, we breath out
nothing but blood and spoils, what peace would we have with him, whose laws
and commandments we infringe and break? And withal, that war is no better
then the blossom of injustice, which is, abominable before God.

14 His eye, which is this well framed and loving eye, beholds none but the
just and righteous: his light, enlighteneth none but them, neither are his
miracles showed but in favor of them, and his ears are not open but unto
their prayers: and we may properly say, that his justice is on his side, that
examineth the life of those which offer themselves unto him, and to him
recommendeth their prayers which are of an upright heart.

15 And as for those that take pleasure in ill doing, he looks upon them
indeed, but it is with a furious burning eye, whose beams are like the arrows
of pains and misery, wherewith he wounds their souls, filling them with
fear and astonishment, besides a thousand other miseries, which he lays on
them, as earnests of torments which attend them. He dreameth not of them
otherwise then of the rooting out of their memory from the ^ce of the earth,
and by justice to wash the arrows of their polution, which are left: for he
sufficiently knows their impenitent hearts, which have insolently neglected
his holy mercy.

16 Now, the righteous have not so done, for they have in good time returned
unto God, and calling upon his clemency, have in the end obtained it, they
rejoiced therein, and it remained with them, as it were their portion, he has
delivered them out of all their troubles wherein they were plunged, and
received them under his grace, as under a brazen wall, so as no violent
mischief what soever, can be able to make them false hearted.

17 Undoubtedly, God is marvelous good and favorable, thou might say, that
he is always favorable unto the afflicted which call upon him, and forsakes
him not day nor night. For no sooner has our grief and sorrow humbled us, and
made us know what need we have of him, but that he is by and by ready at hand
to save us.

18 In very deed the righteous are afflicted with strange calamities, and a man
might properly say, that they are the very subject and matter of miseries to
work on, there are so many mischiefs come tumbling in, one in another neck,
to oppress them. But this is not, to any other end, save to make the mercy of
God shine more gloriously in them. For the greater that the tribulation is, the
more does the pity and compassion shine in the preserving of them.

19 For he keeps even the very least bone they have, nay there shall not one
hair of their heads fall, not be plucked in sunder, but by his express will,
neither should that ever once come to pass, but for their only good and
benefit. And yet more then that, for he has all their goods, and al their
trade and traffic in his protection, and when it pleases him, he will
multiply their store, cause his blessings flourish in their houses, and make
their riches and possessions increase, according to their own hearts desire.

20 But contrariwise, the lives of the wicked shall be most miserable. And
although for the proving and inuiting of them to turn unto him, be lend unto
them the goods and commodities of this life, yet shall their deaths be most
lamentable, yea such a death as shall deliver them unto eternal torments, and
plunge them in the bottomless depths of inextinguishable fires, there to be
devoured, and never consumed, and there continualy languishing, without ever
dying. This shall be the end of the wicked, and of those that make war
against the just.

21 And in the mean while, thy poor servants, whom thou have so dearly
redeemed from the hands of death and of sin, shall enjoy the blessed
salvation, which thou have purchased for them, and holding death and sin
enchained under their feet, within the chains of thy mercy, will trust in
thee so long as they shall be in this exile of the world, and after they shall
have departed hence, shall enjoy that everlasting blessedness which thou have
promised them, beholding in thy face, this fountain of bringhtnesse, bounty,
and beauty, wherewith thou framedst heaven and earth, and all in them contained.

Grudge not to see, etc.

Psalm. 37.
1 SEeing that the providence of God, president of the government of the
world, is to reward every man according to his desert, I am sometimes astonished
to see, how those men who bend their whole study to do i^, receive so many
favors in this life, and exceed and abound in so many sorts of benefits. But
as mine heart began to breath out despightful words, and to be angry within it
self, me thought I felt the spirit of God coming to m^o touch me, and very
gently pulling (...) by the care, said unto me, Alas gen^e poo^ wretch, thou
vndoest ^y self (...) ^ding to far in this so deep (...) dangerous
discourse: comfort thy self in me, and envy not the prosperity of the wicked,
neither be thou (...) those that work in iquity.

2 For, that which thou take to be their chiefest felicity, in but (...) dow,
a false and counte^ for image, which will lose it self when it is between their
hands, and fly away from them when as they think to have it most (...). As
grass which has bi^ out do^ (...) the fi^he, withers in a (...) so in a
moment, shall the (...) of the wicked lose that (...) and wax pale and wan, as
if (...) ^ted. The herbs and flowe^s in (...) are not so quickly withered, as
thou shall see the riches of the wicked decay and come to naught: have thou
not considered the ^erocall, a very beautiful flower truly for one day, which
in the morning has a fresh ruddy color, and keeps his fine ruddinesse all
day long, and at evening becomes so dry and withered, as that a man would
think, it had been tainted by (...) of the winter? Even so, the prosperity
of the wicked, if their prosperity may be so called, is but a laughing or
smiling deceiuer of an outward apparent felicity, and may be most properly
likened unto this flower, for it withers so suddenly, alters in so (...) a
^ime, and is transformed into such a fashion, as is wonderful to behold.

3 Put thy trust therefore in God, and believe verily, that the insolency of
the wicked shall never be firm, so long at the ^fice of God shall rule and
reign, and believe also that the just shall ne^ be forsaken, in what affliction
so ever they be. And therefore be not discouraged, but continue in well doing,
for he that shall persevere, shall be saved. D^ell in the land which the Lord has
given thee, and content thy self with the graces which he has bestowed upon
thee, neither enter thou into judgment with him, for thou shall find in the end,
that the riches of the wicked are but in ye keeping of their own hands.

4 But rejoice thou in the hope which thou have in thy God, and put away the
grievous care which possesses thine heart, and which as rust consumes the
same. For when thou shall have once powered out thy spirit, and lifted up thy
thoughts unto the Lord, he will accomplish all thy desires, and make thee enjoy
whatsoever thou would wish.

5 Neither come thou before him as it were waueringly nor mistrustingly, no
hide thou thy thoughts from him, but lay open unto him the very bottom of thine
heart, and discover unto him all thy ways and cogitations. For it is
impossible for thee to deceive him, and a dangerous thing to try him. For he
sees and marketh all things, especially, a double and unbelieving heart, which
he abhors of all the rest, but receives and embraces the poor and humble
spirited man, hears his prayers, and grants him before hand that, which he
is determined to crave.

6 For he that stands in his grace and ^auour, shall never want either wealth
or honor, if thou please him once, he will make the glory of thy
righteousness shine as a clear light, and cause the equity of thy
judgments, shine as bright as the sun at noone days. For every man shall
see ^each place, the people following ^ee, blessing thine house as a temple of
justice, commending thy speech as an oracle, and reuerencing thee, as the very
cause of their tranquillity and liberty. And men shall exalt thine integrity,
as the Tutrix of all good men, and ^ure defense of the afflicted. And yet thou
shall have more than all this, for thou shall receive both honor and glory,
and therefore humble thy self the more under the hand of thy God, and
acknowledge this benefit to come from him, and so yield him homage. Now ye
homage which he requires of thee, is nothing else but thy mouth and hands; Thy
mouth, to offer him praise and thanks, and thy hands to serve him according to
his commandments.

7 Here ye see what the spirit of God, as me thought, said unto me by word of
mouth, which I will communicate with you my friends, and make ye partakers of
these holy aduertiseme^ts, to the end, that if ye shall see any man hereafter
prosper in his assayres, and blaspheme in his life, ye be not offended thereat,
neither be ye angry and grieved in your selves, if ye see a man that deals
unjustly, abound in all kind of wealth.

8 Be still therefore, and qualify that bitter humor which pricketh and
hammereth so in your heads, and then no doubt, ye will never have the heart to
do him any hurt for all this. For, the requital of good men, is not only to do
good for good, but to require also good for evil.

9 And all such as are carried away with an impatient heat, to the procuring of
another hurt, and all they, who in stead of leaving unto God the revenge which
he reserueth unto himself, will vsurp the same, shall be rooted out for ever:
and as insolent and saucie servants, which take upon them the authority of
their master, shall be shamefully and hardly punished. But he that possesses
his soul in patience, and constantly attends the judgment of God, he will
commend and bless his obedience, and after that he has punished the wicked
for their unmercifulness, he will also confiske their goods and possessions,
and make him self master and possessor of them all.

10 Wait but awhile, and ye shall see the time come, that he whom ye have
seen to be so mighty and great, and benefited himself so greatly by his
sins, and by his wicked and crafty devises, stored up an infinite number of
goods, and as he himself thought, was in the hye way to heaven, shall pass
away like a running brook, where the water fleeteth away in great billows,
where nothing shall be seen save mire and dirt, and there shall not remain
only so much, as any mark of the place where he had been, nor no more
remembrance of him, then of the wind that blew the summer past.

11 But contrariwise, humble and merciful men, shall enjoy his place, be the
successors of his wealth, and reign most assuredly in the land, leaving his
goods in succession to his children, and peace shall be with his as an
inheritance. A rich peace, and a plentiful inheritance, which sauoureth all
the rest of the goods, without the which all the remaynde is naught else but
torment and affliction. A peace that is sweeter then oil, and the honey that
is most sweet, which hatcheth in thy bosom all manner of pleasures and
delights, which makes virtue sprout ou^ flower, and nourishes and ripeneth
his holy fruits.

Now this peace is the gift of God, and none can give it us, but his goodness,
and nothing can move his goodness to do it, save the reformation of our wicked
lives. For, so long as there is war within us, and sin, which is the seed
of discord, shall lodge with us, we can not hope, or yet look for either peace
or rest. But contrariwise, if we can be at peace with God, we shall be sure to
be forthwith at peace with men, and be in firm, and most assured rest.

13 I right well know, that there will be always some wicked men, whose
abominable wills will go even to the grave with them: And I right well know,
that they will ever have a watchful eye, to surprise good men, and to take part
against them: they will gnash their teeth at them, and grin like roaring Lions,
for their hatred is so extreme against the good and godly, as that when they
behold them, they cast down their countenance, and are more like beasts then
men.

14 But the Almighty God, who has ordained that which has been, shall be,
and must be, and whose ordinances are unchangeable, laugheth to sco^ne these
their devises, and smileth at the vain devises of these miserable false
wretches, which rush into the air, and flourish with their swords against the
wind: he sees their end draw near by degrees, which will c^rie them away as
a great whirlewinde.

15 For, when as they shall think themselves to be masters, and make a
reckning to have all in their own hands, then shall they be in greatest
danger. Ye shall see these miserable sinners with their naked swords in their
hands, bending their bows, and taking their aim to overthrow the innocent:
They will make their part strong, dispose of their people, lay their ambushes,
have their watchword, and in a iollitie and meriment will fay in their hearts,
Tush, we have him now in hold, he shall never escape.

16 They will massacre the poor, the needy, and innocent, and take upon them
to root out all such as are of an upright soul and heart. For, it is they,
with whom they mean to deal, it is they, whom they bid war unto, because
they stop the execution of their purposes, and whose innocence is a perpetual
reproach unto them.

They have already put their knives to the throats of the poor innocents,
their blows were numbered, they had shot their arrows, and the train had
already taken fire, and lo^, by a wonderful accident, the points of their
swords are turned upon their own breasts, their own arrows stab in them,
their bullets rebounded, and lighted upon themselves, their bows brake all to
shiuers in their hands, and in the end they were slain with their own
weapons. Thou have said o Lord, always right well, that wicked counsels light
upon the authors of them, to their own destruction. Thou have rightly
foretold, that the wicked are taken in their own snares, and thou have rightly
fore-iudged, that the wicked in the end abide the same punishment which they
had prepared for others.

18 It is not therefore, o Lord, the worldly power, greatness, and authority
which make men happy, neither yet the troops, nor the armies which do assure
them, and make the^ conquerors. For, that little that the just man has, who by
his sincerity has obtained thy grace, stands him in better stead, then the
abundance of all sorts of goods which the wicked do any way get, stand them in
stead. The little that a just man has, swells and rises as a piece of dough,
and his force redoubleth against the charge, even as the arm of a Palm tree
does: for his strength takes root in thee, who art the foundation of all
force and power.

19 But, as for the arm of the sinner, how stiff and stout soever it be, yet
shall it be shiuered in pieces, and his strength shall be troad under feet,
for, it is but a vain outward show, which swells and puffs it self up as
a glass in the furnace, for it is puffed up by the blowing of the workman,
grows and looks very clear, but the more it grows and waxes bright, the
tenderer and britler it is, so as it breaks in pieces with the first knock
it has, and after the noise of the breaking and fall, there is no more seen
of it but the small pieces. But as for he just man, he is compared unto a
Diamond, for the more it is rubbed, the cleerer it is: And that, which
affliction takes away from an innocent man, is nothing else but his
beastliness, his ordure, and his excrements: for, the nakedder that he is, the
more beautiful he is.

20 Lastly, whatsoever it is that God lays upon the godly, it is altogether
for their salvation. For, he knows both the days and the life of those that
are pure and clean, and gives unto them that which is needful for them.
Their blessedness is prepared for them from all eternity, and shall possess it
unto all eternity. Not as (...) earthly inheritance, but as an heavenly
inheritance, whose riches are infinite and eternal, an inheritance, which
being divided amongst all his children, will continue found and whole, for ever
and ever, whose parts shall be as great as they very whole enherita^ce. For,
this is that glorious enheritance, which enriching so many people, fills all
with eternal blessedness, and remains always one, and always infinite.

21 Now, although the hope of the servants of God be not tied to the earth, yet
nevertheless, so long as they shall be here in this world, yet will not God
let them want that which is necessary for their lives. For, whenever the ill
time shall come, and that vengeance shall rise up against men, and that the
waters oue^ow, storms reign, and heaven p^re down fire like rain, yet shall
the righteous be then at rest and peace in the midst of the tempests, dry
amongst the shipwracks, and safe and sound in the hotest of the flames. And
again, whenever any hideous famine shall come to devour the people, yet
shall they have Manna rain down from heaven to satisfy them. For, the wrath
of God is but against the wicked, and his anger is not kindled but against
them. But as for the godly, the nearer that they think themselves unto
danger, the nearer are they unto salvation and health.

22 It fares not with them, as it does with the enemies of God, who are
mightily exalted and honored on hye, that their fall might be the greater, and
the more shameful, because no man can leap a great leap, but such a one as
stands very hye. The falls of hye Towers shutter all to pieces, and are
brought as it were unto dust. Howbeit, it is far worse with the wicked: for
when they have once had their blo^, they fall not only unto dust, but vanish
into smoke, nay they become nothing at all. Behold how the clouds come forth
as if it were the thunder out of the mouth of a great Cannon, they grow into
heaps, increase, and lie out so broad and thick, as that a man would say, they
would fill the emptiness of the air, and toll up the Sun: But after they
have by little and little gotten higher up, ye see them by and by to wax thin,
and in the end scatter, and consume, so as a man shall not see so much as any
sign or token that ever they had bin. And such is that mightiness of the
wicked, whose substance is nothing else but sin, and whose moving is nothing
but vanity, it grows suddenly, and it is gone as suddenly, and what soever
they are able to do for to think to conserve the same, they can by no means
any way further it.

23 They borrow and never pay again, all is fish that comes to net, and all
is theirs that they may gain by, neither leave they any thing behind, which
they are able to carry away, and yet notwithstanding, all this profits them
nothing, for, as the abundance of meats fatteth not him that is in a
consumption, because the radycall humor of his life is dried up, even so is the
blessing of God, which is the root of all prosperity, withholden from the
wicked. But contrarywse, the just, which is merciful, and full of compassion,
gives his goods, and deals liberally, distributeth his money, and is as the
course and running of a lively water, which never dries up.

24 This is a blessing which is promised unto all those that bless the name of
God, that they shall enherit the land, that is to say, they shall have a good
title unto the land, as it were by enheritance. And although they are striuen
against for it, yet shall they never lose it. For they are as Gods dear
children, whom he has created, and therefore they are of a good and sure
ground, that they shall hold the same. But they which blaspheme against his
name, are disinherited of his grace, and as unthankful children, deprived of
their fathers inheritance, so as they having his curse, can not choose but
perish.

25 For, there is no salvation in this world, but by trusting in God, and by
committing our selves unto his tuition. For, he so directs the ways of a
good man, and so guides all his actions, as that it is impossible to be
amended. He aymeth his will at godliness, and turns away his eyes from the
baytes of sin, he brings back the windings and cross ways of
voluptuousnes, into the broad beaten hye ways of virtue, and sets it in the
way of his commandments.

26 For, this is a fair and smooth way, wherein are no stones, ne yet lets,
for it is altogether plain and smooth. So as although the wicked one, or the
father of lies casts his leg before the just man to make him trip and
stumble, or yet set a snare for him, thou thy self O Lord, stand hard by
him to lift him up again, and wilt not suffer him to be frushed and crushed.
And with thy merciful hand, yea even with a most gentle and even hand, thou
sho^est him up, and redressest him.

27 I have been young and now am old, and yet as far as I can remember, I can
not call to mind that ever I saw God forsake the righteous man, nor his
children driven to beg their bread. Well may he have sometimes a little trouble
come upon him, to prove his constancy, and to try his strength, but is passes
and tottereth on without any fearing of him.

28 I have seen a man that has done nothing all day long but give, and lend,
so as a man would have said that he had taken great pleasure in scattering
abroad his goods, and yet he more abounded in wealth then ever he did before.
He resembled properly the pipe of a pumpe, which draws water by casting of it
out: for the fullness thereof can not abide that any emptiness should be in
it. And so, the rightuous man gives, and God forthwith fills him again, his
posterity feels no want of his largeness, for, the blessing of God, causes
his store to bud forth, even as the Sun makes the fruits of the earth, and
multiplieth an hundred for one.

29 Seeing then that God is so good and so liberal, if thou love to have his
favor, bethink thee how thou may please him, for, it is the very mean to
tu^ne him from doing hurt, and to do good. For God, loves such a one, as
^itateth him: for love comes of resemblance, and his actions are to do good,
for, he busieth himself about nothing else, and he began this work even from
the first beginning of the world, and was never wearyed therewith. And
therefore let us do like unto him, and so long as we shall dwell here in this
world, where he has granted us means to serve for his glory, and for the
profiting of our neighbors, let us neglect no occasion at all to discharge both
the one and the other, and in so doing, we shall be sure to obtain his favor,
which is the richest treasure that we possibly can recover.

30 For, there is nothing that pleases him so much, as to deal uprightly and
justly: for thereby, we conserve his workmanship, as much as in us lies, and
allow of his wise counse^l, in rendering unto every man that which is appointed
him, and distributed by the universal law of the world, which we call Nature,
and to think that when we judge others, we administer his power, and look
what judgment we give against others, the like will he also give against us,
when as he shall enter into his Throne to judge the whole word. Not that he can
judge corruptly as we do, but will make us feel by his judgment, the corrupt
dealing which we have made others feel, by our own. For, he will never
forsake his holy ones, he will gather them together at the end, and cover them
from the unjust dealing of men, and will expressly enter into his judgment
seat, to judge all those that oppressed them.

31 And there will he pronounce heavy judgment against the unjust, and make
the wicked perish. They shall be fast bound in infernal pains, where they
shall be heard houle amiddest their torments, and the pain shall exceed and
abound over their heads, even unto their posterity, and their children shall
draw their fathers sins after them, and bear part of their miseries.

And at that time shall the grace of God spread it self abundantly upon the
righteous, because their prosperity might be a second pain unto the wicked,
filling their hearts with envy, which shall co^^nually gnaw the^, for they shall
see the good and godly me^ possess their la^d in peace, their generation
reign in most assured rest, and flourish as the tree planted fast alongest
hard by the pleasant rivers side, which casts out his branches at length, and
spreads forth his boughs into the air, flourish beautifully, bring forth
leaves abundantly, and fructify most excellently.

33 But what shall be the fruits of the rightuous man? shall they be his goods
which he has scraped and scratched together, or the castles and goodly houses
which he has built? Nay, nay, they are fruits most unworthy of such a tree,
which will wither away at the very first feeling of any frost, yea, fruits
that will fall at the first blast: No, no, they are those good and sweet
sauouring fruits which grow within the beautiful and fat green soil of the
divine wisdom. They shall be holy and religious thoughts, meditations, full
of zeal and devotion, by the which he shall join his spirit unto God, and
withal opening his soul, shall receive the beams of the holy Ghost, which
shall animate in him a thousand gracious and virtuous actions, as the fruit of
life: and holiness passing from his heart into his lips, shall make his talk
to be both righteous, and full of equity.

34 For he shall have the law of God always imprinted in his soul, as a most
just and sure rule, wherewith he shall encompasse his talk, neither shall he
need to fear for ever going out of the right way, or yet to have his foot at
any time to slip, for, the foundation thereof is ouer-strongly laid, and the
situation thereof too too sure, and the path thereof most excellently directed:
for, the law of God, is sounder and surer, then either steel, or iron, it is
an inflexible rule, and an unchangeable light: this is such a place of
assurance, where a man is not only rightly guided, but also in as great
safety, as if he were between two brazen walls.

35 For, mark and behold awhile the wicked, what ado he makes to lie in
ambush to surprise the innocent, and consider also what preparation he makes
to take from him both his honor and his life, and mark, if he has forgotten
any thing for his purpose.

36 And yet God never leaves a good man into what danger soever he falls, he
never gives him over into the sacrilegious hands of these cruel murderers,
neither yet into their bloody crafty doings, nor shameless sclanders: for,
he is Judge, and full of all power, he his also a witness, and the knowledge
of all truth is in him, and therefore, since he knows the truth, and both can
and will judge the innocent, shall not he be justified by his sentence giving?

37 Wait upon him therefore all ye righteous, for his help is sure, neither let
it grieve ye to attend upon him: for, he knows what ye have need of better
then ye your selves. For, he makes slow haste many times, because he would
prove your patience, and sometimes because he would glorifye you. Walk
therefore in his ways, and see that ye carefully keep ye in them: set ye
strong hedges about his ways, and edder them with the thorns of your pains,
with the briers of your tribulations, for fear that voluptuousness enter not
in at them, and that pleasure train ye not up in them, and so break and
spoil your way. Persevere still in your course, even until you sweat both
blood and water, to the end ye may come unto the abode of your rest, where God
will exalt ye far above this visible world, yea, far above his glorified
Angels: for, he will cause you lead sinners in triumph, and make you see the
land purged of their iniquity, assigned out for the portion of good and godly
men.

38 I am many times astonyed to see the wicked and naughty man advanced unto
all honor and dignity, and holding all the whole land as it were subject under
his feet. The Cedar tree of Lybanon has not an hier nor an vprighter head, ne
yet seems to be more glorious, even then when he is clothed with his green
and tender boughs, and puts forth his new buds and branches, as is the
wicked man in the strength and power of his pomp and magnificence.

39 But as I passed by whereas I had left him, I was abashed that I could see
him no more, for I saw the place of his greatness. I demanded what was become
of him that was so lusty and brave, and that was so redoubted and feared, and
lo, there was not a man that could tell me what was become of him. I sought
after him in every place, to see and if I could have met with him, and I could
neither hear either tale or tidings of him, all was melted away with him, so
as there was not so much as any note or mark of him, it seemed that the fire
had run over him and consumed him.

40 We must therefore learn by the example of their misery, to eschew their
sins, and in following another kind of life, we may come to a better end. Be
innocent therefore, and study to be upright, and love equity and
righteousness: for the peaceable and reasonable man leaves rest to his
family, and is renewed in his posterity.

41 It fares not with him as it does with the reprobate, who is forgotten in a
moment, and none comes after that once vouchsafes to name him, without it be
to curse him. Their race is gone at once, and swallowed up as it were in a
bottomless depth, for the first blow he gives them, turns them clean over,
for they have no help but from themselves, and God has long sithence given
them over.

42 For, he helps only the righteous which put their trust in him. For on him
they attend, and therefore it is reason that they should find comfort at his
hands. They gather themselves together under his wing, as poor chickens,
whom the kite pursues, there shall they find covert, defense, and
consolation.

43 He will help them out of the strongest part of the battle, yea, and
although they were environed on every side, yet will he come and deliver them
as it were by his miraculous power and might: he will run through the prease,
to pluck the righteous ou^ of the hands of the wicked. Why do thou, o Lord,
after this manner, so affectionately support the righteous? Forsooth, it is
because that they have put their whole trust and confidence in thee, and not
put their hope in the frail and corruptible goods of this world, but in thy
infinite goodness and clemency, which is never void of help unto all those
that call upon thy holy name. Seeing then, o most righteous and merciful
Father, it has pleased thee for a time to endure the wicked to enjoy the
wealth and honor of this world, and to set their feet upon the throats of good
and godly men, and suffer them by their cursed threats, and crafty devises,
to torment thy good and innocent servants. Frame we beseech thee our affections
so, as that we be not offended at their prosperity, and not envy their
deceytfull riches, but courageously to bear whatsoever affliction thou shall
lay upon us, patiently attending till thou shall come to judge their
consciences, and search out the bottoms of their counsels, and with the
severity of thy justice, imprint upon their foreheads the shame which they
have justly deser^ed, abolishing their infamous me^ from above the earth,
destined (...) the service of they glory: and in the ^ea^e while so to keep
our hearts, as that we trust in none but in thee, and make no reckning of
whatsoever is here in this world, to set our love thereon, but on thy grace and
blessing.

Judge me O Lord. etc.

Psalm. 33.
1 LOrd, be my Judge, take knowledge of my cause, and be thou judge of all the
sclanders whereof the wicked accuse me. Deliver me, O Lord, from the hands of
the unrighteous, and from dece^tfull lips. For they have assembled themselves
together to imagine mischief against me, and have set up (...) selves against
me to opp^ (...) overthrow me. They will (...) up a cloak of righteousness
befo^ their theeuish purposes, and (...) pretense of law, undo (...) me.
But, o thou divine (...) with an all-seeing eye, (...) clouds of sclaunders
(...) g^auntest day unto the (...) shine upon me a little, and make (...)
^derstand that truth pierce (...) and beholds all their cra^ty (...) and
makes way to appear before thee, o thou seueare and vncorrupt Judge, the only
comfort of the afflicted.

2 Thou art my strength and my defense, and upon thee alone rests mine
innocence. I made ready my self to fight against the crafty devises of
these deceivers which assail me, and have dreamed of a thousand arguments to
convince them withal, and do make an account rightly to deduct my reasons. But
when as I had thoroughly considered that thou keep in mind the knowledge of
my cause, as my God, my guardian, and protector. I have said alone to my self,
for what purpose serve all these goodly syllogismes? for, my Judge knows the
truth of the fact, and understands the equity of my cause. What can be hid
from him who is present at all things? and what can any man declare and show
unto him that is righteousness himself,? who has established laws, and
unto whom it belongs to interpret them? I therefo^ p^t my self into thy
arms, my God, my strength, and refuge. Judge my cause, and rid me from the
sclaunders of the wicked. But why reiectest thou me, my God? I have a long
while called upon thee, and yet thou have not come unto me. In the mean while
mine enemies oppress me, and I am no more able to abide. But now thou my
sweet, yea my most sweet soul, why art thou so heavy and sad? and God be
somewhat slack in coming to help thee, all the while the wicked are
afflicting of thee, why losest thou thy courage thus, and geuest thy self over
unto sorrow and grief? That tha^ is deferred, is not altogether lost, for he
will come, seeing he has promised it.

3 Come therefore, my Lord my God, and spread our the beams of thy divine
light upon me, and seeing thou art the father of truth, leave not this thy
poor captiued daughter in the wicked and unjust hands of her accusers. If thou
love innocence, deliver her then from the bonds of these false accusations.
For now, O Lord, malice lies hidden in the dark, and if thou let her have day
ligh^, she (...) overcome, and if she be acknowledge (...) she is undone. I
beseech thee therefore, O my God, let thy light and truth assist my
righteousness: for, I have loved them all my life long, and from my youth,
have I made much of them. They have been they, my Lord, which first led and
guided me before thee, and presented me unto thee upon thine holy mountain,
set me in the midst of thy Tabernacle, brought me i^to thy Church, and gave
me an honorable place in thine house.

4 There it is o Lord, where I have chosen my mansion, and mine abode is with
thee. My rest, o Lord, is only in thee, and all my glory is to serve thee.
Assuring my self then upon thy support and stay, and trusting in thy grace, I
will present my self unto thee, who know my conscience, and in knowing it,
iudgest it, in judging it, esteemest it, and in esteeming of it, thou
confoundest the common enemies of mine honor, and of thy service. I will (...)
unto thine Altar which I have set up to bless and sanctify thy name, and
(...) upon thee my God, which fillest (...) youth with gladness, and
inspiring (...) heart the holy flame of thine holy love, do heap upon me
pleasure, delight, and joy.

5 And therefore will I found out upon mine harp in mine hand, the confessing
of thy magnificence, and rune with my voice the sweet notes of thy praise, one
while I will sing thy immeasurable power, one while thy exceeding goodness, and
another while thy infinite clemency, and in the end, I will finish with this
wonderful justice which has saved me from the oppression of the ungodly, and
made the shame of their wicked purposes, rebound and leap upon their own
faces. Why will thou then be sad my soul, why vexest thou me thus? and take
in ill part the opprobries and sclanders of the wicked, as if their venomous
tongue; could any way hurt an innocent conscience? No, no, a burning torch thrust
into the water can no sooner be extinquished, then the sclanderous reports of a
man that leads an innocent life.

6 Trust therefore in God, o my soul, and rejoice in his favor, for I right
well know, that he is well pleased with his praises by my lips. All my life
long ^ill I praise him, and declare and confess him to be the God of truth,
the God of justice, God, the tutor of the innocent, God, the father of
salvation, and God, mine only defense. I will have mine eye always fixed on
him, and my face continually turned toward him: for, I have found no salvation
but in him. O my God, who from the beginning of the world reachest out thine
arms unto the afflicted, which have always received into thy protection, the
oppressed, and comfortest the just unjustly tormented, grant me, O Lord, both
comfort and courage, to the end that I taking my spirits unto me again, which
were half in a dead sleep through affliction, may glorify thee with all my
force, and strangle by the strength of my voice, the blasphemies of the wicked,
which go about to defame thine honor, and not being able to reach thee, rush
and run upon the good and godly men that faithfully serve thee.

All people harken and give etc.

Psalm. 46.
1 COme unto me all ye strange nations, draw near ye people that are
farthest off, and come ye from all coasts to hear that which ye shall never
hear elsewhere. Pass ye the seas and mountains, and let not any hardness
of the way stop ye, for, the prize of your navigations shall be greater, then he
that sayleth from the East to the West, laden with pearls and diamonds. And
the reward of (...) swe^ings shall be more precious, then the Trophies of those
that conquer the nations of the earth. Shore up your ears therefore* and
harken attentively unto that which I shall now say unto you. O, I would (...)
God that ye were all (...) all the rest of your (...) might strengthen! your
he^ (...) conceive that which I will del^ (...) to you.

2 Come, come, all ye that (...) selves the children of the earth, which think
to attribute your original being unto nothing but unto the earth, and your
being borne, unto none but unto your fathers, and suppose nothing to be more
ancient here in this world then they, and nothing greater then your selves. In
very deed, ye are the right children of the earth, for, ye are as insensible
as it is, and of no more understanding, then images made of clay, and annealed
in the furnace. Come and open your ears, that I may open the spirit, close up
the eyes of your bodies, that I may make your souls so clearly forsake this
stepmother of earth, that I may make you know your heavenly father. Come ye
therefore together both poor and rich, for ye are unworthy of the goods that I
mean largely to bestow upon you.

3 Come, for I go about to discover and lay wide open unto you, the treasures
of eternal wisdom. And in opening my mouth being inspired with the grace of
Almighty God, I mean to unfold unto you in my words his wonderful wisdom. I
have long held my soul in a deep thought, and after I had a great while
dreamed, I conceived in the end of a strange discourse of Gods wisdom, by
which I understood his goodness and mercy in all things, and the folly,
misery, and infirmity of mankind.

4 Whereupon, I being as it were beside my self, about the wondering at his
greatness, and the feeling of our own infirmity, I was forthwith desirous to
give ear unto that which my spirit taught me, and began carefully to consider
of those things which it covertly showed me, and under a disguised manner the
knowledge and the truth. And after I had carefully understood and examined the
same, I took my harp in my hand, and according my voice unto the sweet tune of
my harp, I was ready to put abroad my conceits, and to make my meditations to
be heard, unto all those that would hear them, that they might be acceptable
unto God, the author of so holy thoughts, and wholesome instruction unto the
favorable hearer of my discourses.

5 If thou will then know what I said within my self, this I said, what shall
I fear in the hardest time of my life? Why should I fear when death shall
come to lay hold on me, and to cause me to get me out of this world? Alas,
death is a strange busibody, I know not who should not fear him, seeing no man
can keep him self from him. How shall I be able to defend my self from his
arrows? What armor shall I put on against his pick-axe, which overthrows
and razeth Castles, Cities, Kingdoms, and Empires: yea, which threatens to
bring the world to an end, and who at last shall make an end of himself? I
shall need no kind of weapons but innocence, that is able to be a steely, and
an assured buckler for me: for, if I take not good heed unto it, that traitor
sin, whom death has appointed, will never be from my heels, will lodge in
my concupisce^ce, and deliver me presently at an assault into the hands of
damnation.

6 O dear and wholesome innocence, in thee alone rests all our assurance,
under thy faith we constantly abide whatsoever shall come upon us, and we
believe that thou art strong enough to defend us from death. O foolish and mad
men, who leaving this faithful protection, assure themselves in their
greatness and mightiness, make an account of their riches and magnificences.
They account the Nations which are under their governments, and reckon up the
treasure, which they keep under lock (...) key, and to what purpose serves
and this against death?

7 If one brother can not redeem the life of another for money, nay, and if
one would dye for another, yet inexorable death will not receive him, what then
shall man give unto death for his own ransom? Shall he give the goods that
are none of his, or his dominions which he loses as soon as he is dead? No,
no, there is nothing which he has left unto himself wherewith God is
appaised, and pacified when his judgment is once pronounced against mortal
men. He will not compound with him for any thing whatsoever. This is his
creature, this is the slime of the earth, out of which he will take when it
pleases him, the spirit of life which he breathed into him, and therefore man
can no way gaynsay, not yet reply against him.

8 Let us I beseech thee a little, value the soul of man, and let us see what
he will offer unto God for his ransoming of him, let him travel a little all
his life long, let him go and travel awhile all the days of his life, let him
go and ferrit out all the ^ners of the earth, let him go and (...) out the
bowels of the mines, let him draw dry the golden dugs of both the Indies, let
him dispeople the Eastern parts of the world of all her pearls, and when he
has heaped up all this gear, let him then come and bargain with God for the
prolonging of his life, and we shall hear his reasons. What other thing shall
he be, but like unto a prisoner, which offreth to cast off his bolts and
shackles, if he might have liberty given him? O miserable man that thou art:
for, that thing which thou think should serve thee for thy safeguard, is the
very window whereat death must enter. For, death comes by reason of sin, and
sin by reason of concupiscence, and thy concupiscence is nourished, increased,
and kindled by all these. For, God will speak all naked unto thee eue^ as he
placed thee here in the world, and will, before he begin to capitulate with
thee, have thee deliver unto him that which thou have robbed him of, I mean
those graces and benefits which thou have misused, and then shall the think
with thyself whether thou have of thine own to pay him double, yea quadruple,
for the punishment due unto thee for thine ill life.

9 Alas poor senseless thing, if thou once come to that, what shall thou
be able to say against death, seeing that the wisest and valiantest men are
enforced to be courbed under his yoke? Shall thou who have made no account but
of corruptible and perishing riches, shall thou, I say, be preserved from
corruption, and the wise man, who sought by all the means possible he could,
to immortalize himself here in this life, and conuersed with the Angels,
cannot warrant himself from him? Thou thy self see him come to an end, and
hopest thou to be immortal? No, no, for both wise men and fools dye, but
after a diverse and sundry manner: for, the death of the wise man shall be but a
passage, and he shall s^d at his return his talent infinitely multiplied and
increased, and the glory which he has sown, shall increase abundantly, and
ouershadow the generation of his children.

10 Howbeit, all these poor wretched blind souls, who conti^ally hold down
their heads unto the earth, and whose spirits are shut up in their purses, who
have none other understanding, but to love those things which are not to be
beloved, who neglect and contemn both Sun and Moon, the very principal
works of nature, to admire stones, and marble, gold, and silver, which vainly
scatter and disperse the virtues of intelligence and understanding, for the
getting together, and heaping up of the excrements of the earth, shall forgo
the riches which they have so greatly loved, and for which, they hated all the
rest. Ye shall see them hale and pull against death, and draw their riches
with them even unto the grave, but death will set them upon their fingers ends,
and cause them to leave them even when they have gotten them. They that are
half dead, shall go about to lift up a little their eye lids, to see and if
they can find their treasure at the wykes of their eyes, but in the end they
must be packing, they must leave this worldly pomp, because a mighty power
has plucked them away. But unto whom shall they leave this preparation and
furniture? forsooth it may be unto a stranger whom they never knew, or ever
yet once dreamed of, who shall bath and bless him self in the sweat of this
miserable rich caytife and churl, who shall have no more left him for his
portion, but a grave of fifteen or twenty foot long at the most, and this
shall be his house for ever, wherein let him keep him self if he will.

11 What is become then of these brave waynscotted palaces, these guilt vautes,
these beautiful ranks of choice pillars, these so fair curled marbles, these
emblemes and sentences engraven in brass, and all the rest of these wonders of
vanity? What? is nothing of all this left for him? he had established his
lands and possessions from race to race, from generation to generation, and
called his houses by his own name: surely, this must needs be, a great man.

12 Alas poor man, for, when he was in honor, he knew not himself, neither
had he any knowledge, and he so carried himself, as that he is brought to be of
the number of the brute beasts, and made like unto Asses and horses, who have
neither wit nor judgment. For, what greater honor could he desire or wish to
have, then to be made and formed unto the fashion of the Deity, and to be
placed amongst the works of God, there to command as his lieutenant? he was not
as it were less then Angels, and had a spirit to comprehend the greatest
wonders of the Deity: but by flying from the day and light of knowledge, he hid
himself in the dens and caves of ignorance and blockishnes, and remained
therein all his life long, hatching there I know not what miserable riches,
and was found in the end to become like unto the brute beasts: for, as they
never neigh and bray but after otes, and never travel but for pasture, even so
this man never bestirred him self, but about the getting of necessary things
for the body: nay, he did worse then so, for he could not provide, and use,
for the entertayning of him self, the goods which he so eagerly coueted, but
became therein far worse, then all the rest of the beasts of the field, whose
unruly appetites were satisfied with the use of those things which they desired.

13 O, what an infamy and offense are the lives of such kind of men, who are
so shamelesly brutished? What remains then more for them both here in this
world, and in the world to come, but shame in this, and pain and torment in
the other? And besides, let them run on in delighting them selves in their
vain discourses, and priding of them selves in their riches. Let them now a
little remember the speeches which they have, whereby they seem to esteem of
none but of them selves, and their money, making no better account of all other
men, then of the rushes under their feet.

14 Thus we see how they draw them selves unto hell, eue^ as sheep led to the
Shambles, death is come who has devoured them, and nothing left of them but
their pitiful bare bones, which canker and are worme-eaten in the grave.

15 And lo, the just man who patiently endured their insolency, his time is
now come to reign, and is at case, he is up by the break of the day, and
after he has given thanks to God, he goes to see if he can find the place
where one of these miserable caytifs dwelt, and where he is placed, for
insulting, brauing, and tyrannizing of the whole world, and says a part unto
him self, Thanked be God, for cleansing the earth of such offscouring, and
placing such as bless his name. For, this wicked churl with all his glory is
become rotten and putrified. He is now in torment, and there is not one to help
him, and so let him remain there hardly: for, death is a passage for him,
never to return.

16 And as for me, o Lord, I right well know that I must dye, for, the sin of
our first parent has bound us to pay that debt, it is the reward for his
disobedience, we must go again into the earth, and return from whence we
came. Nevertheless, o Lord, thou shall redeem me from death, and deliver me
from the hand of hell, when it would lay hold on me. Thou will not suffer me to
go down all below, but wilt deliver me eue^ at the very mouth thereof, and be
contented that I acknowledge it, without suffering the punishment of my
deserved thraldom and captivity. But what shall be the price of my
redemption? shall it be the goods and possessions of the earth, and the
abundance of gold and silver? No, o Lord, for hell is full thereof, it makes
no reckning of this gear: for thou thy self shall be the price of my
redemption, thou shall deliver thine own body to death, that my soul might be
delivered from hell, Thou shall put upon thee and cloth thee with the dolors of
the dead, that I might be clothed with the joys of immortality. And therefore
I will not from henceforth my God, have any other riches but thee, and in
possessing thee, I shall possess the whole world, and in loving thee, I shall
be in thee, and thou in me, and thou being there, shall bring thither all the
goods, strength, and glory of the world, and fill me full with other manner of
riches, then the riches of these miserable carles which will not acknowledge
thee: for, their riches, are but the fruit of their sin, which shall perish
with their sin.

17 No man ought to be abashed to see them all at once suddenly enriched, ne
yet to esteem the^ to be any whit the happier thereby: for, although the false
honor which they so greedily hunt after, exceeds and excels, and are
filled with this vain and vanishing glory, which carries with it but a
glorious glittering outward show, yet must we not be in an admiration thereat,
much less envy the same.

18 For, although they shall at any time have kissed the earth, and put on the
round compass thereof, yet shall they carry away nothing of it with the^ save
their winding sheet, nothing shall follow them but their shadow, and yet I
believe, that it will also leave them, for the very selfsame day which makes
the shadow, will forsake them, and they shall want the ordinary light, and in
stead of these magnifice^ces, pomps, and swelling ostentations, wherewith they
make little children afeard, shall wrap them up in sorrow, grief, dolor,
anguish, poverty, and misery, and cast them into Mercuries heap.

19 And is it not great reason that it should be thus? for, they have taken
their pleasures here in this life, and have had their felicity in this world,
and whatsoever they have desired, has fallen unto them, goods have come rolling
in by heaps unto them, the felicity of their greatness was a burden unto
them, they esteemed of none, but of such as did help to enrich them, neither
loved they any but such as gave them, and made much of none, save of those that
increased their revenues. They are like to those me^, who because they would
have a great stock, sell the propriety of their goods unto others, they dye,
leaving nothing behind for the world to come, having made no provision for any
goods that are there in request, but content them selves with the goods that
serve for this earthly life, which being ended, they are left very poor.
They have desired honor, but a vain and slipperie honor, which hangs and
rests but upon the opinion of fools; they had it, but they could not tell
well how to keep it. They would gladly have sit upon the top of the wheel,
and that being turned about, they are now down in the bottom thereof, but
blessed and happy are they which can keep them sure and immovable upon the
scaffold, and see them selves safe both above and below.

20 But these miserable caytifes have done nothing so, for they have made the
leap them selves, they have voluntarily climbed up to the steepest place, from
whence they have been cast down backward even unto hell, they are at this day
in the number of their forefathers, there have they found their Auncesters,
from whom they received their birth and conditions, they were imitators of
their sins, and when they are dead, they shall be also partakers of their
punishment: for, when repentance comes too late, they then learn but out of
season, what it is to lift them selves up against God, and oppose them selves
unto his glory: then they learn what it is to afflict the just, to oppress
the poor, and to scorn the afflicted. They are confined in the dark, and the
light gives no more sight unto their eyes. They hear nothing but horror, and
gnashing of teeth, they breath out nothing but sighs and groans, and they
never stir, but with trembling and fretting.

21 When these poor senseless people were in honor, they could not understand
it, but became like unto brute beasts, which have neither sense nor judgment.
But yet alas they are far unlike, for death, in bereauing the beasts of
their lives, takes from them as well the feeling of their pain, as of their
pleasure: but as for these poor fools, who would never understand wherein
their chief blessedness consisted, but closed up their eyes against the
eternal light, and stopped their ears against the spiritual word, shall have
their sense as an argument or subject of torments, and their spirit shall live,
continually to conceive, and eternally to languish their miseries.

O how good is God. etc.

Psalm. 73.
1 O How gr^t is the goodness of our God, and how assured is his help unto all
those that wait upon him? Unto those, I say, who have never turned away their
thoughts from his justice and mercy, and who having the eyes of their souls
always fixed upon his providence, never gave over the hope which they should
have in his grace. And how greatly blessed are they, whom the sundry ill haps
of this world could never shake that constant assurance which they ought to
have of Gods righteousness: O, how greatly, I say, is the constancy of such
men to be commended!

2 For, to say truly, my foot oftentimes began to slip in the way, and I glided
oftentimes as it were even ready to fall to the ground. Much like unto them
that climb up a steep thornie hill, who, so soon as they feel the briers
and brambles begin to prick and raunch them, or rub off the skin against any
flint stone, lay hold with their hands for very grief upon the crampons and
rests which help them to climb up, and then forthwith tumble quite and clean
down, if they be not the sooner stayed: Even so my God, whilst I would
understand the judgments of thy works, and behold how thou dispensest thy
graces, as one pricked and wounded to see the wicked prosper, I make many false
steps and strides, and am ready to fall into this steep breakeneck of not
believing thy wisdom and righteousness.

3 What, say I, shall become of the people which know not God otherwise then to
blaspheme him, who think that they have taken a pawn to serve their lusts and
perverse affections, who will none of him but to have him serve the^ as a
mommet, to serve their wicked doings, and for a mask to serve their
iniquities, and for a lure to serve their deceits, and yet get together the
fruit of his grace, and possess in peace and rest the chreame of his benefits?
I confess my God, that I am jealous of their prosperity, and do envy this
their ease, and me thinks it to be altogether against all reason.

4 For, who is he that sees them, that would say they should dye? Who would
not think but that they had bought of thee for a certain sum the right of
immortality here in this world? Who would not say but that they were partakers
with thee of everlasting and constant felicity? Moreover, we see that all
things alter and change here in this world, which shows, that in success of
time all these things must come to an end, but we see their prosperity to be
so firm, and of so great equality, as that a man would think that if they
continually increase in such sort as they do, they will grow at last to be as
infinite as thy self, and place them selves in thy heavenly Throne: for, there
is no likelihood that any thing can do them hurt, neither yet that any the
least and only mishap is able to rest upon the skirt of this so glorious
magnificence. It is incredible, that any thing can be able to hurt their
precious bodies, environed with such abundance of so excellent riches.

5 As for other men, they are made crooked with labor, and travel is their
ordinary course of life: they are borne with groans, they grow up with sighs,
they wax old with lamenting: the Sea is oftener without wind, then their lives
are without torments, a man shall not see so many shot about a white, as he
shall see miseries and afflictions fas^ tied round about all other men. But
these men alone are shielded and exempt from all these, and in an equal and
constant course of life, they swim at pleasure in the delights of this world,
and make the calamities of good men, and such as fear God, their pastimes and
sports. Have not thou seen a Tyrant upon the top of a Theater, looking upon
poor slaves fighting against Lions and Tygres, feeding his eyes and cruel
heart, with seeing a poor man plucked quite and clean in pieces, and
dismembered?: After the same manner do the wicked feed their desires, in
beholding the troubles which scourge the innocents.

6 O, how proud and arrogant does this make them? for they think that the
earth was made for them alone, nay, they suppose, that it is not great enough
to hold them. As for other men, they look over their shoulders at them, and it
should seem that they envy them because they live, and disdainfully say in
murmuring wise, Shall we always see this rascal before us? Shall this bundle
of miserable wretches be ever still in our eyes? And besides, when they are
alone, they say, What beggar is this? What beast is it? Thus we see how they
are lovers of themselves, without companion, and they know no good thing here
in this world, but them selves, none worthy desert but them selves, and taking
them selves as Gods, they adore themselves, serving nothing but their own
lusts, and reuerencing nothing but their own passions, so as they are covered
over from top to toe, with pride, injustice, and impiety.

7 They are fat with nothing but with wickedness, and their bodies are not
fatter with grease, then their souls are with sins and iniquities. All
manner of villainies and abhhominations rumble and toss up and down in their
consciences, all their desires and thoughts tend to nothing but unto some
filthiness, malignitie, at this their eyes leere and gleere, at this it is,
that their hands itch, hereon is all their heart set, other affection have they
none, they are moved with nothing but with malice, a man would say, that this
were it, which stirs and emboldneth their bodies.

8 Thou shall see, that after they have a long while forethought themselves of
their sins, after they have chawed down their wicked purposes, and executed
any cursed enterprise, how they glory therein, brave all the world, speak of
Authority, they have law to do what so ever they do, there can nothing be so
stoutly or yet so proudly imagined as they do, but if they had any shame at the
least, and that being contented lice^tiously to outrage men, yet might they
co^teine themselves from most villanously blaspheming the holy name of God.

9 But what shall I say my God? they have lifted up their heads against heaven,
and disdainfully looked upon the seat of thy mightines, as if they would have
said, who is like unto us? which do here in this world what we lust: yea even
we, unto whose bows all men bend themselves, and unto whom nature her self
serves for a walking staff. And as for the earth, they will not so much as
once vouchsafe as it were to look on it: but in the end, casting their eyes
upward, by way of commiseration, say, what is all this that we see, but that,
whose abundance is noisome to us, and whose fertility troubles us?

10 This is in very deed, the cause o Lord, why all the people, being astonished,
assemble them selves together to behold this monstrous sight, men run every
where unto this spectacle, and know not what to say, when they look upon this
wonderful show: for they are there fast tied, gaping and looking on it.

11 And in the end, they lose their patience, and begin to murmr, and why?
does God which sees all things say they, perceive this? Is not this he which
has that great seeing eye, which saw all things before they were made, sees
them in their being, and foreseeth them to bring them to their end? Is this he,
whose providence is said to be as great in the government of the world, as his
goodness was great in the creation of the same? If he has disposed all things
by compass, and created all things by measure: If his justice be president,
and has the chief place in the government of this world, what does he at this
present, how is it, that he is now asleep?

12 Behold how the wicked spoil his goods, and possess the riches of the
world: a man would say, that all things are created for them, goods rain down
upon them as they would desire, honors roll in by heaps into their houses,
felicity holds them whether they will or no, they desire, and have, they
wish, and it comes upon them.

13 And in the end I my self thus said also, what now, my God, what a thing is
this? for the justifying of mine heart, and the ruling of mine actions according
to thy commandments are all in vain? I gave over all mine own affection,
because I would love none but thee, I have circumcised mine heart of all his
wicked desires, and fettered my will with the shackles of thy love, because it
should serve nothing else but thy glory: and in eschuing both sins and
sinners, I have kept company with the innocents, and washed mine hands amongst
them, and not the hands of my body only, my God, but the hands of my soul,
that are mine affections, which I have washed and purified with the brooks of
my tears.

14 I have embraced repentance, and scourged my self all day long, beating
mine heart with continual sorrows, pricking it with sharp and piercing
contritions, and drive from it with many sorrowful sobs all that ill and
cursed humor which has engalled my will. Every morning when I rose I cried
thee mercy for my sins, and detested mine iniquity, and thinking to amend my
life, I continually watched over this purpose, and thereupon I began my days
work.

15 I said within my self when I was alone, lo, as for my self, all that I
am able to say, is this, that in the end, they which fear God, and serve him,
are afflicted, and they that blaspheme his name, live at all ease and pleasure.
And thereupon, I began o Lord, to detest the condition of all those who
glorified them selves in being thy children and chosen people, and began to
say, Are these they that are called the children of the Almighty God? verily,
these are the children of reprobation, for lo, the other sort, possess the
inheritance of their Fathers, and these men live in extreme poverty. But the
others are they that abound in all wealth, and unto whom God is so favorable
and indulgent, which are his children; it is they unto whom this name
belongs, seeing they enjoy his benefits, and are masters next unto him self,
of his works.

16 As I my self, o Lord, verily thought, that I knew it to be so, and to say
truly, I was told that it was so indeed. I could not hold me from vexing and
tormenting my self, saying, A^ my God, how does this fall out? Is it possible
that it should be thus? considering how thou have threatened the wicked, and how
thou have also prepared punishment for them? To be short, I became strangely
and wonderfully perplexed, when I considered of this gear.

17 But I at last perceived thy mind and purpose, and having entered into the
depth of thy sanctuary, me thought I was come into thy holy consistory, and
understood thy council therein. For, after I had resolved with my self to see
the end whereunto thou had prepared those peoples, I forthwith saw that thy
justice is most true, and that although it sometimes makes slow haste, yet it
pays home at the last with seueare punishment, and therefore I very
steadfastly waited and looked what should become of them.

18 And truly, in the end, thou payedst them thorough stitch, and rewardedst
them according to their crafty and wicked dealing. For, when they thought them
selves at the highest degree of honor, behold, thou ouerthrewest them, and
castedst them down headlong in a bottomless depth of misery. For, all their
pomps, magnificences, and riches, were nothing unto them in the end, but an
high and eminent scaffold, to bring them up unto that steep and high
breake-necke, from whence they were most shamefully rolled down over and over.

19 O most true God, what a desolation and discomfort is this? There is nothing
but weeping about them: for, all they of their guards, and all their
pentioners, do nothing else but beat their breasts, holding down their heads as
the Lilly holds down his when it is sore rayne-beaten, and having compassion
of those whom they were wont to envy. They most lamentably look upon the
ruin of their idol, and consider with them selves how foolish they were to
make a mortal and miserable man their God, who was no better then wind or
smoke. For, if a man considers and marketh their end, he shall see them
dispatched and gone in a moment, neither is there any thing that comes more
speedily to an end, then the way of their greatness brings them thereunto,
and they have been so suddenly changed, as that there could be nothing
possibly to be seen of them. Behold and look on them, for once they were, and
now they are not, hardly can a man see their footsteps, and mark, whither
their sins have brought them, it was a great while before the snare or grin
could be made fit for them, but lo in the end, they lighted into it. For,
during the time that the foundation of the house was in undermining, they
climbed the higher, that their fall might be the greater. They continually
clambered up higher and higher, and thought, that whatsoever was below them,
was theirs only, but in the end they clambered up so high, as that they lost
them selves in the air, before they could get again to the earth, so as they
were carried away with the wind.

20 And lo, they became as dreams when men awake: for, as a man says when he
awaketh, I dreamed well to think of such a thing, even so shall it fare with
you, for, when such men as ye are shall vanish away and come to naught, the
people will then say, surely the greatness of these men, was but as a dream,
and a very mere, vain, and inconstant folly. For, thou will make them of so
little worth, as that they shall be never once thought of, but as in a
mockery, and in discommending and condemning their pride and insolency, will
say, See how their houses are ruined, behold the place where these outrageous
Sirs dwelt, who cared neither for God nor men, which delighted in nothing but
in filthiness and wickedness, who have built so many, and so many houses with
the boanes of the poor, and cimented their palaces with the blood of the
needy, and lo, there remains nothing of all that they had, but the marks
and notes of their ignominy, for, the tempest has passed over them, and there
is not so much as any one tittle or jot remaining of them.

Thus we see, o Lord, that we must not rashly judge of thy providence, and
therefore who so ever will judge thereof, must patiently wait unto the end, and
suffer himself to be led by thy spirit, and must call upon thee also for the
comforting and addressing of him: for, notwithstanding that I fret, fume,
chafe, sigh, and groan, and have set every part of my body in a sweat with sore
labor, and brought my self as it were even to deaths door, yet am I never
a-whit the better for it: and after I had tormented my self, I found my self
as resolute as I was before.

22 I was so vexed and grieved I say, as that I knew not whether I was a man or
a beast, nay, I was in very deed like a beast, and could no more comprehend the
same, then if I had utterly lost mine understanding. Howbeit, I still stand to
that hope which I have in thee, and the more I see my sense and judgment fail
me, the speedelier run I unto thee, and humbly beseech thee to open my
spirit, that I may know and understand what thy will is.

23 Thou have taken and held me fast by the hand, and set me gently again in
the way of thy will, and made me understand thy purpose and mind, nay, thou
have done more then that, for me thinks, thou have opened both mine eyes, and
the heavens all at once, that I might see the mightiness of thy glory: Thou
have I say, o Lord, made me to see it, for, this is a thing, whereunto no
mortal man without thee, is able to reach.

24 For alas, should I, poor weak thing that I am, go to seek for that in
heaven, which I cannot very well see at my feet, who cannot perceive, but with
much ado, that which is here o^ earth before me? The eyes of my body are very
duskish and mistie, and the eyes of my soul fa^re worse, and men's thoughts are
mar^ellous uncertain and weak^, for the earthly and corruptible body, d^lleth
and makes idle our spirits, and tyeth and binds our senses fast unto the
earth, in so much as that without thee, I can not hope for any thing here below
in the world, nor yet promise unto my self any certain knowledge of what
thing soever. What am I able, being ^ere upon the earth, to judge and discern
without thy aid, and without it pleases thee to enlighten my spirit with those
things which thou have, ordained in heaven, in the s^ate of thine eternity?
But thou also, o Lord, have supplied my want, and l^d me by the hand, to make
me see the cou^s^ of thine eternal wisdom, thou ha^ (...) it were made me in
love with (...) and have heaued and thrust my (...) out of my body, to ma^e
(...) capable of the heavenly light, and of thy wise purposes.

25 Surely, when I consider of these (...) things, I am clean gone, (...) is
t^en from me, and I am (...), o God. What is (...) my God, which thou have made
(...) the God of any heart, of (...) and of my hope, and thou, (...) God, ^ho^e
I esteem to be my onl^ felicity, and whom to love, I have from henceforth
destined all my affections. I now know, o Lord, what thou a^, how just, and how
puissant; I will now never be abashed more, ne yet astonyed, to see the strange
and wonderful things of the world; whereof I am not able to comprehend the
reason. For, thy counsels are marvelous ^gh, and thy wisdom ^e^i^ble
profound. But in the end, o Lord, whatsoever thou disposest o^ here in this
world, is finished (...) I^stice.

26 For, as many as withdraw them (...) from ^y obedience, and estr^ them
selves from thy grace, ^a^ perish most miserably: and ^ll they which break the
faith of the (...) which they have swor^, to ^eru^ their concupiscences and
(...), and go ^n whoring with (...) ^arth, and (...) all they the (...) sci^
and pro^ (...) unto (...) and (...) shall be rooted (...) the ^y of thy
reue^ging (...).

27 (...) as for me, (...) depart from thee, neither hope for (...) other
felicity, but (...) and stick fa^ (...) ^y ^des, as (...) I ^ll ^uer d^p^rt
^hence. I will so steadfastly look^ upon t^e^ as that I (...) observe (...)
t^n^ling of thine ^yes, and so confirm my self unto whatsoever thou desire
of me and foll^ rank by rank whatsoever thou, co^andest (...) i^e^d (...) p^
(...) and seeing I (...) thee to be altogether good and almighty, and (...)
^redly believe that (...) also will I constan^ (...) will assist me, and g^u^
(...) all (...) that are necessary for (...). O how (...) c^l^^t and most
assured i^ t^t (...) is (...) upon the (...) good and almighty God, (...) m^
such (...) ^mb^ (...) of hi^ bene^ (...) so (...) hi^ liberalitie^, (...) me
believe, that I shall be assured of the reward which he has promised me, if I
serve him faithfully. Why do thou, my God, most liberally bestow upon me so
many benefits, why do thou promise me such infiniteness, seeing there is in
me nothing but sin and infirmity?

28 I right well see, o Lord, that it is to the end that I may be the man to
declare abroad every where, thine immensurable mercy, and vnspeak^able goodness,
and publish thy praise throughout all the gates, places of resort, and secret
corners of Syon, thine holy City. To the end that I, going up into thine holy
hill amongst those whom thou have assembled in thy Church, for the receiving
of thy blessings, and serving of thy glory, might make them understand the
secrets of thy wisdom which thou have vouchsafed to reveal unto me. And that
in addressing my voice with that style which thine holy spirit has framed in
the same, I might unfold the holy mysteries of thine incomprehe^sible wisdom,
to the end, that every one hea^ing me discourse of the knowledge wherein thou
have instructed me, might be had in admiration, not of me, who am but an
hoarse instrument of thy glory, but of the marvelous effects of thy quickening
spirit, who shall embolden me unto this glorious, holy, and solemn work. But
o Lord, after thou have for a while, entertained us here in this estate, upon
this terrestrial Syon, lift up our eyes unto that heavenly Syon, embolden and
encourage us unto the attayning of that blessed abode, and teach us, which are
they unto whom thou have promised the same. And teach us also, how we must
carry our selves to be made worthy of so excellent, holy, and glorious a
dwelling place.

O Lord who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle, etc.

Psalm. 15.
1 THE world, o Lord, since it has so pleased thee, is unto us a tedious
pilgrimage, we daily walk therein, and cannot find any nights rest for our
wearyed members. For, if we think to lay down our heads upon the pillow or
bolster to give our eyes sleep, our afflictions importune us like flies, yea,
and the very passions which are bred within our flesh, do swell and puff us
up, and venom us like dangerous scorpions, and kill us, if we presently kill
not them. What are we like to hope after, seeing that as we lack strength, so
must the miseries also needs grow upon us? seeing that which way so ever we
turn, or are any way able to turn us, we shall find our selves altogether in
the midst of the world: and this world, find it how and where we will, is
only full of misery. Where then shall we find rest? we shall never find it in
this miserable life, where-into we are put as chief wrestlers, to strive
against all manner of adversities, but rather, o Lord, in thy Tabernacle, in
the holy dwelling place of thy Godhead, where our labors shall be crowned. O
blessed, yea thrice blessed is he, for whom thou have prepared this so goodly
and pleasant a withdrawing place, for the mitigating and comforting of his
pains and griefs past, within the bosom of thy grace, and rests himself
between the arms of thy mercy. But, who are they that shall one day dwell
with the companions of thy blessedness and glory? for, to hear that which is
said of it, this is not a place for all the world to come unto, for this is a
place of a monstrous height, and of an infinite largeness, and compassed and
adorned with incredible magnificence. I know not what else to say unto thee,
but that this is a very high hill, upon the top whereof, is a marvelous
beautiful Garden, beset and furnished with all sorts of delicat and fine
flowers, wherein also are planted many rows of trees, of infinite sorts of
fruits, and moystned and bedeawed with most lively and clear running waters.
Certainly, this is a very hye hill in deed, for whosoever comes there, must on
every side run through grievous and hard tribulations, yea, an hundredth times
harder then either the flint or rocky stone. And he that will come there, must
be always far from the center of the earth, that is to say, he must not be
too too far in love with himself, but must tread under his feet all sensual
and earthly affections. This is in truth like a most flourishing Garden, for in
it are resident, the seeds and causes of all things, which daily bring forth
most infinite goodly effects, and most noble and excellent works: for, the
partitions and deuisions thereof, there is a goodly disposing of the parts of
the world, so justly and euenly measured, as possibly can be devised. The
fruits thereof, are the pleasant and sweet sauouring contemplations of
wisdom, wherewith it nourishes and satisfies the souls there dwelling. The
running waters thereof, are the spring heads, issuing from the eternal
bounty, which spreads it self from an high over all the parts of the world,
and continually batheth and refreshes them. O most beautiful and holy hill,
who shall ascend unto thy top, and who shall rest in the bosom of this so
glorious and delightful an abiding place?

2 Even he that is purified within the sacred flames of an holy and devout
zeal: that has so eased his soul of the dregs of the world, that there is
nothing left to hinder his course from going that way. For, when the desire of
our soul is left naked and bare, it draws right on unto the and of her
wishes, even toward the ^eate of her felicity. And it is even then, when
being out of love with it self, which is the very seducer of our
understanding, it judges altogether uprightly; and rendereth to every thing
that duty which nature commands, conseruing peace by justice, maintaining
all things as they were in their creation, and directing them unto that end for
the which they were brought forth. And to say truly, the just man is nothing
else, but the tutor of nature, who defends her laws, and fights for her
own conservation, maintaining in rest and peace that, which was by wisdom
created. And therefore, o thou Justice, the mother of peace, thou art, next
unto innocence, in the first degree, to ascend unto the hill of eternal
blessedness.

3 Next after, Truth follows thee, clearly shining on every side, which is a
most firm and durable rock, against the which the clouds of sclanders kick in
vain, and at the first encounter which they spurr^ in he^ flanks, they are
all (...) scattered and gone. And Verity, who presents herself second,
marches to get into that blessed barbrough. For, o beautiful and holy Truth,
whenever any one loves thee, and has set his heart on thee, thou thy self
art by and by in his heart, and after go into his l^s, etc there adornest
thou him with most singular beauty. And to say truly, that beauty is nothing
else but the eternal truth, which shines in the works of the word of God,
which made al things from the beginning. H^ he^ which has embraced this pure
truth, she ^scend to that top, he has ioyn (...) thought with her, ^et up an
Altar in his lips, driven from him deceit and lying, and rooted them clean
out of his ^are and mouth. For lying is the very mortal poison of the soul:
it is a s^yin^ and cleaving h^mor, which ouerflowing the eye of understanding,
engenders therein as it were a filme, which takes away both sight and
judgment.

4 No, no, he that will ascend into that hill, must cast from him all vanity
and lying, for these rags will catch hold on every nail: he must also be
purged of this venomous malignitie, which is always busy and ready to do ill
unto his neighbor, the very poison of humane society. For, seeing it has
pleased thee, o Lord, that men which live together, should serve, as all the
rest of thy works do, to the ministry of thy glory, he that cutteth off good
will, which as a firm band joins the^ together, does not he break thy law,
and offend thine honor? what shall become of him then, who not co^e^t to suffer
the fire of charity to wax dead in his heart, but enforces himself besides to
defame his good name?

5 And therefore, o Lord, he that will ascend unto thee, and stretches out his
hand to enter into this blessed habitation, must always abhor these
pestilences, which being full of bloody malice, think of nothing but of the
infelicitie of their neighbors, and take pleasure in nothing but in
displeasing and grieuing of them, as by their very countena^ces may be seen^
for, when they weep, then are their neighbors in good estate, and when they
laugh, then goes it ill with them. No, no, their imaginary greatness, their
pride settled upon their extortions and deceits, will not suffer them to abide
an honest man, for, they are but white painted sepulchers, whose filthiness
and infection, will one day discover it self, when it shall please thee, my
God. But know thou who they are that will make account of an honest man?
Even they that fear and serve thee in holiness of life, and simplicity of
heart.

6 They, I say, o Lord, who think thee to be always present, not only at
their actions, but in their most secret thoughts, they that inviolably keep
their faith, whose word is a sure pawn of truth, upon whose promise his friend
assures him self, and accompteth it already done which he has promised for,
such a man, o Lord, believes verily that his salvation depends of the
promise which thou of thy mere favor and grace, have made unto him, and that
he shall not be worthy to receive the effect of thy holy promise, if he
render not unto his neighbor, the sure effect of him own. He will not hear
Usury once named, but abhors that wicked the every, which puts another
man's necessity to ransom, puts the help which he owes unto his neighbor
to sale, and sells time, days, months, and years. But much less will he
be corrupted, to condemn the innocent, to sell the goods of another man
wrongfully, and defile the sanctuary of Justice for filthy gain: but holding
his eyes always open, that he may understand the point of reason, and leans
bu^ unto that side where the law judges rightly. Neither does avarice make his
hand shake, nor favor to hold up his hand to take, but keeps him self
always equal and upright, and faithful and just unto all others, giving by
his wisdom, authority unto his judgments.

7 He that shall thus live, shall without doubt, ascend unto the height of this
happy hill. The Angels shall carry him up in their arms, guide his feet for
fear of stumbling, and in the end, place him before the face of the eternal
truth, where he shall for ever enjoy the pleasant abiding place of this most
excellent hill, lifted up above the heavens, to be the habitation of glorified
innocence, and be, reunited unto the principal of his being, which is that
everlasting Deity, and divine eternity. All things here below, alt^ and
change, have an end, and are cons^med: but he, whose virtue shall have lifted
him up unto this heavenly blessedness, shall continue in most glorious estate,
and vanquish all times and ages. Strengthen therefore, o Lord, our courages,
and comfort us in these worldly afflictions. And seeing it is thy good will and
pleasure, that good men shall go this way, through the insolences and
injuries of the wicked, sustain thou their hope which is shaken by their
afflictions, and by the prosperity of the wicked, and grant them constancy
to continue unto the end, that they may see the repayment both of the good and
of the bad.

A MEDITATION OF THE Lords Prayer.

printer's device of Richard Field (McKerrow, 164) ANCHORA SPEI

1594.

A MEDITATION of the Lords Prayer.
I Come unto thee, my God, as unto the common Father of the whole world* I come
unto thee, I say, who in the creation and conservation of all thy works, have
witnessed thy self to be a most affectioned and loving Father. To thee I come,
as to my right Father, who have not contented thy self with the giving me of
my being, life and feeling, as thou have done unto the rest of thy living
creatures, but have sent down on me thine holy spirit, and filled my soul
with an heavenly light and bea^e of thy Divinity. I come unto thee, my God,
regenerated and reincorporated into thy family by a new grace: I come, by
reason I have appeased the wrath of my Father, through the satisfaction of my
Redeemer. I come, because thou thy selfe-hast called me unto thee, and hold
forth thine arms. Receive me therefore, my God, not after the austeritie of a
just Judge, but according to the compassion of a pitiful father, and accept
this mine earnest prayer, which being conceived in the bottom of mine heart,
has disclosed it self by my lips, and flies with my voice unto the
favorable ear of mine heavenly Father, seeing it has pleased thee, o Lord,
to suffer me so to call thee. Cause it, o Lord my God, to pierce the heavens
where thou thy self art. I know right well that thy Throne is above, and that
thou keep under thy feet both the Sun and the Stars, and the earth to be
but a very tittle, and my self being the least part thereof, am a great deal
less then nothing. Who then shall dare to make me so saucy ^s to lift up mine
eyes unto thee? It is even thou, my God, who fittest on hye, to behold at once
all the works of thine hands, the better to understand our wants, and daily to
pour upon us thy grace, as a most sweet shower. Even thou, who have thy self
said, Ask, and ye shall be heard. But thou will be prayed unto with a
constant faith: cause it therefore to be borne and grow in my soul, for it is
a gift, that cannot come but from the Treasure of thy grace: and as at other
times thou have addressed the lips of infants to glorilye thee, govern now the
infancy and infirmity of mine heart, that it may deliver unto my mouth such a
prayer as may very well like and please thee. And because thou may know, my
God, that my prayer is sooner conceived in my soul then in my lips, and that
although the binden of my ^esh greeueth and vexes my spirit, yet breaths it
out as much as it can, thine honor and praise. And the first petition that I
make unto thee, is this*

Hallowed be thy name, or rather, let thy name hallow and sanctify me, that I
may be after able to bless and glorify thee. But which of thy names shall I
bless? that, wherewith thou have confouded and cast down the enemies of thy
people, or else; that, wherewith thou have blessed all the nations of the
earth. Will thou be praised as the God of hosts, o Lord God of all battles,
or, as the Savior and Redeemer of the world? Shall I tell abroad, how thou
have made all things of nothing, how thou have sown the heavens with stars,
covered the earth with flowers, fruits, rivers, and with all living creatures,
and Man, like unto thy self? Or, shall I speak but of that incredible love,
by which thou have delivered thine own only Son unto death, to purchase for
us life everlasting? I have not breath enough o Lord for such an enterprise,
but let it content thee, that I sanctify thy name with an humble and chaste
thought, and that my meditation be always fixed upon all the benefits
wherewith it pleases thee continually to favor me, so as both my self, and as
many as thou have placed here in this world, as in the midst of a rich
Temple, for the beholding and admiring on every side the excellency of thy
Deity, we never turn our understandings unto any other thing, but to the
comprehending and learning of thy will, to the end that we being reunited in
one and the self same desire to serve thee, Thy kingdom may come, and that
after we shall have cast off the yoke of sin, which so long time has
thralled and captiued us, thy love alone may reign in our consciences. A most
blessed and prosperous reign: for, to obey thee, is to command our unruly
appetites, and to command them, is, for a man to be master of his own self,
and for a man to be master of him self, is the most sovereign principality.
It is an easy matter, my God, to obey thee, thy yoke is gracious, and the
tribute which thou exactest on us, is nothing else, but to have us to be
blessed. Confirm us therefore, o Lord, in this thy will, and assist the zeal
of thy good servants, repressing the insolency of all such as blaspheme
against thy Majesty, because that thy law, and thy truth, do reign
throughout the world. O King of kings, which have the dominion of our hearts,
who by our humility and obedience, have established thine Empire, bend our
wills under thy law, to the end that we looking all to one end, aspire not but
to the advancing of thy glory, and that our good actions may testify the good
discipline of the King of heaven, unto whom we do homage, and who allows us
for his subjects, of whom we hold so many benefits and graces, as that we can
not possibly come any thing near the number of them. Now, what obedience is it
that we should yield unto thee? how should we guess to do that which might
please thee? who is able to sound the bottom of thy thoughts? and who shall be
able to understand that which thou would have? I therefore beseech thee only
that thy will be done. For* l^h thou art altogether good, thou willest nothing
but good things: and for thee, both to do and to will, is all one, and in
making this prayer unto thee, we wholly submit our selves unto thee, who never
faylest to will us well, and to perform the fame also. For, whatsoever, o
Lord, thou have willed, wa^ done, and from this thy will, as from a lively and
pleasant spring head, are derived all the benefits, wherewith the whole face of
the earth is covered, and wherewith all the heavens are beautified. Continue
thou the same toward us, and seeing thy love is as a fire that increases,
according as it finds matter to burn, let it increase and enlarge it self
in doing good unto us, unto us, I say, poor miserable wretches, in whose
weakness, misery, and infirmity, it shall find it self matter enough to
exercise and work upon. When I pray thee, o Lord, That thy will be done, my
meaning is to beseech thee; that thou would eftsoons root out of mine heart
all these worldly desires and wills, which being borne in the corruption of
the flesh, can not have any fellow-feeling and agreement with the law of the
spirit: neither give thou me the bridle to live as I lust, and seeing that I am
thy child, and honor me with this title, let me never be bondslaue unto my
affections, but keep me under the rod of thy law, and under the tutorship of
thy (...) deme^ts, to the end that my (...) and (...) many as have swo^se to
(...) ^ing framed to serve and (...) thee worthily, may also be re^dy and
^erfull in the ministry of thy ^e^ce, so long as we shall abide here below in
this mortal world, as thine Angels, and other most blessed souls, are in that
heavenly habitation: and so Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. And
seeing it is thy will that our frail and mortal bodies do daily decay, and
had need to be repared and strengthened by some new nourishment, that we might
have continually recourse unto thee, Give us, my God, our daily bread, and give
us therewith, the grace so to use it, and all other thy benefits which thou
have bestowed upon us, that we in some measure nourishing and maintaining our
bodies, grieve not, nor vex not our souls, making them thereby less able to
come unto the knowledge of thy truth: And in using thy liberal dealing with
thanksgeuing, we tie not for all that, our affections unto earthly and worldly
things, but make us so to pass through these temporal benefits, as we lose
not, for the getting of them, the eternal blessings. Let not the taste of
earthly bread, wherewith we feed our bodies, make us forget our heavenly bread,
that bread of life, that eternal bread, which nourishes and strengthens our
souls, keeps them from death, fills our mouths with the Deity, and
makes us the temples of our God, to receive him into our bodies, and to be
made members of his members. Grant us, my God, that by this bread, or rather
by this flesh, we may be incorporated into our Redeemer: and as he, in taking
and putting on of our flesh, was partaker of our death, even so we taking and
putting on of his flesh, may be partakers of his immortality. And seeing we
have, my God, been made vessels and receptacles of his Deity, wash us, and
make us clean, to the end that he coming to dwell in us, thou may find
nothing there to give thee occasion to depart from us, and to make us void of
thy grace, and of our salvation. Now, it is impossible for us to be made
clean, without thou forgive us our sins, and remit our debts. For, we have
been bondslaues both unto sin, and unto death, and whatsoever we claim to be
ours, it belongs unto him: neither have we any thing either to pay our
ransom, or yet to discharge our debt, and therefore, o Lord, it is thou that
must do it. Thou have once for all redeemed us, and set us at liberty: but yet
notwithstanding, we daily fall into the hands of the enemy, we daily commit a
thousand sins, which make us bond unto sin: cease not for all this, my God,
to open unto us this treasure, from which we may take the price of our
liberty. Be thou, o Lord, more strong and stout in pardoning of us, then we
are in offending of thee. Let thy merciful hand stretch it self out
continually unto us, for sin cleaves fast unto the marrow of our bones, and
grows and waxes old in us, which makes us when we are old, to be after a
sort more filthy and infectious, were it not that thou continually applyest
unto our misery, the merit and worthiness of thy holy passion, to the end
that we in some measure launching and wounding our consciences, thou may
strengthen and heal our wounds, and rub out with the oil of thy mercy, the
skarres that may of them remain. Otherwise, o Lord, I should be afeard, that
thou in casting thine eyes ordinarily upon us, would in the end be so angry
and grieved, as that thou would come very fast upon us, to be revenged of
the wickedness which we our selves have committed. Forgive us therefore our
offenses, that is to say, our sins which we commit all the time of our life:
And forgive us, o heavenly Father, as we from our very hearts forgive the^ that
trespass against us. Cause us continually to set before us this love, by which
thou have not only taken upon thee to pay our debts, but the punishment for our
sins: that we may judge what an unreasonable thing it should be for us to look
to have any favor at thy hands, who will not agree with our neighbors,
considering there is no comparison between the offenses which we commit
against thee, and the offenses wherewith they offend us. Pluck clean out of our
hearts, all pride and malice for their sakes, for whose aid and succor thou
causedst us to be borne. Give us gentle and meek spirits, which may keep us
in unity and brotherly love, by patiently and meekly bearing the infirmities
one of another. For, we right well know my God, how easily we slip, yea, how
easily we stumble and fall in the way of thi^ slippery and irksome life. We
have too too little force and strength, continually to keep our feet, and to
resist the winds which drive us forward into the steep breake-necks of all
wickedness and iniquity. And therefore we pray most earnestly unto thee, Not to
lead us into tentation, and to keep far from us all occasions which may any
way cause us to offend thee, and to arm us with thy holy spirit against all
those objects which of them selves offer them unto us, without the which we
shall be always overcome, and by the which we shall continually be va^quishers
in this wrestling against sin: for this prize, and garland of victory, is for
none but for such a one as thou do second in this fight. Grant us therefore
such grace, as that when any extraordinary desire of getting worldly riches
assail us, that thou will strengthen us with a mind to obtain heavenly
riches, and valiantly contemn and despise the goods of this world, and the
uncertain and frail knowledge of them. And let us remember that they pass
away as the clouds in the air from one country unto another, and in the end
melt and consume away to nothing, and that for the most part, the gold and
silver which we so greedely gather and heap up together with so great toyling
and moyling, serve us to none other and, but to bring condemnation on our
heads. And if so be that thou of thine own goodness departest with more unto us
then we any way deserve, grant us eftsoons a will to use them well, and
charitably communicate them unto those that have greater need of them then we
have. For the earth is thine, and we are but the gardiens and farmers thereof:
our goods are thine, and we are but the dispensers and stewards of them. And
therefore, if we refuse to give them unto those which ask them of us in thy
name, thou will not only take them from us, but wilt also, for our
unthankfulness and infidelity, make us pay double usury for the^. And grant us
also this grace, that the gloriousnes of the honors of this world blind not us
and draw us on, to desire more then is expedient for our salvation. And let it
always be imprinted in our thoughts, that there is no true honor in this
world, but to serve thee worthily, and that for the serving of thee, the place
of honor is too too base, and that the greatness thereof consists in humility.
As for the rest which we so wonder at and admire, it is but a deceitful light,
after which we hunt with open mouth, and is like unto those little fires which
appear in the night about the rivers. They shine and cast light but in the
dark, and carry them which follow them even to their drowning, if they take not
very great heed of them. For our worldly pomps and secular dignities never
appear but in this dark world, and when we have winkingly cast our eyes upon
the heavenly light, they seem to us to shine as bright as the fire, their
clearenesse is like unto a basen of gold finely polished: but in following of
them, we fall into the running brooks, where we are incontinently lost and
undone. We uncertainly flote amiddest the wills of Princes, and the opinions
of the common people, so long, as that we stumble at last at some scandale or
offense, which mightily shakes and shiuereth us. And therefore, my God, give
me constancy, that I be not shaken with beholding these vanities: but make me
only ambitious of thy glory, and cause that my spirit, in lifting up it self
toward immortality, feed not it self with the smokes of this world. Neither
let me envy those which possess all these frail and transitory goods and
honors: but let my desire be, to approach as near as I possibly can, the
example of good life, which thou have pictured out unto us with most lively
coulors, in the table of thine own life. And this being done, let all the
violent passions of ire, wrath, and rancor, be banished from my soul: and let
my desires be to do good unto all the world, and hurt to none, and let my body
and soul be ever waking, and employed about good and commendable works,
without ever to be englutted with pale and ill favored slothfulness. And let
this filthy and infamous gluttony, which abuses thy gifts, and which is
drowned in wine, and buried in superfluous eating and drinking, be far away
from me. Quench also, o my heavenly Father, all these shameless prickings of
the flesh, which allure us to break the chastity of our bodies, and purity
of our minds. Beat back from us all objects, which may stir up in our
souls any slippery and shameless affections. And to be short, Deliver us from
all evil, namely, from all evil Angels, not giving them any power over us.
And if thou know that we are about to cast our selves headlong into evil,
make speed to pluck us back, and stretch out that fatherly had of thine, which
is always more ready to show mercy then justice. Save us, o Lord, maugre our
selves: neither let our relaps and perverseness so sharpen and quicken thee
against us, as that thou remember not thy self, that thou art not only our
God, but our Father also.

MEDITATIONS UPON THE Lamentations of JEREMIAH.

Translated out of French into English, by Tho. Sto. Gent.

1594.

Unto the Kingdom of France. Guill. du Vair greeting.
Seeing, most miserable and wretched Province, that thy over great exceeding in
thine ancient and wonted delights and pleasures, has brought thee into this
outrageous fury, and that thine ill hap has caused thee to put to these thy
rent and torn hands, to pluck out thine own bowels withal, and to disfigure
thine own face: yet if there he any intermission of this ho^e broyling
mischief, see thou employ the same about the beholding and looking upon thy
misery. But if so be thou be too too fearful of the miseries which thou best
brought upon thy self, or caust not abide the sight of them, behold and looks
upon the ruin and destruction of these miserable Hebrews, because it is the
truest glass that thou can look in. But who^ a^ thine eyes shall have
borrowed their image and face to behold and see thy miseries therein, let them
also borrow tears of thee to, wayle and mourn for them. For the chiefest
remedy to ease thy sorrow and grief, is for thee to acknowledge the same, and
then to have compassion thereof. And when will that be? forsooth even then,
when God, who loves thee more then thou love thy self, shall by his own
love overcome that desire of thine which thou have to destroy thy self. And in
waiting for this good, and praying for the same, I do here prepare and make
ready for thee holy tears, that thou might thereby mollify thine hard
heart, and extinguish therein the wrath of God enflamed against thee. It may be
that they will well like thee, as a charitable remedy ought to do, and it may
be that they will mislike thee, and then will thou do ^en do, who utterly
r^iect whatsoever is offered them for their good. And whether they please or
displease the, yet will I never cease both to love and serve thee. For, what
(...) it that I should more v^^ly and willingly love and serve, then (...) ^are
and best beloved Country, (...) dear Country, I say, that makes some (...)
of me? The Lord my God save and presence thee my poor country of France, and
gra^ ^gr are to be able as blessedly to p^u^ thy welfare, as I have an earnest
desire to do it.

G. DV V.

MEDITATIONS upon the Lamentations of Jeremiah.
THE PREFACE.
Aleph. A Good Father has always a great regard unto the welfare of his
children, and seeks by all means possible to preserve and keep them, But
when they, through their rashness and wilfulness shall despise his wisdom,
and go about utterly to undo them selves, and in the end cast them selves
headlong into those calamities which he foretold them, he by and by is revenged
of his eyes, fills his face with tears, and his soul with grief. But if so
be he have leisure to pour out his sighs, and that sorrow gives his tongue
leave to utter any words, they are nothing else but so many lamentable
passions, turned into gall and bitterness. Such a one do we, both hear, and
see at this day, this Prophet to be, who having long before foreseen the
tempest which should overthrow his country, denounced and cried out with open
mouth, that the time of her destruction was at hand, and should see their
houses burnt, and their City sacked before their faces, if so be the inhabitants
thereof did not speedily with running streams of tears, and with sackcloth and
ashes, meet with the enflamed wrath of God, for their sins and
transgressions. But they rather harkned unto the deceitful words of their
enemies, then unto the voice of their friends, and harkned rather unto those
that brought them tidings of their destruction, then unto them which denounced
the same unto the^. And so it fell out, that this beautiful and mighty City,
the very eye of the East, and miracle of the whole world, after so many, and so
many threats, fell in the end into extreme calamity. And after that she had
been spoiled and sacked, she saw her inhabitants chayned and led into miserable
bondage, whole households taken away, and led into captivity, women and maids
dishonored, and afterward divided and parted amongst the Soldiers. And then
Jeremiah beholding the uncomfortable face of this City, acknowledging therein,
nothing more then the sorrowful effects of his old prophesies, began to lament
them after this manner, saying:

CHAPTER I.
Aleph. OVt alas, in what estate do I see thee, thou great and proud City?
O, the pride of thy magnificent Palaces is now abated. Now, all thy sumptuous
and rich shows of thy costly buildings are come down, and brought to
rubbish. I looked on every side of me, to see what was become of all the brave
men, which were wont to furnish thy houses, but I saw all lie like a waste
wilderness.

I sought in every place, and could find nothing, there was no body to answer
me, and yet I called all the town over. I saw nothing come out of thy Castles
but jack dawes and owls. And now o poor City, which sometime were the
stately dwelling place of Kings, and the Princess of Provinces, and the feate
of the kingdom, thine honor is dead, and thou art become a most miserable
widow. Sorrow is now thy livery and badge, sorrow, without end, sorrow, full of
all horror, yea and sorrow, full of all despair. For, alas, thou saw not
only thy goods and children lost, but being lost, thou saw them also put
unto most cruel pain and torment. With what eyes shall they be ever able to
look toward thee, and with what thoughts be able to remember thee, when as
groaning under the burden of a most insupportable slavery, they shall represent
unto thee, thine ancient magnificence, and their pristinate liberty? will
they not all say weeping, that the Princess of the nations is now become a
most wretched slave, and she that was wonted to command others, is become her
self now to be taxed? O poor and miserable City, thou have now maruellously
altered thine estate and condition. Weep therefore, and sigh hardly, for,
neither thy weeping, nor yet thy sighing, will these many days be able to
match thy miseries.

Beth. She wept and wept again, and her eyes never ceased. And when the Sun
arose to take his course, she began to mourn, and when he went down, yet had
she never made an end. All living creatures withdrew them selves into doleful
and dark places, and all things were silent and at rest every where: but her
plaints increased in the dark, and the nights rest was troubled with her
cries. Her broken and trembling voice sounded every where, and all the whole
world that heard this complaining voice, were moved with horror and fear. Her
cheeks were never dry, and her tears never ceased running. Her face was ever
wet, and her eyes distilled continually. And alas, how could her plaints end,
when as there was no end of her misery? She had not one only to comfort her,
no not so much as one to wipe away her tears. All her friends forsook her,
and the nearest neighbors she had, quite and clean left her. They that
sometimes honored her good hap, do now utterly contemn her, and they that once
reverenced her prosperity, do now scorn and mock her: for, some of them fled
from her when she fell into misery, and they that tarried behind, did nothing
else but dishonor her.

Gimel. Thus was poor Jerusalem and the poor Hebrews entreated and handled
in their captivity. And after loss, followed shame, and after damage rep^och.
They went this way and that way, thinking to find some that would comfort them,
but all the world pursued them. And what, the very dens of the wild beasts
were their safety, when any went about to set upon them, and the poor people
could neither find cave, nor any place of repair, safely to go into. The
nature of misery is to have compassion on others, but the misery of this
people, increased the hatred that was borne them. In so much as that nature it
self is here altered, to the end to augment the torment of these poor people.

Alas, what a fatal ruin is this, that can not be avoided? For, thus they
might have said: If so be ye will have our goods, ye shall have them: if so be
it be for our lands and houses that ye afflict us, why, take them to you, and
if ye persecute us for hatred that ye bear unto the name of our Country,
why, we will banish our selves thence. What would our misery have more of us?
Why persecuteth it us when as we are ready to fly? Does it afflict us that
are poor wretches? and pursue us who are banished? We are scattered abroad
through out all the nations of the world, and stray and fleet about like
wracks and vagabonds, we have all the miseries that any can possibly bear, and
yet have not so much as one of the least of their comforts. And they that see
us, are void of commiseration, neither do they look only vncompassionately
upon us, but scornefully also. And this was not our entertayneme^t in one
place alone, but every where: and the only benefit which we have, is this,
that all things are alike unto us in our misery. For, persecution passes as
lightly away as we, and is present every where with us. For, if we think to
escape by any unknown and secret place, we shall find some thing to bewray
us, and deliver us unto our enemies. Ha, what a thing is this? must we who are
chased into all the corners of the earth, think to return and hide our selves
under the ruynes of our houses, there to reliue continually our griefs, in
beholding the hideous desolation of our City?

Daleth. O poor Syon, we should then be enforced to behold thee again with
far more tears and groans, we should look upon the great beaten hye ways,
and say unto our selves, What is become of all those companies that were wont
to cover all these hye ways, and where are they that were wont to come by
heaps, to honor our City? For, all the nations both whole and some, have come
running unto our feasts, and to the solemnities of our great sacrifices: but
now, we see not so much as a man once come near unto this holy City. There is
not so much as an hermitage about it. All the ways are covered over with
grass, and there is a pretty forest of briers and thistles about it. Neither
can one find and pick out the footstep of any man. These beautiful and great
gates so ritchly and cunningly wrought, which in the solemn days were belong
with garlands and nosegayes, are now laid all wide open upon the ground, and
broken in fitters. The Centres that laid open the ways, are now filled and
stopped up with their ruynes: Alas, what a change is this? And the garments
of our Priests which went in their pontificalibus, singing with great majesty
and reverence the praises of our God, are torn and rent in pieces as well as
other men's, and do nothing else but weep and groan. They look up pitifully
with their eyes unto heaven, to see whether the rigor of his wrath would fall
upon them yea or no. The tender Virgins who were wont with their beauty to
adorn the face of our City, as the Stars do a most glorious and clear
night, are all withered and besmeared, and nothing but horror and astonishment
in their countenances. For, extreme famine has dried up their flesh, cold
has bereaved them their ruddy and smooth cheeks, sorrow and grief has
wrinkeled their faces, and the flower of their chastity by the soldier
insolently defaced, has covered all their faces with shame and dishonor. And
these are now no more, but even so many dead, living. For, they live altogether
in sorrow and grief. Neither is there any thing that encourages them more to
live, then the same dolor, which kills them with very heaviness, and
awakeneth them out of their bitterness.

He. A dolor truly, too too bitter, and in very deed more bitter then soote,
to see themselves carried in triumph by their greatest enemies, to see them
brave by our spoils, rich, by our great poverty, and mighty by our
overthrow. Thou have, o Lord, poured out thy heavy wrath upon us, and made
us feel how heavy thy reuengefull hand is. Thou have, I believe, gathered
together all our faults into a bundell once for all, because that when thou
saw them to be so infinite, and worthy the like pain and punishment, thou
awakenedst thy self, and have discharged the arrows of thy severe justice
against us. But, o Lord, ought not thou to stay the course of our punishment
in our own persons, and consume all thy torments upon us? but must we also be
tormented in the persons of our children, and for the making of our misery the
greater, to cause us also to see theirs? For, we were spoiled of our goods,
put out of our houses, and led away captive. We thought that there was
nothing, as it were, to be feared more then death, and yet now we fear it
not, for, it is sweet to those that are in misery. But our speedy and quick
calamity, to our great pain and grief, has now overtaken us with new
miseries. For, we have seen go before us whole bands of our children
fettered, and carried captive into Babylon, there to serve our enemies as
bondslaues.

Vau. Even so has Syon lost the flower of her youth, and all the honor of her
City is clean gone: She has been miserably torn all to rags, and there is no
whole thing left in her, but sorrow and grief. For, the greatest and ritchest
of her inhabitants were carried away by troops, and led into strange Provinces,
as flocks of sheep are driven by days iourneys from market to market, without
giving them any leave to feed as they go. They go with their heads and their
eyes looking down to the ground, sighing most piteously. And the conqueror
follows them scourging them with rods, and they which dwell by the hye ways
sides, as they pass, laugh at their affliction, and most injuriously cry out
upon them.

Zain. And as a fresh wound opens again the old ones, even so were their
hearts thoroughly pierced, whereby they remembered their old sins, and the
punishment which their fathers suffered, because they had forsaken the true
service of God, and given them selves over unto their foolish passions. They
called also to mind, how often they were fallen into their enemies hands when
as God had left them. O, thou too too over late remembrance, thou should
have come a great deal sooner, to have turned them from their wicked and
abominable ways, and if they would not have done it for Gods sake, yet they
should have done it at least for fear of his fury which they had so often
felt. O late repentance, which comes after punishment suffered. They were very
poreblind that could not foresee this great train of miseries which followed
their offenses. But alas, o blind sin, thou do thus bleare the eyes of
thy friends, and wilt not put them in mind of their repentance but when it is
all past time. For, Jerusalem has turned her back upon God, and followed her
own concupiscences, she has made her a God of her own pleasure, and
worshipped her own delights. She never once turned her eyes toward heaven,
until such time as she saw her magnificence clean under foot, the whole
world laughing at her shame, making a scorn of her Sabboths, and translating
and altering of her sacrifices, wherein she had so great confidence, which
could in very deed serve her to no purpose, because they were done with such
polluted hands.

Heth. For, to say truly, Jerusalem was nothing else but a sink of sin and
filthiness: for, from the highest unto the lowest, they were all most
abominable: for, she began to forget her God that was so favorable unto her,
and thereupon, as one that was blind, she stumbled and fell into all manner of
wickedness. And after that she had groped about here and there at all
adventures, she fell into this strange calamity: and then, as many as
heretofore were wont to reverence and honor her, began forthwith to disdain
and look sourely upon her. For, her shame lay open unto the eyes of all the
world, and was set before every man as a laughing stock, some asking her, what
was become of all her wealth, some, what was become of all her honor, and there
was never an honest womans child, which had not a gird at her. In so much that
she could do nothing else but weep, and being all ashamed and comfortless,
she was driven to go hide her self.

Thet. And when she saw her self alone, and in what estate she stood, she found
her self from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot, to be most
filthy, and her garments to be most beastly berayed, with blood and mire. And
as the Peacock, when he has spread abroad his tail, in looking at his feet,
lets it fall down again, abating thereby his pride* even so has she
plucked down, (...) heart, sorrowed within her self, and cared no whit for
death, by reason that all things misliked her, but chiefly and above all, her
poor and miserable life. She was given to be altogether sad, without having
any body to comfort her. For, her friends had forsaken her, or if they were
near about her, it was to none other end but to afflict her. Wherefore, when
as she found no help here upon earth, she lamentably lifted up her head unto
heaven, and with deep sighs from the bottom of her heart, addressed herself
unto God, and said: O Lord, have thou not compassion upon me, in this my great
affliction? See thou not mine extreme misery? Surely, there is none can
save me so well as thy self. Come therefore if thou be the God of mercy, and
forsake not thine humble and old servant: for, mine enemy sets his foot
upon my throat, and causes me most shamefully to belch. Come therefore, o
Lord: for, my continual injury is thy shame, and the outrage that is done unto
a servant, redoundeth to the master. And therefore, come o Lord, for, mine
enemy ^geth me beyond all measure, and without all pity.

Iod. He has laid his bloody hand upon that which I accounted most dear, and
spared no whit of that, which I made reckning off to be most holy. Thou have
seen him enter into thy Sanctuary, and into that place which ought to have
received none but sanctified persons: no, none but pure and clean souls, and
such as are worthy to be partakers of the beholding of thy divine majesty,
has seen received and touched, even pollution and impiety it self, and
seen his sacrilegious hands steal away the ornaments of thy Temple, destroyed
the habitation of thy deity, and the abiding place of thy grace, as if thy
laws, and prohibitions forbidding them not to abide and carry in that place,
no nor once to enter thereinto, had been but as it were a very song. Where were
thou then, o Lord, and although thou carest not for the injuries which we have
received, why art thou not yet revenged of the wrongs done unto thy self?

Caph. Thou have been, o Lord, very angry against poor Jerusalem, and have
said, that thou had no will to come to help it, by reason of the great and
manifold offenses thereof. It is now time, o Lord, or else never, for all her
miserable inhabitants go shamefully a begging for their living, and have given
whatsoever good thing they have, for a mouth full of bread, and bought full
dearly the water which they have drunk. Forsake not, o Lord, this our earnest
prayer, and turn a-little thine eyes of mercy upon us, for, if our pride has
heretofore estranged us fom thee, our humility shall now reconcile us unto
thee. There can be now nothing, o Lord, to be seen so humble, vile, and abject
as we are, nor there is nothing that has more need of thee then we have,
neither can there be any thing found to be more pitiful then thy self.

Lamed. Tell me, I beseech ye, you that pass by and see my ruins, and do
consider the remain of my greatness, and then tell me if there be any thing
in the whole world so miserable as it is, and that ever sithence you have had
eyes, that ever you saw any dolor like unto mine? Tell me I pray you if ever
ye were able to keep your eyes from shedding of tears, whenever ye beheld
my desolation? I speak unto you, I say, which have heretofore seen this City
so wonderfully furnished with wealth and riches, her greatness and magnifice^ce,
and do now behold her monstrous spoil, do ye not think that you see a
vineyard laid wide open, whereinto all sorts of beasts are entered, who have not
only spoiled the vintage of the grape, but have also broken down the hedges,
and plucked in sunder the very arms of the vines. And this ye see is the
pleasure of God, he is justly angry with me, and has determined to visit me in
his fury.

Mem. His vengeance is come down from heaven like lightning, it is come to
thunder and lighten upon me, and is entered into the very marrow of my bones,
nothing can be seen to be done more suddenly, more earnestly, or more
powerfully. For, in a moment it is come, overthrown all in a moment, and all
in a minute shaken into fitters and pieces. For, my Temples and my Castles
which reached unto the clouds, lie now even with the ground. Our Cities are
like unto plain heathes, whereon you may drive Carts. God has made me right
well know, to my cost, his power and might. He has made me hear an horrible
lesson. We thought by our wisdoms to have been able to withstand the blow of
his justice, howbeit, there is neither wisdom nor council against God. We
have been entrapped on every side. For when we thought to come out, and to be
in safety, we were fast entangled in his nets, and the more haste we made to
get out, the faster were we masshed, and in the end were cast down headlong
into that punishment which he had prepared for us: like unto the mariner, who
thinking to escape a shelf or flat, falls into a gulf which swalloweth him
up. For, our misery, is in deed a very gulf, where our fight is taken away,
and we brought back into an inaccessible wilderness, where there is none to
comfort us, in so much as that our eyes, never giving over weeping, are able
enough to drown us in our own tears.

Nun. I never o Lord, looked to escape it, for thou have too too long had an
eye unto my sins, and have determined of the punishment which I should
suffer, it is over long ago since thou did couple my sins together, and
hold them fast linked within the hand of thy justice. In the end, I found my
self all at once oppressed, and felt my sins as an hard and insupportable
yoke, tie me fast to be tormented. I yielded my neck unto the punishment, as an
ox unto the yoke; under the hand of an unmerciful master. My misery gave me
no rest nor intermission so long as there was any strength in me. I might have
said that I was with my last master, and that God had put me into the hands of
an enemy, of whom I could never have been rid, but by departing out of this
life.

Samech. What, relief or comfort, o Lord, may I have in my miseries? In what
place may I lodge the rest of my hope? Thou have utterly extirped and rooted
out the race of Iehuda, the very stalk of Kings and Prophets. And as if by
laying open mine entrayles, thou might pluck out mine heart, even so have
thou taken from me my brave and valiant children, by rooting out some, and
sending captive othersome. Thou have chosen out a very good time for thy self,
to ruin and sack me, and to give me for a pray unto my greatest enemies, and
thou have taken a very good order in all things for the overthrowing of that
which I hold most dear, which I have made chief choice of, to love, and
wherein I have settled all mine whole affection. But alas, with what cruelty,
if I may dare say so, has Jerusalem seen all her streets paued with the
torn members of the bodies of her poor children. They have been laid upon the
rack, their bones have been broken in pieces, and their blood has run down
the channels like streams. There might you see the poor Virgins utterly
discomforted, there is no more maydenly shamefastness left to coulor their
faces withal, that is to say, no more of their fathers blood to leap up into
their visages, to mix with their tears.

Ain. Alas, what is there left for me to do in such a strange an affliction
as this, but incessantly to weep? And therefore I will weep, and weep my
fill. I will convert mine eyes into fountaynes, and fill mine heart with sorrow
and grief. Ha, is it not possible, to kill my self with weeping? Ha, when
shall I sigh so much, as that I may sigh my soul out of my body? For, seeing I
have none other consolation, and that God alone who is able to ease my misery,
is far away from me, I can hope of none other end unto my dolor, but to
suffer it consume it self, to the end that as the flaming fire when it burns
brightest, soonest consumes the matter which it takes hold on, even so the
more my dolor increases, the sooner it may make an end of the matter wherein
it remains. And what other thing should I look to be? For, I have lost my
children, mine enemy has gotten them into his clouches, made himself master
both of me and of my goods, should I then desire to live, to behold any longer
a more continual misery?

Phe. Poor miserable distressed Syon, has cast open her arms, and lifted up
her hands unto heaven, but has not as yet found either in heaven or in earth
any aid or comfort. All the world has run to hear her cry, but none
otherwise then as flies do swarm about a sore, to suck and sting it. Every one
of her very near neighbors have encompassed her, to fleese her, and to divide
her spoils, and all her ancient friends have forsaken her, and fled from her,
as me^ would fly from a loathsome diseased woman.

Sade. I feel, o Lord, much misery, mine heart is ready to burst with very
sorrow and anger, in so much as that I am enforced to confess that my misery
is nothing else but thy justice, and that my sinful hands have wrought me all
my torment. I have provoked thine anger against me, and forced thy goodness by
mine obstinate wickedness, to take the rods into thine own hand, to make me
feel, that thou art just, to let me understand, that thou know my life, to
make me learn, that there is nothing hid from thee, that thou apparently
see, what is in mine heart, and that my most secret thoughts, are visible unto
thy providence. I thought once to have hidden my sin, and therefore I must
needs now confess the punishment, and that the very strength of my sorrow,
draws out the truth from my mouth. But alas, seeing my misery is such, and
that all my comfort rests in complaining, hear ye at the least, o my
neighbor people, my doleful and sorrowful voice, and behold a little my
misery, and mark if ever ye saw any grief comparable unto mine. And seeing
ye will not set to your hands to aid me, lend me yet your eyes at the least, to
have compassion on me: and if ye be not altogether stony hearted, weep with
me, to see my poor daughters thus led captive into a strange country.

Coph. What thing is more weak, deceitful, and uncertain, then the force of
men, and especially wh^ God is against us. I have besought the aid of all my
friends, and have looked to have had all Egypt to come to help me, because that
for to hold friendship with her, I set my self against the Babylonians. But
alas, I remain alone, and am left unto this cruel Caldean race, and
therefore, all that I am now able to do, is, to detest the false faith of my
false and traiterous friends, and having understood that the succors which
they promised me were to none other end but to undo me, and to be partakers of
my spoils, even to conjure heaven and earth to be aduenged of their villainies.
And yet for all this, I feel my misery no whit lessened, neither have I found
for all this, any whit the more succor, that my Priests and sacrificers
promised me, nor seen any of those hopes wherewith they filled me, nor yet any
of the vain promises, wherewith they puffed up mine heart, it seemed to them,
that they could have overthrown mine enemies with bare words. They were all
astonyed when as they had felt the danger, and had in the end seen the common
misery of the whole City light upon their own heads. They dyed of extreme
famine, their Philacteries or Rochets, ne yet their long, side, and wide
vestiments, were able to save them, one might have seen hunger bring them to
their end, and with a dying voice craving a mouth full of bread to relieve
their wretched bodies, could ^ind none to give it them.

Rhesch. In so much, that when I had turned my self on every side, and found
no help any where, I was enforced my GOD, and my Lord, to run to thee, and
in bowing my knees, and lifting up my hands, to cry out all to be blubbered
with tears, saying: O Lord, if thou be a God of mercy, behold me now, for, I
am so afflicted, as that my very enemies themselves have compassion on me. I am
from the crown of the head unto the soale of the foot full of sorrow, and
there is no part of me that is not grievously touched. Me thinks my bowels to
be plucked in pieces within me, and am of the opinion, that mine heart will riue
in sunder. My mouth is as bitter as soote or gall, and I am eftsoons nothing
else but bitterness it self. For, all my words, thoughts, and deeds, are
bitter, and which way so ever I turn me, I see nothing but horror and
trembling: for without, the sword cutteth down whatsoever stands before it,
and the iron pardons nothing. My land is not known, it is so thick sown
with dead bodies, and within, the estate and condition is not much more
pleasant: for I see there my children afflicted with famine, and dye most
pitifully, I behold them lying ghastly and thinly with goggle eyes, and wide
open gaping mouths, breathing out the last gasps of death.

Sin. O what a fatal and horrible spectacle is this, and yet men have no
compassion on them! They have seen me in this estate, and yet could there not
be found one that had a fellow feeling of my misery, or that ever gave me any
comfortable word to mitigate my grief. And as for mine enemies, the extremity
of my misery made the^ no more to melt, then if they had had stony hearts in
their bodies, and frosen blood in their veins. For, all their talk was, Mark
how God has chastized, and dressed her, and beaten down her pride. But thou
know not o thou tygerlike and inhumane race, how God keeps thee. Thou thy
self reioyc^st at my misery, and I will comfort my self by thine. For thou will show unto them, o Lord God, that thou art just all the world over, and
that with thee, there is no acceptance of persons, that every man has his
turn through thine hands, and that the longer thou deferrest thy vengeance,
the more grievous and terrible it is when it comes, recompencing the
forbearing thereof, with rigor and severity.

Tau. Enter therefore, o Lord, into judgment with mine enemies, lay open a
little their doings, show unto them their lives, and after that thou have
caused them to know, that their consciences are full of blasphemy and
pollution, and have taken from them the curtain of hypocrisy which so mightily
ouershadowed their robberies and thefts, be revenged a little of their turns,
lay them upon the rack, that they may be hard a little to cry under the press
of tribulations, to the end they may understand, that seeing that I have
suffered for my sins, that the rigor of my punishment is but as it were a
summons and denunciation of theirs, and that my tears and groans, have put out
thy heavy wrath, which I kindled and lighted against my self, and that they
have lighted again the same, against those which rejoiced and laughed at my
misery.

CHAPTER II.
Aleph. Mark and behold here a strange and lamentable alteration of things.
For, Syon, the dearly beloved daughter of God, who held up her head above all
the C^es of the world, as a Cypres tree does, above all the bushes in the wood,
who carried in her forehead an honorable and magnificall majesty, and shining
most gloriously, is now brought down to the ground, and so disfigured,
obscu^ed, besmeared, and blemished, as that no man will ever know her, and
this, o Lord, is come to pass by reason of thine irefull blows which thou
have laid upon her, who, as thou have with an infinite power created all things
in perfection, destroyest also with a most infinite power all things in the heat
of thy just anger. Thou have lifted up even unto heaven thy dearly beloved
Syon, and afterward threwest her down roundly from heaven to earth, because
she contemned thy amity and friendship. Her mightiness served her for none
other purpose, but to make her fall the greater, and the noise thereof the more
terrible. For, as thou art extreme in loving, so also art thou as extreme in
punishing* and when through long impenitencie, the people enforce thee to put
to thy reue^ging hand, then is thine anger like thunder and lightning, which
spares nothing that it meets withal. Now, it is a strange thing to see how
God has dealt with Syon in his fury, to see how he has been avenged of his
very Temple, to see how he has destroyed and shaken to fitters the place of
the world which best liked him, and whereupon a man might say, he rested his
feet, making his deity to be seen and known in that place, as much as
possible might.

Beth. And what has he pardoned? Has any thing escaped his hands untouched?
Look upon all the houses of Ia^ob, and upon what so ever exquisite thing that
is in Judah, and tell me if there be any whit of any of all these things
standing? Tell me I beseech thee, if there be so much as a corner of any of all
those so brave and proud fortresses remaining? Is it possible for all Palestine
to be noted for one, whose feasts are not brought down also as low as the
foundations? Has the Kings Throne been polluted and overthrown? Have the
Princes and noble me^ of the country been beaten with cudgels, and dressed like
poor and miserable slaves? Surely, they were the very Buts of the injuries.

Gimel. To be short, since the time that God began to be aduenged of us, he
has not left either great or mighty in our land, whom he has not shaken and
shiuered. For, what so ever was eminent and high, has met with the finger of
his wrath. He has brought upon our heads great armies of enemies, assembled
strange nations, and brought them home even unto our faces and left us unto
their furious cruelty. We have called and cried upon him, and coniured him to
aid his people, but he has beheld us with a threatfull and disdainefull eye,
and turned his back upon us, without giving us answer. And incontine^tly, he
lightened a fire of dissension in the midst of our pr^uince, which winning
from place to place, and compassing all the whole country, has burnt down
even to the very least houill or shed, and devoured all the whole nation.

Daleth. It is the Lords hand which has done this, It is he that is our
principal enemy, and he that has fought against us. We have seen his bow
bent against us, and his arm stretched over our heads. And with this blow,
have all our Citizens been cast to the ground. With this blow, have our most
proud palaces fallen to pieces. Believe me, it is with his own hand that he
has spread upon our land the fire of his indignation, which has thus miserably
consumed us. Unto him alone must we impute our ruin. For, all the forces of
me^ were never able to bring this matter thus about, and to pass.

He. Nay, he has of set purpose put to his hand, has denounced war unto
Israel, and means to prove his forces against him. O, what an hard and
dangerous trial is this! He has cast down headlong from the highest, unto
the lowest, the most pompous and great feast, even unto the bottomless deapths
of poverty and misery, the has shaken with thunder and lightning all her
fortresses; and dismanteled all her Castles. He has humbled, and that with
great shame, both men and women, and changed their pomp and magnificence into
mourning and groaning.

Vau. But will thou know how we have been handled? Imagine then with thy self
that thou see a flock of Goats in a fair Garden set full of young graffes
and impes, bordered and knotted with beautiful flowers, and sown with most
excellent seeds of most dayntie herbs, and in a moment they are all rauened,
broused on, bitte^ to the stumps, and rooted clean up. Or else, imagine thou
see before thee a small houill or shed as we call it, built up with dirt and
spittle, and Thatched with straw, and as soon as any storm arises, it
carries away with it an handful of it this way, and another handful that
way: and the place where it stood, is that, where the least part of the
substance thereof remained. Even so has Syon been dealt withal, for, of all
the great Temples, and brave buildings thereof, can hardly be sound the place
whereon they stood, that a man might say, Here they were once. For now, there
is no more speech of them, then if they had never been. The feasts and
Sabboths, which were there celebrated with so great ceremony and reverence,
are utterly abolished. Yea, both Kings and Bishops were touched with the ^inger
of God, as well as the rest.

Zain. It was a strange thing to see God grow to be thus angry, that he
abhorred his Aulters, had his sacrifices in abomination, to curse that which
he him self had once sanctified, to leave his holy Temple, his very dear and
precious Sanctuary, in the impure and polluted hands of infidels. To lodge this
unclean nation, within this brave, magnificall, and religious accent or Tenor
as it were, within the tents of a Camp. To hear the crying and howling of
their barbarous voices in that place where his service was wont to be solemnly
celebrated, and Hymns song unto his glory.

Het. It may be very well said, that God thought long before to destroy this
City, to see how all things met so iump, for serving to the overthrow thereof
all at once. Thou might say that he had taken measure and order of and for
all things for it, to the end they might join together in this behalf. In so
much as there was nothing wanting, as if it had been fatal, and that
whatsoever we had been able to have done, could no way have turned the hand of
God from us, neither yet defer our misery: for, all felt it, yea, forefelt
it, and we also saw before the coming of our mishap the very walls of our City
as it were weep, and all the face of the City fall away and look sadly, and
bear on her forehead a cloudy and dark wilderness: for, after she had once
received a strange shock, she was straightwayes ouerturned, and there was not
left one stone upon another.

Thet, Oye brave and honorable Gates of Syon, ye have been cast down wide
open, your books and hengils pulled out, your locks broken up, and your iron
bars beaten in pieces, and in v^se deed there was not a gate left, for the
City lay wide open in every place, and men might go in and out at the breaches
where they pleased. But for thy last unhappy farewell, before thou were razed,
thou saw thy Princes and worshipful Citizens pass over thy thresholds led
captives into a strange land. Thou saw thy law abolished, yea even that law
which the Lord thy God had given thee as a guage and earnest penny of his
covenant: so as thou might have judged, that thou had lost his
friendship, when as he took from thee those his pawnes. And besides, he never
revealed him self unto thee, for his spirit was never in thy Prophets, they
that came from him, had no mo visions, by which, he made them understand his
will, he has left us without both counsel, and conduct, like strayed sheep
that go bleating over the fields, without Shepherd or guide.

Iod. And therefore the poor gray haired old men which could no way escape,
finding no more help in their God, and seeing him deaf unto their prayers,
being altogether out of heart, laid themselves down on the ground, and leaning
upon their elbowes, pitifully lamented their misery, and taking ashes in their
hands, cast them upon their heads, praying from the bottom of their hearts,
that their poor and miserable bodies might eftsoons be there changed. They
also were so trussed up in sackcloth, as that there could be nothing seen of
them but their feet, and the place of their grave. They carried also their
hairs on their backs, that they might be either familiarly acquainted with the
custom of their misery, or else make them not to feel it all. And after this
manner bewailed they their calamity. The poor and delicate maidens, and
desolate fatherless children followed them, casting down their eyes,
bedeawing their cheeks, and holding down their heads, even as the Lilly does
when it is sore beaten with rain and wind.

Caph. And in very truth, when I saw this so lamentable a Tragedy, mine eyes
melted into tears, and I had almost lost my sight as it were with extreme
weeping, and mine heart heaued up my body, as if one had rent my bowels out of
my belly, when as I saw, I say, the poor children of Syon in this pitiful
estate, when I saw them lament so bitterly, when I saw the greatest of them
fall into swound^ with very sorrow and grief, and the sucking children
forsaken of their mothers, pine away most miserably.

Lamed. Some crying unto their mothers for the teat, and others calling upon
them for bread. But they had neither milk not bread to give them, and this was
the greatest comfort that the poor mothers had, even to go as far as they
could from their poor children, and turn away their faces from them, until
such time as the famine had consumed them, and they themselves lay screeking
out in other places, dying of very faintnes, as if they had bin wounded to
death. And some of them were of that stomach, as that they could abide to see
their children dye between their arms, and by little and little prolong their
own poor life, dying soon^ after with very sorrow and grief. O, what wounds
felt these poor hearts! and how deep did these blows pierse! verily even into
the place of motherly pity, which is even the very bottom of the heart. And
it is no marvel that they died so suddenly, when as they were at once so
piersed throughout all the vital parts, yea, to the very wounding of the
soul, and the casting of it perforce out of the body.

Mem. O poor and miserable Jerusalem, how shall I depaint and set forth this
thy so great misery? what terms shall I devise, lively to express so strange
and sudden a calamity? Whereunto shall I compare the greatness of thine
affliction? The earth is not able to comprehend it, and therefore the sea must:
for, it is as large and infinite as the sea is, a tormentrous field like to the
sea, a bottomless gulf, and a receptacle for great and hidious monsters, as
the sea is: one mischief drives on another, as the waus of the sea do. But
alas, the sea has sometimes calm winds, and thou o Syon, have in thine
affliction, nothing but storms and tempests, the sea has ports and havens to
come into, and thou billowest continually in travel and pain. O poor
Jerusalem, who shall then be able to save thee, seeing thy misery is greater
then either heaven, or earth, from whence then shall thou find remedy?

Nun. Shall thy Prophets do it, which have so long troubled thine head, which
have delivered unto thee their dreams and old wives tales, and entertained
thee with vanities and leasings, whereas they should have boldly told thee of
thy sins, and so thereby have called thee back unto repentance? But they
imagined and thought upon Anticks, and being sotted, and in love with their
own shadowe^ and presumptuous opinions, undid them selves in all their
discourses and enterprises.

Samech. Behold in what a case thou now stand, o poor and desolate Syon,
for thou receyuest herein, both loss and shame together: for now, all they
that go by, clap their hands, and shake their heads at thee, saying, Is this
that so brave and honorable City, that was so full of all magnificence, and
more full of all delights and pleasures, then all the Cities of the earth
beside?

Phe. There is not one that passes by thee, which has not a cast at thee to
bite and sting thee: and who will not, after their groining manner, thus say,
we will now have it, we will devour it, and nothing shall keep us from it, this
is the day which we have so long looked for, and now is the hour which we have
daily hoped after.

Ain. Behold Jerusalem, the reason why God preserved thee so long, is, because
thou were worthy of it. Thou thoughtest, that his threats had been vain and
frivolous, and now thou see whether he be a liar or not, and whether he be
able to perform that which he promises yea or no. For, he foretold thee, that
if thou obeyedst not his law, that he would destroy thee, and make thee an
heap of stones, and see now if he has mist it. Yea, he has ruined thee
without remission, and made thee a scorn unto thine enemies, and given them
all power and authority over thee.

Sade. But God in the end began to wax weary of their insolency, because they
carried the^ selves too too proudly of their conquest, for after they had
trodden under feet the greatness of Jerusalem, they meant again to deal with
his majesty, and blaspheme his name, and having overthrown the walls of this
holy City, they bragged that they would make war against God him self, and
triumph over the spoils of his Temple. Let their example, o Jerusalem, serve
thy turn, and take occasion to appease God by thy repentance, that he may
turn the punishment which he has prepared for thee, upon thine enemies. Let
thine eyes forthwith burst into bloody tears, and weep continually day and
night, give no rest to thy sighs, let thy pitiful eyes speak for thee, and
looking up still unto heaven, attend thou thine aid from thence. Conjure by
thine humble looks, this divine mercy, that it may ease thy weakness, and
convert his justice, unto the chastising of the insolency of thine enemies.

Coph. Lift up, lift up, I say, both thy body and soul all at once, and before
it be day, so soon as thou shall awake, put thy self in a readiness to pray
unto God, to praise and thank him for that he, by the torments which he has
caused us to abide, has brought thee back into the right way, as men do oxen
with the goade, unto the knowledge of his name, and the acknowledging of thine
iniquities. And before his face, that is to say, when thou have obtained favor
at his hand to look upon thee, and see him to have compassion on thee,
distill thine heart through thine eyes, and melt it all into tears, by thine
earnest repentance, even as the Sun would melt the snow newly fallen, into
water. But if so be that thy tears will not touch him, and bring him to have
compassion of thy misery, lift up thy hands yet at the least unto him, and
beseech him to be contented with thy miseries, and not extend them unto thy
poor innocent children, who are there dispersed, dying of hunger and
weakness, in corners, saying unto him,

Resch. O Lord, if thou have any eyes, behold this pitiful spectacle, and if
thou have any cares, harken unto our prayers, and consider how great our
misery is. Behold how thou have been avenged of us, and see what a spoil thou
have made of us. And in very deed, I must needs confess that we have deserved
it, and I do protest, that we are unworthy of thy mercy, and do also vow, that
we our selves are the causes of our own misery. But what have these poor and
wayling children done, whom thou see screaking out them selves, faintly
drawing their breath? Why should the child, whom hunger and torment had drawn
out, before the time of the mothers womb was ready to deliver it, which is not
as it were so great as a man's hand, be rent in pieces by her, which should
bring it forth, and so be eaten by her, and the same to go down by peece-meale
into the body, out of which it came whole and sound? Surely happy, and twice
happy, are the Tygres and Lions whelps in comparison of these, whose dammes
will adventure their own lives against whatsoever violence shall be offered
their young ones, rather then they would suffer them to take any hurt at all. O
Lord, how can thou abide this horrible dealing? Is it possible that thou,
which art altogether good and gracious, would abide such great impiety to
be wrought? that thou, which art so wise, would allow of such a cruel act?
and that thou, which art Almighty, would suffer such a strange outrage?
Show thy self o Lord, show thy self as thou art: and although for a time thou
art determined to exercise thy severity and justice, yet think upon this
also, that thy mercy must reign and have her course. Content thy self that so
much blood is spilt, for the appeasing of thine heavy wrath. Thou have not
been pleased with the blood of our sheep and oxen alone, but wilt needs also
have thine Aulters covered with the blood of thine own Priests, for they have
sacrificed their owen lives, and thy Prophets likewise have been offered up in
oblation, and yet thou art no whit appeased.

Syn. What more would thou have at out hands? Thou have seen abroad in the
fields, the gray haired and decreped old men and women lie upon the ground,
crying out, groaning, and weeping: thou have seen lying within our walls the
slaughter of our youths: our streets strawed all over with legs and arms: our
rivers running over with blood, and neither sex or yet age spared. Thou have
seen amongst the dead, the young and tender maidens with their hairs sheueled
about their heads, having their breasts lying open with great wounds, out of
which gushed streams of blood, and thou have seen them lying on their backs
with their eyes up unto heaven, beseeching thine aid. And thou, o Lord, have
notwithstanding all this, turned away thine eyes from them, and as if thou
had been a God not to be entreated, have without either pity or mercy, run
through them all with the sword of thy fury.

Tau. Thou have invited all my neighbor nations round about me to come to my
discomfiture, as it were unto a marriage, and to take part of my spoils. Thou
have brought them in such great multitudes, to take possession of me, an to
compass me, as that I can not devise which way to escape the^. Thou thy self
have sounded to the assault, and animated them to my destruction, and stopped
up the passages, for fear that any of us should be saved. And truly, thy will
has been done upon all the children which I have brought up, nay there is not
one of them saved, mine enemies have made a shambles of the^, they have
murdered and massacred them till they cried ho^ withal: and lo, see thou
them weary with killing, and yet carest thou not to see them do it, to let them
to do it, and to cause them do it? Has the remembrance of our sins made thee
forget the remembrance of thy clemency? Have thou created us in thy mercy, to
dest^oy us in thy fury? Be thou then no more Almighty, if thou will not become
both all courteous, and all kind. To be short, be thou no more God, without thou will be likewise pitiful. Ha o Lord, why have thou called us thy people, if
thou will be no more our protector? Why have thou called us thy children, if
thou will not deal with us as a father? Have therefore, o Lord, compassion
upon us, and seeing thy mercy is infinite, ever since before the world was,
cause that thine ire, which was never until our sins were, may take end and
dye with them; and that as our repentance has set us again into the especial
way of obedience and godliness, so also it may bring us again into thy favor.

CHAPTER III.
Aleph. IT is I, even I my self, that has so many times foreseen and
foretold of the afflictions that should light upon poor Jerusalem. It is even
I, that so often have announced her misery, and stirred her up therewith, unto
repentance: but as my spirit of prophecy has done her no good in her
obstinacy, no more has it also done me. For, I my self am overtaken with the
common destruction as well as the rest. For, when the wrath of the living God
comes upon a people, it ordinarily cutteth down the corn with the tares
and darnell, and binds up, as it were in one sheafe, both the good and the
bad. For he has suffered me, since it is so his pleasure, to be led into a dark
place of abode, and has bereaved me both of day and light. I was confined and
limited into a fearful and dark prison, where I saw neither sun nor moon.
I may very well say, that he has borne an hard hand upon me, and that his
grace was turned into an implacable indignation, which had neither ease nor end.

Bet. He made me wax old before my time, my skin wrinkled with sorrow and
grief, my flesh fell away, and my bones payned me, as if they had been broken
in pieces. Now the long continuance in prison, made me thus feeble, for I saw
my self closed up as I had been walled in round about, giving me nothing but
gall to feed on, and torment to exercise my self withal. But understand
thou where they shut me up? verily even in more obscure and dark places, then
those wherein the damned souls are.

Gimel. What? Must I have such wide walls to keep me in? and must I have such
bolts and shackles at my heels, for fear of running away? But alas, God was
not pleased only thus to confine and limit me in such an hidious prison, but
after that the gates and windows were shut, he also closed up his ears when I
called upon him. In so much, as that my soul was captiued as well as my body,
and was deprived of that sweet comfort which she was wonted to have with God
her comforter. And this in very deed was the thing that astonyed me, when as I
saw all my hope cut off at once. For, all my hope and trust was in God, for
when I had lost his favor, I then right well felt that I was in very deed a
prisoner, and that I had utterly lost all my directions, and that I was shut up
within a wall, far stronger then any stone or brazen wall, for all the
prisons in the world are nothing so cruel unto a man, as to be without the
grace and favor of God.

Daleth. For, he that should meet with an hungry Bear in the midst of a
wilderness, could not be in greater danger then my self: nor he that should
meet a roaring Lion hunting after his pray, could not be more afraid then I.
For, I saw my self utterly undone, not knowing what way to take. For, the
wrath of God cut off the way from me in every place, it went out more speedily
then any Lion, and laid on far more stoutly then any Bear, and then what
resistance was I able to make? and what else remained for me, but utterly to
despair? Thou would verily and properly have said, that God had bound and
set me up as a Butt, for him to shoot all the arrows of his fury at me.

He. He drew out of the Treasure of his wrath, as out of a well furnished
Quiver, his arrows of affliction and torment, wherewith he shot me through
and through, brake in sunder my loins, even as a man would break a dogs back
with a great leaue^. O poor miserable broken backed wretch that I am, I am
pulled and strayned joint by joint, and am left a laughing stock unto the
whole world. They made songs of me, which they song every day in the open
streets. God gave me most bitter drink, and made me very drunk with
wormwood wine.

Vau. Alas, what a kind of entertainment call ye this? he made me eat
bread that was half flintie, and my poor teeth were broken with these dayntie
morsels. And me thought I was very well, when as my bread was half knoden with
ashes, and in the end I grew very impatie^t, for my soul could neither abide
the present misery wherein I was, nor yet hope for any better hereafter to
come, and so descryed she her self: so that, the aid which I looked for at
Gods hand was lost in very deed, all my hope was cut off on that side, I must
no more make account of his grace, for he has brought me, since it so likes
him, unto the end both of my miseries, and also of my days.

Zain. Nevertheless, I straightway took my self with the manner, and said.
Ou^ alas poor Jeremiah, can thou tell what thou do? Is this all the
benefit which thou have reaped by thine afflictions? have not thy tears, and
bitterness of thy sorrow, otherwise mollified thine heart? can thou benefit
thy self no whit by the remembrance of thy miseries past, that thou might
be humbled, so as thy humility might entreat the justice of God, and con^ure
his goodness? In the end, I came to this, and in reuoluing all these discourses
in my brain, I began to raise up again mine hope, which the greatness of my
sin had utterly benumbed.

Het. And thus I said within my self, the Lord has yet showed me great favor
and grace, in that he has not utterly cast me off, but has given me my voice
to call upon him for mercy. For, a man shall at last, find always pity and
compassion in him, if so be he will patiently attend his good pleasure and
leisure. The Sun neither rises nor falls, but it sees his mercy. His
goodness spreddeth it self over all the earth, neither is there any corner
thereof which bears not his mark. And furthermore, I say, that the Sun
shines not but to be seen, and to cause to see. O Lord our God, how great is
thy goodness, how assured is thine aid, how certain is thy word, and how
infallible, thy promise? As for my self, I will trust in none but in thee, and
if so be I may have thy grace and favor for my portion, I care for none of the
rest. My soul is fully resolved hereof, and do feel it say unto my
conscience, that she puts all her trust in thee, and lays up her salvation
in thy hands.

Thet. How can she do better? For, God never halted with them which put their
trust in him, for at one time or another, either early or late he has showed
them, that his goodness is infallible, and that the heart which seeks it,
finds it far or near, and that the soul which desires it, obtains in
either soon or late. We must therefore wayt for it patiently, and not murmr
if God come not unto us at the first call, let us hold our peace, and let him
do it, and he will in the end do that which she shall see to be most for his
glory, and most necessary for our salvation. For, great things are not brought
to pass, nor made perfect but with patience and long suffering. And let us not
despair, if so be things fall not out as we would wish at the first chop. For,
he does nothing but for our good, for, as he is Almighty, so is he also only
good, and as he is only good, so is he also only wise: and that, which we
think many times to be most against us, is most profitable for us, and the
wholesomest medecines, are commonly most bitter. Believe me, it is a good thing
for a man a little to bear the yoke in his youth, that is to say, to have
afflictions which may somewhat bow and bend his neck, and abate his pride.

Iod. Let a wise man therefore which feeth him self fallen into any great
calamity, be quiet and say nothing, but patiently bear his yoke, and the more
that his misery increases, let him be the more courageous, and yet
nevertheless, let him lift up his eyes unto heaven, and cry God mercy, and
imagine thus with him self, that it can not be but that he has done amiss,
seeing that the hand of God does so visit him. Let him prostrate him self upon
the ground, and clothe him self with sack, and cast ashes on his head, to see
if he can any way appease the wrath of God, and although he has no hope
thereof, yet let him quiet him self, and let him patiently bear the injuries
that are done him, offer his cheek to him that will strike him, and satisfy
him self as well with reproach, as another man would fill him self with bread.

Coph. And why so? forsooth because he right well knows, that God will in the
end appease his wrath, and that after that men shall have driven him to the
ground, that God will take him up in his lap, and although he let him alone for
once, yet will he in the end have compassion upon him, according to the
greatness and multitude of his mercies. For, God takes no pleasure in seeing
men afflicted, and it is much against his heart to torment them, yea even when
his justice enforces and strayneth him thereto. And he does it for the benefit
of men, because he fears that his ouer-great indulgence, will cast them down
so headlong into sin, as that they shall never be able to recover them selves
any more. For, he corrects them as a good father does, who in chastising his
son, weepeth with grief that he drives him thereunto, not meaning thereby
to do him any hurt, but rather good.

Lamed. It is not, believe me, the purpose of God, to tread men under his feet,
and to triumph over them in their afflictions, much less to hold them fast
bound and posternd as the trophies of his power. Neither is it his meaning to
throw them into misery and poverty, and there to leave them, for he knows
best what they have need of, and judges aright what is most profitable for
them. He is nothing like unto those wicked Judges, which take pleasure in
nothing but in cuffing and boxing of men, and to have occasion to hang and
torture them upon the wheel. He never beholds our sins but with sorrow of
heart, neither hates he any thing so much, as to punish. And so, all the
calamities which he lays upon us, are but as threatening words to advertise us
to run unto his grace, before he enter into judgment with us, to the end
that when he would condemn us, we might plead the pardon and remission of our
sins which he shall have granted us.

Mem. It may be ye will say unto me, that is it then that so torme^teth men,
seeing ye say that it comes not from God, who is altogether good, and that i^
is not he which commands it? Comes not both good and ill from the most
high? Does not he distribute the same unto us in such manner and measure as
pleases him self? O wretched poor man, why murmurest thou against God? Is it
not enough that he has given thee life? and that without him thou should be
nothing? Thou will contest against him, even thou a creature, against thy
creator, thou, a vile sinner, against him that is altogether just, thou, that
art altogether weak, against him that is Almighty.

Nun. Our miseries come not from God, but from our selves, let us examine our
lives, and lay open our actions, and if we search well, we shall find the
cause of them to proceed from our selves. For, the root of them is in our
own hearts, which being infected, corrupt and mar what so ever comes out
of them. Let us therefore cut off sin by the stumps, let us tear and pull in
pieces the heart strings of iniquity, and in stead of this concupiscence, which
buddeth and brings forth naught else but sin and damnation, replant therein
the lively and pure love of God, which flourishes and fructifieth under the
husbandry of his discipline. Let our hearts lift up them selves straight unto
heaven, as noble and upright plants, and put forth their thoughts, as the
branches, and lift up their motions thither, as the flowers or blossoms, and
place their words as leaves, let them bring forth their good works, as their
fruits, and in looking up always unto heaven, make them selves worthy
thereof, and from thence, look for the growing and ripening of them. And as
young plants in the hoatest time of summer (when as the yawning earth chappeth
through dryness) look for rain from above, to be refreshed, even so let us
also in the extremity of our necessity, look and call for the sweet milk of
the grace of God, to bedeaw our lips, and sustain our selves. Now, to the end
that we might obtain this grace, let us lift up our hearts and hands unto him,
bow our knees, and prostrate our selves before his face, in confessing our
sins, and beseeching him of mercy. And let us say unto him, It is true o Lord,
that we have sinned, and do protest, that we have kindled thy wrath against us,
and this is the just occasion for which thou have unto this day, made thy self
inexorable unto our prayers.

Samech. But how inexorable? Forsooth even thus far, that when we have
thought to have lifted up our eyes unto thee, thy fury has bleared them like
thunder and lightning. Thou have beaten and broken us without all pity or
mercy. All the world has miserably forsaken us: we are like unto the loppings
and shreddings of trees, and unto the beesoms of an house, which serve for none
other purpose, but to be cast into the fire. To be short, we have been thrust
out amongst all the nations of the earth, as a matter of opprobie and wrong.

Phe. Which of our enemies, o Lord, is there, that have not had their mouths
open to rail against us? and look which way soever we have turned our selves,
we have always found that which we most eschued. Our ruin and desolation
lies waiting for us like traps and snares, set in the ways where we might
have escaped, and as one, being in an inevitable mischief, I had none other
recourse but unto mine eyes. My tears have trickled down abundantly, and
have bitterly bewailed my mishap, and the misery of my fellow citizens, and of
thee my best beloved Jerusalem.

Ain. And as our miseries never ceased, no more also did mine eyes, so as a man
would have verily said, that through affliction, mine heart was in the press
to squeeze tears out of it, as men squeeze water out of a sponge. Thus did I
lead my life continually, until such time as I had enforced thee o Lord, to
have pity on me, and had with my tears quenched the heat of thine anger. What
other things should I have done, when as I saw before mine eyes so many Cities
destroyed, so many houses burnt, so many Templs cast down, so many men slain,
and so many mayds forced and defloured? And surely, I had had a very steely
heart, if I could have held my self from weeping, and although it had been of
steel, yet had my dolor been strong and able enough to have molten it into
weeping.

Sade. Ha, what a thing is this? they drove us before them, as men drive
cattle. We fled from our enemies, and yet they pursued us, we yielded our selves
unto them, and yet they massacred us, and all this they did, not giving them
any occasion of offense. They led me into the bottom of the arse of a ditch,
and tied a stone about my neck, as they do about a dogs neck when they mean
to drown him. And verily, I had like to have been drowned: for, mine
afflictions had abundantly run over the very crown of mine head, and had
almost choked me and all the help that I had, was to cry out and say, O Lord, I
dye, have mercy upon me.

Coph. I was as it were in a bottomless depth, in the hole of a prison, I knew
not but by my memory, whether there had been either Sky or Sun in the
world, so monstrous dark was the place wherein I was. And yet ceased I not to
call upon thee my Lord my God, and sent up my faith, wither my senses could by
no means reach. And thou never reiectedst me, but receiuedst my prayer, for my
sobs in the end moved thee, and made thee turn again unto thy first
resolution. I felt thee forthwith to assist and help me, yea even at the very
first instant, I say, that I began to pray unto thee: And still me thought, I
heard thee say unto my soul, be of good courage, fear not.

Resch. And so, o Lord, thou can tell, that as great a sinner as I am, that
thou will help and succor me even for thy Christ his sake, and for thy mercy,
promise, and truth sake. For, thou that understand the very bottoms of our
hearts, can truly judge that my soul has been carried away unto sin, by
her senses and concupiscence: but as soon as she felt thy rods, she converted
unto thee her creator and redeemer, for whom alone, as she has had life, so
also aduoweth she the restoration thereof, after sin. For, the question, o
Lord, is of the judging between mine enemies and me, whether it be reasonable
that my misery should serve them for a sport, or whether it be hye time that
they should bear part of the punishment. Judge it, o Lord, thou that know
the righteousness of my cause. For, thou know their thoughts, their cruel
purposes, and the plagues which they have prepared for me. I have mine health
by reason of their inhabilitie, for if they had as great power as they have
will, I had abidden as much as they had been able to have laid upon me.

Syn. Thou have sufficiently seen, o Lord, that they have dealt with me, as
far as they might: and thou know also that there is no injury which they
have not committed and spoken against me. And to be s^ort, thou have very well
known their counsels and thoughts. And I do verily think that there as never
word came out of their lips, wherewith they purposed not to hurt me: and believe
me, their minds were never unoccupied in finding out some cunning devise or
other to hurt me. And consider I beseech thee, whether ever they arose or lay
down, that their talk was not on me: neither had they ever any other matter
to sing on, but to speak evil of me.

Tau. Go to then, o Lord, seeing they have over come thy patience, will thou
not daunt their malice? and since nothing can drive them to repentance, will thou not punish them? And seeing they take so great pleasure in ill doing,
shall they not feel and abide thy displeasure by course? For, once I am sure,
that thou art just, and since thou art so, thou must needs pay them home
according to the works of their own hands. And seeing that through their pride
and arrogancy, they have forsaken thee, to follow their own presumption, thou
must needs leave them in their error, and they, must needs persevere in their
sin: and this hard scale of impenitencie must of force cover over their whole
hearts: and a greater curse can thou not lay upon them then this, then to
blind their minds, and take away from them their senses. For, when thou shall
come at once, in the day of vengeance, with a rod of iron in thine hand, and
break them all in shards like a potters vessel, there shall be nothing under
the heavens, by many thousands of degrees, so miserable as they, for they shall
find no mercy at all, because they them selves were mercylesse: they shall be
poor, and there shall be none to help them: and they shall be afflicted, and
none shall comfort them. In the mean while, o Lord, have thou an eye unto us,
and second our patience, with thine holy mercy: to the end, that as long as
thou shall please to exercise us with the injuries and opprobries of the
wicked, our hearts fail us not, and that our souls may always be able to
lift them selves up unto thee, and look for thine aid, taking the miseries
which it pleases thee to send us, for a trial of our faith, hoping that after
our long patience, thou will crown us as victorious wrastlers, and cause us
triumphantly lead the wicked, against whom we continually wrestle here in
this life.

CHAPTER IIII.
Aleph. I Know, O Lord, right well, that we must yield unto thy will, and that
we do but kick against the prick in complaining of thee. Nevertheless, I can
not keep in my griefs, much less my sighs, when as I behold this strange
desolation. And although my soul bids me hold my peace, yet can not mine
heart keep it self from sighing. For, who, o Lord, would not have pity of
this, to see all the beawtifull golden walls of thy temple bescrabled, and
scraped, all the goodly golden vessels so finely wrought, now melted, and clipped
in pieces, and all the rich Jasper and Porphirie of thy sanctuary, broken,
laid in gobbets, and cast about all the corners of the City; in so much, that
that place which shone as bright as the Sun, is now become like a ruinous
dark dungeon.

Beth. Besides, who would not groan, to see the children of the best houses,
who were so much made of, and so beloved, as that they were accounted as
precious as any gold, to be now cast upon the leystalles like the shards of a
broken pot? Ha, o Lord our God, this was not men's work, but thine own: Yea,
why forsookest thou after this sort thine own most dear and most excellent
workmanship? createdst thou them, to destroy them?

Gimel. O, I would thou had showed as great favor at the least unto the
children of Jerusalem, as thou did unto the most vile and abject creatures
on the earth, for the very young serpents them selves find their dams teats,
who bring them up until such time as they are able to shift for them selves.
Alas, thou have made the women of Jerusalem to become more cruel then
serpents, more savage then the women of Lamia, which have no womanlike shape
no^ condition but the very face, for, their hearts, and the rest of the members
of their bodies are most hidious and fearful. Nay, there is not so little
amity amongst the very Ostridges, who, amongst the fowls of the air, are the
most wild and untameable, as there is in the women of Jerusalem, by reason of
their continual affliction which has so degenerated them.

Daleth. We have seen the young children, that there lay streaking out them
selves, yawning and gaping, with lips as dry as sticks, their tongs cleeuing
unto the rooffes of their mouths with very drought, and sucking wind instead
of milk: for, their mothers at the first offered them their breasts, but they
were so dry, as that they yielded nothing but blood. In so much that the poor
wretches having nothing to breed any juice or moisture in them, dried up,
whereby they fell into a consumption, and so most pitifully languishing and
wearing away, forthwith dyed. And they that were somewhat bigger, ran after
their fathers, and hanging about their heels, cried so lamentably upon them
for bread, as that it would have made the stones in the street to have rent in
sunder with compassion. But what shall I say? verily, they had nothing to give
them, for, all that their fathers could do for the^, was to wish them dead, and
curse the day that ever they begot them, to see them now in so miserable an
estate.

He. O Lord our God, what an alteration of life was this? yea, what an
inexorable cruelty? This is a misery which scourges the whole world, and
whippeth both hye and low. For, they that were wont to live most delicately,
and pamper their bodies, begged in the hye ways, and dyed of honger, yea, and
they that were wonted to lie on their down beds, and had their couerings of
velvet and silk, and troad upon nothing but upon Tapistry, thought them
selves now to be in very good case, if so be they could get a dunghill to lie
upon.

Vau. In so much, that for any thing that I can see, o Lord, thou iudgest our
sins to be more heinous, then the sins of Sodom. For, thou have punished
us more cruelly, then ever thou did them. For, they were overthrown in a
moment, and fire from heaven devoured them presently. And besides, there was
none but thy self that dealt in this, for, she was not committed unto the
mercy of men, left unto the discretion of her enemies, nor yet unto the
injuries that follow the taking of Cities.

Zain. It is a common saying, that there is no right judging of misery but by
way of comparison, and then begins it to touch the quick, when as a man
compares his estate wherein he presently stands, with that wherein he
sometime was. As when I bethink me of the magnificence of those of Nazareth,
and see what miserable caytifes they now are, For, it was a marvelous glorious
thing to see them come unto Jerusalem to the feast, in their robes as white as
the driven snow, so neat and white were their clothes, their faces were
smoothly painted, and glistered like yuorie, and their cheeks as ruddie as any
rose, or rather as ruddie as any rubie.

Het. But they that had seen them now might have said, that they had blown
the cole all their life long at a smythes forge, or had been begrimed for the
nonce, and would have rather taken them for the Lazars of a spittle house then
otherwise, for, their bones bear out their skins, and a man would have said
that their skins had bin like parchme^t wrapped about a dead carrion, and I
verily believe that there is as much moisture in a dry slough or ditch, as was
in any of their bodies.

Thet. Yea, and they which past the edge of the sword, came to a far better
market then they, for their misery was not long, and they were acquitted once
for all. But to dye of cruel famine, and to see and feel one so long a dying,
is a most miserable thing, they felt them selves continually wither away, and
knew not how their strength went from them, without a man would have said, the
earth had consumed it. For they were like unto a plant, whose root was clean
dried up, which in the beginning waxes yellow in the neither parts, and so by
little and little the boughs and arms thereof, dye, and in the end the whole
body dries up, and is good for nothing else, but to be cast into the fire.

Iod. Ye may think, that I have very much spoken of things, and yet they are
but flowers, in respect of the rest of the miseries which necessity has
suggested unto us, and which, if I had an hundredth tongs, I were never able to
express. Shall I tell them, o Lord? Alas, I will not, for then I should
accuse thine ouergreat severity, in delivering out the excessive miseries,
wherein thou have plunged us. Notwithstanding I will do it, I will tell them, o
Lord, to the end thou might at the last have compassion of us, and somewhat
hold back thy reuengefull arm. For, thou have laid it over heauely upon us,
we have seen it, and must we needs see it o Lord? and shall our eyes be our
own still, after we have seen it? We have seen the mothers, I say, through
famine and want, so degenerate from their kind, as that they have dismembered
their own children, pulled them in pieces, boiled them on the fire, and devoured
them with their teeth, to satisfy that cruel famine, wherewith they were
afflicted.

Coph. Ha, o Lord our God, what thoughtest thou to have done with us? meantest
thou to show thy self to be almighty, as well in thy fury, as in thy mercy,
to show, all thine actions to be infinite, to show, that when thou go about
to set thy self to be cruel, that thou art out of all measure cruel, and to
show thy self wheresoever thou passest when thou art in choler, to be a
devouring fire, which sets on fire, raueneth, and consumes, and to be such
a one, as thou have showed thy self to be in visiting poor Syon, even unto the
co^suming the very foundatio^s thereof.

Lamed. O most strange, and most incredible thing, these news have been told
unto other Kings and Princes of the earth, and to all other strange people, but
they could never believe any jot of it. For thus they have said, What? is it
possible, that this holy Ci^ which God has chosen for his dwelling place,
where he has set up his throne on the earth, where he will be worshipped,
whither all nations have carried their offerings, where he has appeared and
answered unto the cries of those that have prayed unto him; the same only, to
be taken, and to fall into the hands of her enemies? Surely, we will never
believe it, nay, we do not believe, that if they found the gates thereof stand
wide open, that they durst once enter into it.

Mem. And ^et for all this, o Lord, it is even so, the poor city is utterly
undone and razed, but after what sort? and wherefore? Forsooth, for the sins o
Lord, of our prophets, and for the sins of our priests, who have shed the
blood of the righteous, even in the midst of Jerusalem.

Nun. They have run up and down in the streats like mad men, and reeled too
and fro', as men drunken with the blood of innocents. They are so polluted and
defiled, as that all the world is a feared to touch them, for fear of being
imbrued with them. Yea and they themselves are ashamed to go into the temple,
for fear of violating it with the blood which comes from their cloths.

Samech. I do assure ye, that the very heathen themselves have been afeard of
them, I say, even they that know not God, but by the light of nature, and have
cried out against them, saying; O ye wicked and cruel caitiues, hence and
away, and defile not the place which is delicated unto your God, and they
again with great indignity despitefully have said, no, no. Believe verily,
that God dwells not amongst such kind of people.

Phe. For, a man may easily see, that their God has forsaken them, has dabd
them in the necks, and set them at division and discord. They have tasted of
nothing so little as of godliness, and therefore they must look no more for any
help from heaven. What? the very ancient servants of God, appointed to serve
at his altar, have not so much as once blushed, in committing most horrible
and great wickednesses, and the elder sort which should have bin the most
modest, have bin most mad? and had no compassion of their equals: neither could
the age of their afflicted companions drive them to any compassion? And seeing
that all humanity is rooted out of their hearts, how is it possible for God to
dwell in them? Believe me, these are no men, but counterfeit Tygres. And
therefore God will deal with them as he deals with brute beasts, and make
one of them pray upon another.

Ain. Ha, o Lord, these people have said rightly, Thou have made us to feel it
in deed: for, after all these our furious pranks, the time of punishment came
upon us: for, our enemies environed us on every side, and whilst we were gaping
and looking for aid from men, and looked so wishlie for them, as that we were
weery of looking, and could see none at all come, we were very foolish in
looking for help from men, to defend us from thee, o Lord, which make war
against us. Alas, what are men's forces able to do against thee? What rampart
in all the whole world is able to defend us against thy wrath?

Sade. We have been taken as Partriges in the cod of a net, thou have driven us
together on a Couie, and afterward coueredst us: we thought to have escaped,
and our feet slid, we are fallen, and are snared in the net: we have assaied
to fleet from one place to another, and we have been always stayed. And why
so? forsooth, because the day was come. We have hastened the punishment by our
perseuering in evil doing, and have in the end enforced God to pronounce the
inevitable judgment of our condemnation against us.

Coph. When God has resolved to do a thing, all things both in heaven and
earth, are ready to execute his will, every thing makes it self ready to
serve his purpose, our enemies are more swift to pursue us, then are the
Eagles, the Stock doves. For, they have followed us even to the tops of the
mountains, and met with us in the deserts. I do verily believe, that if we
were in the deepest dungeons that ever were, that they would there find us out.

Resch. And what shall I say? where found they out our good Josias, even him,
whom thou had anointed to reign over us, and whom we esteemed and made
more of, then of our own lives, who was always in our hearts, and ever in our
mouths? him they took, and led captive as well as the rest. Nothing could
keep him from their hands. I do verily believe, that our sins are the cause
of his taking, and for our sins, did he suffer and abide the same, and
therefore we have said thus unto him for his comfort, We beseech thee, o King,
patiently to bear the affliction which the Lord thy God has sent thee, which
is the shadow and figure of the passion of him, who by his death shall
establish again our former felicity, make us reign over the Gentiles, and
subject all the nations of the world unto our law.

Sin. But in the mean while he is bound and shackled, o most heavy and
lamentable adventure. Laugh thou, yea laugh thou thereat, o thou daughter of
Edome, which dwell in the plains of Arabia, there is enough thereof left
for thee, yea, thou shall drink of the cup when thy turn comes about, and
be made drunk with the bitter wine as well as we. They shall make thee hazard
thy throat, and thou shall believe it, make a good reckoning of our spoils.
There is small joy and comfort in beholding another misery, and that joy and
comfort shall we have, for, we shall see them lament and be sorry for their own
punishment, even to see themselves to be sorry for their own, that laughed at
ours.

Tau. And therefore I beseech thee o poor desolate Syon, begin to take heart
unto thee, for God has eftsoons made an end of that which he had ordained for
thy punishment, he will add no more affliction unto thy dolours past, for he
has done that which he had a desire and mind to do. He will now suffer thee
by little and little to restore thy self, to build again thine houses, to
rere up again thine aulters, and to reedifie thy temples. Fear now no more
any new banishment. For he will come unto thee himself, to reassure thee,
comfort, and strengthen thee. And as for thee o thou daughter of Edome, he will
now come and visit thy turn, and teach thee that he right well knows thy
life and conversation, that he makes a good account of thy sins, and art no
more exempt from his justice then any of the rest: and will make thee have
compassion of thy self, seeing thou will have none of another, and bewail
thine own miseries, because thou have laughed at the miseries of others.

CHAPTER. V.
The prayer of Jeremiah.
IF so be it be true, o Lord, that we are thy people, and thou our God, behold
us a little, and consider the miserable estate wherein we stand. Consider I
say, if there be any opprobrie in the world, wherewith we have not been utterly
overwhelmed. Look not for it within the houses which our fathers built for us,
neither yet in the provinces which thou have destined for us: For, we our
selves are banished, and strange men enjoy our goods. We have unknown heirs,
which have driven us out of our auncesters houses, and sent us away stark
naked.

2 We are like poor orphans, whose fathers are dead, and have none to direct
and guide us.

3 We are like unto mourning widows that have lost their husbands, and
although they are not dead, yet are they in their widowhood, and have double
occasion to weep and bewail the imprisonment and captivity of their
husbands. A servitude, alas most rigorous, yea such a one as is not to be
named, nay more then is able to be imagined. For we are driven to die of
thirst, to buy with our money, the water of our own fountains, and to moisten
our poor dry toungs with cruel thirst. We are enforced to buy again our wood,
stick by stick, and that very dearly, to warm our selves withal, although our
poor members be almost dead with cold.

5 We have borne the collar on our necks, and have been yoked together like
Oxen, we have drawn the waine, and labored like beasts. And although the
cattle travel all day, yet take they their rest at night, but there is no end
of our pains taking, neither do we find any rest in our labors.

6 As for us, we are fold for bread, and yet must we run unto the furthermost
parts of Egypt, to find thos^ that must set us a work. The Assirians thought
to show us great favor, in making us travel day and night for a morsel of
bread. O Lord, what an hard and pitiful slavery is this? how is it possible
that we should thus grievously provoke thee?

7 I believe that thou have put in a catalogue all the sins of our
forefathers, and heaped their sins on our heads. What o Lord? does this
rigor become thy bounty? Shall our forefathers begone hence, and shall their
punishment remain behind them? Shall they be dead, and their sins live? And
shall we bear them and know not why?

8 And if so be that they have offended thee, why have thou given them the land
of promise to possess? why have thou subjected the strange nations unto them?
Is it because that it is our turn, to be the slaves unto the slaves of our
ancestors, and that the world might see us to be captives to those that
heretofore served us.

9 That we should be enforced with strokes to labor for our bread, and to take
pains for others in our own land, having our throats always in danger of
cutting, and dwelling in the wilderness, in stead of our goodly houses?

10 Behold, o Lord, if thou have any eyes, how they have dressed us, behold how
our skins are cut and torn with bearing, they are as full of holes as a sieve,
and there is not an white and free place in them. Famine has made us as lean
as rakes, and they have all to backed and hewed us.

11 If so be amongst all these their insolent dealings; they had spared either
age, sex, or noble and wothy persons, it had been somewhat. But their cruelty
was alike, both unto male, and female, unto young and old, and unto mighty and
base. Was there ever a wife, in Sion, whom they dishonored not, or ever a
maid, whom they forced not? This weak sex, o Lord, powered our before thee
tears and sighs, their imbecility, implored thine Almightinesse, their
inhumane injury, thy divine justice.

12 How handled they thy princes? They hung them up with their own hands, and
the gray haired old men, in whom old age had imprinted a kind of reverence and
majesty, were drawn through the dirt by them, and plucked and torn, as if they
had been amongst cruel Tigers.

13 And what did they with the young children think you? Verily they abused
them with most extreme vnshamfastnesse, and afterward knocked them in the
heads, thinking to extinguish thereby, the remembrance of their abomination,
and choke up one fault with another.

14 Alas, O Lord, what a strange alteration is this? For, when as we think
upon the flourishing estate of our country, and set before us that venerable
assembly of our Senators, placed as Gods on the earth, to deliver oracles unto
men, and by their mouths to form the voice of justice, and call to mind the
magnificence of our iusts and ^ies, and draw out as it were, by line and by
level, our fine and pleasant dances, where all the youth shined and glistered
like the stars in a clear and bright night.

15 O good God, what a grief and sorrow is this? Can we take any pleasure and
delight after all this? Must not we swear a perpetual mourning? and condemn
our eyes unto everlasting tears?

16 Is it possible that we should be able to live after all this? Is our grief
so small, as that it is not sufficient to make us dye? Is our misery so
cruel, as that it has left us eyes so long time to behold it? and condemned
us to be so long while afflicted with so strange a misery? Must we see at our
feet, the pieces of the Crown which fell from our heads, and tread upon the
shiuers of the Scepter which we were wont to carry in our hands? and see our
kingly ornaments pulled in pieces before our faces? Cursed be we, who have
caused by our sins, this desolation, who have enforced the justice of God to
visit us in his (...), and to pour upon us the fire of his wrath and anger.

17 This is it that we must bewail, this must be here the springhead of our
tears, for this is the fountain of all our miseries. These are, yea, these
are our iniquities, which have changed the face of what soever we see to be
before us, which have made our champion grounds deserts, wildernesses of our
Cities, rubbish of our houses, and left nothing unto our selves, but an object
of sadness and dolor, to bleare our eyes with so monstrous a spectacle, and to
kill our hearts with so pitiful thoughts.

18 For who is he that would not put out his eyes with much weeping, and what
is he whose spirit would not be dulled with very dotage, when as he shall see
this beautiful Syon, the Garden of the world, and the eye of all Palestine, to
be made now a Warren of Foxes, where nothing use and haunt but wild beasts?

19 But these, o Lord, are the ^lowes of thine own hand, who make great
things that thou might pull them down, which set up Cities and
Kingdoms upon the face of the earth, as a ladder, to show that they are
nothing but the execrement of thy other more excellent works, and would
have the overthrow of all earthly things, bear witness of thine eternity
and infiniteness. Thou art, o Lord, only eternal, exempt from all course and
change, for no times are able to measure thy greatness, for they serve thee,
and are but as Stewards and dispensers of thy will. Thy Throne is far above
all corruptible things, and there thou sit, making all generations to pass
before thee, one after another, changing when it pleases thee, the enhabitants
of the earth, even as men do their garments.

20 But seeing, o Lord, that thou art thus altogether good, just, and
Almighty, will thou wholly forget thy goodness and loving kindness toward
us, thou that can forget nothing? Will thou which ever ^pest thy word and
promise, forget the righteousness of thy promises which thou have ever made
unto thy chosen people? Will thou let slip the occasion which offers it self
unto thee to have pity on us, and help us, who art not Almighty, but for to
do good, and aid the afflicted? and as soon should thou forget to be God,
as to forget to pardon and forgive. Very well thou have for a time dealt
seuearely with us, and sent us calamities, to make us feel that we have
offended thee, and we have perceived it right well, and we have returned unto
thee with broken hearts, and dolorously groaned before thee, and therefore what
more would thou have of us? What other sacrifice may we offer up unto thee,
then our tears? All the rest is thine, and there is nothing in our disposition
but our wills, and the same we present unto thee washed in our tears, pressed
and squeezed by the sorrow of our repentance, and purged and cleansed with the
zeal of thy lively love, and therefore why reiectest thou us? Why causest thou
us to wax old in our miseries?

21 No no, o Lord, thou art too good and favorable, for so long as we shall
call upon thee with sound hearts, thou will never forsake us. But because, o
Lord, there is no more force nor strength in us, and that our misery has
knocked our spirits in the head, quicken thou them in us, and let all our
affections be set upon thee. And to the end we may continually cleave unto
thee, and not have thy grace disdain to dwell in us, renew our spirits and
lives, and reestablish us again in our first integrity and pureness wherein
thou createdst us.

22 Thou have heretofore reproved us, and in reproving us, have rejected us,
and to say truly, thou had reason so to do, for our too too intolerable
iniquities, had most strongly provoked thee. But since that we have now humbled
our sel^es before thee, and have done what so ever we might bethink us of, to
appease thee with all, receive us to thy grace, pour upon us thy benefits,
embrace us lovingly as lost children, which come again with weeping tears, to
cast them selves into the arms of their father, and mercifully receive our
prayers and vows, for they come not now, o Lord from our lips alone, but even
from the very bottomes of our hearts.

The song of Ezechias, taken out of the Prophecy of Isaiah. Chap. 38.
I Am dried up with very sorrow and grief, and I breath out the very last
sighs of my life, and when my spirit launched out with dolor, me thought it
began to cry out after this manner; What? must I in the midst of my days
descend into the pit? Is the flower of my youth no sooner hatched, but that
death must by and by come to gather me up? And shall my brightest and most
clear shining days be converted into darkness? O, farewell then, farewell,
I say, most sweet light, which hidest thee from mine eyes: for lo, the night
trayneth me into dark and unknown caves and ^ens, and sends me a great way
upon the earth, even unto hell gates.

2 But tell me, I beseech thee, what shall become of the rest of my life?
Whither shall the rest of my years fly? O, vain and deceytfull hope, which
nourishest our minds and purposes, and afterward leauest them in the midst of
their course. I hoped to have had a fair and white old age, and disposed of
mine household, to mitigate the discommodities thereof. I builded palaces,
devised, garden plots, and got riches together, to pleasure my children
withal, and t^ make merry with my friends, and so (...) and easily to spend
the rest of mine age in serving of God, and doing good unto men. But I must now
change my note, and sing another song, and am enforced, o God, to say now unto
thee, I shall see thee no more in the land of the living.

3 I shall never more, I say, lift up mine eyes unto thee amongst the living,
and in turning my face toward the corners of this world, behold and admire the
works of thine hands. Farewell most beautiful and glorious Sun, which have
so often risen far above the waters, to give unto mine eyes the shining
brightness of thy beams. Farewell pale siluery Moon, which by degrees
slakest the shadowy sails of the night, and by degrees markest the measures of
our time, put thy self out when ever thou will, for my sight is put out for
ever seeing of thee. And ye glistering stars of light, which cover by pace
measures all along this azured plain skies and which spread over our weak
bodies your heavenly powers, stay your selves when you will, for, ye have not
any power over the dead, and o ye rich mead^es, wither when ye will your
excellent enameled flowers, and o ye christ^ll, spring heads; dry up when ye
will the beds of running streams, for death comes to feel up mine eyes, and
to bereave me of your pleasant sights: farewell o world: farewell o men, and
farewell what so ever pleasure I have had in this place. And ye my dear
friends, lo here my last farewell, for hers is broken ^e knot of our sweet
friendship. And ye my children, here ends the holy affection wherewith I
have made merry amongst you, and now I am possessed with another care: for,
death seperateth me from you, and you from me.

4 My posterity is carried far away from me, even as the Shepherds Tents
of Scythia, to day here, and to morrow there. O most bitter and grievous
separation, which pluckest the children out of the arms of their father, and
from the sweet bosom of their mother.

5 But why is this so quickly done, and against all hope? I came no sooner to
be set upon the frame, and scarsly was there a bait or stale laid for my life,
but that the workman was ready to put his fleame, or lancing knife into me.
What a kind of alteration, o Lord, is this? In how short a time changes the
face of the world? And truly, are not the evening and morning all alike? For, I
was this morning alive, and lo, I am now amongst the dead. I look but for the
hour, wherein I mean to tread the fields, that I might trusse up bag and
baggage, and away.

6 Why? I was this morning a very gallant, and I was tickled with new and
strange hopes, I proved mine own strength, and me thought I was sound, and
like to live long, and I had a world of devises in mine head, and every minute
my courage increased, and anon death comes upon me like an hungry Lion,
sucketh my blood, shakes my flesh, breaks in sunder my bones, and lo, I am
stretched out, and ready to yield up the last gasp of my life. Alas, I was
this morning some body, and now at night I shall be no body. O God, what a small
distance is there between a man's being, and his not being? And from morning to
night every man goes this broad beaten hye way: yea yea, o Lord, in a moment,
if thou please, a man passes from the one to the other, and goes from life
unto death. The first course of the heavens is very sudden and swift, and
yet is the cutting sithe of death, more sudden, and far nimbler, for thou
geuest us life in breathing on us, an when thou ceasest we dye. Thou look
upon us, and we are borne, and thou turnest away thine eye from us, and by and
by we are dead. We are the bubble of the water which apeareth with the least
moving, and is puffed out with the smallest wind. We are the harvest leaf
hanging now upon the tree, and eftsoone lying flat on the ground; or to speak
more properly, we are the shadow of a dream, which is quite gone so soon as
we awaken. But although, o Lord, death has laid fast hold on me, and that one
of my fecte is already in the grave, yet will I cry out unto thee, and conjure
thee by thine infinite power, and pitifully groan unto thee, in acknowledging
my misery, and thy clemency, will thou not then have compassion upon me?
would thou not somewhat lengthen the thread of my life?

7 The terror, o Lord, of thy great majesty makes me afeard to speak: and
although I feel my misery to press me and pursue me, and that I know my help
is in thee, yet dare I not address my prayer unto thee. But I am like unto the
young new hatched swallow, who being naked and without feathers, is left alone
in the nest, pitifully chirping and looking for her dam. Nay, I am rather like
unto the scarefull Dove alone in her nest, who seeing the Gerfalcon soaring
over her head, hides her self poor miserable Dove, and sits close and
amazed, by reason of the danger she sees her self in. O my God, I know my
misery, and do right well understand mine infirmity. But although o Lord, that
with a submisse voice and trembling words, I implore thy majesty, yet forsake
me not I humbly beseech thee.

8 Is it so long sithence, o Lord, that I turned mine eyes unto thee, to call
upon thy goodness. I am always wonted to lift up mine eyes on hie. O Lord, I
am at a non plus, I am forced, and my misery is gone over mine head* and
therefore I beseech thee to help me, if it may so please thee.

9 But alas, dare I speak unto God, and show my self unto him? Even I, whom
he has created with his own hands, and fashioned by his grace, who in stead
of serving and honoring of him, have given my self unto the pleasures of this
world, and turned the honor which I owe unto him, unto earthly and corruptible
things? what answer will he make me? for if he grow once to be angry, and show
himself unto me in his fury, with that countenance that he shall judge the
guilty, were it not an hundredth times better for me, to have held my peace,
then to speak? But it were better, I say, to be dead and buried, then to have
eyes to see him, and ears to hear him? what then shall I either do or say?

10 I will endeavor my self to appease him before, in presenting him for an
offering, the contrition of mine heart, and bitterness of my soul, and in my
grievous anguish, will call to mind all my years past, lay abroad the
moments of life, run over the number of my sins, that I might cleanse and
purge the sins and transgressions, which defile my conscience, and stir up
Gods wrath against me.

11 And therefore thou shall, o Lord, most assuredly, seeing that I return unto
thee, and bitterly weep for mine offenses, receive my repentance, and through
the heartinesse of my continual prayers which I so effectuously power out unto
thee, appease thy sharp and heavy wrath. Thou shall stay the hand of thy
justice, which would swallow me up. Thou shall turn away the dart of death,
whose point has pierced me even to the very heart. Thou shall lengthen the
course of my years, which my sin has already shortened. And thou shall be
contented that thou have reproved me without utterly undoing me, and made me
to acknowledge and confess my sins, with punishing me for the same.

12 And although I think my self blessed, and as it were, in most
excelcellent peace, yet do I use, nay rather abuse the blessings and riches,
which thou have lent and vouchsafed me: yea, and although, I say, I should be
drunken with the honey sweet pleasures of this world, yet lo a store of
affliction and misery is betide me, which as a most bitter brooks, is come upon
me to drown me and swallow me up. But as I was about to give up the ghost, I
felt thee taking me by the hand, and by a wonderful help, drewest me by
little and little out of that fearful gulf. O Lord, the weight that sunk
me to the bottom, was the weight of my sins. They lay so thick and heavy on
my head, and held me so to the ground, as that I knew not how to lift up mine
eyes unto heaven, much less was I able to hold up my head, and open my mouth,
to utter and show forth thy holy grace and mercy. Thou have broken the chains
of the wicked affections, which held me bound unto these cursed sins. And
nevertheless, because they are ever before thine eyes, and that my repentance
in some measure coniureth thy goodness, and mine iniquity sharpeneth thy
justice, yet have thou cast all mine offenses behind thy back, and turned them
all away from thy presence, to the end, there might be nothing between me and
thy mercy, to hinder me from being environed by the same, as mine only and
assured defense. But how can this be o Lord, that thou, who see all things
both present and to come, which see through the earth, and piercest the
bottomes of our hearts, that in regard of me alone, o Lord, thou becommest
blind, and see not my s^nes which enuiron me round about? O how wonderful
great is thy mercy, which blindfoldeth the eyes of thy Deity, which hides
from thee that every one sees, and makes thee forget that which thou knew,
before such time as it was done.

13 From whence, o Lord, comes this great change and alteration in thee?
whence comes it, that to do me favor, thou put so far from thee, thy
justice which is naturally in thee? I wonder, but yet cannot I tell from whence
this thy so great clemency and loving kindness proceeds. It is, yea it is, o
Lord, because thou will save us whether we will or no, and to draw us as it were
by force, out of that condemnation which we most justly have deserved. For,
thou art the God of glory, jealous of honor and praise, for thou art alone
worthy thereof. Thou know right well that very hell shall praise thee, and
thou know also, o Lord, that death it self, shall set forth thy praise.
Seeing that thou have created all things, to testify thine infinite goodness
and power, shall death which is one of thy works, make an end of thy praise?
Yea, and seeing thou have here placed man, to lift up his eyes unto heaven, and
to behold thy glory, and to sing both with the heart and mouth, a continual
hymn thereof, and if thou take away his life, is not that a breach of one of
the organes of thine honor? And if thou send him to hell, is not that to
defame thy workmanship? Thou have, o Lord, sown by the mouths of thy
Prophets, the truth of thy promises. Shall they that are pent up in the earth
gather together the fruit thereof: shall they whom the death of the body has
closed up the eye liddes, and whom the death of the soul, engendered through
their impenitence, has sealed up the eyes of the spirit, making them go
groping to hell, wandering and stumbling from pain to pain, and from torment
to torment? No, no, it shall be the living man that shall publish and set forth
thy praise, the man, I say, that lives, and that living life which is
maintained by those blessings which thou bestowest upon us here on the earth,
and that life which is nourished by the beholding of thy Deity, and by the
blessings which thou have laid up in heaven. Even so, O Lord, do I at this
day with them, seeing it has pleased thee to convert my miseries into grace
and blessing, and to turn away from me death and dolors which brought them
unto me. Mine infirmity is at this day, seeing it so pleases thee, an
argument of thy glory, and thou workest such miracles in me as are able to
astonish an whole world. To the end, o Lord, that the fathers may tell unto
their children, what the effects of thy mercies are, how sure the effect of thy
promises, and how undoubted, the truth of thy word. And so whenever the last
and hindermost posterity, shall understand what has be fallen unto my person,
it will praise and bless thy holy name.

15 Seeing then my God, that thou have assured me this life, I mean this
earthly and corporal life, grant me also assurance of this heavenly and
divine life, to the end that I being most full of all hope and strength, may
pass the rest of my days, in praising and serving of thee continually. Mine
aboade, o Lord, shall be always at the feet of thine aulters, mine action
shall be a song of thy praise and goodness, and so will go day and night
into thy church, lifting (...) eyes unto thee, and having my thoughts fixed on
thee, I will open ^ine heart, and thou shall fill it with thy grace, that it
may sanctify all mine affections, and so (...) thereby may set forth nothing
more, then thy glory.

FINIS.

