ENGLANDS HOPE, AGAINST IRISH HATE.

Sint Maecenates et non deerunt Marones. AT LONDON, Printed by VV. VV. for
Thomas Heyes. 1600.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORIE.
I Have here presumed for to present you with my ENGLISH HOPE: which, though it
be but roughly handled, yet the Matter is good. If you be pleased to take
delight in it, I shall not only be encouraged to some more serious study, but
be bound (before any other) to make you part thereof. I hope you will not
measure the Matter by the M^^, nor proportion the worth of my labor with the
unworthiness of my self: f^r that were to refuse the Rose, because it has pr^;
or to make light esteem of H^nny, because the L'ee has a (...). I know Mo^us
will look at it narrowly, and say; So (...) a matter is but weakly foll^wed.
Zoylus with his squint eyes, will find some fault with the shape; so shall I
be bitt^n both for matter and method: Well, I care not though They be (...), if
I find you curte^us. If an Ass strike me, I will never lift up my heel: and
if Diogenes be cinicall, I will shake off his (...) with Ari^ipus. Though
Hipanchion could not warble like O^pheus, yet he could pipe. And though
En^i^-wrote a rough style yet he was a (...) and I may term my self a
Writer, thou (...) (...) Inditer. Every one dippes not his (...) with H^mer in
the (...) nor all men's works can^^t (...). How so ever I have pleased (...),
and my trust (...) please you: In which hope, I commit my self, and (...)
Book, to your (...) censure.

ENGLANDS HOPE AGAINST IRIHS HATE.
THE Serpents sly insinuating course,
Is far below most opposite to sight;
His practice deadly, his desire worse:
The fairest green conceales his hidden spite,
Nothing less feared then to shun his force:
Yet nothing sooner does beget mishappe,
For worst insnares the sudden unseen trappe.
Such are those creeping Machauils of late,
Those eues-dropping Heralts listening spies,
That come to prye into our Countries state;
To hide their Treason, Vizards they deuize;
That so they may our purposes relate:
With us they walk, they laugh; with us they eat
Yet in their hearts has Judas taken his seat.
But if their falsehood, Truth has open laid;
If younger wits, their elder shifts have seen:
If their close meeching providence displaide,
And all their councels have confounded been:
If Treachery have Treasons self betraide,
And not our selves do laugh at them alone,
If all miscarry: Why not then Terone?
What venom beast compared to the Toade,
Does better picture malice of the mind?
He stripes so long his rancor to unload,
As coveting an equal pitch to find:
With him whose cloven hoof is scarce so broad
In puffed presumptuous humor glowting sitts,
Until his carcas quite in sunder splitts.
Such is the broody monster Rome contains,
His eyes he strains until they sparkle fire:
His hands are fatted with continual gains:
Each hour against the anointed he conspires
His heart a thousand stratagems retains,
And down his throat he needs will swallow Spain
With France and Italy, to work our pain.
But if this diet have distemper wrought,
If this huge glutton surfettor on hate,
In striving to be greater then he ought:
Has still been crossed with death, a boading fate,
That his disseuered members fly about;
And some of them unto our gates at blown,
For Crows to feed on: Why not then Terone?
The Shepherds dread, the silly flocks annoy,
The ravening Woolfe, is ever known to be
His thirsty stomach slaughter must enjoy,
And naught but blood allayes his tyranny:
The more he has, the more he will destroy,
Nor is it soueraintie, but beastiall lust:
For who knows not the silly Lamb is just?
Such is the stern Iberian Monarchy,
Whose fingers dipped in ill effused gore:
And hearts ybath'd in neighbor Tyranny,
Lift up their snowts into the West for more,
And naught may staunch their bloody penury,
But wrongful massacre of Gods elect,
The more their proud ambition to detect.
But if the sinnewes of their strong assaults,
The just revenger have in sunder cracked:
If so their huge Armados in the vault's,
Of vast Oceans kingdom have been wrackt,
Leaving the world to descant on their faults:
If all their boasting th^ea^es away were blown,
And they suppressed: then why not now TERONE?
If wavering with the reed that shakes his top,
Which way the wind sends foo^th a whistling gale,
Ever be turning with the weather-cocke,
And spread Inconstancies forbidden sail,
Deserve reproach, and every Idiots mock:
What then shall they that like Camelions skins,
Make every object Author of new sins?
Yet such there are, whose rotten inside shows
Their outward painting, but corrupted dross,
Whose faith as often alters, as the glo^e,
For most advantage in deceit so gross:
As for their gain, they wrecke not honors loss;
Now swearing, then recounting what they swore,
One foot on board, the other on the shore.
But if the Plains of Cressy, like a Book
Contain in Carracters their heavy doom:
If Bullen, Turny, Poictiers, pale do look,
To think what has, or may here after come:
If they be witnesses how ill we brook
Dissembling lips, when Truth the goal has won,
Treading on falsehood: Why not then Terone?
The Fox is subtle, and does lie a loofe,
Waiting occasion when to catch his pray;
Seeing, and yet not seen, for his behoof,
As though compassion kept him at a stay,
When (God does know) it is fear does rule the day:
Yet such is his Hypocrisy by kind,
He will be thought to love; to hate inclinde.
Such Cubbes the Northern issue of the air,
Sends forth to bark against the silver Moon
Whose frosen temperate cannot repair
Nor better fame that Region ever won.
It Is hard to wring moist water from a stone:
What has been custom'd, seldom men refrain,
A bone-bred evil, the flesh will still retain.
But if their lurking malice has been impt
Even when their treason, like grassie blads did spring
And down their giant boastings rudly tript,
When circumuention looked for greatest speeding,
And in one day their Army lay a bleeding:
If King and people both were ouer-throwne,
What lets to hope the like against Terone?
As that disease which does attaint the heart,
Is more pernicious fatal then the grief,
Does outwardly afflict some other part;
And is less capeable of swift relief:
So among our enemies the worst and chief,
Is nothing foraine, but the homebred foe;
And such as own dominion undergo.
Whereof four kinds I purpose to relate;
All Viper-like, their mothers womb assayling:
All worse then Hemblocke to their countries state,
Against her life, with meagre death prevailing,
In them fair Peace her miseries bewailing:
That most unnatural outrage filles the air,
And Prince and subject feeds upon despair.
The first, the Traitor Passant I define:
The next, Regardant: Couchant is the third:
Rampant the fourth and last: where I combine
The general Eyrie of this monsterous Bird;
Whereof not one has wickedly been stirde,
That under vengaunce justly did not groan,
To quit rebellion: Why not then Terone?
THE TRAITOR PASSANT.
This whelpe of Typhe, this gross influence,
Of canckring humors having taken hold,
Infecteth all, like to the Pestilence:
Gaddes too and fro, in council shameless boulde;
Persuading here, there tempting with his gold:
That so he may pervert the civil good,
And hurt, for whom he owes his vassaile blood.
Such Inundation of lewd villainy,
Such walking Spirits, such hopping Grasshoppers:
Such Frogs of Egypt, bastard Iesury,
Not long ago did play the damn'de introppers,
With drawing subjects from their fealty:
Sounding our Havens, gathering in munition,
Against some foreign power abrupt-intrusion.
But if Throckmorton, Campion, and the rest,
With those their deadly sins, in number doubling
All agents to the Triple wreathed Beast:
With plodding feet our spring of gladness troubling
Fell in their own mudd errors, groueling:
If their blood paceing trackts, were quickly known,
And they supplanted: Why not then Terone?
THE TRAITOR REGARDANT.
This sqint-ey'd wat, this wry-neckt fugitive,
Labors in like oppugnacie of faith:
Some fatal Organon for to contriue,
Whereby he may procure his Countries scath;
But being smoakt in that he plotted has,
A way he goes; yet flying wrythes his head,
Repyning still at those from whom he is fled.
Such after-malice, such retorting hate,
That grindes the teeth when he is forst'to skud:
Cursing the fortune of well governed state,
When other mischief wholly is withstood,
Ploughing with speed through the Ocean flud:
And having got the seas upon their back,
Look ore their shoulder for their countries wrack
But if their staring expectation fail,
And they have gapt until their laws do ache:
It imprecations nothing do prevail,
Nor else what they in practice under take,
But daily miseries their souls partake:
As not the woeful Westmerland alone,
Repents his treason: Why not then Terone?
THE TRAITOR COVCHANT.
This leering monster lurkes within his den,
Seeming well pleased with any square of life;
Conceales his thoughts from public sight of men:
Gives underhand increase to factious strife,
And in his bosom hides the fatal knife:
With which, when Innovation calls him out,
He ruthles means to cut his countries throat.
This is that lump of vile hypocrisy,
That Ianus-like does bear a double hood.
This is that framer of bace villanic,
By whom all virtuous actions are withstood.
He never does intend his Countries good;
But privately endeavors public smart,
To whom he owes his blood, his life, his heart.
Such are the ruins of decade excess,
The Catelines that some time pestered Rome,
Our newtrall malcontents, of conscience less
Then they which sacrilege their fathers Tomb:
With them Church will-full exiles halting come;
Who are as Spiders among the honny Bees,
Or to pure Wine, the dreg down sinking Lees.
If these gross abiectes, these indifferences,
Respecting almost neither hell nor heaven;
Have been ingaold within their durty styes,
Of all exulting glory quite bereauen:
Not daring once lift up their low-checkt eyes*
If trembling fear have drencht them in their moan,
Leaving them prostrate: Why not then Terone?
THE TRAITOR RAMPANT.
Amain, Amain, thus cries this lusty base,
The top must veil, no other congie serves:
A Cottage? fic, his seat must be a Palace;
To which his brandisht blade, his passage carues,
All, or else none, his worthiness deserves:
And so does eleuate his reaching paw,
With kingly spoil, to gorge Ambitions maw*
Such was the Serpentine late gathered head,
Congeald obedience published in the North*
And such is that in Ireland now bred,
By him whose parentage is little worth:
That has inkindled Majesty's high wroth:
Those only Vermin of their Countries soil,
Contemning Peace, and glorying so in spoil.
But if in all times former memory,
Such, and the like proceedinges have declinde:
If never yet was seen that Treachery,
Against th'annoynted, had his force combinde;
But still deserued-vengaunce was assignde:
If all have learned experience one, by one,
To taste affliction: Why not then Terone?
To over pass the ruins long perfixt,
Inroulde in leaves of grave Antiquity:
The mutual Blood of Traitors late commixt,
Let out by sword of sharp severity,
Give warrantize of laurel victory:
And to these Rebels fearful discipline,
What ty's a subjects duty to resign.
If Rory Oge, a pillor of that crew,
Of glib-pate Karne, and breechles pedigree;
Presuming of a Scepter to ensue:
Fell headlong into cureles misery,
Cursing the time of treading thus awry,
And with his blood powrde forth repentant tears,
To show his sorrow, for mispence of years.
If Feaghe Mackhugh an other outlaw carle,
Stamped of the same rebellious vp-start moulde,
With those, against the regal guidance gnarle:
Not enterprizing what they should, but would;
Received his hire, for being over bold:
And for adulterat Nobility,
Was taught the study of Astronomy.
If stern Mackshaw irregular and bloody,
That likewise gave us base upon the bogges,
In treasons pursuit, obstinate and moody:
Trayning with him a number such like dogs,
Performd at last his currish obsequie,
A haulter destined to his mankind neck,
That gave the lusty gamester mate and check.
If great Oneale, sole great in his abuse,
Rich in the want of true humility:
A pignie punie for the spirits infuse;
And Irus poor for his fidelity,
Was forced to see his naked Treachery,
And stealing forth to find the Figtree-shade,
Could no way shroud the offense his soul had made
If Desmond, that Hereditary Lord,
Lilke Naball vaunting his large Seigniorie;
Thousands depending on his ill drawn Sword,
Paid dearly for his damned perjury:
His House attaint with lasting infamy,
And his cropped head aduanct' in deaths pale throne,
For men to gaze at: Why not then Terone?
If Deity the righteous cause uphold,
And wrong be still the Jewel of his hate:
If band coal black, their Princes love have sold,
And blessed that stick unto their countries state:
If death the one do never subiugate,
But spite of Destiny, his fame shall flourish,
Where as the other eternally shall perish.
If Traitors though immured in walls of Brasie,
And locked in Armor of the strongest proof;
In courage still, are brittle as the Glass,
Their conscience telling how they keep aloof:
If they are but a bubble, smoke, a puff;
Afraid to look upon the rising Sun,
And dreading more, when he his course has run
If every scowlyng cloud aloft does glaunce,
And some times but the shadow of a Tree,
Make them conjecture some sudden wrackfull chance,
Leading their senses to an ecstasy:
If multitudes and many hands they be,
But hearts to guide those hands but few or none:
Who sees not then the downe-fall of Terone?
A Traitors Cognizaunce to know him by;
Are his leawd deeds, and success therein,
To find them such peruse their villainy:
Vnrippe the fardle of their moldy sin:
Describe the puddle they do wallow in,
The heinous theftes, the massacres of ruth,
Wherein they have bin nouzled from their youth.
As they are rude, and strange in their attire,
Portrayted in an Anticke fashion:
So all their dispositions, all desire,
Bewrayes a crooked generation,
Uncivil in their first creation:
Each channel beggar needy will be a Lord,
Although his honors purchase be a cord.
Those civil hearts that stoop to just command,
Allow Religion, and embrace their God:
They seriously with all their might withstand,
Afflicting them with wars deep wounding rod,
Accounting still the number to be od,
Until such Subjects they have overthrown,
As are unfeigned friends unto the Crown.
Banquets wherein their appetites may broach,
The crymsen veins of kin, to quench their thirst:
In rage they wrecke not Natures near approach;
Who is the last, appears to be first.
If he can glory most of deeds accursed:
All their delight is general annoy,
And by most harms acrues their greatest joy.
Fruit Fields ore-runne, and stately Cities burning,
Order disordered, Justice in the wayne:
The current of sweet Peace, to discord turning:
Women lamenting, Children cries in vain:
What ere is got, accounted honest gain.
Blasphemy to God, to Men a scandal,
This Irish Kerne allows, else they condemn all.
Their will submits not to their Princes will.
Obedience is a word, they never heard:
Their hope is for to be magnifide for ill.
The Law's a chastity, a task too hard.
Prayer, and all good exercise, is bard:
And sooner they will lift a hand to kill,
Then once entreat remission of that ill.
Humility is native arrogance,
Retain from time of their Conception.
Three things accompany their essence,
Never retain but by subversion,
Fear, Shame, and Guilt of Consience:
But if it chance they do out-liue their pride,
Then comes Repentance, else they are never tried.
Fear of his Judgment that appears above,
Shame of the worlds reproachful censure,
The minds fell torment that does ever move,
And wrappes the body in perpetual torture:
This is a duty growing every quarter;
Exactes a pention, if it be denide,
Despair assayles the party, so exilde.
And then proceeds the sport as at a feast,
Blindness goes on, and their delight is pressed,
More rude in Nature then the savage Beast:
Observing these three qualities detest,
Impudency, Craft, and Covetousness:
Whereof the first assures them void of shame:
The second wealth: the third a victors name.
When, though the boosome of Affection open,
The eye of Pity smyle them in the face;
The tongue pronounce sweet Liberties free scope:
And Arms expantion offer kind embrace:
Though all resolve to do them any grace;
As what on earth is more to be extolde,
Then Princes love, out valuing finest gold?
Yet they contemn with Aesops Cock the Pearl,
Esteeming more some dirtie Grain rake up,
Then all the blessings gracious Heavens do sell,
To such as thirst to drink of Virtues cup,
Treading the open way that leads to Hell:
Rather then enter at the Narrow gate,
Whose Journey is the blessedness of fate.
Nature besides abhorres this loathed vice,
Opening her womb in monsterous prodigies,
Whose better favors melt away like ice,
Supplanting them with harder penuties.
The earth all barren and forsaken lies,
In stead of wholesome fruits, ranckest of weeds,
Albeit their labor cast in better seeds.
Heaven lowres in Tragic colors of disdain,
His marble face has no relenting motion:
The day expectes her wonted light in vain:
Or if it deigne the world her beams of notion,
It is with fiery meteors perturbation:
The angery Sun refraines to shine on those,
Which are to God and men such brainsicke foes.
The dropsy-sicke infeebled air a bounds
With mystie vapors filling all her parts.
The Siluans their mellodious cheerful soundes,
To dismal Skreech-Owle Elegies conuertes,
Down the black vesture of sad Fos' skyrtes:
A Deluge from her raynie cheeks distilles,
To see the earth replenisht with such diuelles.
Look toward the mountains, and in modest lothing
They shrink aside, not able to endure
The hidious proud unnatural incroching
Of such their pleighted loyalty abjure:
The savage Beasts hold this as most impure;
They follow the just instinction of their kind:
Men are to all lycentiousnes inclind.
The raging Waters of the boisterous Seas,
A little bank of Sand does circle in;
Although it seem naught may his threats appease,
Yet to exceed his bounds, was never seen.
The Sun, the Moon, and Stars, obsequious been:
The Clouds depart not out their station,
But gliding, keep their first creation.
More near to come, peruse the bodies frame,
How all things keep their mutual harmony,
Without the least commotion in the same;
The one disturbing not the others duty,
But love induceing friendly amity,
Causes a sweet consent of many stringes,
That to the whole exceeding comfort bringes.
The Hand gives not direction to the Head,
But serviceable takes his charge from it.
The Foot instructs not the Eye to guide;
But from his beams receives his borrowed light:
Contemplate on the flaming vital bright
Within the Heart; the motive in the Brain:
The natural power the Liver does contain.
Who sees not if the least of these revolt,
Presuming to supplant his neighbor brother
Ruin, destruction does the rest assault;
And that becomes their murder, was their mother;
Moisture contending lively Heat to smother:
Cold conquering Heat, and what was spirit and life,
Quite profligate by such intestine strife.
May droopes not straight, if but in quality
The bodies temperature retain excess?
As say the blood inflamd with Luxury,
Increase beyond his wonted greatness:
What sudden pricking yrksomnes
Nettles the Veins? as but some Delphian art
Rebuke disorder: health is desperate.
Obedience ioynes; Disorder seperates.
Obedience pitties; but Disorder scorns.
Obedience plants vineyardes of sweet Grapes:
Disorder planted with sharp pricking Thorns.
This many cut-throate Ministers subbornes,
That styrres direct Astras golden Helm,
And makes a peaceful want, excluding Realm.
Yet these blind reprobates, Megara's brats,
These Safforne-shirts; these party-pleited lackes:
These wod borne Savages; these dunghill Gnats,
Had rather bear war-armour on their backs,
(So they may practice rapes, and tru-mens wrackes)
Then freely take fair Mercy by the hand,
To glad themselves, and dignifie their land.
But if the end of Theft, be I^bbet-capering.
Or if the Scorpion have a glosing face;
Yet in her tail conceal 2 deadly sting.
If Judgment do a while give Riot place,
And in the end, pay home with deep disgrace.
If Treasons period be confusion,
Quelling the proudest: Why not then Terone?
The valiant hand of ESSEX honored line,
Already once display de great Mars his Banner;
Ringing the ^^owtes of these rebellious Swine,
Within their Confines, teaching them the manner,
Of mylde obedience, humbly to surrender
Their necks to yoke, though fircely they withstood
And know the penalty of sheddyng blood.
A Vollume would but serve a readyer Pen,
Then my slow feathered Muse to celebrate;
The golden Trophies were erected then,
When that renowned Knight vphelde the state,
Sir HENRY SIDNEY gracious by his fate,
A throng of Rebels to his mercy crowched,
And who refused, the scaffold dead avouched.
The Bogges yet tremble, and the leaued Trees
Shake their high branches in memorial
Of his sharp censure, and severe decrees.
The warlike GRAY, whose actions Tragical,
Did likewise curb their minds Imperial,
Gives document; Fitzwilliams, and the rest,
In those proceedinges ever highly blessed.
Preuaylde they then? Our quarrell's still the same,
Our wrong no less; nay rightly understood,
Who sees not merit of far greater blame,
By lavish late expense of English blood:
This joined with the abuse of Traytor-hood,
Incites revenge, deafes-heauen with clamorous cries,
Till they go down, and we in conquest rise.
For this vile ribble rabble vp-start crew,
Misled by Treasons treacherous command;
And that rebellion teacher, that late drew
His Country against their head to lift up hand;
Will know what it is to dwell in wars false band:
And will with cause cry woe, woe; one by one:
VVoe to thee that misled'st us: woe Terone?
(...)
