A TRUE RELATION OF THE VNIVST, CRVELL, AND BARBAROVS PROCEEDINGS against the
ENGLISH at AMBOYNA

In the EAST INDIES, by the Neatherlandish GOVERNOR and COV^CEL there.

Also the copy of a Pamphlet, set forth first in Dutch and then in English, by
some Neatherlander; falsely entitled, A TRVE DECLARATION OF THE News that came
out of the EAST INDIES, with the Pinace called the HARE, which arrived at TEXEL
in June, 1624. Together with an Answer to the same PAMPHLET. By the English
EAST INDIA Company.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by H. Lownes for Nathanael Newberry. 1624.

TO THE READER.
GEntle Reader, thou may (perhaps) wonder why this Relation of the business
of Amboyna, so many months since taken upon the oaths and depositions of our
people that came thence, and presented to his Majesty, and the Lords of his
Privy Council; comes now at last to the Press, and was not either sooner
published, or altogether suppressed. The truth is, the English East India
Company have ever been very tender of the ancient amity and good correspondence
held between this Realm and the Neatherlands, and have been very loath, by
diuulging of the private injuries done them by the Neatherlands East India
Company, to give the least occasion of any distaste or disaffection, which
might happily grow between these two Nations, for the sake and on the behalf of
the two Companies respectively. For which cause, although the wrongs and
injuries, or rather contumelies done unto the English by the Dutch in the
Indies, have been as intolerahle as manifold; as to say nothing of those great
heaps of them buried in the Amnesty of the Treaty of the year 1619. and only
to point at the general heads of those committed since that Treaty, and
grossly contrary to the maine int^nt, and express words and disposition of
the same: first, in the point of hostility; the in^asion of the Islands of
Lantore and Polaroone, then and before in the quiet possession of the English,
in the name of the Crown of England; the taking of the same Islands by force;
the razing and demolishing of the English Forts; the binding of the English
(that had not so much as resisted them) to stakes with ropes about their
necks, throttling them with the same, and flourishing their naked swords about
them, as if they would presently have dispatched them; then taking them so
amazed and bound, and tumbling them down ^he r^cks; and after, carrying their
crushed and bruised carcases away in irons: secondly, in the point of their
usurped sovereignty; their taking upon them the Conusance of controversies
between the English and the Indians, for matters passed far without the
compass of the Neatherlands pretended jurisdiction, and executing their
sentences thereupon by plain force; seizing of the English Companies goods;
fining, imprisoning, stocking, yea, whipping our people at a post in the open
marketplace, and after, washing them with vinegar and salt: thirdly, in point
of partnership with the English; their putting great sums to the common
account, which were disbursed to the private and sole behoof of the Dutch;
giving great Presents for the glory of the Dutch, without consent of the
English, and making war for the enlargement of their own dominion, yet
bringing the charge to the common account; together with infinite other the
like, the particulars whereof would arise to a just and ample volume:
Nevertheless, the English Company from time to time contented themselves with
informing his Majesty and his Honorable Privy Council with their grieuances
privately in writing, to the end that necessary relief and reparation might be
obtained, without publishing any thing to the world in print, thereby to stir
up or breed ill blood between these Nations, which are otherwise tied in so
many reciprocal obligations. And the same course they have hitherto holden
also in this crying business of of Amboyna; only offering to the Manes of
their murdered Contrymen, Factors and Kinsfolks, their effectual endeauours
in a dutiful ^ourse unto his Majesty, for justice for their innocent blood, and
reparation of the honor of the nation herein interessed. In which their
wonted way they were so constant, that they could not be driven out of the same
by the contrary course of some of the other party; that not glutted nor
mollified with the blood of these innocents, nor with all the other sufferings
of the English in the Indies, published a Pamphlet in print in the Netherlands
Language, not only in justification of ^his barbarous butchery, but withal in
disgrace of the English Nation, and the laws and justice of the same. But
behold now further, the same Pamplet, being called-in by an Edict of the States
general, was yet afterward translated and printed in English, and dispersed
even in this Realm it self, to brave and disgrace us at our own doors, and in
our own language. This, no English patience can bear: the blood of the
innocent cries out against it: the honor of the nation suffers in it.
Wherefore the English East India Company is heerby enforced, contrary to their
desire and custom, to have recourse also to the Press, to maintain the
reputation of those their Contrymen and servants, that lost their lives
unjustly; and to acquaint the world with the naked truth of this cause,
hitherto masked, muffled, and obscured in a fog of fictions, concealments, and
crafty conueiances of the Author of this Pamphlet, and his ^lients the Governor
and Council (so termed) of Amboyna.

Having thus acquainted thee, gentle Reader, with the reasons why this
business was no ^ooner published in print, it remains yet further* that thou
be satisfied in an objection or two more, which common reason will suggest unto
thee. Witho^t doubt, reading this discourse, and being a ^rue p^triote of thine
own Country, and a well willer of the Neatherlands (as we presume and wish
t^ee to be), thou will wonder how it comes to pass, that our Nation, which
has not been w^nt to receive such disgraces, should now be so weak and
unprovided in the Indies, as to suffer such indignitie^, and to be so grossly
ouertopped, outraged and vilified there: as also thou will no less admire that
any of the Netherlands nation, which has received such and so many favors and
supports from hence* and held so good and ancient correspondence with our
nation, should now offer and commit such odious co^tumelies on Englishmen,
their partners and allies by special Treaty. Herein thou will soon ^nswer thy
self, if thou but consider the different end and design of the English and
Dutch Companies trading in the Indies, appearing by their several course and
practice respectively. The English being subjects of a peaceable Prince, that
has enough of his own, and is there with content, without affecting of new
acquests; have aimed at nothing in their EastIndia trade, but a lawful and
competent gain by commerce and traffic with the people of those parts. And
although they have in some places builded Forts, and settled some strength, yet
that has not been done by force or violence, against the good will of the
Magistrates or people of the country; but with their desire, consent and good
liking, for the security only of the Trade, and upon the said Magistrate and
peoples voluntary yielding themselves under the obedience and sovereignty of
the Crown of England; their own ancient laws, customs and privileges,
nevertheless reserved. Further, the same English had undoubted confidence in
the Neatherlands Nation there also trading, especially being lately conjoined
with them in the strict alliance and sociall confederacy of the year 1619. and
therefore attended nothing from them, but the offices of good affection and
partnership. Upon these grounds, the English Company made their equipages
answerable only to a course of co^merce and peaceable traffic; not expecting
any hostility, neither from the Indians, nor especially from the Dutch. On the
other side, the Neatherlanders, from the beginning of their trade in the
Indies, not contented with the ordinary course of a fair and free commerce,
invaded diverse Islands, took some Forts, built others, and labored nothing
more, than the conquests of Countries, and the acquiring of new dominion. By
which reason, as they were accordingly provided of shipping, soldiers, and all
warlike provision, as also of places of Rendeuouz upon the shore, and thereby
enabled to wrong the English as well as others: so the cost and charges of
their shipping, Forts, and soldiers, employed upon these designs, rose to
such an height, as was not to be maintained by the trade they had in those
parts. Wherefore, for a supply, they were forced (as some of their own
Countrymen and Adventurers in their Company, affirm) to fish with dry nets,
that is to say, to pick quarrels with the Indians, and so to take their ships,
and make prize of their goods. Which yet not answering their charge and
adventure, they proceeded also to quarrel with the English, to debar them of
trade to free places; and for attempting such trade, to take their ships and
goods. Touching which, when a good order was set by the said treaty of the year
1619. yet they saw, they could not make their reckoning to any purpose, unless
they utterly drove the English out of the trade of those parts; thereby to have
the whole and sole traffic of the commodities of the Iudies in these parts of
Europe, in their own hands; and so to make the price at their pleasure,
sufficient to maintain and promote their conquests, and withal to yield them
an ample benefit of their trading. Which unless they can, by this and the like
worrying and wearying of the English, bring to pass, it is easy to be judged
by those that understand any thing of the course and state of the trade of
those parts, that albeit their returns hereafter should prove as great
continually, as of late extraordinarily they have happened to be, yet the maine
stock and estate of the Company must needs abate and decay by some hundred
thousands of pounds yearly. Thus, Reader, thou see what has made us
unprovided against such accidents, and what now enforces the Dutch East India
Company, or their servants in the Indies, against the common Genius of their
Nation, and the wonted firm affection between these two Nations mutually, thus
to degenerate, and break out into such strange and incredible outrages against
their nearest allies and best-deseruing friends. Farewell.

Hac if a cor^ge. Page 20. l. 1. for three, ^. five. p. 25 l. ^5. dele all, p.
35. l. 3 r. sleeping in the watch. In the Answ. p. 12. l. 11. for him, r. them.
p. 21. l. 30 r. Price and M Towerson;
A TRVE RELATION OF THE LATE VNIVST, CRVELL, AND BARBAROVS PROCEEDINGS AGAINST
the English at AMBOYNA in the East Indies, by the Neatherlanders there, upon a
forged pretense of a Conspiracy of the said English.
AFter the fruitless issue of two several Treaties: the first An. 1613. in
London; and the other Ann. 1615. at the Hage in Holland, touching the
differences between the English and Dutch in the East Indies, at last by a
third Treaty, Anno 1619. in London, there was a full and solemn composition
made of all the said differences, and a fair order set for the future
proceeding of the Supposts of both Companies in the Indies; as well in the
course of their Trade and commerce, as otherwise. Amongst sundry other points,
it was agreed, That in regard of the great bloodshed and cost, pretended to be
bestowed by the Hollanders, in winning of the Trade of the Isles of the
Molluccos, Banda, and Amboyna, from the Spaniards and Portugals, and in
building of Forts for the continual securing of the same, the said Hollanders
therefore should enjoy two third parts of that Trade, and the English the other
third; and the charge of the Forts to be maintained by taxes and impositions,
to be levied upon the Merchandise. Wherefore, in consequence of this agreement,
the English East India Company planted certain Factories for their share of
this Trade; some at the Molluccos, some at Banda, and some at Amboyna. Of the
two former of these, there will be, at this present, small occasion to speak
further; but the last will prove the Scene of a sad Tragedy.

This Amboyna is an Island lying near Seran, of the circuit of forty leagues,
and gives name also to some other small Islands adjacent. It bears Cloves;
for gathering and buying in whereof, the English Company for their part had
planted five several Factories: the head and Rendevouz of all, at the town of
Amboyna; and therein first, Master George Mus^hamp, and afterward Master
Gabriel Towerson, their Agents, with directions over the smaller Factories at
Hitto and Larica upon the same Island, and at Loho and Cambello, upon a point
of their neighboring Island of Seran.

Upon these Islands of Amboyna, and the point of Seran, the Hollanders have
four Forts; the chief of all is at the said town of Amboyna, and is very
strong, having four Points or Bulwarks with their Curtains, and upon each of
these Points six great pieces of Ordnance mounted, most of them of brass. The
one side of this Castle is washed by the Sea, and the other is divided from the
land with a Ditch of four or five fathom broad, very deep, and ever filled
with the Sea. The Garrison of this Castle consists of about 200. Dutch
soldiers, and a Company of free Burgers. Besides these, there is always a
matter of three or four hundred Mardikers (for so they usually call the free
natives) in the town, ready to serve the Castle at an hours warning. There
lie also in the road (for the most part) diverse good Ships of the Hollanders,
as well for the guard of the place by Sea, as for the occasions of traffic:
this being the chief Rendevouz, as well for the Island of Banda, as for the
rest of Amboyna. Here the English lived; not in the Castle, but under
protection thereof, in a house of their own in the town; holding themselves
safe, as well in respect of the ancient bonds of amity between both nations,
as of the strict conjunction made by the late Treaty before mentioned.

They continued here some two years, conuersing and trading together with the
Hollanders, by virtue of the said Treaty. In which time there fell out sundry
differences and debates between them; The English complaining that the
Hollanders did not only lavish away much money in building, and unnecessary
expenses, upon the Forts and otherwise, and bring large and unreasonable
reckonings thereof to the common account; but also did, for their part, pay the
Garrisons with victuals and cloth of Coromandell, which they put off to the
Soldiers at three or four times the value it cost them, yet would not allow
of the English Companies part of the same charge, but only in ready money;
thereby drawing from the English (which ought to pay but one third part) more
than two thirds of the whole true charge. Hereupon, and upon the like
occasions, grew some discontents and disputes, and the complaints were sent to
Iaccatra, in the Island of Iaua Mayor, to the Council of defense of both
Nations there residing: who also, not agreeing upon the points in difference,
sent the same hither over into Europe, to be decided by both Companies here;
or, in default of their agreement, by the Kings Majesty, and the Lords the
States General, according to an Article of the Treaty of the year 1619. on
this behalf. In the mean time, the discontent between the English and the
Dutch, about these and other differences, continued and daily increased, until
at last there was a sword found, to cut in sunder that knot at once, which the
tedious disputes of Amboyna and Iaccatra could not untie. And this was used in
manner as follows.

About the eleventh of February, 1622. Stilo veteri, a Iaponer Soldier of the
Dutch in their Castle of Amboyna, walking in the night upon the wall, came to
the Sentinel (being a Hollander,) and there, amongst other talk, asked him
some questions touching the strength of the Castle, and the people that were
therein. It is here to be noted, that those Iaponers (of whom there is not
thirty in all the Island) did, for the most part, serve the Dutch as Soldiers,
yet were not of their trusty bands, always lodged in the castle, but upon
occasion called out of the town to assist in the Watch. This Iaponer aforesaid,
was for his said conference with the Sentinel, apprehended upon sufpicion of
treason, and put to the Torture. Thereby (as some of the Dutch affirmed) he was
brought to confess himself, and sundry others of his contrymen there, to
have contrived the taking of the Castle. Hereupon, other Iaponers were examined
and tortured, as also a Portugal, the Guardian of the Slaves under the Dutch.
During this examination, which continued three or four days; some of the
Englishmen went to and from the Castle upon their business, saw the
prisoners, heard of their tortures, and of the crime laid to their charge; But
all this while suspected not, that this matter did any whit concern
themselves; having never had any conversation with the Iaponers, nor with the
Portugal aforesaid. At the same time there was one Abel Price, Abel Price
examined.
Surgeon of the English, prisoner in the Castle, for offering in his
drunkenness to set a Dutch-mans house on fire. This fellow the Dutch took,
and showed him some of the Iaponers, whom they had first most grievously
tortured, and told him, they had confessed the English to have been of their
confederacy, for the taking of the Castle; and that if he would not confess
the same, they would use him even as they had done these Iaponers, and worse
also. Having given him the torture, they soon made him confess what ever they
asked him. This was the fifteenth of February, 1622. Stilo veteri. Forthwith,
about nine of the Clock the same morning, they sent for Captain Towerson, and
the rest of the English that were in the Town to come to speak with the
Governor in the Castle: They all went, save one that was left to keep the
house. Being come to the Governor, he told Captain Towerson, that himself
and others of his Nation were accused of a conspiracy to surprise the Castle,
and therefore, until further trial, were to remain prisoners. Instantly also
they attached him that was left at home in the house, took the Merchandise of
the English Company there into their own custody by Inuentory, and seized all
the chests, boxes, books, writings, and other things in the English house.
Captain Towerson was committed to his chamber with a guard of Dutch Soldiers.
Emanuel Tomson was kept prisoner in the Castle; the rest, viz. John Beomont,
Edward Collins, William Webber, Ephraim Ramsey, Timothy Johnson, Iohu Fardo,
and Robert Brown, were sent aboard the Hollanders ships then riding in
harbor, some to one Ship, and some to another, and all made fast in Irons. The
same day also the Governor sent to the two other Factories in the same Island,
to apprehend the rest of the English there. So that Samuel Colson, John Clarke,
George Sharrock, that were found in the Factory at Hitto, and Edward Collins,
William Webber, and John Saddler at Larica, were all brought prisoners to
Amboyna the sixteenth of February. Upon which day also John Powel, John
Wetherall, and Thomas Ladbrook, were apprehended at Cambello, and John Beomont,
William Grigs, and Ephraim Ramsey, at Loho, and brought in Irones to Amboyna
the twentieth of the same month. In the mean time the Governor and Fiscall
went to work with the prisoners that were already there: And first they sent
for John Beomont, and Timothy Johnson, from aboard the Unicorn; who being
come into the Castle, Beomont was left with a guard in the Hall, and Johnson
was taken into another room. Where, by and by, Beomont heard him cry out very
pitifully; then to be quiet for a little while, and then loud again. After
taste of the torture, Abel Price the Surgeon, that first was examined and
tortured (as is above remembered) was brought in to confront and accuse him: But
Johnson not yet confessing any thing, Price was quickly carried out, and
Johnson brought again to the torture; where Beomont heard him sometime cry
aloud, then quiet again, then roar afresh. At last, after he had been about
an hour in this second examination, he was brought forth wailing and
lamenting, all wet, and cruelly burnt in diverse parts of his body, and so laid
aside in a by-place of the Hall, with a soldier to watch him that he should
speak with no body. Then was Emanuell Tomson brought to examination; not in
Emanuel Tomson examined.
the room where Johnson had been, but in another something farther from the
Hall. Yet Beomont being in the Hall, heard him roar most lamentably, and many
times. At last, after an hour and an half spent in torturing him, he was
carried away into another room another way, so that he came not by Beomont,
through the Hall. Next, was Beomont called in, and, being demanded many
things, all which he denied with deep oaths and protestations, was made fast
to be tortured; a cloth tied about his neck, and two men ready with their
Iarres of water to be powered on his head. But yet for this time the Governor
bad loose him, he would spare him a day or two, because he was an old man.
This was all Saturdayes work, the fifteenth of February before said.

Upon Sunday the sixteenth of February, William Webber, Edward Collins, Ephraim
Ramsey, and Robert Brown, were fetched from aboard the Rotterdam, to be
examined. At the same time came Samuel Colson, William Griggs, and John Clarke,
George Sharrock, and John Saddler, from Hitto and Larica, and were immediately,
upon their arrival, brought into the CastleHall.

Robert Brown Tailor was first called in; and being Robert Brown examined.
tormented with water, confessed all in order as the Fiscall asked him. Edward
Collins examined.


Then was Edward Collins called in, and told, that those that were formerly
examined, had confessed him as accessory to the plot of taking the Castle. Which,
when he denied with great oaths and execrations, they made his hands and feet
fast to the Rack, bound a cloth about his throat, ready to be put to the
torture of water. Thus prepared, he prayed to be respited, and he would
confess all. Being let down, he again vowed and protested his innocence;
yet said, that because he knew that they would by torture make him confess
any thing, though never so false, they should do him a great favor, to tell
him what they would have him say, and he would speak it, to avoid the
torture. The Fiscall hereupon said; What, do you mock us? and bad, Up with
him again; and so gave him the torment of water: which he not able long to
endure, prayed to be let down again to his confession. Then he devised a
little with himself, and told them, that about two months and a half
before, himself, Tomson, Johnson, Brown, and Fardo, had plotted, with the
help of the Iaponers, to surprise the Castle. Here he was interrupted by the
Fiscall, and asked, whether Captain Towerson were not of that conspiracy. He
answered, No. You ly, said the Fiscall: did not he call you all to him, and
tell you, that those daily abuses of the Dutch had caused him to think of a
plot, and that he wanted nothing but your consent and secrecy? Then said a
Dutch Merchant, one John Ioost that stood by, Did not you all swear upon a
Bible to be secret to him? Collins answered with great oaths, that he knew
nothing of any such matter. Then they bade make him fast again: whereupon he
then said, All was true that they had spoken. Then the Fiscall asked him,
whether the English in the rest of the Factories, were not consenting to this
plot. He answered, No. The Fiscall then asked him, whether the President of the
English at Iaccatra, or Master Welden Agent in Banda, were not plotters or
privy to this business. Again he answered, no. Then the Fiscall asked him,
by what means the Iaponers should have executed their purpose. Whereat, when
Collins stood staggering and devising of some probable fiction, the Fiscall
help him, and said, Should not two Iaponers have gone to each point of the
Castle, and two to the Governors chamber door; and when the hurly-burly had
bin without, and the Governor coming to see what was the matter, the Iaponers
to have killed him? Here one that stood by, said to the Fiscall, Do not tell
him what he should say, but let him speak of himself. Whereupon the Fiscall,
without attending the answer to his former question; asked what the Iaponers
should have had for their reward. Collins answered, 1000. Ryalls apeece.
Lastly, he asked him, when this plot should have been effected. Whereunto,
although he answered him nothing (not knowing what to devise upon the sudden)
yet he was dismissed, and very glad to come clear of the torture, though with
certain belief that he should die for this his confession.

Next was Samuel Colson brought in, being newly Sam. Colson examined.
arrived from Hitto, as is before touched, and was the same day brought to the
torture, who, for fear of the pain wherewith he saw Collins come out, in
such a case, that his eyes were almost blown out of his head with the torment
of water; chose rather to confess all they asked him: and so was quickly
dismissed, coming out weeping, lamenting, and protesting his innocence.

Then was John Clarke, that came with Colson from ^ohn Clarke. ^xamined.
Hitto, fetched in, and a little after was heard (by the rest that were without
in the Hall) to cry out amain. They tortured him with water and with fire, by
the space of two hours. The manner of his torture (as also of Iohnsons and
Tomsons) was as follows: First they hoised him up by the hands with a cord on
a large door, where they made him fast upon two Staples of Iron; fixed on both
sides, at the top of the door posts, haling his hands one from the other as
wide as they could stretch. Being thus made fast, his feet hung some two foot
from the ground; which also they stretch^ a sunder as far as they would ^etch,
and so made them fast beneath unto the dore-trees on each side. Then they bound
a cloth about his neck and face so close, that little or no water could go by.
That done, they poured the water softly upon his head until the cloth was
full, up to the mouth and nostrills, and somewhat higher; so that he could not
draw breath, but he must withal suck-in the water: which being still continued
to be poured in softly, forced all his inward parts, came out of his nose,
ears, and eyes, and often as it were stifling and choking him, at length took
away his breath, and brought him to a swoune or fainting. Then they took him
quickly down, and made him vomit up the water. Being a little recovered, they
triced him up again, and poured in the water as before, eftsoons taking him
down as he seemed to be stifled. In this manner they handled him three or four
several times with water, till his body was svvolne twice or thrice as
big as before, his cheeks like great bladders, and his eyes staring and
strutting out beyond his forehead: yet all this he bare, without confessing
any thing; insomuch as the Fiscall and tormentors reviled him, saying that he
was a Devil, and no man, or surely was a Witch, at least had some charm about
him, or was enchanted, that he could bear so much. Wherefore they cut off his
hair very short, as supposing he had some witchcraft hidden therein.
Afterward they hoised him up again as before, and then burnt him with lighted
candles in the bottom of his feet, until the fat dropped out the candles; yet
then applied they fresh lights unto him. They burnt him also under the elbowes,
and in the palms of the hands; likewise under the arme-pitts, until his
inwards might evidently be seen. At last, when they saw he could of himself
make no handsome c^nfession, then they led him along with questions of
particular circumstances, by themselves framed. Being thus wearied and overcome
by the torment; he answered, yea to whatsoever they asked: whereby they drew
from him a body of a confession to this effect; to wit, That Captain Towerson
had upon New-yeares day last before, sworn all the English at Amboyna to be
secret and assistant to a plot that he had proiected, with the help of the
Iaponers, to surprise the Castle, and to put the Governor and the rest of the
Dutch to death.

Having thus martyred this poor man, they sent him out by four Blacks; who
carried him between them to a dungeon, where he lay five or six days without
any Surgeon to dress him, until (his flesh being putrified) great Maggots
dropped and crept from him in a most loathsome and noysom manner. Thus they
finished their Sabbath days work; and it growing now dark, sent the rest of
the English (that came that day from Hitto, and till then attended in the Hall)
first to the Smith's shop, where they were laden with Irons, and then to the
same loathsome dungeon where Clarke and the rest were, accompanied with the
poor Iaponers, lying in the putrefaction of their tortures.

The next morning, being Monday the seventeenth of February, old Style, William
Griggs and John Fardo, with certain Iaponers, were brought into the place of
examination.

The Iaponers were first cruelly tortured, to accuse Will. Griggs examined.
Grigs; which at last they did: and Grigs, to avoid the like torture, confessed
all that the Fiscall demanded. John Fardo examined.
By and by the li^e also was done by John Fardo, and other Iaponers: but Fardo
himself endured the torture of water, and at last confessed whatsoever the
Fiscall asked him; and so was sent back to prison.

The same day also John Beomont was brought the second time to the Fiscals
chamber; where one Captain Ioh. Beomont examined 20.
Newport a Dutch-mans son (borne in England) was used as an Interpreter.
William Grigs was also brought-in to accuse him; who said, that when the
consultation for taking of the Castle, was held, then he (the said Beomont)
was present. Beomont denied it with great earnestness and deep oaths. At last
being triced up, and drenched with water till his inwards were ready to crack,
he answered affirmatively to all the Fiscals interrogatories: yet as soon as
he was let down, he clearly demonstrated to Captain Newport, and Johnson a
Dutch Merchant then also present, that these things could not be so.
Nevertheless he was forced to put his hand to his confession, or else he
must to the torture again: which to avoid, he subscribed; and so had a great
iron bolt and two shackles riueted to his legs, and then was carried back to
prison.

After this, George Sharrock, Assistant at Hitto, was George Sharrock examined.
called in question; who, seeing how grievously others were martyred, made his
earnest prayer to God (as since upon his oath he has acknowledged) that he
would suffer him to make some such probable lies against himself, as the Dutch
might believe, and so he might escape the torment. Being brought to the Rack,
the water provided, and the candles lighted, he was by the Governor and Fiscall
examined, and charged with the conspiracy. He fell upon his knees, and
protested his innocence. Then they commanded him to the Rack, and told him;
Unless he would confess, he should be tormented with fire and water to
death, and then should be drawn by the heels to the gallows, and there hanged
up. He still persisting in this his innocence, the Fiscall bade him be hoised
up. Then he craved respite awhile, and told them, that he was at Hitto, and
not in Amboyna, upon Newyeeres day, when the consultation was pretended;
neither had been there since November before, as was well known to sundry of
the Hollanders themselves that resided there also with him. Hereupon, they
commanded him again to the Rack: but he, craving respite as before, now told
them, that he had many times heard John Clark (who was with him at Hitto) say,
That the Dutch had done them many insufferable wrongs, and that he would be
revenged of them: to which end, he had once broken with Captain Towerson of a
brave plot. At which word the Fiscall and the rest were attentive, encouraging
him to proceed. So he went on, saying, that John Clark had entreated Captain
Towerson, that he might go to Maccassar, there to consult and advise with the
Spaniards to come with galleys, and rob the small Factories of Amboyna and
Seran, when no ships were there. Here they asked him, what Captain Towerson
said to this. He answered, that Captain Towerson was very much offended with
Clark for the motion, and from thenceforth could never abide him. Hereupon the
Fiscall called him rogue, and said he prated all from the matter, and should go
to the torture. He craved favor again, and began another tale; to weet, that
upon Twelf-day then last past, John Clark told him at Hitto, that there was a
practice to take the Castle of Amboyna; and asked him, whether he would
consent thereunto. Whereupon he demanded of Clark, whether Captain Towerson
knew of any such matter. Which, Clark affirming; then he (the said Sharrock)
said, that he would do as the rest did. Then the Fiscall asked him, what time
the consultation was held. He answered, In November last. The Fiscall said,
That could not be: for, the consultation was upon New-yeers day. The prisoner
said as before in the beginning, that he had not been in Amboyna since the
first of December, till now that he was brought thither. Why then, quoth the
Fiscall, have you belyed your self? Whereto the prisoner resolutely answered,
that all that he had spoken touching any treason, was false and fained, only
to avoid torment. Then went the Fiscall out into another room to the Governor,
and anon returned, and sent Sharrock unto the prison again. The next day he
was called again, and a writing presented him; wherein was framed a formal
confession of his last conference with Clark at Hitto, touching the plot to
take the Castle of Amboyna: which being read-ouer to him, the Fiscall asked
him, whether it were true, or no. He answered, No. Why then, said the Fiscall,
did you confess it? He answered, For fear of torment. The Fiscall and the
rest in a great rage told him he lied; his mouth had spoken it, and it was
true, and therefore he should subscribe it. Which as soon as he had done, he
fell presently into a great passion, charging them bitterly to be guilty of the
innocent blood of himself and the rest, which they should look to answer for at
the Day of Judgment: withal he grappled with the Fiscall, and would have
stopped him from carrying-in the confession to the Governor, with whom he also
craved to speak; but was instantly laid hold on, and carried away to prison.

William Webber, being next examined, was told by William Webber examined.
the Fiscall, that John Clark had confessed him to have been at Amboyna on
New-yeers day, and sworn to Captain Towerson's plot, etc. All which he
denied, alleging, he was that day at Larica: yet, being brought to the
torture, he then confessed, he had bin at the consultation at Amboyna upon
New-yeers day, with all the rest of the circumstances in order as he was asked.
He also further told them, he had received a letter from John Clark; after
which was a Postscript, excusing his brief writing at that time, for that there
was great business in hand. But one Renier a Dutch Merchant, then standing by,
told the Governor, that upon New-yeers day, the time of this pretended
consultation, Webber and he were merry at Larica. So the Governor left him,
and went out. But the Fiscall held on upon the other point, touching the
Postscript of Clark's Letter, urging him to show the same. Which when he could
not do, though often terrified with the torture, he gave him respite;
promising to save his life, if he would produce that Letter.

Then was Captain Towerson brought to the examination, Gabriel Towerson
^xamined.
and showed what others had confessed of him. He deeply protesting his
innocence, Samuel Colson was brought to confront him: who being told, that
unless he would now make good his former confession against Captain
Towerson, he should to the torture; coldly re-affirmed the same, and so was
sent away. They also brought William Grigs and John Fardo to justify their
former confessions to his face. Captain Towerson seriously charged them, that
as they would answer it at the dreadful day of Judgment, they should speak
nothing but the truth. Both of them instantly fell down upon their knees
before him; praying him for God's sake to forgive them, and saying further
openly before them all, that whatsoever they had formerly confessed, was most
false, and spoken only to avoid torment. With that, the Fiscall and the rest
offered them again to the torture: which they would not endure, but then
affirmed their former confessions to be true.

When Colson (who had accused Captain Towerson before) was required to set his
hand to his confession, he asked the Fiscall, upon whose head he thought the
sin would lie; whether upon his that was constrained to confess what was
false, or upon the constrainers. The Fiscall, after a little pause upon this
question, went in to the Governor then in another room; but anon returning,
told Colson he must subscribe it: which he did; yet withal made this
protestation: Well, quoth he, you make me to accuse my self and others of
that which is as false, as GOD is true: for, God is my witness, I am as innocent
as the child newborn.

Thus have they examined all that belong to the English Company in the
several Factories of the Island of Amboyna.

The one and twentieth of February, they examined Ioh. Wetherall examined.
John Wetherall, Factor at Cambello in the Island of Seran. He confessed, he was
at Amboyna upon New-yeers day: but for the consultation, whereof he was
demanded, he said he knew of no other, but touching certain cloth of the
English Company, that lay in the Factories rotting and worm-eaten; which they
advised together how to put off to the best auail of their Imployers. The
Governor said, they questioned him not about cloth, but of treason: whereof
when he had protested his innocence, he was for that time dismissed. But the
next day he was sent for again, and Captain Towerson brought to confront and
accuse him, having before (it seems) confessed somewhat against him. But M.
Towerson spoke now these words only: Oh, M. Wetherall, M. Wetherall, speak the
truth, and nothing but the truth, as God shall put into your heart. So Captain
Towerson was put out again, and Wetherall brought to the torture of water, with
great threats; if water would not make him confess, fire should. He prayed
them to tell him what he should say, or to write down what they would; he
would subscribe it. They said, he needed no Tutor; they would make him
confess of himself. But when they had triced him up four several times, and
saw he knew not what to say, then they read him other men's confessions, and
asked him from point to point, as they had done others: and he still answered,
Yea to all.

Next, was called in John Powle, Wetherals Assistant John Powle examined.
at Cambello: but he, proving that he was not at Amboyna since November (save
now when he was brought thither prisoner), and being spoken-for by one John
Ioost, who had long been well acquainted with him, was dismissed without
torture.

Then was Thomas Ladbrook, servant to Wetherall Thomas Ladbrook examined.
and Powle at Cambello, brought to be examined: but proving that he was at
Cambello at the time of the pretended consultation, and serving in such
quality, as that he was never acquainted with any of the Letters from the Agent
of Amboyna, he was easily and quickly dismissed.

^phraim Ramsey was also examined upon the whole pretended conspiracy, and
particularly questioned Ephraim Ramsey examined.
concerning Captain Welden the English Agent in Banda: but denying all, and
proving that he was not at Amboyna at New-yeers tide, being also spoken-for by
John Ioost; was dismissed, after he had hanged in the Rack a good while, with
the Irons upon his legs, and the cloth about his mouth.

Lastly, John Saddler, servant to William Grigs at John Saddler examined.
Larica, was examined; and being found to have been absent from Amboyna at
New-yeers tide, when Grigs and others were there, was dismissed.

Thus have we all their Examinations, Tortures, and confessions, being the
work of eight days, from the fifteenth to the three and twentieth of February.
After which, was two days respite before the Sentence. John Powle, being
himself acquitted as beforesaid, went to the prison to visit John Fardo, one of
those that had accused Captain Towerson. To him Fardo religiously protested
his innocence; but especially his sorrow for accusing M. Towerson: for, said
he, the fear of death does nothing dismay me; for, God (I trust) will be
merciful to my soul, according to the innocence of my cause. The only matter
that troubles me, is, that through fear of torment I have accused that honest
and godly man Captain Towerson, who (I think in my conscience) was so upright
and honest toward all men, that he harbored no ill will to any, much less
would attempt any such business as he is accused of. He further said, he
would before his death receive the Sacrament, in acknowledgement that he had
accused Captain Towerson falsely and wrongfully, only through fear of
torment.

The three and twentieth of February, old Style, all the prisoners, as well the
English, as the Portugal and the Iapons, were brought into the great Hall of
the Castle, and there were solemnly condemned, except John Powle, Ephraim
Ramsey, John Saddler, and Thomas Ladbrook, formerly acquitted, as aforesaid.

Captain Towerson having been (during all his imprisonment) kept apart from the
rest, so that none of them could come to speak with him; writ much in his
chamber (as some of the Dutch report), but all was suppressed, save only a
Bill of debt, which one Th. Johnson a free Burgher got of him by favor of his
keepers, for acknowledgement, that the English Company owed him a certain sum
of money. In the end of this Bill he writ these words: Firmed by the Firm of
me Gabriel Towerson now appointed to die, guiltless of any thing that can be
justly laid to my charge. God forgive them their guilt, and receive me to his
mercy. Amen. This Bill being brought to M. Welden the English Agent at Banda,
he paid the money, and receiued-in the acknowledgement.

William Grigs (who had before accused Captain Towerson) writ these words
following in his Tablebook: We, whose names are here specified; John Beomont,
Merchant of Loho, William Grigs, Merchant of Larica, Abel Price, Surgeon of
Amboyna, Robert Brown, Tailor, which do here lie prisoners in the ship
Rotterdam, being apprehended f^r conspiracy, for blowing up the Castle of
Amboyna: we being judged to death this fifth of March, Anno 1622. which we
through torment was constrained to speak, that which we never meant, nor once
imagined; the which we take upon our deaths and salvation, that tortured us
with that extreme torment of fire and water, that flesh and blood could not
endure: and this we take upon our deaths, that they have put us to death
guiltless of our accusation. So therefore we desire, that they that shall
understand this; that our Imployers may understand these wrongs, and that your
selves would have a care to look to your selves: for their intent was to have
brought you in also: they asked concerning you; which if they had tortured us,
we must have confessed you also. And so farewell; written in the dark.

This Table Book was afterward delivered to M. Welden before named, by one that
served the Dutch.

Samuel Colson also, another that accused Captain Towerson, writ as follows
in the waste leaves of a book, wherein were bound together the Common Prayers,
the Psalms, and the Catechism.

In one page thus;

March 5 ^stilo nouo, being Sunday, aboard the Rotterdam, lying in Irons:

Understand that I Samuel Colson, late Factor of Hitto, was apprehended for
suspicion of conspiracy; and for any thing I know, must dye for it: wherefore,
having no better means to make my innocence known, have writ this in this
book, hoping some good Englishmen will see it. I do here upon my salvation, as
I hope by his death and passion to have redemption for my sins, that I am
clear of all such conspiracy; neither do I know any Englishman guilty thereof,
nor other crcature in the world. As this is true: God bless me.

Samuel Colson.


On the other side, upon the first page of the Catechism, is thus written:

IN another leaf you shall understand more, which I have written in this
book.

Samuel Colson.


In the beginning of the Psalms, and in the leaf so referred unto, is thus
written, viz.

THe Iaponers were taken with some villainy, and brought to examination: being
most tyrannously tortured, were asked if the English had any hand in their
plot. Which torture made them say, Yea. Then was Master Tomson, M. Johnson, M.
Collins, John Clark brought to examination, and were burned under the arms,
armepits, the hands, and soles of the feet, with another most ^niserable
torment to drink water; some of them almost tortured to death, and were forced
to confess that which they never knew, by reason of the torment which flesh
and blood is not able to endure. Then were the rest of the Englishmen called
one by one (amongst which I was one) being wished to confess, or else I must
go to torment; withal caused M. Johnson, who was before tormented, to
witness against me, or else he should be tormented again; which rather thea
he would endure, he said, What they would have, he would speak. Then must I
confess that I never knew, or else to go to torment; which rather than I
would suffer, I did confess that, which (as I shall be saved before God
Almighty) is not ^rue; being forced for fear of torment. Then did they make us
witness against Captain Towerson, and at last made Captain Towerson confess:
all being for fear of most cruel torment; for which we must all dye. As I
mean and hope to have pardon for my sins, I know no more than the child
unborn of this business. Written with my own hand the fifth of March, stilo
nouo.

Samuel Colson.


Yet in another page were these words:

I Was borne in New Castle upon Tyne, where I desire this book may come, that
my friends may know of my innocence.

Samuel Colson.


This book he delivered to one that served the Hollanders, who sowed it up in
his bed, and afterward, at his opportunity, delivered it to M. Welden before
named.

All these said writings are yet extant under the hands of the several
parties, well known to their friends here in England.

The six and twentieth of February, stilo veteri, the prisoners were all
brought into the great Hall of the Castle (except Captain Towerson and Emanuel
Tomson) to be prepared for death by the Ministers. The Iaponers now all in
general, as some of them had done before in particular, cried out unto the
English, saying; Oh you Englishmen, where did we ever in our lives eat with
you, talk with you, or (to our remembrance) see you? The English answered, Why
then have you accused us? The poor men, perceiving they were made believe each
had accused others, before they had so done indeed; showed them their tortured
bodies, and said, If a stone were thus burnt, would it not change his nature?
how much more we that are flesh and blood?

Whilst they were all in the Hall, Captain Towerson was brought up into the
place of examination, and two great Iarres of water carried after him. What he
there did or suffered, was unknown to the English without: but it seems they
made him then to vnder-write his confession. After supper, John Powle, Ephraim
Ramsey, Thomas Ladbrook and John Saddler, who were found not-guilty, as
aforesaid, were taken from the rest, and put into another room. By and by also
were Samuel Colson and Edward Collins brought from the rest, into the room
where Emanuel Tomson lay. The Fiscall told them, it was the Governors mercy,
to save one of them three: and it being indifferent to him, which of them were
the man, it was his pleasure they should draw lotts for it. which they did, and
the free lot fell to Edward Collins; who then was carried away to the chamber,
where John Powle and the rest that were quit, lodged: and Samuel Colson back
into the Hall. Anon also John Beomont was brought out of the Hall into the
chamber, where John Powle, and the rest of the acquitted persons were, and was
told, that he was beholding to Peter Johnson the Dutch Merchant of Loho, and to
the Secretary; for they two had begged his life.

So then there remained in the Hall ten of the English; for Captain Towerson
and Emanuel Tomson (as is said before) were kept in several rooms apart from
the rest. To these that remained in the Hall, came the Dutch Ministers, wh^
^lling them how short a time they had to live, admonished and exhorted them to
make their true confessions; for it was a dangerous and desperate thing, to
dissemble at such a time. The English still professed their innocence, and
prayed the Ministers that they might all receive the Sacrament, as a seal of
the forgiveness of their sins; and withal, thereby to confirm their last
profession of their innocence. But this would by no means be granted.
Whereupon Samuel Colson said thus unto the Ministers; You manifest unto us the
danger of dissimulation in this case. But tell us, if we suffer guiltless,
being otherwise also true believers in Christ Jesus, What shall be our reward?
The Preach^r answered, By how much the cleerer you are, so much the more
glorious shall be your resurrection. With that word, Colson started up,
embraced the Preacher, an^ gave him his purse, with such money as he had in
it, saying; Domine, God bless you: tell the Governor, I freely forgive him;
and I entreat you, to exhort him to repent him of this bloody tragedy, wrought
upon us poor innocent souls. Here all the rest of the English signified their
consent to this speech. Then spoke John Fardo to the rest, in presence of the
Ministers, as follows: My contrymen, and brethren, all that are here with
me condemned to dye, I charge you all, as you will answer it at Gods judgment
seat, if any of you be guilty of this matter, whereof we are condemned,
discharge your consciences, and confess the truth for satisfaction of the
world. Hereupon Samuel Colson spoke with a loud voice, saying, According to my
innocence in this Treason, so Lord pardon all the rest of my sins: and if I
be guilty thereof more or less, let me never be partaker of thy heavenly
joys. At which words, every one of the rest cried out, Amen for me, Amen for
me, good Lord. This done, each of them knowing whom he had accused, went one to
another, beging forgiveness for their false accusation, being wrung from them
by the pains or fear of torture. And they all freely forgave one another: for
none had been so falsely accused, but he himself had accused another as
falsely. In particular, George Sharrock (who suruiued to relate this nights
passage) kneeled down to John Clarke, whom he had accused of the tale at
Hitto above mentioned, and craved forgiveness at his hands. Clarke freely
forgave him, saying; How should I look to be forgiven of God, if I should not
forgive you, having my self so falsely accused Captain Towerson, and others?

After this, they spent the rest of the doleful night in prayer, singing of
Psalms, and comforting one another; though the Dutch that guarded them,
offered them wine, bidding them drink Lustick, and drive away the sorrow;
according to the custom of their own Nation in the like case, but contrary to
the nature of the English.

Upon the morrow morning, being the execution day, the 27. of February, stilo
veteri, John Powle being freed (as is above recited) came into the room where
the condemned persons were, and found them at Prayer. They all requested him to
relate unto their friends in England, the innocence of their cause; taking it
upon their deaths, that what they had confessed against themselves and others,
touching this crime, was all false, and forced by fear of torture.

The same morning, William Webber was called again into the Fiscals room, and
there pressed to produce the letter, which he had before confessed to have
received from John Clark, in the Postscript whereof some great business was
intimated. They promised him his life, if he would deliver or produce them that
letter: which although he did not, nor indeed could, yet at last they
pardoned him, and sent him to the rest that were saved, and Sharrock with him.

That morning Emanuel Tomson, understanding that John Beomont was pardoned,
made means to have ^im come and speak with him; which with much a^oe he
obtained. Beomont found him sitting in a chamber, all alone in a most miserable
fashion; the wounds of his torture bound up, but the matter and gore blood
issuing through the Rollers. He took M. Beomont by the hand, and prayed him,
when he ^ame into England, to do his duty to the honoura^le Company his
Masters, to M. Robinson, and to his ^rother Billingsley, and to certify them
of his inno^encie, which (said he) you your self know well e^ough.

All things being prepared for the execution, the condemned were brought forth
of the Hall, along ^y the chamber where the quit and pardoned were; who stood
in the door, to give and take the farewell of their contrymen now going to
execution. Staying a little for this purpose, they prayed and charged those
that were saved, to bear witness to their friends in England of their
innocence, and that they dyed not traitors, but so many Innocents, merely
murdered by the Hollanders, whom they prayed God to forgive their
blood-thirstinesse, and to have mercy upon their own souls.

Being brought into the Yard, their sentence was there read unto them from a
Gallery, and then they were thence carried unto the place of execution, together
with nine Iapons and a Portugal: not the ordinary and short way, but round
about in a long procession, through the town; the way guarded with five
Companies of Soldiers, Dutch and Amboyners, and thronged with the Natives of
the Island, that (upon the summons given the day before by the sound of the
Drum) flocked together to behold this triumph of the Dutch over the English.
Samuel Colson had conceived a prayer in writing, in the end whereof he
protested his innocence: which Prayer he read to his fellows the night before,
and now also at the place of execution deuoutely pronounced the same; then
threw away the paper, which the Governor caused to be brought to him, and
kept it.

Emanuel Tomson told the rest, he did not doubt but GOD would show some sign
of their innocence; and every one of the rest took it severally upon their
death, that they were utterly guiltless; and so one by one with great
cheerfulness, they suffered the fatal stroke.

The Portugal prayed over his Beads very deuoutely, and often kissed the
Cross; swearing thereupon, that he was utterly innocent of this Treason: yet
confessed, that God had justly brought this punishment upon him, for that
having a wife in his own country, he had, by the persuasion of the Dutch
Governor, taken another in that country, his first being yet living.

The Iapons likewise (according to their Religion) shut up their last Act with
the like profession of their innocence. So there suffered ten Englishment,
viz. Captain Gabriel Towerson, the Agent of the English at Amboyna, Samuel
Colson Factor at Hitto, Emanuel Tomson Assistant at Amboyna, Timothy Johnson
Assistant there also, John Wetherall Factor at Cambello, John Clarke Assistant
at Hitto, William Griggs Factor at Larica, John Fardo Steward of the house,
Abel Price Surgeon, and Robert Brown Tailor.

The Portugal also suffered with them. His name was Augustine Perez. He was
borne at Bengala.

The names of the Iaponeses that suffered (if any be curious to know them) were
as follows: all borne at Firando.
Hitieso, Tsiosa, Sinsa.
borne at Nangasacque.
Sidney Migiel, Pedro Congie, Thome Corea.
Quiondayo native of Coraets. Tsabinda of Tsoucketgo. Zanchoe of Fisien.
Besides these, there were two other Iaponeses; the one named Soysimo, borne at
Firando; and the other Sacoube, of the same place: the former of which being
tortured, confessed both to have been privy to this pretended treason, and to
have offered his service unto the English to aid them in taking of the Castle:
and the latter confessed to have had knowledge of the consultation of the other
Iapons to this purpose. But neither of them was executed, nor so much as
condemned. The reason whereof was not known to the English that were saved.

They had prepared a cloth of black Velvet for Captain Towerson*s body to
fall upon; which being stained and defaced with his blood, they afterward put
to the account of the English Company.

At the instant of the execution, there arose a great darkness, with a sudden
and violent gust of wind and tempest; whereby ^wo of the Dutch Ships, riding
in the harbor, were driven from their anchors, and with great labor and
difficulty saved from the rocks. Within a few days after, one William
Dunckin, who had told the Governor, That Robert Brown, the English Tailour,
had a few months before told him, he hoped, that within six months the
English should have as much to do in the Castle of Amboyna, as the Dutch: This
fellow, coming upon an evening to the grave where the English were buried,
being all (save Captain Towerson) in one pit, fell down upon the grave; and
having lien there awhile, rose up again stark mad, and so continued two or
three days together, and then died. Forthwith also fell a new sickness at
Amboyna, which swept away about a thousand people, Dutch and Amboyners: in the
space wherein, there usually died not above thirty at other seasons. These
signs were by the suruiuing English referred to the confident prediction of
Emanuel Tomson aboue-named, and were by the Amboyners interpreted as a token of
the wrath of God for this barbarous tyranny of the Hollanders.

The next day after the execution, being the eight and twentieth of February,
Stilo veteri, was spent in triumph for the new General of the Dutch then
proclaimed, and in public rejoicing for the deliverance from this pretended
treason. The day following, being the first of March, John Beomont, George
Sharrock, Edward Collins, and William Webber, were brought to the Governor; who
told Webber, Beomont and Sharrock, that they were pardoned in honor of the new
General; and Collins, that he was to go to Iaccatra, there to stand to the
favor of the General. So the Governor made them drink wine with him, and
courteously dismissed them; willing them to go and consult with the rest that
were saved, who were fit to be placed in the several Factories. Which done,
and their opinions reported to the Governor, he accordingly commanded each to
his place; adding, that he would thenceforth take upon him the patronage and
government of the English Companies business. To which purpose, he had within
a few days past opened a Letter that came from the English President at
Iaccatra, directed to Captain Towerson; being (as he said) the first English
Letter that ever he intercepted; further saying, that he was glad that he found
by that Letter, that the English at Iaccatra were innocent touching this
business.

The Governor and Fiscall, having thus made an end at Amboyna, dispatched
themselves for Banda: where they made very diligent enquiry against Captain
Welden, the English Agent there; yet found no color nor shadow of guilt to lay
hold on: but at last entertained him with courteous speeches, professing to be
very glad, that they found him, as well as the English at Iaccatra, to be
without suspicion of this treason (as they term it). Captain Welden,
perceiving the disorder and confusion of the English Companies affairs at
Amboyna, by means of this dealing of the Dutch; forthwith hired a Dutch Pinace
at Banda, and passed to Amboyna: where, instantly upon his arrival, he
re-called the Companies servants, sent as before by the Dutch Governor to the
vnderFactories.

Having enquired of them, and the rest that were left at Amboyna, of the whole
proceedings lately passed, he found, by the constant and agreeing relation of
them all, that there was no such treason of the English as was pretended: as
also understanding what strict command the Governor had given to the suruiuing
English, not once to talk or confer with the countrey-people concerning this
bloody business, although the said countrey-people every day reproached them
with treason, and a bloody intention to have massacred the natives, and to have
ripped up the bellies of women with child, and such like stuff; wherewith the
Dutch have possessed the poor Vulgar, to make the English odious unto them.
The said M. Welden therefore finding it to sort neither with the honor nor
profit of the English Company, his Masters, to hold any longer residence in
Amboyna, he took this poor remnant of the English along with him, in the said
hired Pinace, for Iaccatra; whither the Governor had sent John Beomont and
Edward Collins before, as men condemned, and left to the mercy of the General.

When this heavy news of Amboyna came to Iaccatra and the English there, the
President forthwith sent to the General of the Dutch, to know by what
authority the Governor at Amboyna had thus proceeded against the English, and
how he and the rest of the Dutch there at Iaccatra, did approve these
proceedings. The Governor returned for answer, that, The Governor of Amboyna's
authority was derived from that of the Lords States General of the United
Neatherlands; under whom he had lawful jurisdiction both in criminal and
civil causes, within the destrict of Amboyna; further, that such proceeding
was necessary against traitors, such as the English, executed at Amboyna, might
appear to be by their own confessions: a copy whereof he therewith sent to
the English President; who sent the same back to be authentickly certified, but
received it not again.

Hitherto has been recited the bare and naked narration of the progress and
passage of this action, as it is taken out of the depositions of six several
English Factors; whereof four were condemned, and the other two acquitted in
this process of Amboyna: all, since their return in^o England, examined upon
their oaths in the Admiralty Court. The particular of captain Towerson's, as
also of Emanuel Tomson's examinations and answers, are not yet come to light,
by reason that these two were kept apart from all the rest, and each alone by
himself; nor any other of the English suffered to come to speak with them,
except only that short Farewell which John Beomont took of Tomson the morning
before the execution beforementioned. The like obscurity is yet touching the
examinations and answers of diverse of the rest that are executed; being,
during their imprisonment, so strictly looked to and watched by the Dutch, that
they might not talk together, nor mutually relate their miseries.

But because the Hollanders defend their own proceedings by the confessions of
the parties executed, acknowledging severally under their hands, that they were
guilty of the pretended crime; it will not be amiss to recollect and recall
unto this place, as it were unto one sum and total, certain circumstances
dispersed in several parts of this narration; whereby as well the innocence
of the English, as the unlawful proceedings against them, may be manifested.

First therefore it is to be remembered, that the Iapons were apprehended,
examined, and tortured three or four days, before the English were attached;
and the fame as well of their apprehension, as torture, was rife and notorious
in the Town of Amboyna, and the parts adjoining. Tomson, in this interim, and
the very first day of the examination of the Iapon, went to the Castle to ask
leave of the Governor to land some Rice, and brought back the news with him to
the English house of the cruel handling of these poor Iapons. This had been
Item enough to the English, if they had been guilty, to shift for themselves:
whereto also they had ready means by the Corricorries or small Boats of the
Amboyners, which lie along the Strand in great number, wherewith they might
easily have transported themselves to Seran, to Bottoon, or to Maccassar, out
of the reach and jurisdiction of the Dutch: but in that they fled not in this
case, it is a very strong presumption, that they were as little privy to any
treason of their own, as suspicious of any ^eacherous train laid for their
bloods.

In the next place let it be considered, how impossible it was for the English
to atchieue this pretended enterprise.

The Castle of Amboyna is of a very great strength (as is before declared); the
Garrison therein two or three hundred men, besides as many more of their free
Burgers in the Town. What their care and circumsp^ction in all their Forts is,
may appear not only by the quick Alarm they now took at the foolish question
of the poor Iapon, made to the Sentinel aboue-recited; but also by that which
a little before happened at Iaccatra, where one of their soldiers was shot to
death for sleeping on the water.

Durst ten Englishmen (where of not one a soldier) attempt any thing upon such
a strength and vigilance? As for the assistance of the Iapons, they were but
ten neither, and all unarmed as well as the English. For, as at the seizure of
the English house, all the provision therein found was but three swords, two
muskets, and half a pound of powder: so the Iapons (except when they are in
service of the Castle, and there armed by the Dutch) are allowed to have no
Arms, but only a Catanne, a kind of short sword: and it is forbidden to all
the Dutch, upon great penalty, to sell any hand-gum, powder or bullets, to the
Iapons or Amboyners. But let it be imagined, that these twenty persons, English
and Iapons, were so desperate as to adventure the exploit; how should they be
able to master the Dutch in the Castle, or to keep possession when they had
gotten it? what Second had they? There was neither Ship nor Pinace of the
English in the harbor. All the rest of the Iapons in the Island, were not
twenty persons, and not one English more. The nearest of the rest of the
English, were at Banda, forty leagues from Amboyna; and those but nine persons,
all afterward cleared by the Governor and Fiscall themselves from all
suspicion of this pretended crime, as were also the rest of the English at
Iaccatra.

On the other side, besides the strength of the Castle and Town of Amboyna,
the Hollanders have three other strong Castles, well furnished with Soldiers,
in the same Island, and at Cambello near adjoining. They had then also in the
road of Amboyna eight Ships and vessels, namely, the Rotterdam of 1200. tun,
the Unicorn of 300. tun, the Free-mans vessel of 100. tun, the Calck of 60.
tun, Captain Gamals Iunck of 40. the Flute of 300. tun, the Amsterdam of 1400.
tun, and a small Pina^e of about 60. tun; and all these well furnished with men
and munition. It is true, that the Stories do record sundry valiant and hardy
enterprises of the English Nation, and Holland is witness of some of them,
yea, has reaped the fruit of the English resolution; yet no Story, no Legend
scarcely reports any such hardiness, either of the English or others, That
so few persons, so naked of all provisions and supplies, should undertake such
an adventure upon a counterpartie, so well and abundantly fit^d at all points.

But let it be further granted, that they might possibly have overcome all
these difficulties; yet to what end and purpose should they put themselves into
such a ieopardie? They knew well enough, that it was agreed between both
Companies at home, That the Forts in the Indies should remain respectively in
the hands of such, as had possession of them at the date of the Treaty, Ann:
1619. and that the same was ratified by the Kings Majesty, and the Lords
States General. They knew likewise, and all the world takes knowledge, of his
Majesty's religious observation of peace and treaty with all his neighbors,
yea, with all the world: what reward then could these English hope for, of this
their valor and danger? Certainly none other than that which is expressly
provided by the Treaty it self, that is, To be punished as the disturbers of
the common peace and amity of both Nations.

But let these Englishmen have been as foolish in this plot as the Hollanders
will have them; is it also to be imagined, that they were so graceless, as
when they were condemned, and seriously admonish^d by the Ministers to
discharge their consciences; yet then to persist in their dissimulation, being
otherwise of such godly behavior, as to spend the time in Prayer, singing of
Psalms, and spiritual comforting one another, which the Dutch would have had
them bestow in drinking to drive away their sorrow? Let Colsons question to the
Minister be considerd: his and the rests offer and desire to receive the
Sacrament, in sign and token of their innocence; their mutual asking
forgiveness for their like false accusations of one another, forced by the
torture; Tomsons last farewell to Beom^nt; Colsons prayer, and his writing in
his prayer book; Fardo*s farewell to Powl^; also his coniuring exhortation to
his fellows, to discharge their consciences, and all their answers thereunto;
craving Gods mercy or judgment, according to their innocence in this cause;
their general and religious profession of their innocence, to their
contrymen, at their last parting with them, and finally, the sealing of this
profession with their last breath and blood, even in the very article of
death, and in the stroke of the Executioner. What horrible and unexampled
dissimula^ion were this? If some one or more of (...) (...) ^n so fearfully
desperate, yet would not there one amongst ten be found to think of the
judgment to come; whereunto he was then instantly summoned without Essoine,
Bail, or Mainpri^e* What* had they hope of reprieue and life, if they kept
^eir countenance to the last? Yet what hope had Tomson and the rest, when Capt.
Towersons head was off? Nay, what desire had Tomson and Clarke to live, being
so mangled and martyred by the torture? They were executed one by one, and
every one several took it upon his death, tha^ he was guiltless.

Now to blanch and smooth ouerall this rough and barbarous proceeding; it is
here given out, that the Governor and Fiscall found such evidence of the plot,
and dealt so euenly in the process, that they spared not their own people;
having used some of their native Hollanders, partakers of this treason, in the
same manner as they did the English. But this, as well by the relation here
truly and faithfully set down, grounded upon the sworn testimony of six
credible witnesses, as also by other sufficient reports of diverse (lately come
out of those parts) appears to be a mere tale, not once alleged by any in
the Indies in many months after the execution, but only invented and dispersed
here, for a Fucus and a fair color upon the whole cause, and to make the
world believe that the ground of this barbarous and tyrannous proceeding was a
true crime, and not the insatiable covetousness of the Hollanders, by this
cruel treachery to gain the sole Trade of the Molluccos, Banda and Amboyna;
which is already become the event of this bloody process.

To add hereunto by way of aggrauation, will be needless; the fact is so full
of odious and barbarous inhumanitie, executed by Hollanders upon the English
Nation, in a place where both lived under terms of partnership and great
amity, confirmed by a most solemn Treaty.

FINIS.
A TRVE DECLARATION OF the News that came out of the East Indies, with the
Pinace called the HARE, which arrived in TEXEL, in June, 1624. CONCERNING A
Conspiracy discovered in the Island of Amboyna, and the punishment following
thereupon, according to the course of justice, in March 1624. comprehended in a
Letter missiue; AND SENT From a friend in the Low Countries, to a friend of
note in England, for information of him in the truth of those passages.



Printed, anno 1624.

Right Worshipf^ll, and Worthy SIR.
THe great outcryes which have been made in England, upon the last news which
came out of the East Indies, about a certain execution which was done in the
Island of Amboyna, in March, 1623. because we see the great desire that your
Worship has, to keep good correspondence betwixt these two Nations, it has
caused me (beyond my own curiosity) to search and inq^ire after theright and
true beginnings, procedings, and issues of these affairs, upon which this
execution followed. Wherein, I persuade my self, I have attained good
success, by such means as I have used, and by my good acquaintance, so that
(at the last) I am come to the clear light of the matter* partly by the
letters that have been sent home, to the Company here, and declared to the
States General, as also by a particular examination of the process made
against them in Amboyna, before their execution, and sent over hither, in
writing, which at this present has caused me to write this unto your Worship,
that so, the truth may be made known concerning this business in all places,
where your Worthynes, and respect, can, or may bring it to pass; that so your
Worship, and all true well willers (of our Country,) may be no otherwise
thought of than we deserve.

THe very causes and beginnings through which, the Governor, and Council,
established in the name of the United Netherlands, in Amboyna, came into
suspicion, that some thing was plotted against that Province; did first flow
from the great licentiousnes of the Tarnatanes, in Moluque, and Amboyna: Who,
contrary to the contract of alliance, 1606. made with the High and A
Mighty Lords the States, attempted (without our consent, and knowledge) to
make peace with the King of Tidore; as also truce with the Spaniards, (their,
and our ancient adversaries) by which, the B
said Tarnatanes had too much cast off all respect which they, both in regard
of our confederacy, and manifold assistance, did owe to this State. The
Spaniard C
also was master enough at sea, in the Moluque, because the English Merchants
there, in the East Indies, were unwilling to furnish us with ships of war,
toward the common defense; as they were bound to do, according to the treaties
1619. to the number of ten. Through which, the voyages to Mannila, coming to
cease, the enemy traded there, without any interruption, and procured power to
send Gallyes, Ships, and Pynasses to the Moluque, with great succors of
people, and provision; and that because, against the same (through the default
of the English Merchants) there were no Ships of war kept, as there should
have been.

The subjects of the King of Tarnata, begun to D
commit great insolences (otherwise than they were wont) against our Nation,
having outragiously assaulted diverse of us, diverse ways, and also slain some,
and we notwithstanding could not obtain any punishment upon them. And as one
outrage (unpunished) prouokes many more, through hope of the like impunity, or
other considerations; so were the said Tarnatanes of Amboyna, dwelling at Loho,
Cambello, and those near adjoining places proceeded further, and have armed
themselves at Sea, and invaded diverse Islands, and places, standing under the
Netherlands Gou^rnour in Amboyna, spoiling them, and killing our subjects, and
taking others, and carring them away for slaves. And notwithstanding the
instant request of the Netherlands Governor, no satisfaction, or justice, ha^h
followed; but the said Tarnatanes are yet gone further, and openly threatened,
to murder the Dutch Merchants, and to spoil and burn the Logie, or Factory,
which our people have many years there enjoyed: so that our Merchants have
taken out the Dutch goods, to avoid damage: And the Tarnatanes at Loho did
actually set on fire, and ruined the said Netherlands Factory. In the
Manichells (an Island being under the Province of Amboyna) they have in like
manner shortly after, burned the Netherlands Logie, with the loss of all the
goods therein. The Netherlands Governor, that by his presence, and authority,
he might cause such rebellions to cease, and to give order for time to come,
and also to seek satisfaction, and punishment upon the foresaid insolences;
went toward Loho, with a small power of sloopes, and coming there-about, was
met (otherwise than was wont) by a navy of sloopes of the Tarnatanes of Loho,
stronger than his were. These (by their conference) gave him well to know, how
little reverence they gave the Dutch Governor: they braued him, without hope
of restitution of any thing to come; so that, (nothing done) he was feign to
return to his Castle of Amboyna. By reason of these things the said
Tarnatanes became so stout and daring, that they gave out openly, that they
would come, and spoil our subjects by a general army, with above a 100.
Friggetts: with these, they said they would come against Amboyna, to make a
universal spoil of our people; Through which, there came a great fear upon
the Indians, standing under the subjection of the High and Mighty Lords the
States, as also over the Netherlanders.

In the Islands lying far Eastward of Banda, it E
was also said, and the news went currantly there, That the Hollanders were
sure enough quit of the Castle of Amboyna; And at that time there were diverse
secret correspondencies between the Indians, and others, which gave us great
suspicion. By this means the Neatherlands Governor, and Council of Amboyna,
were moved to have special regard, and look narrowly unto all things, seeing
that it might be thence clearly gathered, that something might be plotted
against the State in Amboyna, and that the Indians (of themselves) durst not
offer to undertake any such great design, without some F
great help of some of Europe, either of Spaniards, Portugalls, or some other;
and also, they understood, that they of Loho, Cambello, etc. had great secret G
correspondence with the English Merchants. When things were in such a state in
Amboyna, there came forth, and was wonderfully discovered, in February 1623. a
horrible conspiracy, against the Castle, and Person of the Dutch Governor,
and the whole state of Amboyna: and first, by the apprehension of a certain
Iaponian (a complice of the feate) who at an unseasonable time was often seen
upon the wall of the Castle, where he also ouer-curiously enquired of the most
unskillful and sillyest soldiers, touching, the setting, and change of the
Watch, and what number of people might be in the Castle, and many other
things. Whereupon, in the very act, the said Iaponian was apprehended, and
being examined of many circumstances, he confessed, that the Iaponian
soldiers under our service, had decreed to make themselves Masters of the
Castle, and that they should have set upon this by the help of the English,
who had solicited them unto it; and that he, with all the other Iaponians in
the English house, often times within three months before-going, had conferred
with the English (whom he there named, by their names) touching the manner,
whereby they should bring this treachery to pass. Hereupon it came to pass,
that all the Iaponian soldiers which were in our service, were disarmed, and
imprisoned, and by examination of them all, it appeared plainly, by an orderly
and ioynt-confession, that all the said Iaponians, upon the entreaty of Gabriel
Towerson, and other English Merchants, and Officers agreed to assist the said
English; to betray the Castle, and to give it over into the English Power: and
that Gabriell Towerson, and Abel Price (an English Surgeon) and other
English, dealt often with them, (whom he named by their names) of the way and
means, how they should work it; the said Abel Prince being before imprisoned,
for a foul, and execrable fact, and yet remaining in durance.

And although it appeared sufficiently to the Governor, and Council of
Amboyna, out of the confession of the Iaponians, what the said Gabriel Towerson
with his Merchants, and other accomplices, had before resolved to do, and that
the Council had sufficient information to imprison them all; yet the Gener all
Council would not precipitate, but commanded the said Abel Price, (who was in
prison) to come before the Council, and (after the places, persons, and time,
nominated to him, where, and when he had dealt with the Iaponians, and other
English, about the said treachery) it was also from him well understood, how
he (in the name, and by the command of Gabriell Towerson) and another
Iaponian, (who was then also in prison) had persuaded all the Iaponians, to
consent to this villainy, and that consequently the said Towerson as the first
Author, and all the other English Merchants, (being in the Foreign Cantore
of the Province of Amboyna) had also knowl^dge of the said treachery.

Upon this full and uniform examination, and confession of 12. persons, as
well of the 11. Iaponians, as one English, is the said Gabriell Towerson called
to the Council; and there appearing, the said Towerson called together all his
people unto the Castle, upon the request of the General Council, who were
there taken, and imprisoned, except the said Gabriel Towerson himself, to whom
(upon his request) and in regard of his quality, being chief merchant in
Amboyna, in the name of the English Company; his own house was allotted him
for his safe keeping, and forth coming. And the said prisoners were all
lawfully and orderly examined, and it appeared by them jointly, according to
their own confession (every one having underwritten it with his own hand) as
follows.

Gabriel Towerson, about New years day 1623. H
having with him almost all the English Merchants of the Foreign Cantore in
Amboyna, he assembled them in his chamber, and propounded to them, that he had
something of great moment, to impart unto them, (which he alone could not
effect) under the fidelity of an oath to be taken before, for the keeping
secret thereof, and being trusty therein; saying, It is necessary so to be:
for if the thing should come abroad, which I shall make known unto you, it
will cost all our lives. Whereupon the holy Gospel was produced, upon which,
every one who was present, did swear secrecy and fidelity, as was required.
Then Towerson (after a preface) opened to the conspirators, how he had a way
and means to make himself Master of the Castle of Amboyna. And whereas some
present made it difficult to do, being too I
weak for it: the said Towerson answered, That he had already won to his
purpose the Iaponian soldiers who were in the Castle, and that they should
execute his purpose when the Dutch, who were in the Castle, were in their
greatest weakness: and worst provided, or (unawares) when the Gou^rnour
should be absent, about some exploit; and that they should wait till some
English ships, or ship, were in Amboyna* whose people he might employ in this
attempt; as also, when as all other the English Merchants, and slaves of the
Foreign Cantore in Amboyna, should be sent for to the Castle. And said
further, That he knew how to get men enough, and they should leave this to his
care, and themselves do their best; and that they of Loho should also come to
help him with certain Corrercorens, etc. upon which inducements, all that
were present swore to assist Towerson herin. And concerning the manner of
execution, the said Towerson had prescribed to the Iaponians, which were in the
Castle, that they should send to every point of the Bulwarks, two men, and the
rest in the court attend the Governor, and to murder him, and that at the
sign which should be given by the English, they should make themselves Masters
of every point of the bulwark, and kill all who should resist, and imprison
the rest; and further should take, and divide between themselves, and the
Iaponians, the goods of the Dutch East-Indian Company; except a 1000. rialls of
8. which every Iaponian should have before, and that they should kill the
citizens who would not consent with them, and do them all the mischeife they
could. And touching K
the time, he had not yet certainly set it, but that there should suddenly
be another assembly of the conspirators, when Gabriel Towerson would give
order for all things, and give a sign to the Iaponians, whereupon, when they
showed it, they should begin the work within.

The said Gabriel Towerson being asked in particular, L
what moved him to such a wicked fact; he answered, the desire of Honor, and
Profit. Being further demanded, who should enjoy that Honor and Profit, and
for whom he would have taken the Castle: he answered, That if he did obtain
his desire, he should presently have advertised those of his Nation being in
Batauia, and called for their help, who if they had sent him succor, he
would have kept the Castle for his own company (viz: for the English
East-Indian Company) and if not, he would have held it for himself, and have
endeavored a peace with the Indians, that so by the one means or the other,
he might attain his purpose. After the examination of Towerson was ended, the
M
Dutch Governor in Amboyna vpbrayded Towerson of his cruel intent, and asked,
if this should have been the recompense of the manifould honors, and
kindnesses he had done unto him. Whereto Towerson answered with a deep sigh,
Oh, if it were to be begun, it should not be done. This voluntary confession,
and penitent acknowledgement, with much sorrow, was made the 9. of March, being
the day when the execution should have been done; but the examination of
Towerson was ended the 18. of February, so many days before. This is the
substance of the confessions of 10. Iaponians, of 14. En^lish* and of a
Neatherlandish Merinho, or Captain of the Slaves; who all confirmed these
their confessions with their own hands.

What crime this intended prodition was, is hence very manifest, and undoubted:
what punishment is due to treachery, according to the law and customs of all
nations, is also well known: no true Christian man will patronage any such
horrible attempt, but will adiudge it worthy of death, as it was determined
upon the accomplices of this conspiracy, according to order of justice, as there
in Amboyna it is exercised (according to desert) by the Governor and Council,
in the name of the High and Mighty Lords, the States.

Here you have (Sir) the very substance of the truth, both of the fact and
punishment; other than which, many things are spread abroad in England, but
upon what pretense, or intendement, I know not; let the matter it self speak
for it self.

The first point, which is objected against this justice Object. 1.
done in Amboyna, is concerning the proceedings; N
which are said to be holden without formality, and with extremity, against
these conspirators: Your Worship (and each reasonable man) knows, that every
land has their laws, and ordinances, and their particular manner of
proceedings, as well in Civil as in Criminal causes. England has hers.
France, Spain, Dutchland, Netherland, and all other Kingdoms and Governments
have also theirs, which are just and lawful to every one in their dominion; so
that, when any man will judge of the equity or injustice of a proceeding used
in any land, he must examine the same according to the laws and customs of
that Kingdom or dominion, where the justice and proceedings were holden. These
proceedings were holden by the Netherlandish Governor, in the name of the
illustirons Lords the States, having supreme power, many years since in the
Yles of Amboyna, which were conquered (in the name of the said Lords the Staes)
from the Spaniards, or Portugalls, who held that Castle in the name of the King
of Spain, our hereditary enemy; therefore they are now possessed in the name
of the Lords the States, and are under their dominion, by a just and lawful
title of war, according to the law of Nations. There, (among other things)
justice is administered according to the laws of the Netherlands, in that
manner as was used in the proceedings against these conspirators. I know that
the laws of England are diverse from ours in criminal cases, yea, and from all
the Nations in Europe: howbeit therefore, no man has any ground of reason to
say, that the proceedings of the English Judges (holden in England) against
delinquents, are not legitimate, though the said English proceedings do vary
in the manner, from the proceedings of France, Spain etc. where other customs
are: for that is lawful, which agrees with the laws of that land where the
fact is committed. Now then the Iaponian soldiers, being in the service of the
Netherlands Company in Amboyna, are discovered to have conspired against the
Castle and the Gou^rnment there, under whose oath and pay they were, they were
apprehended, and examined, and convicted of the said conspiracy. This
proceeding is lawful, and touches no man, because the said Iaponians knew no
other Master than the Netherlanders, under whose oath, service, and pay they
stand. All these Iaponian conspirators with the said Merincho, a Captain of
the Netherlands Slaves, confessed with one mo^th, that they were moved and
induced to this conspiracy, by the English Merchants resident in Amboyna, whose
names they named. Now, not only the right of Netherland, but of England, and of
the whole world requires, that the authors, abettors and accomplices of murder
and treason, should be punished with death; whereto, according to the common
laws, as also the particular laws of eue^y Kingdom or Dominion, the
suspected persons first, and before all, should be imprisoned* not only for
preventing the effect of their evil purpose, but that they might also receive
their deserved punishment: which apprehe^sious, could not ( in that place) be
done by any other man, than by the command of the Netherlands Governor, to whom
it belongs to take care, to see every act concerning supreme power, to be
there observed, and specially (al other reasons O
ceasing) the highest English Officers there, could not apprehend these English
conspirators, because all the chief of the English Merchants in Amboyna were
themselves of the conspiracy, and accomplices of the fact, upon which the
apprehension was made. Therefore the apprehension of the English accomplices,
must be done by the Dutch Governor, who therefore has therein proceeded
according to the custom of all Nations of the world. And P
that these apprehensions may be holden more lawful, it appears out of the
written process, that the said English accomplices were not imprisoned upon the
first suspicions and gross evidences, which were had against them, but then at
last, when all the Iaponian soldiers were taken, examined, and convicted, and
had discovered by the uniform confession of all the 11. the names and
sur-names of such English as had persuaded and hired them to this fact; of
which English, one (viz. Abel Price Barber) was before apprehended (as an
Incendiary) for burning and violence done upon other houses, who also was first
examined, and first confessed (as the other 11. Iaponians) that he (by name,
Gabriel Towerson) and other English Merchants, whom he named by their names,
had suborned the said Iaponian soldiers, and that all the English Merchants in
the Foreign Cantores in Amboyna, had knowledge of this conspiracy, etc. So
that it may be seen, out of that which went before, that the Dutch Governor
dealt no otherwise in the apprehension, and examination of the English, than
according to his place, and power, and that with great discretion, according to
the laws of these United Provinces.

The second point which is abusiuely dispersed in Object. 2.
England, against this execution, is, that it is said, that it Q
did not appertain to the Netherlanders in Amboyna to imprison the said
English, and to proceed against them, or to punish them; but that it did
belong to the Council of defense resident at Iaquetra, consisting half of
English, and half of Netherlanders, according to the treaty of the year 1619.
made between his Majesty and the Lords the States, between the two East India
Companyes. That I might the better inform my self thereof, I took in hand,
and perused the general treaty of 1619. with the explication following
thereupon; but I profess, that (as I think) every understanding man, (not
loving discord) must confess, that neither in the said treaty, nor in the
enlargement, any one article or word could be perceived, whereby (according ^o
that which is untruly said in England) either this, or any such thing is
ordained, or decided, by the said treaty, as it ought to have clearly been in
so great and important a point, as this part of jurisdiction is. I appeal to
all wise men, who I desire may judge of this, whether this speech of some in
England (to wit, that the said Council of defense should (alone) have judged
these conspirators) be agreeable to the said treaty, or contrary to the same. I
find many arguments for my negative opinion, to wit, that before the treaty of
1619. the Dutch in Amboyna administered jurisdiction, and judicature, upon all
and every one who dwelt in or under the jurisdiction of the Castle, as well
inhabitants as strangers, without difference; and that in this said treaty, the
Dutch, with the English Merchants, made only a league in the matter of
commerce and negotiation of Nutmegs, Mace, Cloves, and Pepper, in some
quarters, without having any further treaty, or communication in the land; so
that without the bounds of this common negotiation, every one remained free,
and vn-hyndered in the land by the right and possession which either Company
enjoyed and exercised severally; according as the same appears out of the 23.
article of the treaty: where it is expressly said; That Castles, and Forts
shall remain in their hands who at present do possess them: And out of the
*13. 14. 15. articles of the treaty, all may see, that this common Council of
Defense has no more power, save only over the fellowship of the treaty, that
is, over the Navy of defense in the Sea, to the defense of the common
Merchandise, and liberty of commerce; and lastly, to tax the charges for the
provision of munition in the Forts: neither can any other thing be sincerely
collected out of the said treaty, so far as I can conceive. Therefore this
second point is found to be untrue and abusiue, being not founded upon the said
treaty, which treaty (notwithstanding) ought to be the only rule, both of the
one and the other Company.

Finally, it is given out in England, that in the examination R
of the Conspirators there was excess in the Netherlands Judges, in the point
of Torture I acknowledge, that no argument or pretext against the justice of
this execution, has more moved me in the beginning, than this pretense of
excess aforefaid, because this stirs Christian compassion; although I also
judge, that wise men will not suffer themselves to be too much transported
thereby, before the true reasons do fully appear, which should move us
thereunto. For, I well remember yet, that in the time of former mistakings in
the Indyes, many things were pretended on both parts, upon which, there were
great outcries one either side, which yet, by due examination, were found to be
(though fair, yet) false pretexts of some ill-willers, and men desirous to
wrangle: which pretenses being thoroughly sifted by the High and much admired
wisdom of his Majesty, and the Lords the States, were well discovered ^o be no
such matters as they were made: as it is also vndoub^edly to be believed, that
his Majesty, and the States, will yet further do in this affair; and so the
cause of the Dutch Company may be (in the carriage hereof) rightly justified.
Of which I understand that the Lords the States have special regard, and that
they have been thoroughly informed, what is the very truth of the things there
past, and of the execution in Amboyna upon the English Conspirators. Unto which
end the Lords the States resolved to see and peruse all the papers and letters,
touching the said pro^eedings: And now thereupon men speak far otherwise
than heretofore; for pretenses, and cauills (being once detected) cannot stand
with truth. And it does plainly appear, that there is little truth in the
matter of torture, reported to be most cruelly inslicted upon these English
Conspirators, as in England it is said. And I have ever suspected this for a
slander: for I know the Dutch Nation does naturally abhor this kind of
cruelty, and are as much moved to commiseration, as any other people. But
whether these evil minded men, who have scattered this great slander in
England, and have so fowly defaced a just cause, have done it by occasion of
our use of tortures in these lands, in some weighty causes, according to the
custom of the most dominions of Europe; I cannot judge. But is that to be
censured and judged (...) be unjust of the whole world, which is repugnant to
the l^wes of England, (or any one Nation) where tor^ure is rarely used? Nothing
so; but the justice or injustice of a cause, must be (as aforesaid)
determined, according to the laws where it is done, and not of other lands. If
this were not so, why then should not the whole world much more judge that as a
hard, and a thing unheard (and therefore condemnable) which in some cases is
used in England, according to the laws there, when they proceed against some
guilty person; who being once and again asked of the Judge, and utterly
refusing to be legally tried, is adjudged as dumb, that is, by contumacy,
whose condemnation then accordingly follows, that he is laid upon a table,
or planke, and another planke upon him, and so much weight of stone or lead
laid upon him, that his body is miserably bruised, and so pressed violently to
death. The which, according to the confession of all nations, (especially,
because this kind of justice is not used in other lands) and by the English
writers, is judged to be one of the most sharp and severe kinds of death,
that can be invented; yet cannot such an execution be called cruel and
unlawful when it is done in England, because it is done according to the laws
of that land, though strangers shall judge otherwise of it. And in like manner
the English nation cannot complain of the torture which evil willers say, was
used upon these English Conspirators in Amboyna, because it is done according
to the laws of this Government, and is not unusual in cases of treason,
neither with us, nor (almost) any Nation in Europe. And for England it self,
it is well known (and his most excellent Majesty does acknowledge by his own
Princely pen) that the Rack, and the Manicles, are the only tortures, that are
exercised upon Traitors, to force them to confess, (without concealment) what
they know to be dangerous to the State.

And to say the truth, without taking parts, the English Conspirators being
a^ronted with the uniform and written confessions of the 11. Iaponians (their
Compli^s) which could convince them sufficiently, according to the laws, and
fr^de them guilty of the same conspi^acy, and consequen^ly of death: if now,
notwithst^nding this, they had persisted in the sto^t denial of the fact, were
not this, (to speak according to the manner in England) enough to judge them
dumb by con^umacy, and so to esteem them worthy of this sore punishment of
pressing to death, as is aforesaid? But this torture of ours (if any in Amboyna
were so tortured) is to be judged far less, than that pressing, where the
malefactor does suffer such extreme misery as cannot be imagined, and which
is not to be lenifyed or cased at all, but ended by death. But to the
sufficient satisfaction of my self, and your Worship, and all men, and not to
speak according to the sentence, and conscience of others; I have used all
diligence to get into my hands the written Process, con cerning the
Conspirators in Amboyna, which I obtained authentically, and read carefully,
and I find, that all, that is by me above said, is confermed, to wit, That
the Iaponian Accomplices were examined, and made their confession as aforesaid,
for 3. days, viz. the 23. 24. 25. of February, 1623. and that all this being
done, and consummated before, then at last, is Gabriel Towerson, first with the
rest of the English Accomplices, imprisoned, the said 25. of February, when their
examination, and confession began, and continued diverse days, without
ouerhasting, till the 3. of March. And the said examinations and confessions
being so finished, the Netherlands Governor, and Council, deliberated whether
the punishment might be deferred to any long time, or referred to any other
place; but it was so concluded, by joint consent of all, that the said
punishment (there deserved) must be executed in the same place, for example,
and that it could not (in any wise) be delaied without extreme danger, for
reasons there related; and among others, because the Ternatanes, and Indians
about Amboyna, had otherwise than they were wont, rebelled; neither could it
be fully known, what great confederacy these Conspirators had made with them,
and others. And touching any extraordinary, and cruel ^orture, I have
accuratly ouerlooked every ones confession, but I find not one word in any
one, which makes any mention of such torture, as is unjustly spoken of in
England; nay, scarce find any mention of that ordinary torture, which is in
use, save only these words, in one act of the 25. February, 1623 viz. The
Council being gathered together, have thought meet, that all the English
should be presently examined one after another (as accordingly it was instantly
done) and some of them, before any torture; others, after a little (or rather a
touch) of it, confessed as follows. Unto which, follows presently, the
particular confession of each one, subscribed with his own hand, as aforesaid.
So that hence it is manifest, that no extraordinary torture was used, in such
manner as is giuen-out there, by those that wish us evil; nay, that those few
that felt any, were only touched (not punished) with ordinary torture.

And thus your Worship has the upright, and impartial S
truth of this business, touching the whole passage as it proceeded, and the
punishment, as it was inflicted; from which, some English were exempted by
favor, that the English goods should not be lost, according as order has
been given to that end: And I find that the sentence was given the 9. of
March, 1623. by a competent assembly of 14. Judges; who, (as it appears in
the sentence) in the doing thereof, did ( before) earnestly call upon the name
of the Lord, that he would please to be president and predominant in every one
of their hearts, in this their sorrowful assembly; and that he would inspire
them only with that which might be judged to be expedient and just, etc. So
that out of all that is above said, nothing else can appear, but that this
business was managed lawfully, and orderly, by men of honesty and conscience,
against such as had undertaken against the State, against the wealth and
advantage of this East India Company, the lives of their Officers there placed,
against the estate and welfare of many, who had little deserved, and as little
expected, such wickedness from their friendly confederates in the same society
of Merchants, there resident with them.

And now (considering the premises) I hope it shall be far from every
Christian in any wise to protect or excuse this wicked fact, but rather to
mourn and g^ieue (as we do) for this conspiracy, and for the evil, the
conspirators have so deservedly drawn upon their own heads; and to honor
them, who in justice have punished villainy, according to the due merit thereof;
for we all know, that without JUSTICE, without reward of that which is Good,
and punishment of that which is Evil, no society of mankind can consist.

And of this information, (which I send in love, and honor, to your Worship,
as unto a lover of Truth, and a hater of Treachery) you may make such use, as
to yo^ shall seem good, in any place where you come, both for refutation of
any thing already reported contrary thereunto, and for prevention of any
further false rumors, or clamors; and finally, for propagation of that
undoubted truth, which here (to my b^st) I have endeavored to discover. And if
you shall meet with any thing of worth, which can be truly auowed, to be
contradictory unto any thing I have written, I desire to understand it from
you, and you to suspend your wise and impartial judgment, till I have cleared
it unto you. TRVTH remains ever the same. So I commend you to the God of
truth, desiring him to give us minds, Not to judge according to outward
appearance, but to judge with a righteous judgment.

From my Lodging, July 23. 1624.
THE ANSWER UNTO THE DUTCH PAMPHLET, MADE IN DEFENSE OF THE VNIVST AND
BARbarous proceedings against the ENGLISH at AMBOYNA In the East Indies, by the
HOLLANDERS there.



Printed at London, Anno M. DC. XXIV.

AN ANSWER TO THE DUTCH RELATION, TOUCHING THE PREtended Conspiracy of the
ENGLISH at AMBOYNA in the Indies.
THE Compiler of this relation, perceiving that he had an hard task, to make
it probable, that eighteen Englishmen, Merchants and their servants, all
unarmed, should, with the help and assistance of ten Iapons, likewise
unarmed, undertake the surprise of a Castle, so provided every way, as that of
Amboyna, is before in the relation of the English truly described to be: as
also the same Author, well weighing that albeit all that he was to write, of
this pretended Conspiracy, should be taken for true, yet the fact would seem
very poor to bear so rigorous a punishment in persons of that quality, and
of that relation to those that inflicted it; prouides more skilfully than
fairly, for both these points in the preamble of this relation: To this end,
he ^akes and heaps together all the iealousies and dangers that the Dutch had
in the Indies: yea and more than they truly had, at or about the time of the
pretended conspiracy, and applies them all to the suspicion of this business: as
if all their enemies were likely to conspire ^ith the English; and therefore
the fact, under color whereof they were condemned and executed, were possible
and probable; and as if the state of the time had bin then so dangerous, that
every shadow of conspiracy was to be exquisitely enquired of, and the l^ast
off^ce to be seu^rely punished. Wherefore al^ this be no direct charge of the
English, but used by the Author to supply the want of probabili^ies in the
process it self, it will not be amiss to examine the several circumstances,
and how far they may yield any suspicion against the said English.

Now this Author takes the maine grounds of this s^spicion of some great plot
against the Province of Amboyna, from the unwonted boldness and insolences, A
of the Ternatans; first in the Moluccoes, and then in Amboyna. For those in
the Moluccoes, h^ says, they had lately before the pretended conspiracy of the
English, gone about, contrary to the Treaty, Anno 1606. between them and the
Dutch, to make peace with the King of Tedore, and truc^ with the Spaniard,
without the consent or knowledge of them, the Dutch: which how honestly and
conscionably it is alleged to this purpose, may appear by the Iournalls of
those parts; which evidently show, that this Treaty between those of (...)
and Tedore, was in November, 1621. that is to say, fifteen months before this
forged conspiracy; and that with the knowledge of (...), the Governor of the
Dutch, who, upon the 19. of November the year aforesaid, acquainted M. Nichols
the Agent of the English in those parts, with the preparations of this Treaty,
which was actually holden at Ternata the 24. of the same month. But the matter
was so well handled by the Dutch, to keep those neighbor Islands in
perpetual war, that the Treaty was dissolved re infecta, And the seventh of
December following, an Edict was published by the King of Ternata, commanding
all the Tedorians forthwith to depart the Island of Ternata, upon pain to be
made slaves. After this, the correspondence between the Dutch and Ternatans in
the Moluccoes, returned into as firm state as ever; the Ternatans performing
daily exploits against the Spaniards, and communicating the triumph with the
Dutch: As the seventeenth of February 1622. being a full year before the
feined treason of the English, the King of Ternata, with twenty Curricurries,
took a Spanish Galley, slew forty in fight, and took 150. prisoners, whom
they sold to the Dutch for Cloth and Rice: and coming by the Hollanders Castle
of Maalaio, the eighteenth of the same month, with the heads of diverse
Spaniards at his Stern, the Dutch saluted him from their said Castle with nine
shot of great Ordnance. The 25. of April following, the Admiral of the King
of Ternata took a Prow of the Spaniards, slew some, and sold the rest to the
Dutch. The 28. of the same month, both Dutch and English were feasted by the
King of Terna. The 22. of May next ensuing, the king of Ternata went forth to
Machian with six Curricurries, and at his departure was honored with thirty
shot of great Ordnance from the Dutch Castle. The 15. of June the Admiral of
the king of Ternata made a voyage toward Mindanow, carrying diverse of the
Dutch with him to assist him. The third of July the Ternatanes took other
prisoners, and sold them to the Dutch. The 24. of August the king of Ternata
made one Vogler a Dutch Merchant, his Treasurer; at whose instalment in his new
office, the Dutch gave seven great shot from the Castle. And this good
correspondence, between the Ternatans and the Dutch in the Moluccoes,
continued even until, and after the execution of the English at Amboyna: which
was (as has been showed) in February 1623. new style. Upon the 14. of which
month, the Dutch gave the king of Ternata, and other Blacks, two hundred
Bailes of Iapan Rice, with other presents: at the delivery whereof, there were
shot off from the Castle seven pieces of Ordnance, and three Vollies of small
shot. By all which may appear, how sincerely this Author applies the
diffidence between the Dutch and the king of Ternata, which was now none at
all, to this business of Amboyna.

The next point is, that the Ternatans in the Moluccoes B
went about also to make truce with the Spaniards, without consen^ or knowledge
of the Dutch: wherein this dealing of the Author is worse than the former. For
this Treaty of truce appears by the Iournalls to have been holden the 19.
of July 1623. which was five months after the execution of the English at
Amboyna, and so came too late to mo^e suspicion against them.

And yet this pretended fear and jealousy of the C
Moluccoes is f^rther (...) by the strength of the Spaniard, being then (as
this Author affirms) Master of the sea there, and that by default of the
English; who, contrary to the treaty of the year 1619. had deserted the
defense, and sent no more ships, neither to the Moluccoes, nor to the
Manilliaes: whence now the Spaniards had means to send Ships, Galleys, and
Pinaces, to the Moluccoes. What the strength of the Spaniard in the Moluccoes
(by sea) was, at the time of this pretended fear, may appear by the exploits
beforementioned, done upon them by the Cur^curries of the Ternatans, without
help of the Hollanders. But for the default of the English, which is here
odiously alleged, it will be requisite to set down the true causes wherefore
the English relinquished the action of defense, as well at the Manilliaes, as
elsewhere; being a matter much aggrauated upon all occasions by the Holl^ders,
albeit themselves have given the cause thereof. Wherefore shortly, the true
motives of the English, their desisting from the action of defense, were as
follows. The English had, by agreement of the Council of defense, two years
together maintained a Fleet of five tall and warlike ships, to join with the
like strength of the Hollanders, for the action of the Manilliaes, and the
profit of the voyage (as the charge) to be common to both Companies. The Dutch
prepared another Fleet of seven ships, all of their own, for Ma^ao,
bordering upon Chyna, near the Manilliaes, without giving knowledge thereof to
the English at Iaccatra, until their Fleet was ready to depa^t thence; well
knowing, that upon such warning it would b^ impo^sible for the English to
prepare a like force ^o ioy^e with them. To those they appointed also (...)
^naces the were then abroad, to ioin; and (...) sent another ship with
provisions unto them. This Fleet passing by two of the English ships, which
were appointed for that quarter of the Manilliaes; the English welcomed them,
and offered to ioyn with them in their exploit: which the Dutch refused,
saying, That this being an exploit of their own, the English should neither
participate of the fact, nor of the benefit that might arise thereby. Likewise,
by agreement of the Council of defense of both Nations, there was another
Fleet of ten ships set forth at the equal charge of the English and Dutch,
for the coast of Mallabar, to secure the trade in that part. Of the Dutch ships
(about a month after they set sail) two were found to be so weak and leak,
that they were fain to return to Iaccatra. The rest being come to their
quarter, two of the best of the Dutch ships were sent away by the Dutch
Admiral, for the red sea; contrary to their instructions and commission at
Iaccatra from the Council of defense, and notwithstanstanding the
protestations, obtestations, and exclamations of the English against this
preuarication. So that four Caracks of the Portugals coming that way, the
rest of the Fleet of the English and Dutch being thus weakened by the default of
the four Dutch ships aforesaid; the fairest opportunity that ever happened either
before or since the joining of the English and Dutch Companies, or is ever
likely to offer it self in the future, was lost and utterly defeated. By this
it appears, what cause the Dutch have to complain of the English for
deserting the action of defense, and what reason and encouragement the English
have to continue the joint action and charge with (...) that use so little
sincerity, ever contriuing the common actions and charge to their private
advantage; that when the joint forces are employed to give the enemy work in
one part, they (the Hollanders) might with ease oppress them in another, and
appropriate the whole benefit to themselves.

The next suspicion that this Author gathers, is D
from the insolences of the Ternatans of Amboyna, dwelling at Loho and
Cambello, and thereabouts; who (as this Author says) presumed now beyond
former example, to outrage the subjects of the Dutch, slaying them, and
carrying them away for slaves, yea burning two of their houses, one at Loho,
and another at Manichells: for which when the Governor went out with a Fleet to
crave justice and reparation, he was braued by the Te^natans with a stronger
Fleet than his own; yea, they threatened to come with an hundred Curricurries
against Amboyna.

This dealing of the Author is like the former about the treaty of peace with
the Tedorians, and truce with the Spaniards. For when the Governor of Amboyna
set forth the last Fleet of Curricurries before the apprehension of the
English, he stood in good terms with the Ternatans at Loho; neither of the
Factories here mentioned being then burnt or injured. The Governor then went
only, according to his yearly custom, to visit the skirts and out-parts of
Amboyna, and had no affront offered him. After that, upon occafion of a slave
of the English that ran away, and being afterward laid hold on, was rescued by
a reputed holy man of or near that part; the English craved assistance of the
Dutch Governor, who did his best, but was therein abused by those of Loho; and
not only some of his men outraged, but the English Factor M. Beomont (to whom
this slave belonged) was waylaid by the people of the said holy man: and, in
stead of him, one of the servants of the Dutch was slain between Cambello and
Loho. The next day also, was Beomont himself assailed, and shot in the hand by
the same holy man's people, who also a little before did their best to kill
William Grigs, another of the English Factors, that finding the said slave at
Loho, laid hold on him there. Upon this occasion, both the English and Dutch
left their Factorie at Loho, which was shortly after burnt by those Ternatans.
That other, touching the burning of the Factorie at Manichells; is more
grossly applied than the former; for that Factorie was burnt after the English
were apprehended: besides that, this Author dissembleth that there was a
vehement and common suspicion at Amboyna, that this Factorie at Manichells was
burnt, not by the Ternatans, but by the Dutch Factor himself, who, being there
alone, was said to have first conveyed away the goods of the Dutch and the
English there for his own use, and then to have burnt the Factorie; laying the
fact upon the Ternatans.

After this indeed, the Governor of Amboyna made out a Fleet of Curricurries,
to procure reparation of those excesses; and therein not going so strong as he
might, was braued by those Ternatans of Amboyna. But this was after the
apprehension and execution of the English; and so is as honestly applied to
move suspicion in this place, as the joint quarrel of the English and Dutch
with those of Loho, beginning upon occasion of the English; and as the burning
of the Factorie at Manichells, done after the English were apprehended and
imprisoned. As for the threats of the Ternatans here mentioned, that they would
come with 100. Curricurries against Amboyna, it is (for ought any of the
English ever heard) a mere fiction; at most, it was a vain brag, and such
as could not affright the Governor, that knows well that the Ternatans have
no gunpowder, nor other provisions, for such an exploit; and yet are far
behind the Governor of Amboyna for number of Curricurries, besides the Dutch
ships and Castles.

The next cause of suspicion, this Author makes to E
be an idle report in the East parts beyond Banda (uncertain which, or by whom)
that the Hollanders were already quit of their Castle at Amboyna. A poor
pretense, and not worthy to be answered; yet still further discovering what
penury of good matter this Author had, that he was feign to borrow such crazie
stuff.

But the last, and that which alone is expressly applied F
to the English, is, That about this time the Dutch understood that those of
Loho and Cambello held great and secret correspondence with the English. How
did the Dutch understand this? or why does not this Author express the
particular proof, in a matter so pertinent? It is true, the English had their
Factories at Loho and Cambello; but in the same houses with the Dutch, and for
their joint account, and had traffic with the countrey-people, as the Dutch
had: but what secret correspondence is this? or what danger to the Dutch? Was
the burning of the Factories, which belonged to the English as well as to the
Dutch, a note of good intelligence between the English and the Incendianies?
What was that for correspondencie with those of Loho, when at one time they
way-layed M. Beomont to kill him, and at another time shot him in the hand with
an Arrow, offered to kill William Griggs, and from time to time abused and
outraged our people, equally with, and as the Dutch? Further, our people as
well as the Dutch, had now dissolved their Factory at Loho, and were come all
thence. What letters or messages did they ever send thither afterward? or how,
and by what means maintained they this correspondence? Yet this was
understood, says this Relation. How understood? Perhaps by the Governors
dreams: for that (as he afterward told M. Welden, Hill, and Cartwright, that
came thither from Banda) was a motive to him to examine the first Iapon, which
was the beginning of the whole process.

The Author having thus quit himself in this preface, G
proceeds to the matter it self, first setting down the occasion and manner
of the discovery of this pretended plot, and then the confessions of the
Iapons and of the English: but he makes no mention of any torture used upon
the Iapons that first confessed, nor of any other indicium or presumption to
torture or examine that Iapon; but only his curious questioning touching the
setting and changing of the Watch, and of the number of the Soldiers in the
Castle: which, what sufficient indi^ium and cause it was to torture a Soldier
of their own, that serving them, had reason to desire to understand the course
of their Watches, and the strength of the aid he might expect, if any sudden
attempt should happen in his quarter; is easily to be judged. And how this
poor man, and the rest of his countrymen were tortured, appears in the
English relation. Here also is concealed, by what manner and kind of questions,
this and the other Iapons were led along in their confessions, to make up the
plot just as the Dutch had devised it: as also, what other answers they made,
before they were thus directed. That they, and the English both, confessed what
the Dutch would have them, is no doubt nor wonder, being so tormented and
feared with torture; etiam innocents cogit ment^ridolor. But what likelihood
or possibility there is of the truth of their confessions (if yet they
confessed as is here related) may appear by that which has been already
discoursed in this poin^, toward the end of the English relation; which for
brevity sake is here forborne to be repeated: yet some circumstances, which
the Dutch Relation has more than the English, deserve here to be examined. And
first, that of Abel Price the English Barber, who is made the messenger and
negotiator of this practice with the Iapons. It is true, that he (and he
alone of all the English) had some kind of conversation with some of the
Iapons; that is, he would dice and drink with them, as he likewise did with
other Blacks, and with the Dutch also. But is it credible, that M. Towerson
would commit any thing of moment, nay, so dangerous a matter as this, to a
drunken debauched sot, who also (as the English that were there, constantly
report) threatened to cut his, the said Towersons, throat, for that he had
punished him for his misdemeanors? Further, this Relation makes this Abel
Price confess, that all the English Merchants in the out-Factories, were
privy and accessarie to this pretended treason: Yet the Governor and Fiscall
in their own process found John Powle, Ephraim Ramsey, and two others,
guiltless.

After Price his confession, he sets down the general H
substance of all the confessions in one body; where first having assigned
Master Towerson a preface to the rest, to induce them to the exploit, he tells
us; that they made doubt of the point of possibility, (as well they might)
knowing the weakness of their own part, and impregnable strength of the
Dutch, in comparison of theirs: for satisfaction of which their doubt, he
says, M. Towerson told him that he had already won the Iapons within the
Castle to his purpose, and that he would attempt this matter; not when the
Dutch were at their full strength, and the English at the weakest, but would
expect till the Governor should be some where abroad upon some exploit, and
some English ships, or ship at least, at Amboyna; the people whereof he would
use in the enterprise: Likewise, he would send for the Factors and slaves of
the other Factories, and should have a supply from the Ternatans of Loho, of
certain Curricurries, etc.

Here he has enrolled a goodly army for this action; I
but let us see the manner how they should have executed their exploit: and
first for the Iapons in the Castle, we must believe, if this Author or his
voucher say true, that Master Towerson had acquainted those, and won them to
his plot, before he had imparted it to his own contrymen the English. And
yet in the acts of the process, Emanuel Tomson is recorded to have confessed,
that eight days after the consultation, Master Towerson told him, that he had
then sent out Johnson and Price to treat with the Iapons, and win their
consent to this enterprise. But what should these (being all but ten) have
done? Marry (says the relation by and by) Master Towerson had ordained, that
eight of them should have been bestowed, by two in a company, upon the four
points of the Castle, to kill all those that should resist them, and to take
the rest prisoners. It must be (therefore) here imagined, that the Dutch and
their Mardikers in their Castle, being three or 4. hundred, would scorn to
take the advantage ofse^ding forty or fifty; much more of an entire company,
to any point of the Castle, but would combat with the Iapons at even hand by
two at a time, and so give the Iapons leave and respit to kill or take them by
two, and by two. A sweet conceit, and such a service as perhaps has been
sometimes represented upon a stage, but never acted in surprise of a Castle in
good earnest.

Thus we see how eight of the Iapons were to be employed; what should the
other two have done? forsooth they should have waited in the great chamber to
murder the Governor. Yea, but this relation told us yer while, that this plot
should have been executed when the Governor was abroad upon some action. How
then should these two Iapons have killed him in the Castle, at the same time?
But we see how all the Iapons (that is) all the pretended party of the
English within the Castle, should have been occupied. Who should have opened
the gates to the English, and their other aids? who should have killed the
Court of guard at the gate? These parts were left for them that were without:
therefore let us take a reuiew of them, what they were. The relation mustereth
them to be fourteen English, whereof eleven were Merchants; one Steward of the
house, one Tailor, and one Barber, to dress the wounded, besides God knows
how many English shippers, slaves, and Ternatans. First, for the English
Merchants, of what dexterity they are to take Forts, is easily judged; and in
all the English house when it was seized by the Dutch, upon this pretended
treason, the whole provision was but three swords, two hand-guns, and about
half a pound of powder. Yea but the English ship or ships would have brought
both fitter men and better provision. But how knew Master Towerson that those
of the English ships, when they came, would join with him in this work being
so contrary to the Treaty, and it self so dangerous? or why did he not stay
the opening of the plot till this ship or ships were come, that he might swear
the shippers also, or at least the chief Officers amongst them, and take their
advice? Is it possible that Master Towerson was so slight, as to open his plot
to all the English at Amboyna, yea to the Tailor and Barber, so long before it
was to be put in execution, and before he knew the minds of his chiefest
assistants, of whose arrival he was so incertaine? Yea, but he was sure of the
slaves of the English, and of the Ternatans of Loho, with their Curricurries in
quemlibet euentum. This indeed is the remainder of the Army; let us view them.
The slaves were, in all the English Factories, just six in number, and all
boys: The Ternatans were enemies as well to the English as to the Dutch* as is
before showed in answer to the preface. When were they reconciled? how comes
it, that in all the examinations of the English, this point was not sifted, and
somewhat confessed of it amidst so many tortures? There is no confession
thereof in all the examinations; and M. Towerson in his expressly denied it, and
was pressed no further. The truth is, the Governor and Fiscall of Amboyna knew,
that what-euer had been confessed in this point, would not have been believed
by their own people there; who knew well enough, that the first beginning of
this breach between the Dutch and Ternatans at Loho, was about the slave of the
English: and the outrages thereupon following, were done upon the English,
as well as upon the Dutch. Yet this Author seems to hope, that that may be
believed here in Europe, which had no color at Amboyna.

Concerning the time of executing this plot, it was K
not (as the relation says) yet prefixed, but left to the next meeting of the
conspirators, which should be shortly holden, when Gabriel Towerson had
prepared all things, etc. Her was certainly a hot practice of treason, and
worthy to be termed by this Author, An horrible conspiracy. They met together
on New years day, and plotted as is before related: and now it was the ^ue and
twentieth of February, and not only nothing done all this Interim, but not so
much as a new consultation. But this (^orsooth) is the body and substance of
the unanimous confession of all the English, by themselves severally
subscribed. In the L
next place the Author relates somewhat singular in M. Towerson*s confession;
as that he said, he was moved to this fact by hope and desire of honor and
profit: and being demanded from whom he attended this honor, and for whom ^e
meant to hold the Castle, his answer was, That if he could hau^ compassed his
project he would forthwith have given advertisement thereof to the rest of his
nation at Iaccatra (which now they have christianed Batauia), and have craved
their aid: which if they had yielded him* then he would have held the Castle
for the English Company; and if not, then he would have kept it for himself,
and have used means to have agreed with the Indians; and so, by the one means
or other, would have compassed the enterprise.

Here first is to be observed, that he would not (as this Author makes him
speak) have sent for aid to Iaccatra, until he were first Master of the
Castle: and yet in the general confession before, it is said, he would attend
the coming of some English ships or ship, before he would adventure upon the
Castle. Next, let the ambiguous and alternatiue resolution, here said to be
confessed by M. Towerson, be considered in both the parts thereof, and it will
appear, that no man in his wits would have any such conceit as is here
pretended. What hope could M. Towerson have, that the President and English
Council at Iaccatra, living under command of the Dutch Fort there, and
altogether subject to the Hollanders, durst join in any such action, thereby
to give occasion to the Hollanders to arrest, torture, and condemn them of
treason? M. Towerson knew well enough, that about six months before, the
General of the Dutch at Iaccatra, had caught at a very slight occasion to
entrap the English President there: who having sent out two of his people in
the night to the English Cow-house, to see what watch the Blacks in their
service kept over their (...)* the said two English were apprehended by the
D^tch (...), kept in prison seven days, and charged, that they had said that
they went the Round: and one of them, being last examined, was told by the
Balieu (the officer of the Dutch in criminal causes), that his fellow had
confessed, that they had said they went the Round, and that by the English
Presidents commission; and if he would not confess the same, he should be
tortured: but the fellow, being constant in the truth, came off at last without
torture. yet this was Item enough to the English President and Council, how
the intent of the Dutch was to entrap them upon the least occasion: and this,
and other daily captious dealings of the Dutch at Iaccatra, which were too long
here to recite, were all advertised from time to time to M. Towerson, who
therefore was sure he could expect no assistance from them, that were
themselves in such a predicament. The other part of M. Towerson's resolution is
said to have been, To keep the Castle for himself, and to agree with the
Indians, in default of help from the English. This is yet more improbable than
the former. Were the Portugals and Indians not able to keep out the Dutch from
Amboyna, when they had no footing there; and shall Captain Towerson, with
twenty or thirty English and Iapons, without Ship or Pinace, be able, with the
help only of the poor naked Indians, to drive them out, hauiug already three
Ca^tles in the Islands of Amboyna, and at Cambello hard by, all well furnished
with men and provision, besides their power of shipping, which makes them style
themselves Lords of the sea? And yet how could M. Towerson hope to win the
Amboynezes (the Hollanders sworn subjects) to his side? He might rather assure
himself, that after he had mastered the Hollanders (if yet that must be
believed to be possible), the Amboynezes would have surprised him, and cast him
out (being so weakly provided to stand of himself), that so they might
utterly free themselves from their servitude. Here also must be remembered, that
this Author himself in his preamble faith, that the Indians themselves durst
not undertake any such great design (as he there feineth) against the State of
Amboyna, without some great aid of some* Nation of Europe, either of Spaniards,
Portugals, or some other. Whereby is not only confessed, how weak the Indians
of themselves are; but withal it follows, how small hope M. Towerson might
have, being deserted of his own Nation (as here the case is put), to hold the
Castle for himself by the help of those Indians, if yet he could once have
won it. In a word; they that know the power of the Hollanders in Amboyna and
thereabou^s, and the weakness of the poor Indians there, will judge this
conceit of M. Towerson's (To keep the Castle for himself) to be a mad plot;
and for which, M. Towerson should rather have been sent to Bedlam, or the
Dullen Kissed (as the Dutch call it), than to the Gallows.

But this Author has one voluntary confession, M
upon which he takes special hold; to weet, that M. Towerson, after his
examination was finished, being expostulated withal by the Dutch Governor,
and demanded whether this should have been the recompense of his (the
Gouernor's) manifold courtesies toward him; answered with a deep sigh, Oh!
were this matter now to do, it should never be done. This voluntary
confession and penitent acknowledgement, says this Author, was made the ninth
of March, being the day when the execution was to be done: but the examination
of Towerson was ended the eight and twentieth of February, so many days before.
But how shall we believe this? Forsooth, he has it out of the Acts of the
Process of Amboyna. Yea, but in these Acts are omitted many material passages
of these examinations, as is already showed: why may they not then be guilty of
addition, as well as of such mutilation and omission? But let us peruse the
words of the Act i^ self, which are these:

WE, whose names are heerunto subscribed, do declare upon our troth, in stead
of an oath, that Gabriel Towerson, after that he had been already examined
touching his said offense, and that the worshipful Governor Van Speult had
expostulated with him thereupon, asking him whether this should have been the
recompense of his courtesies from time to time showed unto him, the said
Towerson: thereupon he, the said Towerson, with a deep sigh answered him, and
said, Oh! if this were to be begun again, it should never be done. Actum
this ninth of March, in the Castle of Amboyna, and subsigned.

Harman van Speult. Laurence de Maerschalck. Clement Kersseboom. Harman
Crayeuanger. Peter van Zanten. Leonart Clocq.


Thus we see the Act it self, and this pretended voluntary confession of M.
Towerson; which is not delivered upon the credit of the Court or Council at
Amboyna (and yet how small that is, is before showed) but upon the Attestation
or Affidauit of the Governor and five others, the principal actors in this
bloody Tragedy: And this not upon their oath, but upon their troth, or honest
word (forsooth) in stead of an oath. The time when these words were uttered by
M. Towerson, is not described by the day when he spoke them, but only by the
precedent Act of his examination. And yet the circumstance of time is not only
an usual and customary solennity, and requisite in all such Attestations; but
also in a business of this nature altogether necessary: as likewise in this
case, that of the place was. For if these words were spoken in the place of
torture, or incontinently after the examination ended, they are by their own
law, esteemed no more voluntary, than the confession upon the Rack it self.
Neither yet does this Attestation affirm, that this confession was voluntary.
But this Author, unconscionably reporting the date of the Attestation, for the
time of the confession, collects it to be voluntary, because (as he says) it
was made the ninth of March, being so many days after his examination, which
was taken the 28. of February. Can a man attest nothing but what was done upon
the very day when he makes Affidauit? The Attestation says, that these words
were spoken by M. Towerson after he had bin already examined. Why may not that
have been rather upon the very day of his examination, than upon the day when
this Act was entered; if yet he ever spoke any such words, or meant them, as he
is here interpreted? the contrary whereof is the more probable by all the
circumstances of this business, truly set down in the Relation of the
English.

But in that this Author makes so much of this poor circumstance, of M.
Towersons profession of sorrow for what was done, naming it a voluntary
confession; it is plain how destitute he was of voluntary confessions, and of
all true and concluding circumstances. What? was there not a letter or other
paper, to be found in all the Chests and Boxes of the English, so suddenly
seized at Amboyna, Larica, Hitto, and Cambello, to discover this treason? nor
amongst so many accomplices of diverse nations, a false brother to betray the
rest, and accuse them voluntarily; but the process must begin with the
torture, and the Heathens confession upon torture, be sufficient to bring
Christians to torture? the debauched and notoriously infamous persons (such as
Price was) to draw torture upon the sober, orderly, and unstained? And yet this
Relation it self confesses, that Price's confession was drawn from him by
the Examiners specifying of place, persons, and time unto him. Certainly one
Demonstration to the Lords States, touching the government of the Maiores.
of their own Nation had reason to advise, that more Advocates might be sent
over to the Indies, to aid the accused, to make a legal answer; For, says he,
they go to work there so villanously and murtherously, that the blood of the
poor people cries to heaven for vengeance.

But why have we no particular of any man's confession, but this of Price; and
M. Towerson and all the rest blended together in one body? Did none of all the
rest go (...) than his fellows, or (...) more ^han they? Where is Sharrocks
confession, that he was at Amboyna upon New-yeares day, when ten or twelve
of the Dutch themselves witnessed he was at Hitto? Where is his confession of
Clerks plot to go to Maccassar, to deal with the Spaniards there, to come
and rob the small Factories? Where is Collins confession of another plot, about
two months and a half before his examination, undertaken by Tomson, Johnson,
Price, Brown, Fardo, and himself? Where be the leading Interrogatories, that
directed them to the accusation framed by the Dutch, lest otherwise there had
been as many several treasons confessed, as persons examined? Not a word of
all this, nor of a great deal more of this kind, which is here in England
proved by the oath of six credible persons, to have passed in the
examinations. Whereby appears, how faithfully the Dutch at Amboyna have entered
the Acts of this process. Well, at last he concludes the narration of the
confessions, with the summing up of the number and nations of the parties, that
had thus confessed; which, he says, were ten Iapons, fourteen English, and
the Neatherlandish Marnicho, or Captain of the Slaves. By which last words,
he would give the Reader occ^sion to think, that the fact was so clear, and
their own proceeding so even and just, that they had executed one of their
own Neatherlanders for it. Which how true it is* is already declared in the
conclusion of the English Relation. The truth is, this Captain of the Sla^^es
was of the Portugal race, and borne in Be^gala. His very name, Augustine
Perez, shows, he wa^ no N^therlander.

Having thus (...) this relation, this Author N
proceeds to a disputation: and taking notice of some aspersions in England
cast upon these proceedings at Amboyna, he divides them into two heads; the
one, that the process was without its due formalitie; the other, that there
was excess and extremiti^ used against the Conspirators. For the point of
formalitie, he first takes great pains to prove, that the formalities of
process in Amboyna, are not therefore unlawful, because they agree not with
our form in England. Which labor he might have spared: for no wise man will
deny him this point. And such as shall be so ignorant as to blame the Dutch for
varying from us herein, were not worthy the answering. Herewithall also he
deduceth the title of the Lords States general to the Sovereignty of Amboyna;
and so the Governor of Amboynaes jurisdiction, in causes as well criminal as
civil, to be rightly grounded. Thence he concludes, tha^ the Iapons being
sworn servants to the Dutch, and (...) their pay, were subject to the
jurisdiction of the Dutch Governor. Then he tells us, that the Author, and
accomplices of murder and treason, are by the laws of all nations to be
punished with death; all which points may be grant^d him witho^ any prejudice
to the cause of the English in this question.

At last he comes in partic^lar to the^ case, and a^firms, O
that the chief of the English there mig^* not apprehend the English accomplices
of this conspiracy, because themselves were accomplices of the f^ct. All which
also may be gran^d in t^is po^ of (...), ^ in the point of cognizance, shall
be anon in due place examined.

In the mean time, this Author, to make the point P
of apprehension clear beyond exception, says, that the English were not
apprehended upon the first suspicion, when yet there was evidence, and indicia
sufficient to do it; but after the examination of all the Iapons and their
joint confession, that the English, whom they specified by name and surname,
had moved and hired them to this treason: yea, not until Abel Price had also
confessed as much, and that all the English in the out Factories were privy
thereunto. For answer hereof, that must be repeated which has been upon other
occasions before alleged; that the first beginning of the process, was by
the torture, there being no sufficienteuidence or indicium to torture the
Iapon, that only sought to inform himself of the course of the Watch, and of
the strength of the Castle, wherein himself was a soldier: and so the whole
Series of the examination proceeding from the confession of one tortured
person, to apprehend and torture another, without other evidence; though it
brought forth more confessions, and those with name and surname, and other
circumstances, according as the Interrogatories (or rather directories) of the
Governor and Fiscall led the prisoners, was wholly against the form and rule
of all laws of tortures;

Scilicet in fabriea ^i pra^a est reg^la prima,
Caeter a mendose fieri atqu^ obstipa necesse est.
But here must be answered an objection that may be made against this, from
another part of this relation, that is, that some of the English confessed
without or before torture; yea, this Price here m^ntioned, was either not
tortured at all, or very lightly. Yea but he was showed the tortured bodies of
the poor Iapons, martyred with fire and water, and told, that unless he would
confess that which they told him they had first confessed, he should be
tortured as ill, or worse than they. This fear of torture is by their own
law, equalled to the torture it self, and consequently, the confession
thereupon made no better indicium or evidence to bring another man to the
torture, than the confession made upon the rack it self. Again, it must be
here remembered, that the very matter of Price his confession here mentioned, to
wit, that all the English Merchants of the out Factories, were privy to the
pretended treason; was refuted by the process of the Dutch themselves, that
found Powle, Ramsey, and two others of those Factories guiltless.

Next, this Author takes notice of an objection Q
made in England against the jurisdiction of the Dutch Governor, and his
Council at Amboyna, over the English there; because this power is, by the
Treaty of the year, 1619. disposed of, and agreed to consist in the Council
of defense of both nations at Iaccatra. For information in which point this
Author says, he has perused over all the several articles of the said
Treaty, and finds in the 23. article, that the Fortresses were to remain in
the hands of them that then possessed them; and in the thirteenth, fourteenth,
and fifteenth, that the Council of defense has no other power, but only over
the Fleet of defense, over the commerce, and finally, to tax the charges of
maintenance of the Forts: But he could not see the thirtieth article; which
orders, that all disputes that cannot be decided by the Council of defense,
should be remitted into Europ^; first, to the two companies there, and in
default of their agreement, to the King and States. Why then was not this
dispute so proceeded in? There is nothing in the former articles, to limit the
Council of defense; and this general article appears to be added by way of
ampliation, to provide for that which was not particularly and expressly ^ared
for in the former. Which is most plain by the words of the explanation upon
this thirtith article, agreed upon at the first, and subscribed by the
Commissioners on both sides, An. 1619. where this course of proceeding is
expressly directed, not only in disputes about the meaning of the Articles, but
also about any other matter happening in their common abode. Since which aso the
Kings Majesty has, upon a smaller occasion than the life of his Subjects,
clearly declared himself in the point of Sovereignty; That both nations in the
Indies should wholly lay aside all pretense thereof. Which declaration was sent
to the Lords States General, and by them accepted before this bloody butchery
was executed. But if it were granted, that the Hollanders are absolute Lords of
their partners the English in those parts, without respect to the Treaty, yet
at least the Hollanders in Amboyna are bound to observe the Laws of the united
Provinces; for so says this Author himself. Do these allow to begin the
process at the torture, and to bring persons of honest fame to the rack, upon
others confession made in the torture? Do their laws allow of the leading
interrogatories above mentioned, to direct the prisoner what to say, to avoid
the torture? Where, in the united Provinces, is that drowning with water, in
use? or the torture with fire, used to Johnson, Tomson, and Clarke? or
especially the splitting of their toes, and launcing of the breast, and putting
in gunpowder, and then firing the same, whereby the body is not left entire,
neither for innocence, nor execution? Clarke and Tomson were both feign to be
carried to their execution, though they were tortured many days before.

Lastly, their confessions were contradictorie, apparently false, and of things
impossible to be done, much less practiced before by the said parties; and
therefore ought not by their law to have been believed, nor the prisoners to
have been condemned thereupon, without other sufficient indicia or evidence
besides.

In the last place, this Author handles the excess R
of torture whereof (he takes notice) there is much complaint in England; and
says, That the Lords States general take great care to inform themselves of
all the passages of this business; and to that end have desired to see all the
letters, pieces, and papers that concern this process: by which it appears
not, that there was any cruel torture used. But suppose the acts make no
mention of them; is it any marvel that the Authors of this murtherous and
tyrannous process, being themselves the persons that also formed the acts,
would omit those things that made against them? It is to be presumed also, that
the acts kept by their people at Poloway in Banda, have omitted many things of
their process, against the poor Polaroones, whom in August, 1622. being about
six months before this execution of the English, their Governor there used in
like sort, as the Governor of Amboyna did the English, and gave him a model
and precedent of this process; which it will not be amiss to relate briefly,
because this Author, in the next place, alleges the merciful disposition
of the Netherlands nation in general; to infer thence, that it is therefore
unlikely, that their Governor at Amboyna was so cruel as is reported in
England.

Polaroon, one of the Islands of Banda, was in possession of the English at the
time of the treaty, Anno 1619. and by the agreement was to remain theirs.
After the treaty came unto the Indies, the Hollanders forbear publishing
thereof in the Islands of Banda, until they had taken Polaroon. But, knowing
that it must be restored again, according to the treaty, they first take all
courses to make the Island little or nothing worth: they demolish and deface the
Buildings, transplant the Nutmeg-trees, plucking them up by the roots, and
carrying them into their own Islands of Nera and of Poloway, there to be
planted for themselves; and at last find a means to dispeople the Island, and
to leave it so, as the English might make no use of it, worth their charge of
keeping; and that upon this occasion: There was a young man, the son of an
Orankey, or a* Gentleman in Polaroon, that had committed felony; for which, by
the Laws of his Country, he was to die. This fellow, to save his life, ^ed to
another Island of Banda, called Rofinging, and there turned Christian: but
quickly understanding, that that would not make him safe from punishment, he
went back secretly to his own Country of Polaroon; and, having lurked there a
few days, took his passage for N^ra, another Island where the Dutch have a
Fort; and told the Dutch Governor, that the Orankeys of Polaroon had conspired
to massacre the Dutch, as well at Polaroon, as at Poloway, with help of the
people of Seran, that should send* over thirti^ Curricurries for that purpose.
Immediately upon this indicium of this malefactor, certain Prows or
Fisher-boats of the Polaroons, that were fishing at Poloway, were seized, and
the people made prisoners. Command was sent by the Dutch Governor to Polaroon,
that the Orankeys should come over to him, that there might be further
inquisition made of this matter. The Priest of the Polaroons and seventy
Orankeys instantly took a Prow or small vessel of their own, and embarked
themselves for Poloway. As they were at sea, and yet out of the sight of the
Dutch Castle, they were met by a Fisher-boat of Bandanezes, and told, how all
the rest were apprehended; and that, if they went to Poloway, they were all but
dead men. Nevertheless, the Priest and the rest, although they had space and
means to have escaped to Seran and other places safe enough from the
Hollanders, yet were so confident of their innocence, that they would needs to
Poloway to purge themselves. Where, as soon as they were arrived, they were
instantly carried prisoners to the Castle: and withal the Governor, with a
force of two hundred men, went presently for Polaroon; whence he fe^ched all
the rest of the Orankeys, and bro^ght them prisoners to the same Castle. As
soon as they were comne, they were presently brought to the torture of water
and fire, even in the same sort as our people were afterward at Amboyna; only
herein differing, that of those at Poloway, two were so tortured, that they
died in their tortures: the rest, being one hundred sixty two persons, were
all, upon their own forced confessions, condemned and executed. The Priest,
when he came to the place of execution, spoke these words in the Mallaian
Tongue: All ye, great and small, rich and poor, black and white, look to it:
we have committed no fault. And when he would have spoken more, he was taken
by the hands and feet, laid along, and cut in two by the middle with a sword.
Forthwith, the Governor caused the wives, children, and slaves of those of
Polaroon, to be all carried out of the Island, and distributed in other Islands
subject to the Dutch; and so have made a clear Country for the English; where
they may both plant and gather themselves, destitute of the help of any of the
Countrey-people; without whom, neither the English nor Hollanders can maintain
their trade in the Indies. And yet this is not here recited, to the end thereby
to charge the Neatherlands Nation with those cruel proceedings, but the
persons themselves that have committed those barbarous tyrannies: Who, if we
Nootwendich discourse, printed ann. 1622. under the name of Ymant van Waarmond.
shall believe an Author of their own, are not of the best of that Nation. For
the Maiores (as this Author says) use the Indies as a Tucht house or
Bridewell, to manage their unruly and unthrifty children and kindred; whom when
they cannot rule and order at home, they send to the Indies, where they are
preferred to offices and places of government. Yea, says he, they prefer such
to be Fiscals there, as never saw study nor law. So that it is no marvel,
that such persons proceed not with that justice and moderation as is used
generally in the Low Countries, by the choice of the Nation there. And this
agrees well with the report of our Merchants of credit, that came lately from
Amboyna; who auerre, that, excepting the Governor himself, who is well stepped
in years, of the rest of the Council there, as well the Fiscall as others,
there was scarce any that had hair on their faces, yea, that most of them are
lewd drunken debauched persons; and yet must be Judges as well of our English,
as the poor Indians there.

Now to return to this Authors proofs, that there was no excess used in the
proceedings; at the last he takes one argument by way of comparison, from the
Law of England to press men to death: which he says, has much more cruelty
than their course of torture, used by the Dutch in Amboyna, and is holden, as
well by some authors of our own nation as others, for damnable. How
pertinently is this matter of Pressing alleged, for justifying of their
tortures, since no man in England is pressed for not confessing, which is the
cause of torture in Dutchland? But the cause why any is pressed, is, for that
he obstinately refuses the trial of his country, and challenges the Judges
as incompetent, which the Law appoints him: which he does (for the most
part) to save his goods, which, but by that ordinary course of trial, cannot
be confiscate. What is this to the point of confession, for refusal whereof,
the Dutch use the Torture? And yet no man blames them for proceeding according
to the Law of their country herein; nor yet in their execution, when they
break the legs, arms and thighs of the malefactors, and then set them upon
a wheel on the end of a great pole, there to languish to death: an execution
far more direful than the English pressing, which is so suddenly done, and
so seldom used. But why does he not name the Author of our own or foraine
Writers, which condemn this kind of execution? Let him do it yet, and he
shall have more Authors of his own Country, that condemn their course of
tortures: and yet the English complain not of the course in general, but of
the unlawful use of it; contrary to the rules of the Laws even of the united
Provinces. Lastly, in this point the Author pretends, that little or no
torture was used in this Process. What the torture was, and in what degree,
appears in the English Relation: but he can find little or none mentioned in
the Acts. What if he will not find it? or what if their Officers of Amboyna
have concealed it? shall we not believe those that suffered it themselves? shall
we not believe those, that being themselves acquitted, yet heard the cries,
and saw the bodies of Johnson, Clarke, and Tomson, and have confirmed their
relation by their corporal oaths? As for the Act of the five and twentieth of
February, which this Author has here transcribed; it cannot be a true Act:
for therein it is said, that that day all the English were examined one by one,
and some before torture, and some after confessed the fact. Whereas it
appears not only by the English Relation, but by this very Author in the
precedent page, that they were not all examined the same five and twentieth day
of February; but that the examination continued six days together, even to the
third of March inclusiue. How then could the Act of the five and twentieth of
February have all their confessions? By this may appear, what credit may be
given to these Acts, or else to this Author. Here also by the way he tells us of
the deliberation of their Council; whether the punishment of the fact might be
respited, or the cause removed: wherein it was resolved, that execution must
needs be done in the place of the delict, for example sake; and might not be
respited, for fear lest the conspirators (as he terms them) might have more
dependances than yet were known; and in particular, the Ternatans and other
Indians about Amboyna. A poor pretext: as if, having all the English in irons
aboard their several ships, they should need to fear their joining with the
Ternatans. But it may be, they feared some English ships also to come thither:
for so they had made their own people believe. And therefore, two ships being
descried at sea, the Dutch and their free Burghers cried out, That there were
the English that should have holpeh to take the Castle: but when they arrived,
they proved to be two ships of the Hollanders come from Iaccatra; wherein
was a Letter from the President of the English there, to call away Captain
Towerson and all the English from Amboyna to Iaccatra. Which Letter was opened
and read by the Dutch Governor, while our people were yet in prison, and not
executed; and might well have secured him, that there was no further danger to
be feared of the English aids of shipping, what-euer the English prisoners had
through torture confessed.

At last the Author comes to the sentence it self, transcribing out of the
Acts of the ninth of March, That the College of Judges being then competent,
and calling upon the name of the Lord to assist the^ in this mournful
assembly, to preside in their hearts, and inspire them with equity and justice;
proceeded to sentence, etc. Who knows not, but the Act may be thus formed,
and yet no prayer at all made? or if there were any such prayer, yet the
proceedings well weighed, will show it to be but like Iezabels Fast, the
preparatiue to the false judgment against Naboth. Neither will the wise and
indiff^rent Judges of this whole matter, conceive the better of the cause, for
the hypocritical formalities therein observed.

Last of all, he concludes his treatise with a justification, S
yea an Elogie and commendation of the whole proceedings of the Dutch at
Amboyna against the English; not finding the least to be blamed in the Dutch,
but aggravating the crime of the English very ridiculously, because (forsooth)
that this plot amongst other things, was against the great means of the
Netherlands East India company: as if a conspiracy to rob them, (if any such
had been) must needs be treason; ^r as if the intent only in any crime but
treason, were capital.

Thus have we examined this strained justification of that most barbarous and
execrable process of Amboyna; consisting of a preamble, full of false and
forged suspicions; a narration of the fact, fraught with ridiculous
absurdities, contrarieties, and impossibilities, and of a dispute of
impertinences, with concealment of the maine grounds of the English griefs.
All which verifieth that of Papinian, That Parricides are more easily committed
than defended.

FINIS.

