HOLY MEDITATIONS Upon Seven Penitential and seven Consolatory Psalms of
the Kingly Prophet David. Written by the noble and learned G. D. V.

Imprinted at London for Thomas Thorp 1612.

TO SIR PETER Manwood, Knight of the Honorable order of the Bath.
SIR,
NEITHER Seas nor Mountains are so impassable a division in humain society, as
diversity of language: they separate our bodies only, these our minds, making
us absent even in presence, while though our bodies meet together, yet we, (I
mean our diuiner parts) cannot: If any one could open the back door of the
Indies, and let us in a nearer way, how would fame dwell on his memory, and
posterity gratify his labor. A sinceere clear Translator does more, for he
conducts our understandings the next safest way to the ritchest intellectual
mines that are. How many after a long travail, bring forth only some foreign
deformity, their example making deeper impressions then their precepts, where
as these Bees bring us home the honey, leaving the poison in the weed, save us
the labor of travail, by transporting other countries to us, and not exiling
us to them, making remotest kingdoms as domestic and cheap as mapps,
greatest Princes as familiar as books, and our farthest journey but to Paul's
Churchyard. For they reconcile and new tune iarring mankind, bringing back
the harmony of speech from discord to vnisone. For as original writers are the
spring-heads of knowledge, so are these the conduit pipes bringing us home what
we have not strength or leisure to fetch abroad. The unhappy difference is,
that all waters are cleerd and purified by long conueyance, writings corrupted
and thickened. How so nyce and delicate an apprehension will relish these, event
will tell me. The Author can protect himself (who is yet living, and famous
for his singular learning and eloquence) and you me, not by patronizing mine
errors, but in correcting them. Some hours of melancholy I have bestowed on
these Holy Meditations, with much satisfaction to my self, if so to you I will
think it a very fortunate idleness, and strive hereafter to present you with
matter of some other subject. Thus wishing you whatsoever may become your own
virtues or my desires. I submit my self to your favorable censure, and rest

Yours ever to be commanded, W. SHVTE.

Meditations on the Penitential Psalms of David.
Domine ne in furore. Psalm. vi.
Lay not upon me o Lord the arm of thy severe judgment: It would throw me
like a torrent into the depth of death and eternal damnation. It would devour
me like fire, and the remander of my body would fly away into ashes: what eye
is able to endure, without perrishing for fear, the only look of thine angry
countenance, when casting thine eye upon us, thou percest the very bottom of
our hearts, and discouerest the secrets of our impure consciences? our
abominable sins will draw down thy just anger upon our heads, and thy
inkindeled wrath will throw us headlong at once into the gulphe of pain,
torments and misery. Before then that thy fury does arise against me, and that
thou come with a just disdain to overthrow and destroy me, harken unto the
humble groaning which my heart, possessed with fear, does present unto thee,
and receive this weak and panting voice which with tears, cries thus unto
thee.

2. Mercy, mercy o Lord, alas my God what do thou? will thou make proof of
thy strength on my weakness? do thou think that I present my self before
thee to wrestle against thy power? it is thy clemency o Lord which I run unto.
I place my self under thy wing to the end it may defend me from the rigor of
the co^demnatio^ which I have to much deserved. Look then upon me with a
milder countenance, and seeing that I have in a time convenient called upon thy
goodness, help me, and deliver me from so many evils which beseege me: for
behold, my body does languish: and it seems unto me that all my bones are
bruzed and broken.

3. And my poor body is not only thus cruelly aflicted, but likewise my
miserable soul is wholly dipped in sorrow: this soul, o Lord, which did
determine with her voice to glorify the author of her life, is beaten down,
and desolate, without strength, and courage; and as the fearful Dove hides
her self at the voice of thunder in some little hollow place, even so she
perceauing thy fearful indignation does seek out the most obscure darkness
for retreat. But until when my God, shall thine anger last?

4 Come, come o my God, and turn upon me that look of pity wherewith thou
can blot out, not only my sins, but those of the whole world. I feel my
soul to stick fast in a foul and deep bogge of iniquity: she sinketh, she
stretches out her hand unto thee o Lord: alas draw her forth of it, and
bring her into the way of salvation. Save her o Lord, for she coniures thee by
thine infinite goodness and unspeakable mercy. It is most true that she
deserves it not, and ought not to hope for help from him, whom she has so
carelessly forsaken, against whose honor she has so wickedly conspired: The
reward of her offense ought not to be mercy, but torment and eternal death.

5. But o Lord who is it that in the midst of hell; in the bottomlese pit of
death, shall sing thy praises, and sound forth thy name? there is the dwelling
place of sorrow, there is nothing heard but howlings, there is nothing seen
but torments, and thy praise on the contrary consists in the publication of
thy infinite meekness, goodness and mercy.

6. And thenbehold on the one side humble penitence which intercedeth for me,
and which has sworn not to leave me until it has reconciled me unto thee.
And on the other, humble prayer which importunes thee for me, and has sworn
not to let thee rest till it has reconciled me unto thee. Alas o Lord, thou
have so oftentimes seen my tears, and heard my lamentations. That I do daily
at the remembrance of mine offenses wash my face with my tears, I cause my bed
to swim in the water with streameth from mine eyes: what is it which commands
me to do so? is it not o Lord penitence which I religiously observe?

7. I look downe-ward, and tremble with fear at the aspect of thine angry
countenance. I do patiently endure the rebukes of mine enemies, and take their
reproaches in good worth, as the just punishment of their offenses. I walk in
their sight with sackcloth, with ashes on my head, and confession in my mouth,
I prostrate my self at the feet of thine Altars; I make lean with scourges
of affliction the flesh which delivered over my body unto sin: but my
torments serve for matter of laughter unto those that hate me, who swarm
about me to traduce me by scoffs and derision.

8. But now that thou do show mercy unto me, I will bid them stand back,
stand back o ye children of iniquity, ye shall no more laugh at my misery:
the Lord has heard my prayer, my tears have overcome his wrath, and lo I
enjoy the fruit of his holy favor. The brightness of his goodness has shined
upon me, and behold, the mists wherein my head was wrapped are on a sudden
scattered and vanished away.

9. I had skarce opened my lips to inuoke his aid; my heart did skarcely
dispose it self to crave his pardon, when as I felt his grace to be shed upon
me, to comfort and quicken my languishing soul, even as an hot bath does the
members of a poor Pilgrim tired with travel: oh incredible clemency! how
comes it to pass O Lord that thou art so ready to forgive? I ran on to
offend thee, and thou came'st flying to give me pardon. I have employed all the
days of my life to seeeke both by sea and land matter for my ambition,
avarice, and licentiousnes; and after that I had engulphed and lost my self in
mine own pleasures, thou pearced'st in a moment the heavens, and clouds, and
came to deliver me. So as now I triumph over my sin, which follows the
tropheis of my penitency, the which has found favor in thy fight. And in this
manner my hope (which mine offenses had almost smothered) is revived more then
before, and does promise me not only the Empires of the world, which houer
where the Lord enclineth them, but opens the highest heavens unto me, and
assures me after an happy life in this world, the enjoying of divine
immortallity. What shall then mine enemies do now, when they shall see such
felicity heaped upon me? They shall blush for shame, and shall by greatly
troubled in their minds: they shall retire themselves all confounded and
astonished: For he whom they thought to destroy, is raised higher then ever he
was. Alas they mocked mine ashes, they iested at my fasts, they flouted my
tears, and whilst by abstinence I tamed my flesh, the true enemy to my soul,
they did swim in worldly delights: but lo, the arm of God was ready to
thunder on their insolency. o my God, give them leisure to perceive the
extreme danger wherein they are, and to beg from an high the only remedy
for their disease, and as for me, who feel my self purified from those
filthinesses which compassed me about, which feel my soul enflamed with the
fire of thy charity, teach my lips to set forth thy praises, adresse my voice
to resound thy mercy, and direct mine affection to love thee sincerely, and to
establish her chief happiness, and highest felicity in the knowledge of thy
truth.

Beati quorum, Psalm, 31.
HOw happy my God are those, whose offenses thou have pardoned, and whose sins
thou have buried in a tomb of forgetfulness. For, alas! what can become of
him whom thou causest to endure the just punishment for his sins? an army of
miseries enuirons him, poverty assailes him, sickness afflicts him, famine
oppresses him, and death it self, which he thinks to be the haven of this
tempestuous navigations, is the bottomless pit to draw him into eternal
torments.

2. Thrice and four times happy then are they of whom God demands none
account of their actions, but is satisfied so that they humble themselves
before him, acknowledging their infirmity, and opening unto him the depths of
their hearts: For his mercy is to be called upon by true confession, and
sincerity of conscience: he that will be heard, must humble himself before
him. As he which goes to a fountain, puts down the mouth of his vessel
before he can fill it with liqour, in like manner it behooves him to cast
himself down before his creator, which will draw and taste of the water of
this sacred fountain, from whence distilleth the humor, which alone can
cleanse and purge our consciences.

3. I did think sometimes, oh my God, to hide my faults from thee, and have
said unto my self; How can he tell, or not, what I have done? In this manner
my sin waxed old in my bones, and like the sores of a sick man, who is
ashamed and dares not show his disease to the surgeon; they do increase and
wax worse, till the whole body perrish: in like manner the sins which I have
hidden from thee, have wholly infected me.

4. But at the last thou have in such sort, day and night, laid thy heavy hand
upon me, and have caused me to taste so many kinds of misfortunes, betwixt
which my soul lives without rest, quelled with a continual pricking in my
conscience which pierces the very bottom of my heart, as I have acknowledged
my falt, the which I now carry in my hand. Take notice of it o my GOD, but not
in thine anger: for the streaming tears which have quenched with weeping the
light of mine eyes, ought likewise also to have extinguished the heat of thy
just indignation. And then, am I not the work of thine hands, and that which
is more, the lively image of thy divinity? who is he so transported with
choler, which will break in pieces the workmanship which he has so much
delighted to polish and bring to perfection, because it is a little foul and
slubberd? This image is laden with filthiness I confess, but is it not much
better to cleanse and burnish it then to destroy it and tread it under foot?

5. Teach me then my God, what satisfaction I am to make, for I have now
discovered unto thee all those faults which before I did conceal. The fear
which possessed me then, when I hid my self from thee, now when I lay my self
open unto thee, is turned into hope of favor and pardon. And now I cast my
self into thine arms, as my surest refuge, with the self same countenance,
as the poor patient, who showing his wound to the Surgeon, looks attentively
upon him, and manfully endures the search and lancing, for the desire and hope
which he has to be healed. But that which gives me most hope of health, is,
that those vices wherein I delighted heertofore, do now make me afraid to
behold them, as the meats wherewith a man is stuffed in health do afterward
make him sick at the heart. That which made me fierce, does now make me
ashamed, when I consider the danger of death, whereunto my pride had exposed my
poor soul. I thank that day which first gave me the light to acknowledge my
fault. I did on that day, my GOD, receive a singular testimony of thy goodness
toward me, let it please thee then, that the pleasure which I have received
in displeasing my self, may continue with me as long as that which I took in
my vices: For if I can take as great contentment in my penitencie, as I have
taken in my sin, my happiness shall be equal to that of thine Angels, and
by my humilation before thee, I shall see my self exalted to the highest top
of thy favor.

6. Who doubts o Lord that thou will not receive me to mercy? thou whose
meekness and benignity, is not only unspeakable but incomprehensible? I did
no sooner think of returning unto thee, but thou did meet me. I did no
sooner say that I would confess my misdeeds; but thou did grant me
pardon. I did no sooner know what punishment belonged to my sin, but thou
forgauest it. I took the rods in hand to chastise my flesh, and thou tookest
them from me. To be short, I thought that thou would have proclaimed war
against me, and thou offeredst me a charitable reconciliation. Oh how much
more rather o Lord do thou pardon then punish? Can a good Father more
lovingly receive his Child which beggeth his pardon, then thou have received
me, when I did cast my self at thy feet? Mine heart also leapeth for joy,
and boyleth with an holy heat to praise thy name; it rejoices in the favor
which thou have showed it, accusing none but it self for what is past, and
cries out, it is I which willed it, it is I which have done it, it is I which
took pleasure therein: but my God was merciful unto me,

7. How could he have refused me his mercy, seeing Christ Jesus is my Advocate,
and thy Saints, whose prayer is so dear unto him, have prayed, do pray, and
will continually pray unto him for me? They are those who make intercession
for me; who procure his favor for me; who implore his goodness, for in
those prayers which they power out for thy universal Church I hope to have my
part? They have need alas to intercede for me, seeing that the impiety of my
heart has in such sort blinded mine understanding by her evil thoughts, as my
soul could not look up toward heaven, to lift up her hand to him, who only
can and will save it: what remained for me more, but that those whom thou
drawest near to thy self, and whom thou have received into the sacred
consistory of thine eternity, should beseech thee to have pity upon me? Upon
me, who (a chief enemy to my self) have never, could, nor would have prayed
unto thee for mine offense. I do now then comfort my self, for that thou have
opened mine eyes to see the lothsomnesse of my conscience, for that thou have
mollified my heart to make true contrition to lodge therein. If it has not
been so soon as it should, it has not at the leastwise been so late, but
thou have vouchsafed to receive me as thou art wont to do those who let
slip no time of repentance.

8. For those which make haste to sin, and do willingly neglect repentance,
when they perceive their faults, and have means to do it, deferring till
their lives end, to crave thy mercy and loving kindness, and to make a deluge
of their eyes, they are in great danger of deceiving themselves, and true
repentance cannot afterward enter into their hardened hearts; their sorrow will
be like that of desperate people, and thy mercy prove deaf to their too late
repentance.

9. But I run in time to thee as unto the refuge and end of my hopes, to my
comfort in tribulation which has environed me in the same manner as the fear
of death sezeth upon him that is appointed to some shameful punishment. Cause
me then now to taste the pleasure which that man feels in his heart who is
freed from Irons, delivered out of prison, and defended from the punishment,
wherein his enemy has a long time held him captive. And on the contrary, let
the enemy of my soul blush for shame when he shall perceive me so devoutly
to crave the assistance of my God, who with the only twinkling of his eye,
can deliver me from the voluntary bondage which I vowed to damnable
voluptuousness, at such time as I drank the sweet honney of delicious
pleasures which it presented unto me with a deceitful hand in the loathsome
cup of this world.

10. Alas! when I call to mind the time that thou did thus return unto
me, and when with that eye of mercy thou made a sign unto me of pardon
mercy, and salvation, it seems unto me that I do verily behold a clear
sunneshine to arise amiddest the storms and tempests of the sea, who by little
and little perceiving the clouds brings back a clear and calm season, and
unites the raging waves of the water. Every hour I seem to understand that
sweet and gracious word, when thou did say; Fear no more, for behold my
spirit shall direct thy paths, and shall not lose the sight of thee, thou
shall walk now under his conduct, who brings in pure and clean souls into
my glorious kingdom. So soon as I heard this word, I fixed mine eyes on my
guide, like the attentive Pilot on the shining star that directs the course
of his Navigations. O God! how sweet shall that rest be which I shall enjoy,
after that I have walked in those ways which thou have taught me; I which
went astray out of the path which leads to thy holy Tabernacle? I was already
entered into the thick forest of this world, where such do easily loose them
selves, who to enjoy tho pleasure and sweetness of the shades, do fly from
tho light of the day, which should direct them in their journey: for soon
does the fearful face of night afright them, and delivers them for a prey
unto wild beasts that cruelly tear and devour them. I did already wander in
this Labyrinth, and I was hopeless to get forth of it, but that thou did
put the thread into my hand, which brought me out of this dangerous prison.

Be hold I am now at liberty, to do homage and service unto that GOD which did
deliver me, to present unto him his image pure and undefiled, and to
acknowledge all those favors, which it has pleased him to bestow on me, to
proceed from his only goodness. He has not only heard me above his other
creatures, giving me the use of divine reason, but he has likewise among men
lifted me up into a throne of honor and magnificence, so that there was
nothing left to perfect my happiness, but only to be able to know it: and
after that I had forgotten my self he did enlighten me by his holy light, and
gave me time and will to bewail my life past, and to amend in time to come.

11. Do then like me that are my friends, and have recourse in time to his
mercy, for he himself calls you into the way of salvation: and be not like
to the stubborn Mule which kicketh against the spur, he wants reason,
knowledge and judgment.

12. For a bit is put into his mouth, and he does continually feel the spur
in his side. In like manner, if at the first warning, which the Lord gives you,
to return into his ways, you do not obey his will, he will rain upon you
showers of calamities, which will make you more miserable then misery it self.

13. You see the stars which twinckle in the firmament, the sand which lies
on the Sea shore, but neither has the sea so much sand, nor the heavens so
many stars, as there are punishments prepared for the obstinate. Their
misery hangs over their head, misfortunes follow them at every step, until
they have thrown them headlong into that gulf, the only thought whereof is
fearful to all those which do remember it, whose easiest places of retreat
are full of cries, groanings, and lamentations: Where pain is without end,
griese without remedy, repentance without mercy, where death is immortal, the
body living but to dye, and the soul to suffer; where the soul feels nothing
but her sin, and the body but his punishment. On the contrary, those which
cover themselves with the Lords favor, which make his mercy their buckler, who
have no other hope but in his goodness, who follow his comandements and are
jealous of his will and pleasure, what felicity is there but they may attain
to? what precious thing is there in heaven, but shall be opened unto them?
They shall sit side by side with their God, and being environed with glory,
so much happiness shall be heaped upon them, as the soul of man is not able
to conceive the least part thereof, much less can my barren tongue express it.

14. I will then rejoice o my God in the hope of such and so many benefits as
thou reseruest in heaven to crown the just withal. Unto this joy I inuit you
all which trust to the words of our Savior, which love justice and
righteousness, there does the reward of your labors attend you, there you
shall be placed in honor and glory, there shall you exchange the sharp thorns
of this world, for flourishing Lillies of all eternity; Oh then shall the
sweat of your afflictions find most sweet rest. Gold comes not forth of the
flames in the Furnace more pure and shining to be stamped with the Image of a
great Prince, and then to serve for the adornment of some rich cabinet, as the
heart of that man which loves his God shall be drawn pure and clean from the
miseries of this world, to be environed with splendour and glory. What day can
now displease me in this world? who shall hinder and stay me from entering into
the house of the Lord, for to live in his service? upon what day of my life
shall I cease from bewailing those sins which kept me forth of his favor?
unite then in me, o my God these two contrary passions, joy and repentance, to
the end that like as the pilgrim, who has lost his way in a desert, rejoices
when he beholds the dawning of the day, and yet for all that cannot forget the
obscure darkness out of the which he is yet scarce come, nor lay aside his
fear of so troublesome a night: even so have I always abhorred my sins
past, and have nevertheless a certain and lively hope to enjoy that eternal
happiness which thou have purchased for us by the price of the blood of thy
dear Son Jesus Christ. Alas! how great is this love, when the Master
spares not the life of his child to redeem his servant? Being then formed
by thy hand, redeemed by thy blood, and purified by thy mercy, I offer my self
unto thee for a sacrifice of obedience; reject me not o my God.

Domine ne in furore. Psalm 37.
O Lord I must needs return again unto thee, and begin a new to implore thy
mercy, for thine anger seems to be newly kindled against me. Alas! my God,
will thou punish me in thy wrath, and cause me to feel the violence of thy
just fury, which my sins have stirred up against me? the torch consumed by
fire falls into ashes, and I being devoured by the heat of thine
indignation, shall vanish away, and nothing will be left of me but only smoke.

2. For I see o my God that thou have let fly the sharpest arrows of thy
vengeance upon me: thou have touched me with thine hand, and thou take it
not of from me. I feel remorse and terror in my conscience, which do astonish
and bruze me like flashes of lightning, and claps of thunder miseries come unto
me by heaps, and one mishappe brings on another, war is no sooner ended but
the plague assaileth me, and death at the last bereaues me of the dearest
pledges which I have in this world: In what then o my GOD shall I take comfort?
shall it be in my self?

3 Alas there is no whole member about me, the disease has pierced even to
the marrow of my bones: there is no part about me, but does reproach me for my
sins, and endures the punishment thereof. I languish in my sorrow and no man
comforts me: mine eyes serve me for none other purpose but to behold my
misery, and my soul but to acknowledge my misfortune.

4. I look round about me, and as much as the eyes of my body and soul can
discern of the time past, I see nothing above, beneath, nor on each side of
me, but sin which compasses me about, and mine iniquites which crush and
press me down: they are heaped upon my head like an heavy burden, and
behold, they smother me.

5. How shall I resist them? what strength have I to defend my self, seeing
that my body falls in pieces? corruption runs from it on every side:
mysoares are no sooner shut, but they open again, and if my body be ill, my
soul is much worsse, it is all confounded and trembles for fear.

6. And as sickness undermines my body, which is ready to die, even so does
sorrow my soul, and steals away the strength thereof, and as a sharp cold
does freeze and wither the tender new bud in the blosome, even so does the
finger of the Lord, which has touched my soul discourage it, and make it to
languish.

7. But Alas my God! what courage can I have, when I behold my self covered
with wounds, and that there is no part of my body free from grief, and that
besides my disease, my licentious pleasures present themselves before me,
which reproach my sin, and deride my vanity? I say to my self, must I needs
dippe my life in the honney of so many delights, to steep it afterward in the
gall of such bitter anguish: where art thou now o deceitful voluptuousnes,
which did melt my soul in the sweere licour of thy pleasures? o what a
draught do thou now leave me.

8 Now o Lord, have I not endured enough? has not my humility sufficiently
chasticed my pride? if I have sinned through foolish presumption, I have since
then fallen upon the ground and covered mine head with ashes; with mine own
arm I have prevented my punishment. I have cleft my heart with cries, and
melted mine eyes into tears, and yet thy wrath continewes.

9 It may be o Lord that thou have not perceued my laments; thou who in the
twinkling of an eye look through heaven and earth, whose sight pearceth the
very bottom of our hearts; o LORD thou have read my thoughts, and know mine
intents what have I craved but thy mercy? wherein did I hope but in thy
goodness? wherefore have I made a public profession of repentance, but to
condemn my self? if my tongue has not lively expressed my desire, alas
Lord! thou know what we would have before we have thought thereon. It is
sufficient to lift up our hearts unto thee, and forthwith thou grantest our
petitions.

10. But wherefore o Lord do thou delay to give me the holy comfort which
thou have promised me? alas, I am hable to do no more, my heart fails me, my
senses are troubled my strength forsakes me, my sight waxes dim, and my
run away soul, is already upon the brinkes of my lips.

11. All my friends stand about me, and do already bewail my death, they have
no hope of my health, they take care for my burial, and question with
themselves, where is the help he expected from his God? where is the favor
which he promised to himself from him?

12. Flatterers are departed from me, they did think to divide my spoils,
they would have prevented my fatal hour, so troblesome am I to the whole world
in the state wherein I stand.

13. They rounded one another in the ear, and made a thousand tales of me:
they did daily invent new practices against me, and thought on nothing so much
as to betray me: he is (said they) upon his death bed, he will never rise up
again, what do we fear? will the shadow of his bones bite us?

14 And I, as if I had been deaf, made as though I heard nothing, and like a
dumb man I answered not a word, my patience was my buckler, and my constancy
my rampire.

15 Every one that saw me so patient in mine adversity, did say, this man for
a certain is dumb, when he is taunted he replies not, could he endure all
these indignities if any feeling of courage or reputation were left him? He
must needs be guilty, for innocence is ever bold in her own defense, yet all
this did not move me.

16. Wherefore I trusted in my God, and am assured that he will help me. Let
the world bend it self against me, let heaven and earth conspire my downfall,
so long as I have his aid, I shall always conquer. By the breath of his mouth
he created all things, and by his breath, if he please, he can destroy them: I
will fight under his banner and I am assured of victory.

17 I have oftentimes said unto them, rejoice not at my misery, though I am
tormented and afflicted, brave me not, for the Lord is long enough to reach
you: trust not to his long patience, for though he has feet of woll, his
arms be of Iron. If he once lift them over your heads, o ye impenitent
souls, he will crush you in such sort, as there shall be no more remembrance of
you.

18. As for my self, I have handled the rod, I have imprinted upon my
shoulders the condemnation of my sin, I have O Lord, appeared before thee
with tears in mine eyes, repentance in my mouth, and sorrow in my heart, I
have fought with my self, for fear least mine enemies should triumph over me.

19. I have openly confessed my fault, I made my sin manifest in time, I
took care to run unto thy mercy in due season.

20. But the more I humble my self before thee, to draw of this running water
out of the fountain of thy grace, which streameth from thy goodness, the more
do mine enemies oppress me, their number does daily increase, they
strengthen themselves on every side, and foresee not the tempest which will
crush them in pieces. They kindle by their pride the furnace of thy wrath; they
despite thy power, which to their destruction they shall soon make proof of.
In a word, they being secured against heaven and earth, do wallow in their
filthy pleasures and raze out, as much as in them is, the mark of divinity
which thou have imprinted in their souls, and shut their eyes at the hope of
salvation, which shines on them out of thy word.

21. I do not cease o my God to admonish them, but they pay me evil for good,
and turn into laughter all that which I do to please thee, and to give them
good example: they do slanderously traduce me up and down the streets, and
lay a thousand wickednesses to my charge: I confess o Lord that I begin to
loose my patience.

22 But my God, strengthen mine infirmity, and forsake me not by any means:
otherwise I should fall like a little child into the first pit I come at.
Increase strength and courage in me o Lord, as much as thou have afflicted
me, giving me firm constancy as often as I shall stand in need thereof, no
less then a charitable mother, who so soon as she hears her child cry,
does straight ways give it the dugge.

23. Nourish me then o Lord with the milk of thine holy charity, to the end
that being in some sort strengthened, I may day and night run on in thy paths,
to attain salvation, the hope whereof shines in thy promises. And if sin
come and stand in my way, I will open the floud-gates of mine eyes, and will
not close them again, till I have drowned it in my tears.

Miserere mei Deus. Psalm 50.
Have pity upon me o my GOD, according to the greatness of thy loving
kindness, and by thine immense mercy pardon the punishment which I most justly
have deserved. For if thou expectest that my fasts, watchings, and prayers
should make satisfaction for my sins, alas! o Lord, that will never be. Mine
offense being measured by the compass of heaven and earth, surpasses the
greatness of the whole world, who then can enuiron and wholly blot it out, but
only thy holy mercy, which is by so much greater, as thy righteousness
exceeds ours? It is thy mercy o Lord which cricleth the whole universe, which
keeps fast together the parts of the world which shake and are ready to fall
upon our heads, to bury with us in their ruin the memory of our sins, to
turn away thy sight from our ungrateful, disloyal and disobedient
generation, which disadvoweth her birth, creation, and conservation from thee.
Let then this merciful goodness which shines in thy divinity, above al thy
other virtues, spread it self now upon me, not in a sparing manner, but
prodigally and without measure. And as thou did once cause the waters to
overrun the tops of the highest mountains, for to smother and ouer-whelme
the wicked, cause in like manner a torrent of mercy to ouer-flowe me, not O
Lord to drown, but to bathe and purify me.

2. And be not satisfied with once clensing me: do not tell me that thou
have regenerated and washed me in the blood of the chaste and innocent lamb,
for notwithstanding my pureness then, thou shall now find me foul and
deformed. I did plunge my self in a deep filthy vault, and am so durty and
disfigured, as thou will no more know me. I do sometimes question with my
self, whether I am he whom thou did create with thine own hands, or no,
but my heart being confounded and ashamed dares make me none answer. O my God
thou have created me of dirt and clay, and lo, I am now such an one as I was
before thou tookest me in hand, I have put off my beauty and comeliness, and
put on dirt and filthiness. But my God, wherefore do thou not new make me?
is thine arm waxed short? do thou want will to do good to thy creature?
alas! thou art Almighty, all good, wherefore then dooest thou tarry? Thy
workmanship o Lord grew obstinate against thee, and took pleasure in
diffiguring and deforming it self: be thou obstinate against thine
handy-worke, and make it fair and perfect, yea, even in despite of it: but my
God, I will be no more stubborn, hold me, take me in hand, turn me as
thou please, repair this dirte, renew it, refresh it with new coullours, it
is ready to obey thy will. But o Lord, when as thou shall have wholly renewed
it, forsake it not for all that, put a bridle in his mouth, which by abstinence
may keep it from gluttony whereunto it is proane: by chastity it may quench
the impudent heates of voluptuousness which warmeth it, by humility it may
beat down pride, which biting envy raises up in her, let pitiful charity
drive hatred and the hunger of covetousness far from it, let the care to
serve and honor thee be a continual spur in the sides of her slothful and
blockish negligence.

3. For otherwise my God, I have made too great proof of these vices which
enuiron me; they will in such sort tear and dismember thy workmanship, as at
thy coming, thou shall find nothing but the fragments thereof all bruzed and
broken. I have had such experience of them, it is they who have brought me
into the state wherein now I am; and I now perceive them standing round about
me, to reproach me with those blottes where with they themselves did defile
me, and to make me guilty of the wrongs which they have done to me. How have
thou sinned, say they? how foul and deformed art thou become?

4. Indeed, I have sinned, I confess it my God, behold, I offer the bottom of
my heart unto thee, take notice of my whole life. I have sinned before heaven
and earth, and the whole world is witness of my misdeeds. But if I had not
sinned, unto whom would thou show mercy? how would thou discharge thy
self of the promises of grace, which thou have so long declared by thy
Prophets? when thou shall come to sit upon the eternal throne of thy Justice,
if we were all just, who would stand in fear of thee? But, to the end thy
greatness may be known, it behooves us when we shall be summoned before
thee, humbly to fall down upon our faces, and to cry out; Be middle o Lord,
for we come not to excuse our selves before thee, our fault is notorious, but
lo, our pardon stands ready, thou thy self have given it us, behold it signed
with thy blood, sealed with thine image, which for our redemption was imprinted
in the weakness of the flesh.

5. Did thou expect O my God, that when I should present my self before
thee, I would make a rampire of mine innocence, or that I was so blind of
understanding to go about to justify my self in thy presence? Alas! o Lord, I
know that I was nothing but sin before I was borne, my mother thought to
bring forth a child, and she was delivered of sin, it had been much better
for her, if so prodigious a burden had proved abortiue, which shameth the
tree which bare it, the earth which nourished, and heaven which ripened it. I
was fed with sin in my mothers womb, I sucked it with her milk, and lo,
it grew up in such sort with me, as it ouer-shaddoweth mine head, and
blinds mine eyes.

6. But when I perceive the eyes of my body to be dazeled, I then open the eyes
of my mind, and begin to discern a far off the beam of thine infallible
truth, and to acknowledge the wonderful secrets of thy wisdom which thou
have revealed unto me. Then my soul, abandoning the impurity of my body,
liftteth her self up unto heaven, and pearceth through his incredible light,
and lookking upon the book of Eternity, she therein reads the treatye of
the new alliance which thou will make with mankind, then returning into her
wretched body, she fills it with hope and joy, and promises it an assured
victory over his sin.

7. For she learned in heaven how thou would take the branch of odoriferous
Hisope in hand, and sprincle upon me the water of purification: thou will wash
me, and I shall become whiter then snow, there shall no one spotte of sin
be seen on me. What manner of washing-lye will that be o LORD, which shall be
made with the ashes of my sins, consumed by the fire of thy charity, with the
water of tears which my repentance shall distill from my heart, and in the
sunshine of thy grace our laments shall be dried up, which shall cause new
spiritual joy to grow up in us, and at the last will make us so white in the
purity of righteousness, as we shall one day shine brighter then the stars
in the firmament.

8. We shall then hear the delectable sound of the trumpet of salvation, which
will proclaim grace and mercy unto all those who will receive it. We shall
then see rotten and consumed bones, to rise up out of their graves, to be
partaker of this universal joy, whereunto thou have invited the whole world.

9. Now to the end I may at that time appear before thee in such honorable
equipage as so noble a magnificence does deserve, put all my offenses o my God
under thy feet, bury them in the center of the earth, to the end that noe eye
may behold them, separate me for ever from mine iniquity, from henceforth I
renounce it, and swear an irreconcilable diuorcement from her.

10, Behold my soul which I offer unto thee, make it pure and clean, power a
new spirit into mine heart, which may conceive nothing but holiness and
righteousness. Establish therein o Lord God, the mansion house of thy holy
spirit, to the end that henceforth, I may think, wish, nor breath any thing,
but thy praises: let thy will be always imprinted in my mind, and thy glory
written in my lips.

11. When thou shall have thus clothed and decked me with piety and integrity,
I shall then be assured, that nothing shall be able to separate me from thy
presence, and then as the true bred Eagle looks directly upon the Sun, even
so will I fix mine eye upon the face of thine Eternity, and will behold in
thy wonderful countenance, all those perfections which now I can not conceive:
thine holy spirit shall never more depart out of mine heart: it shall carry me
on the wings of zealous charity into thy bosom, there to make me an
associate of that celestial joy.

12. Let me then quickly taste the sweetness of this immortal life, save me
suddenly from the rocks of this world, which on every side threaten shipwreck
to my soul: and as the Sailer when he is arrived in the haven crowns the
masts of his ship with garlands of flowers, in token that he is in safty, even
so crown me o my God, with the precious gifts of thine holy spirit, for
pledges of the eternal blessedness which thou promisest me. I say, of thy
spirit, which reigns in thy faithful ones, which distributes faith to thine
elect, charity to thy beloved, and hope to those whom thou have predestined.

13. Now whilst my soul continues in this exile, looking every day when thou will call it to thy self, I will teach sinners the way they ought to follow
for to please thee I will direct them, left that in the darkness of this world
they stumble upon the blocks which shall he presented to them: they will
believe me, and they shall return to thee o father of light, turn to thee o
Father of light, they shall with all their hearts embrace thy law, and walk in
thine obedience.

14. I know o Lord that there be some who will stop their ears at my words,
and will grow stubborn in their sins; they will plot my death, and willingly
would die their barbarous cruelty with my blood. Deliver me my GOD forth of
their hands, and preserve me that I may declare thy righteousness, and
pronounce their condemnation. I will fore-tel them of their miseries, and so
soon as my speech is ended thine hand shall strike them, and so soon as thine
hand has stricken them, behold they shall be for ever crushed in pieces and
confounded.

15. And then thou shall open my lips, and my mouth shall declare thy
victory, the air will be clear, the winds will be appeased, and the floods
will stand still, to hear me sound forth the wonders of the eternal GOD. For
thy praise o LORD shall be the sacrifice which I continually will offer up unto
thee, which at all times will be pleasing unto thee.

16. I would willingly have bloudied thine Altars, with the slaughter of much
cattle: I would willingly have sacrifized a thousand Oxen and as many sheep
in thine honor, but blood stinkes before thee, and their flesh thou acceptest
not, the smoke of such offerings consumes it self in the arie like wind, and
it can not ascend where thou art, the only voice of a just man, mounteth
higher then the heavens, and thine Angels present it unto thee.

17. O how acceptable unto thee is the sacrifize of an heart pierced through with
repentance, an heart that is humbled in the knowledge of his sin? such an one
will thou never reject: he that will go up unto thee must descend down into
himself, the way to touch heaven to lie groueling upon earth: he that will be
heard of thee must hold his peace, and he that will be crowned in thy
kingdom must be beaten and scourged in this world. These are the sacrifices
which can reconcile us unto thee, and enter us into the alliance which thou
have made with us.

18. If thou will have us, o Lord, to offer up unto thee bulls and oxen, and
that we shall make thine Altars smoke with the blood of Beasts, if thou will
have us by the death of an innocent oblation, to represent before thee the
death and innocence of him whom thou have destined for the redemption of our
souls, if the figure of that which shall come to pass in the person of the
Immaculate Lamb be pleasing unto thee in the slaughter of sheep and rams,
pitifully then beehold thy poor people, comfort desolate Sion, encourage her
poor inhabitants, to the end that they may repair the walls of thine holy
city, and re-edifie thy temple, not in equal measure to thy deserts o Lord,
but according to the riches and industry that the world can attain unto.

19. Thither from all parts shall thy faithful people come in heaps to offer
sacrifize unto thee, there only shall thou accept the expiation for their
sins. But my God, neither the blood nor death of beasts can wash out their
filthiness: the expiation of their sin and disobedience is prepared before
all eternity. It is an inestimable sacrifize, an immaculate burntoffering, that
must draw away the veil, dissipate the darkness, and break down the
partition wall for to make us behold the truth of our salvation face to face,
which must cause the beams of the divine mercy to shine upon us, and
reassociate us to the communion of the eternal blessedness which we have
willingly renounced. O must pitiful God, which have cleared the eyes of mine
understanding and made me to see the mystery of my salvation, cause me o Lord
to taste the excellent fruit, which budding on the tree of the cross, shall
quicken with his juice our mortified souls, shall for ever keep and preserve
us from the ruin and calamity, which has so miserably attainted mankind, and
has spread it self all over them, by their own disobedience.

Domine exaudi. Psalm, 110.
O Lord, how long have I cried out for thy mercy, yet I am still expecting
thine aid. The air is filled with my lamentations, the winds have carried the
voice of my complaint to the farthest parts of the earth, and thine ear which
understands what is done in the deepest botto^ of hell, harke^s not unto my
prayer, which pierces the very heavens. Thou art only deaf o Lord in my
respect, and the whole world will sooner then thy self give ear to my
laments. No, no, my God thou have too long stretched out thine arm unto me, to
reject me now when I come unto thee for refuge.

2. Now that I feel a thousand, and a thousand griefs, and that evils
assail me on every side, turn not thy face away from me o Lord. Alas! I
have placed all my comfort in the mild aspect of thy countenance, I have left
the world, and retired my self unto thee, I have forsaken the children of the
earth, to the end to allie my self to the master of heaven, can thou now
cast me of? do not so o Lord, but all the days of my life help my
infirmity.

3. So soon as my voice shall cry out unto thee o my God, so soon let me
feel thee, let thy grace come down as swiftly upon me, as an Eagle to the
succor of her young ones. For if thou assist me not, what combat can I wage
against the enemies of my soul?

4. My strength and my life does continually vanish away like to a light
smoke, which in flying abroad loses it self: that eye which sees it come
forth of the fire, does as quickly see it dispersed, and accompanies it in a
moment from his original to his end: and they that ask what is become of it,
cannot so much as discern the trace thereof. Who has seen pieces of wood lie
drying in the sun, loose both their vigor and verdure, let them behold my
poor bones which are become dry and withered, and crave nothing but a grave:
A grave in deed, too happy for me, if so small a pit may be able to stay
the violent course of mine extreme misery.

5. He that has seen the mowed grass, to turn coulor and wither in the
field, let him look upon my pale and lean visage, which seems to make death
it self afraid. Mine heart waxes dry in the midest of my intrailes, and my
blood withers within my veins; for I no more remember to give bread to my
mouth, and every day I forget to eat meat.

6. My mouth serves me for none other use but to cry out and lament, and the
usual voice of my sorrow is of such force, as it carries away with it all the
remainder of my strength, so as my sorrowful body does by little and little
consume it self, and my boanes do already pierce my skin: why then should I
be careful to pamper this wretched body, which is the subject of my miseries?
wherefore should I study to preserve this life, which wrestleth with so many
discontents, and is tormented with so many afflictions? were it not better for
me, by ending my life, to give an end to my miseries?

7. The Pelican which in the most solitary deserts of Aegipt torments her
self for killing her young ones, and bathes them with her blood to restore them
to life which she berest them of, is she more sorrowful then I? does she
feel more griese then my self? has not my sin procured the death of that
child whom I loved better then my self? and now that all my tears are drawn
dry, blood will gush forth of mine eyes, for fear that weeping should fail
me in such a lamentable misfortune. But the Pelican with the price of her
blood redeemes the life of her young ones, and my wretched self shall for ever
be deprived of that child whom I so dearly loved. Therefore will I abandon
the light of the day, and will confine my self in the thick darkness, like
unto the fatal Owl which stirs not forth of some hollow place, until the
night has spread his obscure mantle over the earth.

8. I am continually awake, always rauing upon my mishap, and seeking to hide
my self from the misery which follows me apace: I seek nothing so much as
some corner to bestow my self in, like to the wild Sparrow, who beaten with
the wind and rain, searches out some place of covert to keep her from the
storm.

9. Mine enemies seeing me in this plight, have derided me, they have
reproched me with my misery: and those which were wont highly to esteem me,
in steed of bewailing mine affliction, have conspired against me. Of what
worth then are the goods of this world, if friends be the most precious
richesse that a man can purchase, and if they prove treacherous and disloyal,
and make so small account of violating their faith?

10. My strength is indeed diminished, the flower of my complexion is withered,
for I have strewed my bread with ashes, I have tempered my drink with tears:
but therefore shall this unbelieving race make me the argument of their laughter?

11. It is true that I met with thine angry countenance in the day of thy
wrath: thou have laid on me the arm of thy vengeance, it has crushed me to
pieces: I was glorious among men, and behold I am now cast down to the ground.
O vain presumption! unto what height have thou raised me, to give me so
terrible a downfall? Alas! what matter could I find in my self, that might
beget such a selfeconceit in me?

12. Even as we see the shadow of a body to decrease by little and little,
when as the sun stands right over it, and at last becomes a small point; in
like manner, so soon as thy wrath did ascend over me o Lord, my life, my
wealth, and my greatness did consume away by little and little: in such sort
as I seem like to the withered hay, without sap and beauty, it is gathered
for the fodder of cattle, and so many fair, sweet, and odoriferous flowers
are made up in bottels among weeds and thistles.

13. But shall I therefore despair? not so, my God, for thy power is infinite,
and lasts for ever, thy mercy is immense, which spreds it self over all
those which trust in thee. Ages shall pass away one after an other, but the
memory of thy goodness shall never have end: for ever, one generation shall
succeed an other, and they shall continually set forth thy praise and loving
kindness.

14. Thou will one day awake, o my God, and show favor unto Sion, for the time
of mercy is at hand. It is already come, behold I see it. The rivers send not
so many clear waters into the large bozome of the Ocean, as thy goodness
shall shed forth favors and mercies upon the earth. Open your hearts oh ye
people, open your hearts, for the liberal hand of my GOD will fill them with
an holy heat, which shall cleanse and purify them more then gold is in the
furnace.

15. Now the building of Sion, is o Lord, the refuge which thy servants wait
for: that it may become the dwelling place of eternal life, the seat of
salvation, the treasury of grace, and the temple of eternity.

16. Then my God shall the nations be astonished, and all the Kings of the
earth shall tremble at the brightness of thy glory. What remotest corner is
there in the world, but shall resound thy happy coming? what people are there
under the sun so confined in darkness, but will open their eyes to behold
the glistering brightness of salvation which shall shine upon them? Heaven it
self shall increase the number of his torches, to give light to this thine
entry into the world, and Kings shall run from all parts to do homage to
the King of Kings, and to the Lord of Heaven and Earth.

17. For in Syon has he erected his royal throne in magnificent and
sumptuous manner: there shall men behold him all environed with glory, darkning
the Sun and Moon with the brightness of his countenance.

18. But what is the cause o Lord that thou have so highly exalted the throne
of thy glory? Is it because thou will contemn the humble prayers of thy
faithful servants, and neglect the whole world, which is nothing in comparison
of this thy greatness? Alas! not so my God: Thou have lifted up thy self in
an eminent place, to the end that all the inhabitants of the earth may see and
acknowledge thee; to have recourse to thy grace and mercy, for thou will be
always ready to come at the humble summons of thy servants, and thou will
never scorn their pitiful requests. Behold they are all set in order like
poor galley slaves condemned to the chain, which wait for the arrival of
some King to set them at liberty on the day of his coronation. In this manner o
Lord dooest thou deliver those, which have given themselves over to the
bondage of sin: at the only twinkling of thine eye their Irons shall fall
from off their hands.

19. Then shall they all be heard to sing a song of glory to the victorious
King, their voice shall be heard in all the parts of the earth, and the memory
of thy singular goodness and infinite mercy, shall be engraued in men's
minds, to pass from age to age, even to their last posterity: when the earth
shall be consumed, the waters dried up, the firmament vanished away, and the
heavens come to an end, even then shall men sing forth the glory of the
eternal God.

20. The eternal GOD who has vouchsafed from the highest heavens to cast his
eyes down to the depths of the earth, to take notice of the torments of poor
captives detained in the prisons of hell, who has heard their gronings, and
made haste to unbind and deliver these poor wretched prisoners, and their
whole posterity. Death had overcome them with the weapons of sin, and
confined them in his dark prisons, but the God of life has vanquished death,
and set them all at liberty.

21. To the end o Lord that they may declare thy praise in Sion, and preach thy
mercy in Jerusalem. But though every one of them had an hundred mouths, and a
voice as strong as thy thunder, they should never be able to attain to the
greatness of thy glory. All the parts of the world do conspire together, but
to represent in their motion some part of thy power and infinite goodness, and
yet they shall miss the mark; for they are bottomless pitts, and more then
bottomless pitts, which have neither bank nor bottom, and which must only
be looked upon a far off.

22. Be pleased then o my God, that thy people assembled together, and
reunited in body and mind, do devoutly offer unto thee the holy desire and
will which they have to honor thee, for the effect it self can in no sort draw
near to thy desert. Take it in good worth o Lord, that the Kings of the earth
do come and humble themselves before thee, to pay the homage and service which
is due unto thee, as to their souerain Lord. They shall lay their scepters on
the ground, and their crowns at their feet, and shall present thee with a
sacrifice of humble devotion, and an innocent conscience. I will be the first o
my God that will prostrate my self before thee, to adore and serve thee with
my whole heart: I will settle my thoughts on thee only, unto thee alone will I
consecrate my spiritte: Quicken it o Lord, to the end that it being purified,
by the holy heat of thy charity, it may receive into it self, (like a
well-pollished looking-glass) the Image of thine incomprehensible beauty and
perfection, and that it may feel the reflection of thy sincere affection, so
as thine infinite goodness may make it one of the number of thine elect, to be
a coheire with them of eternal life.

23. I do now already feel o my God, that thou have enlightened my soul by
thy grace, and have showed me the mercy which thou will offer to all the
children of the earth, my spirit has already seen from a far off how
readily thou walk to deliver the world, which was in danger of death before
thine arrival, that was the cause why thou heardest it cry out unto thee,
saying, tell me o Lord the number of my years, and what time thou will give an
end to my days.

24. Cut not of the thread of my life o Lord at the first or second turn of the
wheel; shorten it not in the midst of his course; stay, my God, til the time
be come; when as thou will open the treasures of thy graces, to give a largess
of salvation unto men: or if at the least thou have determined of mine end, and
that my life cannot be so far stretched out, yet remember my posterity, and
cause him to be borne of my stock, who by his coming shall sanctify the
world.

25. In very deed o Lord I know, that in the beginning thou did make heaven
and earth, and all that excellence which we see in this world, is the
worke-man-shippe of thy hands.

26. But all that, shall wear away, like an ouer-worne garment, men shall
seek after and enquire what is become of it, but it shall be no more found:
it has been made, and it shall be undone, it had a beginning, and must needs
have an end; but thou alone o Lord which art from all eternity shall remain
for ever at one stay. Age, and time which consumes all things, do but confirm
thine essence, and publish thy divinity, and it seems unto me that men are
borne upon the earth to none other end, but to behold on the one side thine
incomprehensible greatness, and their own weakness on the other.

27. Men shift not shirts so often as one selfsame land does oftentimes
change her inhabitants, the one pusheth on another, and all is renewed in a
moment. But thou art yet my God to day, the same that thou were at the
beginning. Every Province of the earth, makes mention of a great number of
Kings which have commanded therein one after another, but heaven and earth do
continually sing unto us, that thou have always been alone, ever like thy
self, and that neither the time past nor that which is to come can in any sort
change thee.

28. Yet notwithstanding o Lord, that we must part hence, I do not lose my
hope to taste one day of the sweet fruit which will heal us of this
contagious disease, which our first parents have communicated to us by eating
of the fruit of sin and death. For our children shall succeed us, and thou will do us this favor, o Lord to continue our posterity from age to age,
until that all of us together do appear in thy presence, not to receive a
rigorous judgment, but to enter by the merrits and intercession of thy
well-beloved Son our Savior into the inheritance of eternal blessedness,
which shall be purchaced for all thy faithful ones by the adoption of thy son,
in the house of thy servant David.

De profundis. Psalm 129.
FRom the bottom of the deepes I have cried unto thee oh my God, being buried
and lost in the most fearful cauernes of the earth: I have called upon thy
name, listen to my voice, and give ear unto my prayer: for all hope of aid
was taken from me, I saw nothing round about me but fear and trembling, and
yet notwithstanding I was not discourraged, but have expected from thee that
which thou have promised to all those which shall live in the fear of thy
name, and in the obedience of thy commandments.

2. Lend then a favorable ear o Lord unto my prayer: if sin have set it
self betwixt thee and me, to whet thee on against mine iniquity, and to make
thee an enemy to my request, chase it away from the aspect of thine eye of
mercy, or else o Lord, shut for a while the eye of thy justice, until that
thine ear of clemency has received my confession, and the humble petition
for favor, which I present unto thee. For I come not into thy presence to boast
of mine own righteousness, but of thy mercy and loving kindness.

3. If thou should keep a register of our offenses, and should call us
to an account, who were able o my God to endure the rigor of thy justice? What
day of my life is there, but would deserve an age of torment? Thou may in a
manner inflict all the pains of hell upon me, and yet the greatest part of
mine offenses will remain unpunished.

4. But notwithstanding that men do offend thee, yet thou let not to
receive the sinner which comes unto thee with confession in his mouth, and
contrition in his heart. He has no sooner looked toward thy mercy, but he
feels it to work in him, to break^ and dissolve sin, which had frozen his
heart with fear and horror. The punishment which did hang over his head,
runs backward from him, and carries away with it this wretched carfulness
which tormenteth the consciences inflicted with sin. This is the reason o
Lord why I would never forsake thy law, but have always waighted, till it
might please thee to show mercy upon me. For he who ill advised, does
despair in his sin, and abandons his soul as lost, dooes like the
abominable usurer, who because he has sustained some loss in his goods,
does therefore deprive himself of life.

5. My soul has not done so; for so soon as she has felt thy heavy hand
upon me, which exacted a part of the punishment which my sins had merited,
she did still for all that keep whole the hope which she had in thy promise.
Even when thy blows fell heavy on my back, I cried out unto thee, Lord God
thy will be done, yet give me as much strength as affliction. Measure my
punishment by my strength, and, my torments increasing, augment my courage,
thou have o Lord, done so.

6. Let all Israel then from the day break until dark night, hope in his
God, let them expect succor from him alone. For his help is ready unto those
which call upon him in integrity of conscience, and purity of heart. It matters
not how great and fearful the misery is, for so soon as the Lord has
understood the cry of his servants, even so soon do they feel themselves
delivered.

7. For he abounds in mercy: he is infinitely good to those which have
recourse unto him. For if our sins surpass all measure, his mercy exceeds
all thoughts. We have deserved a long and grievous captivity; lo, he delivers
us, and sets us at liberty. We have blinded the eyes of our understanding,
behold, he comes and enlightens them.

O Israel, thou have offended the Lord, thou have derided his law, thou have
played with his commandments, thou have forgotten his benefits which he has
bestowed upon thee. He has drawn thee forth of a miserable bondage, he has
fed thee with the bread of heaven, he has caused fountains of water to gush
forth of the barraine rocks, only to give thee drink; he chose the most
delicious garden of the earth for thy dwelling place, he made his covenant with
thee, he gave thee his will in keeping and thou have conspired against his
honor, committed whoredom with strange Gods, trodden his law under thy feet,
thou have in a word deserved more punishments then hell can afford. And he
nevertheless offers himself favorably unto thee: he will redeem thee from
the bondage of sin, whereunto thou were willingly bound, with the price of
his own blood. Behold, he himself pays their ransom which did betray him,
and takes upon himself the punishment for our sins, and pays the forfeiture
of our offenses. With what words shall we give thee thanks? Open then my
lips, my God, my Creator, my Redeemer, to the end that my voice may be
spent, and mine heart enflamed with a burning affection to praise and thank
thee: and cast me down in the knowledge of my self, to the end to exalt me
in the knowledge of that holy mystery, whereby we are re-incorporated into
thee, and re-integrated into thy alliance, for to enter into this blessed
society of glory, in the which all those shall triumph, which shall be
pertakers in the merit of the passion of thy well beeloued Son, the true and
only Savior of the world.

Domine exaudi vocem meam. Psalm 142.
MAn o Lord is at the last weary of all things: continual running puts him out
of breath, too much looking upon a thing dazels the eyes, a thundering noyce,
troubles the hearing: but the more my voice cries unto thee, the stronger it
is, my courage is the more increased, and my prayer is the more pleasing unto
me. Therefore do I every day begin a fresh to cry out, o Lord hearken unto my
prayer, and give ear to my supplication, for all my comfort consists in
praying unto thee o my God. It is my prayer o Lord, which coniures thy
clemency to expiate my sins, not by the rigor of the punishment, but by the
effect of grace which thou have granted us, by the which thou abollishest, by
thy sovereign and absolute power, the memory of our offenses.

2. Enter not then into judgment with thy servant o Lord, give him not over to
the rigor of the law: for of all living creatures which shall appear before
the face of thy rigorous judgment, not one shall be justified, none shall
escape that fearful condemnation, whose pain is not only terrible but
eternal in his terror. Alas! o Lord, who is able to save himself in thy
presence? It is thou who art offended, it is thou who wilt accuse us, thou have
seen our offen^es, and can witness against them, it is thou which shall
judge us. When the accuser shall be the witness, and the witness shall be
the Judge, what shall become of the offender? what excuse can serve to justify
him? But o Lord, I will not trust to that, I will shield my self under thy
favor, and oppose it to thy justice. Thy favor is obtained by the
acknowledgment of our offenses, by the humiliation of our minds, lo, I
prostrate my self before thee, laying open my sin, o Lord have pity upon
me.

3. My sin o my COD, the chief enemy to my soul, has in such sort hurried
and beaten me down, as I now grouell upon the earth, not daring to look up
unto heaven: for so soon as I lift up mine eyes, I see the light which
presents to the day such and so many faults, which do accuse my conscience.
I also do suddenly feel shame in my guilty countenance, which makes me hold
down my face to the ground; my face unworthy to look up to heaven, the Lord
whereof it has so grievously offended; my face, which is not valiant enough to
cast up his eyes toward those places, which have so many lightning flashes
prepared to root out guilty offenders.

4. My spirit then has conducted me into darkness, and has buried me like a
dead man in the cave of obscurity. My soul is highly grieved within me, and
mine heart is astonished; like unto his who walking with an erected
countenance, is by misfortune fallen into the bottom of some pit; his senses
are forthwith troubled, he forthwith loses his reason and torments himself,
he knows not what to will or do, till calling his wits together, he takes
notice of the place where he is, and the manner how he fell down: for then he
begins by little and little to get up again, and to climb with great labor
from the place whereinto he easily fell.

5. Even so, I having called to memory from far, the remembrance of things
past, and representing to my self in a deep meditation the works of thine
hands, and considering exactly the things which thou have wrought: namely
remembering the state wherein thou did create us, and then calling to mind
that wherein I find my self now as it were crushed down in the ruins of
sin, I curse the hour wherein my mother conceived me: I detest the day
which first opened mine eyeliddes to cause me to look upon heaven and earth,
the witnesses of my weakness; and at last finding nothing in this world which
can comfort me in this distress, I come again unto thee.

6. I fall down on my knees before thee, I lift up unto thee mine arms and
hands, and my soul thirsts after thy grace, with as great a desire, as the
earth gaping with heat, waits for a pleasing shower of rain in the hottest
time of summer.

7. Run then hastily unto me o my God, for I am already out of breath, my
courage fails, and lo I fall fainting down, will thou tarry till I am dead?
I am so already if thou make not the more have, for my senses fail by little
and little, my soul slideth sweetly out of my body, leaving it without motion,
and I am like unto him who is let blood in his foot in hot water, whose life
runs out with his blood, not feeling the cause of his death.

8. Now o Lord, if thou keep thy self far from me turning thy countenance
away, I shall become like unto those who go down into the bottom of the
grave; pale death will discolor my visage and benum my senses: and that which
is worsse, spiritual death o my God will kill my soul; will fill it with
fear and horror and bereave it of the knowledge of thy singular goodness and
the hope of grace which shines in thy wonders, like a glistering star in an
obscure night.

9. Cause me then betimes to understand and feel the effects of thy mercy, and
in the morning, when the sun shall arise upon the earth, let thy clemency
rise upon me, to enlighten mine ignorance, and to direct me in the way of thy,
commandments: But let it not do o Lord like thy Sun who, at the end of his
race, plungeth it self in the sea, hiding his light for a time from poor
mortals: but let it perpetually assist me; let it be no more separated from
me then my soul from my body: for thy mercy is far more the soul of my
soul, then my soul is the life of my body.

10. Let it not then leave me; let the brightness thereof still direct my
paths in thy ways, let it still guide me in the way which I must walk to
come unto thee. For my spirit which has thrown it self into the midst of
the briers of this world, which has gonne astray amongst her thickest bushes,
can no more find out her right way, but walking at all adventures, loses both
her way and her labor, going still back-wards from the place whether she
thought to arrive. But my GOD I still wait for thy help, I hope for succor
from an high.

11. I am prisoner in the hands of the cruellest enemies of my life; make have
o Lord to deliver me: thou art my refuge, receive me into thy protection,
teach me what thou would have me to do, for thou art my God, unto whom
only I now resolve my self to do service. Away, far, far from me deceitful
pleasure, which hereto fore did bewitch my soul, and poison my mind: thou
have by thy lickorish delights inueigled me, and with a little honney thou have
made me swallow a most bitter and deadly pill; which spredding it self through
my members, has in such sort mortified and made me giddy, as there is small
difference betwixt me and a dead person; and my body is not only thus
mortified, but my soul likewise, wherein consists the original of my life
present and to come.

12. It behooves then thine holy spirit to come unto me, to warm again my
dying soul, to take it by the hand to lead it into safety, and to quicken it,
imprinting in it the image of thy righteousness, which may defend it against
the temptation, which on eueryside does beseege it and threaten her ruin.

13. Thou will come then, and at thine arrival thou shall draw my soul out of
trouble, and in showing mercy unto me, thou shall destroy all those which have
conspired against me. Then shall my grief have an end, and theirs begin: it
shall be a beginning of their forrow which shall never end: but as rivers rising
out of their springs run on still bigger and bigger until they fall into the
bosom of the sea, which has no bottom; even so shall their miseries
increase, and at the last shall heap upon them extreme torments and infinite
distress.

In this manner shall all those perish which vex my soul: for, o GOD, I am thy
faithful servant, whom thou have remembered, and thou will not forget those
who in disdain of my Lord have so shamefully abused me: they laughed at my
misery, but the time draws on when they shall bewail their own. Thy
vengeance begins to be kind: be against them, and they shall wither like
leaves upon the trees at the approach of winter. O GOD what glory shall I give
unto thy name, and how shall I begin to declare thy praise? shall I publish
thy goodness in the creation of so many wonderful works which are underneath
the sun? thy wisdom in thy preservation of them? shall I preach thy Justice
in the condemnation and punishment of the pride of the Angels, and disobedience
of men? Shall I sing of thy mercy in the redemption of those who offending thy
law, had thrown themselves headlong into the bondage of eternal death? to
what part of thy praises may the humble sound of my voice attain? and though
my voice were able, what ears are capable to receive it? All things fail me
o Lord in this business, except courage and will, which full of fervent
affection do cry out unto thee. Aid with thy grace their weak strength, and
seeing the tears of my penitence have washed away the filth of sin,
wherewith my soul was heavily laden, give it now the wings of faith and hope,
which may carry it with a swift flight into thine arms, to reunite it to her
first original, without ever nourishing any other thought then that which
shall tend to the honor of thy seuice, and advancement of thy glory.

FINIS.
Meditations on seven Consolatorie Psalms of David.
Dominus illuminatio mea. Psalm 26.
AFter that I had a long time bathed my heart in my tears, and sighed forth a
thousand sorrows in bewailing my sins: I thought o Lord, that I had appeased
thy wrath, and that my miseries should forthwith end. But alas! as I walk on
in the world, and determine with innocence of life to converse amongst men, I
perceive their envy to be turned against me, and all their envy to be turned
against me, and all their endeavors bent to do me hurt. So as I begin to
doubt, whether I am yet reconciled unto thee, and whether that this my
penitence have satisfied the or no, But when castinge mine eyes on every side,
I perceive that this affliction is common to me with all honest people, when I
behold every where what practices are used against them, how that their
constancy is continually put to the trial, and on the contrary, how that the
wicked do abound in delight, pleasure, and all manner of wealth, I stand all
amazed and confounded. For on the one side I call to mind, how thou art a
great and a righteous GOD, whose all-seeing eye pearceth the profoundest
deepes, whose almighty hand stretches it self forth to the farthest parts of
the world. And on the other, I perceive how those that lift up their heads
against thee, and oppress thy poor and innocent servants, do prosper in thy
sight, and wax proud every day for thy happy success of their impiety. I
confess o Lord, that in this contemplation I remain as though I were dull and
blind, not being able to pearce through this thick mist, which did dazell the
eyes of mine understanding. But at the last o Father of light, thou have opened
mine eye liddes, and enlightening me with the beams of thy wisdom, thou have
made me to understand the reason thereof: and freeing me from the travail
and doubt wherein I was, thou have filled me with assurance of my salvation,
and given me a most certain consolation: so as now, I not only neglect the
threats of the wicked, and despise their insolency, but being armed with an
admirable constancy and greatness of courage, I of my self, do undertake the
combat, and cry out with a loud voice: Happen what will, I now fear nothing.
For although God for a while do exercise his faithful servants, yet he
forsakes them not at their need, but does in such sort mix their adversity
with their strength, as they ever remain victorious in this encounter. And
indeed, so long as I shall put my trust and assurance in his mercy; what
occasion shall I ever have to fear?

He has now taken my life into his protection, and covers me on all sides
with the wings of his power, who is able to enforce him to forsake me? what
shall I fear, if he defend me, whom all the world stands in fear and awe
of: his forces are not armies of men, but legions of Angels, Princes and
Captains, are not his ministers, but lightenings and tempests: his
displeasures, are not strokes and wounds, but earthquakes, swallowings up of
Cities, inundations of Countries: Thou have already o Lord, taken all these
weapons in hand, and art ready to thunder upon the pride of the wicked, who
have conspired the destruction of good men. But because o my God thy mercy does
for a while hold back the arm of thy divine vengeance, thou comfortest me in
the mean time with a firm hope, that thou will never forsake me: And I seem
daily to hear thee, speaking thus unto me, Tarry yet a little while, the
hour which I have appointed is not yet come, and build thou in the mean time
on my promise, and what affliction soever is prepared for thee, assure thy
self, I will make thee to overcome it. My courage o LORD increases, when I
feel thee thus to second me; and this thine exhortation does more animate me
to patience, then thee applaudes of the people do the wrastler in the midst
of his game. Nothing does now any more astonish me, all these practices and
conspiracies against my life and honor seem like the tempestuous waves of the
raging Sea, who roaring a far off, come and break themselves against the
foot of some rock, they are scattered at the first shock, and the blow yields
nothing but a vain sound, which is the end of these great menaces: It is
certain, that the conscience of an innocent person, builded upon thy favor,
is stronger then the greatest rocks, and no furious assault is able to shake it.

3. What shall I now fear any more? a sort of wicked people who compass me
about, seeking means to surprise me? they invent sundry means to entrappe
me. Behold how they look at one side, how they bend their brows and grind
their teeth at me, I do verily believe that their cheifest desire is to tear
me in pieces with their teeth, to glut themselves with my flesh, to gnaw my
bones, and to drink my blood. O cruel beasts, how can ye thus change your
natures, how can ye thus abjure all humanity? Do you think that because ye
have forgotten GOD, that GOD has forgotten his servants? Do ye think that
his seru^nts are as far separated from him, as your selves are from
righteousness?

4. And though like cruel Tigers ye have shed your poison upon me, ye
have disquieted me with your fearful cries, and torn me in pieces with your
teeth and talents, yet your strokes have none otherwise lighted on me then on
burnisht steel, they would not pearce me, mine innocence is invulnerable, and
at the last being tired and spent, ye are constrained to make retreat, and
lying flat on your bellyes; ye bark and grinne in despite, but ye have no
more power, and ye have none other weapons left, but only the will to do
evil. But because your voice is abomination before God, and that by your
threatenings ye blaspheme him, he will wholly root ye out, and throw down
those hills upon you which your ambition and avarice have heaped one upon an
other, thinking thereby to scale his throne, and to rob him of his glory.

5. O Lord! what sight have thou presented to mine eyes? I am now so assured of
thy mercy, so comforted by the care which I perceive thou have of thy faithful
servants, as albeit I should see never so great an army of men, yet I would
not fear them. Let them bring against me an Army composed of all the nations
of the earth, let them place Scithyans on the right wing of the battle,
Aethiopians on the left, the East Indies and America in the rereward, and place
the rest of the world for the battle in the midst, add thereunto what
so-euer the art of killing men is able to invent, so as my GOD conduct me, I
will without fear pass through the midst of them. And if he being angry
with the world, please to use my hands to revenge him on their impiety, I will
cut them all in pieces, so as not one of them shall remain alive.

6. No, I do now rejoice, when I hear tell that the wicked bend themselves
against me, and assure my self that it is GOD who prepares matter for my
glory: for o my Lord, be thou only near unto me, and the victory is mine
one, bless my weapons, and mine enemies are confounded. But what weapons?
breath only upon them, and they shall be scattered abroad like the dust driven
by a great wind: yet for all that o Lord I beseech thee, blow not yet upon them
the breath of thy vengeance, let it please thee to tarry a while, to see if thy
long suffering will amend them. As for my self, albeit I am covered with their
wounds and defamed by their wrongs, yet I had rather have them to be the
subject of thy mercy then of thy justice, and I desire, if thou so please, that
their unrighteousness may rather serve for my confirmation, then for their
own damnation.

7. Thou know o Lord my wishes, thou read in my heart, how I never
requested vengeance at thy hands, my vows do co^iure thy mercy; my thoughts
tend only unto peace: will thou understand the sum of my desires and the end
of all my prayers? it is o LORD, that I may spend my days in thy faithful
service, that thou will make thine holy house my dwelling place, and that so
long as I shall be separated from thee and from thine Heavenly Tabernacle,
being staked down to the earth by the counterpoise of my flesh, all my
thoughts may be united unto thee, and my self made wholly conformable to thy
will. O blessed dwelling place, which art able to cover us from worldly
passions, from concupiscence of the flesh, and in a word from the assaults of
the Devil. For there o Lord thou art present with us, and as much as thou
can thou drawest thy self down from Heaven to remain amongst us, thou
fillest us with thy self to cleanse us from sin, and changest our carnal
will into a quickening spirit, to make us to feel thy wonders, to comprehend
thy mercies, and to conceive thy power.

8. Grant then o my God, that being incorporated into thee, as much as mine
infirmity, and thine infiniteness will permit, I may be illuminated with the
beams of thy wisdom, to the end that shining in mine understanding, it may
cause me to know thy will. For it is the thread o Lord which is able to guide
me safely through the bywaies of this worldly labyrinth, it is the passeport
whereby we attain to his eternal life, the which we daily sigh for. Reveal
then unto me this thy will and lay it up in my soul, to the end I may
carefully keep it, and that in the midst of thy Church I may build an Altar
for it with my mouth, in offering it up daily unto thee, under the sacred veil
of thy holy word.

9. For o Lord seeing that thou have shut me into thine holy tabernacle,
showing me the sacred mysteries of thy divinity: and that in the hardest time
of mine adversity, thou have received, hidden, and retired me under thine
Altar, and not content therewith, have caused me to enter into the holy of
holies, and into the secretest place of thy Tabernacle, where thou art wont to
reveal thy most secret commandments; cause me to conceive them so directly,
as I may be able faithfully to deliver them to thy faithful servants.

10. For seeing thou have lifted me up on so eminent a place and set me on
an high pillar for all the world to look on, and have honored me above mine
enemies, grant that the foundation of my faith may be as firm and solid as a
rock, and that the favor which thou show unto me may be a testimony of thy
righteousness, making me worthy and capable of those good things which it
pleases thee to bestow upon me.

11. As for my self o Lord, I will endeavor reverently to handle the ministry
which thou have committed to my charge, thou know how I have carried my
self therein; I have turned on all sides to know what might please thee, I
would willingly have sacrifized sheep and calves unto thee, I would willingly
have bathed thine altars with blood, but such an oblation is to small for thee.
I have o Lord slain my heart, dedicated mine affection, and vowed my thoughts
unto thee: and drawing them from the bottom of my stomach, I have presented
them unto thee in my voice, whereby thou have understood all that which my
soul desires; which is, only to please thee in all mine actions. My cry then
was mine offering, the which thou did accept, opening the Heavens to
entertain and receive it. I will then o LORD all the days of my life sing thy
praise, and rehearse the hymn of thy glory.

12. Give ear o pitiful God unto my songs, and take in good part the voice,
which witnesses thy goodness, and publishes thy mercy. Increase in me both
strength and courrage, to lift up my cries and spirits unto thee. And seeing
that thy mercy is never deaf to those that call upon thee sincerely, send it
down upon me for all manner of felicity attends it: send it down o Lord, for
thou have promised it to all such as shall inuoke it.

13. How often have thou heard my heart, I say my heart, I speak not of my
mouth, for I only unto thee with my heart, crying out unto thee, saying, what
o Lord? I have sought thee with so much carefullnes day and night, in peace and
war, in rest and torment. I have desired nothing so much in this world, as to
beehold thy face, not o Lord the face of thy divinity wherein that fearful
majesty is imprinted, which shines like lightning, and which human eyes are
not able to bear, but at the least wise that face covered and veiled with thy
works, the which albeit we can behold it but behind, and that very obscurely,
does seem most admirable unto me, and does wholly ravish and draw me forth of
my self. If then o Lord, thou art this uncreated word which has created all
things, thy word which is a part of thy will, and thy will a part of the whole,
does it not represent thy countenance unto me, wherein I behold many excellent
marks of divinity, which brightly shine on every side? o Lord I am amorous of
this rare beauty, I have none other care or thought, but how to enjoy this thy
presence, which shows it self in thy word, as in the mirror of thy divinity.

14. Seeing that thou perceiuest the sanctity and sincerity of my love, deprive
me not of this sacred object, which blesses and sanctifies my thoughts: if
thou do abhor my sin and if the deformity thereof do displease thee,
enter not into fury against me, neither turn away from me this fair and
admirable face of thine: Thy warth o Lord, is only upon such as glory in their
sin, and wax stubborn in their iniquity. But I thy servant do humble my
self before thee, and do acknowledge, that being an unworthy sinner as I am,
I durst not appear in thy presence, but that thy cleme^cy brings me before
thee. Thou shall not then reject me, for thou must forthwith then reject thy
mercy whereunto I am so strictly bound and tied, that as it is not to be
separated from thee, even so can it not be seauered from my penitence.

15. If it please thee, then thou shall dwell with me, and seeing it has
pleased thee to aduouch me for thy servant, and to put me to this combat,
thou shall not forsake me therein, otherwise my destruction would turn to thy
shame, whereas my victory will redound to thy glory. Now o Lord cause this
aid to be continually with me. For, as mine own infirmity does ordinarily
fight against me, even so is it needful that my succor should ever be at
hand. If thou estrange thy self from me never so little, my soul will vanish
away, in the same manner as would my body, by the loss of my soul: For thou o
Lord art more the soul of my soul, then my soul is the life of my body. I do
very well know, that in me thou shall find a dwelling place, in no sort
worthy thy divine Majesty, yet for all that, disdain not to enter into me;
where thou come, all magnificence abounds, and where thou art, there is
always honor enough: Thou do not o Lord honor thy self by visiting me, but
thou thereby do honor unto me thy poor servant, wherefore should thou
leave the brightness of the heavens, and the glistering of the stars, to
come down here on earth to so dishonorable a subject? But as I think thou
dooest it to give warning to thine Angels not to grow proud in their
magnificence, in regard they are thy creatures, and that thou art able to make
the basest dweller upon earth as glorious as they. That is the reason why thou
descendest from heaven, to show mercy upon us, and bearing a part in our
misery, thou come to re-establish us in our ancient perfection. And because
we, as much as in us was, have defaced the image of the divinity, which thou
had imprinted in us, thou of thine especial grace come to renew those
beauties and sparks of our first nature. It is thou then which art not only
content to be our Creator, but our redeemer likewise, and as thou art our
father, in like manner it pleases thee to be our protector and defender. When
all the world forsook us, thou stretchedst out thine arms unto us, and
did receive us under the wings of thy clemency.

16. I stood in great need thereof, for I knew no more whether to go. My
father and mother had forsaken me, that father I say, who had tenderly fed and
brought me up did abhor me, when he perceived that I delighted wholly in
thee, and that I had left the vanities of this world. They beheld me with
sorrow, and accounted me for a lost child. The kind embraces of my brethren
were converted into disdain, the sweet friendship of my sisters changed to
contempt, and the loving welcomes of my friends turned into derision. Whether
now should I make retreat? If my dearest friends use me in this manner, what
will mine enemies do, whose mouth is all bitterness and tongue poison, whose
actions and ordinary exercises, are wrongs and reproaches? But when I am most of
all forsaken, then art thou nearest unto me, then do thou most favorably
embrace me, and most liberally powrest upon mine head the treasures of thy
mercy.

17. Now seeing it pleases thee in this abundant manner to bestow thy grace
upon me, to the end I may be able to keep it, teach me how I ought to serve
thee. Learn me thy law, and how to direct my paths, to walk always aright
in this narrow thornie way, which should conduct me to the haven of health.
For o Lord, I have left long since that easy beaten way strewed with earthly
pleasures, and which leads those that follow it to destruction and damnation.
Show me then my God, thy way, for under such a guide I shall never go astray,
show it I say, unto me o Lord, for if I stray never so little, I am undone,
mine enemies watch to surprise me, and to find matter to dishonor me, and
thy self likewise, because they know I serve thee truly and faithfully.

18. Give me not over then into their hands, to do with me after their hearts
desire, for they would soon deprive me both of life and honor. They have
already laid their plotte, invented a thousand accusations, practiced a world
of witnesses, but their lies return upon themselves, and bear witness
against them. Falsehood cannot be hidden, she lies open, and truth pierces
it through on all sides. It is compounded of pieces ill joined together, which
fall a sunder at the first blow they receive, and being opposed against
innocence, it melts away like Snow before the sun.

19. But if as they desir, they should heap slanders upon me, and smother me
under the burden of their wrongs, I would not for all that be discouraged. I
have not put my trust o Lord in the richesse and honors of this world, they
are commonly the portion of the wicked, they are for the most part the rewards
of their perfidious wickedness and deceits: this merchandise is commonly
bought with none other money. All my trust and hope o Lord is in thee, the
world is not able to contain it, the fruit of my labors does not grow in the
land of the dead, it is in the land of the living that I wait to gather them,
there do I hope to see my wealth, nay rather thine, o my GOD. Other men look
for the fruit after the blossom, but I expect it after the fall of the leaf.
After that the leaf of my body shall be fallen, I hope that my soul shall
flourish with new fruit, and shall be clothed with the eternal verdure of
immortallity.

20. Be patient then my soul, and bear thy self valiantly, redouble thy
courage, and wait till my GOD come toward thee. Be not astonished at the
prosperity of the wicked, fear thou not though they do oppress good men:
And because thou see o Lord, that I am not strong enough of my self, assist
and underprop me, least that the affections of the wicked cause me to
remove forth of the place where thou did set me; second my fervent
zeal, to the end that having fought valiantly in the assault which the wicked
make upon me, I may stand ready when thou shall open the gate, and being
entered in triumph with thee, I may sit at thy feet at such time, when thou
shall judge the quick and the dead. Then we shall see the great difference
betwixt their lives and ours, and what reward attends them: they have had their
wealth in this world, it shall be said unto them, Depart hence, for you stand
indebted in a great sum, think upon yielding an account of the goods which
were committed to your keeping, and pay the arrerage for the misspending of
them. Your dwelling is prepared for you where you deserve, among eternal
pains and torments, the rigor whereof has been often denounced unto you, and
yet it could never draw you from your ungodly life, ye shall now feel it,
because then ye did not fear it. But as for those o LORD which have been
patient in thy name, and suffered in thine honor the fury of the wicked, thou will say unto them. Come ye blessed children of my Father, enter into the
Tabernacle of glory, to judge with him the quick and the dead. Comfort thy
self then my soul, and wait for this time, hope in GOD, GOD almighty and
most merciful, who has never forsaken the just man in his adversity, nor
never stopped his ear against the innocent which was oppressed.

Benedicam Domino in omni tempore. Psalm 34.
BLessed be thy name o Lord, which have comforted me in my sorrow, blessed be
it for ever which have succored me in mine affliction. All things have their
appointed hour, and all the actions of men are disposed by times and seasons,
change serves for rest, and rest refreshes the ordinary labor of living
creatures: nothing can continue at one stay without relaxation: yet for all
that, herein this rule fails, for I o my God, do and will continually
bless thy name: the sun rising shall find me praising thy name; the sun
setting shall leave me praising thy name, I will thereby begin the months
and the years, and thereby I will finish them: o eternity, I have no feeling
of thee in this world, but only in this will of mine, which is ever ready
perpetually to praise and glorify thy name o my God. My body consumes with
age, and my strength fades away, but my soul, obstinate against eorruptible
humanity, does not only last, but increases daily in this holy affection. If
I think to take my rest, my heart gives spurs to my thoughts. If I think
to be silent, my soul breaks forth betwixt my lips, and by maine force
forms a voice which prononnceth the glory of my LORD. What makes thee o my
soul so fervent in the praises of my God? I see well that thou know, that
thou have drawn thine essence from him, and waitest by him to be glorified,
what usury do thou offer him? Thou presentest him with a parcel of his
praises, and thou in the mean time expectest to be made partaker of the
riches of his glory. For from him only thou art to hope for all honor. The
heavens shall pass away, and shall wear like an old garment, and it shall be
changed, but God shall remain to triumph over the ruins of the world. Peaceable
and meek people shall be on every side about him; they shall hear the
triumphant hymns which shall be sung to his victory, and filled with joy, they
shall accord their voices to the trumpets of the Angels.

2. Let us begin then betimes to learn the songs of his glory, let us
magnify him and exalt his name as high as our voices will stretch, let us
re-enforce our cries, to the end they may ascend as high at the least as we can
discern them, that the air filled with our songs, may carry them on the
wings of the wind to the very farthermost parts of the earth to the end that
all people may be wakened with the sound of our tunes, and rejoice when they
shall in this manner hear the name of the Lord of heaven and earth to be
exalted, the lord, who is the trusty and assured refuge of all those which call
upon him.

3. I sought him and he forthwith heard me. I no more knew whether to go, and
after that I had cast mine eyes on every fide, finding nothing able to succor
me, the whole world forsaking me, I returned toward my self, and bewayling my
calmity beheld my self: And on a sudden he at once filled me with strength
and courage, and causing my soul to rebound out of the gulf of sorrow and
tribulation which had swallowed me up, he said unto me, trust in me for I am
here, then I cried out o Lord where art thou? make have and quickly help me,
and forthwith his spirit came down upon me and as a strong wind drives away
the clouds, even so did it drive from me all manner of grief and aflictions.

4. Come then and run unto him, come, the way is easy, it is open on ouery
side, he shows himself every where, in what place so ever we be he calls us
unto him. He is so much afraid least we should go astray, as he comes down
from heaven to carry the torch before us to give light unto our feet. For he
is the Father of light, and gives a purer light to our souls then to our
bodies, it dissipates and scatters of it self, all that which may hurt and
offend us. Come then and draw near unto it, for so long as it shall shine
upon you, you shall walk with an erected browe, and nothing shall be able to
offend you, your strength shall be renewed within you, and nothing shall be
able to confound you: if your sin offers to show it self, it will drive it
away: if your enemies come toward you it will ouer-throw them.

5. Will ye behold an excellent proof of his help and singular mercy. Look
upon this poor miserable wretch, who was accounted the maister-peece of
misfortune, who was supposed to have lost all that he had, yea, very hope it
self, the only comfort of the miserable, yet he no sooner cried unto God, but
he forthwith heard him and delivered him from the misery wherein he was, he
has brought him to the haven and set him in a place of safety.

6. He sends his Angels to the aid of his servants, who compass them about
like a strong guard, and stir not from them till they have delivered the^ out
of al danger. For as he is great, so are his ministers mighty: and albeit of
himself he is able to do all things yet in regard of his greatness, he
executes his will and pleasure, by the means of his creatures governing the
small ones by the mean, the mean ones by the highest, and the highest by
himself.

7. Taste then a little how sweet his mercy and goodness is, how happy is he
which puts his trust in him. The swallow is very careful of her young ones
and yet she often lets the^ cry out for hunger, mixing their sweet with
bitterness: but our God comes at the first cry, at the first sign, at our
first wish, and so soon as he perceaues that we thirst after his succor, he
puts into our mouths the fertile dugges of his goodness, and sheds betwixt our
lips the sweet milk of his grace, which quenches the thirst of our
infirmity, and the heat which our sin like a rotten ulcer has in gendred in
our consciences.

8. Now seeing he is so good unto us, and denies us nothing that we ask him,
take heed I pray ye unto your selves, I speak unto you on whom he has
bestowed so many benefits, whom he has sanctified with his holy blessings,
whom he has set apart to be his chosen, and to be partakers of his love. Take
heed least ye offend him by your unthankfulness, and make your selves unworthy
of his benefits by a distrust and unbelief of his goodness. For those which
fear him never want any thing, in fearing him they hope in him, also they
fear him with a loving fear, with a fear, not that he will hurt them, but
with a fear to offend him, or rather with a fatherly reverence, which makes
him by so much the more the ready to do us good, as we are respective to
demand it. For he of himself knows what is necessary for us, he forthwith
preuents our desires if they are not agreeable to his will, and makes us rich
in the midst of our poverty, and valiant in the midst of our weakness.

9. On the contrary, he does not so to the rich worldlings, whose wealth he
has not blessed, for those men are needy in their riches, starued in their
abundance, their wealth melts into poverty, their magnificence vanishes away
into smoke, and becomes like to a river whose springhead is damned up, his
channel remains dry, his banks lose their greenesse, and the trees planted
thereon wither and fade. But those which have recourse unto God and do not
forsake him, who refer all to his honor, shall never want any good thing,
because the fountain of all goodness, which is the love of GOD, springs in
the midst of their souls, and sheds it self abroad through all the parts of
their body.

10. Now in regard you see how much profit there is in fearing God, how his
fear is that which reconciles us unto him, this reconciliation does purchase
us his favor, does increase our felicity, come unto me and I will teach you to
fear him, who like a good and merciful father, does never deny his mercy unto
him which acknowledges his sin, and is willing to return into the way of well
doing.

11. Do you desire to please him, by that means to live in his favor which
is as much to say as to live happily, and to pass your days in tranquillity
of spirit, and plenty of al things necessary for this mortal life, and
moreover to walk apace in the way of this immortal life, which tarrieth for
us after our departure hence: In a word do ye desire his blessing, which is as
much to say as a firm and certain prosperity, which begets in us a
spiritual joy, which will keep your hearts always open to breath his
honor, and to use, with contentation, the wealth which he lends you in this
world? In a few words I will show ye the way. For I know wherein he
delights and which of our actions do please him.

12. The first thing that ye shall do, bridle your tongue, that it utter no
words which may offend Gods honor, nor use sharp and bitter speeches. Do you
see this little member, how nice and tender it is? yet nevertheless it is the
helm of our life, which steereth and turns our minds on the same side as it
self is turned. For so soon once as it is filled with naughty and vicious
speeches, it carries the passions of our heart, where they are conceived, unto
the depth of our understanding, and does water it in such sort, as it forthwith
loses the form and figure of reason which God has inspired into it, do you
not see how a little spark of fire burns down a whole building? even so the
tongue gives sin entry into us, brings him in deafely and spreading his fire
abroad in our soul, consumes in us all matter of goodness. Let us then
command our lips to receive nothing but the bare and simple truth, and let
lies and deceit before ever banished from us. For if we shut up the evil
cogitations which may arise in our hearts, not giving them any vent, they will
in the end smother themselves, like to a fire which has no air.

13. Let us first of all then put far from us all deceit and lying, for the
true praise which God expects from us, is, that we imitate him as much as our
nature will permit. Now he is the God of truth and righteousness, who can
neither love nor cherish us, so long as lying, which is his contrary, shall
dwell in us. Secondly we must fly from all sin whatsoever; to avoyde evil,
is the beginning of well doing, and if God find us empty of evil meaning, he
will fill us with good, and will teach us what we ought to wish and procure.
He learneth us that which we ought chiefly to desire. It is peace which he
will have us to wish for, with all our hearts. Peace first with him, which is
the heap of all goodness, the which we cannot have, unless we yield him that
obedience which we owe him. Peace afterward amongst our selves, without which
we cannot obtain his. For he has commanded us to love our neighbors as our
selves, but if we, instead thereof, breath forth nothing but blood and rapine,
what peace can we have with him, whose laws and commandments we break? For
war and discord are the roots of unrighteousness, and are abominable before
God.

14. His eye, which is this good and merciful eye, does not look but upon
the just: his light shines only on them, his wonders are wrought in their
behalf; his ears are only open to their prayers: and we may properly say,
that his Justice stands at his side which examineth the lives of such as
present themselves before him and does recommend unto him the prayers of those
that are of an upright heart.

15. As for those who take delight in doing evil, he does look upon them, but
it is with an eye kindled with fury, whose beams are like arrows of pain and
misery, which he shoots into their souls, filling them with fear and
amazment, with a thousand other mischeefs which he sends unto them, as the
earnest of eternal torment which attends them. He thinks not on them but only
how to root out their memory from the face of the earth, and by his justice to
wash out the spots of their polution: for he has a long time known their
impenitent heart, which has insolently neglected his holy mercy.

16. The Just have not done so, for they returned unto God in time, and crying
after his clemency, they did at the last obtain it, they now enjoy it as their
portion, he has drawn them forth of all the troubles wherein they were
plunged, and has covered them with his favor as under a brazen wall, so as no
violent evil whatsoever is able to pearce through it.

17. Truly god is good and favorable he is always near to the afflicted
which call upon him, he forsakes him not, neither day nor night, so soon as
sorrow has humbled us, and caused us to know what need we have of him,
behold he is at hand to save us.

18. The righteous indeed are afflicted with strange calamities, and we may
in a manner say, that they are the subject of misery, so many evils do at once
seem to ouer-whelme them. But it is only to make the mercy of God the more
illustrious and notable in their behalf: For the greater that their
tribulation is, the brighter does Gods pity and compassion shine in their
conservation.

19. He preserves the least of their bones, yea, namely not an hair of their
heads shall perish or be plucked off, but by his express will, and he never
wills it, but for their good and salvation. More-ouer a! their wealth and store
is under his protection, and when he pleases he will multiply their riches,
he will make his blessings to flourish in their houses, and he will increase
their wealth and possessions above all envy.

20. On the contrary the life of the wicked shall be miserable. If at the
leastwise for to try the^, and to inuit them to return unto him, he does
lend the^ some wealth in this life, hard and lamentable shall be their death.
Death, which shall turn them over to eternal torments; Death which shall
plung them in the botomlesse pit of fires unquenchable, there to be
devoured and never consumed, there to be ever languishing and never dead, such
shall be the end of the wicked and of him which persecuteth the just man.

21. And thy poor servants in the mean time, whom thou have so dearly
redeemed out of the hands of death and sin, shall enjoy in all happiness the
salvation which thou have purchased for them, and holding death and sin in
bands under their feet in the chains of thy mercy, they shall trust in thee so
long as they shall remain in this worldly exile, and after that they are come
forth of it, they shall enjoy that eternal blessedness which thou have
promised them, beholding in thy countenance, that fountain of brightness,
goodness and beauty, wherewith thou did create heaven, earth and al therein
contained.

Noli Ae^ulari. Psalm 36.
IN regard that Gods providence which governs the world, owes a recompense
to every man according as he has deserved; I am sometimes amazed to see how
those whose only study is to do evil, do receive so many favors in this
life, and do bath themselves in so many kinds of pleasures. But as my heart
begins to swell and to be despited in it self, I feel (as it seems unto
me) the spirit of God which comes and touches me, and plucking me by the ear,
it says unto me, soft and fair, soft and fair, thou poor wretch, thou
losest thy self in this ouer-deepe and dangerous discourse: comfort thou thy
self in me, and envy not the good of the wicked, be not jealous of those
which work iniquity.

2. For that which thou think to be their felicity, is but a vain shadow,
a false and deceitful image, which will be lost betwixt their hands, and will
fly away when they shall think to hold it fast. As the hay, which is mowen
down, fades and withers in a moment, even so in a moment shall the magnificence
of the wicked lose his color and brightness. The herbs in a garden are not
so soon withered, as thou shall perceive the riches of the wicked to fall away
and perish. Have thou not beheld the flower Emerocall, true beauty of a day,
which flourishes with a crimson dye in the morning, keeps his color all
day long, and in the evening becomes so pale and withered, as though it had bin
bitten with the frozen teeth of winter? The happiness of the wicked, if a
deceitful smile of an apparent felicity, may be termed a happiness, does
properly resemble that flower, for it is withered so suddenly, is changed in so
short a time, and is transformed in such diverse manner, as it is a wonder to
behold it.

3. Put then thy trust in God, and believe it, the insolence of the wicked
shall never continue, so long as the divine justice shall bear rule, and be
likewise assured, that the just man shall never be forsaken, what affliction so
ever he be in. Discourage not thy self, but continue in well doing, for he
which perseuers unto the end shall be saved. Dwell in the land which thy God
has given thee, content thy self with the graces which he has given thee,
and enter not into judgment with him; For thou shall find in the end that the
riches of the wicked are but given them to keep.

4. Rejoice thou in the hope which thou have in thy God, and lay aside the
melancholy which thou hatchest in thy soul, which like rust eats and consumes
thy heart. For when thy mind shall be once purified, and thy thoughts lifted
up to thy Lord; he will accomplish all thy wishes, and will cause thee to enjoy
all that which you art able to desire.

5. But do not present thy self before him with wavering, go not unto him
with diffidence, do not hide thy thoughts, open the very bottom of thy heart
before him, and discover thy thoughts. For it is impossible to deceive him, and
it is dangerous to go about it. He sees and notes all things, chiefly a
double and unbelieving heart, the which above all things else he detesteth:
but he receives and embraces the poor man that is humbled, he harkeneth to
his prayer, and gives him before hand that which he meant to ask.

6. Nothing is wanting, neither wealth, nor honor unto him which has his
favor: if thou please him once, he will cause the glory of thy righteousness
to shine brighter then the day light, and the equity of thy judgments to
glister like the mid-daies sun. For people on all sides shall be seen to
come from thee, blessing thy house for a temple of justice, praising thy word
for an oracle, and reuerencing thee as the cause of their rest and liberty.
Every one shall exalt thine integrity, as the protector of good men, and sure
defense of the afflicted. But the more honor and glory that thou receiuest,
humble thy self so much the more under the hand of thy GOD, and acknowledge
this good to come from him, and yield him homage. The homage which he demandes
of thee besides thy heart, is but thy mouth and hands, thy mouth to set forth
his praise, thy hands to serve him according to his commandments.

7. Lo, this is that which the spirit of God told me, I communicate it to you
my friends, and make yeepertakers of these holy aduertisements, to the end that
if here-after you see any one to prosper in his affairs, and yet to blaspheme
in his life, ye should not be offended thereat, nor be angry in your selves,
though he which works iniquity, do abound in all manner of wealth.

8. Be quiet then in your minds, sweeten the sharpness which pricks and vexes
you, and never go about to hurt him because of that. For the recompense of good
men is nor only good for good, but good for evil.

9. And those, who carried away with a fiery impatience, do procure the hurt of
others, and who in stead of leaving vengeance to God unto whom it belongs, will
usurp it from him, they shall be rooted out for ever: and like insolent
servants which enterprise upon their masters authority, they shall be sharply
and shamefully punished. But he which possesses his soul in patience, and
constantly waits for Gods judgment, God will praise and bless his
obedience, and after that he has punished the wicked for their mischief, he
will confiscate their possessions, and make him master and owner thereof.

10. Tarry yet a little, and ye shall see the sport, He whom ye did see so
magnificent, which made so great profit by his sin; who by his naughty
practizes had gathered together so much wealth, as he thought thereby to have
purchased an immortal name: he shall glide a way like a wave, where the water
flowed with great surges, there shall be seen nothing but mudde and dirt: there
shall not remain so much as any sign of the place where he stood; he shall be
no more remembered then the wind which blew a twelue-moneth past.

11. And on the contrary, a good and righteous man, shall possess his room,
shall be successor of his riches, and shall reign in safety on the earth,
leaving his wealth in succession to his children, peace shall pass on to his by
inheritance. Peace, a rich and wealthy in heritance, which gives taste to all
other benefits, without which all the other is but torment and afliction.
Peace, more sweet then the sweetest oil and milk which hatcheth all kind of
pleasures in thy bosom, which causes virtue to budde and flourish, and which
no wrisheth, and ripeneth her holy fruits.

12. Now this peace is the gift of God, and nothing can bestow it upon us but
his goodness and nothing can procure his goodness, but the reformation of our
wicked lives: for so so long as war shall remain in us, and that sin, which
is the sin of discord shall lodge with us, we cannot hope for peace and rest
amongst our selves. But on the contrary, if we can make peace with God, we
shall forth with have it with men, and we shall live in a firm and quiet rest.

13. I know well that there will always be wicked people found, whose
euill-will, will not cease till they dye; I know very well that they will
always lie in wait to surprise good men and to practice against them, they
will grind their teeth at them, and gromble like roaring Lions, for their
hatred is so extreme against the good, as when they see them they know not how
to look, and resemble beasts rather then men.

14. But God almighty who has appointed that which has bin, which shall be, and
is, whose ordonances are immouable, does mock such practices, and laugheth at
the vain doings of those false miserable wretches, which beat the air and
skirmish with the wind: he sees their end to come on fair and softly which
shall bear them hence like a great whirlwind.

15. For when they think themselves to be master and to have al in their own
power, even the^ shall they be in most danger. You shall see these miserable
si^ners with naked swords in hand to bend their bows and to take their aim,
to hit the innocent. They will band themselves together, they will put their
people in order, place their ambush, give the watchword, and joyful in their
hearts they will say: we hold him, he cannot escape us.

16. They will come to slay the poor, needy and innocent person, and will make
account to root out all those whose hearts and souls are upright. For against
such men they denounce war, because they hinder the execution of their
purposes, and for that their innocence is a continual reproach unto them.

17. They had already set their knife to the throat of the innocent, they were
fetching their stroke, they had shot off their arrows, but lo! by a
wonderful accident, the point of their swords was turned upon their own
breasts, their arrows fell upon themselves, their bows brake betwixt their
fingers; And at last they slew one another, with their own weapons. Thou have
rightly said o Lord, that always evil councelles overthrow the authors
thereof, thou have foretold that the wicked are taken in their own snares, and
that at the last they shall suffer the punishment which they prepared for others.

18. It is not then o Lord, power, greatness, and worldly authority, which make
men happy, troops and armies of men make them not safe and conquerors. For the
small store which thou give unto the just man, who by his sincerity is
reconciled to thy favor, is of more worth, then all the plenty and a fluence
of the wicked: the little which a just man has, rises like the leven in the
dough, his strength flourishes like the branches of the Palm tree, for his
vigor takes root in thee who art the depth of al strength and power.

19. But on the contrary the arm of the sinner, how strong soever it be, shall
be, broken, and his strength shall be trodden under foot: for it is but a vain
show which swells like to the glass in the furnace; it waxes great by the
breath of the workman, but the more it increases and shines, the more weak
and brittle it becomes, so as a small knock breaks it all to pieces. But the
just man is like to the diamond, the more it is hammered, the brighter it is:
Affliction takes only from the innocent man his uppermost filth and excrement,
and the nakeder he is, the fairer and purer he appears.

20. In a word whatsoever God sends, to good men, all is for their good. He
knows the life and days of all such people as are pure and clean, and
gives them that which is needful for them. Their happiness is prepared from
all eternity, and they shall eternally possess it, not an earthly inheritance,
but a heavenly, whose wealth is infinite and eternal, an inheritance, which
divided amongst his children, shall nevertheless remain whole and entier,
whose parts shall be as great as the whole. For it is this inheritance of
glory, which enritching so many people, does fill them all with eternal
blessedness, and remains ever one, and always infinite.

21. Now albeit that the hope of Gods servants is not fixed on earth, yet
nevertheless so long as they shall remain in this world he will not suffer
them to want that which is necessary for the maintenance of this life. For when
the evil time shall come, when as vengeance shall be poured upon men, when the
waters shall ouerflow their banks, when tempests shall bear sway, and the
heavens reign down fire, the just shall be then at rest in the midst of the
tempests, stand dry-foot in the time of shipwreck, and shall be safe in the
midst of the flames. And namely when a fearful famine shall come to devour
nations, Manna shall fall from heaven to feed them. For the wrath of God is
only upon the wicked, his anger is only kindled against them: As for the just
the nearer they seem to danger, the nearer they are to safety.

22. They are not like to Gods enemies, who are highly honored and exalted, to
make their dounfal the more greiuous and shameful; for nothing has a great
fall but that which is highly exalted. The ruins of towers shiuer themselves in
pieces and fall to dust, the wicked do worse, for when they once fetch their
leap, they do not only fall away to dust but vanish into smoke, and euaporate
to nothing. Behold the clouds which comes forth of the thundering throat of a
great Cannon; what a thick vapor it casts forth, how it seems to fill the
emptines of the vaste air, and to must the sun: but they are no sooner
ascended, but they grow lesser, and so at the last consume away, so as not any
token there of is at all to be seen.

Such is the greatness of the wicked, which has no matter but their sin, no
motion but their vanity; it increases in an instant, and in a moment
perrisheth. And all the labor they bestow in preserving it, serves to no use
or purpose at all.

23. They borrow and pay not again, all that they catch is their own, and
they leave nothing for other men to carry away, nevertheless all his proffits
them nothing, for as the abundance of meat does not fatten him that is in a
consumption, because the radical humor of his life is spent, eauen so the
blessing of God which is the root of all prosperity, declines from the wicked.
The just man on the contrary who is full of mercy and compassion, gives
largely of his goods, and distributes his money, and like a current of
springing water never waxes dry.

24. It is a blessing promised to those which bless the name of God, that they
shall inherit the earth, that is, they shall hold the earth, as an inheritance
by good title: albeit they are molested, yet they shall never be overthrown;
For they are Gods children, whom he has created, and therefore they have
sufficient authority to hold it. But those which blaspheme his name, are
disinherited of his favor, and like ungrateful children, are deprived of
their fathers inheritance, so, as bearing his curse they must of force perrish.

25. For there is none other salvation in the world but to trust in God, and to
commit ones self to his keeping. He directs the ways of the just man, and
gouernes his actions, so as they need not to be amended. He stirs up his will
to godliness, and turns a way his eyes from the baits of sin, he will bring
him back from the lanes and bywayes of pleasure, into the road way of virtue,
and cause him to walk in the paths of his commandments.

26. It is a fair plain way where there are no stumblingblocks, all is smooth
and even. And if the wicked, or father of lies, holds out their legs to give
the just man a fall, thou o Lord art near unto him to raise him up again, and
not to suffer him to be broken in pieces. And with thy hand of mercy, that most
soft and tender hand, thou liftest him up again on his feet.

27. I have been young and now am old, yet to my remembrance, I never saw the
just man wholly forsaken of God, nor his children brought to beg their bread.
It may be that sometimes some cross may light on him for a trial of his
constancy, and for a proof of his virtue, yet it does no more but pass by and
shake him, not being of force to throw him down.

18. I have seen such an one who all day long did nothing but give and lend,
so as a man would have thought that he took delight in wasting his goods,
and yet nevertheless he did still abound in substance more then before, he
much resembled the Pipe of a Pumpe, which draws up water in casting it forth:
the full in him could not endure the empty. The just man gives, good does
forthwith fill him, his posterity is never the poorer for his bounty, for the
blessing of God causes riches to spring in him, as the sun does the fruits
of the earth, and multiplies them a hundred for one.

29. Seeing then that God is so good and bountiful, if ye love his favor,
take care to please him, the way is, to turn away from evil, and to do good.
God loves him which imitates him, for love proceeds from resemblance, his
actions are to do good, it is his chiefest occupation; He began this work when
he made the world, and is never weary of it. Let us then do like him, and so
long as we shall dwell in this world, where he has given us means to serve
to his glory, and the profit of our neighbor, let us not neglect this occasion
to discharge our duties one to another, and by that means obtain his favor,
which is the richest treasure we can purchase.

30. Nothing does please him so much as Justice, for thereby, as much as in us
lies, we preserve his workmanship and allow his wise council, in giving to
every one that which is his own, and distributed by the universal law of the
world, which we call nature, and we must think, that when we judge other
men, we administer his power, and that such judgment as we give, the like will
he give us, when he shall sit in his throne to judge the world: not that he
can judge amiss like us, but he will make us feel by his indgement the smart
which we have procured to other men by ours. For he will never forsake his
Saints, he will at the last gather them together, and will shield them from
the in-iustice of men; he will of purpose sit down in his seat to judge
those which do oppress them.

31. There will he pronounce a rigorous judgment against the unjust, and he
will destroy the wicked. They shall be confined in infernal torment, they
shall be heard to howl in the midst of their torture, and their punishment
shall overrun their heads, even unto their posterity; and their children
shall bear the sins of their fathers, and shall endure part of their misery.

32. And at the same time the grace of God shall shed it self abundantly on
the just, to the end that their prosperity may be a second punishment to the
wicked, filling their hearts with envy, which shall continu^lly gnawe them:
for they shall behold good men to pos^sse their lands in peace^, their posterity
to reign in quiet, and to flourish like the tree planted by a sweet rivers
side, which spreds forth her branches in the air, flourishes in beauty,
abounds in leaves, and brings forth most excellent fruit.

33. But what shall be the fruits of the just man? shall they be the wealth
which he has gathered together, the castles which he has builded? o fruits
unworthy such a tree! fruits which wither at the first feeling of frost,
fruits which fall off with the first wind! not so, it shall be the go^d and
sauory fruits which grow in the fair and plenti^ull arbors of the divine
wisdom. They are holy and religious thoughts, they are meditations full of
zeal and devotion, by which he will join his spirit to God; then opening his
soul, he will receive the beams of the holy Ghost, which will animate him to
a thousand goodly virtuous actions, as the fruit of his life. Holiness passing
from his heart to his lips, will cause him to utter none other speeches but
of equity and righteousness.

34. For he will always have the saw of God imprinted in his soul, as a just
and certain rule, whereby he will encompasse his speech, and he need not fear
ever to go astray out of the right way, nor that his foot will in any sort
slide, for the foundation thereof is too surely laid, and the pathe too much
beaten. The law of God is more firm and solid then Iron or Steel. It is an
in flexible rule, an immovable rock. It is a place of safety, where a man is
not only conducted in righteousness, but safely preserved as betwixt two
brazen walls.

35. For, behold the wicked, how long he has lain in ambush to surprise the
innocent? behold what means he has used to take away his honor and life,
see whether he have forgotten any thing or no?

36. But God forsakes not the just man, into what danger soever he falls,
he gives him not over to the sacriligious hands of these cruel murderers,
nor to their bloody impostures, and impudent slanders; For he is Judge, and
the power resides in him, but he is likewise a witness, and the knowledge of
truth is in him, seeing then that he knows the truth, and that he can and
will judge the innocent, shall he not be justified by his sentence?

37. Wait then on him o ye just, for his help is certain, be not weary of
staying for him, for he knows better what ye need then your selves: sometimes
he tarries to try your patience, sometimes to glorify you: walk then in
his ways, and observe them carfully: Plant strong hedges round about his
ways, stick your labors with thorns, and your tribulations with briers, for
fear least voluptuousness enter in, and pleasure break and spoil your way.
Persevere in your course until ye sweat water and blood, to the end that ye
may arrive at the haven of rest, where God will exalt ye above this visible
world; ye namely above his glorified Angels. He will cause ye to lead
sinners in triumph, and will make ye to see the earth purged from their
iniquity, to be assigned for a portion to good men.

38. I have been sometimes amazed to see the wicked man raised up to all
sorts of honors, and to hold the earth, in a manner, subject under his feet.
The Cedar of Libanus looks not more fair and straight, at such time as he
puts on his green livery, and spreds forth his new blossoms, as the wicked
seemed in the strength of his magnificence.

39. But returning by the place where I left him, I did greatly wonder what was
become of him, I beheld the seat of his greatness, which was turned into
solitude, I did ask what is become of him that was so brave, and so much
feared? no man made me answer. I sought up and down every where, to see if I
could meet him, but I could hear no tidings at all. All melted away with him,
there remained not so much as a mention of him, and it seemed that the fire had
eaten all up.

40. We must then by the example of their misery learn to eschew sin, and
following another life, meritte another end. Preserve your selves then o ye
innocent people, study righteousness, love equity and justice: For the
peacable man loves rest in his family, and is newborn in his posterity.

41. They are not like to the reprobate, whose memory is lost in a moment, and
no man remains afterward to name them, unless it be with cursses. Their
posterity is lost at once, the first stroke that strikes them does wholly
overthrow the^, for they had no help but in their own selves, and God had
forsaken them long since.

42. He succoureth only the just that trust in him: they have waited on him,
and it is reason that they should find comfort in him: he likewise supporteth
them in the day of their affliction. They shall retire themselves under his
wings, like to poor chickins pursued by the Kite, they shall there be covered,
defended and comforted.

43. He will help them in the midst of the bickering, and then they shall
be environed on every side, he will miraculously by his power come and
deliver them. He will break into the throng, and will draw the just forth of
the hands of the wicked. Wherefore, o Lord do thou support the just with such
affection? Because they have trusted in thee, and not placed their confidence
in the frail and corruptible goods of this world, but on thine infinite
goodness and mercy, which never fails those which call upon thine holy name?
Seeing them o father of Justice and mercy, that it pleases thee for a time to
permit the wicked to enjoy the goods and honors of this world, and to set
their feet on the necks of good men, and with their evil artificial practices
to torment thy good and faithful servants: compose in such sort our
affections, as we may not be offended with their good hap, nor envy their
decetfull riches, but grant that we may courageously bear what affliction so
ever it shall please thee to lay upon us, waiting with patience till thou
come to judge their conscience, to enquire out the depth of their counsels,
and with the severity of thy justice to imprint on their for-heads the shame
they have deserved, razing their infamous memory from the face of the earth,
which is appointed for the service of thy glory. And in the mean time,
contain our hearts in such sort that we have none other hope, but in thee, and
make account of nothing else in this world, or to set our love upon, but on
thine only grace and blessing.

Iudica me domine Psalm. 42.
Be my Judge o Lord, take notice of my cause, and judge the slanders wherewith
the wicked do accuse me, deliver me o^ Lord out of the ungodly, and from
deceitful lips. For they are gathered together to conspire against me, and
they have practiced my destruction. They would cloak their theft with justice,
and under show of law they would overthrow and defame me. But o divine
justice! which with an all-seeing eye do scatter the clouds of slander, and
give light to innocence, shine a little upon me, and make them know that
truth pearceth throw their deceits, and makes way to appear before thee, who
art a severe and uncorrupted judge, and the only comforter of the afflicted.

2. Thou art my strength and defense, on thee alone does mine innocence
repose. I was prepared to encounter the impostures of those which assailed me.
I had devised a thousand arguments to convince them, and made acou^t to gain
the cause. But when I did consider that thou tookest upon thee the knowledge
of my cause, like my God, my keeper and my protector: I said unto my self, to
what purpose are all these goodly syllogismes? for my Judge knows the truth of
the matter, and is acquainted with the equity of my cause. What can be hidden
from him, before whom all things are present? what can be showed unto him
which is justice it self, who has established laws, and unto whom the
interpretation of them does belong? I throw my self then into thine arms my
God, my strength and refuge. Judge my cause and deliver me from the slanders of
the wicked. But wherefore do thou reject me o my God? I have a long time
called upon thee and yet thou come not. Mine enemies in the mean time
oppress me, and I am able to hold out no longer. o Lord I am almost in
despair, why do thou forsake me? But soft and fair my soul, why art thou
so desolate? although God does for a while defer to come to thine aid,
whilst the wicked do afflict thee, why art thou thus discouraged, and give
thy self over to grief and sorrow? That which is deferred is not lost, he
will come, seeing he has promised it.

3. Come then o my God, my Lord, and display the beams of thy divine light
upon me, and seeing thou art the father of truth, leave not this thy poor
daughter captive to the iniquity and injustice of these accusers. If thou
love innocence, deliver it from the bands of these false accusations; now o
Lord malice lies hid in the midst of darkness, if thou putst it to the light
of the day, she is overcome, If it be known it is undone: Let then thy light
and thy truth o my God, assist me in my justice: For all my life time I have
loved them, from my youth I have made much of them and sought them out: They
are they o Lord which first of all brought me before thee, and presented me
unto thee upon thine holy hill, seated in the midst of thy Tabernacle, they
brought me into thy Church, and gave me a place of honor in thy house.

4. It is there o Lord where I have chosen my dwelling place, mine habitation
is with thee, in thee o Lord is my rest, al my glory has been to serve thee.
Being then assured of thine aid, hoping in thy grace, I will present my self
before thee, which know my conscience, and knowing iudgest it, in judging
thou esteemest it, in esteeming it, confound the common enemies of mine honor
and thy service. I will come unto the Altar that I have built unto thee to
bless and sanctify thy name, and I will call on thee o my God, which fillest my
youth with joy, warmest my heart with the sacred flames of thy holy will, and
heapest pleasure and gladness upon me.

5. Taking my Harp in hand, I will play the confession of thy magnificence,
and with my voice I will tune the sweet accents of thy praise, I will now sing
of thy mighty power; by and by of thine immense goodness, then thine infinite
clemency: but I will end with this admirable justice, which has defended me
from the oppression of the wicked, and has caused the shame of their naughty
practices to light upon themselves: wherefore then my soul art thou thus
sorrowful? why dooest thou thus trouble me, and fret thy self at the
indignities of the wicked, as though their venomous tongues were able to
prevail against an innocent conscience? no, no, a burning torch thrust into
the water is not so quickly put out, as is slander which is thrown upon an
innocent life.

6. Hope in God then o my soul, and rejoice in his favor, for I perceive that
he is pleased with his praises in my mouth. All my life long I will praise and
confess my self unto the God of truth, the God of Justice, God the defender
of the innocent, the father of salvation, God mine only defense. I will always
fix mine eyes and countenance on him, for I have found no salvation but in him
only. O God, who from the beginning of the world do stretch forth thine
arms to the afflicted, protectest the oppressed, and comfortest the just man
unjustly tormented, give me o Lord comfort and courage, to the end that
recollecting my spirits, half dulled with affliction, I may glorify thee with
my whole strength, and drown with the vigor of my voice the blasphemies of the
wicked, who defame thine honor, who being not able to reach unto thy self,
do furiously assail good men that serve thee faithfully.

Audite haec omnes gentes. Psalm 48.
COme unto me, o ye strangest nations, draw near unto me o ye people the
most remote, come from all parts, to hear that which no where else ye can
hear, cross the seas and mountains, overcome boldly all difficulty of the
long way. For the reward of your navigations shall be greater then his which
sayleth from the East to the West, laden with Pearls and Diamonds. The
recompense of your travails shall be more precious then the trophies of those
which subdue the nations of the earth. Bend then your ear and listen
attentively to that which I will now declare unto you, Oh! how gladly would I
wish, that all the rest of your senses were turned into hearing, to the end ye
might purely conceive, that which I will pronounce unto you.

2. Come, come, all ye, which call your selves children of the earth, and
think that ye owe your original and being to the earth, and your birth
only to your parents, and acknowledge in this world nothing older then they,
nor nothing greater then your selves. In deed, ye may be rightly called the
children of the earth, ye are insensible like it, and ye have no more
understanding then Images made of claye, which art bakte in the furnace: Come
and open your ears, to the end that I may open your minds, shut the eyes of
your body, that I may cause your souls to see clearly, forsake the earth,
this goodly motherin-law, to the end I may make you to know your heavenly
father: come then every one, both rich and poor, for ye are all alike
unworthy of the benefits which I will liberally bestow upon you.

3. Come, for I will open unto you the treasures of eternal wisdom. And
opening my mouth, inspired with the grace of God Almighty, I will declare in my
words the wonders of his wisdom. I have a long time held my soul in a
profound meditation, and after much deliberation, I did at last conceive a
strange discourse of the divine wisdom, whereby I have in all things
acknowledged the goodness and mercy of God, and the folly, misery, and
infirmity of men.

4. That is the reason why being wholly confounded in the admiration of his
greatness, and compassion of our own weakness, I thought good forthwith to
listen unto that which my soul taught me, and to take careful heed of those
things, the knowledge and truth whereof it showed me covertly, and under a
disguised form. And after I had carefully understood and examined it, I took
my Harp in hand, and framing my voice to the sweet tunes thereof, I prepared
my self to commit my conceits to the air, and to cause my meditations to be
heard of all those which would give ear unto them, to the end they might be
pleasing unto God, the author of such holy thoughts, and serve for a wholesome
instruction to the favorable hearer of my discourse.

5. If ye would then know what I said unto my self, it was thus, what should
I fear in the hardest time of my life? whereof should I be afraid, though
death did lay his hand upon me and took me out of this world? Alas death
is a strange piece of work, I know not any one but would sear him, seeing no
man can defend himself from him. How can I shield my self from his darts?
what rampiar can I make against his assaults, which undermines and ouerthrows
houses, castles, Cittyes, Kingdoms, Empires, which thretens the destruction of
the world, and will at the last give end unto himself? no armor will prevail
but innocence: Thereof will I make a strong shield of steel. For unless I look
well to my self, the traitor sin, deaths hired soldiar, will dog me at the
heels, he will lodge in my concupiscence, and will turn me over at the time
of the fight into the hands of damnation.

6. O dear and precious innocence, thou art only our safety; under thy trust
we constantly wait for all that which may happen unto us, and we know thee
to be strong enough to defend us from death. o foolish mad men, which
forsaking this trusty protection, do strengthen themselves in their power and
greatness, and highly account of their riches and magnificence! They reckon
up the nations which are under their government, they number the treasure
which they have under lock and key, but how can all this defend them from
death?

7. If the brother cannot redeem his brother with the price of his own life,
if being willing to dye for him, inexorable death will not accept thereof: what
shall man then give unto death for his own ransom? shall he give those goods
which are not his own, or the Empiers which dye with him? nothing less, God
will by no means be appeased, after he has pronounced his judgment against
mortal men. He will compound with no man, man is his creature, the clay of his
earth, from whom when he pleases he will draw that spirit which he breathed
into him: man has nothing to say against it, nor must not dispute with him.

8. Let us I pray you a little rate the price of man's soul, let us see what he
will offer unto God to redeem it from him, let him labor all his life time,
let him go to the corners of the earth, let him thrust his hands into the
bowels of the mines, let him draw dry the golden dugges of both the Indies,
let him spoil the East of her pearls, and having heaped all this together,
let him come and traffic with God for the prolonging of his life. It is eauen
as though a prisoner should make offer to leave his irons, if he might have his
liberty. Poor wretch, that which thou think to be thy safety, is the window
whereat death enters. Death comes of sin, sin from thy concupiscence, thy
concupiscence is nourished, enflamed and increased by those trumperies. God
will talk with thee when thou art stark naked as he sent thee into this
world, before he will capitulate with thee he will have thee to render that
which thou have stolen from him, his goods which thou have mispe^t; then thou
may consider whether thou have any thing of thine own to pay the double,
yea the foure-fould for the punishment of thy evil life.

Alas poor mad creature, if thou come once to that point, what will thou
say to death, seeing that the wisest men have bended their necks under his
yoke? Thou who never made acount of any thing but of thy corruptible and
perrishing riches, do thou think to be preserved from corruption, and the
wise man who, as much as in him lay, did immortalize himself in this life, and
conuersed with the Angels, could not shield himself from it? thou see him
come to his end and yet thou hopest to be immortal! no, no, the wise and the
foolish dye both together, yet for all that in a diverse fashion, for the wise
man's death is but a passage, at his return he shall find his Tallent
infinitely multiplied, the glory which he sewed shall grow up in abundance,
and shall shadow the generation of his children.

10. But these poor blinded people, who have ever their eyes fixed on the
ground, their mind shut in their pursse, who have no more understanding, but
to love those things which love nothing, who neglect the Sun and Moon, the
chief works of nature, to admire stones, marble, gold and silver, the
excrements of the earth, shall leave the wealth which they so much loved, and
for which they hated all the rest. You shall see them strive with death, they
would gladly draw their wealth with them to the grave, but death will strike
them over their fingers, and make them leave off their hold. Being half dead,
they shall open their eye liddes, to beehold with half an eye their treasures,
but at the last they must march away, they must forsake all this trashe, a
stronger power hales them away.

But unto whom shall they leave this store? Perhaps, an unknown stranger
shall bathe himself in the sweat of this poor wretched creature, unto whom
for a portion shall be allotted a grave of fifteen or twenty foot at the most,
that must be his house, let him dwell there if he will.

(...). And what is now become of those goodly palaces? where are those
gilded roofs, those gallant ranks of carved Pillars, those marbles so bravely
pollished, those emblems engraven in brass, and all his other miracles of
vanity? is there nothing left for him? He purchased lands to continue from
generation to generation, he gave names to his houses, truly he was a great
Lord.

12. Alas, the poor man when he was in honor had not the wit to know it,
and now he is like to the beasts, and resembles the horse and ass which have
no reason nor understanding: For what greater honor could he desire, then to
have been cast in the mould of the divinity, and to be placed amongst the
works of God to command over them as his Lieftenant? He was little inferior
to the Angels, and had a soul able to comprehend the greatest wonders of the
divinity, but eschewing the daylight of knowledge, he went groaping up and
down in the dens and caves of ignorance and blockishnes, and remained
therein all his lifetime; hatching this miserable riches, and at the last is
become like to a brute beast. For as a beast ^eigheth after his prouender, and
takes no care but how to feed, even so this man, would not stir but for the
necessities of the body, nay, he would scarcely use that wealth, which he had
so much coueted, being herein much worse then all other beasts, whose
unbridled appetite, is satisfied by the use of those things which they desire.

13. O how scandalous and infamous is the life of such people! what share have
they in this world, or in the next? but only shame in this, and pain and
torment in the other. Let them now please themselves in their own discourse,
let them grow proud in their wealth, let them now a little call to mind the
speeches they were wont to use, when they esteemed no man but themselves and
their money, and held all other men in contempt.

14. Behold they are haled into hell like sheep to the slaughter, death has
devoured them, and there is nothing left but their bare boanes, which rotte in
their graves.

15. The just man, who with patience endured their pride, his turn is now
come: lo, his time is to reign, and he is now at his ease. He rises up by
the break of day, and after he has given thanks unto God, he goes to behold
the place where one of those miserable wretches dwelt, the place where he was
wont to brave and tiranize over the world, and says softly to himself,
praised be God, who has cleansed the earth from this filth, and has given
place unto those which bless his name. This wretch is rotten and his glory
with him. He is now in torment, and no man helps him, let him remain so
hardly, for death unto him is a going on, but not a coming back.

16. As for my self o Lord. I know very well that I must dye, the sin of our
first parent has bound us to this debt, it is the reward of his disobedience,
we must return into the earth from whence we came. Yet for all that o Lord
thou shall redeem me from death, and deliver me from the hands of hell, when
it would seize on me. Thou will not suffer me to go down so low, thou will
set me at liberty at the entry of the door, and wilt be satisfied, that I
should know without suffering, the punishment of my deserved bondage and
captivity. But what shall be the price of my redemption? shall it be the goods
of the earth the abundance of gold and silver? Not so o Lord. Thou thy self
shall be the price of my redemption, thou shall give up thine own body to
death, to the end to deliver my soul from hell, thou shall put on the sorrows
of the grave, to the end to cloth me with the joys of immortallitie. I will
then, hence-forward, o my God, have none other wealth but thou, possessing thee
I shall enjoy the whole world: loving thee, I shall be in thee, and thou in me,
and being so, thou will bring thither all the wealth of the world, all the
strength, all the glory of the world, and wilt fill me with an other manner of
wealth then that of these poor wretches: they know thee not, their riches is
but the fruit of their sin, which with their sin shall perrish.

17. We must not be amazed to see them suddenly wax rich, nor account them
happy for that: if they do abound in false honor which they hunt after, and
that they are laden with this vain and fleeting glory, which is nothing but a
show, we must not wonder at it, and much less envy them for it.

18. For so soon as they shall kiss the earth, and be clothed with their
winding sheet, they shall carry away nothing with them but the cloth that
couers them, nothing shall follow them but their shadow. Nay, I believe that will
leave them also, for the light which causes the shadow will fail them, and
instead of these magnificent shows, and pompous solemnities, wherewith they
scared little children, grief, sorrow, anguish, poverty, misery, shall wrap
them about, and cast them into the lake of Brimstone.

19. And, not without cause, they took their pleasure in this life, their
happiness was in this world, they obtained what they wished for, wealth came to
them by heaps, greatness and felicity was a burden to them, they loved none
but such as enriched them, they made much of none but those which increased
their revenues, they are dead, and have nothing left them in the next world,
for they made no provision of the wealth that is current there: they satisfied
themselves to have sufficient riches for this earthly life, that is now ended,
and they are in poverty. They desired honor, but it was vain and fleeting,
which depended only on the opinion of fools, they had it, but they could not
well tell how to keep it. They would needs sit on the top of the wheel, it
turned round, and threw them headlong down. Happy are they which can sit at
the foot thereof constant and unmoved, and behold in safety how it turns
about.

20. But these miserable wretches did not so, they willingly mounted the top
from whence they fell into hell, they are now of the number of their fathers,
they found their Ancestors there, from whom they drew their birth and manners;
they imitated their vices, and after death they partake their punishment. They
learn, but too late, and when repentance is unprofitable, what it is to lift
themselves up against God, and to resist his glory. They learn what it is to
afflict the just, to oppress the poor, to deride the afflicted. They are
confined in darkness, and the light shines no more before their eyes. They
hear nothing but horror and gnashing of teeth, they breath out nothing but
sighs and groans they do not move up and down, but in fear and ttembling.

21. When these wretched madmen were in honor, they knew not what it was, and
became like beasts without understanding. But alas, this is no true comparison,
for when beasts die, death takes away their feeling of sorrow, as well as that
of pleasure: but these wretches, which would not know wherein their happiness
consisted, who would not look upon eternal light, who stopped their ears at
the spiritual word, their feeling shall remain for the subject of their
torments, and their soul shall live perpetually to conceive their misery and
they shall for ever languish.

Quam bonus Israel Deus. Psalm 72.
HOw great is the goodness of our God, how certain is his help to those
which wait on him? to those I say, who never turned away their thoughts from
his mercy, and who holding the eye of their soul, fixed on his providence, have
never let slip the hope which they ought to have in his favor, How happy are
they, whom the sundry encounters of this world could never shake in their
assurance of the divine justice? how great and praiseworthy is the constancy
of such people?

12. For to speak truth, my foot did oftentimes slip in this way, I did
often slide, and almost fell to the ground; Like unto those who ascend a sharp
and thornie passage, when they feel themselves pricked with some thorn or
bryer, do presently with the pain let go their hold, whereby they went up,
and forth with tumble down, unless they be soon stayed, even so o my God,
whilst I take upon me to judge of thy works, and to behold how thou disposest
thy graces, being pricked and grieved at the prosperity of the wicked, I fetch
many false steps, and am ready to fall headlong down, and to judge amiss of
thy wisdom and justice.

13. How comes it to pass say I, that people which know not God, but to
blaspheme him, who think they have hired him to serve their libidinous and
perverse affections, who care not otherwise for him, but only to have him serve
for a color to their wickedness, and for a mask to their iniquities, that
they should nevertheless reap the fruit of his favor, and possess in peace
and quiet the very cream of his blessings? I confess it o my GOD, that I am
jealous of their prosperity, and I envy it, and it seems unto me that it is
altogether against reason.

4. What man that beholds them will say that they should ever die? who is it
but would think that they had purchased of thee, at a price, immortality in
this world, and parted stakes with thee of an eternal continuance in all
felicity? In other matters of this world some change is seen, which shows
that of necessety an end must follow, but in their happiness is such firmness
descerned, as it seems, that they still increasing as they do, will at last
attain thy infiniteness, and seat themselves in thine Heavenly throne: for
there is no manner of likelihood to imagine that any thing should hurt them,
nor that the least misfortune should once draw near the luster of such
magnificence. It is a matter incredible to think that any evil should hurt
their precious bodies environed with such numbers of excellent riches.

5. Other men wax crooked with travail: labor is their trade of life, they
are borne in tears, and grow up in sighs, they wax old in lamentations; the
sea is oftener free from wind, then their life from torment: so many arrows
stick not about a white as miseries and aflictions are seen to encompasse
other men: But these men only are free and safe; and with a firm and smooth
course of life, they bath themselves with ease in the pleasures of this world,
and make the calamities of honest people and such as fear God their only sport
and pastime. Who has seen a tyrant from a theater, to behold his slaves
fighting with Tigers and Lions; and to feed his cruel eyes and heart with the
inhumane sight of those poor dismembered creatures? in the self same manner
do these vile wretches feed their wishes, with the sight of the aflictions
which scourge the innocent.

7. Oh how proud and arrogant it makes them! they think that the earth was made
only for them; and that it is not big enough to hold them. As for the other
sort, they behold them at one side, and it seems that they envy that they
live, and they scornefully mutter these words, shall we never be rid of these
rascals? will they still be in our sight? Then they say among themselves, what
is this fellow but a varlet? that man but a fool? So in love are they with
themselves, that they account nothing in this world goodlier then themselves,
they adore themselves like Gods, they serve their own lusts, reverence their
own passions, so as they are covered over head and ears, with pride, rapine,
and injustice.

7. They are fat only with mischief, their bodies are not so larded with
fat, as their souls with sins. All manner of villainy and abomination
dwells in their consciences, all their thoughts and wishes tend to filthiness,
they fix their eyes only thereupon, their fingers itch at it, they have none
other mind, nor affection: and malice does animate and give motion to their
bodies.

8. Ye shall see them so soon as they have a long time thought on their sin
chewed their evil plottes, and executed some wicked enterprise, how they will
glory in them, brave the world, and talk as though they had authority for
whatsoever they did. If there were any shame in them, they would at leastwise
satisfy themselves with their licentious outrages, exercized upon men, and
not thus vilanously blaspheame and curse the sacred name of God.

9. But what? o my God they have listed up their heads against Heaven, they
have scornefully beheld the seat of thy greatness, as if they should say:
what is there to be compared unto us? To us, who do what we list in this
world, who have abundance of all things: As for the earth, they vouchsafe not
to look on it, or if in pity they cast their eyes on it, they say, what is
this earth, but that which cloyes us with her abundance and wearies us with
her fruitfulness?

10. This is truly the reason o Lord why all the people being amazed come
together in heaps to view this prodigy, and run from all parts to behold
this spectacle, and they are mute to see this wonder: they are there fixed, and
look one upon another.

11. At the last they wax impatient, and begin to murmur: What, does not God
who sees all things perceive this? Is it not he which has this great
all-seeing eye, who bath beheld things before they were created, sees them in
their being, and force-sees their end? Is not his providence said to be as
great in the government of the world as his goodness was wonderful in the
creation thereof? If he has disposed all things in order, if he has created
by measure, if his justice be present in the government of the world, what
does he at this time? where does he now sleep?

12. Behold the wicked have seized on his benefits, and possess the wealth of
the world: a man would think that al was made for them, riches raines down
upon them, honors enters their houses in heaps, happiness lays hold on them
perforce, they desire and have, they wish and obtain.

13. And at the last I my self have likewise said, my God how comes this to
pass? I have in vain justified mine heart, and ruled mine actions, according
to thy commandments. I have despoiled my self of al affections, for to love
nothing but thee: I have circumcized my heart from all evil desires, I have
fettered my will in thy law, to the end it might only serve thy glory and
eschew sin and sinners. I kept company with the innocent, and have lifted up
my hands with them: not only the hands of my body o my God, but those of my
soul which are my affections, the which I have wash ed and purified in the
torrent of my tears.

14. I have done penance, and have all day long scourged my self, beating my
heart with continual sighs, peircing it with sharp contrition, and have
driven away by force of my bloody tears that viscuous humor which had
ouerflowed my will with very bitter gall. Every morning when I arose, I cried
thee mercy for my sins, and I have detested mine offenses. I did every day
awake with this purpose, and with it I began my days work.

15. I said to my self, lo this is al I can say, those which fear God and
serve him are aflicted, those which blaspheme him are at their ease. And
thereupon I began to detest the condition of those which glory o Lord in
being thy children, thy chosen, and went foreward and said. Are these they who
are called the children of the Almighty God? surely they are reprobate
children, seeing that others possess the inheritance of theit father, and they
in the mean time are in extreme poverty. The other who ouerflow in wealth and
unto whom God is so favorable and indulgent are his children, this name
belongs unto them, because they enjoy his benefits, and are next him masters
over his works.

16. As for my self, to speak truly, I thought that the matter went thus. I
could not choose but vex and torment my self and said, alas my God how comes
this to pass? can it be, thus, seeing thou have pronounced threatenings against
the wicked, and prepared punishment for them? in a word, I was in extreme
perplexity.

17. But at the last I perceived what thy purpose was; and I peirced to the
bottom of thy sanctuary, I entered as I thought into thy holy consistory, and
there learned thy meaning heerin. For after that I had resolved my self to
wait the end which thou have prepared for such people, I knew forth with that
thy justice never lies, and though it be sometimes long ere it come it
recompenceth her slownesse by the rigor of the punishment. I then steadfastly
determined to behold what would become of these people.

18. Truly at the last thou did pay them home; thou did give them the
reward of their mischief and deceit. For when they thought themselves to be at
the top of their greatness, lo, thou made them leap down into the pit
of misery. All their pomp and magnificence, all their riches, were in the end
like to an high and lofty scaffold which they ascended to give them the more
shameful downfall.

19. Good God, what discomfort, what desolation? there is nothing at all round
about them but lamentations, all their officers and vshers, run up and down
beating, their breasts, and always hanging down their heads, like unto a
flower which is much beaten with the rain, and is also pittyed of those men
who were wont to envy them. They do pitifully behold the ruins of their
Idol, and perceive how mad they were to make a wretched mortal man their
God, who was but smoke and wind. For if a man consider their end, he may see
how in a moment they are vanished: there is nothing so short, as the way from
their greatness to their ruin, the change was so sudden, as sight could not
comprehend it. They were here, they were there, they were, and are no more,
their foote-steps can hardly be perceived, to this pass has their finne
brought them, it laid snares a long time for them, and lo, at the last they
are fallen into it. Whilst it undermined the foundation of their house, they
went up to the top thereof to the end their fall might be the higher. They
still went upwards, and thought all beneath them to be their own, but at the
last they went up so high, as they lost themselves in the air, before they
could come down to the ground, and so vanished like the wind.

20. They became like unto dreams from which we awake, for as men say when
they awake, I did but dream this or that: even so, when such men are gone, the
people will say. The greatness of these men was but a dream, it was a mere
vanity and folly which had nothing in it sure and certain. For thou will in
such sort abolish their memory, as no man shall think of them, but to deride
their pride, and to condemn their insolency. It shall be said, lo, these are
the ruins of their houses, these places belonged to these proud sirs, who
cared neither for God nor men, who took delight in all manner of evil and
filthiness, who built them so many houses with the boanes of poor people, and
cimented their palaces with the blood of the needy: behold there remains
nothing of what they have heretofore been, but the marks of their shame,
lightening fell upon them, and consumed them to nothing.

21. We must not o Lord judge rashly of thy providence, he that will consider
rightly, thereof must with patience attend the end, must be directed by thy
spirit, and inuoke it for his guide and comfort. For whilst my heart boiled
with anger, and that for very sp^te I fetched great sighs from the bottom
thereof, and that all the parts of my body were in a sweat, I had almost lost
my self, and yet nevertheless it was to no purpose at all, for after all this
vexation I was as wise and well resolved as before.

22. I was so troubled as I could not tell whether I were a beast or a man: nay
verily, I was like a beast, and I could comprehend no more, then if I had wholly
lost mine understanding. But nevertheless I still held fast my hope in thee:
and the more I perceived my sense and judgment to fail, the faster did I
run unto thee, and humbly besought thee to open my mind, and to cause me to
understand thy will.

23. Thou did take me by the hand, and gently set me in the right way
of thy will: thou did acquaint me with thy purpose. Thou have done more
then that, for as I think, thou did open mine eyes and heaven at one
instant, where I did see the fullness of thy glory. I say o Lord, that thou
did cause me to see it, for it is a thing that without thee no mortal man
can attain unto.

24. For, alas, what should such a poor and weak creature as I am seek in
heaven, that cannot well see that which is under my feet, nor perceive but
with much a do, that which is before me on earth? my bodyly eyes are very
dim, but those of my soul are much more. The cogitations of men are full of
weakness and uncertainty, for the earthly and corruptible body does dull our
spirits, and staketh our senses to the ground. So as without thee I can hope
for nothing in this base world, nor promise to my self certain knowledge of
any thing. How can I being on earth judge without thy help, and unless it
please thee to inlighten my mind, of those things which thou have ordaided in
heaven in the seat of thine eternity? Yet o Lord, thou have supplied that
defect, and have led me by the hand to see the secrets of thine eternal
wisdom, thou have in a manner ravished me, and taken my soul out of my body,
to make it capable of the divine light of thy wise purposes.

25. In very deed when I enter into the consideration of these wonders, my
heart fainted, and I fell into a swoune, what is this o my God? my God what
have thou made me to see? God of my heart, God of my thoughts, God of my hope,
God whom I account all my wealth, to love whom I have hence-forward destined
all my affections. I know now o Lord what thou art, how just, how mighty, and I
will never more be astonished to see strange matters in this world, the reason
whereof I am not able to comprehend. For thy counsels are wondrous high, this
wisdom is merueilous deep. But in the end o LORD whatsoever thou disposest
in this world ends in justice.

26. For all those who forsake thine obedience, and leave thy favor, shall
most miserably perrish, all those which violate the faith of the alliance which
they have sworn unto, and yet serve their own concupiscences, and commit
whoredom with the earth and their fleshly affections, all those which polute
their consciences, and prostitute their souls to wickedness and impious
cogitations, shall be rooted out, and pass through the fury of thy revenging
hands.

27 But as for me o my God, I will never depart from thee, I will never hope
for any other good but to be first joined to thy sides. I will fix mine eyes
upon thee to the end to observe thy beck, and to conform my self to
whatsoever thou desire of me, and I will follow step by step all that
which thou shall command me. I mean to put all my trust in thee, and seeing
that I know thee to be al good and almighty, as I steedfastly believe that thou
love me, I will likewise firmly believe that thou will aid me and give me
whatsoever shall be necessary for me. o how goodly and certain is the hope which
is builded on the promise of almighty God, who has given me so many earnest
pence of his bounty, so many pawnes of his liberallitie, and all to make me
believe, that the recompense which he has promised me for serving him
faithfully, is most certain and sure.

Wherefore o my GOD do thou thus prodigally lode me with blessings? why
do thou promise me such abundance of them, seeing there is in me nothing
but sin and infirmity?

28. I know very well o Lord, that it is because I shall have matter enough to
spread abroad every where of thine immense mercy, and unspeakable goodness, to
the end I may publish thy praise, in all the gates in all the streets of thy
holy Sion, that going up into thine holy hill, in the midst of those whom
thou have gathered together in thy Church, to receive thy blessings, and to
serve to thy glory, I may acquaint them with the secrets of thy wisdom, which
thou have pleased to reveal unto me. And that directing my voice by the style
which thy holy spirit has framed, I may be able to unfold the sacred
mysteries of thine incomprehensible wisdom, to the end that as many as shall
hear me to discourse of the knowledge, wherein thou have instructed me, may
admire, not me which am but an hoarce instrument of thy glory, but the
wonderful effects of thy quickening spirit, which shall animate me to this
godly, holy, and worthy work. And after o Lord, that thou have a while kept us
at this stay in this earthly Sion, lift up our eyes toward the holy Sion,
encourage us to aspire to this blessed dwelling place, and teach us who they
are, unto whom thou have promised it, and how we ought to carry our selves to
become worthy of so fair, so holy, and so glorious an habitation.

Domine quis habitabit in Tabernaculo. Psalm 15.
IT is thy pleasure then o Lord thar this world to us should be a wearisome
Pilgrimage. Al day long we walk up and down in it, and at night we can find no
rest for our tired members. If we think to lay down our heads on our
pillowes, to give slumber to our eye-liddes, afflictions like so many flies
disquiet us, and the very passions which are engendered in our flesh like
dangerous scorpions do waken, and poison us, and at the last kill us, unless we
kill them on the wound. What may we hope for, seeing that as strength
decreaseth, our evils do increase? seeing that on what side so ever we turn
our selves, we walk in the midst of this world, and this world is every
where full of miseries?

Where shall we then expect rest? not in this miserable life, where we are
sent like champions to the game, to encounter with all manner of adversities,
but only o Lord in thy Tabernacle, in the sacred dwelling place of thy
divinity, where our travails are to be crowned. O happy! yea thrice happy
he, for whom thou have prepared this goodly and delectable place of retreat,
which will sweeten and comfort our passed griefs in the bosom of thy grace,
and refresh us in the arms of thy mercy. But who are they who shall one day
dwell with thee, as beholders of thy felicity and glory? for to hear so much
as is spoken thereof, that place is not accessible to all the world, it is a
place of fearful height, of infinite largeness, decked with incredible
magnificence. I can no otherwise describe it, then that it is a very high
hill, on the top whereof a maruailous goodly garden is to be seen, set with
all sorts of flowers, hedged in with an infinite number of fruit trees,
watered with clear and running fountains, it is verily an hill, for to mount
it, it behooues us to climb upon all sides on tribulations a hundred times
harder then flint or rocks: And in ascending it, we must go still farther and
farther from the center of the earth, that is to say from the love thereof, and
to put all sensual and earthly affections under foot. It is indeed like a
flourishing garden: for there grows seeds and causes of all things, which
do daily flourish with infinite fair effects, and excellent workmanship, it
has for compartiments the goodly disposing of the worlds parts, so justly
measured as nothing more, the fruits are the sweet and sauory contemplations
of wisdom, wherewith it nourishes and fills those souls that dwell there:
it has for fountains the springs gushing foorrh of the eternal goodness,
which poures it self from on high into all the parts of the world, and does
continnually bath and refresh them. O fair and holy hill! who shall ascend thy
top? who shall rest in the very bosom of so goodly and so delectable a
mansion?

2. He who purified in the sacred flames of an holy and devout heat, has
purged his soul from the filth of the world, and has nothing to hinder him in
his course nor to hold him back in his journey. For when the desire of our
soul is stark naked, it aymeth directly toward the mark of her wishes,
toward the seat of her felicity. It is then, when despoyling it self of the
love of her self, the true seducer of our understanding, she judges rightly
of all things, and yields the due to every on which nature commands,
preserving peace by justice, maintayning all things in the state of their
creation, and directing them to the end why they were produced. And to speak
truly, the just man is none other, then natures defender, which maintains
her rights, and fights for her conservation, which keeps in rest that which
was created by wisdom. o justice, mother of peace, thou art then next to
innocence the first step whereby we ascend this hill to eternal blessedness.

3. Next follows Truth, hich is carried up and down every where in a
strong and lasting chariotte, against which the cloud of slander and
detraction do strike themselves, though to no purpose, for they are dispersed
at the first shocke. Truth, which shows it self as the second station, through
which we enter into this blessed lodging. For o fair and holy truth: when any
man loves thee, and sets his mind on thee, thou dwell in his heart, from
thence passest to his lips, and deckest him with singular beauty. And to
speak truly, beauty is none other thing, then eternal truth which shines in
the workmanship of the divine word which has created all things from the
beginning. He then shall ascend the top of this hill which has embraced this
pure truth, is united to her in thought, has builded it an Altar on his lips
has driven deceit and lies far from him, and has rooted them out of his heart
and mouth. For lying is none other thing then the mortal poison of the soul,
it is a clammie and viscuous humor, which distilling into the eye of the
understanding, does there engender a filme which bereaues it of sight and
judgment.

4. It behooves him that will ascend this hill to be void of all vanity and
lies: he must also be purged from this venomous malice, which is ever ready to
hurt his neighbor, the true poison of humane society. For seeing it pleases
thee o Lord, that men living together should like thy other works be
instruments in the ministry of thy glory, that man which cutteth good will
asunder, which like a strong band knitteth them altogether, does he not violate
thy law, and offend thine honor? what shall become then of him who not content
to have smothered the fire of charity in his heart, does by all means strive to
dishonor his neigh-bour, and to take away his good name.

5. He o Lord that will go up unto thee, and give thee his hand to take him
into this blessed habitation will ever abhor such monsters, who full of
bloody malice thinks on nothing but other men's harms, takes no pleasure but in
displeasing others: behold their countenance, if they weep their neighbors are
happy, if they laugh, they are aflicted: no, no, their immaginary greatness,
their pride builded on their rapine and deceit, will not get them estimation
amongst good men, for they are but painted sepulchers whose filthiness and
infection will be laid open, when it shall please thee o my God. But would ye
know who they are whom a good man makes account of, those o LORD which fear
and serve thee in meekness of manners and simplicity of heart.

6. Of him I say, who thinking thee always present, not only at his actions,
but in his most secret thoughts does inuiolably keep his faith, whose word is
a most certain pledge of truth, on whose promise his friend relies, and holds
for already done that which he has promised him. For such a man o Lord
believes, that his salvation depends on the promise which thou have made him
of thy grace and favor, and that he should not be worthy to reeeaue the effect
of thy holy promise, unless he gave his neighbor an assured effect of his own.
He will not hear usury spoken of, and abhors that cursed theft which
ransometh another man's necessity setts a price on the aid which a man owes to
his neighbors, sells times, days, months and years. And much less does
he suffer himself to be corrupted to condemn the innocent, to sell an other
man's goods, by unjust judgment, and to pollute the sanctuary of justice by
filthy sale: but keeping his eyes ever open to discern the truth, does not
incline to any side, but to that Whither right bends him. Covetousness shakes
not his hand, nor favor liftes up his arms, but remains ever like himself
in all things, giving by his wisdom authority to his judgment.

7. He that shall live in this manner, shall certainly ascend the top of that
holy hill, the Angels shall carry him in their arms, keep his feet from
stumbling, and at the least shall set him before the eternal truth where he
shall perpetually enjoy the sweet dwelling of this blessed mountain lifted
above the heavens, to be the mansion house of glorified innocence, and shall be
reunited to the beginning of his essence with this eternal divinity, this
divine eternity. All things here below have an end and shall be consumed: but
he whose virtue shall have advanced him to his celestial happiness, shall
continue in the state of glory, conqueror of times and ages. Strenghen then o
Lord our courage, and comfort our worldly aflictions. And because it pleases
thee that good men should pass through this way, in the midest of the injuries
of the wicked, strenghen their hope shaken by their aflictions, and by the
prosperity of the wicked; and give them constancy to wait for the end, where
they shall behold the reward of the elect and the reprobate.

FINIS.

